AN Answer TO A QUAKERS SEVENTEEN HEADS OF QUERIES, Containing in them seventy
seven Questions.

WHEREIN Sundry Scriptures out of the Prophets and Apostles are cleared: The
maintenance of Ministers by Tithes is by Scripture fullly vindicated: Several
Cases of Conscience are resolved: Several Points of Christian Religion are
confirmed: Parochial Churches, and the Practices of some things in these our
English Churches are thoroughly justified: The Grand Antichrist with the
Heretical Antichrists are decyphered and parallelled.

By John Bewick Minister of the Gospel, and Rector of the Parish Church of
Stanhop in Weredale in the County of Durham.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

Quisquis hoc ligi^, ubi pa^iter c^r^us est, p^rgat m^cum; ubi pa^iter
haesitat, quaerat mecum; ubi erro^em suum cognoscit, redeat ad me, ubi meum,
revocat me: ita ingrediamur simul charit^tis viam, tendentes ad cum, de quo
dictum est, quae^ite faci^m ejus semper, August. de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 3.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Andrew Crook at the sign of the Green Dragon in
Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sr. GEORGE VANE Knight, And to the rest of the
Parishioners of Stanhope in Weredale, J. B. wishes Establishment in the Truth,
Exemption from Error, with Assurance of Everlesting BLESSEDNESS.
THese last and troublesome times (wherein Apostates and Heretics disturb the
Truth) calls on Ministers of the Gospel to be more vigilant, both in feeding,
with the words of Eternal life, Christ's Flock under their charge; and in
fighting by the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, with the Errors
of the time, which threatens the ruin of their souls. Now though the
Inclinations of many Ministers bends them to be exercised more in practical
Preaching the Truth, then in controversal maintaining it by Writing: yet when
any of them are provoked to this latter service, so without it, Truth would be
prejudiced, they ought (without neglecting the former) to apply themselves unto
it, for the confirmation of their people in the precious Truth: knowing
assuredly that God and his Church are served, when his Truths are defended by
the Pen, as well as when they are published from the Pulpit: even as David
honored God as well in fighting the Lords battles, for vanquishing his
enemies, as in dancing before the Ark, for advancing devotion among his people:
His religious Worship was the more admirable, yet Magis miror Davidem sal^antem
quam pugnantem, Greg. Mag.
his courageous Combats was unto the people usefully comfortable. Seeing
therefore my labors in preaching among you, was not diminished by any pains
beside, which was took in writing: I hope none will blame me for answering a
Quaking Questionist, whose confidence rendered him conceited, that the Questions
which he gave unto me to be answered, were unanswerable: considering that this
vindication by Scripture of many Truths, will further your firmer settling in
these known and acknowledged Truths.

It is likely some may deem this a superfluous work, because many have writ in
answer to this sort of men: but judicious men will not account the store of
books in this kind to be any sore, nor a multitude of Antidotes and Medicines
in infected times to be any grievance. My thoughts in this particular are not
unlike Augustines; that in places infected, or likely to be August. contra
Mendaci. cap. 6.
infected with Errors, every one should writ who has ability thereunto, that
all sorts of people may among many books light on some, and be thereby the
better armed against infecting Errors, and that the adversaries of Truth may
find themselves every where to purpose incountred. If the Questionist, or any
of his fraternity, or any Reader, and more particularly you of my charge, shall
hereby reap any spiritual benefit, I shall not value as fruitless, the pains
took in composing this Treatise. It is my hearts desire that you all may be
saved, and be kept in these tottering times from being rocked asleep in any
security in sin and error. Practice that holy faith and obedience wherein I
have instructed you fourteen years with all diligence and patience. I will not
be negligent (so long as I abide with you) to put you always in remembrance of
such things which accompanies salvation, and whereby you may be edified in
love, and established more and more in the present Truth. Commending you to the
love of God and his Truth, and to the hating of all Apostasy, Heresy,
Fraudulency, sacrilegious Impiety, and Atheistical Prophanity,

I rest Jan. 12. 1648. Your loving Pastor always ready to spend, and be spent
for the good of your souls. JOHN BEWICK.

THE LETTER OF Questions was thus endorsed, FOR John Bewick called Minister of
Stanhope.
1. FRiend who calls thy self a Minister of Jesus Christ, and the Scriptures to
be the Rule; Show me out of the Scriptures, where the Apostles, or the
Disciples, or the Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ, or any of the Saints,
or Believers, run up and down, or sent up and down, and wrangled with Parishes
for tith-Calfes, Tith-pigs, Geese, or Eggs, Apples, Hey, Wool, Lambs, Flax,
Foals, Plow-pennies, Bees, Gardens, or for money, for smoke passing up Chimnies.
Answer me this by Scripture, out of the Apostles or Disciples practice, and
give me plain Scripture for it, or else I shall never believe, that thou art a
Minister of Christ, but has the tithes from the Author the Pope, come up since
the days of the Apostles.

2. Did not the Apostle cry against them, that taught for filtby lucre, and
were covetous? 1 Timothy 3. 3. Did not Christ give the marks of the blind guides?
Mat. 23. and says, be not ye called of men Master, and have the chiefest
places in the Assemblies: Christ says, Be not ye called Master, for ye have
one Master even Christ, and ye are all brethren. Do thou abide in his
Doctrine, that art called of men Master? Did not Christ give these marks to the
multitude, and to his Disciples? Now if I was one of the multitude, could not I
tell, thinks thou, if my guide were called of men Master, and had the chiefest
place in the Assemblies, and had his long robes, and uppermrst rooms at feasts?
Read Mat. 23. and how thou can escape the seven woes there pronounced against
such, and whether thou will try thy practice, thy life, by Christ's, the
Prophets and Apostles Doctrine, yea or nay?

3. Art not thou one of them, that seeks for thy gain from thy quarter, and
have a price, and seeks for thy own way? Did not the Prophet say, Come without
a price to them that thirsted; therefore whether must I go to thee that have a
price, or hearken diligently that my soul may live, that I may witness the sure
mercies of David, and outstrip all my teachers as he did, and come into the
Everlasting Covenant, and own the Prophets words, Isa. 55. 5, 8.

4. Art not thou one of them that bears rule by thy means, which the Lord sent
Jeremiah to cry against? Jer. 5. which was an horrible filthy thing committed
in the land, which the people loved to have it so, for which God would visit
them. I in holding up such, do I obey the Prophets voice, or am one of the
foolish people, that have eyes and see not, has ears and hear not, without the
fear of God, holding up such as bear rule by their means. Did they not look
upon Jeremy as one being deceived? and was not he cast into prison and dungeon?
Did not the Priests and the Princes say, he was worthy of death.

5. Art not thou one of them that divines for money, and teaches for hire; and
if I will put in thy mouth, thou will preach peace to me; if I will not, thou
will prepare war against me? Did not such bring the people all on heaps, yea
Jerusalem? Did not God say, night should come on such, and was not Micah full
of the power, and full of the Spirit, to declare unto them their sin and
transgression? And is it not a sin and transgression now? answer me.

6. Art not thou one of them that seeks for the fleece, and has made a prey
upon the people in this cloudy and dark day, and with force and cruelty ruled
over them? Does not the Lord say, he will seek, and gather them from your
mouths, and feed them upon the tops of the mountains: even I will do it, says
the Lord God, Ezekiel. 34.

7. Would thou bear rule among the people, if they should take away thy means?
Would thou divine if they should take away thy money? Would thou keep the
flock if they should take away the fleece? Did not the Prophets cry against
such, and how can thou clear thy self from these steps? if thou can, answer
me by Scripture and the Apostles practice?

8. Art not thou in the steps of them, that the Apostle speaks of to the
Romans, that with thy fair speeches and good words, deceives the hearts of the
simple, which serves not the Lord Jesus Christ, but thy own belly.

9. Art not thou one of the Lovers of their own selves, that art covetous, and
to be turned away from, 2 Timothy 3.

Art not thou one of them, as Peter speaks of, that with covetousness and
fained words makes merchandi^e of the people, and so art in Cains way and
Balaams way, answer.

11. Were not these the wels without water, and clouds carried about with
Tempests, which the Apostle saw coming in before his departure,

12. Art not thou one of the Novices spoken of in the Scripture, seeing that
thy Gongregation is so out of order, scoffing, giving names, railing and
abusing, as Witches, and such slandring expressions to honest people: Are not
these the Mockers now that should come, that the Apostle said should come, that
now we see has reigned since? And are not these the Marks of the false
Prophets, Mockers, Scoffers, Briars, Thorns, Thistles? Do we not see these
fruits proceed from thee, and show that thou have not profited the people at
all, Jer. 23. Does not Christ say, By their fruits ye shall know them, Mat. 7.
inwardly ravening? Do we not see that people could be but wild, Mockers and
Scoffers if thou never spoke to them? and are not these thy fruits? and does
not the Apostle say, their fruits shall whither, and shall not these fruits
wither thinks thou?

13. Where did the Apostles give David's quakings, Prophecies, Reproaches,
fastings in meeter, to sing to the world?

14. Is the Priesthood changed that took Tithes? Is the Law changed by which
they were made? Is the commandment disanulled that gave them tithes? Did
Abraham pay tithes to Melchizedeck of his substance, or of the spoil? Did he
ever do it to him, and more then once? Was it a standing thing to be done after
him? Is the Son of God come the end of all similitudes and liknesses? Now if
thou say that they which preach the Gospel must live of the Gospel, and have I
not power to eat and power to drink: yea when Christ sent forth his Disciples,
he bad them enquire, who was worthy, and what they set before them they might
eat: But did he (that said, have I not power to eat) say, have I not power to
take stipends, augmentations, tithes, gleab-lands, great sums of money, or
parsonage houses: Now if thou come to my house who says thou art a Minister of
the Gospel, and Minister unto me spiritual things, I shall set before thee of
my carnal things, if thou have enquired and found my house worthy; so said
Christ what they set before thee eat: so said the Apostle, have not I power to
eat and to drink, but said, I have not written this nor spoken this, that it
should be so done unto me for I have not used my power: But if thou come to a
town, or come to an house, and inquire for tithes, and augmentations, and
tithe woll, hay, Pigs, Bees, Gardens, and money for smoke passing up Chimnyes,
Foales, Eggs, Geese, Chickins, Calves, Lambs, and other creatures, and thou
can not show me by Scripture where the Apostle did so, I must say, thou art
one of those evil beasts, that minds earthly things, and thine own belly, if
thou cannot prove to the contrary.

15. If any people had followed the false Prophets, false Apostles and such as
made a prey upon them for filthy lucre and covetousnes, and took their money,
bear rule by their means, and divined for money, and sought for their fleece,
and the Priest that preached for hire, and come to Christ from the hirelings,
that will flee, who has laid down his life for the sheep; who says learn of
me, I am the way to the father, and witness the word in them, and the
anointing in them to teach them: are they to maintain and uphold such before
mentioned, that Christ, the Prophets and Apostles cried against, or maintain
such Prophets and Priests in their way, yea or nay as Priests and ministers,
and teachers.

16. Are not they Ministers of unrighteousness: and so messengers of Satan,
that seeks for means, maintenance, tithes of them, they do not work for? is
not that an unrighteous deed and thing. Now if it be said the labourer is
worthy of his hire, is it not then an unrighteous thing, to go and take hire of
them, answer me, and let truth spoke, and come to the light and bring thy deeds
to it. Now if you say we plow in hope, and thresh in hope, that we may be made
partakers of our hope, now if thou plowest not for me, nor threshest not for
me, how can thou bring the Scripture; and say, the workman is worthy of his
hire, to on that has not set thee at work, and that thou plowest not for, and
threshest not for,

17. What is the first principle of the pure Religion, Is the steeple house the
Church? What scripture have thou for sprinkling Infants? What scripture have
thou for the word Sacrament? have thou heard Gods voice immediately from
heaven, as Prophets and Apostles did, or Christ's voice? Do thou believe that
a man shall come to that, which is perfect while he is upon the earth, and have
the body of sin put off and be free from sin. Do thou own that salvation
that is wrought out with fear and trembling? Do thou own the same Revelation,
and Inspiration, that the Prophets and Apostles had now in this age, yea or
nay? Do thou own the Prophesing sons and daughters in this age, and that the
Lord will pour his Spirit upon all flesh? When Christ says to his Dicsiples,
be ye not called Masters, for ye have own Master, and all ye are brethren,
where do thou read Mr. Paul, Mr. Matthew, Mr. Mark, Mr. Luke, Mr. John, Mr.
Peter, Mr. James, Mr. Timothy, Mr. Titus, that these transgressed the command
of Christ? Is not he Antichrist that transgressetb, and the deceiver, and has
not God nor the Son, and is not to be bid Godspeed; read John's second Epistle,
and answer me.

Answer me these queryes in writting, to the thing that is queried, and do not
say they are foolish, and nonsense, but let have me an answer in writing.

William Emerson.

AN Answer Returned to the former Letter: according to its seventeen Heads of
Demands, in answerable CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I.
FRiend I have (as thou desired at the giving unto me thy Paper) read it, with
as great patience and consideration as I could: and I by this do return thee an
Answer, entreating thee to read and peruse it, with Patience, Christian Candor,
and Consideration: giving unto God the praise, if thou reap any good by it. My
answer is to things in the same order, as they were proposed by thee.

Thus thou begins,

I. FRiend who calls thy self a Minister of Jesus Christ and the Scriptures to
be the Rule: Show me out of the Scriptures where the Apostles, or the
Disciples, or the Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ, or any of the Saints,
or Believers, ran up and down, or sent up and down, and wrangled with Parishes
for Tithe-calves, Tithe-pigs, geese, or Eggs, Apples, Hey, Wool, Lambs, Flax,
Foals, Plow-pennies, Bees, Gardens, or for money for smoke passing up Chimneis:
Answer me this by Scripture out of the Apostles Disciples practice, and give me
plain Scripture for it, or else I shall never believe that thou art a Minister
of Christ; but has the Tithes, from the Author the Pope, come up since the
days of the Apostles.

Answer to this, is as follows.

Answer, I do truly affirm my self to be a Minister of Jesus Christ: because he
has called me to his Ministry, and has not only endowed me with gifts
essential to the Ministry, but further called me by a right Ordination to it,
according to the way of the Church of England, and all ancient Catholic
Churches: And according to that only Rule given from God for the ordering of
men's conversation heavenward, which is the Holy Scripture; of which I say, and
will maintain it against all Opposers, that it is the only Rule, given by God
for ordering all men's conversation, in things ^pp^^t^ining to God, and which
leads them toward Heaven.

Whereas thou bids me to show thee out of the Scriptures, where the Apostles,
or Disciples, or Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ, or any Saint, or
Believer, ran up and down, or sent up and down, to wrangle with Parishes, for
Tithe-calves, and other particulars mentioned: bidding me to answer it by
Scripture, out of the Apostles and Disciples practice, and to give thee plain
Scripture for it. Answer, Neither the Apostles, nor the Disciples, who were
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ nor any Saints, or Believers, were (in the first
setlings of the Church after Christ) put to wrangle with any Parishes or
persons, for things which was due unto them. Righteousness was so exercised
among the Professors and Believers of the Christian faith at first, that they
would not wrong any by detaining their Rights. Corruption after^a^ds crept into
the Corinthian Church, a Church which (as thou shall know anon) denied to the
Apostle maintenance, and would wrong one another, and to the shame and scandal
of their profession, 2 Cor. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
by lawing before Unbelievers, made their wrong doings, and defrauding others,
manifest unto the world: A thing, which the Apostle tells them, was a fault, and
threatens such unrighteous Dealers, with not Inheriting the Kingddom of God.

I do not go, nor send any up and down to wrangle, but to demand, (as is my
duty) and to receive that temporal maintenance, which of Right from Christ does
appertain unto me. If any will wran^le with me, and those, whom I send to
demand and receive what is due, seeking thereby to detain fraudulently what is
due; I conceive the fault of wrangling is merely their own; arising from their
own perverse, covetous, sacrilegious spirit, which is rebellious to Christ: but
it is not from me, who does but demand, and challenge what is due: and herein I
do but as Peter did, who demanded of Ananias and Saphira (having kept back a
part of that, which was consecrated to God) Act. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 9, 10,
11.
the Truth and the Right. And though the Lord in these our times, does not show
visible, immediate Judgments, ordinarily on unfaithful and fraudulent payers
of Tithes, which are Christ's dues, and his Ministets for his sake: yet it is
most sure, that without Repentance, such shall lie under Gods eternal curse,
who liv^ and die in their Thievery, of robbing Gods Ministers, in the least
parcel of their livelihood, appointed unto them from Mal. 3. 8, 9.
God.

Touching the Particulars of Tithes, which thou have mentioned, bidding me
answer it by Scripture, out of the Apostles and Disciples practice, and to give
plain Scripture for it. I say, Thou cannot be ignorant, if thou be a Reader of
Holy Scriptures, and not a Rejecter of them, that the Levites under the Law (of
whom many were very holy men) received Tithes, and that God commanded the
people to pay Tithes to them: and that the Apostle says, Know you not, that
they who minister about the Holy things, eat of the things of the Temple, and
they 1 Cor. 9. 13, 41.
which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar: even so also, has the
Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel:
mind these words, Even so has the Lord ordained.

The Apostle tells us, that as it was ordained by God, that they of old, who
waited on the Altar, should live of the Altar: so God has ordained, that they
who preach the Gospel, would even so live of the Gospel; even so, comprehends
in it, that in the same manner, the maintenance of the Preachers of the Gospel
should arise, which thou may know was by Tithes and Offerings, Act. 4. 34.
by lands and houses for them, and their family, etc.

As for the practice of the Apostles and Disciples, which thou calls for, to be
showed from plain Scripture, it was plainly thus: At the first, Believers who
had possessions of Lands and houses, sold them, and brought the prices of them,
and laid them down at the Apostles feet. The Apostles during that time, could
not in equity demand Tithes from them, who had made over to them the possession
of what they had, from whence Tithes arose: and were content themselves to
receive their livelihood for the future, from such distributions, which the
Apostles allowed to every man, according as they had need.

Now if thou or others thinks, that Ministers ought exactly to conform to this
first practice of the Apostles in not receiving Tithes, because they had men's
whole possessions (whence arose Tithes) committed to their prudent disposal:
then thou, and those others, who call your selves Believers, ought in equity to
commit to the Ministers your whole Estates, to be prudentially disposed of by
them to every man, as they have need, or else you conform not to these
Believers, who lived in the Apostles days, and enabled them to live without
demanding and receiving Tithes. But we the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ,
do require no such thing to be done to us by you, as was done to the Apostles
by the first Believers. Neither is their any necessity for you, to imitate
those first Believers in their giving up all to Ministers, or for us Ministers
to receive from you all that which you have: because the Apostle has exactly
prescribed, that the maintenance of Ministers, should arise in another manner.

Another practice therefore of the Apostles, was plainly this.

In places where Churches was planted, and the custom of selling lands and
houses, and conferring them upon Ministers, was not observed: the Apostles
themselves expected, and took also maintenance from those, among whom they had
labored; except some grand inconveniences would have ensued, upon 2 Cor. 11.
7, 8.
their taking maintenance. The Apostle tells the Corinthians, I have preached
unto you the Gospel freely, I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do
you service. He here plainly shows, that the Church of Corinth, where he had
labored, was bound to have afforded unto him, a livelihood and maintenance:
and that they had been very faulty in not doing so; and that while he did them
service, he had received from other Churches maintenance, accounting it a kind
of robbing those Churches, to take from them any thing for that service which
was by him afforded to another Church, and at that time, not to them: for the
Apostle knew, that every Church (where the Gospel was preached) was bound to
afford, a sufficient and honorable maintenance to their Teachers; and that
would seem a substraction from, and obstruction of that sufficiency of
Maintenance for their own peculiar Teachers; if the Teachers of other Churches
should for their Relief and maintenance, while they serve those other Churches,
depend on them to receive it. Yea, the Apostle asks the Corinthians
forgiveness for this wrong, in 2 Cor. 12 13
not being burdensome to them, by taking maintenance from them, which they ought
to have paid: Thereby showing plainly,

1. That he was not bound to abstain, from receiving from them, though he was
pleased to do it for preventing false constructions, which false Teachers, and
his, and the Ministers enemies would have made of it: as if he were a
self-seeker, a covetous wretch, an oppressor, a Fleecer and Spoiler of his
flock, and a partial Judge in his own cause: even as thou, and such as thou,
seek with such like expressions, to defame me, and other Ministers, pleading
for our just settled maintenance by Tithes; And

2. The Apostle by the forementioned words, does plainly intimate, that other
Ministers were not bound to forbear receiving from people their own Rights, as
he did forbear it among the Corinthians.

Yea, This same Apostle has laid down a Canon to be for ever observed; it is
this, Let him that is taught in the Word, Gal. 6. 6.
communicate to him that teaches in all good things. In that he says, In all
good things, nothing is excluded: even all the particulars which thou have
mentioned, and all other temporals, from whence a temporal commodity (through
^ods blessing) arises, they are all comprehended in that expression,
Communicate to him that teaches in all good things. The Apostle injoins a
free, liberal and large allowance in all good things: but no base, niggardly,
and beggarly pittance: in regard, that such who teach are (together with the
taught) fellow Tenants unto God, holding from God with the taught, a right in
common, not in one, or two, but in all good things, wherewith God has blessed
them who are taught.

And for thy further information, know also that it is not to be found in the
whole New Testament, that any Apostle, or that any Saint, or that the Saint of
Saints, The Lord Jesus Christ, did speak one word against Tithes, or forbid the
paying of Tithes to them, who were the Ministers of Gods service. I am sure
that he has ratified the Law of Tithes, and has spoke for them. He tells us
that he came not to destroy the Law, he means the moral Law: yea, he ratifies
the eight Commandment, which forbids robbing of men, and robbing of God: a sin
which Mal. 3. 8.
God does most earnestly complain of, and tells how he was robbed, even in
Tithes and Offerings. And again, our Saviout speaking to Scribes and Pharisces,
says, Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 11. 42.
Hypocrites, for ye tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over
Judgment and the love of God, these things ought you to have done, and not
leave the other undone. According to the Tenor of our Saviors own words, to
take and pay tithes, is no other, but what ought to be done: the fault which he
cried woe against, was the neglect of Judgment, and the love of God.

Thou bids me answer it by Scripture, out of the Apostles and Disciples
practice, and to give thee plain Scripture for it: else thou shall never
believe that I am a Minister of Christ, but has Tithes from the Author the
Pope, come up since the days of the Apostle. Answer, I have done all, what
thou bid me; I have given plain Scripture, for what thou did demand: yet (I
doubt) thou will nor believe that I am a Minister of Christ: however know, that
as thine and others believing that thing, does not make me a Minister of
Christ: so thine and others not believing it, cannot at all make me cease, from
being what I am, a Minister of Christ Jesus: Thou, and ten thousand such as
thou, are not able to disprove it. My Lord and Master will acknowledge me, for
such: and I wish, that the very despising of Christ and God, be not laid unto
their charge, whose abode being (through Gods providence) in that parish or
precinct, whereof he has made me Overseer, do yet despise me his Minister, and
reject his words taught by me.

Thou may now perceive, that I have tithes from God, the true Author, and
ordainer of their full, free, just, and orderly payment: to me among others,
who from him have obtained mercy, to be faithful, putting us into the Ministry:
But I have them not from the Pope as thou expresses it. The Popes by
sacrilegious acts seized in some places on tithes, belonging to the Ministers
of proper Churches, and alienated them from them, and bestowed them on Covents
and Monastryes, and granted dispensations to some laymen, to pay no tithes at
all: and hereby they proclaimed themselves to be very Antichrist, or opposite
to Christ in matters of tithe, as they had also done, in their oppositions to
Christ's institutions, in other points of great concernment, whosoever therefore
refused to pay unto the Ministers of Christ their tithes, they are rather the
followers of the Papal Antichrist, who robbed the Churches of Christ, and his
Ministers, in many places, of their patrimony and tithes: then either the
Dissciples of God, who commands his Worshippers, saying, Honor the Lord with
thy substance, and with the first fruits of all 3 Pro. 9. Mat. 23. 23.
thine increase: Or the Scholars of Christ, who has told the world, That
tithing is a thing, which ought to be done; and has no where by himself, or by
any holy Writer of the New Testament, repealed The paying or receiving of
Tithes established. Enough is answered to thy first head of Demands.

CHAP. II.
Thou thus have writ.

II. DID not the Apostle cry against them, that taught for filthy lucre, and
were covetous? 1 Timothy 3. 3. Did not Christ give the marks of the blind guides?
Mat. 23. and says, Be not called of men Master, and have the chiefest places
in the Assemblies. Christ says, Be not ye called Master, for ye have one
Master, even Christ, and ye are all brethren? Do thou abide in his Doctrine
that art called of men Master? Did not Christ give these marks to the
multitude, and to his Disciples? Now if I was one of the multitude, could not I
tell (thinks thou) if my guide were called of men Master? and had the chiefest
place in the Assemblies, and had his long robes, and uppermost rooms at feasts:
Read Mat. 23. and how thou can escape the seven woes there pronounced against
such: and whether thou will free thy practice, thy life, by Christ's, the
Prophets, and Apostles Doctrine, yea, or no?

Answer, The Apostle in that place which is quoted, does not cry against any,
who taught for filthy lucre, and were covetous: he only relates, what manner of
man, a Bishop (who is a public Teacher in the Church of God) should be: namely
one, who is not greedy of filthy lucre, or who is covetous: and he does the
very like in another place, saying, A Bishop should not be given to Titus 1. 7.
filthy lucre. I acknowledge that the Apostle (though thou have not quoted it)
in the first of Titus, verse eleventh, complains of unruly and vain Talkers and
Deceivers, whose mouths (says he) must be stopped, who subvert whole houses,
teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre.

The public Teachers of the Church then, are not the men (against whom the
Apostle spoke) who were guilty of filthy lucre, though he shows by way of
preparing them to their office, that it is unbefitting their office to be such:
knowing the general proneness in all men to be covetous, he in a special manner
cautions 1 Timothy 3. 3. 2 Timothy 6. 11.
them from being such; exhorting the man of God to fly these things, and to
follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness, even as
he exhorts every particular Believer not to admit of Covetousness, For it does
not b^come Saints so to do: Besides that maintenance which is allowed and
appointed by God, unto these public Teachers; is not that Ephesians 3 5
filthy lucre, which the Apostle condemns, seeing he neither in that place, nor
in any place else, gives such a name unto the maintenance of public Teachers.

But it is plain, that they who were guilty of that filthy lucre, whereof the
Apostle did speak, were Seducers, men who had crept into houses, and there led
Captive silly women, and perverted the Truth, and subverted whole families:
these men unallowed, and unlawfully, and disorderly intruding into teaching in
private houses, were the men, whom the Apostle calls unruly and vain Talkers,
and Deceivers: he tells us, that they t^ught 1 Tit. 11.
false Doctrines, things which they ought not, and that too for a base end,
even for filthy lucre.

Thus the Allowance only which Seducers received, and had from their seduced
Disciples, what ever it was (and not any maintenance of the public Teachers of
the Church) is branded by the Apostle with that ignominious term, of filthy
lucre: and well he might so term it, seeing it was the recompense of those
filthy falsehoods which they had taught, but ought not: for all gain got from,
or with the breach of any Law of God, is filthy lucre.

Thou goes on thus writing.

Did not Christ give the marks of the blind guides? Mat. 22. 23. and says,
They are called of men Masters, and have the chief places in the Assemblies.

Answer, Though the Hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees (for their
mis-interpreting some things in the Law) are called in those Mat. 23. 16.
particulars, Blind Guides, verse 16. Yet our Savior tells the Disciples and
the multitude in the beginning of that Ch^pter, That these Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do; but do you (...).
not after their works, for they say, and do not.

Mark it, Christ does charge these Scribes and Pharisees with grievous faults:
and yet he does not therefore discharge his Dissciples, and the multitude from
hearing, observing, and practicing their good Doctrine.

Surely, If notwithstanding the real faults of Teachers, true Disciples
(according to our Saviors command) ought to hear, observe, and practice, what
is well taught by them; then they who pretend that themselves, are the only
true Disciples and Followers of Christ, ought not to withdraw from hearing,
observing, and practicing those good things, which are taught by the faithful
Ministers of England: though they think, that these very Ministers are really
guilty of Pharisaical crimes: much less ought they to do so, when these very
Ministers are no ways faulty, as were the Scribes and Pharisees, and cannot be
justly charged as guilty of those very things, wherewith our Savior did most
justly charge the Scribes and Pharisees. This will be evident upon the
examination of particulars, which come now to be considered.

For thus thou writes.

Did not Christ give the marks of the blind guides, Mat. 23. and says, They
are called of men Masters, and have the chief places in the Assemblies.

Answer, Christ in the 23. of Mat. did condemn many sins of the hypocritical
Scribes and Pharisees, who in some particulars were blind guides; but Christ
does not say, That they are called Masters, and had the chiefest places in the
Assemblies; but says, That they loved the uppermost rooms in feasts, and the
chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the Market, and to be called of
men Rabbi, Rabbi, that is, Master, Master. It is plain, the Lord condemns not
their being Masters, or their being called Masters, but their love to be called
Masters. He blames not the uppermost seats in feasts, and chiefest seats in the
Synagogues, bur their love and desire, and proud choice, to sit in these
uppermost seats at feasts, and in the chiefest seats in the Synagogues. Luke
14. 7, 8, 9, 10.
He tells us, That the uppermost seats at feasts, are to be reserved, for the
most honorable who are invited: and nature it self will tell any, that it
cannot be avoided, for order sake, but that in all such assemblies of resort,
as were the Synagogues, some must sit uppermost; except the very place, and all
the seats in it, be altogether round, whereby the distinction of upper and
lower rooms or seats are wholly abandoned. Briefly, The Lord who knew the
hearts of all men, condemns only in that place. Mat. 23. 6, 7. The Scribes and
Pharisees, for their ambitious arrogant love, and affectation of Sovereignty
over others: which they did manifest, in contending to sit highest at feasts,
and in Synagogues, and to have in places of peoples greatest civil concourse,
most public open honor done unto them, and to take on themselves the title of
Master, or chief Leader of the Disciples faith; not rendering unto God the due
honor of being the only Lord of every man's belief; this they loved and
desired, and ambitiously sought after. A vain glorious affectation of
magnifying themselves was their sin: and of this no man living on earth can
j^stly tax me, or any other faithful Minister of Christ, but God only who
knows our hearts, and knows that (through his Grace and mercy) we are not
guilty of affecting and seeking any of these self-exaltations, which the
Scribes and Pharisees earnestly pursued.

Yea, but thou writes.

Christ says, Be not ye called Master, for you have one Master, even Christ,
and ye are all brethren.

Answer, Christ says so; and I suppose that thou would infer thence, that
the name Master, may in no sense or meaning of it, be given unto me, or unto
any other Minister of Christ: and because it is given, therefore we do not
abide in the Doctrine of Christ.

But understand thou Christ's words aright, and thou will also understand, that
Ministers and others may lawfully be called of men Masters, when the word
Master signifies another thing; then that, for which Christ is only called
Master: and thou may also understand, that they who are called of men Masters,
do yet abide in the Doctrine of Christ; and that Christ's word does allow, and
approve, that men may be called of other Masters. To clear this know, that the
word Master has several significations.

1. It sometimes signifies one who has absolute power and Authority, over
every man's faith: by whose directions every one is to be guided and ordered in
matters of faith, and of spiritual obedience. Thus Christ only is Master. Mat.
23. 8, 10. His word is a Law, and he guides his saved people by his Word and
Spirit unto everlasting life. He in this sense is the only Master whom all are
to believe, and follow, and acknowledge, to be the absolute Lord and Master of
their faith according to what he Joh. 12. 3^.
said, I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.

None ought to arrogate to themselves the title of Master in this sense: which
thing the Pharisees and Scribes attempted to do: seeking ambitiously to be
counted Head-masters, or chief Leaders of the people, the only supereminent
guiders of men, drawing Disciples not to Christ, the only chief Master, but
drawing Disciples after them, as if they were the only chief Masters: Christ
reproves this sin, and bids his Disciples not to be called of men Masters in
this sense, because they have but one Master in heaven Christ, and they are
brethren, to wit, in that same faith, which he has delivered to the Saints.

Be it then known unto thee, that neither I, nor any faithful Minister of
Christ in the Church of England, dare assume unto our selves the name of Master
in this sense: neither do we think, that any pious Believer is so ill
principled, as to call any of us Master upon that account; if any do it, we
take no pride, nor pleasure therein, as did the Pharisees: and if we knew that
2 Cor. 1. 24 Phil. 1 25.
any does so, we would sharply rebuke them; letting them know, that we have no
dominion over their faith, but are helpers of their joy, and that we abide and
continue with them all, only for their furtherance and joy of faith: and not as
if we were Authors and Finishers of it, for so Christ is the only Master.

Secondly, The name Master signifies one, who under Christ, is a subordinate
Teacher and Opener unto others, the Counsel of God revealed: such an one (by
reason of his office) is called, a Master in Israel: thus Christ himself
acknowledged, that Nicodemus was a Master: though his reproving demand shows
that it Joh, 3. 10.
is a shame for a professed Teacher to be ignorant of a fundamental principle
of faith. Thus also Paul called himself a wise Master Builder under God, the
chief Builder; and thus the 1 Cor. 3. 9, 10. Eccl. 12. 11
Pastors and Teachers assembled in the service of God, are called Masters of
the Assemblies. It is therefore no sin in any Minister, to be called of men, A
Master under Christ, teaching his people: neither does he depart from Christ's
Doctrine, though men so call him, if he do not out of pride, and vain glory,
affect to be called so: neither do men sin who call any Minister a Master, in
the sense rehearsed, so they acknowledge that Christ is the chief Master
Teacher, and that his Ministers are only Masters subordinate, and under him.

Thirdly, The name Master signifies one, who has authority over others: and
thus every one, who has a family, may lawfully count himself the Master
thereof, and may be counted and called by these, Master, who are subject to
him: and yet he abides still in the Doctrine of Christ, though men call him in
this sense their Master. When the Centurion told Christ, I say to my servant,
Do this, and he does it: Christ does not reprove Mat. 8. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.
Ephesians. 6. 5.
him, for counting himself the Master of servants: and the Apostle says, Let
as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all
honor: and again, Servants be obedient to them who are your Masters according
to the flesh. If others who are Masters of a family, may (according to the
Doctrine contained in the New Testament) be called of those Masters, who are
their servants: then a Minister also, (who is a Master of a family, and is to
rule well his house, having his Children and family too in subjection, with all
gravity) may still, and does still 1 Timothy 3, 4
abide in Christ's Doctrine, though his servants call him Master.

Fourthly. The word Master, which is in some places rendered Sir, is a Title of
civil honor, used in compellations or speakings to others; hereby one man
shows his civil respect and honor of such, to whom he speaks: and therefore no
man, much less a Minister, has any cause to renounce that word Master or Sir,
which is only civilly tendered unto them from others; because it is a general
command, recorded in the New Testament, To give honor to whom honor is due.
Christianity teaches no man to be uncivil, either by withholding from others
the Civilities Romans 13. 7
of honoring them; or by rejecting those civilities of honor, when they are
offered: seeing all Christians are enjoined in honor To prefer one another; and
likewise there is a special command, that pious and painful Ministers, be
counted worthy Romans 12. 10. 1 Timothy 5. 7.
of double honor: therefore both Ministers and others may very lawfully
(according to this civil sense and use of the word) suffer themselves to be
courteously called Master or Sir.

Neither does this appellation thwart Christ's saying, Be not ye called of men
Masters: because this Title Master or Sir, in its civil use does not at all
import, that they who are spoken unto, are thereby called the Masters of our
faith: which was the thing forbid unto the Disciples to be so called, because
there was only but one such Master, even Christ himself. If the civil calling
one Master or Sir, when one is spoke unto, had imported that the party who is
so saluted, or spoke unto was the Master of our faith, then the Apostles
themselves would never have suffered themselves to be called Master or Sir, by
those who spoke unto them, without intimating some check and control, and
countermand, at that time, which we never read of.

Thou in the close of thy paper, asks me, where I read Mr. Paul, Mr. Matthew,
Mr. Mark, Mr. Luke, Mr. John, Mr. Peter, Mr. James, Mr. Timothy, Mr. Titus?

Answer, We do not read that every one of those whom thou have recited, were
civilly saluted with the name Master or Sir, because the holy Scripture was not
intended, that it should be a narrative of all particular civil acts done by,
and done unto those particular Saints, whom it does mention; yet it has nor
left us without some information in this particular: For we read in it, that
the Jailer speaking to Paul and Silas, says, Masters or Sirs, What shall I do
to be saved? here Paul Act. 16 30 (...). Joh. 12. 21 (...).
was called by him Master: and certain Greeks came to Philip, and desired of
him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus; Philip is also saluted with the name
Master or Sir. These places plainly show, that some of the Apostles were called
of men in a civil sense, Master or Sir; and yet they did not transgress the
command of Christ, who said. Be not ye called Masters, because Christ by the
name Master, meant only the Master of men's (...).
faith, which they should not be called; but he did not forbid, that they
should be called, a Master teaching under him: or a Master having servants, and
others subject to him; or a Master in a way of civil honor, when they were
spoke unto: for in these three last senses of the word Master, his own Apostles
and Disciples were of men called Masters; and the Scripture no where condemns
either them who being so called, nor yet them who called them so.

The Answer then is easy to thy demand, which is this.

Do thou abide in Christ's Doctrine, that are called of men Master?

Answer, I do abide in Christ's Doctrine, because, though men call me Master, in
those three last forementioned meanings of the word Master: yet they do not
call me, neither will I be called of men the Master of any of their faith,
which is the first sense of the word Master, before spoke of, and was only meant
by Christ in that place: neither do I love (as the Scribes and Pharisees did)
to be called of men Master in that sense of the word.

Thou demands further in this manner.

Did not Christ give these marks to the multitude and to the Disciples? Now if
I was one of the multitude, could not I tell, thinks thou, if my guide were
called of men Master, and had the chiefest place in the Assemblies, and had his
long robes, and uppermost rooms at feasts?

Answer, Christ did tell the multitude and his Disciples, that the Scribes and
Pharisees loved to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, that is, Master, Master, the Master
of Masters, or the only Masters of other men's faith: but he does no where
condemn any, who not affecting that title, is yet termed Master according to
some other sense of the word.

Again he told them, That the Scribes and Pharisees, loved the chief seats in
the Synagouges, and uppermost rooms at feasts; but he no where condemns any,
who (neither loving to be so placed, nor affecting, nor contending for these
seats and rooms) should yet be placed to sit the uppermost in Synagogues and at
feasts.

Again he told them, That the Scribes desire to walk in long Luk 46. 20
robes? but yet he no where condemns any, though clad in robes, who neither
loved, nor affected, nor desired, nor ambitiously sought to be so clad: We are
told, thar an innumerable multitude out of all Nations stood before the Lamb
clothed in white robes: therefore not the having long robes, but the ambitious
desire, and affecting these, is by Christ condemned Rev. 7. 11.
in the Scribes and Pharisees.

Though therefore, thou was one of the multitude, and were able to tell that
the Minister (who is appointed to be under Christ by his teaching to be a guide
unto thee in the ways of Christ) is called of men Master; and that he had the
chief place in the holy Assemblies; and that he did wear a long gown, which (I
suppose) thou calls a long robe: and that he did sit in the uppermost room at
feasts: yet unless thou were informed from Christ (in the same manner, or the
like, as were the multitude, and Disciples, unto whom he spoke concerning the
Scribes and Pharisees) that that self same Minister was one, who does love,
affect, desire, or ambitiously seek after the title, of being called Master,
and to have the chief place in holy Assemblies, and to wear a long gown, or
robe, and to sit in the uppermost rooms at feasts. thou ought not to account
him to be like those Scribes and Pharisees which Christ condemned, because
Christ condemned not the having, but only the loving and affecting these things.

It is thus further written by thee.

Read Mat. 23. and how can thou escape the seven woes there pronounced
against such.

Answer, I have often read the 23d. of Matthew, and do find that our Savior did
most justly therein pronounce woe (not as thou writes seven, but) eight several
times against the Scribes and Pharisees for their several faults, which he
their particularly rehearses: But thou do most unjustly apply, that woe unto
me, who am no ways guilty of those particular crimes, for which the woe was so
often pronounced: neither can thou prove, that I am thereof guilty: and therefore
as men's curse causless, so men's threats causless and groundless shall not come:
yea God has opened an assurance to me, and such as me, that we shall escape
all these woes, threatened us from deluded Mortals in their tongue-revilings: by
promising unto us better things, saying, Blessed are ye when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for
my sake: Rejoice, Mat. 5. 11. 12
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for so persecuted
they the Prophets, which were before yoa.

Thy last demand, in this second head of demands, is,

Whether will thou try thy practice, thy life, by Christ's, the Prophets, and
Apostles Doctrine yea or nay?

Answer, I have learned to try all things by the Doctrine of Christ, and the
Prophets, and Apostles: and I do account every Doctrine of every man erroneous,
and every practice of every man's life enormious, which is not thereunto
agreeing. And my own practice and life is no further approved by me, then as it
consorts to the foresaid Doctrine. I do, and I will try my practice, and my
life only thereby, knowing, that as many as walk according to that rule, peace
shall be upon them.

Thy second head of Demands has had a full answer.
CHAP. III.
Thy third head of demands, is as follows.

III. ART not thou one of them that seeks for thy gain from thy quarter, and
have a price, and seeks for thy own way? Did not the Prophet say, Come without
a price to them that thirsted: therefore whether must I go to thee that have a
price, or hearken diligently that my soul may live, that I may witness the sure
Mercies of David, and outstrip all my Teachers as he did, and come into the
everlasting Covenant, and own the Prophets words, Isa. 55. 5, 8.

Ans. The holy Prophets in their writing, do not blame any faithful Levite,
Priest, or Prophet of the Jewish Church for taking Tith, or the value of Tith
in money: for that was Gods ordinance, Lev. 27. 30 31.
and continued in force through all the time of the Prophets, and therefore
neither Isaiah, nor Jeremiah, nor Ezekiel, nor Micah, nor any other holy
Prophet durst condemn it, or any thing which God himself had established among
his people: when therefore thou reads that they condemn them, who seek for gain
from their quarter, and look for their own way: and that they cry out against
them, who divine for money, and teach for hire; who seek for the fleece, and
make a prey of the people: thou ought not to conceive, that they speak against
any pious, laborious, diligent, faithful Levite, Priest or Prophet receiving
(in those times) Tithes, which was the maintenance which God assigned to them:
but learn to know that by these and such like expressions, they mean somewhat
else; which shall be clearly declared unto thee (through Gods assistance) as I
come to answer in order thy demands.

This in general does fully answer all thy mis-applications of these several
expressions, found in the prophets unto Tithes.

But I shall more particularly examine what thou writes.

Thou asks, Art not thou one of them that seeks for thy gain from thy quarter:
and have a price, and looks for thy own way?

Answer, The Prophet Isaiah, chap, 56. and verse 10, 11, 12. complains of
blind, ignorant, dumb, insufficient, lazy, greedy and drunken watchmen; and
says, They all looked to their own way, every one for his gain from his
quarter. The way which God had appointed for the maintenance of his own
watchmen, was Tithes and offerings: but it seems that these watchmen (of whom
the Prophet speaks) were uncontent with Gods way: and looked after their own
ways of profit, which they had made choice of, and found out for themselves.
Evety one looked for gain from his quarter, expecting in their several abodes,
that gain should come in to them, by these practices for profit, wherein they
were exercised: even as a man standing at his door, expecting some welcome
guest, does look every way; verily believing that in some of the ways leading
to his house, he will come: these were the men, of whom the Prophet spoke, who
looked to their own way, every one for gain from his quarter. But I am not one
of them, who did, or who does thus: I am well content with that maintenance
which Gods Word, and the Law of my Nation has allowed me, according to my
station in the Church of Christ. I have no felfish and by-ways of gaining and
making advantages to my self. God knows that I have hitherto sought the things
of Christ, but neither my own advancement nor advantage. If I had applied my
self to worldly gettings, I might have had opportunities enough in these self
seeking times, to have got as good a share therein as some others have: but I
have used none of the ways of worldly getting: The world has had a small
portion of my time, and less of my affections: for having devoted my self
wholly to fulfill the Ministry whereunto Christ has called me, though I have
therein gained many discouragements from the men of the world, whose portion is
in this life: yet I have had from Christ innumerable Returns of unspeakable
spiritual comforts, greatly encouraging me to a perseverance in his work. I am
so far from complying with such, who look for their own way, and for gain from
their quarter, that if I be by thee ranked among such, thou will therein make
the righteous in that particular as the wicked, and must answer unto God as one
of those, who do lay unto other men's charge the things which they knew not.

Thou further demands.

Did not the Prophet say, Come without money to them that thirsted? therefore
whether must I go, to thee that has a price, or hearken diligently that my
soul may live: that I may witness the sure mercies of David, and outstrip all
my teachers as he did, and come into the everlasting Covenant, and own the
Prophets words? Isa. 55. 5, 8.

Answer, The Prophet does from God invite every one, who is thirsty to things
spiritual, saying, Oh! Every one that Isa. 55. 1
thirsts, come ye to the waters, und he that has no money, come ye, buy and
eat; Come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price. God does sell
for naught unto his people those spiritual things which are mentioned by the
Prophet, namely, The waters of life dispensing and dispersed: the wine of
spiritual consolation, the sincere milk of the word, the satisfying bread
(...)* 3, (...).
of life, the everlasting Covenant of Reconciliation, the enjoying Christ as
the leader and commander of his people, the Mercies of God abundantly
pardoning. God invites the poorest him who has no money, as well as others, to
take these spiritual mercies from him freely, without a price. Profit which is
the result or intended issue of a price, cannot accrue to God from men by ought
which they have, or can do. A price properly is a valuable rate, set by the
seller, on those things which he sells, whereby he expects some answerable
beneficial return in lieu of his forgoing that profit, which he supposes may be
to him from it, if he should still retain it.

Now it is certain that God receives no benefit, gain, profit and advantage by
men; neither does he expect it to receive it from them. God (says the Apostle)
is not worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he
gives to all life, Act. 17. 25
and breath, and all things, Man has nothing but what he has received from
God, and therefore he can be no ways profitable unto God: God looks for no
Revenew of profit or advantage to him from the sons of men: wherefore none
needs to ask, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord; seeing God inviteth every
one that thirsts, to come without money, and without price: Thereby plainly
signifying, that when he calls any to buy of him, he does not mean, that they
should contract with him on terms of profit to him; as it is, when a price is
agreed upon, and paid in men's bargains, but that they should get or take from
him those spiritual things which he gives them, though the things which here
are mentioned by the Prophet, will not be his advantage at all, but altogether
theirs. The things which he requires, are these;

1. A spiritual sense of their wants of spiritual mercies, called Verse 1. Mat.
5. 6.
a Thirsting.

2. A coming to the place where spiritual mercies are frequently: which is here
styled, A coming to the waters. Another Prophet calls them, The waters of the
Sanctuary, where it pleases God sometimes to heal some of their unbelief at
seasons, when the Angels or Messengers of Christ to his Church, by their Ezekiel.
47. 12.
labors, move in these waters: For faith comes by hearing: and they have
grace given unto them, which flows like rivers of Rom 17. 10. John 7. 38, 39
living waters.

3. A drawing near unto God for this grace, which is expressed by an
Evangelist, To be by asking it of God: and here by Gods saying,, Come unto me:
which coming is a spiritual, not corporal Luke 11. 13. Isa. 55. 3, 4 Ver. 7.
motion.

4. God requires a parting with sin, or the putting away of evil doings from
that party, who thirsts after his spiritual Mercies; And, Ver. 2.


5. An attentive heeding and receiving believingly and cheerfully those
spiritual things which he gives: set out in these words, Hearken diligently
unto me, and eat you that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatness.

But what is writ, it may easily be understood that all is spiritual, of which
the Prophet speaks in that place, where he says to them that thirsted, Come
without money. The things which God profers to sale are spiritual: the buying
spoke of, is spiritual: and no civil, or political barter of goods for gain:
the price there mentioned is no money business, no carnal Contract of gain on
Gods part, wherefore it is called a buying without money, and without price.
The gain which is got by these spiritual things which God gives to the thirsty,
is spiritual: the conditions requirabl^ in such, who get or take these
spiritual mercies from God, are all of spiritual concernment, and therefore the
Answet is easy to thy demand, inferred from the Prophets saying, Come without
a price. Thy demand is this:

Whether shall I go to thee, who have a price, or hearken diligently that my
soul may live, etc.

Answ^r, God calls thee to come to him; and God commands thee being come, to
hearken diligently that thy soul may live. God speaks unto men by his Son, and
his Son has sent Heb. 11. ^ 2 Cor. 5 20 Joh. 13, 20 Luke 16. 16
his Ministers unto people, by whom he speaks unto them the Counsel of God:
they in Christ's stead do beseech the people: who receive them, receives Christ
himself; and they who despise them, do despise Christ himself. If therefore
thou come to hear from me, what I from the Word of God do teach his people: be
it known unto thee, that no price therefore is required of thee from Christ,
from God, nor from me his servant; only hearken diligently, and through Gods
blessing his ordinance unto thee, thy soul may live, if so be that thou set thy
self to the forenamed requisites, which are necessary to fit thee to receive
from God his spititual mercies tendered to thee; yet they are neither a price
purchasing, nor merit deserving Gods bestowing them on thee.

Again whereas thou writes; Shall I go to thee who have a price, peremptorily
averring that I have a price.

Answer, Thou do either ignorantly or wilfully mis-apprehend the truth: for
know, that the Tithes which I and other faithful Ministers receive from people
in kind or in money (in case the party tithed is willing to redeem the tithe,
and the party Lev. 27. 31 32
tithing agree thereunto) is not the price of our Preaching unto people
spirituals: for we bring heavenly treasure to them in earthen vessels; even the
heavenly knowledge of Christ; in 2 Cor. 4. 7. Phil. 3. 8.
comparison of which, all earthly things are dung, things not valuable with the
precious pearl of the Gospel preached by us. Carnal things are no price of
things spiritual and heavenly. But tithes are Gods rent, reserved by himself,
out of all the increase of every man's lands and goods to be paid by them, as
Lev. 27. 30 31, 32. Psalm. 24. 1.
an acknowledgement, that he is both the Sovereign Lord of all the whole earth,
and the fullness thereof, of the world, and them that dwell therein: and that he
has supreme Dominion over their own persons and estates; being their Lord, and
bountiful Benefactor, by whose bounty they are what they are, and have what
they have; and upon whose blessing they are continually to depend for their
maintenance, supportance, subsistence, protections, provisions, deliverances
from evil, and for the continuance and increase of all good temporal and
spiritual: or for the gift of all things appertaining unto life and godliness.

Thus the Lord God, who is Lord of all, and might take all, and holds still a
Right to call on men, in some cases, to part with all for his sake, does allow
unto men nine parts of their increase, reserving unto himself only the tenth
part, which is his holy Tribute or rent, to be returned to him as a thankful
acknowledgment of their subjection to him, dependency on him, and of his
exceeding great bounty toward them: he claims it as his: All the tithe of the
Land is the Lords, it is wholly to the Lord. Lev. 27. 30
Therefore whoseover covets the tenth part of the increase, which is Gods, and
detains it from him, whose Mercy has bountifully allowed them nine parts: they
in that act proclaim, that they renounce Gods Sovereignty over them, that they
will have no dependency on him, that they are not beholden to him, for what
they are and have, that they stand at defiance with him: they covet an evil
Covetousness unto their house, bringing themselves under Gods curse, by their
robbing of him: and they defraud themselves of a double blessing, even of the
promises of this life, and that which is to come.

God reserved to himself the tithe which is his annual Rent and holy Tribute,
that out of his own proper goods (wherein no Creature has interest, but such
to whom he has given it) his Ministers who do him spiritual public service,
should have maintenance from himself, and not be at the courtesy of men to be
provided for: for he knew that men would commonly hate, and use mercilesly
them, who sought their spiritual good.

We find moreover that God says, I have given the Children of Levi all the
tenth in Israel for an inheritance for their service Number. 2^ 21
which they serve; even the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. God
here conveyed the tithes to the Levites in a term of an inheritance for their
service; because he the Lawgiver would thereby let all know, that tithes are to
be perpetual, and to descend from Ministry to Ministry to all generations, for
the service, which they do to the Lords congregation.

And it is further to be taken notice of, that Christ who is a Priest after
Melchisedeck's order (of which more anon) which was before Aarons, and received
tithes, before tithes were assigned to those of Aarons order: I say the Lord
Jesus Christ succeeding Aarons Priesthood, and being to continne a Priest for
ever, had all tithes which are Gods inheritance and rent; they of right became
his, both because he is the heir of all things, and among other things the
inheritor of God the Fathers inheritance or revenue: and because also all power
in heaven and earth is given unto him, he is Lord therefore of all persons and
their Estates: to him they owe, and are to pay their yearly rent of tithe. The
Lord Christ has appointed his Ministers Mat. 28. 28
to receive this his rent of tithe, from those, in whose hands it is: so says
the Apostle. As they who minister about holy things, 2 Cor. 13, 14.
do live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar, even so has the Lord ordained, that they who preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel. The tithes which they had, who of old
Ministered before the Lord, are translated by the Lords ordaining to be the
maintenance of his Ministers, who preach the Gospel that they may live upon it.
As Gods portion was given by God to be the Levites portion because they were
taken to minister before him, so the same portion is now become Christ's,
because he continues a priest for ever, ministering at the right hand of God:
and Christ the Lord has ordained that the Ministers of the Gospel, should have
and receive that his portion of tithes for their maintenance.

To shut up then briefly this discourse: Thou may understand, that Tithes are
no price for preaching: but they are Gods re^t, at last settled on Christ, and
by his ordinance established, to be the maintenance of the Preachers of his
Gospel, to the end of the world. So then when I and other his Ministers demand
of men tithes, we demand not from them any price: no not one penny of that
which is theirs, but that they would divide between the parts which God has
given them; and the tenth part which he has given us: and if they either
detain it from us, or defraud us of any part thereof, they rob not us, but God
and Christ of their due rent and homage; and as God threatens a curse to such
rebellious, unthankful, sacrilegious God-robbers; so his curse (except they
prevent it by a speedy amendment) will overtake them; may be in this world not
with a consumption Mat. 3. 8. 9
upon their live-lihoods, and comforts for the flying roll of his curse is
out, to consume the very houses of thieves, who steal from him and others;
however everlasting confusion in the world to come, will be the portion of
such, who repent not their robbing God of his portion.

Thou asks, Whether must I go to thee who have a price, or hearken diligently
that my soul may live; that I may witness the sure mercies of David, and
outstrip all my teachers as he did, and come into the everlasting Covenant. and
own the Prophets words, Isaiah 55. 5, 8.

Answer, This question seems to imply, that they cannot hearken diligently that
their soul may live, neither that they can partake of those other spiritual
mercies, which the question mentions, who come for instruction to me, or to any
one that receive tithes; which thou do most falsely (as has been proved)
call, a having a price.

But I answer thee, The receiving Tithes by a Instructor from the instructed,
does not hinder the instructeds profiting in any of those spiritual mercies,
which are spoken of in this question.

This Truth is clear.

Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck: yet his soul was not Heb, 11. 8, 9. Romans
4. 19. 20. Luke 13. 28.
thereby hindered from living by faith, nor from acting in faith, nor from
inheriting the fruit of the everlasting Covenant, the end of his faith, the
salvation of his soul, for he shall be seen in the Kingdom of God: nor from
obeying diligently Gods commandment: God gave him this testimony; I know him
that he will command his Children and household after him, and they shall Gen
18. 19.
keep the way of the Lord.

Likewise David was a man who enjoyed sure mercies, and out-stript his
Teachers, and had an everlasting Covenant made with him: and yet his
carefulness for settling the Priests and Levites 1 Cor. 23. V. 24, 25. ad fin^m.
in their managements and maintenance, after the dissolution of the Tabernacle
service, no ways prejudiced, his obtaining the forenamed spiritual mercies.

Moreover I am persuaded, that thou thy self art not so uncharitable, as to
think, that the many thousands of Israel, and of Judah, who rejoiced for the
Priests, and for the Levites, in the days of Zorobabel, and of Nehemiah, were
all cut off Neh 12. 44 47.
from partaking of these spiritual mercies, by their paying unto them their
Tithes, and by sanctifying holy things unto the Levites. And I do no think that
thou or any wise man, pondering things seriously, can with modesty affirm, that
the paying Tithes now in the days of the Gospel, unto the Ministers of Christ,
to whom they are due (as has been showed) is an hindrance unto the people of
Christ, in partaking of spiritual mercies, though such payment was no
hinderance unto such comforts of old unto Gods people, who paid their Tithes
unto their Priests and Levites, unto whom they were then due. The payment
therefore of Tithes does not hinder the instructed from obtaining those
spiritual Mercies which thy Question speaks of.

Let it not then be a pretended Plea of thy not profiting: but in dealing
faithfully with thy own soul, apply thy self to these Directions, which God in
the holy Scripture gives for obtaining those spiritual mercies: And do not
follow this thine, or any others gtoundless and unscriptural Proposals. Give me
leave then (if thou have not wholly cast off the regard of holy Scripture) to
put thee in remembrance of these few things.

1. Would thou seriously seek that thy soul may live: then do Pro. 8. 36. Heb.
12. 29 1 These. 2. 13 Isa. 55. 3, 4. Pro. 8. 34. 35 Ioh. 13, 77.
not sin against Christ in rejecting his word taught by his Ministers set over
thee in the Lord; for in so doing, thou will wrong thine own soul, and cannot
escape. But come and incline thine ear, and hearken diligently to Christ's
Messengers as unto Christ; and what you learn, practice saithfully, and then
thy soul shall live in his sight, and obtain blessings, and blessedness, and
life, and favor from the Lord.

2. Many were the Mercies which David and the peole of God (who lived under his
reign) enjoyed: but the mercies which God grants to people in and by Christ
(who is styled the Son of David, and also the David, who is for ever to reign
over Gods people) are these Mercies, which in Scripture are termed, The sure
mercies of David. They are called sure mercies, because Mat. 1. 1. Eze. 37. 24
25 Hos. 3. 5. Act. 2. 30. 31.
God greatly assured David, that they should be accomplished: And David being a
Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit
of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his
Throne; he seeing this before, spoke of those mercies which Gods people were to
enjoy under Christ: and these mercies, are called the Merci^s of David: both
because the David who was past, (when the Prophets wrote of him) who was the
son of Jesse, and a type of Christ, did with much confident assurance from God
foretell them; and also because Christ, who was the David to come, when the
Prophets wrote, and was come, when the Apostle spoke of these mercies, and who
was the root of Jesse, did, and does accomplish, and give all these sure
Mercies, which were from God, assured unto David, that they should be all
brought to pass by Christ, who was made according to the flesh of the seed of
David. Romans 1. 3.


All these sure Mercies are (according to the Scripture expressions) comprised
under two general heads; Name^y, Act. 15. 16,


1. The building up the Tabernacle of David which was fallen down; that is, the
erecting, establishing and enlarging the Church, and endowing her spiritual
privileges, and outward comfortable advantages for promoting the whole public
and private service, required of Gods holy people throughout all the world.

2. The setting up Christ on the Throne of Davi^ to reign for Luke 1. 32. 33.
Rom 14. 27 Psalm. 89. V. 29. 36, 37
ever over Gods people in Righteousness, Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost; and
to bring the Gentile Nations to be subject, and obedient to the faith of
Christ: as it was foretold that under Christ's reign it should be so. These
were the sure mercies of David: even of Christ who is the true David.

Now if thou will witness (as thou speaks) or affirm from good experience (as I
think thou means) that thou art under these sure mercies of David, or of
Christ, which are to be had in Christ's Church and Kingdom: then seek not to
destroy or hinder what Christ has already builded and established, by thy
disobeying and resisting his ordinances, either for his public services, or
for the maintenance of his Ministers, who by preaching the Gospel do the work
of his service of the house of God: but seriously show that thou art a
faithful member of Christ's Church, and subject of his Kingdom, as the
converted Jews, and also Gentiles did, who were made partakers of these sure
mercies of David, by returning unto the Lord thy God, and to David, or to
Christ thy King: returning to his public worship, which the coverted Jews had
for a long time, and the Hos. 3. 5. Act. 13. 16, 17. Isa. 55. 3, 4, 5.
converted Gentiles had altogether wanted: Returning to serve the Lord
according to his own command in his word revealed; returning to fear the Lord
and his goodness, to fear to offend him in any thing, and to be careful to
please him in every thing; to fear to turn his grace into wantonness, to abuse
his goodness; but let his goodness lead thee to repentance, and provoke thee
(in a way of thankfulness) for these sure mercies, to seek to glorify him for
every mercy, and in every mercy received; and so thou will show thy self to be
a thankful servant unto the King of glory, in giving all glory to this King,
for magnifying thee to partake of the sure mercies of his Church, and of his
Kingdom.

3. David said, I have more understanding then all my teachers, Psalm. 119 99
for thy testimonies are my meditation. Its to be considered, that though he
out-stript all his Teachers in understanding, yet he did not despise, nor
forsake, nor withdraw himself from hearing them: for he hearkened both to
Nathan and Gad, and repented of those his sins which they reproved.

If therefore through meditation thou should (as David did) outstrip all thy
Teachers in understanding; yet still thou ought to be of David's mind and
practice; to account it necessary to hear the public Teachers, and to hearken
to them, from whom good advise may be had in places of public worship. David
relates his thoughts and practice concerning this, in this manner, One thing
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of my life, to Psalm. 27. 4.
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

4. The everlasting Covenant is Gods engagement of himself unto fallen men,
upon their faith in Christ the Mediator, returning unto him by sincere
obedience, and believing that he will be their God, to give them pardon for
their sin, eternal life, salvation and whatsoever tends thereto by means of the
Mediator. This Mediator Jesus Christ is surely of this Covenant: He is the
Undertaker, that what God promised should be performed unto those who thoroughly
close with the Covenant: wherefore All the Promises of God are in him yea and
Amen to the glory of 2 Cor. 1. 20
God. He also is the Undertaker to bring a number to the Father, who shall
fully close in with the terms of the Covenant; Wherefore he (the Messenger of
the Covenant) raised up of old the Prophets to speak of it; his Spirit being
with them in their preaching it: Yea, and he himfelf came, and by preaching 2
Pet. 1. 10 Joh. 5. 15. Mat. 16. 28 Heb. 9. 14.
made it know: All things (says he) that I have heard of my Father, I have
made known unto you. And by shedding his blood he ratified this Covenant; and
he appointed that his Apostles in their time, and his Ministers, which were to
succeed them in all after times, even unto the end, should preach to people the
mercies, and the duties of this Covenant, and He promised that he would be
always with them: He therefore works in whom he pleases, By his Word, the
Spirit of Faith, to 2 Cor. 4. 13. Romans 10. 17. Romans 1. 4. Romans 6. 17 Jer. 32.
40. Phil. 4. 13. 2 These. 2. 17
believe, and close with the Covenant: For faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the Word of God: And he works also the Spirit of holiness, thankfully to
yield obedience suitable to this holy agreement: and to do all what they do in
believing, in returning to God, and in sincere obeying of his Will, from
Principles and strength received from Christ, establishing them in every good
word and work.

Now if thou would seriously close in with the terms of the everlasting
Covenant (I in Christ's stead beseech thee) then do not refuse to hear the
preaching of his Ministers, who by office are to attend on this service, to
acquaint people thoroughly, with the everlasting Covenant: least by refusing to
hear them, Luke 7. 30. Act: 13. 46.
thou reject the Counsel of God against thy self, and render thy self unworthy
of everlasting life. But apply thy self to believe the Word of the Lord, taught
by his servants, and repent of thy sins, and become obedient to Gods heavenly
truths, and holy Will; and then the God of Peace, who brought again from the
dead, our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of Heb. 13. 20 21.
the Sheep, will make thee perfect in every good work to do his Will, working
in thee that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, To whom be
glory for ever and ever.

5. The Prophets words in Isa. 55. 5. are these, Behold thou shall call a
Nation that thou know not, Nations that know not thee, shall run unto thee
because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy one of Israel, for he has
glorified thee.

These words are the words of God the Father, touching Christ his Son, the
David mentioned, verse 3. He says, He has given him for a witness to the
people, namely, to testify and teach the truth of his Promise, and of his
Will, and to be a Ioh. 12. 49. 50. Heb. 5. 9.
Leader and Commander to the people. This Witness, this Prince of Life, this
Captain and Author of salvation to all that obey him, is he, of whom it is
said, verse 5. Thou shall call a Nation that thou know not, and Nations that
know not thee shall run unto thee. This Nation and Nations, are the Gentiles,
whom he did not formerly regard, nor look after: neither did they regard nor
look after him: but these upon their Psalm. 18. 44.
Call, as soon as they hear of him, will readily and speedily run to him to
yield him Obedience.

Now if thou (who art by nature a sinner of the Gentiles) will own the Prophets
words, out of good experience, that Christ has effectually called thee to the
knowledge and acknowledgement, that he is thy Leader and Commander; thou must
then run unto him (as did the converted Gentiles, of whom the Prophet speaks)
to obey him. But if thou reject his Ministers, whom he has set to watch for
thy soul, refusing to hear them, and to practice what they teach from his Word,
H^b 13. 17
then thou do not out of good experience, that Christ is thy Leader and
Commander, own these words of the Prophet, Isa. 55. 5.

6. The words of the Prophet, Isa. 55. 8. For my thoughts are not as your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord; are a Reason for
assuring penitent men, of the persormance of the Promise of Mercy, and of
abundant pardon, made unto them: and besides, they are spoke to encoutage the
wicked, to forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and to return
unto the Lord. For God here assures repentant sinners, that his thoughts in
pardoning sin, is not as theirs. Man is usually so straightened in his bowels,
that he with much ado is brought to think on pardoning freely his Offenders;
but God has most vast and large thoughts of pardoning freely and fully such,
who having offended him, do repent, and return unto him; exercising a new
course of life, conformable to his own revealed Will in his Word.

Now except thou forsake thine own evil ways, which are unrighteous, and thy
evil thoughts which are sensual and earthly, and return to Gods ways, which
are righteous, and to his thoughts which are spiritual and heavenly; resolving
to walk according to his Will revealed in his Word: thou will never out of
experience, own these words in the Prophet, That Gods thoughts are not as your
thoughts, nor your ways as Gods ways; for thy continuance in sin, will either
harden thine heart, to think, that because God does not presently punish sin,
he is therefore such an one as thy self: or it will indispose thee to hope for
pardon, seeing Pardon and Mercy is promised only to such, who confess and
forsake their sins: or it will provoke God to with hold Mercy; for your
iniquities separate between Psalm. 50. 21 Prove. 28. 13 Isa. 59. 2.
you and your God, and your sins hides his face from you that he will not hear.

Would thou experimentally own these words of the Prophet, Isa. 55. 8. Would
thou find Gods thoughts of Mercy toward thee, and his acts of pardoning thee,
to be beyond all that thou can imagine, and think of? Oh then forsake all thy
sinful ways, and courses whatsoever; and do not resolve to rob God; do not
continue in despising the public preaching of his Word, in the congregation of
his people: and forsake all thy hand thoughts, and hard speeches which thou
have had, have spoken, and at any time have writ against any Ordinance of the
Lord, and against his Ministerial servants; repent of these, and turn to the
Lord, and he will have Mercy on thee, and our God will abundantly pardon thee.

Thou have now a full Answer to thy third Head of Demands.
CHAP. IV
Thy fourth Head of Demands, is this.

ART not thou one of them, that bears Rule by thy means, which the Lord sent
Jeremy to cry against, Jer. 5. which was an horrible filthy thing committed in
the Land, and the people loved to have it so, for which God would visit them? I
in holding up such, do I obey the Prophets voice, or am one of the foolish
people, that has eyes, and see not, and has ears, and hear not, without the
fear of God, holding up such as bear Rule by their means? Did they not look
upon Jeremiah, as one being deceived; and was not he cast into prison and
Dungeon? Did not the Priests and the Princes say, He was worthy of death.

Answ. I perceive that thy misunderstanding the words of the Prophet, has
caused thee to stumble into very gross apprehensions, which one considerately
reading this thy Proposal, may easily discern to be couched therein. Thy
expressions seems to hold out these things,

1. That Maintenance, called (sometimes in our English, though not in other
languages) Means, which the Priests in Jeremiahs time had, was disallowed by
the Prophet Jeremiah.

2. That the Priests in that Prophets time did rule by their means, or by that
maintenance which they had.

3. That that was the horrible thing, which Jeremiah says, was committed in
the land, that the Priests bare rule by their Maintenance or Means; and that
they were sup^orted in their Rule, by the Maintenance or Means which they had
from the people.

4. That the people loved so to maintain their Priests, they loved to have it
so, and therefore God would visit them for it; And,

5. That if thou, or any other, shall pay unto me, or any other settled Minister
any thing, from whence means that is (according to thy apprehension)
Maintenance should arise to us: then ye should be holders of us up, in bearing
Rule by Means: and be disobeyers of the Prophets voice, and be one of the
foolish people (of whom the Prophet speaks) who had eyes and see not, and are
without the fear of God.

To help to rectify thy Misunderstanding things: I will,

1. Prove that the Prophet Jeremiah did not at all disallow of that Maintenance
or Means, which the Priests of the Lord had in his days.

2. I will evidence that the true Rule, which the Priests in Jeremiahs time
had, was established upon Divine Authority, and did not arise unto them from
that Means or Maintenance which they had.

3. I will tell thee plainly, from the words of the Prophet, what that horrible
filthy thing was, which the Prophet says was committed in the Land, whereby it
willl appear: that neither the Priests bearing Rule, nor their having
Maintenance or Means: nor yet the peoples paying unto them their due
Maintenance or Means, was that horrible filthy thing.

4. I will declare, for what the Lord (in that Chapter alleged) does threaten
to visit the people; and that it was not for their paying unto their Priests
their due Maintenance or Means.

5. I will after all this punctually answer to thy Demands, which concerns my
self, and which concerns thy self, and which concerns the Prophet: and so a
full Answer will be rendered to thy fourth Proposal.

First, There are four considerations which clearly manifest that the Prophet
Jeremiah did not disallow of that Maintenance or Means which the Priests of the
Lord had in his time: they are these.

1. He taxes the Priests for many of their sins; for their Ignorance, for
their profaneness, and that in the house of God; for their unfaithfulness in
executing their Office: for Ier. ^. 8. Ier. 23. 11. Ier. 6. 13, 14.
their opposing the true, and countenancing the false Prophets; and yet he does
not in any of his Chapters reprove them, or any of them, for their receiving
from people Tithes and Offerings, which was a Maintenance appointed by God, for
the livelihood of his Priests: and therefore the Maintenance of the Priests in
the time of Jeremiah was not a thing disallowed by him.

2. The Prophet Jeremiah promises from the Lord, That if Jer. 17. 24. 25. 26.
the Kings of Judah, and all Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, will but
hallow the Sabbath, to do no work therein, that Kings and Princes sitting on
the Throne of David, and that Judah, and the City Jerusalem, shall be
established to remain: and that from places and Cities adjoining round about,
people should bring Offerings and Sacrifices, and meat Offerings, and Incense,
and Sacrifices of praise unto the house of the Lord. The Prophet mentions
Offerings and Sacrifice, from whence no small part of the Priests Maintenance
arose: He promises these, which plainly intimates, that he did not disallow of
the Maintenance of the Priests and Levites in his time.

3. After Jerusalem and the Temple was destroyed, where Sacrifices used to be
offered: Fourscore men with Offerings Ier. 41. 5, 6, 7.
and Incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the Lord, came to
Mizpah, and were slain by Ishmael the Prophet, who relates the History, does
not any ways reprove, or blame that Act of theirs, in bringing Offerings and
Incense, from whence the Priests had some share and portion for their
Maintenance: which Act had it been unlawful, the Prophet would not have let
the mention thereof pass, without some censure: but seeing the Prophet did not
censure it, it is plain, that he did not disallow of the Maintenance of the
Priests, of the Lord in his time.

4. The Prophet relates the affluence of blessings, which shall be to the
Israelites at their return to God in the full Conversion of their Nation: and
he does particularly intimate that a large and liberal provision shall be made
for the Priests (who are a principal part of the State) wherewith they and
theirs shall be in a very plentiful manner maintained: I will (says God)
satiate the soul of the Priests with fatness, as he Ier. 31. 14.
promises also to store the people with abundance of all good things And my
people (says the Lord) shall be satisfied with goodness. The more Gods
blessings abound to his people, among whom his Priests minister and teach; his
Priests do fare the better, by reason that Tithes and Offerings then come unto
them in 2 Chronicles. 31. 5.
greater abundance, as they did to them in the days of Hezekiah, wherein God
greatly blessed him, and the whole Kingdom under him.

Methinks it is very clear from these passages in the Prophet Jeremiah, that he
did not disallow of the maintenance or Means which the Priests of the Lord had
in his time.

Secondly, I affirm: That the true Rule which the Priests had in Jeremiahs
time, was prescribed to them by Divine Authory. This is very clear; because the
order of Rule was observed among them in that time, which God himself had
established: namely, that the Tribe of Levi should attend on the holy service,
and on teaching the Judgments and Statutes of God. This order God ordained,
that their should be an high Priest, who was to command all the rest: and that
there should Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
likewise be a chief Priest, who are called the Rulers of the Sanctuary, and
Governors of the house of God: that is, of 1 Chro. 14 5.
things pertaining to the service of God in his house. They appointed their
brethren the Priests and Levites to their service, and directed them in their
courses: besides their was ordinary Priests and Levites to serve in meaner
services, and to assist the Priests in Rule and Governing. This order of ruling
and governing among the Priests, settled by God, did continue throughout several
generations of the Jewish Nation, and remained unaltered, though the Priests
had contracted much corruption in the time of Jeremiah. He prophesied in the
days of Josiah and of Jehoiakin, and of Zedekiah: in which time Hilkiah was
high Priest; and so was Azariah, and so was Seraiah, who was put to death by
the King of Babylon at Riblah, This Prophet also makes mention of Pashur Ier.
52. 24, 27. Ier. 1. 20. Ier. 33. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 26, 21, 2^.
the son of Immer the Priest, who was a chief Governor in the house of the
Lord: and of Maaseiah, and other ordinary Priests. And tells us from God, that
al time should come, wherein God would multiply the Levites that minister to
him.

This was that true rule observed among the Priests in the time of Jeremiah,
which was established by divine Authority, and was not (as thou and others
suppose) obtained by their maintenance or means.

Thirdly, Touching that horrible filthy thing, which the Prophet says was
committed in the Land; The Prophets words Ier. 5. 31.
are very plain,

A powerful and horrible thing is committed in the Land: the Prophets prophecy
falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it
so.

That wonderful horrible thing was the conspiracy or agreement of Prophets,
Priests and people in evil: and thus it was, the Prophets prophesied lies: the
Priests upheld them in their lies, and the people did wondrous well like of
such lies: so it is expressed.

1. The Prophets prophesied falsely. Some of them prophesied Ier. 2. 8.
by Baal; they were Idolaters: and they taught people to worship the Idol Baal:
they taught a lie, to worship an Idol for the true God: and though some others
of them professed the worship of Jehovah the true God, yet they uttered lies in
his name; promising to the despisers of the Lord, and to wicked Ier. 23. 16,
17. Ier, 8. 11.
Livers, peace and safety, and so they hardened people in their wickedness. The
sin of the Prophets was, they prophesied falsely.

2. The Priests, says Jeremiah, bear rule by their Means, so the words are
rendered in our English Bibles; whereas in the original language, in which the
Prophecy of Jeremiah was writ, the words are, the Priests take upon, or by the
hand of them. The sin of these Priests then was this;

1. They ruled upon, or over the hand of them; that is, they took on them, to
protect these false Prophets in their unlawful deeds: when (according to the
Law) they should have been put to death, for speaking falsehood, to thrust
people out of the way, which the Lord their God commanded them to walk in: and
the Lord threatens that these false Prophets shall be consumed; because they
prophesied lies.

2. They ruled, or took by the hand of them; that is, they by the help or
instigation of these false Prophets, whom they countenanced, and with whom they
had combined, took a tyrannical course, to suppress the true Prophets of the
Lord. An Deuteronomy, 13. 5. Ier. 14. 14. 15.
instance whereof is in the 26. Chapter; where the Priests as principal Actors,
with the false Prophets their seconds, did speak to the Princes, and people,
that Jeremiah was worthy to die, because he had prophesied against the City.
And moreover the Priests by the hand or help of the false Prophets,
(flatteringly magnifying them, and their rule, notwithstanding the corruptions
therein reproved by the true Prophets) contained to rule the people, without
amending in themselves what was amiss: and they boldly confirmed the plausible
lies of the false Prophets, by teaching also the people the same falsehoods, and
not to believe the true Prophets, who had threatened, that eminent dangers
should befall them for continuing in their sins: and therefore this Prophet
Jeremiah complains that from the Prophet unto the Priest every one deals
falsely. and that they healed the hurt of the people steightly. Ier. 6. 14,
Falsehood in teaching began by these false Prophets, and was continued by the
Priests: For from the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all
the Land: they handed first their lying Prophecies, which wrought profaneness:
and Ier. 23 24.
the Priests took at, or by their hands these lies, and in teaching handed them
over to the people, who embraced and hugged them from them both. The sin of the
Priests then in brief was, their protecting the false Prophets, and combining
with them to destroy the true Prophets, and to delude the people by lies and
falsehoods.

3. It is said that the people love to have it so. The sin of the people was
their despising the holy Counsel, and divine Alarms to Repentance, which was
given unto them by the holy Prophets of God: they counted their words as wind,
vain, Ier. 5. 13.
and of none effect: and they loved the flatteries of the false Prophets, and
loved to have them and their Priests, to sooth them in their sins, by telling
them falsehoods pleasing and suitable to their liking, and especially this, That
evil shall not come unto them. Ier. 5. 12.


Thou may now understand, that that horrible filthy thing which the Prophet
says was committed in the Land, was not the Priests bearing true rule; nor
their having maintenance or Means: nor the peoples paying unto them their due
maintenance or Means: for in no one place in his Prophecy, the Prophet mentions
these in a condemnatory way: But it was the Prophets, Priests, and peoples
agreeing in evil. The Prophets prophesying lies: and the Priests upholding them
in their Lies, and seeking the destruction of the true Prophets, who gainsaid
their Lies, and closing with these false ones inventing lies to the people: and
the people being well pleased with their Lies.

Fourthly, Consider for what the Lord does threaten to visit this people he
says twice in one Chapter, Shall I not visit Ier. 5. 9, 29
for these things, says the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this is? and we are plainly told in the same Chapter for what sins
the Lord would do so. Namely,

1. For their deficiency toward judgment, in not executing it, and toward
truth, in not seeking it, ver. 1.

2. For their hypocrisy under a pretense of piety committing perjury, ver. 2.

3. For their obstinacy, and not amending under their sufferings, and
corrections, ver. 3.

4. For their Apostasy, Idolatry, and impudent common Adulteries, verse 7. for
these God threatens to visit them, verse. 8.

5. For the infidelity in not believing Gods threatenings.

6. For their security though threatened.

7. For their slighting the true Prophets, who had threatened them, to be
destroyed, by a Nation, mighty and ancient, whose language was unknown to them,
and not understood by them, ver. 12, 14, 15, 16, 17.

8. For their revolting and rebellious heart, in forsaking the true God, and
serving strange gods.

9. For their foolishness in not considering either Gods greatness, his
mighty power, manifest in the world: nor yet his special goodness, manifest
toward themselves, to be hereby moved, to fear him, verse 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24.

10. For their crafty circumventing others, unlawfully getting their states
from them. And,

11. For their not judging aright in matters of judicature: the Lord says,
shall I not visit for these things, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this, verse 26, 27, 28, 29.

These are the sins recorded, for which God does threaten to visit that people:
but paying unto Priests their due maintenance or means was no sin: for what God
has commanded to be done, and had not repealed, it was a Duty, and the not
doing it; or the not paying maintenance to the Priests, had been a sin: so
also the lawful rule of the Priests was no sin, because it was appointed, and
not reversed in Jeremiahs time: I say, as these was no sin, so the Prophet
could not, and does not threaten either the Priests, for receiving due
maintenance from the people, or the people, for paying it unto them: neither
does he, nor could he threaten the Priests, for exercising that orderly
government, which by appointment was charged their Tribe to observe.

Fifthly, I now come to answer thy demand concerning my self, and concerning
thy self, and concerning the Prophet.

Touching my self thou do ask.

Art not thou one of them that bear rule by means.

Answ. 1. If by the word means in this thy demand, thou understands that
maintenance or portion of temporal livelihood, which God and the Laws of my
Nation allots me: then I must tell thee, that as there is no man on earth,
neither worldly, nor Church-rulers, nor any other of any other sort of men, who
can subsist in it, altogether without any temporal maintenance or means: (as
thou calls it) for substract from any, food and man raiment, and other
necessaries befitting him to have, for the discharge of his calling in which
God has placed him, And he will soon be disenabled from performing both the
acts of it, and from continuing among men in acting as a man: so I acknowledge,
that while I tread upon the earth, I am and must be in the condition of all
mortals, just as the Prophets were of old, subject to like passions as Iam. 5.
17.
other men. I am not exempt from that ordinary state, sufferings, and way of
temporal living in the world, to which God has subjected all men. All men are
Gods beggars, a company of indigent creatures, depending on him daily and
hourly, both for the having, and for the continuing unto them, that temporal
livelihood, which he thinks fit to distribute to every several man in his
station; and therefore though I and other Ministers shall stand in need of all
temporal things, which are necessary, for our temporary subsistence, as we are
men, and for the performance of our calling, as we are Ministers ruling in the
Church of Christ: yet neither thou, nor any other, can justly blame us more
then your selves or other other men, for having maintenance or means in our
temporal condition. And it is a very false conceit that we rule in the Church,
by maintenance or means, because we cannot without maintenance or means live
in the world: For as a King rules in a Commonwealth, not by the revenues,
maintenance, Eccl. 5. 9.
or means, which he receives from his Subjects. Solomon says a King has
maintenance from the field, as well as other men: the profit of the earth is
for all, the King himself is served by the field: but a King rules by the
Authority, wherewith he is invested from God, and by the Laws of the Nation
over whom he rules: So likewise Ministers rule in the Church of Christ, not by
that temporal means or maintenance, which God, and the Laws of the Nation has
appointed them to receive: but by that Authority, which they have received from
the Lord to rule, and by those Laws, which Christ has prescribed unto them in
his holy Word, to rule people by.

I answer then plainly to thy demand. I am not one of them, that bear rule by
any temporal maintenance or means, though while I continue in the world,
discharging duties, required of me as I am a man, and as I am a Minister of
Christ, I shall need outward means or mainteance, as well as all other men
shall have need of the like, while they live, and are to do duties as men, and
as they are men in such callings, wherein it pleases God to employ them.

2. I answer. If by the word means, thou understand by this thy demand the very
same thing, which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against: then I directly
answer: I am not one of them, that bears rule by the hand, help, or means of
any false Teacher, which are in these our days. I neither do nor can (as the
Priests against whom Jeremy cried did and could) protect any of them in their
falsehoods. I never was magnified by any such, as the Priests were, of whom
Jeremiah speaks in his fifth Chapter. I never did conspire with false teachers
(as did the Priests foremention) either in persecuting and suppressing the true
Ministers or Teachers of Christ, nor yet in teaching (as these Priests did)
falsehoods unto the people, and therefore I am not one of them, who bears rule
by means, according as the Prophet understood, and as all ought to understand,
the meanin^ of the word means, in that place of the Prophet to which thy demand
relates.

Touching thy self thou asks.

I in holding up such, do I obey the Prophets Voice.

Answ. The people in Jeremiahs time, holding up their Priests in their due
maintenance, was in that act no ways at all disobedient to any voice of the
Prophet: but they were obedient unto Gods command, which no holy Prophet durst
condemn them for: and so if thou hold up the Ministers of Christ set over thee
in the Lord, in paying unto them their dues, which both God and man's Law
requires, should be paid unto them, thou do not in so doing, disobey any
voice of the Prophet, in that particular: for in his Prophecy, he no where
forbids paying unto Priests, their due maintenance of tithes and offerings;
neither does condemn any people for doing so.

But if thou art one of those, who will not believe the word preached by
faithful Ministers: but will slight them, and not endure the sound doctrine
which they teach, believing and loving rather, the flatteries and falsehoods of
those false teachers, whom thou heapest to thy self: if thou will turn from 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
the truth, and be turned unto the fables or lies of those false teachers: I
say that then thou art like those people in Jeremiahs time, ^ho would not obey
his, and other true Prophets voice, Ier. 5, 12, 13.
calling upon them to repent: neither would they believe their threatenings: but
loved rather to hear the false-prophets and corrupt Priests, who taught them
lies, and secured them in Ier. 7. 4. and 8. Ier. 5. 31. Ier. 6. 10.
their sins; they loved to have it so: but cared not to hear of the sins, and
to be taught the fear of the Lord: the word of the Lord was a reproach unto
them, they had no delight in it.

Thou asks further touching thy self.

Or am I one of the foolish people, who have eyes and see not, have ears, and
hear not, without the fear of God, holding up such as bear rule by means.

Answ. The foolish people of whom Jeremiah complains, are therefore said to
have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, Ier. 5. 21.
and not to fear God, not because they did hold up these their Priests, who
bare rule by giving unto them that due maintenance or means, which was
prescribed by God; for the Prophet does not speak of any such thing, or of any
such reason, of that peoples foolishness, but they are said to have eyes and
see not, to have ears and hear not, and not to fear God; because that people
was such, who took no notice of things apparent to their eyes, and which was
taught them by the hearing of the ear, sufficient to convince them that God
only was to be feared, served, and observed. They might see the greatness Ier.
5. 22.
of God in his workings in the world, restraining the motions Psalm. 89. 9
and commotions of the mighty waves of the Sea: they might see the goodness of
God, in his merciful workings toward themselves, giving unto them the former
and latter rain in season, Ier. 5. 23, 24
and reserving unto them the appointed times, of their earthly incomes. They
also might have heard continually from the true Prophets and holy Levites
mention of the Lord, and abundant motives to fear or serve him only: and yer
they wilfully refused to regard and consider of it, in their heart: having an
heart revolting, unresolved to fear God, and mind what was for their spiritual
good.

Now if thou art one, who is obstinate and resolved in heatt to shut thine eyes
from minding Gods greatness and wonderful workings in the world, and his
goodness toward thy self: and if thou art determined in heart to shut thine
ears Act. 20. 21
from all holy persuasions, tendered by his public servants, whose office it is
to preach repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: then
I pronounce it, that thou art like one of those foolish people, which in
Jeremiahs time had eyes and see not, and ears and hear not, and which were
without the fear of God. And if thou art such, repent in time, least the Lord
withdraw from thee (as he did from Ier. 5. 25. and 29.
them) those good things which he affords thee, and come to visit thee, and to
be avenged, for thy being like a people, who loved to cast off his fear or
service, and to continue in profaneness.

Touching the Prophet thou asks.

Did not they look on Jeremiah, as on one being deceived, and was he not cast
into prison and dungeon? Did not the Priests and Princes say he was worthy of
death?

Answ. Jeremiah was a true Prophet of the Lord, and he often denounced judgments
against the whole Land, against Jerusalem, and against the Temple therein: but
the false prophets to please the people, prophesied otherwise, and the people
believed rather the lies, uttered by the false, then the truths which were
spoke by the true Prophets; being very Ier. 5. 12.
confident that evil should not come upon them; and they finding that
judgments threatened by Jeremiah was not speedily executed, did continually
mock him: The Word of the Lord (said he) was a reproach unto me, and a
derision, daily. Jer. 20. 8.
Thus the true Prophet was accounted as one who was deceived.

Moreover Jeremiah was falsely accused, for intending to fall Jer. 37. 13, 14,
15.
to the Caldeans: and the Princes believing the accusation did cast him into
prison.

And upon the Princes petitioning against him, that he Ier. 38. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6.
weakened the hands of the men of War, and the hands of the people, and sought
not the welfare of the people, but their hurt; he was let down into a dungeon,
wherein he did sink in the mire.

Lastly, we also read that the Priests, and the Prophets, and all Ier. 26. 7, 8
9, 10, 11.
the People having heard his threatening Sermon, that God would make the Temple
like Shiloh, and the City a curse to all the Nations of the Earth, they took
him, and said, he should die, and the Priests and Prophets spoke to the
Princes, and to all the people saying, this man is worthy to die, for he has
prophesied against this City.

By what is related, thy three demands, which concern the Prophet are easily
answered: namely, the people did look upon Jeremiah, as on one being deceived:
he was cast into Prison and a Dungeon: And the Priests and false prophets said,
he was worthy of death: and the Princes petitioned that he should be put to
death.

I list not to conjecture what thy ends should be in questioning these things
concerning the Prophet: but I am sure the questions are to small purpose,
either in dependency on, or in referency to the things at first demanded, in
this thy fourth head of demands: unto which thou have now from me a complete
answer.

CHAP. V.
Thy fifth Head of Demands, is as follows.

ARt not thou one of them that divines for money, and teaches for hire; and if I
will put in thy mouth, thou will preach peace to me? if I will not, thou will
prepare War against me. Did not such bring the people all on heaps, yea
Jerusalem? Did not God say night should come on such; and was not Micah full
of the power, and full of the Spirit, to declare unto them their sin, and
transgression; And is it not a sin and transgression now? answer me.

Answ. The Prophet Micah, Chap. 3. Ver. 11. condemns such Prophets who divined
for money, and such Priests who taught for hire: we have out of holy Scripture
this account of them, what they were. Micah says that these prophets Mich. 3.
5.
were such, who made the people to err; who did bite with their teeth, who
cried peace: who prepared war against them, who did not put into their mouth.
The meaning is: they taught errors; they did tear the true Prophets with
their teeth, in their railing evil language, uttered through the teeth: they
flattered and soothed people in their sins, promising them peace: they sought
to trouble them who did not entertain, and feast them, and did not comply with
them in what they said, and applaud their sayings. These were the men, who in
Micahs days prophesied for money: they would in their prophecyings forbear to
speak any penitential word, Mich. 2. 6.
which humbles and shames sinners: and they would for money speak presumptuous,
or licentious words, to encourage Mic. 2. 11.
people in sin, and particularly in their drunkenness or excess, and it is
certain that the Priests who taught for hire, were only unfaithful and corrupt
Priests, who being uncontent with their portion of Glebes, Tithes and
Offerings, which God had appointed, should be assigned unto them, they would
also be hired, to speak what pleased the people, and justified them in their
sins: making them believe, that Gods Word did as well approve of the profane,
and unclean, as it did of the holy Eze. 22. 26
and clean, not showing the difference of them.

To thy question then: Art not thou one of them, who divines for money, and
teaches for hire.

I answer, I am not any such man who does so: thy supposal that I and other
faithful Ministers have done so, is most unjust: for we make not our people to
err, as did the false prophets of whom Micah speaks, by teaching them lies and
falsehoods; we do not rail upon, and speak all manner of evil of the faithful
Ministers of Christ, as the false prophets did of the true Prophets of the
Lord, tearing them with their teeth, and smiting them with their tongue. We do
not flatter and sooth people in their sins, as did these false prophets: we do
not (as these false prophets did) seek to vex those, who do not afford us
entertainment, and embracement. We do not forbear (when a just oceasion is
offered) to rebuke our people sharply, and to make them ashamed of sin. We do
not speak licentious, or presumptuous words, to encourage people in their
sinfulness, as did the false prophets: we do not countenance any false
teachers, nor yet for base gain (as did the unfaithful corrupt Priests) seek
in our teachings to please, and justify people in their sinful courses: For we
speak not to please men, but God, who tries our hearts: we dare do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth. God has appointed us his servants 1
These. 2. 4
in office, to preserve holy knowledge, and to dispense it to his people. We
are no hirelings of any mortal creature: neither will we be hired for any
worldly considerations, either to betray, or to belie Gods truth: though
oppositions and hatred from worldlings proves to be our portion, for our
preaching for Christ's sake the truths of Christ.

And be it known unto thee, and to all the world: that though I, and other
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, have from God, and the Laws of the Nation
tithes allowed unto us, from whence money arises for supply of our temporal
needs; yet tithes and money arising thence, is not the scope, and end of our
teaching. We are thankful unto Christ for providing for us in this manner:
whereby we are freed from many distractions in his service, and from avocations
from it, wherewith other Ministers (as they complain) are cloyed, who must ride
far and wait long upon Treasurers, and other men for their Salary. We preach
not for tithes, and money accruing to us thence, but out of love to Christ
Jesus our Master, and out of conscience to discharge faithfully our calling and
duty, and out of compassion to our people to save them from death, to gain
them to Christ, and to turn them from the power of Satan unto God. For this it
is we labor and preach, spending our selves, and being spent in study and
preaching, not seeking theirs, but them: Neither count we our life dear unto
us, so we may finish our course with joy, and the Ministry, which we have
received of the Lord, to testify to our people the Grace of God.

We well know; that if we would make money our end, and aim in this world;
there are other courses advantageous and enough contentive, to be took,
forgetting that: and not this course of consuming our selves from morning to
night, and many times in the night, in study, in tiring our spirits, in
mournings of our souls in secret, for the obstinacy, of unruly, unteachable,
ungodly and unconscionable sinners, who care not how uncivilly, unjustly, and
fraudulently they withhold from Christ our Master, their duties, and from us,
his servants, their dues and rights; briefly we preach not for money, but for
the good of our people, that they may be stamped with Gods image in Christ, and
may not prove reprobate silver, rejected of God. We do not preach for hire
(though God gives it unto us) but to bring people to partake of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, with God, and with Christ, for ever and
ever.

To what thou writes which concerns thy self, and my self: namely,

If I will put into thy mouth (say thou to me) thou will preach p^^ce to me:
if I will not, thou will prepare war against me.

I answer. I am by Calling a Minister of the Gospel of Christ, and therefore am
a professed soldier of Jesus Christ, as all other 2 Timothy 2. 3
faithful Ministers are: I must then continually war against the sins, and
errors of the times, and places, where I live: and fight against the powers of
darkness, which seeks to corrupt, and take captives the souls of men. I must
and will denounce Gods judgments against wilful and obstinate sinners, that
they may thoroughly understand, that there is no peace for them: For there is no
peace, says my God, unto the wicked. Isa. 57. 21.
And though false Teachers will speak peace, to those people in their sins and
errors, who are bountiful unto them: yet be thou well assured, that no
bounties or contributions from thee, or from any other, shall stop my mouth,
from uttering faithfully, the messages of the Lord, against those very sins and
errors, wherewith I shall at any time find either thee, or any other of my
people to be tainted. Perhaps thou calls my preaching against them a preparing
war against thee: but I contest not against thy person, but against thy
corruption; I must lift up my voice like a Trumpet, to show my people their
transgression and their sins: and I will not be bribed by any either to hold my
peace, and be silent: or to speak unto you peace, thereby to encourage you, in
any of those abominations, which you resolve to follow.

What is in this fifth Head of demands further writ, is this,

Did not such bring the people on heaps, even Jerusalem? Did not God say night
shall come on such? and was not Micah full of power, and of the Spirit, to
declare unto them their sin? and is it not a sin and transgression now? Answer
me.

Answ. It is already proved out of the Prophet, that the false prophets would
for money, speak words to embolden people to continue in sin: and that the
corrupt Priests would be hired to teach what pleased the people, and what
justified them in their sin; therefore thy Questions will easily be answered.

1. Thou asks: Did not such bring the people on heaps? even Jerusalem.

Answ. The Lord does by Micah threaten, that for these sins of the false
prophets, and of the corrupt Priests, and for the sins of the Princes: Zion
shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem Micah 3. 11, 12.
shall become heaps. Without all doubt the sin of these false Prophets, and
corrupt Priests in teaching lies and errors, and things tending to encourage
them unto sin, and to be secure, having sinned, is a Land-destroying, and a
City-ruining sin.

2. Thou asks. Did not God say, that night should come on such?

Answ. The Lord said concerning these deluding and seducing prophets: that
night shall be unto them, that they shall not have a vision: that it shall be
dark unto them that they shall Micah 3. 5, 6, 7.
not divine: that the Sun shall go down over the Prophets: and the day shall be
dark over them; that they shall be ashamed and confounded, and cover their
lips. The Judgments threatened to befall these false prophets, are these. 1. A
dark night of trouble and calamity shall come upon them, when they shall
neither have any vision, nor any ability to Divine. 2. The Sun of their
prosperity shall set over them, and the days of their living shall be dark or
dreadful. 3. God will discover it, that notwithstanding their former pretenses,
to have vision, and the light of Divine revelation, that they were b^inde,
leaders of the blind to destruction, instead of leading them unto salvation.
4. They shall be exposed to such shame and confusion, that they shall cover
their lips, not daring to speak boldly, or at all, as they wont to do: by
reason of grief, for that contempt, and confusion, which shall be on them. It
is certain that God will punish false teachers with a night of contempt and
confusion.

3. Thou asks: was not Micah full of power, and full of the Spirit, to declare
unto them their sin and transgression.

Answ. The Prophet Micah tells us so in this manner; but truly I am full of
power, by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare to
Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin. Micah having set forth the
faults of the false prophets, shows in the eight verse that his own condition
stood Mic. 3. 8.
in a full opposition to theirs: but truly says he, I am full of power, etc.
as if he had said, you have heard what your false prophets and teachers were:
they were full of coveting your wealth, by the spirit of the world reigning in
them, whereby they were stirred up to prophecy; but I am full of power by the
Spirit of the Lord: his Spirit stirred me up, powerfully to prophecy. They were
full of error, calling evil good, applauding people in their sin: but I am
full of judgment, full of a discerning Spirit, to discover your evils and sins
justly reprovable. They were full of dastardlinesse, fearing to discontent the
people, by telling them that they sinned: but truly I am full of might, full of
the Spirit of courage and boldness, not to fear their faces, in laying open
their sins, and in threatening them for it. Thus it is clear, that Micah was
full of power, by the Spirit to declare unto the P^inces, to the false
prophets, to the corrupt Priests, and to the deluded people, their sins, and
their transgressions. Even thus the faithful Ministers of Christ are full of
zeal, judgment, and boldness, freely to charge home any sort of men, with
their sins and errors, in their discharge of their Ministerial duties.

4. Thou asks: Is it not a sin, and transgression now? Answer me.

Answ. It is in these our days, without all controversy, a sin and
transgression, in all them, who pretend that they are extraordinarily sent of
God to teach, if they make money and enriching themselves, the scope and end of
their teaching: as it is a sin and heinous transgression also in them (as it
was in the false prophets in Micahs time) to teach the people errors, and to
give them encouragements in their sin; and it is a sin and transgression
likewise in such, who profess themselves to be the standing officers in the
Church of Christ, for dispensing holy things, to be uncontent with that
maintenance, which God and the Laws of the Land, has established for them: and
to be hired for filthy g^ine, to preach what is most pleasing to a corrupt
people, and what will help them to justify themselves in their transgressions.
This is as vil'd, as abominable, and as filthy a sin in our times, as ever it
was in those false prophets, and corrupt Priests who lived in Micahs time.

Because thou very peremptorily bids me answer thee, whether it be not a sin
and transgression now: as if thou did think, that I do not account such doings
to be a sin: or as if I and other faithful Ministers, who take tithes, were
therefore guilty of such doings, because we take tithes.

I answer. I and other faithful Ministers of Christ, who take tithes, are no
more guilty of any such doings, which were done by the false prophets, and
corrupt Priests (which Micah relates) Mic. 1. 1* Ie^. 26. 18.
by our taking tithes; then were the holy Levites by their taking tithes, who
lived in Micahs time, and he prophesied in the days of Hezekiah; of which
Levites the Holy Ghost has given 2 Chronicles. 29. 34.
this testimony: the Levites were more upright in heart, to sanctify
themselves then the Priests: therefore as I am clear from all the particulars,
which was done by the false prophets, and corrupt Priests in Micahs days; and
have also plainly told thee, that such doings, is a sin and a transgression
in our days, as well as it was then: so give me leave to tell thee (if thou
already knows not) who in these our days, are those false prophets, who teach
or divine for money: and who those corrupt Priests are, who teach for hire;
that thou may not join with these wicked men, in charging such faults on me,
and other faithful Ministers of Christ, whereof not we, but themselves are
notoriously guilty. Know then,

1. That there is a company of false prophets, Enthusiasts, self-making
teachers in these our days: they pretend they have new lights, the only
revelations of God: and therefore that they are sent from him, to teach the
people: but they make them to err: and they do rail on, and revile the
Preachers of the Gospel: they cry peace and applause to all their followers:
though they know that many of them speak evil of Dignities, and disorderly
leave their callings, and run about in Countries; these false teachers also
disdain, and destroy, and damn all those people, who (as they think) are not
for them and their ways. And in their speakings (as I have it told credibly
from some, who have been well acquainted with them:) they speak not one word
tending to mortify the seed of evil, which is in the heart, whereby it might
be shamed and humbled in the sight of God, and much of their multiplied words
is, to bid their followers detein their tithes, and not hear Ministers, whom
they call Priests. Such teaching does wonderfully please men carnally and
worldly-minded; and so greedy are such teachers to drain to themselves
maintenance, that some of them by raking together sums of money from the
benevolences of their followers, have been suddenly enriched: and after a short
while of continuing in this their course, have become purchasers of something
considerable. These false teachers looking after their unlawful and sordid
gain, and getting, do very suitably resemble the false prophets, who did
divine for money, of whom Micah complained.

2. Know that in these our days, there are a sort of men, who are the Priests
of the Romish Church: who may very well be parallelled with those unfaithful,
covetous, and corrupt Priests which were in Judah, for they tolerate, and teach
for money things truly abominable; the annual rent paid from Curtezans to the
Pope of Rome, for suffering their open stews; their many dispensations for
money, with times of marriage, with adultery, with incest, with perjury, with
murder, with theft, and other enormities: their sales for money, of pardons for
sins committed: their grants for money, of indulgences to commit sin: their
many superstitious inventions of auricular Confessions, of Satisfactions, of
Purgatory, of several Limboes: their injoyning of Pilgrimages, and oblations at
the shrines, and relics of Saints, with their many other devises for money.
All these proclaim them to be a covetous brood, not unlike those Priests
against whom Micah complained, that they taught for hire.

Now as the Prophet Micah himself, and Isaiah, and the other holy Prophets, and
the holy Levites (before spoke of) who all lived in the same time, were no
ways guilty of those gainings whereof Micah complained: So I and other
faithful Ministers of the Word, are not at all concerned in that greedy guilt
of teaching for hire, and preaching for money: wherein the false prophets, and
corrupt Priests were of old, and are now also very faulty. Enough is said to
thy fifth Head of Demands.

CHAP. VI.
Thy sixth Head of Demands is thus expressed by thee.

ARt not thou one of them that seeks for the fleece: and has made a prey upon
the people in this cloudy and dark day? and with force and cruelty ruled over
them? Does not the Lord say, he will seek his sheep, and gather them from your
mouths, and feed them upon the tops of the mountains; even I will do it, says
the Lord God, Ezekiel. 34.

Answ. Thy surmise, that I am like one of those evil shepherds, which was in
Israel is most unjust, though Ezekiels complaint against them, be very just.
That the truth herein may be better cleared: I will

1. Declare what that was, for which the Prophet does blame them. 2. I will
answer to thy demand, which seems to intimate, that I am taxable for those
very same miscarriages, for which the wicked shepherds in Israel were blamed by
the Prophet. 3. I will answer to what thou demands, touching the saying of the
Lord.

First know, that Ezekiel in the 34. chapter quoted by the inveighers against
the evil Shepherds of Israel. These shepherds were their wicked Princes, and
their wicked civil Governors, and their wicked Priests, their Church-rulers.
Both are called shepherds in several Scriptures; and there are some passages in
that Chapter, which of necessity must be meant of the one sort of Shepherds as
well as of the other. The Prophet from Ver. ^.
God does denounce a woe against them for feeding themselves, and for not
feeding the flock. Their greatest fault was, they regarded themselves, and did
not regard their duty, and particularly that which concerned the flock
committed to their charge.

Their regarding themselves is in this wise expressed by the Prophet: Ye eat
the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool.

In these words (ye eat the fat) the Prophet shows that wicked Priests, called
shepherds, sinned in feeding themselves with that delicate, excellent, and
choice food, the fat, which God had forbid them to eat: for God had made it a
perpetual Statute in Israel, for all their Generations throughout all their
Lev. 3. 17.
habitations, that no Israelite should eat the fat: and that whosoever did eat
it, he should be cut off from the People. Lev. 7. 23, 25
These wicked men would for the satisfying of their own bellies disobey Gods
command; and by that act manifested, that they made their bellies their god;
and this sin was the more heinous in these wicked Priests, because they had a
special Lev. 3. 14, 15, 16.
charge to burn the fat: but being uncontent with that portion of the shoulder
and breast, and other things of offerings, which was allowed unto them from
God, and being addicted to fair finely, and to satisfy their liquorish taste,
they (contrary to the Law of God) would have the fat to eat, which was as
unlawful for them, as for any other Israelite. It 1 Samuel 2. 13, 14.
seems they would herein imitate, Hophni and Phinehas, the wicked sons of Eli,
who would not burn the fat, but would have it with flesh to roast, and by
violence took it: they are blamed for eating fat contrary to the Law, and it
was a robbery from the holy offerings, made by them which they ought not to
have done.

Again, in these words (ye cloth you with the wool) or ye put on your selves
with wool, but feed not the flock: The Prophet blames them for regarding their
clothes more then their calling: for minding the arraying themselves with
wool, rather then their discharging their duty to the flock, or their service
in the manner which they ought: for it was the duty of the Lev. 6. 4, 23, 32.
^zek. 44. 17, 18, 19.
Priests, to be clad in linen garments, and to have no wool come upon them,
causing sweat when they were to perform holy service, in the inner Court: and
as soon as that service was ended, they were to put off their linen garments,
and to lay them up in appointed places, and to put on their common apparel: but
it seems that these wicked Priests (here called shepherds) were loath to put
off, and put on several garments, in their feveral services, as it was enjoined
them; they would officiate altogether in their common garments: and though God
was pleased, during only some unsettlement of Zach. 3. 3, 4, 5.
his people, after their return from Babylon, to dispense with the using
various garments, in several services: yet before the peoples captivity, while
the Church continued settled, God was displeased with the omitting it, counting
it a breach of his command, and one of the prophanings of his holy things, even
of his Ordinance, as he complains both in Jeremiah Ier. 23. 11. Eze. 22. 26
and Ezekiel, who lived in the same time, the one at Jerusalem, and the other
among the Captives, who went with King Eze. 1. 1, 2.
Je^o^akin into captivity, Thus these wicked Priests regarded themselves, and
did not regard their flock.

Their not regarding the the feeding of the flock, is expressed by the Prophet,
who plainly sets down their demeanor both toward the sound, and toward the
distempered part of the flock.

Their behavior toward the sound part of the flock is thus related: ye kill
them that are fed.

Some (by them who are fed) understand such, who were rich in temporals: whose
death was wrought in these times, by the wicked Priests and false prophets,
instigating wicked Princes (prone enough thereto) to slay or kill them, all
these sharing in the goods took from those, whom by unjust judgments and
wicked force they had put to death. It is certain that the Princes of these
times were covetously affected, and therefore also bloodily minded. Behold,
says the Prophet, the Princes Ezekiel. 22. 6.
of Israel every one of them were in thee (he speaks of Jerusalem) to their
power to shed blood. And again, her Princes ver. 27.
in the midst thereof are Wolves, ravening the prey to shed blood, and to
destroy souls (that is to root out their persons) and to get dishon^st gain;
and it is certain, that the wicked Priests and Prophets did solicit these
Princes, to put to death some, as men seditious, rebellious, and enemies to the
public welfare, Ier. 26. 11. and 23.
who opposed them: they petitioned that Jeremiah should die: and the Prophet
Vrijah was at that time by the Kings command, slain by the sword; and it is
most certain that the false prophets (with whom the wicked Priests did in many
things conspire) had an hand both in the death, and in taking also of the
wealth of many slain in those times. The Prophet says there is a conspiracy
of her Prophets in the midst Eze. 22. 25
thereof like a roaring Lion, ravening the prey, they have devoured souls (that
is, destroyed persons) they have taken treasure, and precious things, they have
made her many widows in the midst thereof; and it is very probable that the
wicked Priests (called here shepherds) were guilty in partaking with those
ravenous murders, seeing they are by the Prophet charged to have killed those
of the flock, who with wealth were thick or well furnished.

Others understand by them who were fed, such of the flock, who had been
formerly well taught by the holy Priests, gracious Levites, and good Prophets,
and had thickened or thriven well by their Doctrine in the knowledge and
understanding of Gods Law. These were killed by these wicked shepherds, (who
had no natural care of the good of the flock) partly by their starving them, in
not affording them vision, to keep Pro. 29. 18
them from perishing: and partly by poisoning them with errors, and lying
falsehoods which they frequently taught in those days, in perverting the Word of
the living God, and violating Ier. 23. 26. Eze. 22. 26
his Law.

Now whether it be understood, that these wicked shepherds had an hand, in
actual dispatching the well-fed of the flock, from their temporal lives and
livelihoods: or that they only slew them in their spirituals, by depriving
their souls of its necessaries, and by poisoning them, with corrupt
abominations; it is plain, that their demeanor was very wicked toward those
of the flock, who were sound.

Their carriage toward those of the flock, which was distempered, is related
to be evil enough in general to them all, and very evil in many particulars to
some of them; for thus the Prophet writes. The diseased have ye not
strengthened, neither have ye Ezekiel, 34. 4
healed that which was sick: neither have ye bound up that which was broken:
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away: neither have ye
sought that which was lost: but with force, and with cruelty have ye ruled them.

In these words the Prophet indites these wicked shepherds, for not exercising
those acts of their calling, which the distress of their flock called on them
to perform; as namely.

1. Some of their flock was diseased or languishing thorough the afflictions
and discouragements of these times: by these their souls were made feeble and
faint, as sheep are fainted and weakened by the Suns scorching heat: and yet
these shepherds used toward them not one word of strengthening instruction, and
encouragements to uphold their spirits from sinking under sad discouragements;
but they rather added affliction to their affliction, for in this Prophet, God
speaks thus unto some, who taught in those Times: With lies ye have Eze. 13. 22
made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad.

2. Some of the flock was sick in and with sin: sin had wounded and hurt
them; and yet these wicked shepherds spoke not unto them any wholesome, sound,
or healing words, whereby they might have been thoroughly healed: that which
they spoke, did heal the hurt of the people slightly, speaking Ier. 6. 14.
unto them peace, peace, when there was no peace; yea, what they spoke, did not
help to cure, but to encourage them rather in their continuance in sins; for
God in this Prophet speaks thus to false teachers: ye strengthened the hands of
the wicked, Eze. 13. 22
that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life.

3. Some of the flock was broken, or loose joynted, with distress in spirit,
partly with mourning for their own sins and the abominations of others, and
partly with their own perplexed irresolutions what they should do; whether they
should flee: to which the false prophets in their teaching Eze. 13. 20
sought to press them: and these wicked shepherds spoke not one word of
comfort, tending to bind up their broken hearts, and satisfy their disquieted
spirits, whereas the true Prophets Isa. 40. 2.
did it with consolations from God: speaking to them comfortably, even to the
very heart, assuring them that the humble and Eze. 9. 4, 6.
contrite had their sins pardoned, and that in the general desolation, their
persons should be spared.

4. Some of the flock was driven away, partly by the force of Satan's
temptations, from truth, and holiness, into errors and sins: and partly by
wicked men's violent persecutions, Ier. 26. 21
into other Nations: we read that the Prophet Vrijah, was out of fear forced to
sly into Egypt: yet these wicked shepherds spoke not one word of conversion,
tending to bring the flock back to the acknowledgement of the truth, and to the
forsaking of their sins, neither did they speak any one word, for reducing
home to dwell in peace and safefty any of those, who were cast out of their
homes, and the land of their Nativity, by their brethren, for Gods Name sake.
Isa. 66. 5.


5. Some of the flock was lost in sins by their own follies, and the bad
examples of the wicked Princes, Prophets, and Priests, whom they followed: and
yet the wicked shepherds did not seek or use any means to reclaim them from
their transgressions, or to restrain them in them: but they did encourage them
therein, by justifying (in their teachings) those lies of the false prophets,
whereby the people was hardened in sin, and so continued lost in the ditch of
corruption, into which they were slidden. Moreover some of the flock was lost,
in forsaking God, and in serving Idols, on mountains and Eze. 8. 5, 6 7, 10,
11, 14, 16.
on, hills, and at Jerusalem, at the Gate of the Altar, at the door of the
Court, at the door of the Lords House, at the door of the Temple of the Lord;
and yet we do not read that these wicked Priests or shepherds did seek to
restrain any Idolatries, any where in the Land: or that they sought to bring
back unto the true worship of God any, either of the Princes, or of the people,
who were lost in being plunged in idolatrous and superstitious abominations.

6. The Prophet sets out their evil carriage in general toward the flock in
these words: But with force and cruelty have ye ruled over them. These wicked
Priests (called shepherds) domineered unwarrantably over the people: they
violently constrained them (besides what was their dues, and commanded by Gods
Law to be given unto them) to grant them what they exacted, and that both when
and how they 2 Kin. 24. 4 Lam. 4. 13
pleased: yea, and with fierce cruelty, by the help of wicked Princes, as
bloody as themselves, they shed the blood of those who would do nothing but
what was just and right: the consideration Jer. 23, 10, 11 Lam. 4. 14 Ier. 23.
11.
whereof made Jeremiah say; that their course was evil, and their force not
right, for both Prophet and Priest are profane: they became profane by
polluting themselves by blood, as well as by their polluting of Gods
Ordinances, and by working wickedness in his house, and Ezekiel says, that
they ruled the flock with force and cruelty; they rigorously tyranized over
their persons and states, making their lives bitter unto them, and forcing some
of them out of their lives, that they might get what they injuriously gaped
after in their states: thus he who departed from evil was made a prey, and
these wicked Isa. 59. 1^
shepherds, not caring for their flock, did in this manner, like ravenous
Wolves, prey on it.

The doleful event of this ill usage of the flock by their wicked shepherds,
was the scattering them, and exposing them to be devoured or destroyed in all
lands, whether they were driven, and whether also they were scattered in the
dark, and cloudy day of the Nations public calamities and utter desolations.

By all this which has been said, thou and any who reads the thirty fourth
Chapter of Ezekiel, may perceive, that the evil shepherds therein mentioned,
are blamed by him for these faults.

1. For their violating Gods Ordinance, which forbad them to eat the fat, and
to wear woollen, in some parts of his service, both these they did.

2. For their killing some of their flock, in their temporals, by procuring
their death, and by actually poisoning their souls, with teaching lies and
falsehoods.

3. He blames them for not regarding to discharge their duties toward the
flock: they did not teach any thing, which tended to strengthen the weak, and
to heal the sick souls: or to comfort the distressed, or to convert
transgressors, or to persuade to a kind and gentle recall of the banished, or
to reclaim any to reformation, or to restrein idolatrous and superstitious
inventions and practices.

4. He condemns them for their tyrannical domineering over the flock, and for
using them cruelly.

These were the things which the Prophet condemned in these wicked shepherds:
but their taking of their dues allotted unto them in offerings, and in tithe
fleeces, and other things tithable, which was assigned them, was no sin at
all, because God had appointed it: neither is it in any place reproved or spoke
against by the Prophet Ezekiel: neither durst he do so, because he durst not
speak against any standing Ordinance of God: such was tithes and offerings in
those times to be paid unto the Priests and Levites.

I have now done with showing thee what that was for which the Prophet Ezekiel
did blame those evils shepherds.

Secondly, I am to answer thy demands, which concerns my self; thus thou
writes.

Art not thou one of them that seeks for the fleece: and has made a prey upon
the people in this cloudy and dark day, and with force and cruelty ruled over
them?

Answ. The wicked shepherds or Priests (of whom the Prophet speaks) being
uncontent with the tenths and offerings allowed to them, did seek to have also
a share in those fleeces, and other goods of the people, which was the ninth
part, which God ordained that the people should possess. And these Priests
would by violence and tyrannical cruelty (as has been showed) wrest from the
people, what was undue unto the Priest. I am neither one of those, nor yet like
any of these, who seeks to have from people, either fleeces, or any other goods
which is not due to me; but truly I am like one of those holy Levites, and
religious Priests (in those times) who did only seek and look after their dues
of tithe fleeces, and other tithes, from those who were to pay it unto them;
and as it was in them no sin to do so, no more is it in me or any other
faithful Minister a sin, to demand, and seek after, and receive that which is
our due (as tithes are) God and the Laws of our Nation, having allotted them
unto us. There is neither illegality, nor any iniquity in that act, for which
we can be justly taxed: though both injustice and iniquity was in the wicked
Priests in taking and wresting from people unlawfully that which was the
peoples, and was no ways due unto the Priests.

2. To the other part of thy Demands, which is,

Art not thou one of them that has made a prey upon the people in this cloudy
and dark day?

I answer. I have not made any kind of prey upon any one of the people, either
in the cloudy and dark day of our Nations late Civil War and calamity: or yet
in any other day whatsoever.

There is a twofold kind of prey, which men make upon one another. 1. All the
spoil, which (in a time of peace, when Isa. 10. 1, 2
there is no war) is got by unjust acts, and unlawful arts, is Eze. 38. 12 13
called a prey. 2. All spoil took in war by enemies, or from enemies is also
called a prey.

The people (of whom the Prophet in the 34. of Ezekiel speaks, that they were
made a prey) were both ways preyed upon in the dark and cloudy day of the
Nations calamity and captivity. In all the former part of that day (which began
at the first declination of the State, and ended with their captivity) the
people of the Land endured great and unjust taxations, oppressions,
persecutions and spoilings, from their Princes and other Rulers, from their
wicked Priests and false prophets. Jehoiakim taxed the Land, and exacted silver
and gold of every 2 King. 23. 35. Ier. 26. 20 Eze. 22. 27 Ezekiel. 45. 8 9
one of the people of the Land, according to the taxation: and he slew Vrijah
the Prophet. The Princes also in that time was exceeding covetous, shedding
blood to get gain: they oppressed and exacted on people, spoiling them; yea
and the wicked Priests and prophets were also covetous, to have from people
deceitfully and cruelly, what did not legally belong unto them: from the least
to the greatest of them, every one was Ier. 6. 13.
given to covetousness: and from the Prophet to the Priest, every one dealt
falsely; thus that people was made a prey upon before their captivity.

In the latter part of that cloudy and dark day of sufferings, which was at
their captivity: these people were then made a prey by Heathens; both by those
who led them captives, the Chaldeans; and also by the neighboring Heathens,
who helped on that captivity, as be the Edomites, who laid hands on Obadiah 13.
14.
their substance, and did cut off those who did escape: yea, they were then
made desolate, and were swallowed up on every side, becoming a prey, and
derision to the residue of the Heathen that were round about.

In this manner, and no otherwise (that I read of) did these peoples own
Princes, Priests and false prophets, and their enemies make a prey upon them,
in the day of their sufferings and utter suppressing.

To thy demand I truly say: I have not to my knowledge, by any unjust act, or
unlawful arts, in the times of peace, got any thing from any of the people,
which was justly theirs: neither have I in the times of the late wars took from
any by violence, or force, or any other unlawful course, any thing, which was
justly theirs to possess: and therefore I am not one of those, nor like one of
those, of whom the Prophet spoke, who made a prey upon the people in the cloudy
and dark day of our Nations, troubles and tribulations. I have been in all
these times, and am still content with the tithes, which by Gods and man's Law
are due unto me; knowing full well, that the taking of these of the people, is
an act just and righteous in the sight both of God and man: knowing also that
an understanding and just man cannot account, that a Ministers taking the
tithes, which are his dues from the people, is a making a prey upon the people:
unless he conceives also, that the asking and receiving by any one of the
people, their rents, and of their due debts, from any of their debtors, is a
making a prey upon their debtors in this dark and cloudy day: but sure they are
under a judgment of great darkness and cloudinesse, who judge thus either of
the Ministers, or of the peoples receiving of their dues.

3. To that other part of thy Demand, which is,

Art not thou one of them that has with force and cruelty ruled over them.

I answer. I have not used either force, or cruelty toward any of my people.
This is my rejoicing, even the testimony of my conscience, that I (as became a
Minister of God) have showed gentleness toward all men, and have been
patient, and in meekness have instructed them that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure would give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth. I
have not used among them Zac. 11. 15
the instruments of a foolish wicked shepherd, as did the wicked shepherds of
Israel, namely, the sheeres of violence to take from them what is their right,
and the knife of cruelty to butcher their persons, and destroy their lives: but
I have used only the instruments of a good shepherd: namely, the spirit of
love, and of meekness, to persuade them to do that which is right according to
Gods, and man's Law, agreeing with Gods, which is their duty, and the rod of a
righteous Law, to drive such into the paths of righteousness, who have straied
from rightful into wrong doing, and will be no other ways reduced, to do that
which is right, which is their duty. The Law which I have been sometime
constrained from some, to make use of, for the recovering of my dues, as also
all other men may lawfully use the same course, in appealing to Caesar, and the
Laws of the Land, when other courses cannot prevail to obtain what belongs
unto them from men resolved to wrong them: I say this Law is clamoured against
by such men who do wrong, and desire to do wrong to others, as if it were
nothing else but force and cruelty. These exorbitant and disobedient men speak
evil of the things which they do not, or are not willing to understand: for the
just Laws of a Nation, are Proprietaries Sanctuary, the reliever of the
oppressed, and the appointer of due sufferings to those that do evil, and wrong
their brethren. The Law (says the Apostle) is good, if it be used lawfully,
knowing that the Law is made for the lawless, 1 Timothy 1. 8 9.
and disobedient: namely for such people who are licentiously and rebelliously
disposed; the Law is to bring such to understand and to practice their duty,
who without its determinations will not out of a willing mind, apply
themselves to that which is right and just. Briefly, I have not at all used
either force or cruelty toward any of my people: but I have applied my self to
do that which is just and righteous, fit for me to do, according to the Law or
Word of God, as I am a Minister of the Church: and according to the Laws of my
Nation, as I am a member of the Commonwealth.

Thy Demand touching the saying of the Lord, is this,

Does not the Lord say he will seek his sheep, and gather them from your
mouths, and feed them upon the tops of the mountains, even I will do it,
says the Lord God? Ezekiel. 39.

I will answer in their order to thy three Questions here propounded.

1. Thou asks. Does not the Lord say he will seek his sheep?

Answ. The Lord does say so, both in the eleventh and twelfth verses of the
thirty fourth of Ezekiel. I (says he) will search my sheep, and seek them out:
And again, I will se^k out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places
whether they have been scattered. The Lord who is the shepherd of Israel, made
good once this his Word to his people Israel, when he sought and brought them
out of the Babylonish captivity, and from all places, whether they had been
scattered: and the Prophet says, that he will set his hand a second time to
recover the remnant of that people, which shall be left from all places; He
shall set up an Ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble Isa. 11. 11, 12
the Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah, from the
four corners of the earth; yea, and will also seek out all other men, true
Israelites, according to the election Ezekiel. 34. 30, 31.
of grace, who are his flock, the flock of his pasture: and he will gather them
to the Church, which is his fold: and make Joh. 10. 16
them, and the places round about his hill (which is his Zion, his Church) a
blessing. Eze. 34. 26


2. Thou asks. Does not the Lord say he will gather them from your mouth.

Answ. The Lord speaking of the wicked shepherds in Israel, (who had neglected
to feed the flocks, and for their own advantage had by their evil actings been
instruments to scatter some and slay others of them) says, I will deliver my
flock Eze. 34. 10
from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them: he promises herein to
deliver them in their temporal livelihoods, Isa. 9. 12.
from the open ravening mouth of these their destroyers, who were worse then
their professed enemies; and their souls from ruin by the deceitful slattering
mouth of these corrupters, teaching Pro. 26. 28
them lies and falsehoods.

Thou asks. Does not the Lord say, that he will feed them on the tops of the
mountains: even I will do it says the Lord.

Answ. The Lord speaking of his sheep says, I will bring them out from the
people, and gather them from the Countries, Ezekiel. 34. 13, 14.
and will bring them to their own Land, and feed them upon the mountains of
Israel, by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the Country. And
again he says: I will feed in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of
Israel shall their fold be; there shall they be in a good fold, and in a fat
pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel; his promise is to bring
his people Israel from all Countries to their own Land, and there to feed them,
and to fold them, and to fat them also with blessings both temporal and
spiritual, as the residue of the Chapter in several passages does express.
Yea, and his promise is also to his spiritual flock, that he will gather them
out of all Nations and Kindreds, and bring them to his Church: and there he
will also feed them, and fold them, and fat them with blessings. He says that
he will set over them the great shepherd of the flock, Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24.
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is called David, to feed them, and to be a Prince
among them to rule them; he promises also to give unto them under this
Shepherd, faithful Teachers, Pastors according to Jer. 3. 15.
his own heart, who shall feed them with knowledge and understanding: and that
these their Teachers shall not be removed Isa. 30, 20.
into a corner any more, but they shall teach publicly, in the mountain of
the Lords house, which is his Church, which shall be established in the top of
the mountains, in all Kingdoms, Isa. 2. 2, 3.
and be exalted above the hills, above all States; he Eze. 34. 25
promises that the destroying evil beasts shall cease out of the Land: and
shall not hurt nor destroy in all his Church, his holy mountains, and that his
spiritual sheep shall dwell safely, Isa. 65. 25 Eze. 34. 25 Ier. 33. 22 Eze.
34. 26
having none to destroy, and many faithful Levites, true Pastors shall be
multiplied to regard them, and teach them: and above all they shall have God
himself to shoure down on them, showers of blessings.

I answer them in brief to thy questions. The Lord does say that he will seek
his sheep: the Lord does say, that he will deliver his flock from the mouth of
wicked shepherds: and the Lord does say, that he will feed his sheep on the
mountains of Israel.

I do not perceive to what purpose thou have asked these questions: neither how
from them, thou can gain any advantage of plea, or justification of thy self in
the course wherein thou art for the present. For,

1. Though the Lord says, that he will seek his scattered sheep: yet he
thereby gives thee no allowance, to make thy self a wandering sheep, from his
settled flock in the place where thou lives: thou can have thence no
encouragement at all; to despise his settled Ordinances, to withdraw from the
footsteps of his flock, and from his shepherds tents. Thou have thence no grant
given thee, to push all the diseased of the flock with horrid aggravations of
their faults (seeking thereby to scatter (...). 34 21 (...). 4. 8.
them) which charity should cover, and not make the public professed Religion
be evil spoken of by Antichristians, because of some blemishes among some of
its Professors. The Lord seek and search thee out, and bring thee again to the
path of understanding things aright, least thou remain in the Congregation
P^o. 21. 16
of the dead.

2. Though the Lord says, that he will deliver his sheep from the mouth of
such wicked shepherds, who devoured their substance, taking from the sheep,
that which was their proper maintenance, wherein the Priests had no right: yet
this saying of the Lord does not warrant thee, or any other to detein from any
faithful Pastor or Minister, those rights, which is properly theirs, and to
which not any of the sheep, can lay any just claim. God has a time to right
his faithful Shepherds from the wrongs done them, by those who ptetend they are
the only faithful sheep, whereas they are men unreasonable, wholly resolved, by
striving with their faithful Pastors, to wrest the dues of their teachers from
them, and to swallow up together with their own Inheritances, Gods portion
also, which he allots to the Pastors of his Church. The Lord keep thee ftom the
pernicious courses of such men, and from the curse threatened them. Mal. 3. 8, 9


3. Though the Lord says, that he will feed his sheep, on his own mountains
in his Church, and the holy Assemblies thereof: yet this his promise does not
license thee, or any other to frequent the mountains of Idolaters, and hills
of Heretics, as if he there did feed his people: the Lord threatens the
forsakers and forgetters of his holy mountain, his true Chutch: and
particularly says touching frequent resorters to corrupt meetings: Behold it
is written before me, I will Isa. 65. 7, 8, 11, 12.
not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom your
iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together says the Lord, which
have burnt incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me from the hills,
therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom. If ever thou
means to find a blessing from God, in feeding thee with meat, which endures
unto everlasting life: thou must expect to receive it from him, in his own
mountain of Zion, in his own true Orthodox Church, where he commands a
blessing, even life for evermore: but not in the idolatrous mountain of
Babylon, or in the Babel mountains of heretical confusions, which are
mountains of prey, where the souls of people are preyed upon, by beastly men
and unclean spirits.

Enough is spoke to thy sixth Head of Demands.
CHAP. VII.
Thus thou writes in setting down thy seventh Head of Demands.

WOuld thou bear rule among the people, if they should take away thy means?
would thou divine, if they should take away thy money? would thou keep the
flock if they should take away the fleece? Did not the Prophets cry against
such: and how can thou clear thy self from these steps: if thou can, answer
me by Scripture, and Apostles practice.

Answ. I have already answered the fourth demand, and proved that I am clear
from ruling by that means, which Jeremiah cried against: I have in answering
thy fifth demand proved, that I am free from the practice of such, who divined
for money, and taught for hire, against whom Micah complained. I have already
in answering thy sixth Demand proved, that I am not taxable, with that kind of
seeking the fleece, and making a prey on the people, which Ezekiel blamed in
wicked shepherds, and therefore I shall not need here to prove that which is
already done.

But to thy Demand, what my actings toward the people would be, in case they
should withhold from me, and deprive me of maintenance by tithes, or money for
tithes, or tithe fleeces, which I now have from them, by the Law of God, and of
the Nation.

I will answer to the substance of thy Demand, and then I will say something to
thee who do demand it.

1. I say, though honesty, equity, yea, and piety too, should be so far
abandoned by men, that they should universally deteine from Ministers their
rightful dues: and though iniquity of the time, should so far prevail, as to
obtain the abrogation of those very Laws of this Nation, which impowers
Ministers to plead for, and to recover their rights: and though Ministers
should be left without any remedy and redress from men: yet I (for my part) am
resolved to continue in my calling of preaching constantly the Gospel, and of
tendering the welfare of the flock committed to my charge, during my health,
liberty and life: for I know the woe is dreadful, if I preach not the Gospel:
and the work however is comfortable, though when we be 1 Cor. 9. 16. 1 These. 2.
2.
shamefully entreated, we are bold in our God to speak unto the people the
Gospel of God with much contention; therefore my work in the Ministry (God
willing) shall not cease, though wicked men should seek to cause it cease (as
they hope) by deteining my maintenance. God who sets us Ministers on his
work, will care and provide for us, either by ordinary or extraordinary means,
till we have finished our course: and therefore we have from him encouragement
enough to continue at his work; though Sacrilegists should make us temporally
poor, yet then we shall by our labors (as now we do) strive 2 Cor. 6. 10
to make many spiritually rich: though they should bring us into a condition of
having nothing, yet then having the Lord to be our portion and play master, we
should possess all things: though we should be troubled on every side, yet we
shall not be distressed: though we should be perplexed, yet we shall not 2 Cor.
4. 8, 9.
be in despair: though we should be persecuted of men, yet we shall not be
forsaken of God: for he will either suggest unto us the undertaking of some
honest course for a livelihood, which will least hinder our spiritual laboring
in the Word and Doctrine, or he will raise up unto us some gracious Obadiahs,
who will nourish us his servants: or if all humane and worldly means of
ordinary providence fail: yet we know he is a God Allsufficient, able to do for
us abundantly above all that we ask or Ephesians. 3. 20.
think. We know he did extraordinarily relieve (when ordinary means of living
failed) his own Prophet Eliah, by ravens 1 Kin. 17. 6 14, 15.
and by miracle: and he did satisfy his own people in the Wilde^ness, by
raining down for them the bread of Heaven: and Ps. 105. 40
we know that his kindness to us his servants, is as ready to supply our
wants, in all our extremities, seeing he has bid us be content with such
things as we have, and withal promises, Heb. 13. 5.
saying, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. We have this great
encouragement from him, and therefore our labor for him shall assuredly
continue; for we may boldly say, The Lord Heb. 13. 6.
is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. We Ministers have
no reason to be discouraged by men's withdrawing our maintenance: seeing the
omnipotent God, who gives us our present means, does engage, that for the
future, means shall not be lacking unto us: with which whatever it be, we
shall be thankfully content, and will continue in his service with all faithful
diligence.

2. To thee (who demands whether I would discharge my Ministerial service, if
people should take away my Maintenance) this I say, the murmr which is among
many (in these times) against mine and other faithful Ministers maintenance, is
doubtless a murmuring against God, because he did not make us to be creatures,
to live without food and raiment, and other temporal necessaries: but made us
men like your selves, compassed with the same infirmities, and needing like
temporal supplies for back and belly, and other necessaries, as all other men
do: but the Lo^d will one day answer such by himself, and will let them know,
that his Ministerial servants, whom they sought to discourage, by disobeying
their holy teachings, by murmurings against their maintenance; by defrauding
them in any parts thereof, and by unjust deteining the whole from them, shall
be comforted, when themselves shall be tormented: Behold, says God, my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
Isa. 65; 14
and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

Thou have a sufficient answer to thy seventh Head of Demands.
CHAP. VIII.
Thy eight Head of Demands is this.

ARt not thou in the steps of them, that the Apostle speaks of to the Romans,
that with thy fair speeches, and good words, deceives the hearts of the simple:
which serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but thy own belly, Romans 16. 18.

Answ. It is very clear, that causing divisions and offenses Romans 16. 17
contrary to the doctrine which the Romans learned, was the path in which they
walked, of whom the Apostle speaks: and the steps which they took were these.

1. An hypocritical pretending that they served the Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 18.

2. A real intending to serve their own bellies, by causing divisions and
offenses.

3. An earnest contending with fair speeches, and good words to deceive the
hearts of the simple.

1. They whom the Apostle speaks of, in Romans 16. caused divisions, by venting
doctrines contrary to that holy doctrine of faith, which the Romans had
learned: whereby the simple sort among them (it seems) dissented and separated
from them, who persisted in the true faith taught and learned. These sowers of
division sought by this means to make Bethel the House of God, a Bether or
mountain of division. Cant. 2. 17


2. They whom the Apostle spoke of, caused offenses; namely, both to the right
believers, who were justly offended by these men's fomenting of divisions and
separations: and also unto professional believers: whose bitter censurings,
judgings and despisings of one another (whereby the weak and strong in faith
were offended at one another actions) was promoted by Romans 14. 15
these who put stumbling blocks, and occasions to fall in their brethrens way.

3. They of whom the Apostle spoke, did pretend that they did serve the Lord
Jesus Christ, hoping thereby to gain credence with the people, and so the more
unsuspectedly to work on them, to divide from one another in their affections,
and Congregations; but the Apostle says, that those men served not the Lord
Jesus Christ: and he fervently prayed for the peoples exemption from such a
dividing delusion, saying, The God of patience and consolation grant you to be
like minded one toward Romans 15. 5, 6
another, according to Christ Jesus, that ye may with one mind, and one mouth
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. They of whom the Apostle speaks did intend, in making divisions and
offenses, to draw from the divided and offended Phil. 3. 19. Mark 7. 19
earthly things, for cramming with delicates their belly (which is the
receptacle of all meats) and for pampering their flesh, and its other lusts,
all which receive from the belly, much of their inflammation: for the belly is
a Kitchen cherishing, and keeping warm the seeds of all manner of carnal
lusts: to which (it seems) these wicked seekers to pervert the believing
Romans, Romans 13. 14
were addicted, and were resolved to serve their lusts, in seeking to be from
any sort or faction of people, provided for their flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof.

5. They of whom the Apostle speaks, did deceive the hearts of the simple, by
good words and fair speeches. They wrought on men, who were unskilful, and
unwary, easy to be led aside, simple hearts, on men, who were of weak
judgments, and strong affections, on these they wrought, not by sound words,
convincing them by evidence of truth; but by wooing words, full of flatterings,
promising them much good, and full of blessings, or good wishings unto them, if
they will take that course which they propounded to them; herein dealing with
them as subtle thieves deal with simple travelers; they tell them of a better,
pleasanter, and far nearer way to their journeys end, then that is in which
they are passing: and they with many sugared pleasing words offer themselves to
them, to guide them therein, but they lead them out of the common road, to a
place fitted for robbing of them; or they serve them as Satan did Evah; she by
his fair flattering, fawning, and seemingly well-wishing language, was deceived
to her undoing.

Such were the men of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 16. but neither I, nor any
other faithful Minister of the Gospel, are in the paths, and steps of these
deceivers: for,

1. Their most pleasant and plausible words tended merely to work among the
people divisions, and offenses: but our words both in comfortings and
threatenings (for both we use) do all of them in their very tendency seek to
breed and keep among our people an holy union in heart and affections, and in
all 2 Timothy 2. 15 Heb. 4. 12.
holy conversation. Our dividing (as it is our duty) the Word of God aright,
does sometimes convincingly (through Gods blessing) divide sinners from their
sins, which are offenses to God and good men: and so prepares them to an
amendment, and to a removing of what offends: but our dividing the Word aright,
does not, neither ought it tend to work between people and people a causeless
separation and division from one another, either in their affections, or in
their Congregation, for it chiefly aims to teach all, how they (according to
Gods will) may with one mind, and with one mouth glorify God.

2. They of whom the Apostle speaks, did not serve Christ, but their own belly.
They did not (as good servants would) seek to promote his glory, his honor,
his Kingdom, and his Word among his people: they set not themselves to teach
them the faith of Christ, and love to Christ, and love to one another: nor to
acquaint them with the peace of Christ, nor to excite them to show forth the
virtues of Christ, his humility, his patience, his meekness, his wisdom, and
his other imitable excellencies in their lives and conversation: but they
served their own bellies; they sought by causing divisions and offenses among
people, to fish for themselves in these troubled waters; to suck out thence no
small advantage, toward providing for their own ease, security, sensuality,
and satisfying of all their worldly and fleshly lusts; Whereas I and other
faithful Ministers are no Caterers for worldly and fleshly lusts, as were these
Deceivers. We serve not our own bellies, but the Lord Jesus Christ: for we do
not seek (as these Deluders did) to serve our own turns by fomenting divisions
and offenses among others: we affect not invitations unto any man's dainties:
God has given us a nature to be content with a little, and grace to be content
with much less then nature craveth. The providing for our frail bodies things
lawful and necessary, is not that serving of the belly, which the Apostle
condemns: neither is it unlawful unto us Ministers, or to any other rank of
men to 1 Timothy 5. 23
provide things necessarily serviceable for life and health: yet the feeding
our own and others bodies, is not made by us our business; but the feeding our
own and others souls, with the word which abides to everlasting life, is the
scope and end of our labors in our serving Jesus Christ; on this work we
attend, and are wholly intent that Christ our Master may be glorified by our
service. The labors of the man of God (such are we Ministers whom he has
called and employed in his Ministry) is for the mouth, not for the belly: for
study Eccles. 6. 7
of holy Scripture, and finding out acceptable words, and giving our selves
unto daily attendance upon reading, meditation and doctrine, as that by our
mouth and lips we may preach unto people, and teach them the heavenly knowledge
of Jesus Christ; and thereby feed many: and though while we live the appetite
will not be filled, with studying out more knowledge, in the Mystery of Christ,
and with laboring for the good of people, in communicating to them such
knowledge; yet as faithful servants to our Master Christ, we do seek only the
advancement of his glory, and not our own advantages; even by teaching his
people how they may proceed in all the ways of Christ, from strength to
strength, from faith to faith, from grace to grace, from one degree unto
another, we serve Jesus Christ and not our selves and our bellies.

3. I and other faithful Ministers do not in our preaching use such good words
and fair speeches, for which the Apostle blames the deceivers of the simple
Romans: we use no words commending and applauding them, no wishings of
prosperity and success unto them, in their pursuit of things unwarrantable, we
use no words enticing them to factions and separations, no words promising
things unperformable; we use unto them no flattering words, no speeches which
merely allures the affections, and does not inform the understanding with the
very truth. Our speech and preaching is not with the entising words 1 Cor. 2. ^
13.
of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit. We speak not with
humane eloquence, which contains often words without matter, but we speak words
which the holy Ghost teaches, which are full of substance, and evidence of
truth: words which are good indeed, because they have God for their Author,
and contein good and wholesome matters, and they do good to them who are
upright, and gives light and understanding Micah 2. 7. Psalm. 119. 130
to the simple. I can boldly and truly say, I have taught my people (since I
came among them) nothing but the Word of Truth, which tends to inform their
judgments, and to reform their corrupt will and affections, and to conform
their persons and lives to the holy will of God in all things. I tell thee
therefore truly, I am not in the steps of them, who with fair speeches and
good words, deceive the hearts of the simple, which serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly.

Thy eight Head of Demands has now received its Answer.
CHAP. IX.
Thy ninth Head of Demands is thus expressed.

ARt not thou one of the lovers of their own selves, that art covetous, and to
be turned away from? 2 Timothy 3.

Answ. There are some, who though they be lovers of themselves, yet that their
love is not blamable: and there are others whose love of themselves is very
unlawful, and they are justly condemned by the Apostle in that place which is
quoted by thee; I am not one of this latter sort: the truth may be thus cleared.

2. There is a lawful self-love which is natural: whereby every man (as he is a
man, yea, a creature) seeks the good of a being, and of a comfortable
well-being, as it is such a creature. This love is by God stamped on every
creature, that it should look to its own preservation, and the maintenance of
Ephesians. 5. 28. Mat. 19. 19 Luke 6. 7.
it self. It is a law written in nature that the creature should love it self;
and the Law of God revealed commands us to love our neighbors as our selves:
to do to them what we our selves would have others do to us, and grace forbids
not any to love themselves with a right love; which is such, when it is a love
subordinate to that love which we bear to God; we may love our selves, but not
so much as God, nor more then God.

And thus without any sinfulness and blameworthinesse, both I, and thou, and
every man else, may be lovers of our selves; keeping the right order, namely,
being willing to resign our very being, and all the conducements of our
natural well-being, when ever God our gracious Creator, who gave them to us,
shall remand them from us.

2. There is another love of ones self, which is also lawful and laudable; it
is the spiritual love of ones self, when a man loves his soul which is his
better part, so as that he presers it, and the seeking of the good of it before
all worldly things (for Mat. 16. 26
what is a man profited to gain the whole world and lose his soul) and out of
love to it, he takes care to promote its welfare, in all means, opportunities
and advantages of improving it in grace, and fitting it for glory. And thus
also it is very lawful for me, and thee, and every man else, to love our own
selves, in loving our souls, and seeking its good, by following of that which
is gracious. But,

3. There is another love of ones self, which is unlawful and justly blamable:
It is commonly called the carnal love of ones self; whereby a man esteeming
more of himself, and what is his, then he ought, is wholly addicted to regard
and follow his own private personal concernments, and advantages, with a
disregard of minding, or with a careless neglect of seeking the public good
and welfare of others. Such lovers of their own selves, were these, whom the
Apostle in the place alleged mentions; and he complains of such in another
Epistle: that they all sought their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ;
Phil. 2. 21.
they sought their own ease, their own profit, their own repute, but not the
honor of Christ, and the public benefit of his people. Timothy was none of
these self-lovers, he naturally cared for the state of the Philippians, he had
as it were a parental Phil. 2. 20.
care toward them, as toward children: sparing no diligence, no thoughts, no
pains, though very solicitous, in seeking after their spiritual good.

I and other faithful Ministers bear toward our people the like
solicitousnesse, the like carfulness, the like tenderness of affection, the
like diligent seriousness of seeking their spiritual good, as Timothy did
toward the Philippians; and therefore we are no such lovers of our own selves,
as they were, of whom the Apostle speaks, who would not displease nor disease
themselves in any thing to promote the public good of people. We could soon
spare all our pains, labors, thoughts, cares, 2 Timothy 4. 2 Eccles. 12. 12
we could quickly ease our selves from wasting our spirits with often
preachings, and wearing our flesh with much studying, and from weakening our
strength, with beating of our brains, and with often breakings of our sleeps,
in considering how we may to our peoples best advantage, send out the golden
oil Zac. 4. 12.
of the glad tidings of salvation unto them: we could speedily free our selves
from all this task and toil, which we have undertaken for our peoples good, if
we were such lovers of our own selves, who seek our own profit, and not theirs.
But know thou, that the love we have unto Christ our Master, does constrain us
to feed diligently and carefully his Lambs, and Ioh. 21. 15 16, 17 Phil. 2. 17.
his sheep; and the abundance of our love, to have the souls of his people
saved, makes us very willing to sacrifice all our talents, our time, our
thoughts, our travels, our healths, our lives, our selves upon the service of
their faith: we herein seek not our own profit, but the profit of many that
they may be saved. 1 Cor. 10 33
Therefore I and other faithful Ministers: are not like one of them, whom Paul
mentions, who were lovers of their own selves.

Thou further asks: Art not thou one that is covetous.

Answ. There is a virtuous and lawful covetousness; and there is a
covetousness, which is vicious and unlawful: God who knows my heart can
testify, that it cannot justly account me to be actually guilty in this latter
sort of covetousness: for clearing this consider.

1. There is a lawful covetousness, which is an holy affecting and desiring to
have the best things, things spiritual. This covetousness is commended:
wherefore neither thou, nor I, nor any man else, shall be blamed for coveting
spiritual things: as 1 Cor. 12. 31 1 Cor. 14. 1.
namely to be rich in God, and rich in faith, and rich in good works, seeing
the Apostle bids us to be so.

2. There is an unlawful covetousness condemned in holy Scripture; It is a
man's inordinate affecting and desiring to have more riches or earthly things
then the Lord alots him. It is lawful for a man of a low estate, to desire that
it might be better: he Prove. 30. 8.
may pray as holy Agur did, give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with
food convenient for me: yet such a man is not covetous, for it is not the bare
affecting and desiring, but the inordinate affecting and desiring more, which
renders a man covetous.

Now the affecting and desiring of wealth and earthly things is then inordinate.

1. When these things are in the first place desired and Mat. 6. 33.
sought, before the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. And,

2. When a man affects and desires these things, with a will, and settled
purpose to be rich, by fair or foul means, by 1 Timothy 6. 9 10
unprescribed and unallowed courses, as well as by those which are approved and
appointed. And,

3. When the affections and desires to obtain these, are so eager, in putting
a man upon the looking after them, that he longs to be free, and to shift from
any duty of piety, equity and charity, which he conceives will let or hinder
him, in the procuring, Amos 8. 5. Prove. 3. 27
or in the reteining of these things.

In the old Testament he is said to be covetous, who covets Hab. 2. v. 9 and v.
5. Eccl. 5. 10.
covetousness, that is, whose desires are still enlarged as hell, as death,
though the thing desired be obtained. The New Testament describes such men by
two words: The one intimates, he is covetous, who from a greedy desire of
having more and (...)
more, is a rapacious scraper to himself, of more then enough from others, by
false-dealing, circumventing, or some unlawful Ephesians. 5. 5.
means. The other word imports, that he is covetous who is a lover of money;
not he who has it, and receives it, (...).
and imploys it unto necessary and fitting uses, but he who loves it; who has
his heart so affected with it, as if it were a man's very happiness to have it:
such a man is therefore either so didly vile in coming by it: he pierces
himself thorough with many 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
sorrows, and makes use thereto of many foolish and hurtful lusts: or he is
basely miserable in hugging and hoarding it, though it will rust: every penny
which he is to part Jam. 5. 3.
with toward any public good is as a drop of blood distilled from his very
heart.

By what is said it may easily be conceived what manner of men they were whom
the Apostle calls covetous.

To thy question, which is, Art not thou one that is covetous?

I plainly answer: I am not, I bless me God for it, that Heb. 13. 5.
my conversation in this world, has been hitherto, without covetousness,
without love of money. I can truly say as the Act. 20. 33
Apostle did, I have coveted no man's silver, nor gold, nor apparel: yea, and I
can challenge the whole world, as Samuel did the Israelites: here I am, witness
against me before the Lord: whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken?
so I can truly ask, whose Sheep, or whose Lamb, or whose Cow, or whose calfe,
or whose horse have I taken, or whom have I defrauded, or whom have I
oppressed? the tithes of these things, which I have taken was not man's, but the
Lords dues: and according to his preceptive appointing them to his Ministers,
and his Providential designing me to my lot in the Ministry: I have took my
share, which by him, and the Laws of the Nation is allowed to me: and it is
unjust to repute me and other Ministers to be covetous men, because we have
took our dues: for we are thankfully content with that which God allots us, so
are not men who are covetous: and we do not envy at the enjoyments of others,
neither do we desire to share in any part of that allotment which God has
granted unto other men; covetous men are of another temper.

The truth is neither Ministers, nor any other sort of men, can justly be
called lovers of their own selves, and covetous, because they demand and take
that maintenance which God allots them, which is in the hands or custody of
others; who ought not to withold the good from them to whom it is Prove. 2. 33
due. Ministers are not covetous, because they demand and receive tithes, which
is their due: neither is the people covetous, because they ask and take from
others those debts which are owing and due unto them. Thou have then no reason
to suspect me, or any faithful Minister to be men covetous, because we take
tithes: Lay your hands upon your own hearts, and condemn your selves as men
extremely covetous, if ye will envy at that allowance which God has consigned
to us Ministers your fellow servants; and if being uncontent with the nine
parts in that portion of Gods blessing, which he bountifully allots to you, ye
will with fraudulent or other unlawful courses seek also to bereave his
Ministers of the tenth part of his blessing on your increase, which God
appoints unto them, ye then discover your selves to be greedily covetous, in
swallowing up that which is none of yours, ye may perhaps like the wicked,
boast of having herein your hearts desire, and bless and applaud your covetous
selves: but the Lord abhors you for Psalm. 10. 3.
such doings. Briefly ye your selves who will keep from us our tithes, and not
we who demand them and take but our dues, are the men, who are truly called
covetous.

To the last part of thy Querie, which is, Art not thou one to be turned away
from? 2 Timothy 3.

I answer. These words of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 5. is no command to thee, or
any other, to withdraw your selves from your faithful, painful, careful, and
unblamable Pastors and Teachers: but they are a charge unto Timothy, and so to
all good Ministers (especially to them who shall live in the last days, which
are perilous times) how to demean themselves toward such, whom the Apostle
there describes to have nineteen evil qualities: he would have them turn away
from such: which words properly signify, be thou turned away from, or turned
against such.

1. The Apostle would have godly Ministers (such as Timothy was) to be turned
away from such: to show them no countenance, no liking, that they might see in
their looks that their evil courses, has no room, no approbation, in any of
these good Ministers hearts; and not only so, but

2. The words import, that they are to be turned against such, both in
manifesting, that their conversation is opposite to the conversation of such
evil ones; to which purpose the Apostle directs Ministers (in directing
Timothy) to a 2 Timothy 3. 10, 11.
known practical following of his doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith,
love, long-suffering, charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions; as also
they are to be turned against such, in having their communication opposite to
that resistance of the truth; and to that corruption in life, which Seducers
deceiving and being deceived, manifested. To which purpose the Apostle exhorts
Ministers (in exhorting Timothy) 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15, 16, 17
to continue in the things which they had learned and known (as Timothy did)
out of the holy Scripture: whereby they might be profitable in Doctrine, in
Reproofs, in Corrections, in Instruction, in Righteousness, and be perfectly
furnished unto all good works.

I am such, even a man professedly opposite to men of corrupt minds, who are
reprobate concerning the faith, and who resist the truth. I am a man also,
whose life, and conversation (through Gods mercy unto me) is not tainted with
any of those nineteen odious corruptions, which the Apostle mentions. I am one
who endeavors (as Timothy is exhorted to do) to war a good warfare, holding
faith and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4. 12
and to be an example of believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith and purity: and I therefore tell thee both truly and plainly:
that I am not any such man, from whom thou, or any other, has any warrant or
command from God to turn away.

Thy ninth Head of Demands is now fully answered.
CHAP. X.
Thy tenth Head of Demands is as follows,

ARt not thou one of them as Peter speaks of, that with covetousness and fained
words, makes merchandise of the people: and so art in Cains way, and Balaams
way? answer.

I answer. False teachers privily bringing in damnable heresies, and denying
the Lord, were the men whom Peter speaks of, who through covetousness and
fained words, makes merchandise of the people. But these words of Peter do not
speak of 2 Pet. 2. 1 2, 3.
any holy Apostle, or other faithful Ministers, who lived in Peter's time:
neither do they speak of any faithful Minister of Christ, who shall live in
other times. Peter's words are not spoken of such who preach the doctrine of
salvation; but of them who teach damnable heresies, or damning doctrines. They
are not spoken of any faithful Minister, who publicly and openly dispenses
holy truth, in all sincerity: but they are spoken of false teachers, who
ptivily in the houses, into which they creep, or elsewhere, instill into their
hearers corrupting falsehoods, conveying these in their teaching, with much
cunning covert hypocrisy. Peter's wo^ds are not spoken of such, who earnestly
contend for the faith, which was once delivered to the Saints: but they are
spoken of those, who diligently, and slily seek to pervert that faith, and to
turn others from it. Peter's words are not spoken of those, who with the heart
believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth make con^ession unto salvation,
and teach others also to acknowledge the Lord; but they are spoken of such, who
deny the Lord, and who seek by heresies to withdr^w people from believing, and
from confe^^^ng that holy Christian faith, whereof the Lord himself is both the
Author, and the Finisher. Peter's words are not spoken of such Ministers (who
according to the duty of their calling) do study, and read, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14,
16. Eccles. 12. 10
and meditate, and pray, and write, and ponder, and compare things revealed in
the holy Scripture, and who set in order the truths which are thence sought out
whereby they may still teach the people knowledge: But they are spoken of such,
who following cunning devises do compose fine words, plaiting, and artificially
couching them so together, that some sentences, shall with elegancy breath out
truth and falsehood, so as their own disciples sucks in falsehood, understanding
them one way, and others apprehend that good only was meant therein, seeing
they espy that good may be interpreted out of them, both are abused by such
teachers: the one sort are led by them into strong delusions: and the other
sort are deceived, in their hoping that they meant good: who had so craftily
mixed error and truth, that it was hard even for them, who was very good, to
dissever them. Lastly, Peter's words are not spoken of those, who merely
coveting and longing to gain souls to God, and to make them Christ's Disciples,
do plainly let them know, how miserable, or how comfortable they shall be,
according as they shall reject, or receive and embrace Christ, the pearl of
the Gospel, and his precious truths: But they are spoken of them, who out of
covetous desires, to raise a greater worldly gain, from those whom they intend
to make their own Disciples, do use fine, plausible, alluring words, the better
to conceal and cloak those errors and heresies, which they vent: which being
entertained, the souls of those, who embrace them, are sold to become slaves,
unto such corruptions, that the Devil can lead them captive at his pleasure.
These false teachers are not unlike those false chapmen, to whom the Apostle in
the word Merchandise does allude, who through their insatiable desire of gain,
do with fine, flattering, pleasing words set forth the high commendations of
their wares beyond truth, thereby thinking to vent their commodities the more
speedily, and so draw the larger sums of money from the buyers of them.

Such were the persons of whom Peter speaks, who through covetousness with
feigned words made merchandise of the people: But I and other faithful
Ministers of Christ (who live in the reformed Church) are none of these; we (as
I have showed in my answer to thy ninth demand) have not exercised toward our
people any covetousness, neither are we covetous: and we have not sought (as
my answer to thy eight demand has sufficiently cleared) by fair speeches, and
good words, by fine and fair words, either to flatter our people in any of
their present corruptions; or to fix in them, any erratical and heretical
abominations. Peter's words are no ways justly appliable to me, or any other
faithful Minister of Jesus Christ: but they must properly agree to the false
teachers in our days, who are of the papal and popular faction. The Romish
Church by her factors, who are cunning Merchants, traficks in all Lands, and
has a stream of current coin flowing into her sea, by the Merchandise of all
sorts, which she every where vents by her agents, as it is described in the
book of the Revelation. The roaming emissaries of Sectarians, their Rev. 18. 11
12, 13^
younger brothers, like crafty Merchants do traverse countries, to spread
errors, heresies and blasphemies, and to corrupt souls: and they know best,
what a trade they hereby drive, of temporal gain, into their own coffers, from
their deluded Disciples. The common fame in some places is, that they are
Crafts-masters, Silver-smiths sure by occupation, who in a short time, hammer
out of the forge of their heretical forgeries a considerable livelihood. The
false teachers, and not the faithful Ministers of Christ, are they of whom
Peter speaks, who made merchandise of the people: or who did sell and buy them
for their own gain. But as the paying and receiving a due revenue, is not a
buying and selling of commodities: so the paying and receiving tithes is not at
all to be named merchandising: neither do faithful Ministers in that act barter
or bargain away their people.

To thy calling on me for an answer to thy saying, that I am in Cains way, and
in Balaams way.

I answer. Neither I, nor any truly faithful Minister of Christ, are in Cains
way, nor yet in Balaams way.

First, I and they are not in any of those particular courses in which Caine
walked: and for which the holy Scripture condemns him for.

1. I and they have not gone, neither do go in the way of Caines cruelty: He
was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, 1 John 3. 12
because his own deeds were evil and his brothers good: he hated his brother
and his brothers goodness, and therefore slew him. But blessed be God, we who
are faithful Ministers do hate no man's person, nor no man's goodness: our
desires are that every one, (especially they who belong to our Congregations
and Families) did abound in all goodness: and our endeavors are, by teaching
in all wisdom to present every man (if it were possible) exceeding good, even
perfect in Christ Col. 1. 28.
Jesus. I and faithful Ministers are not in the way of Caines cruelty.

But I will tell thee who are; there is in these our days, 2 These. 2. 3


A man of sin, who is a Caine in chief, he is the head of the Papacy, and is
called a son of perdition, because he shall be destroyed by the Lord, and
because he breaths out perdition, destruction, against all true Protestants,
and Protestant Ministers, who are the servants of the Lord. He hates their
persons with a deadly hatred, because they will neither in their hands, Rev.
13. 16
nor in their foreheads receive his mark; they will neither be secret, nor open
professed Papists. This great Antichrists agents are instruments of cruelty:
all of them are wicked Caines, plotting and contriving by subtilty, and
otherwise to disturb and destroy Protestant Nations; they hope to be Rev. 17. 6.
drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus: they are very Caines in their hating Protestants, and their goodness,
being exceeding mad against them, which keep the commandments of God, and have
the Rev. 12. 17
testimony of Jesus Christ.

The Petty heretical Antichrists swarming now adays in several Sects, whether
they be acted (as some shrewdly suspect) by the agents for the Papacy, or by
their own unclean spirits, these also may claim kindred in the cruelty of Cain:
their causeless bitter railings against all Orthodox Christians, especially
against the Ministers, who resists their errors, 1 John 3. 15
are undeniable Symptoms, that their malicious, raging hearts are full of
hatred; and that as (with Cain) they have already slain them in their heart, so
if they had power they would actually destroy both the livelihoods, and the
lives of all right believing Christians, and of all truth teaching Ministers,
who contend for it.

2. I and other faithful Ministers have not gone, neither yet do go, in the way
of Caines infidelity: his offering was Heb. 11. 4.
not accepted, because it was an offering without faith: for Cain did not
believe, that when he was to give an offering unto God, it should be of the
best: but he thought that whatsoever he brought was good enough; and therefore
he offered what came to hand. But the service of our Ministerial labors is a
service of faith: we tender to God and his Church no other 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15.
labors, then what God has commanded us to give our selves wholly unto:
therefore we devote to God and Christ all our studies, our choicest thoughts,
our best gifts, our prime parts, our most precious time, and our whole
strength, neither count we our lives dear to us, so we may finish our course
with joy: we are not then in the way of Caines infidelity. I suppose that such
men are undoubtedly in this way of Cain, who regard not in what manner they
perform any service to God: thinking that any tendery of service is good
enough, though it be with little reverence, small affection, and scant
devotion: and particularly also such men are in this way of Caine, who being to
pay (according to their duty) their tithes unto God, (which his Ministers by
Gods appointment are to receive) they think any thing may serve, and
accordingly do pay their tithes and offerings out of the worst of whatever they
have, not considering, or not regarding, that such deceivers are dreadfully
Mal. 1. 13, 14
cursed by the Lord, whose name is dreadful among the very Heathen.

Secondly, I and other faithful Ministers are not in any of those particular
courses, in which Balaam walked, and for which the holy Scripture condemns him.
For,

1. We are no lovers of the wages of unrighteousness, as 2 Pet. 2. 15
Balaam was. Balak sent for him, promising unto him promotion, and to do
whatever he said to him, if he would come Numb. 22 16, 17.
and curse Gods people. Cursing of Gods people was iniquity, an unrighteous
thing: the reward promised for doing so, was the wages of iniquity, a purchase
obtained by sin. Balaams Mumb. 22. 38 Numb. 23 12 Numb. 22. 20 ver. 12. and 32
heart was so set on getting this promised reward, the wages of
unrighteousness, that he was of himself willing enough to have cursed Israel,
had not God restrained him. Yea, he went it seems (after God had permitted him
to go) with a purpose to curse Israel, though God had forbid him; wherefore the
Angel of the Lord told him, that his way was perverse before him.

We who are faithful Ministers of Christ, are no lovers of the wages of
unrighteousness. Preaching the word of God unto our people is a righteous
thing: it is a blessed work: it is a means to bring them unto the blessing of
God here, and hereafter; it is a work which the Lord has enjoined us, and
tithes are a righteous thing: God himself appointed that they should be paid;
and he is a God who will not command, neither can do any unrighteous act: he
has given them unto us his Ministers, as an assured comfortable provision for
us here on earth, that we may attend on his peculiar service without
distraction: reserving for us (out of his free mercy) the full recompense of
our labors in the life to come. We are not therefore in Balaams way, of loving
the wages of unrighteousness, and of having our hearts bent to curse the people
of the Lord.

But I will tell thee, who (in these our days) are in Balaams way of cursing
Gods people for the wages of unrighteousness. Romish Emissaries are in that
way: their mouths and pens vent enough of the gall and vinegar of railing and
tart speeches against the Protestant Religion, and its Ministers, they hope in
time to crush and crucify it and them utterly; and these for their thus
acting, have pensions (the wages of unrighteousness) allotted unto them from
some Balacks, or Rulers in Romish Babylon.

The Emissaries likewise from some Sects, are in this way of Balaam: they have
their tongues set on fire of hell: their mouths Iam. 3. 6. Romans 3. 13 14
are full of bitterness: their throats are an open Sepulcher, breathing out
against all people and Ministers, (who dislike their way and humor) the odious
stench of unsavory, railing, reviling language; they censure, they condemn,
they curse them, they damn them to the pit of hell. It is probably conjectured
that the ringleaders, or principal managers of these ill manners toward the
Ministers and others, are secretly encouraged thereunto, by stipends (the right
wages of unrigheousness) which they receive from some Romish Balacks, or
principal ones, who love to see a cursed Babel or confusion to be wrought in
the reformed Churches, among the people of God. There is a report concerning a
chief one, among this railing Sect, that he in Scotland, distributed money to
gain G. F. 1657
Proselites to his way: if it were so, his money sure was the wages of
unrighteousness; and whosoever took his money, with a resolution therefore to
desert the holy truth, may well be reputed to be in the number of those who
have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray following the way of Balaam, 2
Pet. 2. 15
the son of Bosom, who loved the wages of unrighteousness.

2. I and other faithful Ministers of Christ are no Counselors of others to
sin, or to draw others into sin: for such an one was Balaam, who taught
Balack to cast stumbling blocks before Rev. 2. 14
the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and commit
fornication. We who are faithful Ministers do preach Act. 14. 15
to turn people from their idolatries, superstitions, and vanities 1 These. 4.
3 4
unto the living God: we preach unto them the Will of God, even their
Sanctification, that they should abstain from fornication, and that every one
of them should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor:
our preaching unto people these, and other holy truths of God (and we preach
nothing but his truths) does not teach people to sin, nor to become other men's
agents and instruments to increase sinners. Our Preaching, and answerable holy
practicing, does l^y no stumbling blocks, to cause any to fall into sinful
practices and offenses. If any be scandalized at our preaching, and at our
dispensing Gods holy Ordinances according to his institution, it is either from
their ignorance of the truth, or from mistakes of truth, or from their
splenetick malicious spirit against the truth: but our preaching Gods truths,
and dispensing Gods Ordinances, ought not to offend: seeing it is our duty to
do so, and it is all good peoples duty, to attend unto the reaping of good, by
these holy preachings, and dispensations; and though some causelessly will be
offended, and pervert all to their own perdition, yet good hearers and holy
livers will learn hereby, both to avoid these stumbling blocks, which Satan and
his instruments casts in their way, to make them sinfully to fall: and also
they will thereby learn to live and to do all to the glory of God, and to give
no offense to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32.
Church of God. I and other faithful Ministers are not in Balaams way of
teaching, to cast stumbling blocks to make others to sin: but I will tell thee,
who in these our days are in that way of Balaam.

Without all controversy, the Church of Rome casts stumbling blocks, to defile
men's consciences, in dispensing with uncleanness; in allowing for money all
kinds of filthiness, in casting reproach upon the Clergies Matrimony: in
speaking contemptibly of a married state: and as Balaam received the wages of
unrighteousness; so the Pope the hire of an whore, a yearly pension for
permitting stews. The Jesuits (the sons of that Church) are of the right
strain of Balaam, in stirring up Princes, where they are entertained to
disturb and offend people, by casting stumbling blocks, to overthrow their
liberties and livelihoods, and to ensnare them under Antichristian tyranny.

Moreover I need not relate (seeing it is well known) that there are at this
day many Sectarians, who walk in Balaams way, of teaching to cast stumbling
blocks to make others sin. Such are they who decrie the holy Scripture; who
reject Christ's Ordinances; who will have nothing to do with the worship, which
God appointed: who deny the seals of the Covenant; who contemptuously speak of
the foundations of piety, equity, and civility; who are often belching out
blasphemies, and hatching heresies; who magnify a Christ, which they have
phancied, but reject and deny the true Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God,
who is the Lord: By these and other means they have laid stumbling blocks, to
cause people fall into Schisms, Atheism, and all profaneness; they have by
these, and such like doctrines, and practices, emboldned people to commit the
sins of injuriousnesse, of licentiousness, and of high presumptuousness. The
falfe teachers of our times, with their Disciples, who follow their pernicious
ways, are in the way of Cain and Balaam: but I and other faithful Ministers
are in neither of their ways.

Thy tenth Head of Demands has now a full and clear Answer.
CHAP. XI.
The ^leventh Head of Demands is thus expressed.

WEre not these wells without water, and clouds carried about with tempests,
which the Apostle saw coming in before his departure?

Answ. They who were wells without water, and clouds carried about with
tempests, are plainly described by the Apostle 2 Pet. 2. 1.
to be those false teachers who bring in damnable heresies, whom he mentioned
in the beginning of the Chapter, and afterward calls them the unjust, whom the
Lord knew to reserve to 2 Pet. 2. 9
the day of judgment to be punished, and chiefly he names them.

1. Who were Epicures, who walked after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness:
they were men, who framed themselves ver. 10.
in their course, to content their flesh, to fulfill its lusts of uncleanness,
or its impure lustings.

2. He names also them who were Libertines in judgment ver. 10.
and practice: men who despised government, who had slight, contemptuous
thoughts and opinions, concerning all civil Government and power: who persuaded
others to believe, that Christians are freed from the yoke of Magistracy, and
from the bondage of having Rulers over them: they were such who were not afraid
to speak evil of Dignities, they were revilers of those who did bear authority,
or were dignified.

The Apostle also plainly relates the evil conditions of these men.

1. He says they were presumptuous, or men of impudent, ver. 10.
daring spirits, to undertake enterprises, impious, and perilous; And

2. He says that they were self-willed, or such who were resolved and set on
it, that they would have their own will and way: and as natural bruit-beasts
contemnes things, the use whereof they know not, or which they apprehend to be
contrary to their nature, even so these kind of men speak evil of ver. 12.
the things which they understand not, or conceives to be things crossing their
corrupt doctrines, and wicked lives: such speak evil of the holy Scriptures, of
most Articles of Religion, of Magistracy, of Ministry; they speak evil of
these, sporting themselves with their own conceits, or delusions; and the
Apostle ver. 13.
further

3. Tells us that they were men of lascivious wanton looks, and were restless
in sinfulness; that they beguiled unstable souls, that ver. 14.
their hearts were exercised with covetous practices; that they were turned
Apostates, having forsaken the right way, and that ver. 15.
they were gone astray.

And having spoken of them in this manner, he compares them to waterlesse
Wells, and to unstable and unsettled clouds, saying, these are Wells without
water, Clouds are carried with a tempest. ver. 17.


1. He compares them to wells without water, saying they are such wells. As
wells without water deludes the travelers expectation of finding relief and
refreshment therein; so these false teachers will at length deceive the hopes
of their seduced followers: who thinking to have from them soul-saving, and
soul-sanctifying instructions, will in time find that they are as empty Wells
having nothing in them but the mud, and filth of sin, defiling and soul-damning
doctrines and conceptions. The Apostle in calling them Wells without water,
intimates plainly, that their misled followers, will have but empty and
uncomfortable ver. 18.
performances, of these alluring, great, swelling words, or promises of
liberty, and happy peace, which they tell them is to be had only in their way,
and which they give out concerning their way; as that it is a nearer path to
heaven, then that which the holy Apostles, and faithful Ministers teach, of
living by faith, in the Son of God, and of exercising Gal. 3. 20. 1 Timothy 4. 7
2 P^t. 2. 18 19
ones self unto godliness, in the works of mortification and vivification. But
the Apostle says, while they promise them liberty, they themselves are
servants of corruption: intimating, that their followers will find that there
is no peace in impurity, and no liberty to be got by following the way of
those, who living in error, and teaching error, do themselves continue
servants in bondage to corruption.

2. The Apostle compares them to clouds carried with a tempest: these clouds
are usually whirled this way and that, in an unsteady positure, with a conslict
of winds, which is a whirlewind 2 Pet. 2. 17:
or tempest, as the Apostle calls it: so that they keep not to any settled
point, or site of the heavens: but are sometimes in one and sometimes in another
position, and sometimes in none, but inclining to any part, whether the winds
will hurry them: such are Seducers, they are empty clouds, having no droppings
in them of any sound doctrine, to distill toward the benefit of the Church,
and toward the improving of it toward heaven; but they are rather darkning
clouds, which seeks to obscure those divine lights of holy truths, which are
already revealed and contained in the holy Scripture; yea, they are clouds ever
and anon whirled or carried about with the tempest of diverse and Heb. 13. 9.
strange doctrines: every new doctrine carries them into a new way: and when
they meet with several new doctrines, they are whirled round, and know not
where to rest, becoming I am. 1. 8.
thereby unstable in all their ways. Sometimes they are in one opinion, and
sometimes in another cross conceit: they are usually exercised with great
conslicts, from plausible and pleasing, though polluting and destroying
doctrines: so as they are unresolved, unto what they should hold resolutely:
trying several ways, till they be outed of all ways, and become seekers, or
rather loosers of themselves, being herein like thin empty clouds, tossed with
several winds, diverse ways, which at last vapors into nothing. The Apostle
tells us, that these kind of men are unlearned and unstable, and that they
wrest 2 Pet. 3. 16
the Scriptures unto their own destruction.

Thus it may be easily understood, that not the settled Ministers of Christ, who
preach his truths and his Gospel, but that false teachers and seducers, who
broach and belch out damnable doctrines, are the men whom the Apostle calls
Wells without water, and Clouds carried with a Tempest; think not that these
will instill into thy soul any of the water of the Wells of salvation, for they
are empty Wells, and whosoever trusts to them, and runs after them, to get
soul-saving comforts from them, will at length find themselves deluded in
them: even as the little ones were, who the Prophet mentions, who were sent to
the pits, and found no water, and returned Ier. 14. 3.
with their vessels empty, and were ashamed and confounded; and think not that
it can be safe unto thy soul, to follow those clouds, carried with a tempest,
as the Apostle styles them: for whosoever will follow their pernicious ways,
will prove as unstable, as their giddy guides, and will be still as children
tossed to and fro, and carried with every wind of doctrine, by the Ephesians. 4. 14.
slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive;
and without repentance they will fall into the same condemnation of an horrible
tempest, with their Psalm. 11. 6.
seducing Leaders, even into the mist of darkness which is reserved for them
for ever. 2 Pet. 2. 17


Enough is said to thy eleventh Head of Demands,
CHAP. XII.
Thy twelfth Head of Demands is thus set down by thee.

ARt not thou one of the Novices spoken of in the Scripture, seeing that thy
Congregation is so out of order, scoffing, giving names, railing, and abusing,
as witches, and such slandering expressions to honest people? Are not these the
mockers now, that should come, that the Apostle said should come, that now we
see has reigned since? and are not these the marks of the false prophets,
mockers, scoffers, briars, thorns, thistles? do not we see these fruits proceed
from thee, and show that thou have not profited the people at all? Ier. 23.
Does not Christ say, by their fruits ye shall know them, Mat. 7. inwardly
ravening? do we not see the people could be but wild, mockers and scoffers, if
thou never spoke unto them? and are not these thy fruits? and does not the
Apostle say their fruits shall wither? and shall not these fruits wither thinks
thou?

1. Thou asks: Art not thou one of the Novices spoken of in the Scripture?

Answ. The holy Scripture says, that a Bishop, that is, he 1 Timothy 3. v. 1. and
6
who is an Overseer, to whom the charge is committed of giving warning unto,
and of guiding and instructing the flock of Christ in spirituals: yea, and he
also, who as antiquity manifests, was Ass^mbly Notes on the place.
an Overseer of the Pastors, as well as of flocks, the chief Presbyter or
Minister, who had on him a charge, or superintendency of all the Churches. A
Bishop (says the holy Scripture) is not to be a Novice, that is, one newly
planted or inserted into the body of the Church, which in Apostolical times,
was in them who were of age of discretion, by their outward profession of
Christianity, whereunto they were converted or come from their former
profession of Judaisme or Gentilisme.

I do truly affirm that I am none of these Novices: As Paul Phil. 3. 5.
pleaded for himself: I am of the stock of Israel, an Hebrew of the Hebrews: so
say I of my self: I am of the stock of Christitns, 2 Timothy 3. 15
a Christion of Christians; and as Timothy from a child, so have I also known
the holy Scripture; and as a child trained Prove. 22. 6
up in the way in which he should go, departs not from it, when he is old: even
so I having already stepped into some degrees of age, yet do still keep in that
holy profession of the Ministry, wherein I have been trained and tutored in my
youth: and I did not rashly and rawly hasten to be a Pastor: for until I had
seriously spent good time, and study in the holy Seripture and divine things,
being nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine, whereunto I had
attained; I did not take 1 Timothy 4. 6
upon me a Pastoral charge; and therefore I am unjustly suspected by thee, or
any else, to be one of those Novices which the Scripture speaks of

But to prove me to be one of these Novices, thou writes: that my Congregation
is out of order, scoffing, giving names, railing, and abusing, as witches, and
such slandering expressions of honest people.

Answ. 1. A Congregation being in some things out of order, is no good proof,
that he who is over it in things spiritual 1 Tit. 5.
is a Novice. Titus was no Novice, though at Creet, (where he was ovet the
Church of God) there was something not in order: so they who are set over the
flock or Congregation of the Lord, to take care of the Church, are not
therefore (in the Scripture-sense) Novices, because some things (it may be) are
for present out of order, which in time may by their care and contrivance be
brought into good order.

2. I say, that such Congregations, or holy Assemblies of Gods people are not
out of order, wherein all things are done 1 Cor. 14. 40
decently, and in order; decently in a seemly and sit manner, and orderly
without confusion; when every thing and Ordinance is dispensed in its proper
season, time and place. In such order I keep my Congregation, in all their
solemn meetings: in regard whereof thou cannot justly charge it with confusion
or disorder, or with being out of order.

3. Whereas thou writes that my Congregation is out of order, scoffing, giving
names, railing and abusing, as witches, and such slandering expressions unto
honest people: I answer thee, that thou ought not to say that the whole
Congregation is out of order, or is to be blamed for the disorderly acts, and
personal faults, of some apperteining to the Congregation, of whose faults it
has no knowledge, and which faults it wholly disallows, when it comes to know
them; for neither I, nor the Congregation of my people, will justify any
belonging to it, in their scoffing, nicknaming, railing and abusing any: nor in
their fastening on any slanderous expressions: they have in the holy Assemblies
been often taught better: and though perhaps some of thy way, have by their
imbittered language (whereof the mouths and letters of your Sect are usually
full) provoked some of our Congregation to pay you in your own coin: yet be it
known unto thee, that such never received any instruction from us to do so, but
were and are upon all occasions charged by us, as the Apostle did the
Thessalonians: see that none render evil for evil unto any man, but ever follow
that which is good: both 1 These. 5. 15
among your selves, and to all men.

2. Thou asks: Are not these the mockers now which should come, that the
Apostles said should come.

Answ. One Apostle says, that in the last days shall come scoffers, walking
after their own lusts, and saying, where is the 2 Pet. 3, 3, 4
promise of his coming? Another Apostle says, remember ye the words which were
spoken before of the Apostles of our Lord Jude 17, 18, 19.
Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last time,
who should walk after their own ungodly lusts: these be they, who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the spirit. Therefore thou and others need not
ask me, who these scoffers were, that should come; for ye may easily satisfy
your selves from the Apostles own words: though men who are ordinary scoffers
and mockers of other men, are censured, complained of, condemned, and threatened
in many places of holy Scripture, for their scornings and reproachings of
others: yet they were another kind of mockers, and scoffers, whom the Apostle
said should come. They were mockers and scoffers of the Word of God: they were
men contemptuously slighting its commands, promises, reproofs, threats, and
Gods holy Messengers, his Ministers, who speak it to his people. Peter
particularly shows that these scoffingly ask, where is the promise of his
coming: and that they reason against his coming, and the day of Judgment, as
if they would never be. And Jude tells us these are they that separate
themselves, that is, (appears by considering to what the Apostle in the 20, and
21. verses exhorts) they separate from truth, from the holy faith once
delivered to the Saints, by their taking up, and adhering unto damnable
doctrines: and they separate from the holy love of right believing Christians,
by breaking off from communion with them, in all those public duties, whereby
they testify and profess, that they have a joint interest in the common
salvation, and have obtained like precious faith. And both Peter and Jude tells
us that these scoffers and mockers are Jude 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
men, who walk after their own ungodly lusts: they are d^riders of the best
counsel and comfort which Gods Word gives unto them: they follow the guidance
of their own corrupt reason and affections, ordering their whole life according
to their own lustings. Such mockers and scoffers were those Seducers, and false
Teachers, and their followers, which the Apostle said should come: and these
since their first rising, have had their ebbings and flowings, in the several
Ages of the Christian Church, according as it pleased the Lord to exercise his
Church, with greater or lesser numbers of them: And I believe that the numbers
of these seducing and heretical mockers and scoffers of the holy Scripture, and
of all persons, Ordinances, duties, services, instructions, directions,
comforts and commands commended unto us in the holy Scripture, was in no time
of the Church, so increased, as they are in these our days: whereby we
assuredly know, that we are in the last days, wherein evil men and seducers 2 Timothy 3. 13
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

3. Thou asks further: and are not these the marks of the false prophets,
mockers, scoffers, b^iars, thorns, thistles?

Answ. 1. I find that Peter and Jude, do give the name of mockers, and
scoffers, unto such false teachers, whom they foretold should arise: and
therefore every one may infallibly conclude, that such teachers are without
doubt false teachers, who are such mockers, as the Apostles speaks of, who
scoff at holy Scripture, and cast all reproaches on it, to villifie and
nullify it: yea, and who jeare and gibe at holy Ministers, for their
preachings of the Gospel of Christ, which that word of truth holds out.

The Rabbis of the Romish Church, and the rabble of teachers, which they of
your way heap up to your selves, will never free themselves from that mark
given to know false teachers by. Whosoever has to deal in the contrroversies
of both, must be of a stupendous inobservancy, if he espies not both of them
to be grand mockers and scoffers of holy Scripture, and of the holy contents of
it.

2. The holy Scripture does not by these words, briars, thorns, and thistles,
particularly, and distinctly, decipher out false teachers from other wicked
men. It ascribes them in general to all wicked men, in which number false
teachers may be comprehended: but it gives not these names, properly and
peculiarly to false teachers, as Marks or Characters, whereby they may be known
to be no other then false teachers. I think therefore it was not advisedly
asked; are not these the marks of false teachers, briars, thorns and thistles?
yet to satisfy thee, understand that the holy Scripture does certify us
touching these words. As,

1. We are told, that it is a piece of the curse on the ground Genesis 3. 17, 18
Isa. 7. 23, 24 Heb. 6. 7, 8
for man's sin; that it should bring forth thorns and thistles; and that it
is threatened as a sore judgment to a land, that it should become all briars
and thorns, and that the earth which brings out these is nigh unto a curse.

2. The holy Scripture informs us, that the enemies of Gods Eze. 28. 24
people of Israel, were pricking briars, and grieving thorns: and that the
enemies of Christ's Church, are all of them Cant. 2. 2.
thorns, surrounding her, as pricking and stinging thorns do a Lilly.

3. The Scripture certifies us, that among Gods own people of Israel, there
were wicked men of all ranks, which it calls thorns and briars. One Prophet
calls the common people Isa 9. 18
(who were grossly wicked) briars and thorns, as he styles the great ones (who
were also wicked) the thickets of the forest. Anothet Prophet tells us that
the great ones, the Princes, and Judges, and great men in Israel, even the very
best of them were as a briar, the most upright sharper then a thorn hedge. The
former Prophet did threaten that their wickedness should be Mic. 7. 3, 4
as a fire in a Wood, which should destroy the Nation: it should first take
hold on the briars and thorns, and then consume all the trees: so wickedness
should first destroy the poorest and meanest sort of wicked people, and after
the Grandees, or them of higher rank and reckoning.

4. The holy Scripture calls those, who rebel against the Word of the Lord,
spoken and taught, by his true Prophets, briars, and thorns, and scorpions:
and bids his Prophet not to Ezekiel. 2. 6
be afraid of them, nor of their words.

Thus wicked men are in Scripture called briars, and thorns, and thistles,
because their fruits is not good: they choke the Mat. 13 12 Ezekiel. 2. ^. Micah
7. 4
good seed of Gods word, which his Ministers sow among them, not suffering it
to take root in their souls: they are disposed to tear and hurt the servants of
God, and likewise others, and many times they do so: they yield no fruits of
righteousness, no grapes of grace to comfort, and cheer any; no figs, no
fruits of faith to assure themselves, that the Lord is their possession or
portion: for men gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles. Though
then false teachers (as all other wicked Mat. 7. 16.
men) are briars, and thorns, and thistles; yet these names are no peculiar
mark of them, that they are such; they are not by these names marked out from
all other wicked men, to have it signified thereby, that they have this
property more then wicked men (who are briars and thorns) that they are false
teachers.

4. Thou having said, that the fruits of these is mocking, and scoffing at
honest people: do further ask: Do we we not see that these fruits proceed
from thee?

Answ. Mocking, and scoffing, and other sins of wicked men, are fruits, which
proceed, from themselves, but they do not proceed from me, or any other
faithful Minister of Jesus Christ. For,

1. They proceed from wicked men themselves, even from Mat. 15. 19
the corruptions of their own hearts, which are fields fertile in all sorts of
wickedness, but barren in any goodness; and pro. 24. 30 31 prove. 1. 24, 25
they proceed from their own neglects of husbanding aright their hearts; and
from their refusals to have their hearts and lives ordered, and husbanded
spiritually, by Gods holy commands, and reproves uttered unto them by his
Ministers. And,

2. These evils of wicked men does not proceed from us, who are faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ, and who preach Gods Word, to take people off from
such vanities and vild conversation: for the Word preached does good to them
who are good, who walk uprightly. The faults of wicked men continuing still in
their reproachful courses, after the Word has been faithfully dispensed to
them; are most unjustly, by thee, and others said to proceed from the preachers
of the Word. The Pharisees having heard our Savior preach against Luke 16. 14
serving Mammon, derided him: the Evangelist does not (as it seeems thou and
others of thy way would have done) charge Christ, with the derision of the
Pharisees, as if that their sin had proceeded from him: but tells us plainly,
that the Pharisees was covetous: it was from the evil in themselves that they
derided him. We Ministers preach to our people the words of truth and
soberness: dissuading them from mocking and scoffing at any, if any of our
hearers (notwithstanding our preaching) will persist in such misdemeanors;
their sin is no way to be reputed as proceeding from us, but it is from their
own rebelliousnesse, that they are not reclaimed. I am sure God will never
charge these their sinnings on us, who has warned them; they shall die in
their iniquity, but we have delivered our own Ezekiel. 3. 19
souls.

Yea, but these fruits in these wicked men (thy hearers) show (as thou writes)
that thou have not profited the people at all, Jer. 23.

Answ. It shows that these wicked ones have not profited under those means of
profiting, which God has afforded them by my labors; but though thou, and
such as thou will say, that I have not profited the people at all; yet others
whose judgment and experience in holy things is truly commendable, will say
otherwise: and if they should not speak out the truth in this, yet it is mine
and other faithful Ministers comfort, that we preach nothing but what will
profit our hearers, and they might profit thereby, if themselves solely were
not in fault. Peoples not profiting under the constant labors of painful
Ministers, is not the Ministers, but the peoples own fault. The Prophets of old
preached against sins, in which the people still continued after their
preaching: God blames not his faithful Prophets for the peoples not amending,
but only the people themselves. I (says God) have sent unto Ier. 44. 4, 5
you my servants the Prophets, rising early, and sending them, saying, Oh do
not this abominable thing that I hate, but they hearkened not, nor inclined
their ear to turn from their wickedness. God will not charge his faithful
Ministers, who labor soundly in the word and doctrine, and preach his Word
faithfully unto the people, with the peoples not profiting by their labors:
but he will blame the people for their not improving the means of profiting,
which they enjoy to their own profit.

Once one of thy way told me, that if I, and others, who are called Ministers,
did preach the true Word of God, all who heard it would profit, for it would
effectually convert and enlighten all that heard it. I returned him at that
time a full answer. And

Now I answer thee, and all who shall read these lines, and are troubled with
the like thoughts wherewith that party was:

Let it be considered that Christ himself did preach the true word of God, and
yet many of his hearers were not converted nor enlightened, neither did they
profit by it; the Pharisees heard him and derided him: many of his ^isciples
who had Luke 16. 14 Joh. 6. 66.
heard him, went back and walked no more with him: he had often preached at
Jerusalem, and would have gathered them, but they would not be gathered. And
so Paul preached the Mat. 23. 37
true Word of God: yet some of his hearers were not thereby Act. 28. 24 25, 26,
27.
profited, for they contradicted and blasphemed; and so it is now; we who are
faithful Ministers, preach the true Word of God, though the most hearers are
not thereby spiritually profited: which thing is not from any impotency in the
Word, as an instrument to work conversion, and illumination, and profiting, for
it is the power of God unto salvation unto every one that believes; but the
not profiting of people by the word, which Romans 1. 16
is faithfully and truly preached unto them, is from their own voluntary
neglect, and rejection of those things, which belongs unto their peace. The
true causes why such people who live under plentiful dispensations of the word,
are not bettered and profited by it, are these.

1. In some the love of their own simplicity causes them to Prove. 1. 22
continue in blindness and ignorance. They are grossly ignorant and simple, and
unable to manage and improve to their spiritual good, those means of spiritual
knowledge, under which they live; and therefore they have no heart to entertain
any thoughts of any spiritual things, though their Ministers often tenders these
unto them, very powerfully and plainly.

2. In others a willing indulgence of the supersluity of naughtiness, and a
contentedness still to live in some disobediences and darling sins: a cockering
of these in their hearts, is the cause why many people (who often he^re the Word,
and live under the labors of an instructing Minister) do not profit, but
remain still blind and ignorant: for a willingness to continue still in
sin, does cast scales and scurfe over the eyes of Isa. 6. 10.
the mind, making it unable to see though it see, and to understand though it
perceive. Such a blind and ignorant people, Romans 10. 21
who were unwilling to put away the evil of their doings, lived in Isaiahs time.

3. In others a wilful affectednesse to be blind and ignorant in spirituals,
does continue them in a condition of not profiting by the word, though it be
very fruitfully and powerfully preached. Many are wilfully ignorant,
peremptorily stiff, and stubbornly resolved, not to admit of any holy
knowledge: the light breaks in on them, where they live under a good Minister,
and they will shut their eyes, that they may not see what is manifested and
held out unto them. Some in whom this affected ignorance reigns, will not at
all, or very seldom come to the public Assemblies to hear the Word; others of
them will come, but they resolve not to learn any thing spiritual from it,
neither to be moved with the Word Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32.
of ^od: they sit before their Ministers like Ezekiels hearers, hearing his
words, but they will not do them: with the mouth they show much love, they
commend his Sermon, and applaud his delivery and voice, but their hearts goes
after their covetousness, they hear his words, but they do them not.

These are the true causes, why some people do not profit, though they enjoy
very plentiful means of profiting, under their very diligent and laborious
Ministers; and therefore the not profiting of people ought not to be deemed, as
proceeding from me and other faithful Ministers, who are not wanting to
discharge our duties. I am sure the Apostle charge that fault upon people
themselves, saying, If our Gospel b^ hid, it is hid 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4
to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the mind of
them that believe not, (namely through their own willingness and wilful
stubbornness not to believe) least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
who is the image of God should shine on them.

5. Thou further asks: Does not Christ say, by their fruits you shall know
them, Matthew. 7. inwardly ravening?

Answ. Our blessed Savior does say, beware of false prophets, Mat. 7. 15, 16,
20.
which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves, you shall know them by their fruits. In which words, our Savior,

1. Gives a Caution to beware of false prophets.

2. He tells us what manner of men they are, namely, they are hypocritical in
their insinuations: they come in sheeps clothing, pretending sanctity and
innocence, but they are truly harmful, they are destroyers in their intention
and endeavor: they are inwardly ravening wolves, full of greedy cruel
purposes, to draw people from life to death, by their erroneous and factious
doctrines.

3. He certifies us, by what means they may be manifested to be such, and that
is by their fruits: by their fruits you shall know them. Our Lord alludes in
that expression, to the critical judgment, which men pass upon trees, from
the good or evil fruit which is gathered from them: every tree brings forth
proper fruit in its kind: a good tree brings forth good fruit, and an evil
or corrupt tree evil fruit: These false prophets, or teachers (of whom Christ
speaks) are for their kind, no other then wicked men: they are evil in having
many evil conditions, they are like harmful thorns, and wicked they are, in
that they have no good conditions, being void of grace and goodness: they are
like thistles, whose substance is vain, light and chaffy: and they are evil in
being fruitful in evil: wickedness procceeds from the wicked: they are 1 S^m.
24 13
like corrupt trees, bearing the evil fruit of evil speech, or false doctrines,
which corrupts good manners: by which fruit of 1 Cor. 15. 33
their lips false prophets may be known to be properly or peculiarly false
teachers: though by reason of their coming in sheeps clothing, the fruits of
their lives, or their actions seems to be as innocent, as are the lives or
actions of the best Instructors: and so they cannot the^eby sometimes be well
discovered.

Now though Christ says, that false prophets may be known by their fruits,
which properly are their false doctrines, yet seeing I have not at any time
brought forth the fruit of any false doctrine; but have always taught for
manner and matter what the holy Scripture allows, and delivered only
doctrines, consenting to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness: thou have no
reason to number me among the false prophets and teachers, who may be known by
their fruits of false doctrines; Such fruits were at no time produced by me,
whereby thou, or others, might have thence any knowledge that I am a false
Prophet or Teacher.

6. Thou asks further: Do we not see that people could be but wild, mockers,
and scoffers, if thou never spoke to them: and are not these thy fruits?

Answ. I have already told thee that peoples mocking and scoffing of honest
people is a fruit of their own wicked hearts: for out of the abundance of the
heart, the mouth Mat. 12. 34
speaks; but they are not my fruits: for I my self am no mocker and scoffer;
none can plead my example to justify thereby themselves in such evils: for all
my people know, or may know that we have not behaved our selves disorderly
among 2 These. 3. 7.
them. The doctrines which I have taught them, do naturally tend to bring them
to Godliness, and to have an holy demeanor toward God and man; that impiety
of mocking, and scoffing, which some have expressed, slowes from the corrupt
source of their own corrupted nature, but not from my mouth: I have ever
endeavored, that it should be, as Pro. 10. 11
a well of life, uncessantly to send fourth (on all good occasions) the words
of truth and soberness; and to teach my people to 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9
be pious, courteous and affable, not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, but contrariwise blessing.

And whereas thou say: Do we not see that people would be but wild mockers
and scoffers, if thou should never speak unto them. Thou seems hereby to
im^ort, that my speakin^ to them does them no good, and therefore it is in
vain for me to bestow among them any more labor.

To this I answer. 1. If people were wild mockers and scoffers before I came
among them; then these their faults are not (as thou say) my fruits: for
they brought them forth before my coming to them; and now they have no cloak
for their sin, seeing they have been better informed. If people have
discovered more their wildness, mockings and scoffings (I know none but they
accuse them thereof) since I have preached among them, then they manifested
before my settlement: yet know, that these are no fruits of my labors, but
they are the ou^burstings of the peoples own corrupt hearts: they have took
occasion from hearing better things taught, to manifest exceeding great
sinfulness in their rebel^ious walkings contrary to holy instructions. Thus
sin (that is corruption) R^m. 7. 8
takes occasion by the commandment to work all manner of concupiscence, that is
actual sin: manifesting unconformity to the holy truths which are taught. The
word preached by me did not implant these sinful qualities of wildness,
mocking and scoffing, which thou says, they have discovered: If it be as thou
says? then theit own evil hearts has taken an occasion (because these evils
have been preached against) to be more mad in wickedness, and to discover the
sinful acts more freely and openly, then they wont formerly. These acts are not
my fruits (as thou pleases to fancy) but the fruits or evil doings of their
own evil hearts.

2. I answer to that which thou seems to import by these words, namely: Though
some reap no good by my labors, yet othets do, and if none should; yet I am
not to cease from speaking to an unreclaimed people. I am still to declare unto
them their sins, and the means of their amendment. The Apostle commands
Ministers, who are the Lords public servants of his Church, to be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, 2 Timothy 3. 24, 25.
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; the
hopes that God may give repentance to opposers is a ground and encouragement
unto us, to continue among a people, for present unreformed, our instant
preachings unto them, in season and out of season. Yea, God also 2 Timothy 4. 2
commanded his holy Prophet to speak his words unto his people, whether they
would hear, or whether they would forbear Ez^k. 2. 5
for they are most rebellious. Ministers must do their duty, and leave the
issue and success to God. If people will not amend, having grace and good
tendered them, by their Ministers labors: yet God will thereby justify his
proceedings, and the wicked shall be left inexcusable: and our Ministerial
labors continued among them, shall however be acceptable to God; for we are
unto God a sweet savor of Christ in 2 Cor. 2. 15
them that are saved, and in them that perish; and God is not unrighteous to
forget our work and labor of love, which we have showed toward his name; our
work or reward is with Isa. ^9. 4.
our God. It is not therefore for us to cease from speaking to our people,
though they should continue to be wild, mockers and scoffers, as thou styles
them,

7. Thou asks. Does not the Apostle say their fruit shall wither? and shall not
their fruit wither thinks thou?

Answ. The Apostle speaking of Seducers, whom he calls men crept in unawares,
ungodly men, who turn the grace of Jude v. 4. v. 10
God into lasciviousness, and deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ: who speak evil of the things they know not, and corrupt themselves in
things which they know: he v. 12
calls them clouds without water, carried about with winds: and also he calls
them trees, whose fruit withers: though themselves are trees without any
fruit, namely without any fruit of Gods Spirit, which is in all goodness, and
righteousness, and truth, yet their own proper fruit withers: so says Ephesians.
5. 9
the Apostle, and so I do both think and say, that their fruit shall wither.
The false doctrines which are properly the fruit, which seducing teachers
brings forth, shall wither. For,

1. Their false doctrines have not in them any sappy taste of the seed of Gods
Word, which endures for ever; though they 1 Pet. 1. 25
pretend Scripture; yet upon a thorough scrutiny and se^rching examination,
they will be found to have in them no inward juice of any saving truths, which
the holy Scripture contains: and for this reason it is, that all the venomous
and poisonous infusion, which these false doctrines have had from the hearts
and heads of those earthly minded men, who devised them, and countenanced them,
will not always last, but will wither, as soon as their leaves and coverings
f^lls off, and they are laid open to the view of all, to see that they are
indeed no other then sour, unsavory, unwholesome and pernicious fruit.

2. The trees themselves, I mean these seducing teachers, are not by God
planted in the House of God. They who are by him planted in the orderly way of
an upright faithful standing Ministry, do flourish, and bring forth fruit in
old age, to show Psalm 91 13 14, 15.
that the Lord is upright: but seducers are no plants of the Lord. They are
either sprigs springing up of their own accord among the trees of ^od,
undertaking the work to which they have no warrant, being (as the Apostle
says) men crept in unawares: or they are brought in by some Machivilian
Politicians, for their better bringing about some earthly designs: and
therefore God will root them out, and blast the fruit which they bear, that it
shall not grow as it did at first, nor be so desired as containing (according
as many supposed falsely) some hidden wisdom: for it is said, every plant
which the heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up: and they who
creep into Man. 15. 13
houses, and who resist the truth, who are men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men. 2 Timothy 3. v. 6, 8, 9.


Thus thou may perceive that I both think and say, as the Apostle does: that
the fruits of false doctrines, which are properly the fruits, which seducers
bring forth, shall wither.

But know also, that the holy doctrines and truths, which I and other faithful
Ministers do constantly deliver to our people, are fruits of the Spirit of God,
gathered by us clearly from the holy Scriptures, which is the written Word of
God, and they are by our preaching delivered to them; and these fruits will
never wither, but will continue to be still gathered and communicated unto
people, even after we are dead and gone, by a like holy order of faithful men
(as we are) whom God in 2 Timothy 2. 2
the succeeding Generations, will raise up to his Ministerial service, who
shall be able to teach others: the things which we teach are the everlasting
truths of God, which perhaps may be suppressed for a while by the prevailing of
heresies, schisms and persecutions, but they will at last triumph over all
those, and continue conquering, and to conquer the errors and corruptions of
sinful mortals.

As for that mocking and scoffing of honest people, with which thou do charge
the whole Congregation which is committed to my charge, and does say, that is
my fruit. I again tell thee, as I have told thee, and proved it too: that these
doings are neither mine, nor the fruits of the whole Congregation: but they are
the fruits only of such, who are guilty thereof: unto whom I hope God will in
his due time give grace to repent of these their misdemeanors: and then these
evil fruits will be withered and be no more, and these sins will be
pardoned: But if such continue in these, and die not repenting of these, and of
their other sins, then they shall in the day of rendering an account, bear their
own burden; but the burden Gal. 6. 5.
of their sin will not be laid, either on me or the Congregation, who have
been no ways accessory to their transgression.

I suppose thou now have a complete Answer to thy twelfth Head of Demands.
CHAP. XIII.
Thy thirteenth Head of Demands is thus expressed.

WHere did the Apostle give David's quakings, prophecies, reproaches, fastings,
in meeter to sing to the world.

Answ. In David's Psalms there is mention made of David's fear and trembling to
offend God, and to provoke him to Psalm. 119. 120
judgments, this thou calls David's quakings: whereas David did not cast his
body (as I hear some Quakers do) into trembling fits, and quaking, shaking
postures. Moreover there is in David's Psalms a Record of David's Prophecies,
and a Narrative of some reproaches which he suffered, and of some fasting which
he used.

Now in those very places, where charge is given by the Apostles, to be filled
with the Spirit, speaking to our selves in Ephesians. 5. 18, 19
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, and to let the Word dwell in us richly,
in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs: and if any Col. 3. 16.
man be merry, let him sing Psalms. The Apostles in all these places points us
to the book of Psalms, (for the New Testament I am. 5. 13.
does speak of no other Psalms) in which Book the Psalms which David, Asaph,
and other holy men of God indicted, by assistance from the holy and unerring
Spirit of God, are contained. And the Apostles recommending these Psalms to be
sung, does plainly intimate that they thought that these Psalms did comprehend
fit matter for every singer to meditate upon for his edification: and also they
approved of their use in meeter with Musical accents and cadencies; and in that
the Apostle says, If any man be merry let him sing Psalms: it is evident,
that the world of men, as well as the Church of Saints, are enjoined by the
outward melody of their voice, to express the inward music of their glad
hearts: and that in the using Psalms, for expressing that they shall be
enabled to mix some spiritual comfort with the lawful cause of natural
merriment, which will be sanctified to them by the word and prayers of those
Scriptural Psalms, which were composed by the Spirit of God for all men to
make use of, to tune their spirits into heavenly well tempered affections in
all conditions.

Enough is said to thy thirteenth Head of Demands.
CHAP. XIV.
Thy fourteenth Head of Demands is as follows.

IS the Priesthood changed that took tithes? Is the Law changed by which they
were made? Is the Commandment disanulled that gave them tithes? Did Abraham pay
tithes to Melchizedeck of his substance, or of the spoils? Did he ever do it
to him any more then once? Was it a standing thing to be done after him? Is the
Son of God come, the end of all similitudes and likenesses? Now if thou say,
that they that preach the Gospel, must live of the Gospel, and have I not power
to eat, and power to drink? yea, when Christ sent forth his Disciples, he bad
them inquire who was worthy, and what they set before them they might eat. But
did he that said, have I not power to eat, say, have I not power to take
Stipends, Augmentations, Tithes, Glebe-lands, great sums of money, or
Parsonage Houses? Now if thou come to my House, who says thou art a Minister
of the Gospel, and minister unto me spiritual things, I shall set before thee
of my carnal things, if thou have enquired and found my House worthy? so said
Christ, what they set before thee, eat: so said the Apostle, have not I power
to eat and to drink? but said, I have not written this, nor spoken this that it
should be so done unto me, for I have not used my power. But if thou come to a
Town, or come to an House, and enquire for Tithes and Augmentations, and tithe
Wool, Hay, Pigs, Bees, Gardens, and money for smoke passing up Chimneys,
Foales, Eggs, Geese, Chickens, Calves, Lambs, and other creatures: and thou
cannot show me by Scripture, where the Apostles did so, I must say thou art one
of those evil beasts that mind earthly things, and thy own belly: if thou
cannot prove to the contrary.

Answ. Many words are here mustered together containing several questions about
tithes: and thy conceit, touching what kind of maintenance, thou deemes to be
only allowed to the preachers of the Gosoel: and here thy promise is expressed
after what manner thou will entertain me, if I shall come to thy house: and
also thou relates what manner of language thou must use, in case I come to
demand things tithable. To all which I shall return an orderly Answer.

Thy Questions are seven: to which answers shall be returned to them all in
their order.

1. Thou asks. Is the Priesthood changed that took tithes?

Answ. The Aaronical Priesthood which took tithes is changed, but the
Melchizedochian Priesthood which took tithes, before tithes were took by any of
Aarons order, and which since the change of Aarons Priesthood, does still
continue, that Priesthood of Melchizedecks order is not changed, but abides for
ever: and to it tithes are due, and at this day, and to the end of the world
ought to be paid unto it; for the fuller clearing this, understand, that God
had but two orders of Priests in the world which we read of: the first was
after the order of Melchizedeck, who is the first Priest of the most high God
mentioned in holy Scripture. This order was for a time discontinued: during
that time wherein the Jews was only known to be a visible Nation upon the
Earth, which were Gods people: But this order is now restored again by our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has broken down the partition wall between Jews and
Gentiles, and has made the Centiles also to become obedient to the faith, and
to be sons and daughters of the living God. And now Christ is a Priest after
Melchizedecks order, continuing for ever. He is confirmed in that Priesthood by
Gods Oath, which is never to be repealed: For the Lord has sworn and will
never repent it, thou art a Priest Psalm. 110. 1
for ever after the order of Melchizedeck: and tithes continue due to be duly
paid unto this Priesthood: He receives them Heb. 7. 8.
of whom it is witnessed that he lives for ever. The other order of Priests
which God had was the order of Levi or Aaron, whose Priesthood was typical, to
continue but until Christ (unto whom the Priesthood did properly appertain)
came, and had taken upon him the everlasting Priesthood. He was made Heb. 7. 21.
a Priest with Oath; whereas the Leviticel Priests were made without an Oath:
they were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of
death; but this man (Jesus Christ) because he continues ever, has an
unchangeable Heb. 7. 23, 24
Priesthood. He was made a Priest after the power of an endless life; but the
Levitical Priests was made after the Law of a carnal Commandment: they were
made Priests by a Ceremonial Heb. 7. 16.
Law, which commanded carnal and outward observations which were not to
continue always, but to have an end. Wherefore the Levitical Priests were to
cease from exercising the Priestly office, when Christ the true Priest should
come, and for ever continue to make perfect the faith of Gods people; he being
both the Author and sinisher of their faith; Heb. 12 ^.
which thing those carnal Commandments, or Ceremonial Ordinances, belonging
properly to the Levitical Priests and service of the Jews could not perfect.

Therefore I say, though the Levitical Priesthood which took tithe, be changed:
yet seeing there is another Priesthood after Melchizedecks order, now
continuing, tithes become payable as they were first, to that order of
Priesthood: and they are to be paid unto Christ, who is of that order, now a
Priest for ever: To him tithes are duly to be paid, as an acknowledgement of
his Sovereign Priesthood: and they are received by him, when they are paid
(according to his appointment) 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
for their maintenance, to his Stewards, his Ministers who serve in his service.

2. Thou asks. Is the Law changed by which they were made?

Answ. The Apostle plainly says: that the Priesthood being Heb. 7. 12
charged, there is made of necessity a change of the Law. The Priesthood which
was changed, was the Levitical Priesthood: and the Law which with it was
changed, was the Law of Ordinances, ritual observations or ceremonies, which
properly concerned that Levitical Priesthood, and the admininistration of the
Jewish service; and as by that Priesthood which is changed, there was no
perfection; so that Law of Heb. 7. 11
Ordinances, which is changed (called by the Apostle carnal Ordinances) could
not make him that did the service perfect, and they were but imposed, until the
time of reformation, Heb. 9. 9, 10 Heb. 10. 14
which Christ brought, who is a Priest for ever, and by one offering has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. I say therefore that the Law of
those Ordinances, which were administered by the Levitical Priesthood, and by
which the Priests of that order were empowered to officiate, or were made
Priests, is now changed together with that Priesthood; for Christ who is a
Priest continuing, has appointed the manner and order of holy administrations,
to be of another kind, then these were, when the Levitical Priesthood was in
request. And likewise he has appointed another manner of admitting those whom
he chooses to be his Stewards, and in his stead to dispense unto his people
warrantably the spiritual Ministrastrations, then was the manner of deputing
any to the service of the Tabernacles and the Temple, while the Levitical
Priesthood: for then such Priests were consecrated by washings, anointings,
sacrificing, and purifying of blood, to attend upon the service enjoined them:
whereas Christ has appointed 1 Timothy 2 7 1 Tit. 5. 1 Timothy 4. 14 2 Timothy 3. 17
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12
that by Ordination only, his Ministers should be authorized to do the work of
the Ministry: hereby they are put into the Ministry, and receive the gift of
becoming men of God, to do service for God; and so they are by him given to his
Church, to be Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: hence Gods tithes
are designed unto them, as maintenance of Gods men, as a recompense for the
service which they do for Jesus Christ, who is over all God blessed for ever. 1
Cor. 9. 14


3. Thou asks: Is the Commandment disanulled that gave them tithes?

Answ. The Commandment which the sons of Levi had to tithe their brethren,
was a special Law or Commandment, Heb. 7. 5.
without which they could not have any title to tithe at all: because tithes
originally belonged to the Priesthood of Christ, typed in Melchizedeck, who
tythed Abraham, by Right or Law original: but the sons of Levi had only a
special command, or grant for a time, for tything their brethren, according to
the original Law of tything, which was before settled as on a foundation in the
Priesthood after another order; and therefore I say that that particular
command which the Levitical, Priesthood had, for taking tithes expired with
their Priesthood: So that now none of that Tribe can claim tithes, by virtue
of any such peculiar command unto the Levitical Priesthood. And this also I
say, that that Law of tything which was Original, and by virtue of which
Melchized^ck tythed Abraham, is still in force: by virtue of which all tithes
ought to be paid unto the Lord Jesus Christ, who is an everlasting Priest after
Melchizedecks order, he receives them who lives for ever: he H^b. 7. 8.
ever lives to be a taker of tithes: but seeing these cannot be paid unto him
in Person, because he is ascended into heaven, and sits at Gods right hand an
high Priest for ever: therefore they are to be paid, according to his
appointment, unto his Ministers, with whom he has promised to be present unto
the end of the world. He has ordained that they should have that very means
appertaining unto the Gospel, which is due, in as much as he by them does
preach the Gospel of peace unto his people. The Apostle says, so has the Lord
or^ained, Ephesians. 2. 14.
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gosp^l. To live of the
Gospel, is to have the maintenance and livelihood, 1 Cor. 9. 14
or portion of temporal substance, which belongs to the Gospel: and that is the
tithes due to Christ the eternal Priest: who thereby pays his own peculiar
servants out of his own proper goods, which he has reserved unto himself out
of every man's increase, and is generally known by the name of tithes. Therefore
I answer to thy question: Though that command be disanulled that gave the
Levites tithes, yet the Law of tything is not disanulled, which gave
Melchizedeck right of tything, and which is given by Christ unto us his
Ministers of the Gospel. We do not take tithes, as the Priests of the Tribe of
Levi did, in way of holding up the Levitical service, and Priesthood, both
which is abolished: but we take tithes as they are that tribute or portion of
the earths increase, which the Lord has reserved for himself, and given them
unto us for our attendance and waiting on the Ministry of the Gospel, to which
he has appointed us.

4. Thou asks: Did Abraham pay tithes to Melchizedeck of his substance or of
the spoil?

Answ. The holy Scripture plainly tells us, that he paid unto him tithes of
both.

1. He paid unto him the tithe of his substance. Moses in Genesis 14. 20 Heb. 7. 2.
saying, that he gave him tithes of all: and the Apostle in saying, that unto
Melchizedeck Abraham gave the tenth part of all, do both of them intimate, that
there was not any substantial increase, which Abraham possessed, left untithed
by Melchizedeck the Priest of the most high God. And,

2. The Apostle also in saying, that he gave him the tenth of the spoil, or
out of the spoil, does thereby specify one Heb. 7. 4.
remarkable event not before known to the world, whence tithes are due to the
Priesthood of Melchizedecks order, as often as such occurrents shall come to
pass: wherefore Melchizedeck took from Abraham the tithes of spoils; out of
which there ought to arise an Augmentative benefit to the Priest of the high
God (Jesus Christ) as often as victories over enemies are obtained. I say
therefore that Abraham paid unto Melchizedeck tithes both of his substance, and
of the spoils. The blessing which Melchizedeck gave, contains in it the
reason of paying tithes of both these. Blessed (says he) be Abraham of the
most high God possessor of heaven and Genesis 14. 19
earth; Abraham was blessed and to be blessed from the most high God, with the
influences of heaven, whereby the earth Hos. 2. 21, 22
was enabled to yield unto him her increase and blessings: and therefore he was
to pay tithes to God, as an acknowledgement of his Sovereignty over all, and of
his liberality unto him in all: he being truly according to the title given
unto God first by Melchizedeck in holy Scripture, the high possessour of heaven
and earth. Again, blessed (says Melchizedeck) be the most Genesis 14. 20
high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thy hand: Abraham was
therefore to pay unto God, the tithes of the spoil, as due to him, the giver
of victory, the subduer of the enemies, and the preserver of the Conqueror.
Holy Abraham was by this blessing well informed upon what grounds tithes were
payable unto God; and therefore he would not on any condition give away Gods
portion: wherefore he gave the tenth of the spoil, which was Gods due to the
Priest of the most high God: though he would not take the residue of the spoil
or goods which he had got in the war, when the King Genesis 14. 21, 22, 23.
of Sodom would have had him. Again, the expressing of the Apostle seems fully
to give a reason of his paying tithes of both. He annexeth immediately to the
interpretation of Melchizedecks names, the mentioning that Abraham gave a tenth
of all as a sufficient reason of Abraham's paying tithes of his substance, and
tithes of the spoils. The Apostles words are these, To whom Abraham gave a
tenth part of all: first being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and
after that also King Heb. 7. 2.
of Salem; which is King of Peace, as if he would have us to consider, that the
tenth part of all is to be given to the God of righteousness, who exacts
nothing from any people but that which is right: and the tenth of spoils also,
as well as the tenth of substance, is to be given to the God of peace, who
causes all to enjoy peaceably, whatever they do inherit.

5. Thou asks: Did he it ever any more then once?

Answ. Abraham's example of doing it, though we had no intimation how often he did
it, is binding to all (who are by profession children of Abraham according to
faith) so often to do it, as they have the same grounds for doing it, which
Abraham once had. As therefore Abraham paid unto the Priest of the most high
God the tyth of all his substance, on this ground: because the Lord was the
high Possessor of heaven and earth, and so the giver unto him all his increase;
even so every true believer must return to God the tithe of his substantial
increase, as often as the Lord gives unto his substance an increase, Deuteronomy. 14. 22
which is yearly, for so God has told him; and such have Abraham's example
acting herein on this ground, because God was the blesser of him, from leaven
and on earth in all his particular increase; and as Abraham paid tithe of the
spoils which were took in War, on this ground, because the Lord had preserved
him, and given him the victory over his enemies; so at every time when the Lord
shall call any true believer, to triumph over his enemies, he ought to return
unto God the tithe of the spoils taken, as a thankful acknowledgement, that
the Lord was his keeper and deliverer from his enemies, and the subduer for him
of those, who were risen up against him; and as often as he does this, he is in
doing so an Imitator of Abraham, who on the very same grounds did pay tithes of
all.

It is not plainly said, how often he did so: because the holy Scripture was not
indicted to be an hystory, either to relate every particular act, which was done
by these holy men, of whom it makes mention; or every particular time of their
doing the self-same holy act for substance, which it says they did; but Gods
intention of recording in holy Scripture any good act which they did (though
there be no mention how often they did it) was for our learning and imitation:
that we might thorough patience and comfort of the Scriptures have hope:
namely, Romans 15. 4
that we from the good presidents of any good which it reports they did, might
learn to be patient or perseverant in the like well-doing, and might be
comforted, seeing the holy Scripture commends unto us the good which they have
at any time done. And holy Scriptural commendings are vertual commandings of us
to practice the same good at all times on the same grounds which moved them at
any time to act it: according to the Apostle, follow (says he) ever that which
is good, and think on these things in which there is any praise: as there 1
Cor. 10. 18
is a great deal in the good done by the holy men in Scripture whom the Lord
commends.

Besides, though holy Scripture tells not in plain terms, how often Abraham paid
tithes to Melchizedeck, for the reason already given: yet there is an
expression which seems to imply, that it was more then once: for the Apostle
commands, not to be slothful, but followers of those who through faith and
patience Heb. 6. 12.
inherit the promise: and presently instanceth in Abraham, continuing still his
discourse of him thoroughout that Chapter, and unto the next, where he tells of
his act of paying tithes of all to Melchizedeck, and of his act of dividing
unto Melchizedeck the tenth out of the spoil. This following of Ab^aham is a
word of prosecution, and naturally implies that Abraham made more steps or acts
then one, only in tything; wherein we are as well called, in following him to
propose him unto our selves for an example, as we are called on, to walk after
his pattern in those several steppings or actings, which he made in believing
the promises, and in patiently enduring until Heb. 6. 13, 14, 15.
he had obtained them.

6. Thou asks: Was it a standing thing to be done after him?

Answ. 1. I suppose it is already very clear, by what is said, that paying of
tithes to Evangelical Ministers is a standing duty to be paid unto them; even
as it was but duty in Abraham (as it has been proved) to pay tithes to
Melchizedeck, the Evangelical Priest of the most high God, who met him not with
Altars and sacrifices, like a Levitical Priest, but with bread and wine, as if
he had been a Minister of the Gospel. Paying tithes is a standing duty, to be
discharged unto the Ministers of the Gospel, so long as Christ imployes them in
his stead, to do his Evangelical service of blessing the people, and of
blessing God for them, and for their good successes, and of seeking the welfare
of their souls and bodies, in teaching them to inherit eternal blessings in and
thorough him the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. It is plain, paying of tithes was a standing thing to be done after
Abraham's time; because Jacob who was Abraham's Genesis 28. 22
grandchild, vowed to pay the tenth to God of all that which he should give
him. That holy man well understood the grounds on which tithes are due unto
God, both from his father Isaac's blessing, wherein he expresses, that all
that which he was to have, was to be given unto him from God. God (said Isaac)
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of
corn and wine: and also at his vision Genesis 27. 28
of the providential ladder, he understood so much from Gods own promise, that
he would give unto him and to his seed the land on which he then did lie: and
that in his blessed seed, which is Christ, all the families of the earth should
be blessed: Genesis 28. 13, 14, 15.
and that he would keep and preserve him in all places whether he went, and
that he would not leave him, until he had done that which he had spoken to him
of. Whereupon Jacob vowed to pay unto God the tenth of all, as soon as the Lord
should give him an estate, out of which these tenths might arise: for he had
(when he vowed) nothing we read of, save a little oil which he poured on the
top of a pillar, and his staff, with which, Genesis 28. 18 Genesis 3^. 10 Genesis 28.
20. 21, 22.
as a poor traveller, he passed over Jordan. As this vow of Jacob is a large
testimony, that he then had in him very plentiful, large, and cheerful
resolutions to pay tithes: so it does fully notify, that he had took into him
an advised consideration of the special grounds, for which they are at all
times to be paid unto God: namely, they are to be always paid, as an
acknowledgement that God is the Sovereign Lord over all people, and that he is
the blesser of them, bestowing on them temporal blessings from the dew of
heaven, and the increase of the earth; and spiritual and eternal blessings,
from Christ the blessed seed: and that he is the Keeper and Preserver of them
in all places: and the, Provider for them of meat and raiment, and the Setler
of them in their habitations in peace. Jacob vowed thus to do, what was but his
duty to do: that when he should come (through Gods enabling him) to perform it,
he might the more heedfully discharge it, as being to him as to all men a duty,
and somewhat more, even a vowed duty, or a duty, requiring from him so much
more carfulness, as he was pleased by his own choice, to single it especially
out to be by him, upon solemn vow, and special engagement the more religiously
observed and performed.

3. Paying of tithes is a standing thing to be done after Abraham's time:
because the Hebrews were commanded by God to pay them, and that before the
Levitical Priesthood was instituted, Thou shall not delay to offer the first or
fullness Exo. 22. 29
of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquor, etc. that is, thou shall not delay to
pay the tithe of these. Certainly, if the slack, or a deferring of paying these
be a sin, then the not paying them at all, is a sin with a witness, even an
high rebellion against a known Commandment.

4. The Lord has made a Law, which he never yet repealed: whereby it is
evident, that paying of tithes is a standing thing to be done after Abraham's
time. The Law is this; Thou shall truly tyth all the increase of the seed, that
the field brings forth year by year. So long then as there shall be in the
Deuteronomy. 14. 22
world fields which yields increase, the owners of them are bound to pay yearly
the tithe of their increase truly, without any fraud unto them, whom God has
appointed should be his Ministers, to dispense unto his people holy things,
according to the Apostles words: Do you not know, that they which minister
about holy things, live of the things of the Temple, 1 Cor. 9, 12, 14.
and they which wait at the Altar are partakers of the Altar? even so has the
Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. It
is hence very evident that though that manner of worship and service is
changed, which was performed by them, who were Ministers at the Temple, and at
the Altar: yet the maintenance which these had is continued, and to be
continued unto those, who are to transact that public worship and service of
God, which the Gospel appoints: Therefore the Ministers of the Gospel are not
to live of the peoples allowance, but of the things belonging to the Gospel,
which is the tithe established by a Law which was never yet repealed: and which
by Christ's Ordinance is yet further confirmed, for as much as it entailes for
ever on his Evangelical Ministerial servants the things of this Gospel, which
are the tithes, and which were formerly settled on his Levitical servants,
during the continuance of their service for him.

And let not cavillers hereafter clamor against this proof for tithes, as
taken from the Law: seeing the Apostle in proving the equity of Ministers
maintenance, calls on us to consider the very voice of the Law enjoining it.
Say I (says he) 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9, 10.
these things as a man? or says not the Law the same also. For it is written
in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads
out the corn; or, says he it altogether for our sakes; for our sakes no doubt
it is written, that he that ploweth shall plow in hope, and that he that
thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. And again, in declaring after
what manner the settled maintenance of Christ's Evangelical Ministerial servants
should arise, he asks us if we do not know (namely, according as the book of
the Law has penned it) how the Levitical Ministerial servants of God had their
maintenance arise: and intimates plainly, that the Lord has ordained, that in
like manner the Preachers of the Gospel should live, or have their maintenance.
And again writing concerning the ample maintenance, which the laborious
Ministers of the word were to have, he cites for proof of it the forementioned
place out of the Law: as if he 2 Timothy 3. 17, 18.
would have us to understand that the limiting Ministers, and curbing them from
enjoyment of their full maintenance, is against the Law: it is a muzzeling the
Ox that treads out the corn: and that their having maintenance by tithes,
is but what the Law appoints, and the Gospel ordaines: and that they who will
but allow them a charitable, and not an honorable maintenance, are
transgressors against the Law, which forbids the muzzeling of the Ox that
treads out the corn. They then who in the time of the Gospel, will in no
case hearken to the Law of God, whether the New Testament directs us, for the
finding out the decision of this, and some other particular points, must
acknowledge, that either the Apostle (who sends us to consider what the Law
says) was therefore in a foul error, which none who are true Christians dare
do: or that themselves (who deny to hear what the Law says) are in the error
for want of grace and judgment; and that out of pride and Covetousness they
will not believe the New Testament which tell us, that the Law has determined
it. From what I have said, I do punctually answer thee, and say, that this
paying of tithes is a standing thing to be done after Abraham's time.

7. Thou asks. Is the Son of God become the end of all similitudes and
likenesses?

Answ. All similitudes and likenesses which were appointed by God in the
Ceremonial Law, either to prefigure Christ who was to come; or to shadow out
something of the spiritual worship and glory, which should be in and to the
Church after Christ's coming, and then were to be accomplished and fulfilled,
are all now ended by his coming; they are no longer to continue to that purpose
for which they formerly served. There is no more need of them, (seeing that
which was signified and represented by them, is come and exhibited) then there
is need of a picture, when the person, whom it deciphers, is present. The
Apostle says, that the Law (he is treating Heb. 10. 1
of the Law Ceremonial, which was the Law of Aaronical ritual Ordinances) had
but a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things.
Ceremonial Ordinances Col. 2. 17.
were but the shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ. Wherefore
though I say, that Christ being come, and having fulfilled all: the use which
these Ceremonial types, patterns, figures, shadows, likenesses, or similitudes
had, is now abolished: they are in respect of their former use, now by Christ's
coming come unto a perpetual end: yet I affirm, that tithes was none of those
similitudes or likenesses: for tithes figured nothing in Christ, nor in his
Church, to be fulfilled by Christ at his coming. The learned wits of the world
have not yet devised, with any successeful proof, what that body is, whereof
tithes should be the shadow, or what that was which they figured out to be
accomplished at Christ's coming. I therefore conclude, that though the Son of
God is come, the end of all similitudes and likenesses: yet because tithes was
no such similitude or likeness which he ended: therefore he has not put a
period or end to tithes: These are still perpetually to be continued unto
Christ's established Ministers, Mat. 28. 20
throughout the world, so long as Christ shall be with them, which will be even
unto the end of the world.

I have now fully answered thy seven questions about tithe and am now to
consider thy expressions about that kind (...) maintenance which thou deemes,
the Gospel only allowed (...) the Preachers of the Gospel.

Thy Expressions are in this sort.

Now if thou say, that they which preach the Gospel mus^ live of the Gospel;
and have I not power to eat, an^ power to drink? yea, when Christ sent forth
his disciples he bad them enquire who was worthy, and what they set before them
they might eat: but did he that said, have I not power to eat, say, have I not
power to take stipends, augmentations, tithes, glebe-lands, great sums of
money, or Parsonage Houses?

Answ. Thou seems in these expressions to have this thought: that living of the
Gospel is no more then that a preacher of the Gospel has a power to eat and
drink what is set before him: thou produces for proof hereof, the words of our
blessed Savior, bidding his Disciples, when he sent them forth, to enquire who
was worthy, and eat such things as were set before Mat. 10. 11 Luke 10. 8
them. Thou also mentions some other things beside meat and drink whereunto (as
thou supposes) there is no grant to any Preacher of the Gospel, in the Apostles
writings, to make claim thereto; and thy promise afterward does plainly show,
that thou thinks, that no other livelihood is appointed in holy Scripture, to
be given to a preacher of the Gospel, then a little meat and drink, when he
comes to a worthy house.

For the rectifying of thy mis-apprehension, I will,

1. Show that according to the Apostle Paul's judgment, living of the Gospel
does entitle the preachers of the Gospel to more then to a bare power to eat
and to drink.

2. I will show that our Saviors inhibition of his Apostles and Disciples,
when he first sent them forth, was no prohibition of the Preachers of the
Gospel, and their successors to take tithe, or any of those things, which they
were forbid at that present to take along with them, when they were sent forth
at first.

3. I will manifest, that though the Apostle does not in express words say, he
had power to take augmentations, etc. yet he says enough, to show that a
Minister or Preacher of the Gospel has a very lawful power to take all these.

First, living of the Gospel, according to the Apostle Paul's judgment does
entitle the Preachers of the Gospel to more then to a bare power to eat and to
drink. Three Reasons cleares this.

1. The Apostle enjoins them who are taught to communicate Gal. 6. 6.
to him that teaches in all good things: Then surely teachers, according to
Paul's judgment, are entitled, to have from thee taught more, and other things
then a little meat and drink. Therefore as a Levite of old had power to eat and
drink at the house of a Jewish Professor; and yet had besides a right to Deuteronomy.
14. 29
receive, from such a professor, the tithe of all the increase, wherewith God
had blessed him: even so a preacher of the Gospel has a power to eat and to
drink, when he comes to the house of a Christian Professor, who is taught by
him: and he has also in Paul's judgment, a right to partake in all those good
things, wherewith God has increasingly blessed that same Professor who is
taught.

2. The Apostles saying that they who labor in the word and doctrine are to be
counted worthy of double honor, does evidence, that his judgment was, that
preachers of the Gospel are entitled 1 Timothy 5. 17.
to receive more then a little meat and drink from an householder, whose
teachers they are; for they will give as much to very beggars coming to their
house, whom they little honor or esteem. But laborers in the word and
doctrine (says the Apost.) are worthy of honor, that is, of maintenance: the
reason he alleges, intimates clearly, that by honor in that place, he
understood maintenance; yea, they are (he says) worthy of double honor, that
is, of a liberal, honorable, comfortable maintenance, as a just and honorable
reward of their labors. Even as the firstborn while they held the Priesthood,
had a double portion; besides the portion which they had as other children,
they had the tithes as an honorary of their Priesthood, whereby their portion
was double: so the Apostle (it seems alluding to the double portion of the
firstborn) enjoins, that the Preachers of the Gospel have double honor, or
honorable maintenance; namely, maintenance both as other men, and also a
further maintenance, as they are Ministers of the Lord: and so they are to have
that very maintenance which the Levites Number. 3. 35 Numb. 8. 18, 19.
had, being assumed into the room of the firstborn, as Priests and Ministers
of God, whereby their portion was doubled among their brethren. This double
portion, or double honor, or double maintenance, was in the Apostles judgment,
due unto the Preachers or Ministers of the Gospel. Paul was so far from
conceiting, that they who preach the Gospel had only a title to receive a
little meat and drink when they came to a worthy house; that counting the
Ministry of the Gospel to be a more honorable and glorious 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9,
10, 11
Ministry, then the Priesthood of Levi, he thought it also worthy to have the
like, yea, the very same portion or maintenance, as a reward of its painful and
continued labors, in seeking to set forth Christ crucified, which that
Levitical Priesthood had, while they were exercised about beasts sacrificed.

3. It is certain, that living of the Gospel intitles the Preachers 2 Cor. 9.
13, 14.
of the Gospel in Paul's judgment, to as much, as living of the things of the
Temple, and partaking with the Altar, did entitle those, who ministered about
holy things, and waited at the Altar: Now as all know such had a title to more
then a little meat and drink: and therefore the Preachers of the Gospel have
title also to more then that; and as the Levites ministering about holy things,
were entitled to all the Temple Deuteronomy. 18. 1 Numb. 18 21
and Altar-maintenance, which was the offerings of the Lord and his
inheritance; and his inheritance was the tithes: even so the Preachers of the
Gospel are entitled to all the temporalities of the Gospel, which the Lord by
his Ordinance has consigned to belong to the Gospel, for the support of his
Gospel service: and these temporalities are the Lords inheritance, which are
called tithes; which tithes were formerly granted unto the children of Levi,
but now are taken from them, and given unto Christ, and are ratified to be his
Ministers until the end of the world, for so long their Ministry must last.

Thus thou may rightly apprehend, that according to Paul's judgment, the
Preachers of the Gospel are entitled to more then to a bare power to eat and
to drink: and likewise thou may understand what that is, to which their living
of the Gospel does entitle them.

Secondly, consider, that our Saviors inhibition of his Apostles and
Disciples, when he first sent them forth, was no prohibition of the Preachers
of the Gospel, and their successors to take tithe, or any of those things which
they were forbad at that present to take along with them, when they were sent
forth at first.

1. Because this command of our Savior was only a peculiar temporary precept
unto these Apostles and Disciples, to be observed by them, during this their
first embassage, and short journey, into those several places of Jewry whither
he sent them: But it was not a stablished precept to be exercised by them at
all other times, and in that and other countries and places, whither afterward
they should go to preach the Cospel, Wherefore,

2. This precept was revoked and repealed by our blessed Savior himself,
saying; When I sent you forth without purse Luke 22. 35
and scrip, and shoes, lacked you any thing? and they said nothing: then said
he unto them: but now he that has a purse, let him take it, and likewise his
scrip: and he that no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one. They were
forbad at first, but enjoined afterward to take these. At first they were
inhibited to take with them a purse, with gold, silver, and brass, that is,
with any money of great or small value, therewith to furnish themselves with
back and belly. They also were forbad to take a scrip, which served (as the
custom then was) to put therein corn and other provision; yea, and they were
not to take with them a flaffe for their own defense, and for the offense of
others; these things they then might not take with them, because all these
things should be provided for them. As it is Gods Ordinance, that they who
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; so it was Christ who prohibited
the first preachers of the Gospel, to provide for themselves at their own free
cost and charges; assuring them, that he that set them on his work, would
freely and fully provide for them all things, which would be necessary, both
for procuring, and keeping, and for defending to them a maintenance or
livelihood. Our Savior gives this reason of his sending them out unfurnished
from themselves: for the workman is worthy of (...)
his meat, that is, of whatever is available toward his nourishment, both by
sustenance and by supportance. It is plain, that even during the force of that
prohibition, that they should not take those things along with them which
Christ mentioned: yet they might lawfully take from those, unto whom they
preached (whose hearts the Lord made willing to give) both gold and silver, add
brass, or any sort of money, and provisions, and clothes, and lodgings, which
was certainly more, then a little meat and drink, as thou supposes; and now
that former inhibition being repealed, there is a strong injunction, allowing
the Ministers of Christ to receive things conducing, to procute them
necessaries. They may now receive a purse with money, of what rate soever,
whether it be gold, or silver, or brass, or any other. They may receive several
provisions in plenty, even a scrip, the repository, and keeper of provision,
which is not spent in the present use, but reserved for future maintenance; and
also they make use of any lawful power of instruments of protection: and in
case they want such, they may lawfully part with something otherwise necessary,
even with their coat, so they may thereby procure a sword, to wit, the sword of
authority, to defend their persons and their just rights.

Thirdly, consider, that though the Apostle does not in express words say,
that he had power to take Stipends, Augmentations, Tithes, Glebe-lands, great
sums of money, or Parsonage Houses: yet he says enough, to show, that his
judgment was, that the Ministers of the Gospel have a lawful power and right
to take all these: for he says, even so has the 1 Cor. 9. 14
Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel;
the words even so, etc. refer to what he had said, namely, they which
minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple; and they which
wait at the Altar are partakers with the Altar: even so the Lord has ordained
that, etc. the meaning is clear, that the maintenance of them, who preach the
Gospel, should be like the maintenance, which they had, who ministered about
holy things, and waited at the Altar. All may know that these had a power to
receive, Exodus 23. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Lev. 27. 22 23 Numb. 35 2. to 9. Lev.
25, 33, 34. Eze. 48, 14
beside tithes, an augmentative maintenance, from every males appearing thrice
every year before the Lord not empty handed: and from every thing which should
at any time be consecrated to the Lord: and likewise they had a power and right
to receive Cities, and Suburbs, and Houses, and Lands. The Apostles paralelling
the Ministers of the Gospel with those Aaronical Priests and Levites, in their
maintenance, is a manifest that his judgment was, that Ministers of the Gospel
have a power and right to challenge, as liberal, and as honorable a
maintenance as these did: and that besides their right to take tithes, they
have also a right to take all such augmentations, as shall at any time arise,
from donations of moneys, or other things: or from the dedication of Houses,
Lands, and other temporalities, which are and may be (in relation to uphold the
service and honor of God) very fit for the present and perpetuated maintenance
of the Ministers of the Gospel; for even unto these Christ promised: that in
this time they should receive an hundred fold, Houses, and Friends, and Lands,
with persecutions, and in the world to come, Mar. 10 29 30
eternal life.

By all this thou may see, that both in the judgment of Christ, and of his
Apostle, the Ministers of the Gospel are entitled to more then to a bare
power, to eat a little meat, and to drink a little drink, at any worthy
house, whether they shall come. Thou have an answer now, to thy expressions,
about what kind of maintenance thou thinks, that the Gospel only allows to
the Preachers of the Gospel.

Next, thy promise after what manner thou will entertain me, if I shall come
to thy House, is thus expressed by thee

Now if thou come to my house, who says, thou art a Minister of the Gospel,
and minister unto me spiritual things, I shall set before thee of my carnal
things, if thou have enquired and found my house worthy; so said Christ, what
they set before ye, eat: so said the Apostle, have not I power to eat and to
drink? but said, I have not written this, nor spoken this, that it should be
done unto me, for I have not used my power.

Answ. This promise of thine seems unto me, to hold out that thy opinion is
this.

That the settting carnal edible things before a Minister, is only that which
he can challenge, as due to him from thee: and this only but then is due to
him, when he comes to thy house, and ministers spiritual things, and has
enquired and found thy house worthy, and thou seems to confirm thy self in
this thought by the words of Christ, eat such things as are set before you; and
by the Apostles words, have we not power to eat and to drink?

I answer. 1. Christ sent forth first the twelve Apostles, and after that the
seventy Disciples, two and two, upon a short journey to the Towns and Cities of
Judea, to preach and to work miracles, even in that time, when the public
maintenance for teaching the people, was not taken from the Priests and
Levites, and was not settled as yet on any Ministers of the Gospel: and
therefore Christ's enjoining these, whom he thus sent forth (in regard that they
were but to make a short stay any where) to abide till they went thence, in
that house which they had by enquiry found worthy, or meet, or convenient for
them to sojourn in, and there to eat what was set before them: I say, Christ's
enjoining them to do thus, is no injunction from Christ to any settled Minister
of the Gospel (who is to attend his flock, over which the holy Ghost has made
him overseer) to go and tarry in some worthy, or well famed Inn or Hostlery,
or other house of good report, and there to eat what the good man of the house
(perhaps some holy Gajus, his host, and of the whole Church, who does Romans 16.
23 3 John 5.
faithfully whatsoever he does to the brethren, and to strangers) does order to
set before him.

For this temporary command to the Apostles and Disciples to go and abide in an
house, and to eat what was set before them, expired at their return from that
expedition on which they were sent, which was very short. It was but necessary,
seeing the ordinary public maintenance in Judea, for teaching was settled on
others, that such, who were in an extraordinary manner sent to teach, should be
extraordinarily maintained from the contribution of such Jews, whose hearts God
should move to afford to them (during their but short abode) the necessaries of
meat, drink and lodging.

But now in all places, in any Nation, where extraordinary mission to it is
ceased; and the ordinary public maintenance for instructing people is settled
on the Ministers of the Gospel; the settled Ministers themselves (according to
holy command) must have their own houses, and must be given to hospitality: 1 Timothy 3. 2, ^.
wherefore they were not to live (as thou and some others imagine) on a little
meat and drink, which shall be set before them in a Inn, or Hostlery, or at an
house, well famed by the neighborhood at their enquiry, before they came to
^it, seeing they themselves are to be hospitable: which cannot be, if their
abode must be in other men's houses; and it be in the power of these men, in
whose houses they abide, to allow them but what they please in meat and drink.

2. Saint Paul's saying, have I not power to eat and to drink? 1 Cor. 9. 4
does not intimate, that he had power only to eat a little meat and drink, a
little drink, which his hearers should give him: for he argues further, that he
had a right, title, lawful authority, ver. 5. (...).
as well as the other Apostles to take from them maintenance for his whole
family, which he might lead about with him; and though he did forbear his power
of demanding any maintenance at all from the Corinthians (which thou also
acknowledges) yet he thereby enjoynes not other Ministers, to forgo their
right, but rather helps them to several arguments to plead their right unto a
most large and liberal maintenance: and he has elsewhere determined that
Ministers have a right to receive more from their hearers then a little meat
and drink: his words are, Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto
him that teaches in all good Gal. 6. 6.
things.

Thou may now see that neither Christ's words, cat such things as are set before
you: nor Paul's words, have we not power to eat and to drink? do justify thy
thought, that a Minister can only challenge from thee a little meat and drink,
as due unto him.

3. Thy promise seems to affirm, that thy ministering carnals is only due from
thee to thy Minister, when he comes to thy house, and there ministers spiritual
things. But thy Minister does truly tell thee, that carnal things are due to
him from thee, for his Ministering of spirituals publicly, to his people (of
whose number thou art one) who are within that precinct, whereof God has made
him overseer. His public dispensation of spirituals to his people, are weekly
constant and frequent: and all his people (if they do not wilfully forsake
them, and forbear coming to the public holy Assemblies) may be there partakers
of some spiritual gift, which he imparts to their edification, in that public
house belonging to them all, which is commonly called the Church. It is also
well known, that he is ready upon timely notice, at all times night or day to
come to thine, and to any other of his peoples private houses, and there to
minister such spirituals, as the present emergencies of your families does
justly require from him. And though he sees well enough who do cordially, and
who do only superficially value those spirituals which he dispenses, yet he
counts any house worthy, which desires his Ministerial service, and which does
not put it away from them, and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life.

All thy expressions are now fully answered, which have been used by thee, to
declare the kind of maintenance which thou deemes, is only to be allowed unto
a Minister of the Gospel; and an answer is also given to thy promise, relating
in what manner thou will entertain at thine house such a Minister.

The language which I must expect from thee in case I come and demand things
tythable, is thus related by thee.

But if thou come to a Town, or come to an House, and quetie for tithes, and
Augmentations, and tithe Wool, Hey, Pigs, Bees, Gardens, and money for smoke
passing up Chimneys, Fowls, Eggs, Geese, Chickens, Calves, Lambs, and other
creatures. And thou can not show me by Scripture, where the Apostles did so,
I must say, thou art one of those evil beasts, that minds earthly things, and
thy own belly, if thou cannot prove to the contrary.

Answ. It has been already again and again proved: that tithes in general,
and that the tithes also of those very things which thou mentions, are all due
from the taught, to him who teaches. It has also been proved, that Ministers
have right to all such augmentations, which shall at any time arise unto them,
either from moneys, or from other things, which are given unto them, or from
the increase either of fruits, or of rents, or of improvements, which those
lands, houses, and other temporalities, which are dedicated to the upholding of
the public service and honor of God, and to his Ministers maintenance, do
yield; and therefore it is lawful for a Minister to come to a Town and House,
and there to querie after his dues of tithes, and other dues of them who have
them, and are to pay them unto him: even as the Apostle Peter did querie, or
demand of Ananias and Saphira, about that Act. 5. 2, 3, etc.
part of dues which they had detained, and had not laid it at the Apostles feet.

If notwithstanding all that clearness of holy Scripture which is brought, and
proves fully my right as I am a Minister of the Gospel, unto tithes, and the
lawfulness for me to demand my dues of tithes from thee: I say if
notwithstanding this, when I come to thy house, thou will say, that I am one
one of those evil beasts, that minds earthly things, and mine own belly: I
shall be therewith only moved, to pray unto God to pardon thee all that, and
the like uncomely and unmanly language, which has in it not a word of truth
and soberness; and that he would grant unto thy very reason, so much freedom,
from being blinded by any covetous desires of withholding other men's dues,
that thou may truly understand, that neither thy Minister, nor others are
therefore evil beasts, that minds earthly things, and their own bellies,
because he and they come to thy house, he inquiring after his dues, and they
after the debts, which thou owe them: and both demanding from the payment of
what is theirs.

Thy fourteenth Demand has now received a full and ample Answer.
CHAP. XV.
Thy fifteenth Head of Demands is thus expressed.

IF any people had followed the false Prophets, false Apostles, and such as
made a prey upon them for filthy lucre, and covetousness, and took their
money, and bear rule by their means; And divined for money, and sought for
their fleece, and the Priests that preached for hire: and come to Christ, from
the hirelings that will fly, who has laid down his life for the sheep, who
says, Learn of me, I am the way to the Father, and witness the word in them,
and the anointing in them to teach them, are they to maintain and uphold such
before mentioned, that Christ, the Prophets and Apostles cried against: or
maintain such Prophets and Priests in their way, yea, or nay, as Priests, and
Ministers, and Teachers.

Answ. I have already fully proved: that though there were false prophets, and
false Apostles (among the Jews) who made a prey upon the people for filthy
lucre and covetousness: and took their money, and did bear rule by their
means, and divined for money, and sought for their fleece: and though there
was carnal covetous Priests, who would be hired, to teach falsehood for
advantage: against whom the true Prophets and Christ, and his Apostles in their
days cried; yet during that time of these false Prophets, and Apostles, and
corrupt Priests there were also (as has been showed) holy Levites and Priests,
true Apostles and faithful Ministers, against whose lawful, settled, public
maintenance, neither any of the true Prophets, true Apostles, nor Christ spoke
one word: neither was their tithes, and their other settled, public
maintenance, that prey on people, nor that means, by which rule was borne, nor
that money, and filthy lucre and covetousnes for which some divined nor that
fleece which some sought for, nor that hire, for which some taught, which was
spoken against, by the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ. And therefore thy demand
needs no large answer. Thy demand in breife is this.

If any people had followed the false Prophets, and false Apostles, and
Priests, that taught for hire, and come to Christ from hirelings, are they to
maintain and uphold such, before mentioned: or are they to maintain such
Prophets, or Priests, in their way? yea or nay? as Priests, Ministers and
teachers.

Answ. If any such should have come to Christ from hirelinges (while he was on
the earth) he would not, because they were come to him, discharge them ftom
paying those public dues and rights, which apperteined to the settled Ministers
of holy things, among them in that Nation: though among such Ministers also,
their were some, who were corrupt and covetous. My reason of this assertion is.

Because though Christ commanded such who came to him, not to follow any
pernicious practice of the public teachers: Math. 23. 3
yet he never persuaded any of them, to deteine from those public Ministers
who were then Preistes and Levites) their dues: but he commanded one, who had
come to him viz. the Leper, whom he had cleansed, to go and show himself to the
Priest, and offer the gift, that Moses commanded, as Math. 8. 4.
a testimony unto them. A part of that maintenance whereby the subsistence of
the Priests arose, was from offerings; which Christ would never have commanded,
to have been paid unto the Priests (who in his time were very corrupt) if the
professing him, or coming to him, had been a warrantable exemption, of any of
his followers, from paying those duties, which conduced to the maintenance and
upholding the livelihood of the Priests and Levites, who were then the public
settled Ministers of that Nation. I say therefore though we read not, that they
who came to Christ, had any command, to maintain those false teachers,
seducers, and hirelings, who for filthy lucre, covetousnes and for hire preyed
on people, and sought to tyrannize over their souls and purses: yet we are
sure, that Christ commanded to pay an offering, which was a part of the Priests
maintenance, unto the Priests, who were the settled public Ministers, to keep
up the holy public service, and observances, which were enjoined that Nation:
and he would not suffer the least diminution of their maintenance; no not one
offering to be withheld from them. For he commanded the Leper to offer his
offering, as a testimony unto them: viz. that he did not abolish the very
least parcel of any thing belonging, to their due maintenance, and honor;
seeing the very comers to him, are commanded by him, to afford unto such,
maintenance in their lawful established way of Priesthood, even as to Priests
and public Ministers and Teachers.

Thou with those of thy way accounts us who are the established Ministers of
Christ's Gospel in this Nation, to be false Prophets, and false Apostles, and
false teachers, and to be very hirelings, and Teachers for mere gain, and for
covetousnes: because we require from our people, that maintenance by tithes,
and otherthings, which from them is due unto us, both by Gods, and the Nation,
law: Ye are confident that ye are the only people of his Nations? who are come
to Christ, and are the true professors of this truths, and ye think, that
therefore ye have a just plea to deteine from us the forementioned dues: asking
us,

Whether comers to Christ are to maintain and uphold false Ptophets, and false
Apostles, and such like in their way, as Ministers and Teachers.

Answ. I have already fully proved, and therefore will now only briefly tell it
thee; that the established faithful Ministers of England, are noe false
Prophets, nor false Apostles, nor false teachers: and that they are no
hirelings, nor teachers for gain, and for covetousnes: though they require
from their people the maintenance by tithes, and other things, which is by law
established unto them, the public Ministers of the Gospel to this Nation.

Moreover know, that notwithstanding the great confidence of those, who are of
your way, that ye are the only comers to Christ, and professors of his truths
in this nation: yet the whole nation (except your selves) cannot believe it,
because ye with draw, from proffessing publicly with the Nation many
soul-saving truths of Christ, and from partaking publicly in those his
gracious Ordinances, which this Nation has maintained, and does yet maintain
publickely, against all. Papal and Popular Antichristians: though they
therefore vex and gnaw their tongues.

Yet more consider: that it has been already proved, that ye have no
encouragement from Christ's words on the pretense that ye are comers to Christ,
to deteine from the established Ministers, any portion of that established
maintenance, which serves to uphold them in their Ministerial way: but that
according to Christ's injunction unto the Leper, ye are to pay unto them their
dues: because they are the public Ministers and Teachers of the Gospel of
Christ, to the people of this Nation.

I yet further would have it well pondered, that none of all those acts, which
are here named by thee, which Christ has done or does give any allowance to
any who comes to Christ, to deteine the due maintenance by tithes and by other
things, from the public established Ministers of the Gospel: for.

1. It is true that Christ laid down his life for his sheep; but it is as
true, that he did so; not to give his flock a liberty, either to despise and
turn from those Ministerial Pastors, whom he the chief Shepherd had set over
them to feed them with spiritualls: or to withhold from these their spiritual
feeders, that milk of maintenance, which by divine appointment they are to 1
Cor. 9. 7.
have from them, his flock.

2. It is true Christ said: Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly: But these
his words do not forbid his people to hear the Ministers of the Gospel, and to
learn of them: seeing he h^th also said: he that hears them, hears him, and
he that despises them, despises him, and despises him that sent him. Neither
Luke 10. 16
do these words learn of me, allow any of his people, who are his Vines, in
his vinyard, or Churnh, to withhold the fruit of temporal maintenance from his
Ministers: seeing he Luke 10. 7.
himself has said, that the labourer is worthy of his hire, and seeing it is
of Divine appointment that the fruits or temporal maintenance, which his
Vines yields, should be eat, or 1 Cor. 9. 7
spent by his Ministerial laborers whom he sent into his Vinyard, to plant,
to water, to prune, to underprop, to weed, to dress; and to do what will
advantage the spiritual good of his Vines, and of his Vinyard.

3. It is true, Christ said: I am the way, and no man comes to Joh. 14. 6.
the father, but by me: because there is no other immediate way, or means to
come to God the father and be saved but by him: yet these his words: I am the
way: do not discard the Ministers Heb. 13. 7.
of the Gospel, from being isntrumental guides of his people, to him, the
true way, and to walk in him, as they receive him, Collos. 2. 6 Ma^k. 16 15
Romans 1. 16
because Christ himself gave them a charge to be his messengers, or preachers
of the Gospel, which is the power of God unto salvation, unto every creature.

Moreover these words (I am the way) do not give encouragement unto any, to
deteine either from Christ's messengers, or Preachers of his Gospel, or from
any holy professor under the Gospel, their reward due unto them, in respect
they deserve it of men: though in respect of God, it is of grace that such a
reward is due unto them, and from him appointed for them. For Christ has
promised to all cordial, and affectionate people, who give unto these their due
reward, of honor namely, and of maintenance; that they shall receive a
Prophets reward, Math. 10. 41
which is fit for such, who have been just in rewarding for their ^orkes sake,
his Prophets o^ Preachers, and his righteous servants, deserving it of them;
which reward is the heavenly reward, whercof they shall be partakers with those
very Prophets and righteous men, whom they have rewarded. Rev. 1. 5. Joh. 18.
^^ H^b. 1. 2. Joh. 1. 57.


4. It is true that Christ is called the faithful witness: and that for this
end he came into the world, that he might bear witness unto the truth: and he
has fully and truly spoken out of the will of God: and he is one of these
three Great witnesses, which bears record in heaven: yet the people of God and
Christ ought not (because he is the faithful witness) to think, that
therefore the Ministers are not Christ's public witnesses, and Rev. 19. 10
publishers of his truths unto his people: for the Scripture tells us, that the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy: the testimony of Jesus is, that
he has chosen these his Ministerial servants to bear witness to his people
of his truths, does give unto all his faithful Ministers, the Spirit, the
authority, the boldness, the life, the liveliness to discharge that Prophetical
or preaching service, which he has appointed them to perform. the testimony
of Jesus touching this particular, is thus recorded: Math. 24. 14
the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached unto all the world, as a witness
unto all nations. Christ after this his testimony, did commission Ministers to
preach that Gospel: and the Ministry which Ministers have received of the
Lord Jesus is to Mark. 16. 25
testify the Gospel of the Grace of God. And therefore none of Gods people
ought, on this ground, because Christ is the faithful Acts. 20. 24
witness after a most eminent manner, to deny that the Ministers, are Christ's
public witnesses to his people: they are chosen and ordained to publish his
truths according to his appointment.

Moreover Christ's being the faithful witness, does not warrant any of his
people, to deny due maintenance unto his Ministers, of whom he said they shall
be witnesses to me, to the uttermost parts of the earth: because Christ has
already condemned all kind of misusage, which shall be done to these Prophets,
Acts 1. 8.
wisemen and scribes, which he sends: and because he has faithfully witnessed,
that though they whom he sent, shall not take pay for their working
miraculously cures, because they had M^th. 23. 34, 35.
freely received that miraculous gift, and were therefore to give freely its
work: yet Christ has testified that they whom he sends, may for their pains
in preaching, receive the pay of maintenance saying: for the labourer is worthy
of his hire, or Luke 10. 7. (...).
of his reward, worthy to have a reward answerable to, and fully recompencing
his work.

5. It is true that Christ is called the Lords Anointed: because Psalm. 2. 2.
A^ts 10. 38 Joh. 3. 34. 1 John 2. 27
he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power: and the Spirit was not
given him by measure: it is true also, that the anointing of grace by his
Spirit is received from him, and abides in his holy people, yet it is also
most true, that neither Christ being anointed to preach (which he did
personally perform on earth, and does since his going to heaven Ministerially
perform by his Ministers) nor his sanctified people being anointed with grace,
received from him, does exclude outward teaching, and the Ministers from being
Christ's public servants to teach his people: seeing Christ has set them in
his Church Ephesians. 4. 11, 12
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry and for the
edifying of his body the Church.

Moreover, Christ's being anointed in a supereminent manner Heb. 2. 9.
above his fellows; and his sanctified people being anointed with grace
according to measure, does not warrant any of his people to deny unto the
Ministers of the Gospel their maintenance; Isa 61. 1. Luke 4. 17, 18
for Christ was anointed to preach, but not to abolish the maintenance of
Preachers, or of any else, which is for upholding the public preaching of the
Gospel in the world. And the anointing which his believing people received from
him, was to make them gracious, but not to give unto them any allowance, to be
injurious unto any, in withholding their dues; least of all to Ministers, whom
he has appointed to be instruments by their preaching, to work gracious men to
become more 1 Cor. 14 22
gracious; for Prophecy is for them that believe; namely to perfect the grace
begun in them since they were in Christ.

Besides it is of divine appointment, that as Christ's Ministers Math. 5. 14. 15
are by him placed publicly to be lights on a Candlestick pouring out the oil
of their labors, in their lightsome informations of people: so Christ's
anointed people, are placed by his providence, as Olive trees round about his
Ministerial servants: that every Zach. 4. 11 12, 13, 14.
one of them should be as Olive branches, emptying the golden oil of
maintenance for his Ministers out of themselves. Gods 1 Co^ 9. 11
appointment is that if his Ministers so v unto his people spiritual things,
his people should not grudge his Ministers, or count it a great thing, if they
reap their carnal things.

Thou have a full Answer to thy fifteenth Head of Demands.
CHAP. XVI.
Thy sixteenth Head of Demands is as follows.

ARe not they Ministers of unrighteousness, and so messengers of Satan, that
seeks for means, maintenance, tithes of them, they do not work for? Is not
that an unrighteous deed and thing? Now if it be said the labourer is worthy of
his hire? is it not then an unrighteous thing, to go and take hire of them that
have not hired them; answer me, and let truth speak, and come to the light, and
bring thy deeds to it. Now if you say, we plow in hope, and thresh in hope,
that we may be made partakers of our hope: now if thou plowest not for me, nor
thresheth for me? how can thou bring the Scripture, and say the workman is
worthy of his meat to me, and the labourer is worthy of his hire, to one that
has not set thee on work; and that thou plowest not for, and threshest not
for.

Answ. Ministers who discharge the work of the Ministry, which God has given
them to do in those places, where he does set them to be teachers unto his
people, are neither Ministers of unrighteousness, nor messengers of Satan,
because they require the allowed maintenance by tithes, or any other things
from those people, among whom they spend and are spent.

1. They are no Ministers of unrighteousness; for,

1. It can be no unrighteousness in them to discharge their Ministerial
duties: seeing God, who enjoynes his servants no unrighteous thing, has
commanded them to do so; And,

2. It is no unrighteousness in them to demand the maintenance by tithes, from
those people among whom they discharge their Ministerial duties: seeing the
maintenance by tithes which they demand, is Gods own peculiar rent, wherewith
he as Lord of all has charged all lands: and has assigned his due (since
himself needs nothing) to his servants the Ministers of the Gospel, for that
service, which in his stead, they perform among his people. They in demanding
Gods dues, are but Gods deputyes therefore unrighteousnes is not in Ministers,
because they demand from people that maintenance: but such of the people are
unrighteous, who deteine from them, that very maintenance by tithes: such
people injure Christ himself; when they withhold from these his peculiar
servants, these his peculiar rightes, which he has deputed Joh. 13. 20 Luk,
10. 16
them to receive and does receive them when these his servants receives them.
Affronts done to his Ministers in this particular as in others, are esteemed by
him, as if they were done to himself.

2. Ministers who discharge the work which God has appointed them in those
places where he has set them, are no Acts 26. 18
Messengers of Satan. For Satan sends none to be his Messengers, whose very
work is to turn people from the power of Satan unto God; And I verily believe,
that Satan has filled the hearts of those people with lies, who call the
Messengers of the Lord, or his Ministers, on this ground, the Messengers of
Satan, because they demand of the Lords people the Lords dues; seeing Satan
himself once filled the hearts of two of the people to lie to the holy Ghost,
and to keep back part of the Acts 5. 3.
Lords dues.

Yea, but thou asks, Is it not an unrighteous thing and deed to seek means,
maintenance, tithes of them they do not work for?

Answ. Every faithful Minister who faithfully discharges his duty, among
those people, over whom as a Minister he is placed, does work for them: and
therefore it is no unrighteous deed and thing in him to demand from them that
maintenance which by Gods appointment is justly due to him for his labors
among them. It may easily be understood that such Ministers do work for all the
people within their charge: if it be considered, that,

1. One may be truly said to work for another, when he does that self same work
which another gives him to do: and thus our blessed Savior did work for God
the Father: he said, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: John
17. 4.
and thus the Ministers of God and Christ working together with them, do work
for God and Christ, when (according as the holy Scripture does appoint) they in
their places apply themselves to work their ministerial work, that Gods people
might not receive the grace of God in vain. 2. Cor. 6. 1.


2. One may be truly said to work for another, when the very good of others is
the end, for which such work (though enjoined by God to be done) is wrought
among them; thus both Magistrates and Ministers do work for those people who
are under their charge. Magistrates appointed by God to rule people, do work
for the people ruled by them, because Romans 13. 4
the end of their Magistratical work is to settle and promote the temporal
good of those people he is the Minister; of God to them for good. And so
Ministers of Gods word, appointed by God to dispense holy things unto the
people, over whom they are placed, do work for those people: because they are
Romans 13 6.
Ministers of God to them for the setting and improving of their spiritual
good. As the Apostle therefore argues for Magistrates maintenance, that people
are to pay them tribute; because they are Gods Ministers attending continually
on this very thing: namely, to work (if it be possible) the temporal good of
all their people: even so, it may on the same ground, be truly pleaded for
maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel: that people are to pay unto them
tithes, because they are Gods Ministers, continually waiting on their Ministry
to work (if it be possible) the spiritual good of all their 1. Cor. 9. 13. 14.
Romans 2. 7.
people.

Yea, but thou says: If it be said the labourer is worthy of his hire? is it
an unrighteous thing, to go and take hire of them that have not hired them?

Answ. It is no unrighteous thing in Ministers to go and take from people that
maintenance, (called in scripture hire) which God has appointed should be
took, for that work, which he has set them to do among his people, though
these people never hired them, nor agreed with them to work that work among
them: Three instances will clear this.

The Levites were appointed only by God to their work: and to take tithes of
the Israelites for their service: but it was no unrighteousness in them (though
the people did not hire them) to take that maintenance, because God commanded
them to take it of the people: even so it is not an unrighteous thing in the
Ministers of the Gospel (though unhired by the people to their work) to take
from their people that maintenance, which God has appointed unto them, for the
work which they do among them.

Again it is certain: that the people did not hire our blessed Savior to
preach unto them, and yet he took maintenance Luke 8. 2. 3.
from many of the people: it is true that that which Christ took, was the alms
and contribution of his followers, and so it was no unrighteous thing in him to
take, nor in them to give it: yet it is as true, that as it was no unrighteous
thing in the Lord of Preachers to take alms, and contribution from those, who
never set him on work; so it is no unrighteous thing in the Preachers of the
Gospel to take from people (over whom God has set them to work) that very
maintenance, which God has appointed should be given by the people unto them
in equity, as a just recompense of all those labors which God enjoined them to
take among his people: though these people never agreed with them to set them
on work.

Moreover the Apostle proves from the practice of Military men, that it is a
righteous thing in Ministers, to take maintenance from that spiritual warfare
which they wage; as it is a 1. Cor. 9. 7.
righteous thing in soldiers to have their pay of their livelihood from the
people for that temporal war wherein they serve: let it therefore be
considered that as soldiers go not to warfare at their own charges, for the
Prince or state, which by their Captains chooses them to be soldiers, and sets
them on work, does (according to the proportion which they think sit) injoyne
the people, to defray such disbursments for the maintenance of these their
chosen soldiers: yet soldiers are not therefore unrighteous, because they
demand of people their appointed maintenance, and receive it from them: though
the people did not contract with them for their service. Even so Ministers of
the Gospel are spiritual soldiers under Christ, the Captain General of all
souls, and they are chosen by him to their service: 2. Tim. 2. 3. 4. 1. Tim. 1.
18. 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5.
he has appointed them their work, that by their constant endless labors in
Preaching the Gospel, they endeavor to pull down strong holds, to cast down
imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, to bring into captivity every thought into the obedience of Christ, and
Christ has thought fit to injoyne people (in their respective places) to pay
unto these his servants these temporal dues which he appointes: therefore
Ministers are not unrighteous in demanding of people and taking from them the
payment of those their temporal dues, though the people did not hire them to
Preach: It is enough that Christ hired them to Preach his Gospel to people.
They are I say hired hereunto by Christ, but not in any way of capitulation
with Christ for this and for that, for though they Preach the Gospel they have
nothing to 1. Cor. 9. 16. 17.
glory of: and a necessity is laid on them to preach the Gospel, and woe is
unto them if they preach not the Gospel. Christ has promised to them a reward;
upon their willingness to accept his work and for their faithfulness in
fulfilling it: and they are humbly and contentedly thankful unto him, for that
visible temporal maintenance which he has appointed the people professing
him, to pay unto his Ministers: and which maintenance he calls their wages, and
their hire, that is, the outward reward of their labor: and they also continue
in their labors, thankfully expecting to receive from himself (when they
shall have finished their work) the invisible penny Mat. 20. 2.
of glory, which he also has promised unto them, which eternal reward of all
their services they shall inherit to together with all their fellow laborers:
and then both he that sows, and he John. 4. 36.
that reapeth will rejoice together,

It is by thee further asked: If you say we plow in hope, and thresh in hope,
that we may be partaker of our hope, now if thou plowest not for me, nor
threshest for me; how can thou bring the Scripture, and say the workman is
worthy of his meat to me, and the labourer is worthy of his hire to one, who
has not set thee at work, and that thou plowest not for, and threshest not
for.

Answ. It is true thou have not, but God (who is thy Lord able to command and
dispose of thee and all that is thine) has set me to work for thee as well as
for others, whose habitations are within the bounds of my charge: and therefore
I can justly claim those dues from you which he has appointed me to receive
and you to pay, as has been already sufficiently proved: and I can truly
allege these scriptures mentioned by thee, with many others as very pertinent
proofs: that neither thou nor others within my charge, ought to detain those
dues from me, because we Ministers are laborers with God, and ye^ people 1.
Cor 3. 9
are Gods husbandry, or tillage: and God has set us his laborers, to their
work of husbanding you the people over whom he Gal. 6. 6.
has placed us, by continued studyings, and labourings, for the plowing up the
fallow grounds of your hearts and, for threshing out for your nourishment unto
eternal life his spiritual corn: and God bids you his husbandry, to
communicate unto us his laborers in all good things, and he is pleased to
appoint us to receive these from you (though we are not set on work by you as
the hire, or temporal reward of our Evangelical toil for you, and among you.

I know that thou art ready to reply thus, or in like manner unto me. Thy
labors are not for me, because I resort not to thy labors: I have withdrawn
my self from your public assembly; therefore thou cannot justly require dues
from me, who have no benefit by thy pains.

Answ. My ministerial labors are for thee, as well as for others, though tho^
do not resort unto them, and by withdrawing from our public assemblies, does
deprive thy self of those benefits, which are very probable to be reaped from
them. A dispensation, of the grace of God, is given me to youward Ephesians. 3. 2.
Ezekiel. 2. 7.
seeing I am by God set over thee, and all them who are within my charge, to
speak unto you Gods word, whether you will hear or whether you will forbear;
my labors therefore are by God appointed to be for thee; though not only for
thee, but to be also for all others, residing within our parochial precinct.
If thou art one of Gods flock, thou will acknowledge (unless covetousness to
keep in thy hands thy Ministers portion, and the inperceptible witchery of some
Romish seducers, prevailing with thee, and thine, have not blinded thee) that
my labors do justly appertain to thee, and to others of our Parish: and that
the due recompense which God appoints to his Ministers, appertains to me, both
from thee and from others, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. Act. 20. 20
for my labors among you. Consider I pray thee that God has given Pastors to
his Church, and has set these his Pastors in several places to have the
Oversight of all the flocks, and to prevent confusion among the flock, and to
settle the best convenience, void of uncertainty: among which number of his
flock, every Pastor is to labor, and to receive due maintenance Act. 17. 16.
for his labor. God has by his providence, set the very bonds of his flocks
habitations: where every one of the flock (according to its respective abode)
has a Pastor, who 1. Tim. 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.
according to Gods appointment, is to abide with it, to instruct it in holy
informations, to dispense to it duly, in due season, holy things, for its
edification, and to watch over all their flocks, spending his days in reading,
meditating, studying, and finding out what will promote their Spiritual
comfort, and the eternal salvation both of himself, and of them that hear him.
Seeing then that God has disposed of thee to live, where the Minister makes
full proof of his Ministry: know, that it is an unrighteous Ma^h. 10. 40.
thing in any appertaining to such a place, to despise his labors, and to
detain his dues, and by withdrawing from the public assemblyes, to deny unto
God their obedience respecting Tit. 1. 4.
his Ministerial servants as himself, and their service Jude. 3.
of professing publicly with his people the common faith, and of attending
jointly with them, at the public assemblies, on the appointed means (their
weekly dispensed) for edification in the common salvation.

It is thy duty to resort to our public assemblyes, and their to here those
words, which are given by the great shepherd, but fastened by the Minister, the
Master of those assemblyes, where God has disposed of thee to be one of the
inhabitants.

But if notwithstanding all hitherto said, thou will resolve not to return to
thy duty: though my soul shall mourn for thee in secret: yet I pray thee
think seriously on the Apostles words: see that ye refuse not him that
speaks, for if they Heb. 12. 25. Luke 10. 16 Heb. 2. 3.
escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him, that speaks from heaven: and again how
shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation.

In the midst of this sixteenth head of demands, thou bids me answer thee, and
let the truth speak, and come to the light and bring my deeds to it.

Answ. I have fully answered thee: and for thy sake to give thee satisfaction
(if thou art yet capable of any) I have laid together the words of truth, that
thou, and all who read them, may understand what is spoken in them, to the
things demanded; and if my deeds be examined by these words of truth (which
have been a lamp to my feet, and a light to my paths) it will plainly appear to
all, who are unprejudiced, and who are judicious, that I have done no
unrighteous deed and thing, in demanding to receive from thee, that portion of
my due maintenance, which is in thy hand; but from God (the Lord both of thee
and me, to whom both must give an account for our doings) assigned unto me for
my labors.

Thy sixteenth head of Demand has now its full Answer.
CHAP. XVII.
Thy seventeenth head of Demands is thus expressed.

WHat is the first principle of the pure Religion? Is the steeple house the
Church? What Scripture have thou for sprinkling Infants? What Scripture have
thou for the word Sacrament? Have thou heard Gods voice immediately from
heaven, as Prophets and Apostles did, or Christ's voice? Do thou believe that
a man shall come to that which is perfect, while he is upon the earth, and have
the body of sin put off, and be free from sin? Do thou own that salvation,
that is wrought out with fear and trembling? Do thou own the same Revelation,
and Inspiration that the Prophets and Apostles had, now in this age, yea or
nay? Do thou own the prophesying sons and daughters in this age: and that
the Lord will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh. When Christ says to his
Disciples, be ye not called Masters, for ye have one Master, and ye are all
brethren, Where do thou read Mr. Paul, Mr. Matthew, Mr. Mark, Mr. Luke, Mr.
John, Mr. Peter, Mr. James, Mr. Timothy, Mr. Titus: that these transgressed the
command of Christ? is not he Antichrist that transgresses, and the deceiver,
and has not God, nor the Son, and is not he to bid God speed. Read John's
second Epistle, and answer me.

Answer these queries in writing to the thing that is queried: and do not say
that they are foolish and nonsense, but let me have an answer in writing.

Answer. Here are eleven Questions proposed: whereunto an answer shall be
returned severally, as they come in order.

1. Quest. what is the first principle of the pure Religion.

Answ. The pure Religion is the doctrine according to Godliness, containing such
wholesome words which teach men the way of 1. Tim. 6. 3 2 Timothy 1. 3. 2. Pet. 4.
6. 2. Cor. 13. 4 Act. 24. 14. 1. Pet. 4. 2. 1. Pet. 4. 11.
living to God, and with God, of serving God according to his own will. The
principles of this holy doctrine or pure Religion, which are to be known, are
all those holy truths, which are revealed from God, and are plainly to be found
in the Oracles or written words of God, called the holy scriptures: for there
they are recorded. Scripturall truths are the principles or things in the pure
Religion, which are to be known, and the holy scriptures are the principles, or
chief outward means by which men come to knowledge, of those principles or
truths, which are in the pure religion; and the first principle of this pure
Religion which is to be known is this, there is a God, and he is the rewarder
of them that diligently seek him. 11. Heb. 6.


2. Quest. Is the steeple house the Church.

Answ. In what sense the places of our holy Assemblys are truly called
Churches, will appear by what I shall deliver at present touching the name of
Church, know then, that,

A multitude of believers is called the Church: namely, the Rational Church,
or the congregation of reasonable creatures, conspiring together in the
profession of the Common faith, and in the practice of all things truly
promoting the common salvation. Thus the whole company and society of believers
throughout the world, agreeing in the Profession of Christ, calling on his
name, submitting to his Ordinances, holding communion in the same faith,
worship, exercise of godliness, and in things of everlasting salvation, Act. 20.
28. 1 Timothy 3 15 Romans 16. 61
is called in holy scripture, the Church of God: the Church of the living God:
the Church of Christ. And thus also partiaular Societyes of believers, visibly
dwelling together within certain convenient limits and bounds, who prosesse
publickely together the same doctrine of faith and love; and submit to the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his ordinances; and to partake in these holy institutions
which he has appointed: and who do meet as the Lords people publickely to
worship God and Christ, I say these particular visible societyes of believers 1
These. 1. 1
are also called the Church. The Apostle writes to the Church of the
Thessalonians, in God the father, and in Jesus Christ: a Church in God, and in
Jesus Christ, is Persons who have fel^owship together, in the faith, obedience
and worship, which God the father, and his son Jesus Christ requires.

Again know also that the very places of Christian Assemblyes, where Christians
meet to perform solemn service to God and Christ, and to enjoy holy
ordinances, these also are in holy Scripture styled the Church of God: namely:
the Local Church, thus the Apostle speaking of the assembly of the Corinthian 1
Cor. 11. 22
church, and abuses therein, says: have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?
or despise'ye the Church of God: the opposition which he puts between their
own houses (which were places, proper for their own ordinary and Common
businesses) and the place where the Church was publicly assembled (which was
no man's house but a place for the common use of the Church in things only
spiritual) plainly shows that the Apostle calls the place of Christians
assembling, for Christian purposes, the Church of God. And he confirmed it, by
saying afterward when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another: and if
any 1 Cor. 11. 33, 34.
man hunger, let him eat at home: so then the very place where the Church
Rational of Gods people publicly meet, is by the Apostle called the Church of
God: his Local Church: not men's home, but Gods house, of public worshipping
him, where Mark. 11. 17
ever such a place be in any nation.

Though thou in derision calls the place of our holy Assemblys a steeple house:
yet it is our comfort, that the Apostle calls it the Church of God: and that
God himself has promised to come, and meet us, and bless us in it, as he will
all his holy people in all other places, where his name is recorded, and Exodus
20. 24.
called his, as namely, Gods house, Gods Church and the like: and where his
Rational Church of holy people meet, to remember him, and to learn to be
improved in all his holy ways and service,

3. Quest. What scripture have thou for sprinkling of Infants?

Answ. I will tell thee. 1. What the Scripture holds out touching sprinkling,
as no ways condemning the use of it in baptizing: and then I will, 2. Tell the
some scriptures injoyning the baptizing of Infants.

First. know that though holy scripture requires that in baptizing a such an
application of wtter unto the party baptized should be made, as may express
representatively or signifingly the virtue of Christ's blood, in washing a way
sin: yet seeing it no where injoynes expressly, that the manner of that
application should be, either by dipping and dousing in agreat quantity of
water: or by pouring, or sprinkling a little water on the party baptized:
therefore the Scripture allows that baptism which is performed by Sprinkling,
as well as that baptism, which is done by dipping. I the rather think so;
because the Holy-^h^st in those holy writings does not make choice of the
expression of dipping, dousing, or ducking, to signify the application of
Christ blood but he have made choice of the word sprinkling, to notifiy so
much. Thus, the sprinkling of the unclean with Hysop, dipped Heb. 9. 13. 14
Numb. 19 18, 19 Isa. 52. 15. Heb. 10 22 Heb. 12. 24 1 Pet. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 3. 21
in the water of purification, did testifiy faith on Christ's blood, applying
that blood for our clensing. It was prophesied of Christ that he should
sprinkle many nations. we are said, not to have our hearts dipped, but to have
them sprinkled, from an evil conscience: Christ's blood is called the blood of
sprinkling, and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ is an expression,
whereby the Apostle intimates our justification: whereof baptism is the
representation.

Secondly, know that I have these scriptures warrantizing me, and other
Ministers to baptize Infants or little Children. Math. 28. 19 Ps^. 117. 2. Psa.
148. 12, 13 Acts. 2. 38 39. Romans 15. 8. 9. 10


Our Savior commandes his Apostles to baptize all Nations: excepting none of
the Nations, no not infants who are (in the Psalmists opinion) a very
considerable part of them. He having in one Psalm said: Praise the Lord all ye
nations: in another he does call on Kings of the earth, and all People, to
praise God, and he recounts children among the particulars mentioned, both
young men, and maidens, old men, and children, let them praise the name of the
Lord.

Again Peter exhorts the Jews to be baptized: because the promise was made to
them, and their children, and to all that are a far of, even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. seeing then the promises of Grace belongs to the
infants of believing Parents, therefore according to holy scripture they are to
be baptized.

Again the Apostle says Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, for
the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers, and that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his mercyes: as he says Rejoice ye Gentiles
with his people.

Christ discharged his ministerial Office, among those of the circumcision,
the Jews, to confi^me the promise made to the fathers, and that the Gentiles
might have a portion in the same promise; that so both Jews and Gentiles might
rejoice together before God. What Christ in discharging his ministry
a-abolished: in the Covenant made with the Fathers, is abolished, but that is
still confirmed and to be in use, what is therein specified, and was not
abolished, either by himself, or by any of his Apostles.

This scripture affords a double proof of the lawfulness of baptizing the
Infants of believing Parents. One is from the confirmation of signing those,
with the seal of the Covenant, who where formerly signed. The other is from
Christ's command injoyning Baptism to be the seal of the Covenant; and not
exempting from it any Infant of believing Parents.

1. God at the first making of the Covenant commanded that the Children of
believing Parents, or Parents in Covenant, should be signed with the seal of
the Covenant: which command was not repealed by Christ, the Lord of the house
which is the Church: but he confirmed the promises made to the fathers. and

2. Christ himself commanded that Baptism should be the seal of the Covenant:
and Infants (not being exempt by him, from the bond of the Covenant: but being
such as he would have brought unto him, and of whom he has told us, that of
such is the Kingdom of God) are therefore to receive the seal of the Covenant,
appointed by him, which is Baptism. These Scriptures (to name no more) do
justifiy the baptising of the Infants of Professional believers.

4. Quest. What scripture have thou for the word Sacrament.

Answ. The 28. of Math. v. 19. 26. Math. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 11. 23. etc. are
scriptures which do positively injoyne those holy institutions, and actions,
which are called among the most of Christians, Sacraments, however some styles
them the seals of the Covenant, and though the word sacrament be not in
Scripture: yet seeing what is thereby meant is fully set down in holy
Scriptture and the word is not used by any, true Protestant in their
Theologically writing, to signify any thing, which disagrees, from No men nihil
hahet Criminis quod non perturbat sensum Religionis. Hilarious lib. de synod:
contra Arium. rope finem.
what the scripture asserts; therefore none ought to blame this, and other
Theological terms, used for explanation of some scriptural truths: and never
used to be additions of something unto the holy scripture, which it mentions
not: nor to be perversions of the true sense, meaning and intent of any part of
holy scripture concerning any of the Ordinances and truths, which it injoynes
and conteines.

5. Quest. Have thou heard Gods Voice immediately from heaven, as Prophets and
Apostles did: or Christ's Voice.

Answ. Though I have neither heard Gods voice immediately from heaven, as did
the Prophets and Apostles, whom he extraordinarily inspired, and sent with his
immediate messages to his people? nor Christ's Voice immediately as did the
Apostles and Disciples, who conversed with Christ while he lived on earth: yet
(as it becomes the Ministry, which I have received fom him in his ordinary way
of mission) I have in all these doctrines (which I taught to his people)
communicated to them, that very voice or mind of God and Christ, which was
heard immediately by the Prophets, and Apostles and have tighrly informed them
concerning these: for I have said no other things then those, that the
Prophets, and Moses, and Christ, and his Apostles said and taught. God in these
Heb. 1. 1. 2
latter days has ceased to speak any more as he did of old, to the father by
immediate voices, and other extraordinary ways: and now he speaks to his
people by his Son: People are therefore said to be all taught of God, because
they Joh. 6. 45
have the doctrine, or teaching of Christ, who is God, whose doctrine is the
Gospel, or the the spell, or speech of God. Now Christ the son of God, from his
word written, by the mouth of all his holy Ministers in their interprating, and
applying his whole revealed will or voice, touching the ways of his service,
and their salvation, does preach and speak: Ephesians. 2. 20,
that his people might be built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets
Jesus Christ being the corner stone. And this his preaching by his Ministers,
from and out of his word written, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
is called a more sure word of Prophecy: It is a word more sure for the benefit
of the Church, then any immediate voice whatsoever.

6. Quest. Do thou believe that a man shall come to that which is perfect,
while he is up on the earth and have the body of sin put off, and be free
from sin.

Answ. I believe all things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets, and
in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles: and therefore I believe no
otherwise touching those things whereof thou asks here what is my belief, then
according as I find what is contained in these holy writings. Take then this
distinct account of my belief, concerning what thou demands.

1. I believe that in some places, the holy scriptures speaks of that which is
perfect, to which they only have come, who are in heaven: but thereunto they
who are on 1 Cor. 13. 10 Heb. 12. 23 Phil. 3. 12.
earth have not come: though while they abide on earth, they must be still
striving, that they may come to celestial perfection.

2. I believe that the holy scriptures says, that believers are perfect or
complete in Christ their head: by reason of their union with him, and
justification by him, who supplies Col. 2. 10 Heb. 12. 14. 1 These. 3. 10 Col.
1. 28 Ephesians. 4 12 Gen 6. 9. 1 Cor. 2. 6 Phil. 3. 15. Ephesians 5. 14. Heb. 6. 1 2 Cor.
13.
them with all things necessary for their salvation; and yet though these
believers have from Christ supereminent prerogatives and surpassing spiritual
influences, they are nevertheless not perfect in themselves, for as much as
they need perfecting that which is lacking in their faith, however they are men
to be esteemed in the way of perfecting or completing.

3. I believe that the Holy scriptures speaks of some, who are comparatively
perfect: that is, perfect in comparison of others; so was Noah, a man perfect
in comparison of the wicked, who live in his generation. Thus strong Christians
who out strippt weak ones in the knowledge of Christ, in grace, and piety, and
in the practice thereof, are called perfect in comparison of such, who adhere
to Mosaicall ordinances and privileges, and who were rude and raw, even babes
in the knowledge and practice of Christianity: yet such who were called
commparatively ^erfect, were not so perfect but that the Apostle exhorts them
to a proceedure unto further perfection: and he wishes the absolut perfection
of those, who yet were strong or in some measure perfect.

4. I believe that the holy scripture in some places speaks of some, who were
evangelically perfect, that is, whose 1 Kings 15 14 2 King. 20. 3 Job. 1. 1.
Luke 1. 9
Obedience was not hypocritical, but sincere and upri^ht, such were Asa,
Hez^kiah, Job, Zachariah and Elizabeth, and others, and yet the holy Scripture
shows, that these were not legally perfect: that is they, were not such, whose
obedience 2. Chro. 15. 10 2. Chr^. 32. 25. 26. Job. 7. 20. Job. 9. 20. Luke 1.
20.
had so exactly conformed to the Law of Righteousness, as that from it, they
had not at all swerved: for it records their particular defaultings, however
God was pleased to account them evangelically perfect: because he accepted the
uprightnes of their intention, instead of perfection justly requirable in their
obedient actions, pardoning all what was amiss, and their falling short of
exact perfection in their performances.

5. I believe, that though holy men on earth may be called perfect because they
have grace, which is the good work begun in them for perfecting them: yet they
are not perfect, by their bare having Grace: because the holy scripture
exhorts all gracious ones to abound in grace, and to strive to be perfect in
the 2. Cor. 8. 7. 2. Cor. 13. 11. Ja^. 1. 4. Psalm. 84. 7. R^m. 1. 17. Phil. 3.
15.
highest degree or pitch of grace, and to let their grace have its perfect
work; and it tells us of gracious men's progressions in grace, they going from
strength to strength, according as the righteousness of God is revealed from
faith to faith. Yea the Apostle who counted himself perfect, in respect of his
Grcace in Christianity: yet acknowledges that he was not perfect, namely in
respect of the supereminencyes of those graces after which he Phil. 3. 12
pressed hard.

From all these assertions of the holy scripture, it is, that I do believe that
a man while he is on earth, may come to have that perfect proportion, or
measure of grace given to him, which God sees convenient for his state,
standing, and service in Christianity while he lives: yet seein^ the fullest
Ephesians. 4. 7.
measure of the most emin^nt in grace on earth, is far short of that hi^hest
pitch, to which Grace may be extended, and which shall be he^eafter attained to
in heaven; therefore I believe that though a gracious man is, and may be called
perfect, in respect of that stinted measure of grace, which is allotted to him
on earth: yet he is not absolutely perfect on earth, because he has not as yet
attained to that ultimate consummate, heavenly perfection, which he is to
press after on earth, and which shall be by him possessed in heaven, when he
shall their be gloryfied.

6. I believe, that a man on earth may have the body of sin put off: that is,
he ^ay have it mortified, or so destroyed, as that sin shall not rai^n in him:
and that he shall not serve sin. But I have no ground to believe, that while a
man is on earth, he can have the body of sin put off: that is: so mortified or
utterly destroyed in him, that no Relics of his corruption should remain in
him: This I cannot believe because it is contrary to holy Scripture, which
describes a regenerate man to be one, who is not altogether spirit, but in whom
there is both flesh and spirit: and these in him lusts one against the other:
and it is certain, Gal. 6. 17.
the war between them will not cease, until he himself has fought the good
fight of faith, and has finished his 2. Tim. 6. 12. 2. Tim. 4. 7.
course, sin therefore will not be so mortified and destroyed in any holy man,
while he is on earth: that he shall never more conflict and combat with it:
for so long as he lives he shall be less or more troubled, with its inherency,
turbulency, and Tyranny; though it shall have in him no regency, no
Sovereignty, no conquest, to cause him to serve sin. The Apostle knew that the
old man was crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth
he and others in Christ should not serve Romans 6. 6. R^m 7 17 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 25,
sin: yet he complains of the Inbeing of his corruption, and of its powerful
working presence, In crossing him the motions of the spirit unto good, and in
haling him to be a captive unto evil: though he acknowledges with
thankfulness, that it shall not have any total and final, conquering
prevalency over him.

7. I believe according to the holy Scripture: that there is no living man upon
the earth, who is free from sin: a personal sinlesse perfection is not to be
found among any mortal men on earth because the Scripture tells us. Their 1.
King. 8. 46. Prove. 20. 9. Eccl. 7. 20.
is no man that sins not: and again who can say I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from my sin: and again there is not a just man on the earth
that does good, and sins not. The meaning is he sins in doing good, for
so the Prophet acknowledges: all our ri^hteousnesses are as filthy rags.
Again, one (...). 64. 6. ^^m. 3. 2. John 1. 8.
Apostle says, in many things we offend all, he includes himself: other
Apostles (as great as he in holiness, and both of them were very holy men)
excludes not himself saying: If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
our^elves and the truth is not in us. I believe the truth of all these
scriptures, and therefore I do not believe, that any mortal man, while he is on
the earth, is free from sin.

7. Quest. Do thou own that salvation, that is wrought out with fear and
trembling?

Answ. That Salvation, the working out of which with fear Phil. 2. 12 13
an trembling, the Apostle exhorts to, because God works in us, both to will,
and to do, of his good pleasure, is properly the work of obedience and Piety,
which one works, who is in the State and course of Salvation. This is called
salvation, because it conduces to and will end in salvation: for a man who
continues to the end, in the course of true Obedience, and Mat. 29 13
piety, is sure to obtain felicity: he who endures to the end shall be saved.
I say then, that

1. I own that salvation which is to be wrought out, I own that their should be
a finishing the work of obedience, and graciousness, which tends to salvation,
even of all such good works, which God has ordained that we should walk in.
and Ephesians. 2. 10.


2. I own that this obedient and pious working (which tends to further us
toward the end of our faith, the perfect salvation of the soul) should be
wrought with fear and trembling, that is (as these words as here conjoined do
genuinely signify) with an awful, reverentiall, humble carfulness, neither to
offend God, on whom their must be a dependency, or ability to work; nor to
deserve his Judgment, by any proud arrogance in presuming on the work which we
do, though it be good, seeing it is of his pure grace, of his good pleasure,
that the very working out, the very doing and finishing of any good, is
effected by us.

I do own this holy fear and trembling commended in Scripture which is an holy
dread in the soul whereby it stands in awe of God, having a great carfulness
to walk humbly with God, and fiducial^y to depend on him in all holy working.
And I do verily believe that this fear and holy awe of the soul, in its
endeavoring to observe Gods commandments, and to depart from evil, is a surer
evidence of one that works out his salvation in fear and trembling: then are
the quakings, shakings, wrestings, and wringings of any body whatsoever, for it
is well known that in some men, bodily quakings, have been the effects of their
D^ut, 28. 65 Psa. 69. 23
bodily diseases: in others they have been the fruits of Satanicall
possessions: and in some they are from divine curse and infliction.

8. Quest. Do thou own the same Revelation and Inspiration, that the
Apostles and Prophets had now in this age, yea or no?

Answ. I own all those self same revelations which were revealed to the
Apostles and Prophets, by the inspiration of the Spirit when they indicted the
holy scripture: for in the writings of these his holy Penmen, Christ has now
fully and finally recorded the whole will and counsel of God, concerning the
way of his service, and concerning all things necessary for man's salvation:
these are able to make wise unto salvation; and seeing that God now only in
these last days speaks unto us 1. Tim. 3. 15. Heb. 1. 1. Iuk. 10. 6. Math.
28. 20.
by his son, and his son speaks to us teachingly from his word written by his
Ministerial servants, with whom he has promised to be, until the end of the
world. Therefore I disowne all those immediate Revelations, which some in this
age pretend to have: knowing that these cannot reveal any saving truth, which
is not already revealed, in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: knowing
that they all are accursed who seek to add to the Prophetical and Apostolical
Revelations, any new Revelations: or to prea^h unto men, any other Gospel, then
Rev. 22. 28. 19. Gal. 1. 8.
that which is received, My faith is grounded (as all good Christians faith
ought to be) upon the divine Revelations, which the Prophets, and Apostles
received, and have recorded in holy Scripture: but not upon any other
revelations, which either in former ages, or now in this age, any other learned
or holy persons have received.

9. Quest. Do thou own the Prophesying sons and daughters in this age; and
that the Lord will pour his spirit upon all flesh.

Answ. 1. I do believe that the Lord did pour of his spirit in plentiful
measure of extraordinary gifts in an unusual manner so as they who received it
in that manner, did speak on a sudden in various and sundry languages, the
wonderful works of God: Joel. 2. 28. Act. 2. 7. 18. 19. Act. 2. 1.
this I believe, because the Prophet Joel said, that it should come to pass:
and the Apostle Peter said that it was come to pass: and the Evangelist Luke
has told, when it came to pass, on the day of Pentecost, when the Disciples
were all with one accord in one place, then was Ioels prophecy fully fulfilled
in respect of the extraordinary effusion of the spirit. But I do not believe,
that such an extraordinary p^uring out of the spirit, in such a visible manner,
with such an apparent abundance of gifts and donations, was ever known in the
world, either before that time or since, or that there shall be the like in any
of the succeeding ages. This I do not believe, because I have no ground from
holy Scripture, on which I can establish a belief, that their shall be such a
thing. And therefore as I disowne any of the Sons of men in this age, who
pretend that they are Prophets, by an extraordinary mission, and 2. Cor. 14.
34. 25. 1. T^m 4. 2. 11, 12.
inabling inspiration, unless they confirm both these, by ungainsayable
proofs and evidences, or by true and real miraculous operations, as they in
the old and new Testament did, who had extraordinary mission and commission to
prophecy, or preach, so also because the holy Scriptures has plainly
prohibited women to preach: therefore I disowne all preaching Daughters of men
which are in this age, both the Jesuitisses among the Papists, and the
Prophetesses (in imitation of them) late sprung up among deluded Protestants,
notwithstanding their great pretentions to extraordinary abilities, and their
extraordinary immodest impudency; in delivering (as they prate) messages from
the Lord. I disowne these because the Scripture disowne Is^. 27. 11.
them, an has told us: that God will neither have mercy on them, nor show them
any favor, who are the fiery zealous auditors, and followers of these feminine
predicants.

2. I do not own or acknowledge that their is or will be in this or succee^ing
ages of the Church any such pouring out of the Spirit on the sons and
daughters of men, who are the Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.
servants and h^ndmaides also of God, or the children of the Church, to make
them all Prophets or Preachers: because the Apostle says: that when Christ
ascended, he gave gifts unto men. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers: He gave some, therefore not all to b^
teachers: yet I do own or acknowledge, that there is now, and in other ages of
the Church, such a pouring out of the Spirit, which will make men holy and
heavenly disposed, wherefore though sons and daughters cannot in truth be
said to Prophecy, as Prophesying signifies the public expounding 1 Cor. 14. 1
1 Cor. 13. 9 2 These. 5. 20 1 Cor. 11. 5
the writings of the Prophets: because they only do thus lawfully prophecy, who
are thereunto peculiarly called, to wait on that service yet they may be said
to prophecy, according to such significations of the word Prophecy, which the
Scriptures allows to any Professor (though he be no Preacher) of the gospel.
As namely, they Prophecy, when they attend diligently with their presence on
the Ministerial teaching, which is the public unfolding, and applying of the
Scriptures, called the sure word of Prophecy, whereby they are 1 Per. 1 19.
Joh. 6. 45.
taught of God. And they are said to prophecy, when from a clear understanding
of holy Mysteryes, which they have heard and learned, they magnify and praise
God, either by singing or by holy discoursing, for his wonderful works, and
saving mercyes, And thus both men and women, sons, and daughters, can bear a
part in prophesying; But God 1 Chro. 25 1 Ps^. 66. 10
has excluded all women, and the most of men from being his officers in
prophesying, as it signifiys, the Preaching of his word officially.

3. Though I do own and acknowledge, that the Lord has poured out his spirit
on all flesh: yet I cannot own or acknowledge, that he does in all times of his
Church, and upon all persons perteining to the Church, power out such
extraordinary gifts of his Spirit, as he once did visibly, miraculously, and
plentifully pour on his Disciples in the day of Pentecost, Act. 2. 4.
whereby they were filled with the Spirit, and fitted for plantting the Church,
and for confirming at first the Gospel in all Nations. For these extraordinary
inspirations and donations of the Holy Ghost, have already obtained those ends,
in the primitive times of the Christian Church: and are not further useful:
seeing Churches every where are planted, and Pastors are set over them, and the
Holy spirit is pleased, now by the ordinary means only, of reading,
medit^ting, praying, studying, sifting searching, finding out and setting in
order Scriptural truth, to bless his servants, with the treasures of that
wisdom and truth, comely order and free utterance, whereby his Church is best
benefited. I do therefore account such men highly presumptuous, who dare
pretend in these days, that such forerecited extraordinary effusions of the
Spirit rests on them and in them, yea and I am confident, that they who believe
it of themselves, are given up to a strong delusion.

4. I own or acknowledge, that in all and several ages of the Church, the Lord
has ordinarily poured out of his spirit on all ^oly good Christians men and
women, young and old, sons 1 Pet. 4. 14
and dau^hters, for their sanctification, to make them Holy and fit them for
glory: But I do not own or acknowledge, that the Lord does ordinarily pour from
his spirit, the gift of interpreting Scripture, on every one whom he sanctifyes
by his Spirit, neither do I own, or acknowledge, that any are therefore
authorized, to preach to others, or are made vessels in the Pastoral
function, because by the gift of Sanctification, they are made Holy vessels,
to receive full salvation in their glorification.

10. Quest. When Christ says to his disciples; Be ye not called Masters, for
ye have one Master, and ye are all brethren. Where do thou read, Mr. Paul.
Mr. Matthew, Mr. Mark, Mr. Luke, Mr. John, Mr. Peter, Mr. James, Mr. Timothy,
Mr. Titus, that these transgressed the command of Christ?

Answ. I have already in answering the second head of thy demands answered
this. There I proved that one of these here mentioned, was named Master: and I
showed in what respects: Paul and Philip was named so, and likewise how a
Minister of the Gospel, and any other Christian professing subjection to the
Gospel, many lawfully be called Master: and yet none of these formerly did,
nor now do therefore transgress Christ's command. I shall not need to repeat
my answer there given: read, and ponder on it, for it may give thee
satisfacton, if thou art not resolved against being satisfied.

11. Quest. Is not he Antichrist that transgresses, and the Deceiver, and has
not God nor the Son, and is not to bebid God speed, read John's second
epistle, and answer me?

Answ. I have read both the second and also the first Epistle of John, in which
he speaks of an Antichrist, who in his days was to come, and who in our days
is already to come. He speaks also of many Antichrists, who were in the world
in his time. And doubtless both the one and the other were transgressors, and
deceivers, and neither had communion with God, nor with the Son of God: and
Gods people are charged to show unto them no tokens of communion or familiarity.

Surely they have most uncharitably transgressed, and are grossly deceived, who
apply what the Apostle John, or Paul, or any other holy Writer, ha^h recorded
concerning Antichrist, and Antichrists unto the faithful Ministers of the
Refo^med Churches: for these Ministers do teach the truths of God, but not the
traditions of men: they teach the doctrins of Christ, but not the doctrines of
Devils, nor the dotages and decretalls of any mortals. They also from the
Apostolical^ writings, do convincingly detect unto the world the grand
Antichrist, and the fry of many Antichrists: both which abuse the world, with
their lying deceipts, errors and heresies.

I will say something concerning the Antichrist, and Antichrists, whom the
Apostle describes: and then I will punctually answer to thy demand.

Antichrist) as the name signifyes) is one, who opposes Christ, the scripture
intimates, that he is such an one, who covertly under the Vizard of professing
Christ, and his Doctrine opposes him.

There is One, who is more eminent then others in this 1 John ^. 18. 2 The^. 2.
3, 4 Rev. 9. 11.
Opposition, he is called in scripture The Antichrist; And the man of sin: and
the Son of perdition, who opposes: and the King of Locusts, or the chief,
over such swarms of seducers, who also are inferior Antichrists; and pretend
that they come in the name of Christ Jesus, and do in all places seek with
subtilty to oppose, and over throw the pure doctrines of Christ. This great
Antichrist has his seat in Rome Papal.

Their are also a multitude of false teachers, who were and are opposers of the
Doctrines of Christ. These bring in privily damnable heresiyes, thereby seeking
to oppose and destroy Christ Doctrines: These are called by the Apostle
Antichrists, ^ Joh. 2. 18
many Antichrists, for they are many in number, and many in factions: and they
vent many false notions, many unsound poisoning doctrines: thinking thereby to
draw many Disciples after them; and to be Masters of their faith, or
Sectmasters these Antichrists are creepers into houses, to lead captive them,
who are silly, especially sinful women: and they mostly reside among their
popular intertainers.

Both the Grand Romish Antichrist: and these puny Roaming heretical
Antichrists, are such (as thou demands after) namely who transgresses, and are
deceivers, and have not God no^ Christ, and are not to be bid God-speede. I
will in these several particulars named by the Scriptures demonstrate it, of
them both.

First both the grand Antichrist: and these Heretical Antichrists, are such
who have transgressed: it were easy to write volumes of the particular
transgressions of them both. Suffice it to know,

That the holy Scripture calls the papal Antichrist a man of sin: that is: a
man transcendently vicious, peerlesly infamous 2 These. 2. 4
for all unrighteousness. The very Popish Chronicles and Histories of the lives
of Popes, do testify that many of them were both themselves men of sin, and
that also they made others sin.

The holy Scripture likewise reckons up a catalogue of such sins, whereof
Heretical Antichrists (either as they are distinguishable from Papists, the
followers of the grand Antichrist: or as 2. Tim. 3 ver. to the 10. 2. T^m. 4.
3. 4.
they are considered as conspiring with them) are commonly guilty. The
Scripture tells us, that they are self lovers, covetous boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient, to parents, sierce, dispisers of those that are good,
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of ^od,
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: that also they are
2. Pet. 2. Jude. 8.
scoffers, mockers, walkers after their own lusts: that they despise Dominion,
speak evil of Dignities: that they tu^ne the grace of God into
lasciviousness: that they are separatists, sensual having not the spirit: they
are thus (as the Papal Antichrist alalso is) transgressors, and their
endeavor is to corrupt others, and make them also in like sort transgressors,
like themselves.

Secondly as the Papal Antichrist: and the heretical Antichrists, 2. Epist.
Joh. v. 9.
are such as trans^resseth so they both do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ.

Whosoever shall compare the Doctrine of the council of Trent, touching faith
and worship (which Doctrine the Papal Antichrist maintains, and curses all
who disclaim it) with what is extant in Paul^ Epistles, he must acknowledge
that the Papal Antichrist is a great Apostate: and the Head now of that great
Apostasy from the faith and true worship of God, which at this day is found
among such, who profess Christianity; and whosoever compares the holy
Scriptures aslertions, touching the faith and true worship, which God requires,
with the sundry principles, and positions, touching these, which the heretical
Antichrists of this age do contend for, and defend, damning all who are
otherwise minded then they themselves are; he must affirm, that these heretical
Antichrists have shaken hands, with the Papal Antichrist, and his
confederates, in Apostatizing from the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, and which was kept sound, and incorrupt in the purer times of
Christianity.

The several heresies about the several heads of the Christian says which at
seve^all times were preached by several Heretics in the Apostles days, and
afterward, were so many standing puddles of false Doctrine, which much annoyed
the Christian world for some space of time. At length Popery prevailing in the
Western part of the world, it became as a corrupt Sea, into which most of the
filthy streams of former heresies therein did run, and was received: and
they with the additions of pestilent, poisoning, popish mixtures, do slow out
again, as often as the Papal Antichrist, and his instruments, do thereby hope
either to infest, or to infect the Evangelicall or reformed Churches.

I will name only two Doctrines of Christ: wherein the Papal Antichist, and
heretical Antichrists have not abode.

1. It is a Doctrine of Christ, that Christ's is come in the flesh The papal
Antichrist and heretical Antichrists, do not in direct terms deny it, for both
use the name of Christ in their words, and writings, and some of them in words
say so much; yet because the Apostle calls them deceivers, (the word signifies,
such who profess the Cosening of others, even while others 2. Epist. John. 2.
7. (...)
looks on them) and Antichrist who do not confess that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh: therefore it is certain that though some of them profess it,
yet both do consequently deny it in some of their tenants.

The papal Antichrist and his adherents, acknowledge in word, that Christ is
come in the flesh: but while they maintain that the bread and wine in the
Lords supper is turned into the very body and blood corporal of Christ: they
thereby affirm, that Christ's body is made of bread and wine, and so do
implicirely deny, that Christ is at such a time, come to them in the flesh
until that very instant be come, wherein the Priest utters the words of
consecration.

Some heretical Antichrists say, that Christ is come in the flesh: but when
they are asked, what Christ it is, whom they own or acknowledge in the flesh?
they reply, that it is no other, but Christ in their flesh, Christ in them,
disowning and denying that there is the man Christ, who is a man different from
other men, and who is the Mediator between God and man, whom God raised from
the dead, who ascended into 2 Timothy 25. page 5.
heaven, and is now sitting at Gods right hand, making intercession for his
Church, who shall come again to judge the quick and the dead at the last day.
This Christ they deny, and speak very contemptuously of him, and of that body
of flesh, which he had on earth, and has now in heavenly glory. A printed
paper of theirs called, the sword of the Lord drawn, has this blasphemous
jeering expression, your immagined God beyond the stars, and your carnal
Christ is utterly denied and testified against by the light. These men led by
the lying spirit of Antichrist, deny that Jesus is the Christ: and they
confess 1 Ioh 2. 2^ 2 John 7.
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh.

Thus both the Papal Antichrist, and his confederated instruments and
followers, and the heretical Antichrists with their associ^tes and disciples,
have not abode in this doctrine of Christ, that Christ is come in the flesh.

2. It is also ^ Doctrine of Christ, that the holy Scriptures, are the written
word of God given by inspiration 2 Timothy, 3. 15. 16. Psalm. 119. 93. Romans 1 16
and are sufficient to direct, and inform in all things, absolutely necessary
unto salvation: and that God by its precepts does quicken his people, and that
the Gospel, is the power of God unto salvation; Christ's doctrine does magnify
the excellency of holy Scripture.

The Papal Antichrist, Pope and Popelings deny, that the holy Scriptures are
sufficient for edification in things of salvation, without traditions, and some
of them have reviled the holy Scriptures, calling them a Dead letter; and
blasphemously, the word of the Devil, as Protestants (whom they call
heretics) alleged it: and one of them said, that the Church had vid. Tilen.
loc. com. 2. Sec. 35.
been better provided for, if there had never been any Scripture.

Some heretical Antichrists, Quakers, and others in our days speaking from
the spirit of Antichrist, have vented the like venomous breath, against the
holy Scriptures, saying, that they are insufficient for guidance in things
belonging unto salvation, in comparison of the light within them, and those
Inspirations and Revelations, which they imagine that they themselves have.
They do not acknowledge, that the holy Scripture are the declaration of Gods
mind: but they call them the declaration of Saints conditions, intimating
thereby, that they being not to us of this present generation: but that they
only concerned the Saints of former ages: This conceit thwarts the holy
Scriptures: yea, and some of these heretical Antichrists, have licked up the
Popish slavering Rhetoric, in calling the holy Scripture a dead letter; and
some of them have said, that some Romans 15. 4.
part of the Scripture is the word of the Devil, and serpents dust; not
considering that though these words, which were originally uttered by the
Devil are recorded by Gods Penmen in the Scriptute: yet being now recorded by
these Penmen of God, who have related the true history, of what the Devil
spoke, these words, are now the words, of the God of Truth: namely his true
relating the Devils words. Moreover some of these heretical Antichrists have
said, that it was no great matter, if all the Bibles in England were burned:
and that it had been better for one (to whom one of them spoke) if he had never
read the Bible.

It is evident by what is writ, as it might be also, if we would in other
points parallel the great Antichrist, and the petty Antichrists, that they both
have transgressed and have not abode in the doctrine of Christ.

Thirdly, Both the Papal Antichrist, and the heretical Antichrists are
deceivers The Papal Antichrist comes (says one Apostle) with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received
not the love of the truth, 2 These. 2. 9. 10.
that they might be saved. The heretical Antichrists or false teachers, bring
in privily (said another Apostle) damnable heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them, and many shall 2. Pet. 2. 1. 2. 3.
follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
spoken evil of, and with fained words they shall make merchandise of
Christians. Both these sorts of Antichrists are deceivers, and do manifest
themselves to be so, for they do not hold the form of sound words, but do
delight purposely, and affectedly to use cloudy and obscure expressions,
thereby to confound the understandings of simple men, from apprehending aright
the truth, yea and their pretendings to extraordinary holiness, and strictness,
in their conversation and religion, beyond truth, is but a crafty deceit under
a mere show of religion.

It were an endless labor to recount all that cunning craftiness, and those
deluding fallacies, and subtle wiles, and cheating tricks, for insnaring
souls, and all those depths of Satan, which they have used for gaining, and
for retaining those Proselites which they have gained. It is enough to know
that the Papal Antichrist, and the Heretical Antichrists, are deceivers:
because the holy Scripture has branded them with that name.

Fourthly, both the Papal Antichrist, and the Heretical Antichrists, have not
God, nor Christ, both these sorts of Antichrists do pharasaically and
arrogantly appropriate only to themselves Rev. 2. 9.
and their followers, the name of the Church of holy ones, yet both are in
reallity no other, then of the synagogue of Satan. Their transgressing, and
renouncing, through their Apostasy, the doctrine of Christ, is a sufficient
evidence, that they have not God and Christ in communion: neither have they
their favor in this world, and without repentance, they shall 2 These. ^. 11.
12.
not have any communion with God and Christ in glory: for God has sent on them
strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned,
who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

Fifthly, As they have not God, nor Christ in Communion: so believers are not to
hold communion, or any intimate conversation with any of them. The Apostle
injoynes, Receive 2 Epist. John. 10.
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. They are not to afford
any intertainment, or encouragement to any Antichrist what ever; not
entertainment? I suppose least thereby such gain occasion of seducing by
Antichristian doctrine from the doctrine of Christ: nor encouragement, lest
thereby they be p^rtakers of his evil deeds.

Thou have now a full answer to thy question, and therewith a true discovery
from holy Scripture, who is the Antichrist, and who are the Antichrists of whom
it speaks, in brief according to it. He who is an Antichrist is one, who
transgresses the Doctrine o^ Christ, and abides not in it, and he is also a
deceiver and has not God and Christ, and is not to be received into true
Christians houses, neither are they to bid him, God speed.

All this ^^ true of those, who are indeed and truth the Antichrist Papal, and
his pertinacious adherents, and who are the Heretical Antichrist, and their
perverse followers, both which do resist the truth, and oppose the Doctrines
of Jesus Christ. But not one word of all that scripturall description of
Antichrist, and of Antichrists, is justly appliable to any fathfull Minister of
Christ who both teaches, and abides in all Christ's Doctrines: as has been
abundantly proved by me, in this treatise: and by sundry other faithful
servants of Christ, in their several laborious works, and writings, for the
benefit of the whole Church.

I do somewhat wonder, to what purpose, this question touching Antichrist was
proposed, for if he belongs to the Papal Antichrist, who contrived these
questions, to get thereunto from me an answer; then I dare boldly think, that
he is some puny Antichristian Emissary, and ill advised, if he hoped thereby to
gravel, any faithful Minister of the Gospel, in any of the reformed
Churches; because much lea neder heads in the Papacy, then his own, have found
experimentally that their stirring in this question, has ever been to the
great disadvantage of their Roman cause, and to the better inabling of the
meanest Evangelicall Ministers, to understand more clearly that the Head of the
Papacy is that Idol shepherd, the great Antichrist, against whom the Prophet
Z^chary denounced a dreadful woe, and unto whom both Hierom and Lyra do
expound that that threat will certainly Zec. 11. 17
fall. But if he or they who contrived these questions do belong to any of the
other heretical clangs of Antichrists, or false teachers, then I dare boldly
charge him, or them, with hypocritical blindness in beholding the motes in
Ministers, and imagining these to be huge notes of Antichristianisme; when he
or they did not consider, that their was apparently in him or themselves, the
real beams of those characters, wherewith the scripture decyphers, the
Heretical Antichrists of the last times.

According to thy request, I have now answered every one, of thy seventeen
Heads of questions, which thou gave me in Writing, and desired, that an
answer might be returned thee also in Writing. Their are couched in these
seventeenth Heads no less then seventy seven questions, and because thou bids
me not say that they are foolish and nonsense: therefore I took the greater
pains, to sift every word and sentence, that I might the better understand,
what grain or chafe was contained in them: If God Almighty make this answer
isntrumental, to remove from thee, and thine, your present delusions, I shall
be much rejoiced: and much the more, if I could see a return unto, and a walk
again in the truth, from whence ye have swerved. In all this pains took for
your satisfaction, I like a faithful Pastor have aimed wholly at your souls
good: therefore read and consider seriously what is written, I adjure thee and
thine hereunto, as Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
once Gods faithful Servant did his people: I call heaven and earth to record
this day that I have set before you life, and death, Blessing and Cursing:
therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live. Thou have in
writing now a full answer returned to thee, from

John Bewick, the servant of Chrst, in the work of the Ministry unto his
people of Stanhope in Weredale.

Thanks be unto God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

1 Corinthians. 15. 57.
FINIS.
A Table of such places of Holy Scripture which are in the foregoing Treatise
cleared, illustrated and vindicated.
Chap. Verse. Page Genesis 14 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 112, 113 Levit. 27 30 22 Numb. 28
24 23 Prove. 3 9 7 Eccles. 6 7 71 Isaiah 55 1, 2. 3 19, 20 4, 7. 25, 27 Isaiah
55 3 30 56 10, 11, 12 18, 19 Jer. 5. 21, 22 40, 23, 24 41 5 31 34, 35 23 24 36
23 32 97 Ezekiel. 34 many verses explained, 51, 52, 55 34 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 59,
61, 62 Joel 2 28 154 Micah 3 11 43, 44 Zac. 4 11, 12 135 Mal. 3 8 32 Mat. 8 4
130 23 7 16 23 16 8, 9 23 23 7 23 34, 35 134 Luke 10 7 133, 134 11 42 6 14 7,
8, 9. 10 10 22 35 122 John 3 10 12 Acts 2 17, 18, 19 147 17 25 19 Romans 12 10 13
13 7 13 15 4 114 16 23 126 16 7 68 13 4, 6 138 1 Cor. 2 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10 3 3 9, 10 12 9 4 126 9 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 3, 23 109 110 111 117 132
133 9 10, 16, 17 133 133 138, 139 2 Cor. 11 7, 8 4 Gal. 6 6 5, 120 1 Timothy 3 2
125 3 3 8 3 4 126 5 7 13 5 17 121 2 Timothy 4 2 74 3 17 110 Titus 1 7 8 Heb. 7 2
112 2 Pet. 1 2, 3 79 2 17 88, 89 2 Epist. of John. 10 149

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE, DIRECTING To some special Materials in the precedent
TREATISE.
A
ABraham paid tithes to Melchizedeck both of his substance and of the spoil p.
112, 113 Abraham paid tithes to Melchizedeck more then once 113 Affectation of
magnifying themselves, was the sin of the Pharisees and Scribes 10 Antichrist
described 148 The grand Antichrist, who ibid. False Teachers and Seducers are
in Scripture language petty Antichrists 148 Why they are called many
Antichrists ibid. Ministers of the Gospel are no Antichrists ibid. The grand
Antichrist and the heretical Antichrists parallelled in their transgression 194
Both deny the doctrine of Christ p. 160 Both deny that Christ is come in the
flesh 161 Both deny the sufficiency of holy Scripture, in what they do so 160
Both are deceivers 149 Both have no communion with God and Christ 148 Sound
Believers are to hold no communion with any Antichrists ibid. The Apostolical
practice of receiving maintenance in their times 4, 5 The Apostle Paul's
practice of personally forbearing to receive from people maintenance, does not
bind any other Minister to do the like 5 No Apostle, nor Saint, nor Christ
himself spoke one word in the Holy Scripture against tithes, or paying of
Tithes to Ministers ibid. Augmentations may lawfully be took by the Ministers
of the Gospel 124
B
BAlaams way, what 83 Ministers of the Gospel do not walk in his way ibid.
Romish Emissaries and Heretics do walk in Balaams way 84 Baptizing Infants or
little children allowed by Scripture p. 146, 147 Belly, and what it is to serve
the belly, and what is not serving it 70, 71 Briars, Thorns and Thistles, what
is in Scripture said of them 94, 95 Wicked men are Briars 96
C
CAins way what it was 81 Ministers walk not in Cains way of Cruelty, nor in
his way of Infidelity 81, 82 Popes, and his Factors, and other false Teachers,
walks in Cains way 82 Careless Servers of God, and deceitful payers of tithes
to his Ministers, are Walkers in Cains way 83 Christ is Mediator of the
Everlasting Covenant 27, 28 Christ is a Priest of Melchizedecks order for ever
108 Christ's Priesthood is differenced from Aarons 109 Christ has ratified the
Law of tithes 3, 4 Christ's laying down his life for his s^eep, is no ground for
his sheep to detain tithes from his ministerial Shepherds 132 Christ's biding
people learn of him, does not warrant them to neglect the hearing of their
Ministers, and to withold from them their maintenance p 132, 133 Christ
saying that he is the way, does not hinder Ministers from being guides in the
way, neither does it discharge them from having maintenance and dues paid to
them for their labors 133 Christ is a faithful witness ibid. Christ being a
faithful witness does not allow people to deny due maintenance to his
Ministers 134 Christ's anointing is no exclusion of Ministers from their work,
nor an expulsion of them from their means 135 Serving of Christ 68 Christ frees
no comers to him from Tithes 131 Christians Primitives were exact and
righteous payers unto others all dues, and were no detainers from others their
Rights 2 Church: a rational Church, what 145 A local Church allowed of by holy
Scripture ibid. The local Church of Stanhopes Assemblies are vindicated thus
145 The Church of Corinth corrupted ibid. Clouds carried with a Tempest, who
87, 88 Clothing with wool, what 52 Comers unto God are to tender unto him what
he requires of them, and what that is 19, 20 Congregations are not out of
order, when all things in them are done decently and in order 92 The fauls of
some appertaining to a Congregation are not to be charged on it ibid. Covenant:
what the Everlasting Covenant is 27 Covetousness, what lawful, and what is
unlawful 74 Covetous who so called in the old and new Testament 75 The
Ministers are not covetous for demanding their dues 76 People are not covetous
for demanding and taking their due debts ibid. They are truly covetous, who
seek to bereave Ministers of the Gospel of the Tithes which God and Law gives
unto them. 77
D
DIrections for observing of spiritual mercies 25, 26, 27, 28, 29
E
Eat. Ministers have titlc to more then to eat a little meat, and drink a
little drink 120, 121, 124 Enthusiasts are one sort of false Prophets, who in
our days teach and divine for money 44, 45
F
FAT. What is meant by eating the fat which was the sin of wicked Shepherds 51,
52 Fed. What is meant by killing them that are fed 53 First borns maintenance
or double portion 121 Fruits. The fruits of Seducers will whither 103 The
fruits of holy Ministers will not whither 104
G
GAin. Looking for gain from ones quarter, what meant by it 17, 18 gleab lands
may lawfully be possessed by Ministers of the Gospel 123 God is no ways
benefitted by ought from man 19 What things God requires of those that come
unto him 20 Coming unto God without money, and without price, what is signifies
19 Gospel. What it is to live of the Gospel 111, 119, 120 Living of the Gospel
in tithes, the Ministers thereof have more, then to a power to eat and d^ink
121 Tithes are the things of the Gospel on which Ministers are to live 116
H
HEarers must not withdraw from hearing their Teachers, though they be faulty
in some things 9 Hearers of the Word are not hindered from profiting, because
their Ministers who teaches them receive titbes 25, 29 Hire. What the Hire of
Ministers is 139, 140 Ministers are not hired by the people but by Christ to
preach the Gospel 139 Ministers may lawfully take means from those people that
never heard them 138 Ministers are not such who teach for hire 44
I
Jeremiah did not disallow of the maintenance or means which the Priests and
Levites had in his time 32, 33
L
LAW. The Commendation of the just Laws of a a Nation 60, 61 The Law is
clamored against by men who do wrong, and desire to do wrong 61 Prooofs from
the Law for tithes and other things in the new Testament and unabolished, are
not to be cavilled against 117 Living of the Gospel what it implies 111, 119,
120 Love. What kind of self-love is lawful and what unlawful 73, 74 Ministers
maintenance is no filthy lucre 8
M
MAintenance of Ministers is not by the Apostle called filthy lucre 8 Master,
the several acceptations of of that word 10, 11, 12, 13 The word Master is not
to be given to any but to Christ, as it signifies one who has power and
authority over another faith and spiritual obedience 11 Pharisees and Scribes
affected to be called Masters of others faith ibid. Ministers are not in this
sense of the word Master, called Masters ibid. Not being Masters, but they
being called Masters, or the affecting of Sovereignty over others faith is
condemned by our blessed Savior 10 Master as signifying a subordinate teacher
under Christ, or the Master of a family may lawfully be imposed on a Minister,
or any other 12 Master as a civil title of honor may be lawfully imposed by
others, and accepted on by those on whom it is imposed 12, 13, 14 To be called
Master in some senses of the word, does not thwart Christ's saying, Be not ye
called of men Masters, and how 13 Paul, Silas and Philip were called Masters or
Sirs in Scripture record ibid. Means or maintenance which the Priests and
Levites had in Jeremiahs time was not disallowed by him 32, 33 What is meant by
ruling, by bearing rule by means 35, 37, 38 From the ordinary way of living in
this world by means or maintenance 38 No Ministers are exempt ibid. The Rule
which Ministers have in the Church, is not by their means or maintenance,
though while they rule they have means or maintenance 38, 39 Melchizedecks
Priesthood is contemned 108, 109 Melchizedeck had from Abraham tithes of his
substance, and of his spoil, and more then once he had from him tithes 112,
113, 114 Mercies of David what they are, and why so called 25, 26 Micah full of
power and honor 46, 47 Ministers are Christ's Messengers 133, 134 They are no
Messengers of Satan, nor Ministers of unrighteousness 137 Ministers toils and
pains 45, 73, 74 Ministers do work for all people who are within their charge
137, 138 The scope and end of Ministers preaching, is to testify their love to
Christ, their care to discharge conscionably their duty, and their compassion
to the souls of their people 45 Ministers must fight against their peoples sins
and errors 46 Their words in preaching tends not to cause divisions and
offenses 70 Faithful Ministers will not desist from the work of the Ministry,
though tithes be took and detained from them 66, 67 A Minister is not to cease
from his labors ministerial, though he find that his people continue unreformed
102, 103 The fruits of faithful Ministers will not wither 104 Faithful
Ministers are no self seekers, but self-wasters for the peoples spiritual good
73, 74 The established faithful Ministers of the English Church are no false
Prophets and false Apostles, and false Teachers, and Hirelings 131 Peoples
believing or not believing that one is a Minister, does not make or unmake him
one 6 Ministers may justly require tithes from those people under their charge
who come not to enjoy their labors, but withdraw from their public Assemblies
141, 142 Ministers are no wranglers in demanding their due maintenance of
Tithes and other dues 2, 3 Ministers are not covetous for demanding their dues
76 Mockers and Scoffers who they are, which the Apostle said should come 93,
94, 95 Money. Who divine for money, and teach for hire 43 Ministers do not
divine for money 43, 44 Preaching for money is a sin 48
N
NOvice, who is, and who is not a Novice 91, 92 A Congregation being out of
order, does not prove that the Minister thereof is a Novice 92
O
OBstinate people are usually those that have eyes and see not, and ears and
hear not 41
P
PArdon of Offenders is easy to God, but not so to man 29, 30 Parsonage houses
may lawfully be enjoyed and possessed by the Gospel 123 Perfection whither
attainable by men on earth, and what perfection men may, and to what they
cannon come, while they are on earth 149, 150 Pharisees condemned for affecting
a magnifying of themselves 9, 10 Places of holy Assemblies for divine service
and holy purposes, are lawfully called Churches 145, 146 Popes by sacrilegious
acts in alienating tithes from Ministers to Monks and others; have proved
themselves to be therein Antichrists 7 Popery the sink of Heresies in the
Western parts of the world 160, 161 Preaching of the word does not profit many
people, the causes whereof is not in the Preachers, but in the people, and what
these causes are 98, 99, 100 Priesthood of Aarons changed, but Melchizedecks is
not 108 Priesthood of Christ's and Aarons differed 109 The Law of Aarons Priests
is changed 109 Priests of Aarons order had a Law to take tithes which is
disanulled to them, and yet the Law of taking tithes is not disanulled to
Ministers 110 Priests who were in Jeremiahs time had their lawful rule settled
on their order by divine Authority 34 Romish Priests are the Priests in our
days w^o divine for money, and teach for hire 50 Prey twofold ibid. How the
people was preyed on in the dark and cloudy day 59, 60 Price what it is 20
Prophets false are threatened, and with what 47 Prophesying sons and daughters
at this age who are not 144, 145, 146 Prophesying or preaching daughters are
disclaimed 145 How sons and daughters are said to prophecy 156 Psalms of David
are enjoined to be sung 105, 106 Singing Psalms is enjoined to worldly men as
to sanctified men 106
Q
QVakers are no such comers to Christ, and professors of his Truth as they
pretend 132 Bodily Quakers are no absolute evidence of salvation wrought with
fear and trembling 144
R
REligion. The first principle of true Religion; what 144 Rvelations now a
days of saving Truths unrevealed in the revelations and inspirations which
Prophets and Apostles had in penning of holy Scripture, are all of them utterly
disowned and disclaimed 144, 154 Long robes not condemned, but the ambitioas
seeking to be clad therewith 14, 15 Romish Teachers and Sectarians are they who
with feigned words and covetousness make merchandise of Gods people 81 Bearing
Rule by means, what is thereby meant in Jeremiah 35, 38, 39
S
SAcrament. that word is lawfully used by Christians 148 Salvation wrought with
fear and trembling in the Apostles sense, what 153 Holy Scripture was not
indicted to be an history to relate every particular act done by those holy men
whom it mentions 114 Seducers their fruit will wither, what it is, and how it
will wither 103, 104 Seducers are guilty of filthy Lucre 8 Self-love what
lawful and unlawful 72, 73 Shepherds, against whom Ezekiah complains, what is
meant by wicked Shepherds eating the fat 52 What by their clothing with the
wool 52, 53 What by their killing of the fllock that were fed 53, 54 The
particular neglect of wicked Shepherds in not exercising their Calling 55, 56
The faults of evil Shepherds 57 Sheep. Gods promise to seek his sheep does not
warrant any of the flock to have wandering sheep, and to turn away from the
Shepherds set over them 63 Gods promise to deliver his sheep, does not allow
the sheep to detain tithes and dues from their Shepherds ibid. Gods promise to
feed his s^eep on the mountains is no warrant unto his sheep to forsake the
public Assemblies or Congregations of his true Church 64 Singing Psal^s
enjoined 106 Sin. The particular sins for which God threatened by Jeremiah to
visit the people 37 38 Wicked men's sins are fruits which proceed from
themselves and not from their faithful teaching Ministers 96, 97, 98, 101 No
man can so put off the body of sin while he is on earth that he shall be free
from sin 151, 152 Soldiers are bound to pay a tenth of their spoils 112 Son of
God is come to end all similitudes and liknesses 118 Spirit, The Spirits
pouring out does not make all Preachers 145, 156 Spirits pouring out of all
flesh, how 145 The Spirits extraordinary inspirations and donations are now
ceased 156 Sprinkling of Infants is allowed 146, 147
T
TEaching lies, errors and encouragements in sin, and security is a ruining in
sin 47 They do not teach for money and lucre who take tithes 49 The duty of one
who has more understanding then his Teachers 27 False Teachers are in the way
of Cain and Balaam 79, 80, 81, 82, 83 False Teachers are wells without water
87, 88 And inwardly ravening wolves 100 They are known by their fruits 100,
101 They are called wicked 101 Thorns, Briars, Thistles, what ts said of them
according to Scripture 95, 96 False Teachers are not by the name of Briars,
Thorns and Thistles described to be false Teachers, but thereby to be wicked
men 94, 95 Tithes are Gods Rent to be paid as acknowle^gment of his Sovereignty
over all 22, 23 Tithes Christ's right 23 And how Ministers are appointed to
receive his right ibid. They demand from people only Christ's right in demanding
Tithes 23, 24 Tithes are for ever to be paid to Christ, by paying them to his
Ministers 109 The fundamental reasons of paying Tithes of all 112 Tithes are
not the price of Ministers preaching unto people spirituals 21 Tithes and money
are no ends of Ministers teaching 45 Tithes were paid to Melchizepeck more then
once 113, 114 Paying Tithes is a standing duty to be paid by all ever after
Abraham's time 115, 116, 117 Tithes are to be paid by all though they come to
Christ 129, 130 Denyers of paying Tithes is a renouncing of Gods Sovereignty
over them Refusing of paying of Tithes to Ministers are in that act of theirs
followers of the Pope, but no Disciples of God and Christ 6, 7 Taking Tithes is
no making of Prey upon people 59 Christ biding his Disciples and Apostles to
eat what is before them, does not inhibit the the taking of Tithes 121, 122 It
is no unrighteous thing to demand Tithes 137 Faithful Priests, Levites and
Prophets of the Jewish Church are not blamed by any holy Prophet for taking
Tithes or ministerial maintenance 17, 18 Tithes were not disallowed and
condemned by Jeremiah 32, 33 Tithes and taking Tithes are in no place condemned
or reproved by Ezekiel, neither dirst he do so 57 Tithes are none of the
Figures, similitudes and liknesses to which Christ by his coming put an end
118
U
UNcontentedness which God and the Law of the Land allows is a sin 48 Voice.
The immediate voce of God is not heard by Ministers, and yet they communicate
unto people the voice and word of God 149
W
WElls without water, who, 88 What is meant by using good words and fair
speeches 69, 71 Wrangling, demanding, and inquiring after dues, is no wrangling
2, 3


FINIS.

