EZEKIEL'S PROPHECY PARALLELED: OR, The Desire of the Eyes taken away.

DELIVERED IN A SERMON, Preached at the FUNERALS Of the most Virtuous Mrs
ELIZABETH COLE, Wife to ROBERT COLE Esquire, At Wye in Kent, Nov. 26. MDCLI.

By SAMUEL BERNARD, Doctor in Divinity.

-- A woman that fears the Lord, SHE shall be praised. Pro. 31. 30. London,
Printed for Andrew Crook. 1652.

engraving of monument commemorating Elizabeth Cole Gen: Cap. 35 -- Vt Rachel

Sic mortua est Elizabetha Cole

No. XIV. M.DC L^

Cuius est haec

(...) diu Domine.



Genesis Cap. XXXV. -- Vt Rachel, Sic mortua est ELIZABETHA COLE, November. XIV.
MDCLI.
Cujus est haec COLUMNA.
Quam diu, Domine!
O mea ELIZABETHA!
O Maritella mea ELIZABETHULA!
O Desiderium Oculorum meorum!
Heu, quam gravi me afflixit manu
Te, Te mihi eripiens, Deus!
Te,
Quam nemo non amavit, qui noverit.
Quam amabilem Te fecerunt Pietas! Charitas!
Quam conjugalis Amor! illibata Vita!
Quam Gratiarum Cohors! quam Formae decor!
Virtutes certe omnes
Tum Corporis, Tum Animi,
Concertarunt Te reddere omnibus
Plusquam Commendatissimam:
Sane, qui Te ademptam non deplorat,
Nec Suavitatem, nec Virtutem ipsam
Extinctam deplorabit.
Vale itaque, mea ELIZABETHULA,
Moestissimus ingemit Maritus
Vale, Vale,
Vsque ad Resurrectionem
Valeto. Moerens, Posuit, and Composuit Maritus Ipse,

HIc dormit ELIZABETHA, U^ Robti Cole Armri: Timothei Thornhill (...) Filia
unica: Quae animam puerpera Creatori suo religiose reddidit, 14. November. An.
Do^. 1651. Aetatis 3^ Conjugii 10.

Reliquit Filiam Janam (Annorum oct Filium Richardum, Qui mox Ab ubere raptus,
in sinu Matris Conquiescit.

Cujus dulci Memoriae, Sed nec minus acerbae, (Eo magis acerbae, quia maxim
dulci* Tristissimus Maritus Sociale marmoravit Mnemosynum.

To my most Honored Friend, ROBERT COLE (of Addington in Surrey) ESQUIRE.
Noble Sir,
I Am very sensible, how deep a Wound the taking away of Her, who was the
Desire of your eyes, made in your breast; and therefore I have been very
unwilling to present you with this Picture, lest the Colors, with which it is
drawn, should renew the wound, and make it bleed afresh: This was the only
reason, that hitherto, I was so hardly brought to represent it to your view.
But now, I begin to call to mind, that though the Original was an incomparable
piece, yet he that drew the Copy: did it with an unskilful hand: I am content
therefore, upon your Importunity, to let you cast your eye upon it, in stead of
a Foil: But I am very Confident withal, upon my Importunity, you will more
easily suppress it, and suffer it only to lie within your private walls, among
your other Papers. It will be satisfaction enough for you, and for Her friends,
to Know, How much She deserved, how much you desired, and how much the Workman
endeavored, but was not able to perform. For my part, I am easily persuaded
both to pardon, and please my self with that of the Poet, In magnis voluisse
sat est, --

In things that are hard and difficult, The Will is to be accepted for the
Deed: And if I can but purchase so much favor at your hands, you shall
Challenge, what proportion you please, both in the sincerest Affections, and
most Earnest Devotions of

Waddon Dec. 2. 1652. (Sir) Your most endeared Servant, SAM. BERNARD.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Virtuous Mrs ELIZABETH COLE.
EZEKIEL. 24. 16. Son of Man, behold, I take away from Thee the desire of thine
eyes with a stroke.
MY Sermon is like this Evening, very gloomy and stormy: And indeed, I must be
your Petitioner (at this time) as well as your Preacher, That it may be lawful
for me so far to be a Time-server, as to fit my Text unto the time. The
occasion of this meeting is sad and sorrowful, and therefore I have chosen a
sad, and a sorrowful Text to meet it, And in the same kind.

It Is a prophecy, or a prediction of a great loss, the loss of a precious
Pearl, which the prophet had in his Keeping: And though it be dark and obscure,
as all Prophecies are at the first sight; yet the Explication of two words, The
desire of thine Eyes, and the Stroke, here mentioned, will acquaint you with
the sense of the Prophecy, and the reason of the Parallel.

For the first. The Prophet shall be his own Expositor: The Desire of his Eyes
was his Wife; and the Stroke, by which she was taken away, was Death: Look but
into the 18th verse, and he tells you, He spoke unto the People in the Morning,
and at Even his wife dyed; and so the Prophecy was fulfilled: Ezekiel is in a
sad condition. His Prediction is proved a great Affliction; The loss of his
dearest Wife.

For the second, The Parallel, we find even at our own doors: we have too just
an Occasion, to pick out this Text. But we must submit to the Stroke, because
it stands so with His good pleasure who works all things after the Counsel of
his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. I opened not my mouth, says Holy David, because thou
Ephesians. 1. 11.
did it. Psalm. 39. 9. So it was in the Text: so it is here, Behold I take
away from thee. Psalm. 39 9.


My Text is a very Winding Sheet, Or a Coffin, Containing in it, some dead
Corpse, and ready for the Burial; Let us look into it, and survey those sad
Remains, and we shall find many things very Considerable.

1 The Author, God; I. 2 The Act, Taking away; I take away. 3 The Patient, from
whom; from Thee. 4 The Object, what; The desire of thine eyes. 5 The Instrument
with which, Death; That was the stroke.
Every one of these, would furnish us with a several Observation: but I
consider the time of the night, and must Remember at this time, the mortality
of your hearing, and mine own speaking; and therefore I will rather make bold
to set limits to my own Meditations, then presume to tire out your Patience.
Give me leave only to Choose out two Doctrines, agreeable both to the Text, and
the Time, and with some brief Application, to encourage us to the imitation of
those virtues, which we shall learn from this Excellent Pattern, that lies
here enclosed in her Coffin; and the rest, I will leave to your meditation: The
first shall be this.

A Man's wife is and ought to be esteemed, the nearest and dearest delight to
him, in the world.

The warrant hereof, is in my Text, Where God himself calls her, the Desire of
her husbands eyes. There was never any thing dearer to our Savior then his
Church. He Purchased it with his blood. Acts. 20. 28. What expressions of love,
and deernesse Acts, 20. 28.
does he use to her, Cant. 7. 6? And this is the Cant 7. 6
Pattern he commends to the Husband; To love his wife, as Christ loved the
Church. Ephesians. 5. 25. Ephesians. ^. 25.


When God would express his love and Regard to the Prophet Daniel, The Angel
calls him Dan. 10 11.
Ish Chamudoth; A man of Desires; Beloved, and dear (...)
to God. So here the expression of her dearnesse, is by the Desire of the eye,
from Chamod in the Original, which implies an earnest, and an ardent
affection; Ubi amor ibi oculus, Where love is, it fastens the eye; He must
desire, He must look upon nothing else under God, with equal delight, with
equal Dearnesse.

And dearest she is, in regard of a threefold Obligation;

1. In regard of her Original frame, and Composition. 2. In regard of Gods
Institution of marriage, and the Covenant between them. 3. In regard of a
gracious Disposition working in her.
1. For the first, In the beginning she was taken out of man, Genesis 2. 22. And
for so curious a Genesis 2. 22.
frame, to make them male, and female, the whole Trinity enters into a
consultation about the composure: Genesis 1. 26. 27. And when all is done, Genesis 1.
26. 27.
that Curious piece, is Nothing else but a Piece of his own flesh: Genesis 2. 23.
And therefore in Loving Gen: 2. 23.
his wife, he loves himself; Ephesians. 5. 28. Dear then in respect of her frame.

Secondly, Dearest she must needs be, in regard of Gods Institution of
Marriage; and that mutual Covenant that he made between them. He brought her
unto the man; There Is the Conjugall Knot, Tied by Genesis 22 2.
Almighty God himself, Genesis 22. 2. God is the Author of Marriage. And when he
made the Match, He ordained it, by a perpetual Decree, a nearer Tie, A dearer
Relation, even then that of Parents; Therefore, shall a man leave Father, and
Mother, and shall Cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh, Genesis 2. 24.
Nay, they Two shall Genesis 2. 24.
be one flesh, says our Savior; Matthew. 19. 5. Math. 19. 5.
Though Two in person, yet one in flesh, In nearness, and affection; Dear in
respect of the Marriage bond, or Covenant.

Thirdly, Dearest she must be in regard of Gracious Dispositions; For where
grace moulds, and rules the heart, reformes the will, and sanctifies the
affections, This Causes Love indeed;

Goodness, and Grace, is the object of love; whereere we find it, we desire it,
we admire it; most of all in a Wife. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty vain, but
a woman that fears the Lord, she shall be Prove. 31. 30*
Praised, Prove. 31. 30.

A Face will fail; But Grace is eternal. Age, or a Disease, will wrinckle the
smoothest forehead, and make furrows in the Cheeks; But the Indowments of
Grace, go beyond the Grave, and are neither subject to rottenness nor to
Corruption; Such a woman while alive, the heart of her husband safely trusts in
her, Prove. 31. 11. Prove. 31. 11.
And even when the body is dead, their souls are still glued together. Goodness
is of an attractive Virtue; Et figuram animi magis, quam corporis, amplectimur,
Tacit. in vita Agr.
says the wise Historian; There are embraces, for the Picture of the mind, as
well as of the Body. The Apostle proposes a Catalogue of Holy men, and Gracious
women; Heb. 11. 35. Honored in their lives, to be imitated, remembered, admired
after their Deaths.

A Gracious Disposition, is a desirable piece, it deserves love; And then tell
me, Is it not pity to part with such a Body, in which dwells such a soul? It is
indeed; But there is a time, when the Creator may take in pieces this goodly
Frame, of his own making; When he that made the Match, may break the Match; and
lose the bond, and Command a Divorce; When the Author of all grace, may
Challenge, and call for his own again, and no wrong to any.

So it pleased God here in the Text; Behold I take away from thee the desire.

So that a second Observation may be this, which shall take in all the Parts.

God is pleased often times, to deprive his Dearest Children of that, which
they love most, which is dearest unto them, and that by some heavy affliction,
even Death it self.

1 God is he that does it; The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, I; that
is, God. 2 Here is Depriving: I will take away. 3 His dearest Children; The
Prophet was one; yet from Thee. 4 That which is dearest unto them: The desire
of thine eyes; That must needs be dear. 5 By some heavy affliction, A Stroke;
and that Stroke was Death.
The Text is full, and fit; ye shall see it confirmed by Scripture-Proofes.
Abraham loved his Sarah dearly; and she deserved it; She had been a dutiful
and a loving Wife; So St Peter Commends her, 1. Pet. 3. 6. and she had brought
1 Pet. 3 6.
him forth a blessed Son, the heir of the Promise; yet, Death must deprive him
of his dearest Sarah. Genesis 23. 2. Genesis 23. 2.


Jacob loved Rachel so tenderly, that his seven years service for her, seemed
but a few days to him, for the love that he had to her, says the Text, Genesis
29. 20. Yet he must not carry her into Egypt Genesis 29. 20.
with him; but she must die in travail; And as soon as she is delivered of her
Benoni, The son of her sorrow, his fathers Benjamin, Jacob must lose his
dearest Rachel, Genesis 35. 18. Genesis 35. 18.


To instance in other Relations; David a man according to Gods own heart, had a
Son whom he Passionately loved, for whom he would have died himself; so dear he
was to him; yet he must lose this Dearest son Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 2. Sam. 18.
33.
ver. 33.

Look upon Josiah, the good Josiah, the best of Kings; Never any like him
before, nor after, 2 Kings 23. 25. The Scriptures style him the 2 Kings. 23. 25.
Breath of our Nostrils; yet the Prophet complains there, So good a King was
taken in their Pits; Lam. Lam. 4. 20.
4. 20. And that best of Kings, that was so dear to his people, whom that holy
Prophet and the people so lamented, 2 Chronicles. 35. 25. was deprived 2. Chron. 35.
25.
of his life, and that by a violent death; 2 Chronicles. 35. 23. 2 Chronicles. 35. 23.


It seems by these Stories, the best of men, the best of Kings, have a share in
the greatest afflictions, have lost their Dearest Wives, their Dearest Lives.

The Scripture does set forth holy Job to the Job 1. 14. 15.
life, a chief example, a very Map of misery, Robbed of his Cattle, Bereaved
of his goods, Deprived of his servants, Spoiled of his Children, One in the
neck of another, and all in a day. Himself exposed to scorn, and Contempt, to
Pain, and shame, and none to comfort him, Job 1. 14, 15

I could here tell you of the Martyrs, the Prophets, Heb. 11. 37.
Their righteous blood; So the Savior of the world calls it, Matthew. 23. 35. and
tells us, it was Matthew. 23. 35
shed upon the earth.

The Apostles, I think near and dear to God, Designed to the shambles. For thy
sake are we Killed all the day long, and are counted as sheep for the
slaughter: Romans 8. 36. Nay Christ himself, the Romans 8. 36.
blessed son of the eternal God, The Captain of our salvation, He was made
perfect through sufferings: Heb. 2. 10. Heb. 2. 10.


It Is a Maxim in the Scripture, Judgment must begin at the House of God, 1
Pet. 4. 17. I 1 Pet. 4. 17.
have forsaken my house, says God himself: I have given the dearly beloved of
my soul into the hands of her enemies, Jer. 12. 7. It Is a rule that never
fails, Jer. 12. 7.
Whom I love, I Correct, Rev. 3. 19. The truth of the Rev. 3. 19.
Doctrine stands good, and warrantable, God is pleased oftentimes to deprive
his Children of that which is dearest unto them, by some heavy affliction, even
Death it self.

Physic in both the Parts, (...), and (...); It Is Restoring Physic and
Preventing Physic. First it restores, and sets us right, cures our diseases;
Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word: Psalm. 119.
67. God is Psalm. 119. 67.
wont to punish his dearest Children, to bring them home, when they wander out
of the way, and forget their duties; In their affliction they will seek me
Early: Hosea 5. 15. The best of Gods Saints Hos. 5. 15.
have their dross, It must be purged out; and Tribulation is as the Fire to
the Gold, 1 Pet. 1. 7. He shall Purify the sons of Levi, and Purify them as 1
Pet. 1. 7.
Gold, that they may offer an offering in Righteousness, Mal. 3. 3. No man is
so good, but he has some sin: God will Purge him, and punish him here, Mal. 3
3.
that he may pardon him hereafter. When we are Judged, we are Chastened of the
Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32.

Secondly, it is preventing Physic: It preserves 1 Cor. 11. 32.
us from sins to come; It Is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn thy statutes, Psalm. 119. 71. (...), says the Greek Proverb: Every Psalm.
119. 71
affliction is our instruction, says Divine Bernard. It Is like Myrrh, that
preserves from Putrefaction; and like Salt, that prevents Corruption. Bern.
So Affliction keeps men exercised, and sweet, afraid to entertain any sin.

Thirdly, God will thus demonstrate his Impartiality. Those that are nearest to
him shall smart, and taste of the rod, shall have their losses, that they may
not presume of Impunity: You only have I known of all the families of the
earth; Therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities. Amos 3. 2.

I will now make some Application. Amos 3. 2.


Conviction of the wicked. They must needs be convinced, and Confess, That if
God deal thus with his Friends, then surely he will not spare his Enemies.

If Judgment begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of them that obey
not the Gospel of God! It Is the Apostles inference: and it is a strong one, 1.
Pet. 4. 17. If he be so sharp to those in his favor, how much sorer will he be
to those in his displeasure? 1 Pet. 4. 17.


You shall see them threatened to the purpose, Jer. 46. 23. and indeed, it is an
argument of an heavier Jer. 46. 23.
doom: I will go no farther then my Text for a Confirmation; This of Ezekiel, is
a sign to the house of Israel of a farther meaning; And they demand it of him,
v. 19. and at the 21 verse ye may see his Application, Thus says the Lord,
Behold I will Profane my Sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, the
desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pities, and your sons, and yours
daughters, whom ye have left, shall perish by the sword.

Now it is not only, the poor Prophet that shall be punished; but the Judgment
is more general and more grievous; They had mocked the messengers of God,
despised his word, and mis-used his Prophets; 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. When he had sent
his 2 Chro. 36. 16
Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending, 2 Chronicles. 36, 15. When they had
more means of salvation then all other nations: A Glorious Temple, Righteous
Judgments, and Statutes, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. which Deuter. 4. 8.
if a man do, he should live in them, Ezekiel. 20, 11. Ezekiel. 20. 11.
Yet all those they neglected, and rejected, though they boasted of them: And
therefore their Religion, their Chiefest glory, shall be taken away, their
Temple Profaned, their Churches dishonourd, their Sacraments disgraced, and
all in a Confusion.

Dearest unto them: this may serve for Caution, and Counsel; Not to pass our
censure presently, and condemn all for Reprobates, upon whom God lays his
hand; Jobs friends were too forward in that kind, and therefore justly blamed;
Job 42, 7. Right good men, as you have heard, Job. 42 7.
have had their losses; their heads full of sorrow; their hands full of hurts;
Many a good woman made a woeful widow, and lost her dearest husband; Many a
good man, lost his dearest wife; Ezekiel a Prophet for one: Parents robbed of
their Children, Holy men spoyld of their Goods; Heb. 10, 34* God does Heb. 10.
34.
not distinguish the Righteous from the Reprobates, neither by prosperity, nor
adversity in this life: Eccles. 9, 2. Ezekiel has his share, a Eccl^s. 9. 2.
Righteous Prophet, in a grievous affliction, a great loss.

direction in all Changes, and Chances, in all our Crosses, and Losses, to
look unto him from whence the stroke comes: to submit all to the good
pleasure of our good God.

He sends us what ever we enjoy, Parents, Children, Husbands, Wives, Health,
and Wealth, Lands, and Life; David refers us to the fountain; All of his
bounty, 1 Chronicles. 29. 12, 16. And he 1 Chr. 29. 12. 16.
may call for any, or all again, when he pleases; whatever we do, let us do
this, Resign all without repining; so did Job: We return but his own, The Lord
gives, and The Lord takes away, Blessed be the name of the Lord; When he had
lost all, nothing out of his mouth, but Submission and Benediction, Job 1. 21.
Job 1. 21


So did old Eli; when he was threatened with the destruction of his house, and
Posterity, he submits with patience, and kisses the rod with an humble return,
It is the Lord; let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. 1 Samuel 3. 18.


So did Holy David, when he was in danger to lose a kingdom, and was driven
from the Desire of his eyes, the Ark of God, and his Chiefest City: He commits
himself, and his cause to Gods disposal: If I shall find favor in the eyes of
the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation; But
if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; Behold here I am, let him do unto
me as it seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15. 25. 28. m. 15. 25.


So did David's Lord, our blessed Savior, when he was to take down that bitter
cup, to undergo the Pain, and shame of the Cross; though it was bitter to
swallow, and heavy to bear; he complies with his Fathers decree, Not my will,
but thine be done, Luke 22. 42. Perdidit vitam, ne perderet Luke 22. 42.
obedientiam, says St August. He was content to lose Augustine.
his life, rather then lose his Loyalty, and bis obedience to his Father; And
when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously; 1 Pet. 1 Pet. 2 23.
2. 23.

I confess the parting of a man from his Wife, is like the parting of the soul
from the body; And there is a time when a man must leave Father and Mother for
his wife; But here is a nearer tie between Christ and thy Soul, then between a
Man and his Wife; why? he must leave his wife, and all for him; Mark 10. 29.
and shall never repent it, Mark 10. 30. Mar. 10. 29, 30


Comfort therefore in the last place, to the Children of God amidst all their
losses: ye have heard, His dearest ones, his favorites he does exercise under
the Cross, and uses to the rod; Why so much the better: It is an argument he
has the more care of you, as his Children: No son he does receive, but he
chastens, Hebr. Heb, 12. 6, 8.
12. 6. Nay, we are no Children but Bastards, without it, Heb. 12. 8. Nay it
brings us nearer to God: All things work together for their good that love God,
Romans 8 28.
Romans 8. 28. (...), says St Chrysostom; our Chrysostom. in Romans 8.
very Greviances, and afflictions: though Tribulation, and Poverty, and
fetters, and famine, and death, or whatsoever else, says the Golden-mouthed
Doctor, He makes no exception. Never think they are tokens of his displeasure,
of separation: They are Pignora amoris, Pawnes of his love; I report me to St
Paul for a witness; It Is the Challenge of that great Doctor of the Gentiles;
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8. 35. shall Tribulation,
or Distress, or Persecution, Romans 8. 35.
or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or the Sword? Nay in all these things we
are more then conquerours through him that loved us; And therefore in this
Comfort and Confidence he triumphs; I am persuaded that neither Death, nor
Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor any other Creature shall ever be able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.
39. Romans 8. 39.


Well then; Has he taken away thy goods? why he can restore them double, as he
did to Job, Job 42. 10. Has he taken away thy Children? why, God can give thee
more, or preserve them to thy Comfort with himself, so that thou shall say,
they are not lost; And indeed, I remember St Gregory Gregor. Moral. 35. cap. 11.
gives the reason, why God Almighty, when he doubled Jobs substance in his
sheep, and his camels, and his oxen, yet he gave him but just so many Children
as he had taken from him; because his dead Children were not lost, but in Gods
Keeping, in a better life.

Has he taken away thy Parents? why, when my Father and my mother forsake me,
the Lord takes me up, Psalm. 27. 10. Has he taken away thy Husband? Psalm. 27.
10.
He is the Father of the Fatherless, and the Judge of the widows, Psalm. 68. 5.
Has he taken away thy Psalm. 68. 5.
Wife, thy Comforter, and thy Companion? Why, God is all in all; Thy Wife, Thy
Husband, Thy Father, Thy Comforter, and thy Companion; Our best refuge, Our
greatest strength, a very present help in time of trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. Let
that comfort thee.

And now I have done with my Text, and the general application, give me leave
to apply more particularly, and as I told you in the beginning, to find it at
our own doors; What ye have heard with your ears, you see here presented to
your eyes; Fix them upon that Coffin, upon those Blacks and Eschutcheons, and
they will lead you from the Thesis to the Hypothesis, from the Prophecy to the
Parallel.

That Death, which you heard of in the Text, you see in her proper Colors:
Behold the Stroke she gave, The wounds she made, yet bleeding fresh, and I fear
nothing so much, as that while I seek to close them, the Commemoration of those
Virtues, which did shine in this Dear deceased, should make them Wider.

You heard, a Wife was the nearest, the dearest delight to her husband in the
world; The desire of his eyes: So it was here; And that will be your joy. Again
you heard, it pleases God oftentimes to deprive his dearest Children of that
their dearest delight, by the Stroke of Death; as he uses to do, so he has
done here; And that will be your sorrow.

For the first, I must tell you, I shall present you with a shadow, with a
Picture of a most heavenly Soul; which though it dwelt in an earthly body, was
right dear indeed, unto her Husband; and that body though now a liveless Corpse,
I may boldly say, The desire of his eyes, in all three respects.

First in respect of the Original frame and Composure. God had made her of the
same mould, so that he looked upon her as a piece of his own flesh* And the
great workman of heaven and earth, had done his part so well, that there needed
no Art to perfect Nature, or supply any defect; But her own Beauty, and lovely
Proportion, had power both to procure, and Continue her Husbands Affection. To
make her the more desirable, she was of no base metal, but Extract, and
derived from a Noble and an ancient family, the memory of some whereof was
precious in this Place. But I remember withal what the wise Roman has upon
record, -- Genus et proavos, et quae non fecimus ipsi, Ovid. Met. Lib. 13.

Vix ea nostra voco. --


Our pedigrees, and Noble blood, we are beholden to our forefathers for,
rather then our selves. I pass them over, and come to the next.

Secondly therefore, she was dear unto him, The desire of her husbands eyes, In
respect of the marriage Knot, the mutual Covenant between them, Gods own
Institution, under which condition, as they had chosen one another out of
mutual Affection, so they did look upon one another no longer as two, made of
the same mould, as all mankind are in general; but they two one flesh: Their
wil^s one, their desires the same; Their souls linkt together: That Is true love
indeed: To choose, and refuse the same things: Idem nolle et velle ea demum
Salust. Conjur. Cat.
perfecta est Amicitia. This is the true nearness, The only dearness, says the
Historian.

And indeed I have often heard the Husband say, which I cannot but mention,
That there was never any contention or Controversy between them, but only one;
But it was a very heavenly one, a most blessed and happy one; And that was
this, Which of the Two should love one another most. It Is worthy your
imitation, And that which makes the state of marriage a Comfortable life.

3. But to come to that which is the Crown of all the rest: She was the desire
of her husbands eyes, and of his heart too: very dear unto him, in regard of
her Gracious disposition. And here I shall take the boldness to tell you, that
I shall deliver nothing upon the Information of others, or uncertain reports,
but what I have observed upon mine own knowledge, and long acquaintance; And I
well remember the Place where I stand, and the Person that I sustain; And
though I am a Stranger, yet I beseech ye, believe my Profession.

I never loved to Prostitute either my tongue or the Pulpit to flatter the
living, or praise the dead, that were unworthy in their lives.

But truly, Beloved, when Gods graces are eminent, and exemplary in his
Children; they are not to be concealed, that Posterity may be encouraged in the
imitation of such virtues, and God, the Author, glorified in such Saints.

Thus St Ambrose honored Theodosius; Thus Gregory Nazianzen remembered
Athanasius, Cyprian, and St Basil; Thus St Jerome commended Marcella, Blesilla,
and other holy and Religious Ladies at their Funerals.

And we do it not without good warrant; A woman that fears the Lord, she shall
be Praised, Prove. 31. 30. It Is Scripture; Blessed are the Dead, which Prove. 31.
30.
dye in the Lord: and we may believe the witness; Even so says the Spirit; for
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them: they follow her
indeed, Rev. 14. 13.
and praise her in the gates, Prove. 31. 32. Prove. 31. 32.


First, as there had been great care in her Education, so God had endowed her
with a great measure of Grace, both to approve and apply all outward
accessories, to the attaining of the great and Principal End, The Knowledge of
God, and Salvation of her soul.

It is a great argument of a most heavenly mind, and I observe it to her
honor. I never came to see her, either in the City or Country, but as St
Hierom writes of that noble Lady Blesilla, Semper Hier. T. 1. de. abit. Bles.
aut prophetam, aut Evangelium in manibus; I found her with a Bible, or some
good book in her hands, of which she was able readily to give you a good
account of her reading.

Secondly, Where the fear of the Lord is seated in the heart, there can be no
Virtue, no Grace wanting; And truly, Religion had so furnished her with all
kind of goodness, that she made her life desired, and her death honored; She
was not contented with a narrow scantling of grace, or a single Virtue, but I
must tell you, There was a sweet conjunction, and a Cohabitation of all, moral
Virtues, and Divine Graces in her breast. Religion that I named before, the root
of all, had taken Possession of her Heart; Charity of her Hands; Those fruits
of the spirit, Joy, and Peace, and long-suffering, Gal. 5 22.
heavenly Patience, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, had
fitted her for the Company of the Lamb; Modesty, the Grace of women, and the
honor of the sex. was one of her natural endowments. Ye might easily know
her to be one of the daughters of Sarah, by her very dress, her inward adorning
her self, as St Peter calls it. Her Chaste conversation coupled with fear, 1.
Pet. 3. 2. The Ornament of a meek and a 1 Pet. 3. 2.
quiet Spirit. The Ornament of those Holy women, that trusted in God; as the
Apostle again, 1. Pet. 3. 4, 5. The Ornament of obdience, of 4, 5.
subjection, the wives Ornament, 1. Pet. 3. 5. 6. That 5, 6.
if there were nothing else, she must for this be the desire of her Husbands
eyes, The Joy of his Heart.

The time will not suffer me to tell you of her sweet and winning behavior,
her kind and Courteous Carriage; No Rancour in her heart, no Revenge in her
hands; The Language of her tongue was Blessing, and the fruit of her lips, were
Prayers and Devotion.

And as she was a Saint her self, so it was her study to make more; Especially,
her dear and only daughter, whom she did so season with the same liquor in
those tender years, that I believe she will savor the better of it ever after;
Prove another Saint.

I shall not acquaint you (though she was but little) of her sweet taking
Carriage; Habituated (as it were) in her by her Parents Pattern, and Prudent
regards of her; for that was the observation (with great applause) of every
eye; and spoke her a woman, while yet a Child.

But I must go higher, and tell you, such was her mothers Religious care, in
her Education, that before she was eight years old, she had made her read so
perfectly, that she exceeded both her equals, and very many of far greater
age; yea (I am confident) even most of her own sex.

But above all, her chiefest endeavor was to make her skillful in the Book of
Books, Gods own Book; which (though so young, and tender, as she was) she had
read through more then once or twice, besides several other Books, which to
name, were too great a Labor, and a wasting of the time. So that we may say of
her as Saint Paul of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15. That from a Child 2 Timothy 3 15.
she has known the Scriptures. And that she might understand them the better,
This Pious Mother had laid a good foundation, instructed her in the Principles
of Religion, and made her expert in both the Catechismes.

And now though she be taken away from her daughter, yet she has left her a
perpetual Remembrance. Her own Precepts, and Pattern; To take God for her
guide, and make Religion her Glory. It Is her honor indeed to be born of such a
Mother, whose Life was an Example, and whose Example deserved to be Remembered,
and may justly both encourage and Command her Imitation.

These are the Chief Colors in her Arms, though she wants not others to Grace
her Funerals (as ye see). Those Blacks and Eschutcheons that are before your
eyes, she needs not, to adorn her Hearse.

Would ye have any Flowers (as the Custom is)? Why, she has provided some her
self, as ye hear; I have but tied them together, to throw them upon her grave.

Would ye have any Ointments, or sweet Odours? Why, she her self has prepared
them against her Burial, to perfume her Corpse, as Mary did our Saviors. A
good report is better then a Precious Matthew. 26. 12
Ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. I do but power it out, and Eccl. 7. 1.
sprinkle it among you; I hope we shall all smell the better for it.

But is it not pity we should part thus? Give me leave to look back again, and
to propose the question anew: Is it not pity that such a Frame should be taken
in pieces? that such a Knot should be untied? Is it not pity such a Gracious
Disposition should be subject to Dissolution? It is indeed, if we look no
higher then our own Designs. But if we look into the Text, It Is the Lords
doing; He it is that may Challenge his own; As I told you in the beginning, He
made this goodly frame, and may unmake it; He made this Match, and may Break
this Match; He gave those Graces, and may call for a return of those Graces;
His dearest Children must suffer the loss of all, without repining; Behold I
take away from thee the desire.

And is she taken away? Has Death seized upon her by a Stroke? was she
snacht away, and surprised as it were, before we thought upon it? It Is true,
Beloved, We might be surprised, but so could not She. Ye heard of her Life; She
could not be unprovided for Death; She that lead such a blessed life, must
needs be Blessed in her death. You must therefore know, That she died in
Childbed, and while she brings another Saint to life, within few days after,
she resignes her own.

The Throws of a woman in travail, are dangerous, and threaten death, in the
best condition, and will make those that are most secure, look about them: But
a Religious woman, ever expects Death in it, and is never unprepared for it.
Sure I am, this worthy Gentlewoman, as through the whole Course of her life,
you could never hear any vain, or idle discourse proceed from her blessed
mouth: So now more especially, it was ever filled with heavenly language, and
breathed out nothing but Devotion.

For that purpose, she desired my self, not long before the time of her
travail, to make her partaker of the Pawns and Pledges of her salvation, in the
blessed Sacrament, that whatsoever befell her, in that great conflict, she
might have her Viaticum, her heavenly provision, as the Fathers call it, the
food of her soul, to witness her faith, and her hope, and to give us assurance
of her preparation: And certainly, she that prepared her self for the
Sacrament, so near the time of her danger, did also by the Sacrament, prepare
her self for Death.

And indeed, the Lord had prepared her, for Himself; and though death were able
to divide her from her dearest Husband, and her nearest friends, yet it could
not divide her from her God: Even in the hour, and Pangs of death when strength
and senses seemed to fail, when she knew no body, her heart was fixed upon her
Creator, his name only was in her mouth, and her last words, that were heard
fall from her, sweetly warbled forth this heavenly Note, Lord, where am I? I am
here, Lord. As if she were seeking her Savior, to resign her soul into his
hands, where she might find rest from her Labor.

Thus she lived, and thus she died, carrying with Her those Graces and
goodness, that were the Ornaments of her life; But leaving us, the grief for so
great a loss, and those sad Remains that we are about to carry, and lay up in
her Grave.

Now if my words and testimony may add honor to her Funeral, give me leave to
express the hopes that I have of Her happiness, in an heavenly desire, Cum
mihi supremos Lachesis perneverit annos.
Non aliter cineres mando jaceremeos. Mart. Epig. lib. 1. Ep. 89.



Thus would I live, and when I die, I wish my soul may be a companion with Hers.

And now I would call for your tears, but that I see them trickling down your
cheeks already: Mourning is seasonable, and is an argument of of love, and
affection: Flebat et Jesus Lazarum, Hierom. super obitum Blesi^
says St Jerome: Our Savior wept himself for Lazarus, for he loved him; He
wept at his John 11. 35.
Grave.

But now I remember, Weep not for Her so much, as for your selves, and your
friends.

Weep ye women, for ye have lost the Glory of your sex.

Weep ye Husbands, for ye have lost the Pattern for your Wives.

Weep ye of the Kindred, for ye have lost the honor of your Blood.

Weep ye that were her Friends, and Acquaintance, ye have lost a Companion, and
a Comforter.

Weep ye that were poor, and in want, ye have lost a nurse and a Reliever.

And if I had any tears left, not yet powered out from those eyes that were
witnesses of her worth, I would even now empty them into her Grave, and bemoan
my own loss also.

Death comes too near us, when it comes to take away a Portion of our selves,
of our eyes, of our hearts: The desire of both. It is coming to us too: it, let
us prepare for, and let it come when it will.

But now to wipe away those tears, which fall from your eyes, This heavenly
soul, whose dead body, we are about to carry to her resting Place, to lay her
by her Mothers side (that noble and worthy Lady, sometimes the Honor of this
Place) Though her body, be to be buried there, and Covered with earth, yet she
is not lost: Her name lives for ever; There is amends made, for all the
spoils, that death can make. And I may truly say of Her, as that great
Historian did sometime of the Noble Roman Agricola. Tacit in vita Agricola.
Quicquid ex Agricola amavimus, quicquid mirati sumus, manet; mansurumque est
in animis hominum, in aeternitate Temporum, fama rerum. What ever we did love
in her deceased, That which we admired, and honored* in Her remains; and so
will remain in the minds of men in continual succession of times, in fame and
renown.

As she was like Rachel, in her Death, and Genesis 35. 18.
while she gave life to another, in a few days after she lost her own; so
shall she have Rachels Pillar: The Monument of her virtues, more lasting then
Rachel's, The goodness and graces of her mind, that never die, that are never
subject to rottenness or Corruption, to mouldring or consuming.

I will go a little farther, and join altogether. Those three Relations, or
obligations, That made her the delight of her Husbands eyes. First, Her
original frame: That shall be restored; This corruptible must put on
incorruption; and this mortal must put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53.
Secondly, Her marriage 1 Cor. 15. 53.
Covenant, That shall be renewed; The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his
wife hathmade her self ready, Rev. 19. 7. The soul is the Lambs Rev. 19. 7
wife. Christ and his Church are married together, Ephesians. 5. 32. Thirdly, Her
gracious disposition, Ephesians. 5. 32.
that never dies: Virtus clara aeternaque habetur; Riches and Beauty fade and
perish, Virtue is eternal, says the wise Heathen man; Their Salust. Consur.
Cat.
works follow them, Says the Spirit of God, Rev. 14. 13. The graces and
goodness of Her mind Rev. 14. 13.
continue for ever; And as the Apostle speaks of Abel, so may I of her; By
them, she being dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11. 4. Heb. 11. 4.


For conclusion of all; That which remains for us to do, is, to Remember Her
Graces, To imitate Her goodness; when we are taken from the earth, they will
accompany us to heaven; when our Savior sees us clothed with the robe of his
righteousness. He will welcome his own Graces into his Fathers Glory, with a
Venite Beati, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Matthew. 25. 34.
Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world; She is gone before;
Now that we may follow after, and find the same entrance, let us first pray,
that we may follow Her Practice, And at last, find Her Reward.

FINIS.
The Elegy Englished.
As Jacob's Rachel, Cole's ELIZABETH,
Diswombing their Benoni's, each found death.
Jacob on's Rachel did a Pillar rear,
So Cole on his ELIZABETH, -- It Is there.
O My ELIZABETH, my dearest she!
My eyes Delight, and all that Good might be!
How heavy Lord, has thy afflicting Hand
On me been laid! vid. p. 26
She answering thy Command.
She whom All loved, that did Her once but know.
What Piety, what Charity did flow
From Her Religious soul? Her spotless Life,
Her love so truly Conjugall! A Wife,
Whose Train of Graces! Whose beauteous shape
Did Her, both Lovely, and Beloved, make!
Her Mind and Body highly did contest,
To render Her to all, most Sweet, most Blessed.
She, She is gone. Who Her does not bemoan,
For Virtue lost, or sweetness will not groan.
The mournful Husband sighs, Farewell, my Sweet,
Till at the Resurrection we shall meet.

