ENGLAND IN ITS CONDITION, BRIEFLY And most lively Characterized, by way of
Essay.

Whereunto are annexed some Acrosticke Verses, Upon the Names of several
Members of the Honorable House of Commons, and others, (viz.)

Sir Tho. Fairfax. Lieut. General Cromwell. Major General Skippon. William
Lenthall, Esquire. Sir Benjamin Ruddiard. Sir John Francklyn. Sir Thomas
Dacres. Sir John Trever. Sir Robert Pie. Sir Roger North. Sir Francis Pile.
Coll. Henry Martin. Capt. Thomas Wogan Sir Walter Earl. Tho. Earl, Esquire.
Coll. Will. Purefoy. Michael Oldsworth. Tanfield Vachell. Sir John Gell. Sir
George Gresley. Sir John Davers. Mr. Ephraim. George Manley, Esquire. Capt. Richard
Owen. John Wastell, Esquire.
By JOHN BENSON, Gent.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.

Printed in the Year 1648.

To the courteous Reader.
Look not for smooth lines from a Soldiers quill,
Who in the art of Retorique has small skill:
In stead of pure phrase, he did use to hear
The Drums and Trumpets sounding in his ear.
Accept this little Poem as it is;
Your smiles can only Crown its Fate with bliss.
Devoted truly to serve you, I. B.

The Authors Prayer for the Parliament.
PReserve good Lord this happy Parliament,
Destroy all those which any ways invent
Mischief against them; Oh let them flourish,
And with thy paps of justice do them nourish.
Let no dissensions spring in that just Court,
Where so wise, gallant, godly men resort.
Oh grant them wisdom, that they may foresee
Those which delight so in our misery.
Bless their endeavors, let them never cease,
Till they have made an everlasting peace
For King and Kingdom, Church and public State,
Against all those which Reformation hate,
That Gods true sacred word may be shown forth,
And we of his pure truth may know the worth;
And let them perish that shall go about
To raise new war, grant you may find them out;
Let all their plots and mischiefs be prevented,
Let all their evil ways be circumvented.
So pray shall he whilst breath is in his breast,
Your true devoted servant e're shall rest.
An Essay, or short Poem upon the Times.
The Author briefly here does show,
From whence our miseries do flow.
WHen great Jehovah with outstretched hand
Did power his mercies on this sinful land;
When Peace and plenty increast more and more,
And heavenly blessings did fill full our store;
Instead of rendering thanks for our great good,
Our sins abounded more then swiftest flood.
Fulness of bread begot in us great pride,
And from Religions truth we began to slide;
Nothing but envy did our hearts possess,
Our sinful souls in goodness still grew less.
Sects and divisions did amongst us grow,
In works of goodness we grew dull and slow.
In Seats of Justice sat corrupted Judges;
Instead of Peace, amongst us private grudges.
Nothing but cruel men tyrannising,
Instead of Justice, Monopolising.
Our Lordly Prelates, that most wicked stock,
False doctrine preached to their harmles flock;
Instead of Christ's true Gospel, they thrust in
Romes traditions, that same man of Sin.
Nothing but pride possessed their sinful minds,
More cruel then the Tigers in their kinds.
England was blessed with a happy sat,
When Bishops scorned their faith to violate.
The Judges they who should just Fathers be
In doing justice, were filled with bribery,
They viper-like fed on their mothers heart,
Making her dearest children for to smart.
Those upright men were left durst hardly speak,
Their hearts within them ready were to break
To see such sinful ways, and unjust crimes,
As daily acted were in those sad times.
It grieved their godly souls within their breast,
To see ungodly men so full possessed
With wickedness, treading ungodly ways,
And from Gods sacred truth most impure strayes.
The Lord of hosts grown angry with our Sin,
D^d with the sword of Pestilence begin,
To try if that would make us leave our ill,
His hand of mercy being with us still.
When that would do no good on our hard hearts,
He did divide us into several parts;
Thousand of opinions among us rise,
And we the sacred truth gin to despise;
Friend against Friend, brothers each other hate
And nothing but combustions in our State.
Our souls are troubled, being fully bent,
Seeking each other for to discontent;
Malicious thoughts possess our evil hearts,
And gladly we do laugh, when others smarts,
Nor can our malice any ways appease,
Until the cure proves worse then the disease.
The sound of Trumpets, and the beat of Drums,
Our only joy and solace now becomes;
The rattling armor, and the noise of swords,
Does louder sound then do our greatest words.
From words to blows we fall, then to killing,
Not sparing our dear friends blood from spilling.
All Kenton field as I well witness can
Did see the death of many a gallant man,
And from my heart unfeignedly confess
Gods mercies there to me; nor can I less,
Then with a grateful heart hmmbly protest
The Lord of hosts me wonderfully blessed.
Besides in many other dismal fights,
That I have fought in for my countries rights,
Against all those whose evil hearts did hate
The good and welfare of this public state,
Which heaven preserve from all that seek its ill,
And with his hand of mercy keep it still.
Amongst us now are those who do foment,
Loving to swim in streams of discontent:
Because they cannot gain their ill designs,
They are disturbers in these worst of times.
They neither care for God, nor his just ways,
If they in Luxury may spend their days,
Or wanton out their time in drinking down
Full bowls of wine; and when the signs in the crown,
They rail and fume against both Church and State,
And all the godly cruelly do hate,
Or what is averse to their most unjust wills,
Instead of mending runs to worser ills.
There is another sort which likewise does
Invent new Tenets from the brainy froth
Of their inventions, and bring forth
A new Religion, but of slender worth,
Thinking no truth was found in former times
But what they now produce, these are great crimes;
They likewise in their mad prophetic fate,
Are great disturbers of a quiet State.
God is the God of order, and he will
Preserve true order, in spite of their ill;
Heavens fabric does in a just order run,
The glorious stars, and transplendent Sun,
The Moon and wandering stars that are above,
By their Creators order gently move:
If order be not both in Church and State,
It lively pourtrayes forth an evil fate.
Another sort there is, that for no cause
Would gladly alter all Religions Laws.
Nothing but what is new they cry is good,
And such as these are, are to be withstood.
Another sort there is, within this nation,
Which fiercely bawles against Reformation,
Because it does restrain their perverse will,
And in a godly way outvies their skill:
They take it to be a most grievous rod,
So strictly to observe the Law of God,
Because it crosses their Libertine will,
They with the Egyptians would live still;
Romes relics do them so deeply possess,
That truth of Gospel they cannot digest.
Another sort amongst us now does dwell,
Who nothing preach but Christ, and can you tell
The truth of Gospel, how to lead your life,
Yet in their hearts is nothing else but strife:
Follow their doctrine, let their works alone,
For they will bring you to destruction:
These are the wolves, which in Lambs clothing come,
(Whose doctrine's purely good) their vices shun,
And such as these, though they seem men of worth,
Must out of Church and state be spued forth.
The Canaanites amongst us yet do dwell,
As bad as Locusts sprung from deepest hell.
Most cruel swearers, such as do profane,
And take the glorious name of God in vain.
To you that sit at helm it does belong
To punish such who do Gods name thus wrong,
And have a care you do it out of hand,
Lest God do cast you out of Canaans land:
And pride in clothes is grown to great excess
In them who chiefly should it most suppress.
The poor and needy not regarded are,
Nor for to ask their own they hardly dare,
You rich men have a care, think on the grief
Of those which are in want, send them relief,
When as your table's full you little know,
That like to want there is no greater woe;
All these are punishments which God has sent
Amongst us, and yet we hardly can repent,
And let me tell you* which you may believe
If we do still Gods sacred spirit grieve,
And do persist in these our sinful ways.
More heavy judgments shall come in our days,
That sword of war, which God has in his hand
Has it not been unsheathed in our land?
How many souls have felt? witness that blood
In several battles flowing like a flood.
If we by these cannot amend our ill,
God in his quiver has more arrows still,
His bow is bent, and if he once more shoot,
Famine shall destroy both the branch and root.
Though God comes slowly with his leaden heel,
His iron hands shall make the stoutest reel.
The Authors most humble Petition to the Honorable House of Commons.
Most worthy Senators,
LEt me beseech you pity my sad fate,
And let your goodness help my poor estate.
I always faithful to the State have stood,
Adventuring many times my dearest blood
In your most just defense, nor did I seek
Mine own advantage, but did fight to keep
Your Noble persons for to sit in Peace,
That truth by your grave wisdoms might increase.
Commiserate my wants, think on my grief,
And let your Honors quickly grant relief,
And I as bound in duty ever shall,
For your prosperity to heavens call.
POEMS UPON THE SEVERAL Members of the honorable House of Commons, and others.
On his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, Capt. General of the Parliaments
Forces.
True nobly valiant, and of courage stout,
Have you not put the Kingdoms foes to rout?
Of you it may be said without control,
Man never enjoyed a more purer soul;
And for your valor, who can parallel,
Sure many may surmise, but few can tell.
Fidelity with true religion placed,
Are of such worth, they cannot be disgraced;
In these it is known your honor has them both,
Religion linckt with virtue is your troth;
For sure I am, that after ages will
Admire your Feats in Military skill,
Xerxes in wisdom had not half your fill.
On Oliver Cromwell, Esquire, Lieutenant General, and a Member of the
honorable House of Commons.
Often has your valor in the field bin shown,
Loud has the Trump of fame your merits blown;
In Winchby field, and upon Marston More
Undauntedly you fought, and killed goodstore:
Eternal blisses shall for you statues raise
Remembrancers to be of your just praise.
Courage and valor have you in every part,
Religions purities placed in your heart;
Only true love unto Gods sacred word
Made you unsheath your keen well tempred sword:
What have you left undone for Countries right?
Enforced you have their enemies to flight,
Leaving a name shall live so long as light.
On Major General Skippon.
Philip of Macedon was not more stout,
How many Battles have you fiercely fought?
In Cornwall was your valor bravely shown,
Leaving true trophies, to the world well known;
Let Newb'ries witness, besides Kenton field,
In which the stoutest you did make to yield,
Proudly your brandished sword you there did weild.
Stand firm and sure, as you have begun,
Keeping truth fast until your glass be run:
Invalid merits tends upon all those
Prefers true virtue, hates the public foes:
Often have you ventured life for Countries cause,
Nor have you swerved from justness of the laws.
On William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
Wisdom with virtue joined dwells in your breast,
Inflamed with zeal to seek your Countries rest:
Learned you are in Laws concerns this State,
Lending your aid to punish all that hate
In their most cruel minds the public good,
Attesting against those which have withstood
Maliciously to ruin all our good.
Loud let the trump of fame sound out your praise,
Erecting statues, and true trophies raise
Never to fade, that your deserved worth
To after ages clearly may shine forth;
Have you not spent your time enacting Laws,
All in defense of Parliamentall cause;
Live shall your pious name* while England is*
Leaving a fame shall crown your end with bliss.
On Sir Benjamin Rudyard, Knight, a worthy Member of the honorable House of
Commons.
Blessed are you in your just and pious ways,
Envy it self cannot detract your praise;
Nor can the worst of hate blame your true worth,
Jn spite of ill, your virtues shines more forth:
All godly men are happy in your good,
More vigor has it, then the greatest flood;
In your religious, and pure harmless life,
None can outvie, with all their greatest strife.
Remain a Pillar fixed on Englands Land,
Unblemished shall your name for ever stand:
Deeds of your goodness, and in smoother verse,
You shall have writ upon your sable hearse;
And after ages shall admire your fame
Rightly deserved, and your spotless name
Does speak the goodness of your pious flame.
On Sir John Francklin, Knight; a Member of tbe Honorable House of Commons.
Jnspir'd with virtue, inricht with noble breast
Of learning, wisdom, goodness full possessed:
Have you not spent much time in taking pain,
Not for your own by-ends, but Countries gain.
Faithful and trusty to the State you are;
Religious in performing arts most rare:
All Soldiers prayers is, that you may be
Not happy here, but to Eternity.
Courage (most noble sir) in your brave ways,
Knowing your merits do deserve great praise;
Let envy speak its worst, sure you shall have
Immortal fame to bring you to your grave,
Nor shall the evillest tongue your merits wave.
On Sir Tho. Dacres, Knight, a Member of the honorable House of Commons.
Trusty and faithful are you to the State,
Have you not spent your time to extirpate
Open known vices, and for to expel
Many gross errors which amongst us dwell;
Arming your heart, with power and might,
Sins to demolish that stop Gospells light;
Deserving here on earth a spotless name,
Apious, zealous, and religious fame?
Courage most godly Sir, in your just ways
Reward from heaven shall crown your age with praise:
Each Soldiers prayers sure shall you have,
So long until death calls you to your grave.
On Sir John Trevers, Knight, a Member of the honorable House of Commons.
Jndued with a most pure godly mind,
Often in Gods sacred book you look to find
How you should lead your life in these sad times,
Now when this worlds best things are full of crimes.
True refotmation is your only aim,
Regarding that more then all worldly gain;
Endeavoring in your most pious soul
Virtue to cherish, all evil to control,
Erecting trophies of deserved fame,
Remembrancers to be of your good name.
On Sir Robert Pie, Knight, a Member of the honorable House of Commons.
Right freely have you spent a many days
On business concerns the public raise;
Be sure you faint not in so just renown,
Ere long such actions heavens will crown;
Religious acts the purest treasure is,
To bring your soul unto eternal bliss.
Prosperity is but times fickle wheel
You see, whereon great men do often reele,
Every good act's more durable then steel.
Though you have lost much for the public cause,
By such as neither feared God, nor laws,
Yet have you gained a name shall last for aye,
So long as Moon shines, or Sun lights the day.
On Sir Roger North, Knight, a Member of the honorable, House of Commons.
Rightly upright you have bin in your life,
Of all that knows you, you are free from strife,
Giving rare examples to all those that will
Incline their hearts to good, as you do still,
Refraining ways that may incline to ill.
Nor have you spared to spend your best of pains
On others not seeking your own private gains.
Reward that is just shall keep you from disdains,
Trusty have you continued to the State:
Heaven for that will prosper your estate.
On Sir Francis Pile Knight a Member of the Honorable House of Commons,
Faithful unto your country have you always been
Rebuking those who wallow'd in their sin.
All good men love you, and admire your worth,
Nor can the ablest men your praise set forth,
Contentment to do good, the stream in which you swim
Inspir*d with goodness which your sins control
Shall make you happy when your bell does toll.
Piety adornes your most godly mind,
In your just ways you will true comfort find;
Leave not to prosecute such pious ways,
Eternal bliss shall crown your head with praise.
On my Honored Collonell Henry Martin, a Member Of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Heroic spirit of Heroic blood,
Ever spending your self for countries good,
Never but striving with all force and might.
Religions purity to bring to light.
Your fame for such good deeds will shine more bright
May you live happy in a pious life,
And may your soul be ever free from strife,
Resting assured your good God shall send
Truth to wait on you to your latter end,
In spite of envy, you shall have a story,
Not writ by mortal pen, but crowned with glory.
Ad eundem.
Help noble Colonel, for want I faint,
Incline your ears unto my sad complaint,
Nor let me perish now for want of food.
Retarded pity is but seldom good
Your favors heretofore has that withstood
May you be pleased out of pious love
Arrears so due to us, the House to move,
Remembering them how many poor starved soul
To hunger destined is without control,
Except some moneys speedily we have;
Nor can we live much longer from a grave.
No man so happy does enjoy that fate
But gains from one or other perfect hate.
I dare be bold to write without control,
If such there be, they are not made of mold,
Go on and prosper in your pious ways
Regard not ill men, good men give you praise.
On my honored friend Captain Thomas Wogan a member of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Times never produced a more valiant man,
Heroic acts that own you, witness can,
Often in the field your valor has been shown
Among thickest of your enemies well known,
As witness Edgehill, where with force and might
Stoutly you kept your standard in that fight.
When you left wars, then did your noble fate
Ordain a place for you in public State.
Goodness with virtue in you is combined,
Agallant spirit, and a pious mind,
Nor are you any ways to vice inclined.
On Sir Walter Earl, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
When as in arms this Kingdom first did rise,
Assuredly you highly then did prise
Liberties freedom, and with force withstood
To Oppose the hurters of your countries good,
Even with the hazard of your dearest blood;
Re^dring to the world, that you were truly good.
Expect that when you have spun out your days,
A Trophy shall be reared of your just praise.
Religious zeal flames in your pious breast,
Love to your maker has your heart possessed.
Eternal bliss shall bring your soul to rest.
On Thomas Earl Esquire, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
True happy, son unto a pious father,
How little wealth esteeming, choosing rather
Of all men to be loved, then to gain
Much worldly treasure, counting that but vain
Amongst the godly shall be writ your story,
SStanding forever to your endless glory
Eternal merit shall wait on your soul
And pious statues raise without controull,
Restoring memory to your good name,
Lending more smoother verses, mine is but lame,
Eternal bliss shall crown your worth with fame.
On Collonell William Purefoy, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
When as this Kingdom first asunder rent,
In men whose hearts were filled with discontent,
Little regarding God, or his just Laws
Loving their self ends more then public cause;
In that same hint of time did you begin,
Amongst the first for to extirpate Sin.
Much good hereafter will you find therein.
Perplexed thoughts possessed many hearts,
Until we were divided into parts;
Religion then was made a laughing stock,
Even to the good became a stumbling block.
Faithful to Church and State did you remain,
Often venturing your life for both the same,
You have by that gained a never dying fame.
Purefoy Pure faith.
You have a faithful pillar firmly stood
(In acting, doing, for the countries good)
On which we will a pious altar raise,
To burn the incense of your purer praise.
On Master Michael Oldsworth Esquire, a member of the Honorable House of
Commons.
May you live happy, in a harmless fate,
In hating those that do oppose the State.
Careful and trusty in the public cause,
Have you not striven to maintain our Laws?
Admired virtue springs within your breast,
Eternal bliss shall bring you to your rest.
Let envy speak its worst in spire of fead,
Live shall your famous acts, when you are dead.
Oh you have gained a never dying name.
Loving Religion more then mundane gain,
Drawing your actions in so just a line
Surely few have outvi'd you in your time.
When fatal death shall seize your harmles heart,
Oh we shall weep sad tears for your depart;
Rejoicing yet, that you have left behind
Triumphant trophies of a godly mind,
How many men have sought, but few could find?
On Master Tanfield Vachell Esquire, a member of the Honorable House of
Commons.
True pious wisdom, justly in you shown
Amongst all those whch of your worth have known
Nor can the worst of envy speak you ill,
Faithful unto the State, you have proved still,
Endeavoring with all your force and might,
In acting things that are both just and right,
Laboring with zeal, and striving against those
Durst any ways the Parliament oppose.
Virtues true tincture, does adorn your mind,
And few such good men in our time we find.
Created goodness springs within your breast
Heavens shall receive your blessed soul to rest.
Eternal merit shall your praise set forth,
Leaving true trophies of your noble worth.
On my honored Collonell Sir John Gell Knight.
Inspired with virtue, inricht with noble breast
Of courage, valor, goodness full possessed,
Having drawn your sword, and has used the same,
Not for your own by ends, but countries gain.
Giving a real test that you wood,
Even spend your dearest life for Englands good.
Let envy speak it is worst in spite of fraud,
Live shall your famous acts, when you are dead.
Accept these lines, sprung from that harmless breast
Your true devoted servant ever shall rest,
Were not his Muse with froward fate cast down,
In smoother lines she would chant your renown,
Yet whilst she lives, shall evermore set forth,
Your deserved merits, and heroic worth.
On my Honored Capt. Sir George Gresley, Knight.
Gracious and good, are attributes belongs
Enobled spirits free from harm or wrongs;
Oh these must needs derive a birth from you
Rightly, for they are your just proper due.
Go on most worthy Sir, in your brave ways,
Eternal praise shall crown your age with baies.
Giving more verdure then the Spring gives flowers,
Refreshing memory, and when sad hours
Enlarge themselves upon your sable hearse,
Sending forth sighs instead of smoother verse,
Live shall your pious acts while time remains,
Eternal bliss shall be your final gains.
Your name lives spotless from all blots or stains.
On the truly noble, Sir John Davers Knight, a Member of the Honorable House
of Commons.
Inspired with valor, enricht with virtues breast,
Of learning, courage, goodness full possessed.
Have you not spent your self in taking pain?
Not for your own by ends, but Countries fame.
Doing and acting all for public good
And firmly to the state y' ave always stood,
Virtues tresnoble orb springs in your brain,
Engraving trophies to your worthy fame,
Rendering you happy, and in stead of bays,
Surely you will gain immortal wreaths of praise.
Your pious valor an unfeigned worth.
An abler pen then mine cannot set forth.
On my much honored friend Master Ephraim Thorn Merchant.
Eternal merit waits upon all those,
Preferres true virtues lore before vain Oaths.
Have you not in your pious lives set forth,
Religion in its true esteem and worth.
Amongst many men of you it may be writ
In golden letters fallen from purest wit,
More just desert by man was never gained yet.
Trusty and faithful are you to your friend,
Heavens for that will crown you in the end
Oh that my muse were able to set forth,
Rightly your noble acts, and real worth,
Nor need you care for best of Poets praise,
Eternal bliss shall crown your head with bays.
On George Manley, Esquire.
Greatness with goodness properly belongs
Enobled spirits free from harm or wrongs.
Often for your doing good you have gained loss,
Regarding justice more then earthly dross.
Giving a real test that you wood,
Even spend your dearest life for countries good.
May you much prosper in your pious ways,
Amongst good men you shall receive much praise
Nor need you care for idle envious* elves,
Let them have rope, they will quickly hang themselves.
Enlivening verse shall for you statues raise;
You shall enjoy a never dying praise.
On my much honored friend, Captain Richard Owen.
Restored you have that most renowned name,
In Wales, of so brave, and so auntique fame.
Created manhood dwells in your noble breast.
Have you not done much for your countries rest?
Actions most gallant has by you been known,
Redoubled courage from your arm has flown,
Did but your valor need for to be shown.
Often has your worth been tried in many a field.
Where you have made the stoutest for to yield.
Eternal merit shall your statues raise.
Nor after death shall end your deserved praise.
Your wisdom valor, and heroic worth,
An abler pen, then mine cannot set forth.
On my honored kinsman, John VVastell esquire a Member of the Honorable House
of Commons.
Justice with wisdom joined, springs in your mind,
Of a pure judgment, and a wit refined.
Have you not pleaded often? the poor man's cause,
Nor left you them toth' rigor of the Laws,
When wars, and jarres did first amongst us rise,
All such fomentors you did them despise.
Stoutly you stood up for the public good,
To punish such as liberty withstood.
Eternal bliss from heavens shall you crown
Leaving true emblemes of your just renown.
FINIS.

