A true Copy of THE LORD ANDEVERS Two Speeches To the LORDS in Parliament;

The one concerning The STAR CHAMBER; The other concerning The PACIFICATION:
Both which were formerly corrupted and abused by a false Copy printed.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable, 1641.

A true Copy of THE LORD ANDEVERS SPEECH To the LORDS in Parliament, CONCERNING
The STAR CHAMBER.
My Lords,
SInce your Lordships have already looked so far into the Privileges of
Peers, as to make a strict inquisition upon sorreigne Honors; let us not
destroy that among our selves, which we desire to preserve from strangers.

And if this greivance, I shall move against, have slept till now, it is very
considerable, least custom make it every day more permanent than other.

Your Lordships well know, there was a Statute framed, tertio H. 7. authorizing
the Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, and the two Chief Justices, calling
to them one Bishop, and a Temporal Lord of the Kings Council, to receive
complaints upon Bill, or Information; and cite such parties to appear, as
stand accused of any Misdemeanour: And this was the Infancy of the
Star Chamber. But afterward Cardinal Woolsey, octavo H. 8. raised it to man's
estate; from whence being altogether unli^ited, it is grown a Monster, and
will hourly produce worse effects, unless it be reduced by that hand, laid
the fountain.

For the Statute is ratified by Parliament, which admits of no other remedy,
than a Repeal. Therefore I humbly offer unto your Lordships some reasons, why
it should be repealed.

First, that the very words of the Statute clearly show, it is a needless
Institution; for it says, they who are to judge can proceed with no Delinquent
otherwise, than if he were convict of the same crime by due process of Law:
And do your Lordships hold this a rational Court, that sends us to the Law,
and calls us back from it again? Next, diverse Judicatories confound one another;
and in pessima Republica plurimae Leges.

The third reason is, from Circumstance, or rather a Consuetudine: and of this
there are many examples, both domestic and foreign; but more particularly
the Parliaments of France, abreviated into a standing Committee by Philip the
Long, and continued according to his intention, till Lewis the eleventh came to
the Crown; who being a subtle Prince, buried the Volume in the Epitomy: for to
this day, when ever the three Estates are called, either at the death of the
old King, or to crown the new, it is a common Proverb, Allons voyre le ieu des
estats.

My Lords, arbitrary Judgments destroy the Common Laws, and in them the two
great Charters of the Kingdom, which being once lost, we have nothing lest but
the bare Name of Liberty.

Then the last reason is, though it were the first cause of my standing up, the
great Eclipse this Court has ever been unto the whole Nobility; for who are
so frequently vexed there, as Peers and Noblemen? And notwithstanding that
their Appeal is ever good to this Assembly, whilst that famous Law remains in
force, Quarto Ed. 3. to hold a Parliament once by year, or more, if occasion
be; yet who durst a year ago mention such a Statute, without incurring the
danger of Mr. Kilverts prosecution.

Therefore I shall humbly move your Lordships, a select Committee of a few may
be named to consider upon the Act of Parliament it self: and if they shall
think it of as great prejudice, that then the House of Commons in the most
usual manner be acquainted with it, either by Bill, or Conference, who
happily may think it a burden to the Subject; and so when the whole body of
Parliament joins in one supplication, I am confident his Majesty will desire
nothing should remain in force, which his people do not willingly obey.

A true Copy of THE LORD ANDEVERS SPEECH To the LORDS in Parliament, CONCERNING
The PACIFICATION.
My Lords,
I Did lately move your Lordships, that the breach of the pacification might be
speedily reviewed, as the unum necessarium; and truly my opinion is yet nothing
altered, although upon second thoughts (me thinks) it would first be known who
did actually engage us in these fruitless dissensions, and so derive the
mischief from some original.

For, my Lords, the Kingdom cannot now long stand at gaze, or undergo new
burdens. Therefore what is to be done (if you intend it should prosper) must
presently receive life from the whole people, otherwise we shall expire in a
dream; and when the success differs from expectation, it is not enough to cry,
quod non putaram.

My Lords, the wiseman says, there is a proper season for all things under
the Sun, and we often find the experiment in natural bodies, which are
voluntarily weakened, to recover strength; yet with a restriction to such
bounds, and limits, as the Physician prescribes himself: And truly, I think it
is your Lorships case at this time, either to consider what should further be
done, than is already, or else how to get out of these labyrinths we now are
in; lest the words of the Psalmist come home to our selves, Vendidisti populum
sine pretio.

My Lords, I am confident the house of Commons does thoroughly see both into the
prejudice, and vast expense that these two Armies lay upon the land; and
undoubtedly so many Gentlemen of worth, as sit there, will have tender eyes
upon the Commonweal. It will therefore become your Lordships to second them
in your way, and whilst they apply to public wounds, the care of this House
may search the intestines; for if those be not cleansed, it will be but a
superficial Cure, and break out again.

My Lords, it seems the Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
have gone high ways of iniquity, and every one knows how to trace them; but
Mines under ground are most considerable, which (unless they be likewise
found out) may at any time spring and supplant the whole fabric of all our
labors. Let us then thoroughly examine this fantastic war, lest as the Duke
of Burgundy made a few sheepskins the cause of his quarrel, so we shall
find those few sheets of paper, sent under the name of a Liturgy, and book of
Canons, were but the Mopsa's of the story, to divert our eyes from the maine
design.

So that my humble motion shall be for a selected Committee of no great
number, who may have power from the House to begin aborigine mali, and revise
every man's negotiations, who was either an Actoror Counselor, since the first
appearance of these troubles in Scotland; and that they may be examined upon
such Articles, as the heavy pressure of this Kingdom shall justly administer
unto them.

FINIS.

