TO CERTAIN NOBLE AND HONORABLE Persons of the Honorable House of Commons
assembled in Parliament.
RIght Honble: and noble by your birth and breeding; your profession of piety
and religion; Your employment and interest, furnishing you with occasion and
power of exercising those Offices, which your qualities oblieg you to.
My hard fortune enforces me to solicit such friends, and necessitates me
thus to seek unto you, that you would be pleased to take notice that I have
suffered about 18 months imprisonment, with what impairing of my subsistence,
I forbear.

As for my Condition,

It is such as will soon and certainly destroy me, if divine providence
prevent not. But if I be destinate to ruin, I wish I might perish by some
other way, rather then you should be accessory.

As for my desires,

My petition relates, and my request (Right worthy) to You, is only that you
would present this Postscript-Petition to the House, and but so far to favor
it; as you feel your selves in honor and humanity concerned. And if any man
can object, and convince me of disaffection to your general good and
proceedings; or that I have in the least receded from what I believe honorable
and conducible, that I may suffer for it: If not, that my sufferings may have
expiated for my diversity of Judgment in case of Conscience.

Thus being reduced to this; either to Rott in a Goal, or thus to importune my
liberty; having no other way left me; this necessity (I hope) will justify
and excuse the course I have now taken.

So being yours both by obligation and purchase, I hope your goodness will
make me mine own; and remain,

Your more and more servant, Paul Best,

To the Honorable, the Commons assembled in Parliament. The Petition of Paul
Best, prisoner in the Gate House in Westminster.
Humbly shows.
THat your Petitioner has suffered a long and close imprisonment, the cause
being sufficiently kowne to your honors.

Wherefore he makes it his humble suit to this Honorable House: that in
consideration of his service, and sufferings you would be pleased to release
him, or grant him a speedy hearing as your Honors shall in charity think
fitting.

Aug: 13 1646 And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.


