AN EPISTLE DIRECTED TO ALL Justices of Peace IN ENGLAND AND WALES.

printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed for M. S. 1642.

TO THE VVATCHFVLL Eyes in this our state, the worthy Justices, Imprisoners of
Malefactors, and Preservers of peace; that peace is wished which passes all
understanding, with the zeal of God, in due execution of Justice against the
enemies of Christ, and our Country.
WHat furtherance your places of Justice be to Judges, sitting in the seat of
judgment, is better known unto your wisdom, and learned selves, then I can
any way immagine or think. Yet I, by my light observation, perceive thus much,
what without your vigelancy and faithfulness; the Judges cannot do, what
either their places require, or themselves desire to do, for the good of our
country. As therefore I have been bold, in the zeal of God, and cause of
Religion, humbly to petition them: so in like manner, I beseech you, in your
places, to do this good for Gods Church, to search out these walking spirits
of Antichrist; I mean the Priests and Jesuits, that they may be conjured
down by the power of the law and sword, which do so audaciously rise up, with
contempt of the word and spiritual power of Christ. Likewise that the statutes
be executed upon open Recusants, who too boldly dare to profess themselves of
the Popish Church. And withal, that a circumspect eye be had of our
Church-Papists: such, as for all their open coming to our assemblies, do
sufficiently in many particulars, declare themselves to be in their coming to
Church, the very mere servants of Men; their course at home, and abroad, being
duly examined. And that you may see, what may truly, and without breach of
charity, be thought of these, I will be bold with a godly learned friend of
mine, Mr. R.B.
to set down unto you, what he concerning these Church-Papist, openly
delivered, as a preface before his Sermon once, at Paul's Cross, word for word,
as near as may be. His affirmation was this:

Conformity to the Oath of alleagiance, and other outward formal satisfactions
of the State, concurring wtth a resolution to continue in Popery, is far
more pernicious to the State, then open and professed Recusancie.

I say it again (says he), A fellow which has taken the oath of allegiance;
first, either by power of some Popish dispensation, which great men especially
may easily procure, because by their wit, or worth, or high room, they may be
more notoriously serviceable to the Church of Rome; or secondly, by
proportionable deduction of some warrant to their consciences in that case,
from that breife of Pius Quintus in the Queens time, mentioned before, which
any understanding Papist will easily apprehend: or thirdly, by the cosoning art
of mental reservation, of which (perhaps) some of their Priests and cunninger
sort, especially of the equivocalting generation, will be ready to make
advantage of; or fourthly, by reason of wideness of conscience, even directly
and grossly against the corrupt notious and instructions thereof; which is much
incident to the more ignorant and inferior rank of Papists, who through
baseness and lowness of state, are exempted from inteligence with the
Consistory of Rome, and acquaintance with the liberty of many popish
resolutions in such cases, and having no grounded and real assurance of
salvation in that profession (which is an inseparable misery to popish
herisie), dare not hazard their temporal happiness, for any hope of future
comfort they are ever like to have, or reap by such a miserable religion: I
say, a fellow having thus taken the oath of allegiance either by popish
dispensation, mental reservation, or directly and grossly against the check
and contradiction of his popi^^ conscience, is by accident, and by consequent,
far more Pestilentiall to the State then he was before, for such reasons as
these:

By this formal outward false hearted-conformitie.

First, he diverts and declines the watchful eye of state-realosie, from
ordinary excubation and vigilancie over his popish villainies and machinations,
from a more narrow particular insinuation into his underground vaults, and
timely observation of his engrossing too much gun-power; and so works a great
deal of mischief vnobservedly, fearfully undermines, without any countermine
of policy; and concurrers most danderously with the outraged malice of that
man of sin, for the wasting of our Church, and dis-strengthening the State,
without sense or suspicion.

Secondly, he is unworthily armed with the respect and reputation of a good
subject; and so may more boysterously and with greater bravery, wound and
weaken the better side; vex goodness, and good men, more boldly without
controlment, and secretly promote Popery, and hinder proceedings against
Papists, even with authority, and some colorable ostentations of safer
policy, and flourishing pretenses of deeper reaches into the mysteries of State.

Thirdly, he may thereby give deeper wounds into the heart of the truth,
through the sides of those they call Puritans; and over their heads do his
worst to knock out the brains of the blessed Gospel of the son of God. It
is incredible, what a world of wrong and mischiese is wrought upon the truth
which we profess, and true professors thereof, by politic conformable
Papists, upon the woeful advantage of certain Ministers inconformitie. If such
a fellow spy out a consionable painful Minister, and find him obnoxious to
the rigor of the law, but in the least point; and that (perhaps) out of a
peaceful tenderness of conscience, while himself is in heart a rank traitor
to the State. O then he plies the advantage with much malice and bitterness,
by informations, aggrapations, exasperations fawning concurrence with
Ecclesiastical Courts, until he have procured the putting out of that
burning and shining lamp, (for he well knows, when such lights expire, the
noisome snufe of Popery is like enough to infect that darkesome place:) and God
knows, all this is done, not for presurvation of peace, as he publicly
pretends; but for promotion of Popery, which he secretly intends. I woul to
God, the reverend Bishops and Fathers of our Church, would wisely think of
this point, before it be too late, I speak not here any thing to harden the
Separatist, or any truly tumultuous; but to point out a dangerous depth of the
mystery of iniquity, which works pestilently upon such advantages. I rather
pray, that all the blessings of the God of peace, both in this world, and in
the world to come, may be heaped upon his head, whosoever he be, which does
any way (with holiness and good conscience) labor to further the peace of our
too much distracted Sion.

Fourthly, he that conformes, in outward obedience, to the State, by warrant of
Popish dispensation, must labor to recompense the Popes liberality in that
kind, with some more remarkable and notorious service to the Sea of Rome. He
shall find himself, out of a sense of such extraordinary favor from that
unholy Father, bound in conscience, and engaged in congruitie, to be more ready
and resolute upon occasion or advantage, upon any desperate adventure and high
attempt, for the advancement of his triple infernal crown.

Fifthly, he that with wilful enlargement of conscience, and secret sturdie
resolution, takes the oath, will easily and naturally grow revengefully enraged
against the righteous Torturers, and conformers of his corrupt and exorbitant
conscience.

The conscience receiving a sting, transfuseth the smart into the affections,
Which when they feel, they are presently furiously enraged against the
occasioners of that their bitter misery. And therefore I am persuaded, such a
fellow, so taking the Oath, howsoever he may bear himself reservedly, is
afterward transported, with more violent and implacable spite, against the
power of that truth, and patrons of that profession, (a sacred zeal whereof
has justly brought a rack and vexation upon his misguided conscience) then he
was before. And assuredly, if the times should turn, (which God forbid) we
should find the Church-Papist, and the politic conformable
Pseudo-Catholicke, more merciless and blood thirsty against us, then the
Recusant, Though the best of them, no doubt, at that day, would be as a Brier,
and sharper then a thornie hedge; nay even as a woolfe in the evening. For
there is no malice near unto the malice of Popery, save the malice of Hell.

Upon these grounds also, I have thought, that as the state of a Church-Papist,
obstinated in popery, is most damnable in it self, (even the popish Doctors
themselves being witnesses) as I have proved elsewhere: (see my book of legal
repentance, p. 59.) so it is most dangerous to the State.

I speak not this to drive or detain any Papist from the Church, for I
pronounce unto him, out of the word of life and truth, he must fly out of
Babylon, into Sion, if ever he will save his soul: but to let him know, that
coming to our congregation, he ought with humility, reverence, and prayer, to
submit his understanding to illumination with truth, and his heart to
sanctification with grace, both for the procurement and comfort of his own
salvation, and the contentment and safety of the State. Otherwise, as his
dangerousnesse to the State is evident and extraordinary: so his own damnation
sleeps not. For, if popery were truth, as it is not, but the very doctrine of
Devils; yet his State is damnable, because he should so, deny Christ before
men: if it be false, as indeed it is, and most accursed from heaven, then he
justly perishes in his heresy.

But, it may be, some will here reply; what can possibly be more required, and
exacted from these men, then conformity in outward obedience to the State? what
better security, or surer bond, can be thought upon, then an oath, the sacred
and sovereign instrument of all justice and obedience amongst men? what
further invention of State, shall be able to stay the fearful mischiefs,
that hang hourly over our heads, from this malicious and murtherous generation?

I answer, none in the world, while they stay amongst us: not the most
exquisite and quintessenticall policy of all the wisest States, that lie under
the face of the Sun, can afford help in this case. I dolatry is ever
attended with this inseparable curse, that it will plague the kingdom that
nourishes it, and pay it home at length with a witness, except some right
round, and resolute course betaken in the mean time, for the rooting of it
out. And indeed the depthes of the mystery of iniquity are so unfathomable,
that they cannot be sounded by the Plummet of any honest and Christian policy,
without diving into the bottom of Hell.

It is a right just and holy thing, to give them the oath, and to bring them to
the Church. But their violations of oaths, dispensations, equivocations,
mental evasions, corruptions of conscience, and execrable transgressions of
all laws, both of God and man, of nations and nature, are so infinite and
endless; and they so mingle their conclusions of State, with the very
confusions of hell; that it is even in proportion as easy, to chain up those
damned spirits, from tempting men upon earth; as to bridle those blood-thirsty
monsters, from undermining and overturning those States; which profess the
truth of Christ, if power and means were answerable to their malice and
revengefull humors.

K. James
It was a royal providence of our gracious Sovereign, in his first speech in
the Parliament, to admonish the Papists, that they would not so far presume
upon his Lenity, as thereupon to think it lawful for them, daily to increase
their number and strength in this Kingdom: whereby, if not in his time, yet
least in time of his posterity, they might be in hope to erect their religion
again. But it is more then manifest, by daily and woeful experience, that
their maine end, all their plots, practis^s, strange insolences, and the whole
sphere of a world of Papist, that swarm amongst us, hold a strong opposition
and counter-motion to that gracious counsel and first motion of his Majesty.
A blessed and happy thing had it been, had his Princely pleasure been
followed in that point. For assuredly, were we rid of the Papists; and were
Idolatry banished out of the Kingdom, as in conscience, and policy, reason,
and religion, it ought: the King and his posterity, by the mercies of God,
might sit upon the throne of England, as fast as the strong and mighty
mountains upon their sure foundations. Oh, then would the foreign mint and
forge of popish mischief, discontinue and expire. Jesuits, the devils
Iourneymen, would take breath, from hammering any more, their hellish
powder-plots in have. That malicious and murdering generation would grow
dishartened and unspirited, for matter of project, and conspiracy, against
this noble State. The royal person of the King would have none about it, but
Angels, and good subjects. The concurrent fury of the greatest enemies in the
world, durst not entertain a thought of invasion, or stir a finger against
the unconquerable glory of our peace. For certainly, the crown of this
kingdom is incircled and surrounded with such infinite and endless variety of
popish insidiations; and stands far more liable to the furious thirst of
foreign ambitions, upon this ground principally; because they hope, when time
serves, to find amongst us, a side and faction of Papists, to serve their
turn. Cut the thread of this hope; and cut the throat of all plots against the
Kings person; and crush the Popes heart, for any probability, or possibility of
ever re-establishing, and erecting his accursed tyranny, in this Island again.

Now this blessed business of most important and highest consequence, for the
pleasing of God, security of the State, and preservation of his Religion, and
royal seed, that now fits with incomparable glory upon the Throne, would be
happily furthered.

First, if laws worthily provided in such cases, might have their course and
current, without opposition, diversion, partiality, interception by false
friends, or any cunning defraudations and delusions of the holy intentions
thereof.

Secondly, if on our side there were but half the care and conscience, for the
maintenance of Christ's truth, and extirpation of the infectious heresies of the
man of sin, which are incompatible, both with salvation of men's souls, and
the safety of imperial Crowns: as there is curiousness, and cruelty, in
Popish Kingdoms, for the continuance of Antichristianisme; and, by a bloody
inquisition into the very thoughts of men, (the greatest slavery that ever the
sun, or the world tasted) for the banishing and barring out, even of all
possibility, (so far as in them lies) of reformation, plantation of primitive
truth, and profession of grace.

Thirdly, and above all, the plantation and protection of a conscionable
learned ministry, must do the deed, when all is done, and strike the
deadlyest and irrevocable blow into the heart of the Pope, if the never-erring
Spirit of God have told us the truth, 2. These. 2.8. The Lord will consume the
wicked man, with the spirit of his mouth. Policy, State, wisdom,
confederations of Christian States, invention and execution of good laws, the
disarming and disabling of the Popes vassals, and the like are very notable and
needful means, glorious attendants, and assistants unto this holy work. But
the sword of the Spirit, managed by the hand of a powerful ministry, must
strike off Holofernes head; and knock out the brains of the great Goliath of
Rome, which with intolerable insolency does revile the host of the living God,
and trample upon the necks of the Lords anointed. The Champions of Christ, in
the battle of the great day of God Almighty, at Armageddon, may bear
themselves bravely, and triumphantly: but the spirit of the mouth of the Lord
Jesus, shall carry away the chiefest glory of the day, in that conquest and
confusion of Antichrist, and in laying his triple crown in the dust.

But in the mean time (until the Lord put to his helping hand, for setting
those means on foot, with resolution and constancy) it is a matter of
prodigious amasement, to consider, how mightily impunity of popish idolatry
provokes the wrath of God against us, and in what danger we stand; the State,
the Gospel, the royal person of the King, the daily invaluable hope of the
succession of his children, and particular welfare of every loyal subject in
the land. For, if any man be so void of brain, to do himself and the State
that wrong, as to think that there are not still new mischiefs on foot, and
secret workings against us still, by powder-plots, Parisian Massacres, or some
proportionable vilanies: let him think there is no divill in hell, no Pope at
Rome, no malice in the heart of a Jesuit.

Me thinks, it is an astonishment beyond the comprehensions of nature, reason,
religion, policies of State: that such an intolerable generation, so odious
both to heaven and earth, with abominable Idolatry; so visibly infamous, both
to this and the other world, with many capital characters of blood; so
endless and implacable, in their ragefull designments, against the crowned
Majesty of the Kings Throne; so prodigious in their plots, that they have cast
an inexpiable and everlasting aspersion, upon the innocence of Christian
Religion; such furious Assasins and Incendiaries, for murdering or Princes,
butchery of people and e, firing of States; so enraged, even like Wolves in the
evening, to swallow us up quick (if the time did serve;) I say, that such, in
so orthodoxe a Church, and noble a State, should by allowance, toleration,
connivencie, or remissness, and paraliticall distempet of the arm of
Justice, or some thing, be suffered to receive encreasement, and
multiplication, both in number, and insolency, to the great dishonor of God
Almighty, the continual vexation of Gods people and good Subjects, and the
most certain hazard of the whole State, and the peaceful succession of the
Kings posterity. It would never be, but that the Lord in his just indignation,
intends, and prepares us for some dreadful judgment. And I am afraid, Papists
will be the men, to execute Gods heavy wrath upon us: because they are a
principal matter in the mean time, of high offense against his Majesty.

To let pass infinite more of very special, and material ponderations, to
this purpose; consider, I pray you, but this one point, with feeling
apprehendsions, which is able to inflame the heart of an ingenuous Heathen with
extraordinary indignation. I am persuaded, there was not a Papist in this land,
whatsoever may be pretended, or protested to the contrary, but did heartily
rejoice, at the taking away of that thrice, nay thousand times noble and
blessed Prince, P. H.
of sweetest memory, for which the heart of every true Subject, did shead most
worthily, even tears of blood. Now, what a rufull case is this, that such
vipers should bemourished in the bowels and bosom of this Kingdom; the
breath, heart, and life whereof, they hartyly wish, and would rejoice to have
extinguished? To conclude the whole point for the present: it is the general
joint consent, and current conclusion of all the Christian orthodox reformed
Churches upon the face of Europe; and it is worthyly, and unanswerably
demonstrated by our gracious Sovereign, that the Pope is Antichrist; and Rome,
mystical Babylon. K. I.
Some particular men, (out of curiosity and conceit of their own wit,
affectation of singularity, doting addiction to popish writers, want of further
illumination in the point, partial inclinations toward the divinity of Rome,
or the like) may dissent, without prejudice of a truth, so universally resolved
upon, by Divines of best learning, and sincerest judgment. If so; then tell me
the meaning of such places as these, and to whom the spirit of God directs the
edge and execution thereof.

Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and give her double, according to
her works: and in the cup that she has filled you, fill her the double; Rev.
18.6.

And the ten horns, which thou saw upon the beast, are they that shall hate
the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
and burn her with fire, Revel. 17.16. This prediction by the judgment of the
best divines, has the power, and passes into the nature of a precept, and
therefore is charged as a commandment, upon those of whom it is spoken.

These, and the like, do indeed strongly confirm, and make good those three
propositions of that learned man, and excellent light of Heildelberge, in his
book de iure regum, page 6. and sequ. The sum whereof may be contrived into
this conclusion; Princes and Magistrates, with their swords and scepters;
Preachers, by the word and writings; private men, by Prayer, and all lawful
opposition, ought to do their their best and utmost, to bring confusion upon
that man of sin, and his accursed doctrine. And thus to follow the council
of the blessed Spirit, in rooting out the limbs of Antichrist, and
Antichristianisme, is so far from being persecution, that it is a very
glorious service unto the Majesty of the God of heaven. The neglect whereof,
and impunity of Idolatry is able in short time, to shake the pillars, and
distrengthen the sinews, to decrowne the head, and shorten the reign of the
strongest State, and most potent Prince in the world Delays are dangerous;
Policy to the contrary is pernicious; and counivency, cruelty; in such places
where these sayings have place blessed shall he be, that takes and dasheth her
children against the stones, Psalm. 137.9. All ye that bend the bow, shoot at
her, spare no arrows: for she has sinned against the Lord, Ier. 50.14. In as
much as she glorified her self, and lived in pleasure, so much give you to
her, torment and sorrow, Revel. 18.7.

In the mean time, until the holy Spirits counsel and commandment to this
purpose, be taken to heart, and thoroughly put in execution, I pray the Lord to
stay their rageful malice, and to turn their popish murtherous hearts for
whetting any more swords, to shead the blood of the Lords anointed: or else,
to turn the sharpest swords from the point, with a cutting edge on both sides,
even up to the very hilts, in their own hearts blood. And in despite of hell
and Rome, good Lord, we pray thee, let King Charles flourish still, with a
crown of glory on his head, and a scepter of triumph in his hand, and still
wash his Princely feet in the blood of his enemies.

Thus much I thought good to Epistle at this time, for the discharge of my own
conscience, and the needful refreshing your memories, with the apprehension of
those dreadful dangers, which howerly hang over our heads, by reason of the
impunity of Popish Idolatry, and the endless inevitable malice and
machinations of the Papists. We have had provocations, and warnings enough;
from this place, from the Parliament house: from heaven, by Gods messengers;
from hell by the powder plot, from Ireland by their heathen Tyranny from Rome,
by the roaring of their Bulls; from France, by their massacres, and butchery of
their Kings: by more mediate, and politic; by immediate and miraculous
revelations, discoveries, deliverances: by a black and bloody catalogue of
most hateful and prodigious conspiracies, which run parallel with the
golden fine of Queen Elizabeth's life; by the daily villainous libels of the
swaggering runagates of our country; base and illiterate pamphlets, stuffed with
ribaldrie, and railings, and personal slanders, impudencies, out-facings,
utterly without any passage or impressions of grace, or gracious spirit. A
thousand times, a thousand ways; And yet what good have they done, since
nothing will serve the turn? Gods will must be done. For mine own part, I
have delivered mine own soul. If any will not take warning, whom it
concerns, his blood be upon his own head.

But blessed is he, who forc-sees the storm, and hide him self in the mean
time, under the wings of Christ, and shelter of a good conscience. With which
Conclusion as he ended, I also conclude, commending this pithie speech of my
so learned afreind, to your wisdom and godly consideration, your selves to
Gods holy protection, and all your just proceedings to his gracious blessing,
that you may confidently look for a reward of your well doing in the end of
your days.

FJNIS.

