GOD FIGHTING FOR US IN IRELAND, OR A MOST TRVE AND exact Relation of the
accurrances done by the English this Month last past to this present.

With the manner and number of our Forces which marched out upon this
expedition.

Also the names of the Castles they took, the manner of besieging, and of the
Releasing the English in their deepest destresse, and what number of the Irish
was put to the sword.

Wherein it apperes that God never forsakes those that puts their trust in him.

Written by W.B. of Dublin, whose Letters have hitherto expressed nothing but
truth.

Printed for W.B. and are to be sold by Thomas B^ in the Old-B^ily. 1642.

DUBLIN JUNE, 16th. 1642.
ON Saturday last, some of our Army consisting of 15. Cullers, marched from
hence toward Trym, the next monday marched after them 34. Cullivers and 5
troops of Horse, besides 200. Firelocks and field pieces 8. and it is thought
their meeting place is to be at Tryme: and diverse others of Foot and Horse
from Droheda and other places where our Garrisons are to come to them, which
we hope by the blessing of the Lord of Host will do good service before they
return; the summer being so far spent, it is full time to begin to redeem
the time which hither to have done very little to so great a work, I hope the
prayers of all Gods people will interseede for them and the rest of all our
Armies, that God may be honored in the good work begun, to the increase of
his Gospel and the true peace and common wealth, all which are now very low
brought and hardly a shadow of either.

This day we hear three things which has happened from and by our Garrison at
the Navs (for where we have forward Commanders God in his mercy has ever
been with them) Captain Michael Jones a very worthy Gentleman a valiant
descreet and religious man, marched to a Town of the Kight Honorable Adam Lord
Viscount of Ely called Master E^^^, which has been long beseidged by the
Rebels, a strong hold and well furnished with Aims, but wanted powder and
shot, yet have held out against those Traitors great forces which were much
pitied of us all, but no succor was sent to them, and the Rebel had so
wrought their trialls, that it was almost past help, but this worthy Captain
with a handful of men in comparison of the Rebels, set upon them, beseigers,
beats them out of their trenches and works which they had made to surprice
the Castle, slew many of them, and put the rest to flight, and burnt the Town
close by the Castle, which harbored the Rebels furnished our friends with men
powder and short and what they wanted, with great plenty and have left them so
strong, that they are by Gods assistance able to bid defiance to their and our
Enemies, this place was in such extremity, that had our men stayed but two
hours longer before they came, the Castle men and Arms in it had been all
lost, and they Rebels had got so strong a hold, that we could hardly have
recovered it without the loss of much blood and great expenses, but blessed
be God for his wonderful deliverance which was done by his great power.

The second is by the same worthy Captain at a place about two miles from the
Naas called Black Hall, which has been wonderfully offencive to us, to whom
our valliant Captain marched with a few men, set upon it, the Rebels strongly
withstood our men, but nothing daunted by them after many assaults approached
near their hold which the Rebels though too strong for us to get, in which
assaults our courageous Captain was in great danger of his life, who espied
one of the Rebels through a speech hole aiming at himself, which by the good
providence of the Almighty he espying, ran with a brave resolution to the
hole, and with his Pistol short the Rebel and killed him before he could
discharge at our Captain, and in the the conclusion took the Castle and put
them the Rebels to the sword, by which good success we and all Gods good
people ought with thankful hearts bless and praise his holy name.

The third was at Manouth the manor house of the Earl of Kilders, which in
some sort was not so prosperous although the wonderful providence of our good
God is wonderfully manifested, 33. of our men were set to keep that great
manor house, the Rebels had their randevouse within a mile of it, and yet our
33 men kept it from them till one in the house the earls Butler played the
Traiterous Rebel and betrayed them, the house is great and full of windows
which were barrocadoed up with Iron Bars and stones, our men were diligent
upon their watch where the danger was, but this traitorous villain appointing
the Rebels where to come at a window least suspected, the Rebels on the out
side and the villain within opened one window, by which 60. of the Rebels
entered the House before our men espied them; but when our men found out their
treachery, with undanted spirits set upon them in that room the Rebels were
in and put them all to the sword, but the Enemy being in number seven hundred,
and the rest so near them, were not able to hold out, for the Rebels cast
balls of wildfire into the House, which burnt so furiously they were not able
to quench it, so that our men gathered themselves into a body, taking with them
in their Pockets and stockings as much powed as they could well carry fired the
rest and marched through the Rebels discharging at the Rebels on front and
(...) and on both flanckes with so slow a march, as a sick man was able to go
with our men secure from their fury with the venture of their own lives; ni
which great extremity we left only three men which were sick in their beds
and could not stir they were so weak: thirty came all safe with their Arms
and as much powder as they could carry with them, but they left the house
burning. This relation I heard from one of the thirty soldiers, all which
thirty are surely come to this Town blessed be God for his wonderful
goodness toward us, but the fair house is destroyed with all the furniture,
besides a fair Liberary of good booles, which the Earl of Kildare had in it;
and this is all of certainty that we have.

Dublin this seventeeth of June, 1642.
June the Eighteenth, 1642.
THis day we heard from our A^^^y, Sir Richard Greenefield who is Commander of
out Garrison at Tryme, went to a Castle about 2 miles from Try^^, wherein were
many Rebel, men, women, and ^hi^dr^^, which for Sir Richard and his (...) of
the Castle is one L^n^h, and the Castle is called Lim^ of the knock, against
which (...) this besieging that part of our Army which wen^ from hence this
day (...) ^ched near the^ and joined with our man to take the Castle, which
stood so long that (...) men, and ten hurt, of which ten Leiftenant Colonel
Kerke was one, which when the Rebels saw that our men were resolute, and that
our men would not depart till they had the Castle, the Rebels themselves set
fire on the Castle, but that would not prevail for their escape although some
of the Rebels were burnt in that fire they themselves kindled, our men would
not suffer them to escape so, but put to sword 60. of them, took 4 prisoners,
but suffered the women and children to pass with their lives: upon this
victory our men marched to a Castle beyond Tryme about the same or less
distant from Tryme of the Lord of Trymelstone, but the Rebels in that Castle
understanding that our men had given an overthrow to Linch is Knock, left the
Castle and fled but their goods with the^, five or six cart loades, which
took when our men understood made after them, recovered the goods but the
Rebels fled into woods and bogger and so escaped themselves, but lost their
goods, which our men enjoyed for pillage. In another Castle not far from this
of Tryme the Rebels hearing of the success our men had against those two
Castle, left their strong holds and fled also before our Army came at them.

This day was two Rebels drawn hanged and quartered at the Gallows green,
where many more will follow if they have according to their deserts. This day
Sir Andrew Elmer the Lord of Ormonds brother in law, Sir Nicholas White, Master
Nicholas White his son and heir, and Master Elmer were indigted of high
Treason at the Kings Bench bar, and returned prisoners to the Castle, and
likewise Alderman Jones was indicted of high Treason this week, and committed
to the marshyall of the four Courts where as yet I leave them.

FINIS.

