A LIST OF VVoods, Under woods, Timber, and Trees felled, and sold out of the
King, and Queen, their Majesty's Forests, ^hases, Parks, Manors, and Lands:

Within the Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, Berks, and Middlesex,
for the use and service of the Parliament, by Order of the Committee of the
Revenue, in four years space last past.

Attested under the hands of Mr. John Bently, Surveyor of his Majesty's Lands.

Printed in the Year. 1648.

The Account of John Bentley Surveyor and Woodward of all the Kings and Queens
Majesty's Forests, Chases, Parkes, Manors and Lands, within the Counties of
Kent, Sussex, Surry, Hampshire, Berks, and Middlesex, and by authority from the
right Honorable the Committee of Lords and Commons for His Majesty's Revenue
sitting at Westminster, of all Woods, Timber and Trees, felled and sold, within
the limits aforesaid, by Order or warrant from the said Honorable Committee,
either severally by himself or jointly with any other between Midsummer 1644.
and Midsumer 1648.
SIr Tho. Wilsingham never felled or caused to be felled any timber in the
manner of Eltham, or in any of the parkes there, but what has been felled,
has been felled by me according to Order of the Committee of the Manor.

Imprimis by Order from the said honorable Committee bearing date 8 of Novem.
1644 made unto Sir Tho. Walsingham Knight and the said accountant, was sold
unto Tho. Foster of Mottingham in the County of Kent, and Thomas Wiley of
Eltham in the said County Yeoman, forty nine Acres of Coppice wood, lying
within the Manor o^ Eltham, viz. One Coppice called by the name of Hasell
wood, and parcel of two other Coppices near thereunto, called by the name of
Shephards Leaye, and Ox Leaye, containing together, the said quantity of 49
Acres statute measure, after the rate and price of 3 li. per Acre, five Acres
of the said forty and nine, being allowed them without price, in lieu and
respect of div^rs wastes and spoils made therein by the poor people in those
parts, and certain Lanes and Cart paths therein, which did amount unto the
sum of 132 li.

Of which sum there was paid unto Tho. Fawconbridge Esquire; receiver General for
His Majesty's revenue at Westminster, on the sixth day of December. 1644 According
to the said Order, the sum of 80 li.

And the remainder thereof was paid unto him on the 14 day of Sept. 1645 being
52 li.

Item by one other Order from the said honorable Committee bearing date 25th
day of Sept, 1645 made unto the said Sir Thomas Walsingham and the said
accountant, was sold unto the said Thomas Foster, and Thomas Wiley, the
remainder of Shephards Leaye, and Ox Leaye, which being since measured, did
amount to 88 Acres, at the rate and price of fifty shillings per Acre, at 18
foot pole, and came at the price aforesaid to the sum of. 220 li.

Whereof paid to the said receiver Gen^r^ll on the 24th of March 1645 the sum
of 6^ li.

And on the 14th Novem. 1645 the sum of, 50 li.

And on or about the 24 day of June ^6^8 the sum of, ^0 ^i.

Disburst by the said accountant for the Coppices before named containing, Rods
as by the workemens bills may appear the sum of 7 li. 2 s. 2 d.

Remaining in the said accountant hands the sum of 2 li. 17 s. 10.

Item, by the like Order from the said honorable Committee bearing date 7 day
of December. 1644. made unto the said Sir Thomas Walsingham, and the said Account
was sold unto one Richard East of Lambeth, one Coppice or Spring of Oak and
Aspe, containing about twenty six Acres, being within Horn Park, alias Lee
Park, in the Manor of Eltham aforesaid, for the sum of 220 li.

Whereof paid unto the Receiver General on the 13. day of March 1644. the
sum of 100 li.

And on the 21 day of Septem. following the sum of 120 li.

Item, by the before mentioned Order of the 25 of September 1645, was sold unto
the aforesaid Richard East, and one David Powell a Fletcher in Grubstreet
London, one other Coppice of Oak and Aspe in Horn Park aforesaid after the
rate and price of ten pound per Acre, which did contain (...) Acres, and does
amount to the sum of 100 li.

And the said David Powel became bound to the said Receiver General, as part
thereof for the payment of 40 li.

Paid unto the Receiver General on the ninth day of Janu. 1645. the sum of
40 li.

Received of them since by the said Accomptant, 60 li.

The charges of fencing of the said Coppice, was by the said Order to be
defraied out of money arising thereby; and there was disbursed as follows:

Unto John Spicer Carpenter for the railing in thereof, containing a 130 Rods,
with gates for the same, at 20 d. per Rod, as by his Acquittance appears, 10
li. 16 s. 8 d.

Unto Thomas Glyn for the carriage of stuff, and for the ditching and hedging
thereof, and for Iron work for the same, the sum of 7 li. 15 s.

More paid unto Thomas Glyn on the 28 of June 1648, for and toward the new
repaying and replenishing of the hedges and ditches of the two Coppices in
Horn Park, formerly fenced, but since broken down by the Dear, and therefore
of necessity to be again repaired the sum of 3 li.

Remaining in the said Accomptant hands the sum of 18 li. 8 s. 4 d

The total of all the wood sales within the Manor aforesaid, and time limited
as aforesaid, do amount unto the sum of 602 li.

Whereof paid in to the receipt as aforesaid, the sum of 602 li.

Due, and owing by David Powell, Fletcher, as aforesaid, the sum of 20 li.

Disbursed for the fencing of the said woods as aforesaid, the sum of 28 li.
13 s. 10 d

Remaining in the said Accomptant hands the sum of 21 li. 6 s. 2 d.

20. day July 1648 John Bently Su^veyer.


