DEVOTIONS Of the ANCIENT CHVRCH In Seven Pious PRAYERS with Seven
ADMINISTRATIONS.

Collected for a private use, and now at the desire of some judicious persons,
made public.

Luke. 5. 39. No man having drunk old wine, straightway desires new: for he
says, the Old is better. LONDON. Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in
Ivy-lane. 1660.

The PREFACE.
THat there may be good use of a set form of Prayer, cannot be gainsaid without
the censure of the Ancient and present reformed Churches, condemning the
judgment and practice of the most eminent Divines, not only the Episcopal but
Mr. Rogers, Mr. Egerton, Mr. Heldersham Dr. Gouge, Dr. Preston, Dr. Sibbs with
others, which also appears by that book conceived to be of Mr Cartwrights
penning) entitled The form of Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, agreeable to Gods word, and the use of the reformed Churches,
wherein is enjoined a constant use of the Lords Prayer, both after the
Ministers prayer before Sermon, ^^d in each other service, Bap^isme, Communion,
etc. and (...) title of Common Prayer (now slighted) is there often ^^^ned.
such as have been and are reputed otherwise. And if so, why not the old,
(being taken out of the most Ancient Liturgies,) unless that must be its
reproach, which with Jeremiah (cap. 6. 6.) is its reputation. The matter is
granted by all to be holy and good, and if a formality be the only bar to its
reassuming, why might not each party for unitysake hearken to some
accommodation? to suppress the whole is to blur the compilers of it, some of
whom suffered Martyrdom by the Sea of Rome: but a review, in the exchange of
some few expressions for the better reception of it in an after age, may be a
friendly office.

Such as observe no form do frequently in sacred administrations fall into
impertinencies, where each Minister takes his own, there cannot but be an
inequality of those performances, in several congregations, and the refusing to
submit to any but our own, argues a too much valuing of our selves, and too
little of that humility and lowliness of mind which best becomes the Ministers
of the Gospel. The framing of a new Liturgy (which some of both parties have
been attempting) will not attain its desired end, by the present much lamented
disaffection between them, that what the one shall commend the other will
dislike: and an equal mixture of a new composure with the old, will be but as
the putting of a new piece to an old Garment, whereby the rent will be the
worse; so that there can be no such probable way of healing up the breach among
us in this particular, as by some prudent consideration of that which was
framed by our forefathers, and with which most of us have been educated, for
which submitting one to another in circumstantials, we have the examples of St.
Paul, and other of the Apostles.

And it is some evidence, such are the stronger in knowledge on either side,
who upon this exigency are the most apt to yield in them, and those the weaker
that stand most upon them, rather hazarding the shipwreck of the whole, then
permit the casting overboard some goods of the least value: zeal is an
excellent virtue, but without a bridle may run the person headlong upon
dangerous inconveniences, as there extremity is to be condemned, who will have
none of the old at all; so is theirs not justifiable, who will have all (i. e.
every particular rite and circumstance) or none, a moderation between both is
the more prudential.

In this book is the matter of the whole, only with some diversity in the form,
method, and dispensing with a few causelessly offensive passages. Many short
prayers found in the same service or administration, (for which St. Augustine
commends the Aethiopick Liturgies) and others prudently appointed for some
special days, and annual commemorations are here (with the several
Exhortatives) in satisfaction of a very weak objection, drawn into one body.
And if the Lords Prayer do appear once in each, I suppose it will be judged
very convenient, by which, with the Creed and Ten Commandments (in the old
form constantly repeated,) the fundamentals of religion were preserved in the
memories of the vulgar, which, by these late years neglect have been almost
worn out of them, and in the younger sort (who have never, or very rarely heard
of them) there is found a grosser ignorance then in the elder.

This caveat is only entered, that if the Reader do sometimes meet with an
exchange or omission of any rite or clause in either, let him not conclude them
to be removed by a writ of error, but be looked upon as innocent honorable
persons, offering themselves to die for the peace of their Country. And as the
aim of all our endeavors ought to be for the restoration of that Primitive
union, when the Church was of one heart and one soul: so it will be the
prudence of us, (notwithstanding our judgments are still firm for the old
form, without the least alteration) to show it in our meekness of compliance
accordingly for that end: It being one of the best evidences of a true son of
the Church of England, to be willing to bear with somewhat cross to his own
opinion, for the peace of his Mother.

In a word, most of these particulars following were drawn up by the Author
long ago for a private use, and though they be now printed, (which was desired
by such whose judgments are sufficiently known to be for the Liturgy of the
Church of England,) yet in regard the principal Administrations are still too
frequently so confined, it is possible they may not transgress that intended
limit of them: and the experimental acceptance which they found then with the
moderate sort of both parties in the hearing, gives the like probability now in
the reading. Howsoever being thus barely presented without any presumptuous
proposal for the public use, as a copy for others to write after, I know no
cause of censure it can incur in the publishing, unless it be for observing
that advice of St. Paul, Let your moderation be known unto all men.

The Contents of the Book.
Diverse brief prayers used by the Church at each, are here drawn into one. 1.
A Prayer for the Morning, page 1. 2. A Prayer for the Evening, page 6.
Consisting of the ancient Collects or prayers appointed for each Sunday in the
year. 3. A prayer for the Morning, page 9. 4. A prayer for the Evening, page 13.
Composed of the like used upon the Festivals of the Apostles and Evangelists.
5. A most profitable prayer, page 19. Meditations upon our Saviors
Incarnation, Birth, circumcision, passion; resurrection; ascension; etc. used
by the Church upon those and the like Festivities. 6. A heavenly prayer, page
23. Full of faith, containing the articles of it, and full of Charity, in
praying for all degrees of men, and all sorts of blessings for them, called
heretofore the Letany, drawn (without the responds) into one continued Prayer.
7. An excellent prayer, page 28. Psalm. 95. O come let us sing, etc. page 34.
We praise thee O God, etc. page 35. Luke 1. 68. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, etc. page 37. Psalm. 100. O be joyful in the Lord, etc. page 38. Luke
1. 46. My soul does Magnify the Lord, etc. page 39. Psalm. 98. O sing unto the
Lord a new song, etc. page 40. Luke 2. 29. Lord now letest thou thy servant
depart, etc. page 41. Psam. 67. God be Merciful unto us and bless us, etc.
page 41. The Creed. I believe in God, etc. page 42. The Nicen Creed. I believe
in one God, etc. page 43. The Creed of Athanasins (commonly so called)
Whosoever will be saved, etc. page 45. The Ten Commandments. 49. Some Choice
sentences out of Scripture used at the beginning of prayer, etc. page 51.
Prayers for rain, fair wether, in time of dearth and famine, in time of war,
in time of any common plague or sickness, and thanksgivings for the return of
each, page 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59. A thanksgiving of Women after
Childbirth, page 59. The Seven administrations. 1. Baptism. page 63. 2.
Communion. page 75. 3. Visitation of the sick. page 91. 4. Catechism, page
117. with confirmation. page 128. 5. A day of fasting or Humiliation, page 131.
6. Matrimony. page 141. 7. An Exhortation at the Burial, page 153.
Some prayers used upon the Fifth of November. page 161. A prayer formerly used
by the Speaker of the house of Commons in Parliament. page 169. A prayer for
the Parliament used in the house, page 174. The substance of the Ancient manner
of Ordination in the Church of England. page 177. The Articles of the Church of
England.
An Advertisement.
PAge 80, 81, 82. some Prayers (at the Communion) in relation to the Nativity,
Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior. Pentecost; Trinity-Sunday, are
intended only for their proper festivals, but may be used at the discretion of
the Minister.

Page 27. line 18. read glory and triumph into thy kingdom of Heaven, p. 29.
l. 21. dele any hurt by; p. 31. l. 13. dele in their lawful affairs, p. 118. l.
4. r. and I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this
state of salvation through Jesus Christ our Savior, p. 123. l. 27. r. be
merciful unto us, and p. 199. dele 100.

DEVOTIONS OF THE ANCIENT CHURCH.
A Prayer for the Morning. I.
ALmighty God, and in thy Son Jesus Christ our most merciful Father, we
acknowledge we have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, we have
followed too much the corrupt desires of our own hearts, and have offended
against thy holy laws, by leaving undone those things which we ought to have
done, and doing those things which we ought not to have done. So that in us
dwells no good thing: We beseech thee to have mercy upon us who are miserable
offenders, to spare us who do confess our faults, and restore us who are
penitent for them, according to thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ
Jesus our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake, that we may
hereafter live a godly, righteous and sober life, to the glory of thy holy
name. And, O Lord, in regard we hear out of thy word, that thou desire not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and
live, and have given power and commandment to thy Ministers to declare and
pronounce to thy people being penitent, the forgiveness and remission of their
sins; And that thou will pardon all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly
believe thy holy Gospel: We beseech thee to grant us true repentance, and thy
holy Spirit, that those things may please thee which we do at this present, and
that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last
we may come to thy eternal joy, where our lips shall be opened, and our mouth
continually show forth thy praise, in giving glory to the Father and to the Son
and to the holy Ghost world without end.

And O Lord our heavenly Father, who art the author of peace, and lover of
concord, in the knowledge of whom stands our eternal life, whose service is
perfect freedom, mercifully hear us now we call upon thee: defend us, thy
humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, but by thy being with us,
and showing thy mercy upon us, and granting us thy salvation, thy chosen people
may be still joyful in thee, peace may be given and continued in our time. O
Lord, and thy inheritance, even thy people may be blessed and saved, and taught
to put their trust in thee, there being no other that fights for us, but only
thou our God; and do thou make clean our hearts within us, that thy holy
Spirit be not taken from us: And seeing, O Lord, thou have safely preserved us
hither to this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that
this day we fall into no sin; neither run into any kind of danger, but that
all our doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do always that which is
righteous in thy sight: And we humbly beseech thee O Father, mercifully to
look upon our infirmities, and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us
all those evils, that we most righteously have deserved, and grant that in all
our troubles, we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and
evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to the honor and glory
of thy name. And O Lord, who art the Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist; to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful unto them that truly repent, we beseech thee to save and
deliver us out of the hands of our enemies, abate their pride, aswage their
malice, and confound their devices, that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all p^rills, to glorify thee who art the only giver
of all victories: And seeing thou have given us grace, at this time with one
accord, to make our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when
two or three be gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests:
fulfill now O Lord the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most
expedient for them, granting us in this world, knowledge of thy truth, and in
the world to come life everlasting Through Jesus Christ our Lord in whose name
and words we further pray, saying,

OUr Father which art in heaven hallowed by thy name: Thy Kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil for thine is the
Kingdom the power and the glory for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening. II.
ALmighty God, from whom all holy desires, all good Counsels, and all just
works do proceed, give unto thy servants that peace, which the world cannot
give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that
by thee, we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in
rest and quietness. And we beseech thee O Lord to lighten our darkness and by thy
great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night following, and
grant that by thy preventing us in all our doings with thy most gracious
favor, and furthering us with thy continual help, we may in all our works
begun, continued, and ended in thee, glorify thy holy name, and finally by thy
mercy attain everlasting life.

And seeing thou have by thy holy Apostle taught us to make prayers and
supplications and give thanks for all men; We humbly beseech thee, most
mercifully to receive these our prayers, which we offer unto thy divine
Majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually the universal Church, with the
Spirit of truth unity and concord; And grant that all they, that do confess
thy holy name, may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in unity and
godly love. We beseech thee for such as are in authority over us, that under
them we may be godly, and quietly governed; And grant to the Magistrates that
they may truly and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of
wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of Gods true religion and virtue;
Give grace (O heavenly Father) to all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of thy
word, that they may both by their life and doctrine, set forth thy true and
lively word, and rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments; and to all
thy people give thy heavenly grace, and specially to us here present, that with
meek heart, and due reverence, we may hear and receive thy holy word, truly
serving thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives: And we
most humbly beseech thee of thy goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succor all
them, which in this transitory life be in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or
any other adversity. And thou, O Lord, who have promised to hear the petitions
of them that ask in thy Sons name, we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine
ear to us, that have made now our prayers and supplications unto thee; and
grant those things which we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may
effectually be obtained, to the relief of our necessities, and to the setting
forth of thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name and words we
further pray,

OUr Father which art in heaven hallowed by thy name: Thy Kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our trespass, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning. III.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, which have caused all holy Scriptures to be
written for our learning, grant that we may in such wise hear, read, mark,
learn, and inwardly digest them, that by patience, and comfort of thy holy
word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life,
which thou have given us in our blessed Savior. And give us grace, that we may
cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, now in the
time of this mortal life when the true light, thy Son Christ Jesus has come
to visit us in great humility, that in the last day, when he shall come in his
glorious Majesty, to judge both the quick and the dead, we may through him rise
to immortal life. And we beseech thee, to lighten our hearts by thy gracious
visitation, to raise up thy power and come among us, and with thy great might
succor us, that whereas through our sins and wickedness, we be sore let and
hindered, thy bountiful grace and mercy (through the satisfaction of thy Son
our Lord:) may speedily deliver us. And mercifully receive the prayers of thy
people, which call upon thee, and grant that they may both perceive and know
what things they ought to do, and also may have grace and power from thee, to
fulfill the same, that so under thy governance (who rulest all things in heaven
and earth,) they may have peace continued to them all days of their lives. And
seeing, O Lord, thou know our infirmities, look favorably upon us, and in
all our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and
defend us. Thou see how we are set in the midst of many and great perils,
that for man's frailnes we cannot always stand uprightly: Grant us the health
both of body and soul, that all those things which we suffer for sin, by thy
help we may overcome. And we beseech thee to keep thy Church and household,
continually in thy true religion, that they which do lean only upon hope of
thy heavenly grace, may evermore be defended by thy mighty power, and though we
be justly punished for our offenses, yet we may mercifully be delivered by thy
goodness to the glory of thy name.

And O Lord which see, that we put not our trust in any thing we do, and that
thou have taught us, that all our doings without charity are nothing worth;
send thy holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift of
charity; the very bond of peace and all virtue, without the which, whosoever
lives, is counted dead before thee: And seeing we hear thou will forgive the
sins of all them that be penitent: Create and make in us new and contrite
hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee the God of all mercy, a present remission and
forgivenes; And may through thy grace, continually use such abstinence, that
our corrupt flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we may ever obey thy godly
motions in righteousness and true holiness, to thy honor and glory. And O Lord,
which do see that we have no power of our selves, to help our selves, keep
thou us this day, both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our souls,
that we may be defended from all adversities, which may happen to the body; and
from all evil thoughts, which may assault and hurt the soul. We beseech the
thus, to look upon the hearty desires of thy humble servants, and stretch
forth the right hand of thy Majesty in the defense of us, against all our
enemies; that we which for our evil deeds are worthily punished, by the
comfort of thy grace, may mercifully be relieved, and by thy great goodness may
be governed and preserved ever more, both in body and Soul, unto thy eternal
kingdom, (through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name and words, we call upon
thee, saying,

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening. IIII.
ALmighty God, and our most merciful Father, who have given thy only Son to be
unto us both a sacrifice for sin, and also an example of godly life, give us
the grace, that we may always most thankfully receive that his inestimable
benefit, and also daily endeavor our selves, to follow the blessed stepps of
his most holy life. And as thou do show unto all men that be in error the
light of thy truth, to the intent that they may return unto the way of
righteousness, grant unto all them that be admitted into the fellowship of
Christ's religion, that they may eschew those things that be contrary to their
profession, and follow all such things as be agreeable to the same.

And, O Lord, which do make the minds of all faithful men to be of one will;
Grant unto thy people, that they may love the thing which thou command, and
desire that which thou do promise, that among the sundry and manifold
dangers of the world, our hearts may surely be there fixed, where true joys
are to be found; And as from thee all things do come, so grant us thy humble
servants, that by thy holy inspiration, we may think the things that be good,
and by thy merciful guiding, who art the strength of all that put their trust
in thee, may perform the same. And because the weakness of our mortal nature,
can do no good thing without thee; grant us the help of thy grace, that in
keeping thy commandments, we may please thee both in will and deed.

Lord, make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name: And in
regard thou never failest to help and govern them, whom thou do bring up,
in thy steadfast love, but art the Protector of all that put their trust in
thee, without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy, increase and multiply
upon us thy mercy; that thou being our ruler and guide, we may so pass through
things temporal, that finally we may not lose the things eternal. And grant
that the course of this world here may be so peaceably ordered by thy
governance, that thy congregation may joyfully serve thee in all godly
quietness. And seeing thou have prepared for them that love thee, such good
things as pass all men's understanding, power into our hearts such love toward
thee, that we loving thee in all things may obtain thy promises, which exceed
all that we can desire.

And O Lord, who art the God of all power and might, the author and giver of
all good things, graft in our hearts the love of thy name; increase in us true
religion, nourish us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the
same, and because thy providence is never deceived, we humbly beseech that
thou will put away from us all hurtful things, and grant those things, which
be profitable for us, and that we may have thy Spirit to think, and do always
such things as be righteous, that we which cannot be without thee, may by thee
be able to live according to thy will. And let thy merciful ears, O Lord, be
open to the prayers of thy humble servants, and that we may obtain our
petitions, move us to ask only such things, which may please thee. And as thou
do declare thy Almighty power most chiefly in showing mercy and pity, so
give unto us abundantly thy grace that we flying to thy promise, may be made
partakers of thy heavenly treasure.

And O merciful God, of whose only gift it comes that thy faithful people do
unto thee true and laudable service: grant we beseech thee, that we may so run
to thy heavenly promises, that we fail not finally to attain them; and give
unto us the increase of faith, hope, and charity; and that we may obtain that
which thou do promise, make us to love that which thou do command; And we
beseech the to keep thy Church with thy perpetual mercy: and because the
frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, keep us ever by thy help, and
lead us to all things profitable to our salvation. And let thy continual pity
cleanse, and defend thy congregation: and because it cannot continue in safety
without thy succor, preserve it evermore by thy help and goodness; Let thy
grace always prevent and follow us, and make us continually to be given to all
good works, and careful to avoid the infections of the Devil, the world and
the flesh, and with pure heart and mind, to follow thee the only God. And for
as much as without thee we are not able to please thee, grant that the working
of thy mercy, may in all things direct and rule our hearts. And let thy
bountiful goodness keep us from all things that may hurt us, that we being
ready both in body and in soul, may with free hearts accomplish those things,
that thou would have done. And we beseech thee to grant unto thy faithful
people pardon and peace; and keep thy household the Church in continual
godliness, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with
a quiet mind and through thy protection they may be free from all adversities,
and devoutly given to serve thee in good works, to the glory of thy name, O
Lord. Be ready to hear our devout prayers, who art our refuge and strength,
that those things we ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually. Absolve thy
people from their offenses, that through thy goodness, we may be delivered from
the bonds of all those sins, which by our frailty we have committed. And
stir up the wills of thy faithful people that they plenteouslly bringing
forth the fruit of good works, may of thee, be plenteously rewarded in thy
eternal glory. And take us we beseech thee, into thy care and protection this
night following, that we may be preserved from all dangers, which we are
subject unto. And in regard we find thou art always more ready to hear, then
we to pray, and art wont to give more, then either we desire, or deserve: Pour
down upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our
conscience is afraid; and giving unto us that which for our own sake our
prayers could not presume to ask, but only for the infinite merits of thy Son,
and our Savior Jesus Christ, our Lord, in whose name we further pray, saying;
Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, etc.

A most profitable Prayer. V.
O Most holy Lord God, seeing we hear, that what is recorded in holy Scripture
of thy Apostles and Saints, was written for our instruction and imitation; give
us grace so to be followers of them, as they were of thy Son Christ Jesus. Thou
did incline the heart of thy Apostle Andrew, that he readily obeyed the
calling of thy Son, and followed him without delay; grant unto us all, that we
being called by thy holy word, may forthwith give over our selves, obediently
to follow thy holy Commandments. And as thou did confirm the faith of Thomas
thy Apostle, whom thou did suffer to be doubtful of thy Sons resurrection; so
grant unto us, that we may so perfectly, and without all doubt believe in thy
Son Jesus Christ, that our faith in thy sight may never be reproved. And as
thou did choose thy faithful servant Matthias, in the place of the traitor
Judas, to be numbered with the Twelve Apostles; so grant still, that thy Church
being always preserved from false Apostles, may be ordered and guided by
faithful and true Pastors. And seeing thou have instructed thy Church with
heavenly doctrine in thy Gospel, by the labor and care of St. Mark, and the
other Evangelists, give us grace, that we be not like children carried away
with every blast of vain doctrine, but finally be established in the truth of
thy holy Gospel: and grant us perfectly to know thy Son Jesus Christ to be the
way, the truth, and the life; whom truly to know is everlasting life; as thou
have taught Philip and the other Apostles.

And, O Lord, as thou did earnestly command thy Apostle Peter, to feed thy
flock, make we beseech thee all Bishops and Pastors, diligently to preach thy
holy word, and the people obediently to follow the same, that they may receive
the crown of everlasting glory: And as thy holy Apostle James, leaving his
Father and all that he had without delay, was obedient to the calling of thy
Son Jesus Christ, and followed him; so, we forsaking all wordly and carnal
affections, may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments, that as he
preached what he was taught from thee, so we may believe what he preached, and
love what we do believe. And let the example of Matthew, who readily obeyed thy
blessed Sons call from the receipt of custom, to be an Apostle and Evangelist,
be our imitation, in forsaking all covetous desires and inordinate love of
riches, and to follow thy Son Jesus Christ, who is God blessed for ever. Grant
us to love our enemies by the example of thy Martyr Stephen, who prayed for his
persecutors; and cast thy bright beams of light upon thy Church, that it being
lightened by the doctrine of thy Apostle and Evangelist John, may attain to thy
everlasting gifts. And seeing we read, those young innocent children of
Bethlehem did show forth thy praise, not in speaking as witnesses; but in dying
for thy names sake, mortify and kill all vices in us, that in our
conversation, our life may express thy faith, which with our tongues we do
confess. And as thou were pleased to teach the world through the preaching of
thy blessed Apostle Paul; grant we beseech thee, that we which have his
wonderful conversion in remembrance, may follow and fulfill the holy doctrine,
which he has taught us; whom (with Barnabas) as thou did endue with singular
gifts of the Holy Ghost, so let us not be destitute of thy manifold gifts, nor
yet of grace, to use them always to thy glory. And seeing thou have ordained
and constituted the services of all Angels and men in a wonderful order,
mercifully grant, that they which always do thee service in Heaven, may by thy
appointment succor and defend us in earth. And as thou did call Luke the
Physician, whose praise is in the Gospel, throughout the Churches, to be a
Physician of the Soul, may it please thee, by the wholesome medicines of his
doctrine, to heal all the diseases of our Souls; and thus, O Lord, seeing thou
have built thy Church upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the head corner stone; and that thou have knit together
thy Elect in one Communion, and fellowship in the mystical body of thy Son. We
beseech thee, grant that we may so be joined together in unity of spirit, by
the doctrine of thy Apostles; that we may be made an holy Temple acceptable
unto thee; as also, that we may so follow thy holy Saints, in all virtuous and
godly living, that we may come to those unspeakable joys, which thou have
prepared for them that unfeignedly love thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior; in whose name and words we further call upon thee saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. A Heavenly Prayer. VI.
O Most holy and merciful God, We do here humbly and thankfully acknowledge thy
infinite love in the great work of our redemption by thy Son Jesus Christ, the
glad tidings of whose incarnation, Conception of our Savior.
thou were pleased to make known unto us by the message of an Angel: We beseech
thee, pour thy grace into our hearts, that as we are brought to the knowledge
of his conception; so by his Cross and Passion, we may be translated unto the
glory of his Resurrection: Thou were graciously pleased to give him thy only
begotten Son to take our nature upon him; and to be born of a pure Virgin:
Grant Birth.
that we being regenerate and made thy children by Adoption and grace, may
daily be renewed by thy holy Spirit, through the same our Lord Jesus: Thou
did also make thy blessed Son to be circumcised and obedient Circumcision.
to the law for man; grant us the true circumcision of the heart, that our
hearts, and all our members mortified from all worldly and carnal lusts, may in
all things obey thy blessed will: And as thou were pleased by the leading of a
Star to manifest thy only begotten Epiph^^y.
Son, to the Gentiles; mercifully grant, that we which know thee now by faith,
may after this life have Presenting in the ^emple.
the fruition of thy glorious Godh^ad. And as he was presented in the Temple in
the substance of our flesh: So grant that we may be presented unto thee with
pure and clean minds. And as by thy providence, thy servant John Baptist was
wonderfully born, and sent to prepare the way to the manifestation of thy Son
our Savior, by preaching of repentance: make us so to follow his doctrine, and
holy life, that we may truly repent according to his preaching, and after his
example, constantly speak the truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer
for the truths sake. And, O Lord, who of thy tender love toward man have sent
our Savior Jesus Christ, not only to take upon him our flesh, but to suffer
death upon the Cross; mercifully Passion.
grant, that we may both follow the example of his great humility and patience,
and be made partakers of his Resurrection: And we beseech thee, graciously to
behold this thy family, for the which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to be
betrayed, and thus to be given up into the hands of wicked men. And not only
us, but the whole body of thy Church, which by thy Spirit is governed and
sanctified, and all estates of men, in thy holy Congregation, for whom we
beseech thee to receive our supplications and prayers, which we now offer
before thee for them, that every member of the same in his vocation and
Ministry, may truly and godly serve thee: And, O Lord, who have made all men,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live, have mercy upon al Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics; and take from
them all ignorance and hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word; and so
fetch them home (blessed Lord) to thy flock, that they may be saved among the
remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one fold under one shepherd, Jesus
Christ.

And merciful God, which through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ, have
overcome death, and by his resurrection, Resurrection.
opened unto us the gate of everlasting life: We humbly beseech thee, that as
by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put into our minds good
desires, so by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect: And as
thou did give him, not only to die for our sins, but to rise again for our
justification; grant us, so to put away the leaven of malice and wickedness;
that we may always serve thee in pureness of living, and truth: And as thou
did give him both a sacrifice for sin, and also an example of godly life;
give us the grace, that we may always most thankfully receive that his
inestimable benefit; and also daily endeavor our selves to follow the blessed
steps of his most holy life. And like as we do believe thy only begotten Son
our Lord, to have ascended with Ascension.
great glory, into the Heaven; so we beseech thee grant us, that we may also in
heart and mind thither ascend also, and with him continually dwell, who lives
and reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost. And do not leave us comfortless;
but, (according to thy promise) send us thine Holy Ghost to comfort us; and
exalt us unto the same place, whither our Savior is gone before. And as thou
did after our Saviors Ascension teach the hearts of thy faithful people, by
thy sending them the light of thy Holy Spirit: Sending the holy Spirit.
Grant us by the same spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and
evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesus.
And seeing thou have given us grace, thus by the confession of a true faith, to
acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trinity, and in the power of Trinity.
the Divine Majesty, to worship the unity: We beseech thee, that through the
stedfastnes of this faith, we may evermore be defended from all adversities
through Jesus Christ our Savior; who lives and reigns with the in the unity
of the self same Spirit, one God, world without end, Amen.

An Excellent Prayer. VII.
O Almighty and Everliving Lord God: God the Father, God the Son, God the holy
Ghost, holy blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God have mercy
upon us. Remember not our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins, but spare us good Lord, spare thy
people whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry
with us for ever. Preserve us from all evil and mischief, from sin, from the
crafts and assaults of the Devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting
damnation. Deliver us from all blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory, and
hypocrisy, from envy, hatred and malice, and all uncharitablenes: from
fornication and all other sins, the wages of which is death, and from all the
deceits of the world, the flesh and the Devil, keep us from any hurt by
lightning and tempest, from the plague, pestilence and famine, from battles and
murder and from sudden death; deliver us from all sedition, and privy
conspiracy, all false doctrine, and heresy, hardness of heart and contempt of
thy word and commandments: And these things we beseech of thee, for and
through the mystery of thy holy incarnation, thy holy nativity and
circumcision, thy baptism, fasting and temptation: through thine agony and
bloody swet, thy cross and passion, thy precious death and burial, thy
glorious resurrection and ascension, and the comeing of the holy Ghost.

And, O Lord God, we do beseech thee, that it would please the to rule and
govern thy holy Church universal in the right way. Illuminate all Bishops
Pastors and Ministers of the Church with true knowledge and understanding of
thy word, and that both by preaching and living, they may set it forth and show
it accordingly. Be pleased to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them
grace to execute justice, and to maintain truth: And Bless and keep all thy
people; give us all hearts to love and dread thee, and diligently to live after
thy commandments, That we may have increase of grace to hear meekely thy
word, and receive it with pure affection, and bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit. We beseech thee to give unto all Nations, unity, peace and concord;
bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived;
strengthen such as do stand, comfort and help the weake-hearted, raise up them
that fall, and finally beat down Satan under our feet.

Be pleased O Lord, to succor help and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity and tribulation; preserve all that in their lawful affairs travel
by land or water; all women laboring with child, all sick persons and young
children; and to show thy pity upon all prisoners and captives: defend and
provide for the fatherless children and widows, and all that are desolate
and oppressed; and let it please thee to have mercy upon all men. Forgive our
enemies, persecutors and slanderers, and turn their hearts. And we beseech the
to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due
time we may enjoy them; and deal not with us after our sins, nor reward us
after our iniquities, but give us true repentance, forgive us all our sins,
negligences and ignorances: indue us with the graces of thy holy Spirit, to
amend our lives according to thy holy word.

And O merciful father that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desires of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities whenever they oppress
us, and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of
the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being
hurt by no persecutions may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church.
And seeing we have heard with our ears and our fathers have declared unto us
the noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before
them. We beseech thee in the midst of these our divisions and distractions, to
arise and help us by thy power, and deliver us for the honor of thy name
defend us from all our enemies, and let thy mercy be showed upon us, as we do
put our trust in thee.

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us, and graciously look upon our
afflictions, pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts, favorably with
mercy forgive the sins of thy people, and grant us what else thou know more
necessary for us, even for Jesus Christ his sake, who is the Son of God, and
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; in whose blessed name and
words, we conclude our imperfect prayers, saying as he himself has taught us,

OUr Father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name: Thy Kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the
kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

These particulars following having been in the peoples memories, and still
are, it is good to preserve them so, by an often rehearsal in their due time
and place; most of them being either select places out of holy Scripture, or
containing the necessary points of faith to be believed by us.
Psalm 95. This was wont to precede the reading of the Psalms.
O Come let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of
our salvation.

Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and show our selves glad in
him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all Gods.

In his hands are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills
is his also.

The Sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come let us worship and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our maker.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.

When your fathers tempted me: proved me and saw my works.

Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: it is a people
that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in
the beginning, etc.

This is both a hymn and a Creed; and if 1200. years continuance in the Church
may not be a suflicient plea for the keeping its place after the first Chapter
out of the old Testament in the morning, the Ten Commandments (much neglected)
may be read in the room of it.
WE praise thee O God: we knowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting.

To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens and all the powers therein.

To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry.

Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of sabbath.

Heaven and earth are full of the majesty of thy glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets praise thee.

The noble army of martyrs praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the world does knowledge thee.

The Father of an infinite majesty.

Thine honorable, true and only Son.

Also the Holy Ghost the comforter.

Thou art the King of glory O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting Son of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor the virgins
womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the kingdom
of Heaven to all believers.

Thou sit at the right hand of God, in the glory of the Father.

We believe that thou shall come to be our judge.

We therefore pray thee help thy servants whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

O Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage.

Govern them and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee.

And we worship thy Name: ever world without end.

Vouchsafe (O Lord,) to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord let thy mercy lighten upon us, as our trust is in thee.

O Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded.

Luke 1. 68. This or the next were wont to be read after the second lesson or
chapter out of the New Testament in the morning.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited and redeemed his people.

And has raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant
David.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since the world
began.

That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that hate
us.

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers: and to remember his holy
covenant.

To perform the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham: that he would
give us.

That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: might serve him
without fear.

In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways.

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the dayspring from on high has
visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and to
guide our feet into the way of peace.

Or Psalm 100. O Be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands: serve the Lord with
gladness, and come before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Luke 1. 46. This or the next were used to be read after the first chapter at
the Evening.
MY soul does magnify the Lord: and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

For he has regarded the lowliness of his hand-maiden.

For behold, from henceforth, all generations shall call me blessed.

For he that is mighty has magnified me: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy is on them that f^^ him, throughout all generations.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble and
meek.

He has filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he has sent empty
away.

He remembering his mercy, has helped his servant Israel: as he promised to our
forefathers, Abraham, and his seed for ever.

Or Psalm 98. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done mavelous
things.

With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

The Lord declared his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all the
ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands sing, rejoice, and give
thanks.

Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a Psalm of thanksgiving.

With trumpets also and shawms: O show ^our selves joyful before the Lord the
King.

Let the Sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they
that dwell therein.

Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together before
the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth.

With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

Luke 2. 29. This or the next were wont to be read at the Evening after the
second chapt.
LOrd now let thou thy servant depart in peace: according to thy Word.

For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

To be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.

Or Psalm 67. GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of
his countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God shall
give us his blessing.

God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in
the beginning is now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

The repetition of this ancient doxology had this pious intention, viz. to keep
the mystery of the blessed Trinity in the minds of the vulgar, who else may be
in danger to forget it. Which with the other (according to the rule) were to be
read by the Minister alone, and not interchangeably by the people, though the
common practice had prevailed otherwise.
The Creed.
This was wont to be read after the second chapter, both at morning and evening.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried,
he descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty, from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

The Nicene Creed.
This was used to be read in the morning.
I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God,
Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one
substance with the Father, by whom all things were made: who for us men, and
for our salvation came down from Heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of
the Virgin Mary, and was made man, and was crucified also for us under Pontius
Pilate. He suffered and was buried, and the third day he rose again according
to the Scriptures and ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of
the Father. And he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick and the
dead: whose kingdom shall have no end. And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with
the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the
Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church: I acknowledge one
Baptism for the remission of sins. And I look for the resurrection of the
dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

The Creed of Athanasius, commonly so called.
This was appointed to be read about thirteen times in the year to the people,
if it were now read once a month, it were very convenient.
WHosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic faith.

Which faith except every one do keep whole and undefiled: without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly.

And the Catholic faith is this: that we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity.

Neither confounding the persons: nor dividing the substance.

For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son: and another of the
Holy Ghost.

But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one:
the glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.

Such as the Father is, such is the Son: and such is the Holy Ghost.

The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate: and the Holy Ghost uncreate.

The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible: and the Holy Ghost
incomprehensible.

The Father eternal, the Son eternal: and the Holy Ghost eternal.

And yet they are not three eternals: but one eternal.

As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty: and the Holy Ghost
Almighty.

And yet they are not three Almighties: but one Almighty.

So the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God.

And yet they are not three Gods: but one God.

So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord: and the Holy Ghost Lord.

And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.

For like as we be compelled by the Christian verity: to acknowledge every
person by himself to be God and Lord.

So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion: to say there be three Gods, or
three Lords.

The Father is made of none: neither created nor begotten.

The Son is of the Father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten.

The Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son: neither made, nor created,
nor begotten, but proceeding.

So there is one Father, not three Fathers, one Son, not three Sons: one Holy
Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts.

And in this Trinity, none is before or after other: none is greater or less
then another.

But the whole three persons be coeternal together: and coequal.

So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity is to be worshipped.

He therefore that will be saved: must thus think of the Trinity.

Furthermore it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also believe
rightly in the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the right faith is, that we believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, is God and man.

God of the substance of the Father, begotten before the worlds: and man of the
substance of his mother born in the world.

Perfect God, and perfect man: of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting.

Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead: and inferior to the Father
touching his manhood.

Who although he be God and man: yet he is not two, but one Christ.

One, not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking the manhood
into God.

One altogether, not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and man is one Christ.

Who suffered for our salvation, descended into Hell: rose again the third day
from the dead.

He ascended into Heaven, he sits on the right hand of the Father, God
Almighty: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies: and shall give
account for their own works.

And they that have done good shall go into life everlasting: and they that
have done evil, into everlasting fire.

This is the Catholic faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be saved.

The Ten Commandments.
GOd spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God, Thou shall have none
other Gods but me.

2. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth: thou shall not bow down to them; nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

4. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God: in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made Heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall do no murder.

7. Thou shall not commit adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

At the beginning of Prayer, as a preparative of the peoples attentions and
affections, there were diverse choice sentences out of holy Scripture, some of
which were to be read at the discretion of the Minister, and then the known
solemn exhortation accordingly, which are still in their memories.
A Sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice to God: despise not (O Lord) humble and
Psalm. 51.
contrite hearts.

Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your God, because
he is gentle and merciful, he is patient and of Joel 2.
much mercy, and such a one that is sorry for your afflictions.

To thee (O Lord God) belongs mercy Dan. 9.
and forgiveness, for we have gone away from thee, and have not hearkened to thy
voice, whereby we might walk in thy laws which thou have appointed for us,
Correct us, O Lord, and yet in thy judgment, Jer. 10.
not in thy fury, lest we should be consumed and brought to nothing.

Amend your lives: for the kingdom of God is at hand. Matt. 3.


I will go to my Father, and say unto him, Luke 15.
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee: I am no more worthy to
be called thy son.

Enter not into judgment with thy servants, Psalm 143.
O Lord: for no flesh is righteous in thy sight.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us. 1 John 1.


And as the Apostles, by the command of our Savior gathered up the crumbs that
remained, that nothing was lost, of which they filled twelve baskets, so these
twelve short Prayers composed for several seasonable occasions may not be
omitted.
For rain, if the time require it.
O God heavenly Father which by to all them that seek thy kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, all things necessary to their bodily sustenance: send us
we beseech thee, in this our necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we
may receive the fruits of the earth to our comfort, and to thy honor, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For fair weather.
O Lord God, which for the sin of Amen.

In time of dearth and famine.
O God heavenly Father, whose gift

In time of war.
O Almighty God, King of all Kings, and governor of all and confound their
devices, that we being armed with thy defense, may be preserved evermore from
all perils, to glorify thee, which art the only giver of all victory, through
the merits of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In time of any common plague or sickness.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath in the time of King David, Amen.

Or this.
O God whose nature and property and though we be tied and bound with the chain
of our sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us, for the
honor of Jesus Christ's sake, our only mediator and advocate. Amen.

A thanksgiving for rain.
O God our Heavenly Father, who Amen.

A thanksgiving for fair wea^her.
O Lord God, who have justly humbled us by thy late plague of immoderate souls
by this seasonable and blessed change of weather, we praise and glorify thy
holy Name for this thy mercy, and will always declare thy loving kindness from
generation to generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A thanksgiving for plenty.
O Most merciful Father, which of thy Amen.

A thanksgiving for peace and victory.
O Almighty God, which art a strong and apparent dangers wherewith we were
compassed: we acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were not delivered over as a
prey unto them, beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us,
that all the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty deliverer,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague.
O Lord God, which have wounded us for our sins, and consumed us Amen.

Or this.
WE humbly acknowledge before thee (O most merciful Father) Amen.

A Thanksgiving for women after Childbirth.
O Almighty God, we bless and praise thy name, that thou have of thy goodness
given safe deliverance unto this woman thy servant, and have preserved her from
the great pain and peril of Childbirth; grant we beseech thee, most merciful
Father, that she through thy help may both faithfully live and walk in her
vocation according to thy will in this life present, and also may be partaker
of everlasting glory in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After which, this blessing may be pronounced to her.
AS thy help has been hitherto in the name of the Lord who has made Heaven
and earth, even so the Lord himself still be thy keeper and thy defense upon
thy right hand, the Lord preserve thee from evil; yea, it is even he that shall
keep thy soul, the Lord preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this
time forth, for evermore. Amen.

Seven ADMINISTRATIONS.
1. Baptism. 2. Communion. 3. Visiting the Sick. 4. Catechism with
Conformation. 5. Day of fasting or Humiliation. 6. Matrimony. 7. An Exhortation
at the Burial.
BAPTISM.
Welbeloved in the Lord, Hear the words of the Gospel written by St. Mark in
the Tenth Chapter.
AT a certain time they brought Children to Christ, that he should touch them;
and his Disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he
was displeased, and said unto them, Suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for to such belongs the Kingdom of God. Verily I say unto
you, whosoever does not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he
shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his arms, he put his
hands upon them and blessed them.

Friends, you hear in this Gospel the words of our Savior Christ, that he
commanded the children to be brought unto him: how he blamed those that would
have kept them from him, how he exhorted all men to follow their innocence.
You perceive how by his outward gesture, and deed, he declared his good will
toward them; for he embraced them in his arms, he laid his hands upon them and
blessed them. Doubt you not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he will
likewise favorably receive these present Infants, that he will embrace them
with the arms of his mercy, that he will give unto them the blessing of Eternal
life, and make them partakers of his everlasting Kingdom. Wherefore we being
thus persuaded of the good will of our Heavenly Father toward these infants,
declared by his Son Jesus Christ, and nothing doubting, but that he favorably
allows this charitable work of ours in bringing these Children to his holy
Baptism, let us proceed accordingly in it.

Welbeloved friends, ye have brought these children here to be Baptized, ye
have heard the gracious promise made by Christ unto them; which he for his part
will most surely keep and perform, wherefore these Infants must also faithfully
for their part by you that be their sureties profess the faith of Christ, and
promise that they will forsake the Devil and all his works, and constantly
believe Gods holy word, and obediently keep his commandments.

Minister.

Do thou in the name of this Child, promise to forsake the Devil and all
his works; the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of
the same; the carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou will not follow, nor be
led by them?

Answer.

I will forsake them all.

Minister.

Do thou in the name of this Child, profess this Faith, to Believe in God
the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth; and in Jesus Christ his only
Son our Lord; and that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin
Mary; that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried,
descended into Hell, and also did rise again the third day; that he ascended
into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty; and from
thence shall come again at the end of the world, to judge the quick and the
dead: And do thou, in the name of this child, believe in the Holy Ghost;
the holy Catholic Church; the communion of the Saints, the Remission of sins,
the Resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life after death?

Answer.

All this I steadfastly believe.

Minister.

Will thou be Baptized? And do you dedesire in the name of this Infant, that he
may be Baptized in this faith?

Answer.

That is my desire.

Now, dearly beloved, forasmuch as all men be conceived and born in sin, and
that our Savior Christ says, none can enter into the Kingdom of God, except
he be regenerate and born anew. I beseech you to call upon God the Father,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous mercy, he will grant to
these children, that thing which by nature they cannot have, that they may be
baptized with water and the Holy Ghost, and received into Christ's holy Church,
and be made lively members of the same; that our Lord Jesus Christ, would
vouchsafe to receive them; to lay his hands upon them; to bless them, and
release them of their sins; to give them the Kingdom of Heaven, and
everlasting life.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty and everlasting God, which of thy great mercy did save Noah, and
his family in the Ark from perishing by water, and also did safely lead the
children of Israel thy people through the red Sea; figuring thereby thy holy
baptism; and by the baptism of thy welbeloved Son Jesus Christ, did
sanctify the flood Jordan, and all other waters to the mystical washing away
of sin; we beseech thee for thine infinite mercies, that thou will mercifully
look upon these children, sanctify them, and wash them with the Holy Ghost,
that they being delivered from thy wrath, may be received into the Ark of
Christ's Church, and being, steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, and rooted
in Charity, may so pass the waves of this troublesome world, that finally they
may come to the land of Everlasting life, there to reign with thee, world
without end. And O Lord, who art the aid of all that need, the helper of all
that flee to thee for succor, the life of them that believe, and the
resurrection of the dead, we call upon thee for these Infants, that they coming
to thy holy baptism, may receive remission of their sins, by spiritual
regeneration. Receive them (O Lord:) as thou have promised by thy welbeloved
Son, saying, ask, and you shall have, seek, and you shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you: So give now unto us that ask, let us that seek find,
open the gate unto us that knock, that these Infants may enjoy the everlasting
benediction of thy Heavenly washing; and may come to thy Eternal Kingdom: And
O Heavenly Father, we give thee humble thanks, that thou have vouchsafed to
call us to the knowledge of thy grace and faith in thee: Increase this
knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore: Give thy Holy Spirit to these
Infants, that they may be born again, and be made heirs of everlasting
Salvation; and as the way to attain it, grant that the old Adam in these
children, may be so buried, that the new man may be raised up in them; and that
all things belonging to the Spirit, may live and grow in them: That they may
have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph against the Devil, the
world, and the flesh: And grant, that whosoever is here dedicated to thee, by
our office and ministry, may also be endowed with heavenly virtues, and
everlastingly rewarded through thy mercy.

And seeing we hear thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, for the
forgiveness of our sins, did shed out of his most precious side both water and
blood, and gave commandment to his Disciples, that they should go and teach all
Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; regard we beseech thee, the supplication of thy congregation; and grant
that these thy servants which shall be baptized in this water, may receive the
fullness of thy grace, and ever remain in the number of thy faithful and elect
children, through Jesus Christ, our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

N. I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, Amen.

We receive this child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock If they that
bring the Children do defire it, the Minister may add viz. and do sign him
with the sign of the Cross.
that so hereafter he may not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ
crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner, against Sin, the world, and
the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier, and servant unto his
lives end, Amen.

Seeing now, deerly beloved Brethren, that these children have received the
Sacrament of Regeneration, and thus visibly grafted into the body of Christ's
Congregation, Let us give thanks unto God for these benefits, and with one
accord make our prayers unto Almighty God, that they may lead the rest of their
life, according to this beginning.

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name: Thy Kingdom come, Thy
will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
And lead us not into temptation, but deilver us from evil: For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen.

We yield thee hearty thanks most merciful Father, that it has pleased thee
to make this infant partaker of this Sacrament of Regeneration, and thus to
receive him for thy child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy
congregation. And humbly, we beseech thee to grant, that he being dead unto
Sin, and living unto righteousness, and being buried with Christ in his death,
may crucify the old man, and utterly abolish the whole body of Sin. That as he
is thus made partaker of the death of thy Son, so he may be partaker of his
resurrection; So that finally with the residue of thy holy Congregation, he may
be inheritour of thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

An exhortation to the Parents (Godfathers) or sureties.

For as much as these children have promised by you, to forsake the Devil and
all his works, to believe in God, and to serve him; you must remember that it
is your parts and duties, to see that these infants be taught, so soon as they
shall be able to learn, what a solemn vow promise and profession they have
made by you: And that they may know these things the better, you shall call
upon them to hear Sermons, and chiefly you shall provide, that they may learn
the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the English tongue;
and all other things, which a Christian ought to know and believe to his souls
health; and that these children may be virtuously brought up, to lead a godly
and Christian life, remembering always that Baptism does represent unto us our
profession, which is to follow the example of our Savior Christ, and to be
made like unto him, that as he died and rose again for us; so should we which
are baptized, die from sin, and rise again unto righteousness, continually
mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and daily proceeding in all
virtue and Godlynes of living.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all everrmore, Amen.

Now in case of necessity, as when the child is in danger of death, the lawful
Minister may briefly call upon God for his Grace, and the child being named by
some one that is present, may only, cast Water upon the Child, and use the
Form of words in Baptism, saying,

N. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Amen.

And let no man doubt but the Child so Baptized is lawfully and sufficiently
Baptized, and ought not to be Baptized again.

THE COMMUNION.
The Exhortation before it.

Dearly Beloved in the Lord, ye that mind to come to the holy Communion of the
body and blood of our Savior Christ, must consider what St. Paul writes to
the Corinthians, how he exhorts all persons diligently, to try and examine
themselves, before they presume to eat of that bread, and drink of that Cup.
For as the benefit is great, if with a true penitent heart, and lively Faith,
we receive that holy Sacrament, (for then we spiritually eat the flesh of
Christ, and drink his blood: then we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us: we be
one with Christ, and Christ with us:) So is the danger great, if we receive the
same unworthily; for then we be guilty of the body and blood of Christ our
Savior: we eat and drink our own judgment, not considering the Lords body.
We kindle Gods wrath against us: We provoke him to plague us with diverse
diseases, and sundry kinds of death. Therefore if any of you be a blasphemer of
God, and hinderer or slaunderer of his word; an adulterer, or be in malice, or
envy, or in any other grievous crime, bewail your sins, and come not to this
holy Table, least the devil enter into you as he entered into Judas, and fill
you full of all iniquities and bring you to destruction both of body and soul.
Judge therefore your selves, brethren, that ye be not judged of the Lord.
Repent you truly of your sins past; have a lively and steadfast Faith in Christ
our Savior: Amend your lives, and be in perfect charity with all men; So shall
ye be meet partakers of those holy mysteries. And, above all things, ye must
give most humble and hearty thanks to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, for the redemption of the world, by the death and passion of our Savior
Christ, both God and man, who did humble himself; even to the death upon the
Cross, for us miserable sinners, which lay in darkness and shadow of death;
that he might make us the children of God, and exalt us unto everlasting life.
And to the end we should always remember the exceeding great love of our
Master and only Savior Jesus Christ, thus dying for us, and the innumerable
benefits, which by his precious blood shedding, he has obtained to us. He has
instituted and ordained holy Mysteries as pledges of his love, and continual
remembrance of his death, to our great and endless comfort. To him therefore,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, let us give as we are bounden, continual
thanks, submitting our selves wholly to his holy will and pleasure; and studying
to serve him in true holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

You that thus do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and be in
love and charity with your neighbors, and intend to lead a new life, following
the Commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways; you
may draw near, and take this holy Sacrament to your comfort, according to
these comfortable words of our Savior, to all that truly turn unto him: Come
unto me all ye that are weary Mat. 11. 28.
and heavy laden, and I will refresh you: So God loved the world, that he
John. 3. 16.
gave his only begotten Son, to the end, that all that believe in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life: Or, that of St. Paul; This is a
faithful 1 Timothy 2. 5.
saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners. Or, that of St. John, If any man sin, we have an 1
John. 2. 1, 2.
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. In confidence of whose mercy, let us make an
humble and penitent confession of our sins before Almighty God, asking pardon
for them, and his efficacious blessing upon this his own ordinance: meekly
kneeling upon our knees.

Let us Pray.

ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things, judge of
all men; we acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which
we from time to time most grievously have committed, by thought, word, and
deed, against thy Divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and
indignation against us. But we do earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry, for
these our misdoings; the remembrance of them is grievous unto us: the burden
of them is intolerable. Have mercy upon us, most merciful Father, for thy Son
our Lord Jesus Christ's sake: forgive us all that is past; and grant that we
may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newnes of life, to the honor and
glory of thy name. And (O Lord:) we do not presume to come to this thy table,
trusting in our own righteousness; but in thy manifold and great mercies: We be
not worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs under thy table. But thou art the
same Lord, whose property is always to have mercy: We beseech thee therefore
gracious Lord, who of thy great mercy has promised forgivenes of sins to all
them, which with hearty repentance and true faith, turn unto thee; have mercy
upon us, pardon and deliver us from all our sins, confirm, and strengthen us
in all goodness, and bring us to everlasting life.

And O Lord, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known and from whom no
secrets are hid, cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy
holy spirit, that we may perfectly love thee and worthily magnify thy holy name.

And seeing it is meet, right and our bounden duty, that we should at all
times and in all places, lift up our hearts, even lift them up unto the Lord,
in giving thanks, unto our Lord God, holy, Almighty, and Everlasting Father,
for all thy mercyes and blessings: So do we now more specially praise thee, for
thy Son and our Saviors incarnation, who by the operation of the holy Ghost,
was made very man, of the substance of the Virgin Mary his Mother, and that
without spot of sin, to make us clean from all sin. But chiefly we are bound
to praise thee, for the glorious resurrection of thy Son Jesus Christ, our
Lord: for he is the very Paschall Lamb, which was offered for us, and has
taken away the sins of the world; who by his death has destroyed death, and by
his rising to life again, has restored to us everlasting life; Who also after
his most glorious resurrection, manifestly appeared to all his Apostles, and in
their sight, ascended up into heaven, to prepare a place for us, that where he
is, thither might we also ascend and reign with him in glory: And we do also
praise thee, for that according to his most true promise unto them, the holy
Ghost came down from heaven, with a sudden great sound, as it had been a mighty
wind, in the likeness of fiery tongues lighting upon the Apostles, to teach
them, and to lead them into all truth, giving them both the gifts of diverse
languages, and also boldness with servent zeal, constantly to preach the
Gospel unto all nations whereby we are, and have been brought out of darkness
and error, into the clear light, and true knowledge of thee and thy Son,
which art one God, one Lord, not one only person, but three persons in one
substance; by whom we have been taught that what we believe of the glory of the
Father, the same we believe of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any
difference or inequality. For these inestimable benefits, we do with Angels,
and Arch*Angells, and with all the company of heaven, laud and magnify thy
glorious name, evermore praising thee and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of
hoasts, heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most
High.

And, O Heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy, did give thy only Son,
Jesus Christ, to suffer death upon the Cross for our redemption; who made there
(by his one oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient
sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and did
institute; and in his holy Gospel, command us to continue a perpetual memory of
that his precious death, until his coming again; hear us, O most merciful
Father, we beseech thee, and grant that we receiving these thy creatures of
bread and wine, according to thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ's holy
institution, in remembrance of his death and passion, may be partakers of his
most blessed body and blood: that we may so spiritually eat the flesh of thy
dear Son Jesus Christ, and drink his blood, that our sinful bodies may be made
clean by his body, and our souls washed through his most precious blood: and
that we may evermore dwell in him, and he in us; and hereafter dwell with him
in his Kingdom of glory; even for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

After this Prayer, the Minister taking the Bread into his hand may stand up,
and say these words following.

Our Lord Jesus, in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take,
Eat, this is my Body, which is given for you; do this in remembrance of me.

And taking the Cup into his hand may say.

Likewise after Supper, he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave
it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for you and for many, for the remission of sins: Do
this, as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

After the Minister has received the Communion himself, he may say thus in
delivering the Bread and Cup to the several Communicants.

The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee, preserve thy Body
and Soul into everlasting life: And take and eat this in remembrance that
Christ died for thee: and feed on him in thine heart by faith with thanksgiving.

The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve thy Body
and Soul into everlasting life, and drink this in remembrance that Christ's
blood was shed for thee, and be thankful.

After the Communion is done, this Hymn at the discretion of the Minister, may
be said, which has been of great Antiquity in the Church.

GLory be to God on high, and in earth Peace, good will toward men: We praise
thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks unto
thee for thy great glory, O Lord God, Heavenly King, God the Father Almighty, O
Lord, the only begotten Son Jesu, O Christ, Lord God, Lamb of God,. Son of the
Father, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us, thou that
take away the sins of the world receive our Prayers; thou that sit at the
right hand of God the Father, have mercy upon us; for thou only art holy, thou
only art the Lord, thou only O Christ, with the Holy Ghost art most High, in
the glory of God the Father.

Let us Pray.

OUr Father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name: Thy Kingdom come; Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the
kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

O Lord and Heavenly Father, we thy humble servants, entirely desire thy
Fatherly goodness, mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that by the merits of thy
Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we (and all thy whole Church)
may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his passion. And
here, we offer and present unto thee (O Lord:) our selves, our souls and
bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto thee; humbly
beseeching thee, that all we which be partakers of this Holy Communion, may be
fulfilled with thy grace and Heavenly benediction. And although we be unworthy
through our manifold sins, to offer unto thee any sacrifice: yet we beseech
thee to accept this our bounden duty and service, not weighing our merits, but
pardoning our offenses.

And seeing, O Lord, thou have now vouchsafed (by our duly receiving these holy
mysteries,) to seed us with the spiritual food of the most precious body and
blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ, and do assure us thereby of thy
favor and goodness toward us, and that we be very members incorporate in thy
mystical body, which is the blessed company of all faithful people; and be also
heirs through hope of thy everlasting Kingdom, by the merits of the most
precious death and passion of thy dear Son. We most humbly beseech thee, O
merciful Father, so to assist us with thy grace that we may continue in that
holy fellowship, and do all such good works, as thou have prepared for us to
walk in. And do thou so dispose the ways of thy ^ervants, toward the
attainment of everlasting salvation, that among all the changes and chances of
this mortal life, they may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready
help. And we beseech thee, to direct, sanctify, and govern, both our hearts
and bodies in the ways of thy laws, and in the works of thy Commandments,
that through thy most mighty protection, both here and ever, we may be
preserved in body and soul. And grant, that the words which we have heard this
day, with our outward ears, may through thy grace, be so grafted inwardly in
our hearts, that they may bring forth in us, the fruit of good living, to the
honor and praise of thy name. And now, O Lord, who art the fountain of all
wisdom, which know our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in
asking, and who have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons name, we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us, that have
made now our Prayers and supplications unto thee; and grant that those things,
which we have faithfully asked, according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom and with whom, in the unity of
the Holy Ghost, all honor, and glory be unto thee, O Father Almighty, world
without end, Amen.

The Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

THE VISITATION of the SICK.
An Exhortation after this Form or the like.

DEarly beloved, know this, that Almighty God is the Lord of life and death,
and over all things to them pertaining, as youth, strength, health, age,
weakness and sickness: wherefore whatsoever your sickness is, know you
certainly, that it is Gods visitation. And for what cause soever this sickness
is sent unto you, whether it be to try your patience for the example of others,
and that your faith may be found in the day of the Lord, laudable, glorious and
honorable, to the increase of glory and endless felicity, or else it be sent
unto you, to correct and amend in you, whatsoever does offend the eyes of your
heavenly Father: know you certainly, that if you truly repent you of your sins,
and bear your sickness patiently, trusting in Gods mercy, for his dear Son
Jesus Christ his sake, and render unto him humble thanks for his fatherly
visitation, submitting your self wholly unto his will, it shall turn to your
profit, and help you forwards in the right way that leads unto everlasting
life.

If the person visited be very sick, then the Minister may end his exhortation
in this place, or else proceed as follows.

Take therefore in good worth the chastisement of the Lord: For whom the Lord
loves he chastises; yea, as St. Paul says, he scourges every son which he
receives. If ye endure chastisement, he offers himself unto you, as unto his
own children. What son is he, that the Father chastises not? If ye be not
under Correction (whereof all true children are partakers:) then are ye
bastards, and not children. Therefore, seeing that when our carnal Fathers do
correct us, we reverently obey them: shall we not much rather be obedient to
our spiritual Father, and so live? And they for a few days do chastise us,
after their own pleasure: but he does chastise us for our profit, to the intent
that he may make us partakers of his holiness. These words (good brother) are
Gods words, and written in holy Scripture for our comfort and instruction, that
we should patiently and with thanksgiving, bear our heavenly Fathers
correction, whenever by any manner of adversity, it shall please his
gracious goodness to visit us. And there should be no greater comfort to
Christian persons, then to be made like unto Christ, by suffering patiently
adversities, troubles and sicknesses. For he himself went not up to joy, but
first he suffered pain, he entered not into his glory, before he was crucified:
so truly our way to eternal joy, is to suffer here with Christ, and our door to
enter into eternal life, is gladly to die with Christ, that we may rise again
from death, and dwell with him in everlasting life. Now therefore taking your
sickness which is thus profitable for you, patiently; I exhort you in the name
of God, to remember the profession, which you made unto God in your Baptism.
And for as much as after this life, there is an account to be given unto the
righteous Judge, of whom all must be judged without respect of persons: I
require you to examine your self, and your state, both toward God and man; so
that accusing and condemning your self for your own faults, you may find mercy
at our heavenly Fathers hand for Christ's sake, and not be accused and condemned
in that fearful judgment. Therefore, I shall first shortly rehearse the
articles of our faith, that you may know whether you do believe, as a Christian
man should, or no.

Here the Minister may rehearse the Articles of the faith, saying thus.

Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

And so forth, as it is in Baptism.

And the Minister may do well to ask him whether he be in charity with all the
world, exhorting him to forgive from the bottom of his heart all persons that
have offended him; and if he have offended other, to ask them forgiveness; and
where he has done injury or wrong to any man, that he make amends to the
uttermost of his power. And if he have not before disposed of his goods, that he
then make his will, as also to exhort him to be charitable to the poor
according to his ability. And if the sick person feeling his conscience
troubled with any weighty matter, shall make a special confession of it, and
shall desire to receive a declaration of forgiveness in the name of Christ from
the Minister: he may do it after this manner.

OUr Lord Jesus Christ, who has given power and commandment to his Ministers
to declare remission of sins to all which truly repent and believe in him; of
his great mercy forgive thee thine offenses: and in his name, and by his
authority committed to me, I pronounce unto thee forgiveness of all thy sins,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

After which the Minister may pray after this manner.

ALmighty Everlasting God, maker of mankind, which do correct those whom
thou do love, and chastisest every one whom thou do receive, we beseech
thee to have mercy upon this thy servant, visited with thy hand, and to grant
that he may take his sickness patiently, and recover his bodily health, (if it
be thy gracious will:) or otherwise whenever his soul shall depart from the
body, it may be without spot presented unto thee: and seeing according to the
multitude of thy mercy, thou do so put away the sins of those that repent,
that thou remembrest them no more: open thine eye of mercy upon this thy
servant, who most earnestly desires pardon and forgiveness. Renew in him (most
loving Father) whatsoever has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the
Devil, or by his own carnal will and frailness. Preserve and continue this sick
member in the unity of the Church; consider his contrition, accept his tears,
assuage his pain, as shall seem to thee most expedient for him. And for as much
as he puts his trust only in thy mercy, impute not unto him his former sins,
but take him unto thy favor; send him help from thy holy place, and evermore
mightily defend him; let the enemy have no advantage of him, nor the wicked
approach to hurt him. O Lord, look down from Heaven, behold, visit, and relieve
this thy servant: look upon him with the eyes of thy mercy, give him comfort
and sure confidence in thee: defend him from the danger of the enemy, and keep
him in perpetual peace and safety. And we beseech thee to extend thy accustomed
goodness to him who is grieved with sickness; visit him, O Lord, as thou did
visit Peter's wifes mother, and the Captains servant: so visit and restore to
this sick person his former health (if it be thy will:) or else give him grace,
so to take this visitation, that after this painful life ended, he may dwell
with thee in life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose name and
words we call upon thee, saying,

OUr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread: and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Here, if the sickness of the person can permit it, the whole 71. Psalm
containing seasonable matter may be read unto him.

IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: but
rid me, and deliver me in thy righteousness, incline thine ear unto me, and
save me.

Be thou my strong hold, whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense, and my castle.

Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the ungodly, out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

For thou O Lord God, art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope even from
my youth.

Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

O let my mouth be filled with thy praise: that I may sing of thy glory and
honor all the day long.

Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul, take
their council together, saying: God has forsaken him, persecute him, and take
him, for there is none to deliver him.

Go not far from me, O God: my God, haste thee to help me.

Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be
covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me evil.

As for me, I will patiently abide always: and will praise thee more and more.

My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for I know no
end thereof.

I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of thy
righteousness only.

Thou (O God) have taught me from my youth up until now: therefore will I tell
of thy wondrous works.

Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, when I am gray headed, until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to all them that are
yet for to come.

Thy righteousness (O God) is very high, and great things are they that thou
have done: O God, who is like unto thee?

O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me, and yet did thou
turn and refresh me: yea, and broughtest me from the deep of the earth again.

Thou have brought me to great honor: and comforted me on every side.

Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulness (O God) playing upon an
instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of
Israel.

My lips will be fain when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul whom thou have
delivered.

My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are
confounded and brought unto shame that seek to do me evil.

The BLESSING.

THe Almighty Lord, which is a most strong tower to all them that put their
trust in thee, to whom all things in Heaven and earth, and under the earth do
bow and obey, be now and evermore thy defense, and make thee to know and feel
that there is none other name under Heaven given to man, in whom, and through
whom thou may receive health and salvation; but only the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory for ever, Amen.

THE CATECHISM.
Question.

WHen was your name given you?

Answer.

At my Baptism.

Question.

What was then promised for you?

Answer.

These three things: first, that I should forsake the Devil and all his works,
the pomps and vanities of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the
flesh: Secondly, that I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
And thirdly, that I should keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of my life.

Question.

Do thou not think thou art bound to believe and do what was promised for
thee?

Answer.

Yes verily: and with Gods help so I will, and I pray God give me his grace,
that I may continue in the same unto my lives end.

Question.

Rehearse the Articles of thy belief.

Answer.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord; which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary: suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried;
he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended
into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, the Father Almighty: from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting, Amen.

Question.

What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy belief?

Answer.

First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all the
world.

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me and all mankind.

Thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the Elect people
of God.

Question.

How many Commandments be there?

Answer.

Ten.

Question.

Which be they?

Answer.

THe same which God spoke in the twenty Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the
Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

II. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God, am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son and thy
daughter; thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made Heaven and earth, the
Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall do no murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his Maid nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any
thing that is his.

Question.

What do thou chiefly learn by these commandments?

Answer.

I learn two things: my duty toward God, and my duty toward my neighbor.

Question.

What is thy duty toward God?

Answer.

My duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him with
all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength. To
worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon
him, to honor his holy name, and his word, and to serve him truly all the
days of my life.

Question.

What is thy duty toward thy neighbor?

Answer.

My duty toward my neighbor, is to love him, as my self, and to do to all
men, as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor, and succor my father
and Mother. (To honor and obey the King, or supreme Magistrate, and his
Ministers.) To submit my self to all my Governors, teachers, spiritual
pastors, and Masters. To order my self lowly, and reverently to all my
betters, to hurt no body, by word nor deed. To be true and just in all my
dealing. To bear no malice, nor hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from
stealing, and my tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering. To keep my
body in temperance, soberness and chastity. Not to covet or desire other men's
goods; but to learn and labor truly to get mine own living, and to do my duty
in that state of life, unto the which it shall please God to call me.

Question.

My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the commandments of God, and to serve him without his
special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer. Let me hear therefore, if thou can say the Lords Prayer.

Answer.

OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom the power and the glory for ever, Amen.

Question.

What desire thou of God in this prayer?

Answer.

I desire my Lord God, our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all good, to
send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may worship him, serve him,
and obey him, as we ought to do. And, that he would send us all things, that be
needful both for our souls and bodies. And that he will forgive us our
sins; and save and defend us, in all dangers ghostly and bodily; and that he
will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and
from everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore I say Amen, So be it.

Question.

How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

Answer.

Two only, as generally necessary to salvation: that is to say, Baptism, and
the supper of the Lord.

Question.

What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

Answer.

I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given
unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same,
and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Question.

How many parts be there in a Sacrament?

Answer.

Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.

Question.

What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism?

Answer.

Water: wherein the person baptized, is dipped or sprinkled with it. In the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Question.

What is the inward and spiritual Grace?

Answer.

A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: For being by nature
borne in sin and the children of wrath, we are hereby i. e. Sacramentally.
made the children of grace.

Question.

What is required of persons to be baptized?

Answer.

Repentance, whereby they forsake sin: and faith; whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God, made to them in the Sacrament.

Question.

Why then are infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age, they cannot
perform them.

Answer.

Yes, they do perform them by their sureties, who promise and vow them both in
their names: which when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Question.

Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

Answer.

For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and the
benefits which we receive thereby.

Question.

What is the outward part or sign of the Lords Supper?

Answer.

Bread and wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Question.

What is the inward part or thing signified?

Answer.

The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken, and received
of the faithful in the Lords Supper.

Question.

What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?

Answer.

The strengthening and refreshing of our souls, by the body and blood of Christ,
as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Question.

What is required of them which come to the Lords Supper?

Answer.

To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life: have a lively faith in Gods mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be in charity
with all men.

CONFIRMATION of Children upon their repeating this Catechism, was an Ancient
and laudable custom, who thereby took upon themselves the profession and
performance of that which had been promised in their names at Baptism, (which
Calvin and other Divines of the Reformed Churches in his time, did much lament
the disuse of, and wished it were restored,) the substance of which was as
follows.

The Prayer for the Children before CONFIRMATION.

ALmighty and everliving God, who have vouchsafed to admit these thy servants
to the Sacrament of regeneration by water and the holy Ghost, and given them
the seal of forgiveness of sins; and who have now in their own persons
professed what had been before promised in their names: strengthen them, we
beseech thee with thy Holy Ghost, the comforter, and daily increase in them the
manifold gifts of grace, the spirit of wisdom and understanding; the spirit of
counsel and ghostly strength; the spirit of knowledge and true godliness; and
fulfill them with the spirit of thy holy fear, Amen.

After this Prayer, the Bishop laying his hand on each Child, says.

DEfend O Lord, this Child with thy Heavenly grace, that he may continue thine
for ever, and daily increase in thy holy spirit more and more, until he come
unto thy everlasting Kingdom, Amen.

The Prayer after Confirmation.

ALmighty and everliving God, which makes us both to will and to do those
things that be good and acceptable unto thy majesty, we make our humble
supplications unto thee for these children, upon whom (after the example of the
holy Apostles) we have laid our hands, to certify them (by this sign) of thy
favor and gracious goodness toward them, let thy fatherly hand we beseech
thee ever be over them, let thy holy spirit ever be with them, and so lead them
in the knowledge and obedience of thy word, that in the end they may obtain
everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee and the Holy
Ghost lives and reigns one God, world without end, Amen.

The Blessing to the Children.

THe blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be upon
you, and remain with you for ever, Amen.

Upon a day of FASTING or HVMILIATION.
This (taken out of that which was called the Commination against Sinners) may
be useful upon a private day of Fasting or Humiliation; the exhortation being
as follows.

WE read in the book of Deuteronomy, and other places of Scripture, of diverse
curses solemnly pronounced against notorious and impenitent sinners; to the
end, that being admonished of the great indignation of God against them, they
may be the rather called to earnest and true repentance, and may walk more
warily in these dangerous times, and flee from such vices, for which God may
justly suffer his wrath to break forth against us. And therefore seeing (as
David also bears witness,) Psalm 119. 21. That all they be accursed which do
err and go astray from the Commandments of God; let us, remembering the
dreadful judgment hanging over our heads, and being always at hand, return
unto our Lord God, with all contrition and meekness of heart: bewailing and
lamenting our sinful life, knowledging and confessing our offenses, and seeking
to bring forth worthy fruits of repentance. For now Mat. 3. 10.
is the axe put unto the root of the trees, so that every tree which brings
not good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the Heb. 10. 31.
hands of the living God: he shall pour down rain upon the sinners, snares,
fire Psalm. 11. 6.
and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. For
lo, the Lord is come out of his place, Isa. 26. 26.
to visit the wickedness of such as dwell upon the earth. But who may abide the
Mal. 3. 2.
day of his coming? Who shall be able to endure, when he appears? His fan is
in his hand, and he will purge his floor, Mat. 3. 12.
and gather his wheat into the barn: but he will burn the chafe with
unquenchable fire. The day of the Lord 1 These 5. 2.
comes as a Thief in the night, and when men shall say, peace, and all things
are safe, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, as sorrow comes upon a
woman traveling with child, and they shall not escape. Then Romans 2* 4.
shall appear the wrath of God in the day of vengeance, which obstinate
sinners, through the stubbornness of their heart, have heaped unto themselves,
which despised the goodness, patience, and long sufferance of God, when he
called them contiually to repentance. Then shall they call upon me, Prove. 1. 28.
(says the Lord) but I will not hear; they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me, and that, because they hated knowledge, and received not the fear
of the Lord, but abhorred my counsel, and despised my correction. Then shall it
be too late to knock, when Mat. 2^ 10.
the door shall be shut, and too late to cry for mercy, when it is the time of
justice. O terrible voice of most just judgment, which shall be pronounced
upon them, when it shall be said unto them, Go ye cursed Mat. 4. 1.
into the fire everlasting, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Therefore brethren, take we 2 Cor. 6. 2.
heed betime, while the day of salvation lasts, for the night comes, when
none can work: let Joh. 9. 4. Joh. 12 35.
us while we have the light, believe in the light, and walk as the children of
the light, that we be not cast into the utter darkness, where is weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Mat. 25 30.
Let us not abuse the goodness of God, which calls us mercifully to
amendment; and of his endless pity, promises us forgiveness of what is past,
if with a whole mind and true heart, we turn unto him. For though our sins be
as red as scarlet, Isa. 1. 18.
they shall be as white as snow, and though they be like purple, yet shall they
be as white as wool.

Turn you (says the Lord) from all your wickedness, and your sins shall Ezekiel.
18. 30.
not be your destruction. Cast away from you all your ungodliness that ye have
done, make you new hearts and a new spirit. Wherefore will ye die, O ye house
of Israel, seeing that I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies? Says
the Lord God. Turn ye then, and ye shall live.

Although we have sinned, yet have 1 John 2. 1, 2.
we an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he it is, that
obtains grace and pardon for our sins.

For he was wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our wickedness. Isa. 53. 5


Let us therefore return unto him, who is the merciful receiver of all true
penitent sinners, assuring our selves, that he is ready to receive us, and most
willing to pardon us, if we come to him with faithful repentance; if we will
submit our selves unto him, and from henceforth walk in his ways; if we will
take his easy yoke, and light Mat. 11 29.
burden upon us, to follow him in lowliness, patience, and charity, and be
ordered by the governance of his holy spirit, seeking always his glory, and
serving him duly in our vocation, with thanksgiving. This if we do, Christ will
deliver us from the curse of the law, and from the extreme malediction, which
shall light upon them, that shall be set on the left hand; and he will set us
on his right hand, Mat. 25 33.
and give us the blessed benediction of his Father, commanding us to take
possession of his glorious Kingdom: unto the which he vouchsafe to bring us
all for his infinite mercy, Amen.

This Psalm being the fifty-first, may be also fitly read.

Miserere mei Deus.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness; and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo! thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy, and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my health:
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips (O Lord,) my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest
not in burnt offering.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart (O God)
shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the burnt
offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine altar.

A PRAYER.

TUrn us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned: be favorable, O Lord, be
favorable to thy people which turn unto thee, with weeping and fasting, and
praying: for thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long suffering, as
also of great pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath
think of mercy. Spare thy people good Lord: spare them, and let not thine
heritage be brought to confusion: but after the multitude of thy mercies, so
look upon us. We beseech thee to hear our prayers, and to have mercy on such,
as do penitently confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by
sin are accused, by thy merciful pardon, may be absolved. And, O Lord, which
have compassion of all men, and would not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should turn from sin and be saved: mercifully forgive us our
trespasses, receive and comfort us, which be grieved and wearied with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is to have mercy, to thee only it appertains
to forgive sins. Spare us therefore good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have
redeemed: enter not into judgment with thy servants, which be vile earth and
miserable sinners: but so turn thine ire from us, which meekly acknowledge our
vileness, and truly repent us of our faults. So make haste to help us in this
world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; to whom with thee and thy holy spirit, be all honor and glory
now and ever, Amen.

MATRIMONY.
Welbeloved, the ancient laudable order of our Church was, that as often as
there was a marriage, there should be a Sermon, wherein ordinarily the duties
of man and wife should be declared according to holy Scripture; but if there
were no Sermon, it was left to the Minister to make this or some short
exhortation. I shall therefore accordingly, first let you know what the holy
Scripture does say, as touching the duties of husbands toward their wives, and
wives toward their husbands.

SAint Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, the fifth Chapter, Ephesians. 5. 25.
does give this commandment to all married men: Ye husbands love your wives,
even as Christ loved the Church, and has given himself for it, that he might
so sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he
might present it unto himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle,
or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. So ought men
to love their wives, as their own bodies. He that loves his wife, loves
himself, for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes
it, even as the Lord the Church: for we are members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and
shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great
mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Nevertheless, let every
one of you in particular love his wife, even as himself.

Likewise the same St. Paul writing to the Colossians, speaks thus Colos. 3.
9.
to all men that be married. Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter
against them.

Hear also what St. Peter the Apostle of Christ, which was himself 1 Pet. 3. 7.
a married man, says unto all men that are married. Ye husbands dwell with
your wives according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the
weaker vessel, as being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers
be not hindered.

Hitherto ye have heard the duty of the husband toward the wife: now hear the
wives duty toward the husband, even as it is plainly set forth in holy
Scripture.

Saint Paul (in the forenamed Epistle to the Ephesians) teaches you thus: Ye
women submit your selves Ephesians. 5. 22.
unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the husband is the head of the
wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church, and he is the Savior of the
body.

Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ: so let the wives be to their
own husbands in all things. And again, he says: Let the wife reverence her
husband. And (in his Epistle to the Colossians) St. Paul gives you this short
lesson: Ye wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.

St. Peter also, does instruct you very godly, thus saying; Let wives be
subject to their own husbands, so that if any obey not the word, they may
without the word be won by the conversation of the wives, while they behold
your chaste conversation coupled with fear: whose adorning, let it not be that
outward adorning of platted hair, and wearing of gold, or of putting on of
apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is a precious
thing in the sight of God. For after this manner (in the old time) did the holy
women, which trusted in God, adorn themselves, being in subjection to their own
husbands, even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose daughters ye
are as long as ye do well, and not being dismayed with any fear. These are your
duties, which if you shall observe, that blessing in the 128. Psalm may be your
portion.

BLessed are all they that fear the Lord, and walk in his ways.

For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, O well is thee, and happy shall
thou be.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine upon the walls of thine house.

Thy children like the olive branches, round about thy table.

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord.

The Lord from out of Sion shall so bless thee that thou shall see Jerusalem
in prosperity all thy life long.

Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children and peace upon Israel.

Dearly beloved friends, we are gathered together here in the sight of God, and
in the face of his congregation, to join together this man and this woman, in
holy matrimony, which is an honorable estate instituted of God in paradise, in
the time of man's innocence; signifying unto us the mystical union, that is
betwixt Christ and his Church: which holy estate Christ adorned and beautified
with his presence, and first miracle that he wrought in Cana of Galilee, and is
commended of St. Paul, to be honorable among all men, and therefore is not to
be enterprised, nor taken in hand unadvisedly, lightly or wantonly, to satisfy
men's carnal lusts, and appetites like brute beasts that have no understanding;
but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God, duly
considering the causes for which Matrimony was ordained. One was the
procreation of children, to be brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord,
and praise of God. Secondly it was ordained for a remedy against sin, and to
avoid fornication, that such persons as have not the gist of continency, might
marry, and keep themselves undefiled members of Christ's body. Thirdly, for the
mutual society, help and comfort, that the one ought to have of the other,
both in prosperity and adversity, into the which holy state, these two persons
present, come now to be joined. Therefore if any man can show any just cause,
why they may not lawfully be joined together; let him now speak, or else
hereafter for ever hold his peace.

And also speaking to the persons that shall be married, he may say.

I require and charge you, as you will answer at the dreadful day of
judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, that if either of
you do know any impediment, why ye may not be lawfully joined together, in
matrimony, that ye confess it. For be ye well assured, that so many as be
coupled together, otherwise then Gods word does allow, are not joined together
by God, neither is their matrimony lawful.

N. Will thou have this woman to thy wedded wife, to live together after Gods
ordinance, in the holy estate of matrimony? Will thou love her, comfort her,
honor and keep her in sickness and in health, and forsaking all other, keep
thee only unto her, so long as you both shall live?

The man answers I will.

Then the Minister says unto the woman.

N. Will thou have this man to thy wedded husband to live together after Gods
ordinance, in the holy estate of Matrimony? Will thou obey him and serve him,
love, honor, and keep him in sickness and in health, and forsaking all other,
keep thee only unto him, so long as you both shall live?

The woman answers. I will.

Then the Minister says,

Who gives this woman to be married to this man?

And the Minister receiving the woman of her fathers, or friends hands, causes
the man to take the woman by the right hand, saying;

I. N. Take thee N. to my wedded wife, to have and to hold, from this day
forward; for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in
health, to love and to cherish, till death us depart, according to Gods holy
ordinance, and thereto I plight thee my troth.

Then they loose their hands, and the woman taking again the man by the right
hand, says;

I. N. Take thee N. to my wedded husband, to have and to hold, from this day
forward, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness, and in
health, to love, cherish, and to obey till death us depart, according to Gods
holy ordinance, and thereto I give thee my troth.

Then again loosing their hands, the man may give unto the woman a Ring, and
put it upon the fourth finger of her left hand, saying;

With this Ring I thee wed, with my body I thee i. e. I give thee my personal
honors.
worship, and with all my worldly goods I thee endow: In the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

Then may the Minister join their right hands together, and say;

Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder: Forasmuch as N.
and N. have consented together in holy wedlock, and have witnessed the same
before God and this company, and thereto have given and pledged their troth
either to other, and have declared the same (by giving and receiving of a Ring,
and) by joining of hands: I pronounce them to be man and wife together, In the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Let us pray.

O Eternal God, Creator and preserver of all mankind, giver of all spiritual
grace, the author of everlasting life; send thy blessing upon these thy
servants, this man and this woman, whom we bless in thy name, that as Isaac and
Rebecca lived faithfully together, so these persons may surely perform and keep
the vow and covenant between them made, and may ever remain in perfect love and
peace together, and live according to thy laws. And, O Lord, seeing it is by
thy gracious gift mankind is increased, give that thy blessing of children to
these two persons, and grant them to live so long together in godly love and
unity, that they may see their childrens children, and peace upon Israel. O
Lord bless them, and sow the seed of eternal life in their minds, that
whatsoever in thy holy word, they shall profitably learn, they may indeed
fulfill the same. Look, (O Lord) mercifully from Heaven upon this thy servant,
and thy handmaid which do put their trust in thee, send them help from thy holy
place, and evermore defend them, be unto them a tower of strength from the face
of their enemies. And as thou did send thy blessing upon Abraham and Sarah,
to their great comfort; so vouchsafe to send thy blessing upon these thy
servants, that they obeying thy will, and always being in safety under thy
protection, may abide in thy love unto their lives end. And, O God, which by
thy mighty power have made all things of naught, which also (after other things
set in order) did appoint, that out of man (created after thine own image and
similitude) woman should take her beginning, and knitting them together, did
teach, that it should never be lawful to put asunder those, whom thou by
Matrimony have made one; O Lord, which have consecrated the state of Matrimony
to such an excellent mystery, that in it is signified and represented the
spiritual marriage, and unity betwixt Christ and his Church; look mercifully
upon these thy servants, that both this man may love his wife, according to thy
word, as Christ did love his Spouse the Church, who gave himself for it, loving
and cherishing it even as his own flesh: and also that this woman may be loving
and amiable to her husband as Rachel; wise as Rebecca; faithful and obedient as
Sarah; and in all quietness, sobriety and peace, be a follower of holy and
godly matrones. O Lord, bless them both, and grant them to inherit thy
everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name and words we
conclude our imperfect prayers; saying, Our Father which art in Heaven,
hallowed be thy name: thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in
Heaven; give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us: and lead us not into temptation: but
deliver us from evil. For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for
ever, Amen.

The Blessing.

ALmighty God, which at the beginning did create our first Parents Adam and
Eve, and did sanctify and join them together in marriage; pour upon you the
riches of his grace: sanctify and bless you, that you may please him both in
body and soul, and live together in holy love to your lives end. God the
Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, bless, preserve and keep you. The Lord
mercifully look upon you, and so fill you with all spiritual benediction and
grace, that you may so live together in this life, that in the life to come you
may have life everlasting, Amen.

AN EXHORTATION AT THE BURIAL.
FOr as much as it has pleased Almighty God of his great mercy, to take unto
himself the soul of our dear brother here departed, we therefore commit his
body to the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, in sure and
certain hope of a resurrection by our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change their
vile bodies who do sleep in him, that they may be like unto his glorious body,
according to the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself. And now while the body is interring, it will be seasonable and
profitable for us to hear some portions out of Scripture, which may put us in
mind of our mortality, and of the resurrection.

It Is the speech of Job, Man that Job 14. 1, 2.
is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble. He comes forth like
a flower, and is cut down: he flies also as a shadow, and continues not.

I know that my redeemer lives, and Job 19. 25, 26.
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for
my self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be
consumed within me. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the
name of the Lord.

The speech of our Savior, I am John 11 25, 26.
the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live; and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never die.

The speech of Saint Paul; We 1 Timothy 6. 2.
brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.

Saint John says, I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, Romans 14.
23.
blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord: from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit, that they rest from their labors.

But no place is more seasonable to be read now unto you, then that of Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 20. which chiefly concerns the resurrection: Christ is risen
from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept. 20
For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. 21
For as in Adam all died, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every
22
man in his own order. Christ the 23
first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes the
end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, 24
when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power. For he must
reign, till he has put all enemies 25
under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. For he 26
has put all things under his feet; but 27
when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is
excepted, which did put all things under him. And when all things shall be
subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put
all 28
things under him, that God may be all in all. Else what shall they do, which 29
are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then
baptized for the dead? And why stand 30
we in jeopardy every hour? I protest 31
by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. If after
the manner of men, I have fought with 32
beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we die. Be not deceived: evil communications 33
corrupt good manners. Awake to righteousness, and sin not, for some 34
have not tbe knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame. But some man will
say, how are the dead raised up? And 35
with what body do they come? Thou fool, 36
that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. And that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that body which 37
shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. But
God gives it a body, as it has pleased 38
him: and to every seed his own body. All flesh is not the same flesh, but
there is one 39
kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another
of birds. There are also celestial bodies, and 40
hodies terrestial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the
terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, 41
and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star
differs from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead,
it 42
is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. It is sown in dishonor,
43
it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power. It is 44
sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body;
and there is a spiritual body. And so 45
it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was
made a quickening spirit. Howbeit that was not first, which is spiritual: 46
but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual. The first
man is of the earth, earthly: the second 47
man is the Lord from heaven, heavenly. As is the earthly, such are they that
are 48
earthly: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And 49
as we have born the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the
heavenly. Now this I say, brethren, 50
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: neither does
corruption inherit incorruption. Behold I show you a mystery: we shall not all
51
sleep, but we shall all be changed. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, 52
at the last trump, for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall he changed. For this corruptible must put on
incorruption, 53
and this mortal, must put on immortality. So when this corruptible 54
shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up
in victory. O Death, where is thy 55
sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and tbe
strength 56
of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, 57
which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore my
beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work 58
of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord.

Welbeloved, seeing we all know, that with God do live the spirits of them that
d^part hence in the Lord, and that the souls of them that be elected, after
they be delivered from the burden of the flesh, be in joy and felicity: let
us labor hereafter so to live in his fear, that when he shall be pleased to
accomplish the number of his elect, and to hasten his kingdom, or shall
deliver us out of the miseries of this sinful world, we may by his gracious
goodness (with all those departed in the true faith of his holy name) have our
perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul in his eternal and
everlasting glory. And seeing we have heard that our Lord Jesus Christ is the
resurrection and the life, in whom whosoever believes shall live, though he
die; and whosoever lives and believes in him shall not die eternally; who
also has taught us by his holy Apostle Paul, not to be sorry, as men without
hope, for them that sleep in him; let us endeavor so to be here raised from
the death of sin, to the life of righteousness, that when we shall depart this
life, we may rest in him, as our hope is, this our brother does, and at the
general resurrection, at the last day we may be sound acceptable in his sight,
and receive that blessing which his welbeloved Son shall then pronounce to all
that love and fear him; saying, Come ye blessed children of my Father, receive
the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Which God of his
mercy grant us all.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all, now, and evermore, Amen.

Prayers for the Fifth of November.
These Prayers following, framed or approved by the reverend Bishops of that
age, do demonstrate how causelessly that conjunction of Prelacy and Popery has
been of late years continued to their reproach.
Prayers and Thanksgivings for the happy deliverance of his Majesty, the Queen,
Prince, and States of the Parliament, from the most traitorous and bloody
intended Massacre by Gunpowder, November 5. 1605.

I.
ALmighty God, who have in all ages showed thy power and mercy, in the
miraculous and gracious deliverances of thy Church, and in the protection of
righteous and religious Kings, and States professing thy Holy and Eternal
truth, against the wicked conspiracies, and malicious practices of all the
enemies thereof: we yield unto thee from the very ground of our hearts all
possible praise and thanks for the wonderful, and mighty deliverance of our
gracious Sovereign King James, the Queen, the Prince, and all the Royal
branches, with the Nobility, Clergy, and Commons of this Realm assembled
together in Parliament, by Popish treachery appointed as sheep to the
slaughter, and that in most Barbarous and Savage manner, no age yielding
example of the like cruelty intended toward the Lords anointed, and his
people. Can this thy goodness, O Lord, be forgotten, worthy to be written in a
pillar of Marble, that we may ever remember to praise thee for the same, as the
fact is worthy a lasting monument, that all posterity may learn to detest it?
From this unnatural conspiracy, not our merit, but thy mercy, not our
foresight, but thy providence has delivered us, not our love to thee, but thy
love to thine anointed servant, and thy poor Church, with whom thou have
promised to be present to the end of the world. And therefore not unto us, not
unto us, Lord, but to thy Name be ascribed all honor and glory in all Churches
of the Saints, throughout all generations: for thou Lord have discovered the
snares of death, thou have broken them, and we are delivered; be thou still our
mighty protector, and scatter our cruel enemies, which delight in blood:
infatuate their counsel, and root out that Babylonish and Antichristian sect,
which say of Jerusalem, down with it, down with it, even to the ground. And to
that end strengthen the hands of our gracious King, the Nobles and Magistrates
of the land with judgment and justice to cut off these workers of iniquity,
(whose Religion is rebellion, whose faith is faction, whose practice is
murdering of souls and bodies) and to root them out of the confines and limits
of this Kingdom, that they may never prevail against us, and triumph in the
ruin of thy Church, and to give us grace by true and serious repentance, to
avert these and the like judgments from us. This Lord we earnestly crave at
thy merciful hands, together with the continuance of thy powerful protection
over our dread Sovereign, the whole Church, and these Realms, and the speedy
confusion of our implacable enemies, and that for thy dear Sons sake, our only
mediator and advocate.

II.
ALmighty God and heavenly Father, which o^ thy everlasting providence and
tender mercy toward us, have prevented the extreme malice and mischievous
imagination of our enemies, revealing and confounding their horrible and
devilish enterprise plotted against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Royal
house, and the whole State of this Realm, for the subversion thereof, together
with the truth of thy Gospel and pure Religion amongst us, and for the reducing
into this Church and land of Popish superstition and tyranny: we most humbly
praise and magnify thy glorious name, for thine infinite gracious goodness in
this our mavelous deliverance; we confess it was and is thy mercy, thy mercy
alone, (most merciful Father) that we are not consum^d, that their snare is
broken, and our soul is escaped. For our sins cried to Heaven against us, and
our iniquities justly called for judgment upon us: but thy great mercy toward
us has exalted it self above judgment, not to deal with us after our sins, to
give us over (as we deserved) to be a prey to our enemies, but taking our
correction into thine own hands, to deliver us from their bloodthirsty malice,
and preserve from death and destruction our King and State, with thy holy
Gospel and true Religion amongst us. Good Lord give u^ true repentance, and
unfeigned conversion unto thee, to prevent further judg^ments: increase in us
more and more a lively says and fruitful love in all obedience, that thou
may continue thy loving favor with the light of thy Gospel, to us and our
posterity for evermore. Make us now and always truly thankful in heart, word
and deed, for all thy gracious mercies, and this our special deliverance.
Protect and defend our Sovereign Lord the King, with the Queen and all the
Royal progeny, from all treasons and conspiracies, preserve them in thy faith,
fear and love, under the shadow of thy wings against all evil and wickedness,
prosper their reign with long happiness on earth, and everlasting glory
following in the kingdom of Heaven. Bless the whole State and Realm with grace
and peace, that with one heart and mouth we may praise thee in thy Church, and
always sing joyfully, that thy merciful kindness is ever more and more toward
us, and the truth of the Lord endures for ever, through Jesus Christ our only
Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

III.
ETernal God, and our most mighty protector, we thy people of this land,
confess our selves, above all the Nations of the earth, infinitely bound unto
thy heavenly majesty for thy many unspeakable benefits conferred and heaped
upon us, especially for planting thy Gospel among us, and placing over us a
most gracious King, a faithful professor and defender of the same; both which
exasperate the enemies of true religion, and enrage their thoughts to the
invention of most dreadful designs: all which notwithstanding it has pleased
thee hitherto either to prevent or overthrow, at this time principally thou
have most strangely discovered an horrible and cruel plot and device, for the
massacring as well of thy dear servant and our dread Sovereign, as of the chief
States assembled in thy fear, for the continuance of thy truth and good of this
Realm. We humbly present our selves at thy feet, admiring thy might and
wisdom, and acknowledging thy grace and favor, in preserving them and the
whole Realm by their safety, beseeching thee for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake
to continue still thy care over us, and to shield our gracious King under the
shadow of thy wings, that no mischievous attempt may come near, nor the sons of
wickedness may hurt him, but that under him we may still enjoy this his
peaceable government, with the profession of the Gospel of thy Son Christ
Jesus, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, etc.

IV.
O God, infinite in power and of endless mercy, we give thee all possible
thanks, that it has pleased thee so miraculously to discover, and defeat the
mischievous plots of thine and our enemies: thou have delivered our dread
Sovereign from the snare of the fowler, and his Nobles from the fire and the
fury of the wicked: he shall rejoice in thy salvation, and we his people shall
triumph in this thy wonderful deliverance, thy Gospel shall prosper, and thine
adversaries shall be confounded. And multiply (good Lord) we beseech thee, thy
great goodness toward our gracious King, and his kingdoms, from this time
forth, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer used by the Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament. I.
O GOD, most great and glorious which dwell in the Heavens over all, yet
humblest thy self to behold the things that are done upon the earth: we, the
people and sheep of thy pasture, assembled by thy providence, to the
performance of this high service, whereupon, the honor of thy name, the beauty
of thy Church amongst us, the glory of our King, and wealth of our State does
depend, knowing, that without thee, we can do nothing: do, at this time, with
fear and reverence, in the beginning of our consultations, first look up unto
thee (from whom wisdom and happy success does come) praying thee, to look down
from Heaven upon us with the eye of thy mercy; to draw near unto us with the
presence of thy grace: to prepare us all with counsel and understanding; and to
be president, and director of all our conferences: that those things may be
propounded, conceived, allowed, and confirmed, which may best please thee, and
most directly and soundly uphold the honor of thy Name, the sincerity of thy
worship; the safety of our King; and peace of thy people: even for thy Son our
Lords sake.

And that we may not our selves, be any hinderance to the obtaining of these
our desires, either by means of any Sin formerly committed, or of any
corruption yet remaining in us: we humbly pray thee, to forgive our sins, and
blot out all our iniquities: and to stand reconciled unto us, in an everlasting
covenant of peace, as if we had never sinned against thee.

And, because our hearts by nature are not fit for good cogitations; create a
new heart, and renew a right spirit in us: remove far from us all vainglorious
humor, of commending our own wit; all covetous humor of advancing our private
profit, all envious humor of disgracing other men's gifts; all malicious humor
of hurting any man's person: and (finally) all froward humor of opposing our
selves, against just; needful, and godly things, by whomsoever propounded.
Furnish us with knowledge, wisdom, and zeal by sending down thy spirit into
our hearts, that we may understand, discern, prefer, and set forward all things
tending to the advancement of thy glory, and such as may be thought worthy our
assent and furtherance.

And, because all good things are not of equal goodness, nor all needful things
of equal necessity: let our care and zeal be equally proportioned to the
degrees of things in goodness and necessity different. And therefore; first,
make us careful of the glory of thy Name (which is the high end of all thy
counsels and works, and ought to be the last end, and first respect of all our
purposes and doings.) And therein, let our especial care be, to provide for the
continuance of thy word, and religious practice of thy worship, by the
ministry and means that Christ has planted in his Church: next, let the good
of this whole Island move our care and zeal; which consisting in the safety and
honor of the King, and the enacting and executing of good laws; let us be
wisely careful, and faithfully zealous for the person of our King, whom thou
the King of Kings have in mercy set over us.

And because no Law can be good, that is not agreeable to thy law, which
contains the fundamental equity of all laws: in making laws to govern thy
people, let us always have an eye unto thy law: not digressing from the holy
equity thereof: and what through thy mercy, we shall here profitably enact: we
pray thee, through the whole Kingdom it may be truly executed, that our great
labor may not be disgraced with little fruit.

And forasmuch as we all and every one of us have, in this place, with wonder
and astonishment, and without any merit of ours, found a most evident assurance
of thy mercy and goodness, in a miraculous deliverance from the greatest
danger, by popish treachery that ever was attempted or threatened, toward our
King, our State and Us: give us (good Lord) hearts above the hearts of men, to
offer unto thee in the same place, a daily sacrifice of thanksgiving in the
highest measure; together with a fervent and incessant zeal, care, and
diligence in all our proceedings, for the settling of the peace and happy estate
of thy Church amongst us: the preservation of our King; his royal progeny; our
selves, and our posterity: and for the preventing, suppressing, and final
rooting out of the spring, issue, and fruit of all such hellish and popish
hearts, intentions, and practices: to the everlasting praise and glory of thy
blessed name.

Hear us, we pray thee (O Father of mercy) in these our most humble and needful
petitions: forgive and answer us, according to thy fatherly and great goodness,
for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, three persons,
and one God, be all praise, glory, and power, now, and for ever, Amen.

A Prayer for the Parliament, used also in the House. II.
ALmighty God, which by thy holy Prophet David art most truly said to stand in
the congregation of Princes, and give judgment in the midst of the mighty
men of the world, and through whose authority Princes do reign, Lawmakers do
discern just things, Lords bear rule, and all Judges of the earth execute
judgment, and for that comes of thee all counsel and equity, all
understanding and strength: grant unto us here gathered together in thy name,
that wisdom which is always assistant to thy seat, to give knowledge to our
feeble and ignorant minds. Send down (we beseech thee) the same wisdom out of
thy holy heavens, and from the throne of thy majesty, that it may be now with
us, and labor with us, whereby we surely knowing what is acceptable unto thee,
may be led through it to the debating, weighing, and final determining of those
matters, by the which thy blessed Name may be glorified, thy Catholic Church
of England confirmed and increased, the Kings assurance established, the common
tranquillity of this Realm safely maintained, and last of all, all estates and
people thereof, in true obedience and charity united and knit together. Grant
this, O God, for thy only Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Ancient manner of ORDINATION, In the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
Received and observed by the most Eminent Divines since the Reformation. The
prudence and excellency of which constitution, these particulars following do
demonstrate to any ingenuous and unbiassed Reader.
THere were four times in the year ordinarily appointed for it, Prayer and
Fasting of the whole Church was to precede it, which times being known, the
persons ordained might be the more assured of the benefit of it.

There was to be a strict examination of the persons to be presented, both for
their learning, virtuous, and godly conversation, and a great charge laid upon
him that did present them, to take good heed they were apt and meet to exercise
their Ministry duly to the honor of God, and the edifying of his Church; and
a principal person of the Ministry (whose office it was) did affirm it
publicly, that he had enquired of them, and examined them, and conceived them
so to be.

Upon the day of Ordination, both of Deacons, and those admitted unto the
Ministry of Priesthood, (or Presbyters) there was to be a Sermon, declaring the
duties and office of Ministers, the necessity of such orders in the Church, and
how the people ought to esteem of them in their vocation.

At the entrance into each, the people were asked if any of them knew any
impediment or notable crime in any of them now presented, for the which they
ought not to be admitted, and were desired in the name of God to come forth and
declare it: and if any were objected, the person accused was not to be ordained
until such time as he had fully cleared himself of it.

The place where it was to be done, was in the face of the Church or
congregation on the Lords day, or some other day of public meeting; the manner
of the Ordination as follows.

First for the Deacons.
THey were first commended unto God by the prayer of the whole congregation;
then some fitting portions out of holy Scripture were read before them,
containing their duties, viz. 1 Timothy 3. from the 8. ver. to the end of the
Chapter. Acts 6. from the 2. to the 8.

After this the office of a Deacon was declared unto them, many serious
questions asked them, some in matter of belief, as whether they did believe
they had an inward call by the motion of the Holy Ghost, to take upon them that
office and ministration; and that their outward was according to the will of
Christ, that they did believe all the Canonical books of holy Scripture. Some
in matter of practice, as whether they would frame their own lives and the
lives of their families as examples unto others, and would reverently obey
their Governors and superiors, harkening to their admonitions, etc. To these
there were solemn engagements for them accordingly, in the presence of the
congregation.

The manner of Ordaining was thus,

The Deacons being upon their knees, the Bishop laid his hands severally upon
the head of each of them, saying,

Take thou Authority to execute the office of a Deacon in the Church of God
committed unto thee, In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
Amen.

Then was delivered to each of them the New Testament, saying,

Take thou authority to read the Gospel in the Church of God, and to preach the
same, if thou be thereto ordinarily commanded.

And as an initiation of them, one of them by appointment did read a portion
out of the Gospel that day.

The oath of Supremacy administered unto each, and the seasonable and sitting
prayers both before imposition of hands, and after, and that they were that day
to receive the Communion, may be found in the book it self, of which is here
intended only a summary; thus much for the inferior office of the Deacon, upon
the experience and trial of whom in it for the space of a year, (except for
reasonable causes it should be thought otherwise,) and being found faithful and
diligent, they might be admitted unto the higher ministries in the Church, viz.
unto the order of Priesthood or Presbyters, which follows.

The ordination of Presbyters.
NOw secondly, for the manner of ordering of those admitted into the Ministry
of Priesthood or Presbyters, it was thus; after the Sermon or exhortation,
wherein their office and duty was to be shown unto them, they were solemnly
presented by a principal person, for that end, the consent and approbatition of
the people was asked in these words following.

Good people, these be they whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this day
unto the holy office of Priesthood, and after due examination, we find not to
the contrary, but that they be lawfully called to their function and ministry,
and that they be persons meet for the same: but yet if there be any of you
which knows any impediment or notable crime of any of them, for the which he
ought not to be received into this holy ministry, now in the name of God
declare the same, etc.

And if any were objected, the person was not to be ordained till he had
cleared himself of it.

Those that were to be ordained, were first commended (as before) unto God, by
the prayers of the whole congregation, of which this was one, viz. That God,
who is the giver of all good things, and by his holy spirit had appointed
diverse orders of Ministers in his Church, would be pleased mercifully to
behold these his servants now called to that office, that he would replenish
them, so with the truth of doctrine and innocence of life, that both by word
and good example they might faithfully serve him in this office, to the glory
of his name and profit of his Church or congregation, etc.

After Prayer some select portions out of holy Scripture, containing their
duties were read before them, viz. Acts 20. 17. to the 36. From Mileto Paul
sent messengers to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church, etc. or 2 Timothy
3. 1. to the 8. If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a worthy
work, a Bishop must be blameless, etc. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. containing the
Apostles commission from our Savior, or John 10. 11. to 17. chap. 20. 19. to
24. And then an Ancient Hymn said or sung, as may be seen more at large in the
book of Ordination.

These things premised, then followed the Ordination it self: first, a grave
solid exhortation and admonition directed to the persons to be ordained, with
diverse serious questions and solemn engagements taken of them; and I conceive
it is more profitable to have things of this nature punctually set down without
any variation, whereby all come to be a like obliged, and each may have an
often serious review of what was charged upon him, and engaged by him, then to
have them left to the ordainers sudden transient expressions, which cannot be
well called to mind by either, and for the same causes a set form of Prayer at
these solemnities is the most prudent.

The Exhortation given by the Bishop to the persons ordained.
YOu have heard brethren, as well in your private examination, as in the
exhortation, and in the holy lessons taken out of the Gospel, and of the
writings of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how great importance this
office is (whereunto ye be called.) And now we exhort you in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ to have in remembrance into how high a dignity, and to how
chargeable an office ye be called, that is to say, the messengers, the
watchmen, the pastors and the stewards of the Lord, to teach, to premonish, to
feed and provide for the Lords family, to seek for Christ's sheep that be
dispersed abroad, and for his children which be in the midst of this naughty
world, to be saved through Christ for ever. Have always therefore printed in
your remembrance, how great a treasure is committed to your charge: for they be
the sheep of Christ, which he bought with his death, and for whom he shed his
blood. The Church and congregation whom you must serve, is his spouse and his
body.

And if it shall chance the same Church, or any member thereof, to take any
hurt or hinderance by reason of your negligence, ye know the greatness of the
fault, and also of the horrible punishment which will ensue. Wherefore consider
with your selves the end of your ministry toward the children of God,
toward the spouse and body of Christ, and see that you never cease your
labor, your care and diligence, until you have done all that lies in you,
according to your bounden duty, to bring all such as are or shall be committed
unto your charge, unto that agreement in faith and knowledge of God, and to
that ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left
among you, either of error in religion, or for viciousness in life.

Then, forasmuch as your office is both of so great excellency, and of so
great difficulty, ye see with how great care and study ye ought to apply your
selves, as well that you may show your selves kind to that Lord who has
placed you in so high a dignity, as also to beware that neither you your selves
offend, neither be occasion that other offend. Howbeit, ye cannot have a mind
and a will thereto of your selves, for that power and ability is given of God
alone. Therefore ye see how ye ought and have need earnestly to pray for his
holy Spirit. And seeing that you cannot by any other means compass the doing of
so weighty a work pertaining to the salvation of man, but with doctrine and
exhortation taken out of the holy Scripture, and with a life agreeable unto the
same: ye perceive how studious ye ought to be in reading and in learning the
Scriptures, and in framing the manners, both of your selves, and of them that
specially pertain unto you, according to the rule of the same Scriptures: and
for this self same cause, ye see how ye ought to forsake and set aside (as much
as you may) all worldly cares and studies.

We have good hope, that you have well weighed and pondered these things with
your selves long before this time, and that you have clearly determined, by
Gods grace, to give your selves wholly to this vocation, whereunto it has
pleased God to call you, so that (as much as lies in you) you apply your
selves wholly to this one thing, and draw all your cares and studies this way,
and to this end. And that you will continually pray for the heavenly assistance
of the Holy Ghost from God the Father, by the mediation of our only mediator
and Savior Jesus Christ, that by daily reading and weighing of the Scriptures,
ye may so wax riper and stronger in your ministry: and that ye may so
endeavor your selves from time to time, to sanctify the lives of you and
yours, and to fashion them after the rule and doctrine of Christ: and that ye
may be wholesome and godly examples and patterns for the rest of the
Congregation to follow: and that this present congregation of Christ here
assembled, may also understand your minds and wills in these things: and that
this your promise shall more move you to do your duties, ye shall answer
plainly to these things, which we in the name of the congregation shall demand
of you touching the same.

First demand.

Do you think in your heart that you be truly called according to the will of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this Church of England, to the
ministry of Priesthood?

Answer.

I think it.

Second demand.

Be you persuaded that the holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all doctrine
required of necessity for eternal salvation, through faith in Jesus Christ? And
are you determined with the said Scriptures to instruct the people committed to
your charge, and to teach nothing (as required of necessity to eternal
salvation) but that you shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the
Scripture?

Answer.

I am so persuaded, and have so determined by Gods grace.

Third demand.

Will you then give your faithful diligence, always so to minister the
doctrine and Sacraments, and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has
commanded, and as this realm has received the same, according to the
commandments of God, so that you may teach the people committed to your cure
and charge, with all diligence to keep and observe the same.

Answer.

I will so do by the help of the Lord.

Fourth demand.

Will you be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away all
erroneous and strange doctrines, contrary to Gods word, and to use both public
and private monitions and exhortations, as well to the sick as to the whole,
within your cures, as need shall require, and occasion be given?

Answer.

I will, the Lord being my helper.

Fifth demand.

Will you be diligent in prayers, and in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in
such studies as help to the knowledge of the same, laying aside the study of
the world and the flesh?

Answer.

I will endeavor my self so to do, the Lord being my helper.

Sixth demand.

Will you be diligent to frame and fashion your own selves, and your families
according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make both your selves and them (as
much as in you lies) wholesome examples and spectacles to the flock of Christ?

Answer.

I will apply my self, the Lord being my helper.

Seventh demand.

Will you maintain and set forwards (as much as lies in you) quietness,
peace, and love among all Christian people, and specially among them that are,
or shall be committed to your charge?

Answer.

I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

Eigth demand.

Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto whom
the government and charge is committed over you, following with a glad mind
and will, their godly admonitions, and submitting your selves to their godly
judgments.

Answer.

I will so do, the Lord being my helper.

Then the Bishop said.

Almighty God, who has given you this will to do all these things, grant also
unto you strength and power to perform the same, that he may accomplish his
work which he has begun in you, until the time he shall come at the latter
day to judge the quick and the dead.

After this exhortation and these demands, the Congregation was desired
secretly in their prayers to make humble supplications to God for the aforsaid
things, viz. that the persons might have grace to perform what they had
promised and had been exhorted unto, for the which, there was a certain space
kept in silence.

And then the Bishop prayed in this wise.

ALmighty God, and Heavenly Father, which of thine infinite love and goodness
toward us, have given to us thy only and most dear beloved Son Jesus Christ to
be our redeemer, and author of everlasting life, who after he had made perfect
our redemption by his death, and was ascended into heaven, sent abroad into the
world his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors, and Pastors, by whose
labor and ministry, he gathered together a great flock in all the parts of
the world, to set forth the eternal praise of thy holy Name. For these so
great benefits of thy eternal goodness, and for that thou have vouchsafed to
call these thy servants here present, to the same office and ministry of
salvation of mankind, we render unto thee most hearty thanks, we worship and
praise thee, and we humbly beseech thee, by the same thy Son, to grant unto
all, which either here, or elsewhere call upon thy Name, that we may show our
selves thankful to thee for these and all other thy benefits, and that we may
daily increase and go forwards, in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Son,
by the holy Spirit. So that a^ well by these thy Ministers, as by t^em to whom
they shall be appointed Ministers, thy holy Name may be always glorified, and
thy blessed kingdom enlarged, through the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ,
which lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of the same holy Spirit,
world without end, Amen.

After this prayer the Bishop with the Ministers present did lay their hands
severally upon the head of every one that received orders, the receivers humbly
kneeling upon their knees, and the Bishop in the name of the rest of the
Ministers asisting him in it, did say*

The sense of these words, and the fitness of the use of them here upon this
occasion, see the late arch. Bishop of Armaghs judgment as the neglect in that
ordination which gives no power or authority, either in these words, or any
other, to the likesense. Ordinat of Presby. ters, p. 136.
Receive the holy Ghost: whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven: and
whose sins thou do retain, they are retained: and be thou a faithful
dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments. In the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen.

Then was delivered to every one of them the Bible in his hand, the Bishop
saying,

Take thou authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy
Sacraments in the Congregation, where thou shall be so appointed.

After this was done there was a prayer that the Lord would send upon those
persons thus ordained, his heavenly blessing, that they might be clad about
with all justice, and that his word spoken by their mouths, may have such
success, that it may never be spoken in vain, and that the people committed to
their charge may have grace to hear, and receive the same as his most holy
word and the means of their salvation, and that in all their words and deeds
they may seek his glory, and the increase of his kingdom, etc.

And it was also ordered that there should be a Communion, and that all that
were ordained, should receive it together with the ordainers, and to remain in
the same place where hands were laid upon them till they had received the
Communion.

Now thus weighing and well considering the whole proceedings of this
constitution. Let any moderate prudent person judge, if there were any just
cause to have laid it wholly aside, but that upon second thoughts there is more
cause it were restored to the general satisfaction both of people and
Ministry.

And for the form of Consecrating a Bishop, it was very grave and Solemn, the
substance of which was as follows.
THe person Elected to that office was commended accordingly to God by the
prayers of the Congregation, that he might have grace duly to execute the
office whereunto he is called to the edifying of the Church, and to the honor
and glory of his name. Wherein the principal prayer is the same which was used
in the ordaining of Priests or Presbyters, with this difference, in the former,
thus, behold this thy servant now called to the office of Priesthood, and in
this, called to the work and Ministry of a Bishop. The portions read out of
holy Scripture are the same also, as 1 Timothy 3. 1. to verse. 8. John. 10. 1. to
verse. 17. only a third added John. 21, 15. to verse. 18. The Bishop Elected was
presented by two Bishops, as a godly and well learned man to be consecrated
accordingly, diverse solemn engagements were demanded, viz. for the reading of
the Scriptures, prayers, preaching, the withstanding of false doctrines, an
exemplary godly li^e, maintaining of peace and quietness, correcting of the
unquiet, to be gentle, merciful and charitable to the poor and needy, etc. As
may be seen more at large in the Book.

Then the prayer before, imposition of hands was this.
ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, which of thine infinite goodness
have given thy only and most dea^ beloved Son Jesus Christ ^o be our Redeemer
and Author of everlasting life, who after that he had made perfect our
Redemption by his death, and was ascended into heaven, poured down his gifts
abundantly upon men, making some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Doctors, to the edifying and making perfect his
Congregation: grant, we beseech thee, to this thy servant such grace, that he
may evermore be ready to spread abroad thy Gospel, and glad tidings of
reconcilement to God, and to use the authority given unto him, not to destroy,
but to save, not to hurt, but to help: so that he, as a wise and faithful
servant giving to thy family meat in due season, may at the last be received
into joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee, and the holy Ghost,
lives and reigns one God world without end, Amen.

Then the Archbishop and Bishops present, laid their hands upon the head of the
Elected Bishop, saying,

Take the holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the grace of God which
is in thee, by imposition of hands: for God has not given us the spirit of
fear, but of power, and love, and soberness.

Then the Archbishop delivers to him, the Bible saying,

Give heed unto reading, exhortation, and doctrine. Think upon these things
contained in this book. Be diligent in them, that the increase coming thereby,
may be manifest unto all men. Take heed unto thy self, and unto teaching, and
be diligent in doing them: for by doing this thou shall save thy self, and them
that hear thee. Be to the flock of Christ a shepherd, not a woolf: feed them,
devour them not: hold up the weak, heal the sick, bind together the broken,
bring again the outcasts, seek the lost, be so merciful, that ye be not too
too remiss: so minister discipline, that you forget not mercy, that when the
chief Shepherd shall come, ye may receive the immarcescible crown of glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Lastly there was a Communion and the new consecrated Bishop, did communicate
with the rest. When there was one special prayer conceived for him as
follows.
MOst merciful Father, we beseech thee, to send down upon this thy servant thy
heavenly blessing, and so endue him with thy holy Spirit, that he preaching thy
word, may not only be earnest to reprove, beseech, and rebuke, with all
patience and doctrine, but also may be, to such as believe, an wholesome
example, in word, in conversation, in love, in faith, in chastity, and purity:
that faithfully fulfilling his course, at the latter day he may receive the
crown of righteousness laid up by the Lord the righteous Judge, who lives and
reigns, one God with the Father and the holy Ghost, world without end, Amen.

Whereby it is evident if there were any negligence in the Bishop in preaching
or other labors, in the work of the Ministry, the constitution was not
defective in the exhortations of him, and prayers for him accordingly, nay it
rather lays more upon him, then it does upon the Presby^ers.

To conclude, let the Reader take a view of the thirty sixth Article of religion
of the Church of England, and let him judge if they had not very good cause to
approve as they there do this book of ordination, and to declare that all such
as have been, or shall be ordered accordingly, to be rightly and lawfully
ordered, and whether it had not been much better, upon the disputes concerning
it, to have had some moderate accommodation, then a total suppression of it.

The Lord give us moderate spirits, and a right understanding in all things.

ARTICLES AGREED UPON By the ARCHBISHOPS and BISHOPS of both Provinces, and
the whole CLERGY;

In the Convocation holden at LONDON, in the year 1562.

For the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of
Consent touching true RELIGION.

THE TABLE.
1 OF faith in the Trinity. 2 Of Christ the Son of God. 3 Of his going down
into hell. 4 Of his Resurrection. 5 Of the Holy Ghost. 6 Of the sufficiency of
the Scripture. 7 Of the old Testament. 8 Of the three Creeds. 9 Of the Original
sin. 10 Of free will. 11 Of Justification. 12 Of good works. 13 Of works before
justification. 14 Of works of supererogation. 15 Of Christ alone without sin.
16 Of sin after Baptism. 17 Of Predestination and Election. 18 Of obtaining
salvation by Christ. 19 Of the Church. 20 Of the authority of the Church. 21 Of
the authority of the general councels. 22 Of Purgatory. 23 Of ministering in the
congregation. 24 Of speaking in the congregation. 25 Of the Sacraments. 26 Of
the unworthiness of the Ministers. 27 Of Baptism. 28 Of the Lords Supper. 29
Of the wicked which eat not the body of Christ. 30 Of both kinds. 31 Of
Christ's one oblation. 32 Of the marriage of Priests. 33 Of excommunicate
persons. 34 Of Traditions of the Church. 35 Of Homilies. 36 Of consecration of
Ministers. 37 Of civil Magistrates. 38 Of Christian men's goods. 39 Of a
Christian man's oath. 40 Of the Ratification.
ARTICLES OF RELIGION.
I. Of Faith in the holy Trinity. THere is but one living and true God,
everlasting, without body, parts, or passions; of infinite power, wisdom, and
goodness, the maker and preserver of all things both visible and invisible. And
in unity of this Godhead there be three persons, of one substance, power, and
eternity; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

II. Of the Word or Son of God, which was made very man. THe Son, which is the
Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very and
eternal God of one substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of
the blessed Virgin, of her substance: so that two whole and perfect natures,
that is to say, the Godhead and manh^^d were joined together in one person,
never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God and very man, who truly
suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and
to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for actual sins of men.

III. Of the going down of Christ into Hell. AS Christ died for us, and was
buried: so also is it to be believed, that he went down into Hell.

IV. Of the Resur^^ction of Christ. CHrist did truly rise again from death, and
took again his body, with flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the
perfection of man's nature, wherewith he ascended into Heaven, and there
sits, until he return to judge all men at the last day.

V. Of the Holy Ghost. THe Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son,
is of one substance, Majesty and Glory, with the Father and the Son, very and
eternal God.

VI. Of the sufficientcy of the holy Scriptures for salvation. HOly Scripture
contains all things necessary to salvation: so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it
should be believed as an Article of the faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to salvation. In the name of the holy Scripture, we do understand
those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was
never any doubt in the Church.

Of the names and numbers of the Canonical BOOKS.
GEnesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numbers. Deuteronomium. Joshue. Judges. Ruth. The
1. Book of Samuel. The 2. Book of Samuel. The 1. Book of Kings. The 2. Book of
Kings. The 1. Book of Chronicles The 2. Book of Chronicles The 1. Book of
Esdras. The 2. Book of Esdras. The Book of Hester. The Book of Job. The Psalms.
The Proverbs. Ecclesiastes, or Preacher. Cantica, or songs of Solo. 4. Prophets
the greater. 12. Prophets the less.
And the other Books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example of
life and instruction of manners; but yet does it not apply them to establish
any doctrine, such are these following.

The 3. Book of Esdras. The 4. Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The Book of
Judeth. The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of Wisdom. Jesus the son of
Sirach. Baruch the Prophet. The song of the three Children. The Story of
Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The prayer of Manasses. The 1. book of
Maccabees The 2. book of Maccahees
All the books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account them Canonical.

VI. Of the Old Testament. THe old Testament is not contrary to the new, for
both in the old and new Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind by
Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and man, being both God and man.
Wherefore they are not to be heard, which feign that the old fathers did look
only for transitory promises. Although the law given from God by Moses, as
touching Ceremonies and Rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the civil
precepts thereof ought of necessity to be received in any Common wealth: yet
notwithstanding, no Christian man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the
commandments, which are called moral.

VIII. Of the three Creeds. THe three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and
that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received
and believed: for they may be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

IX. Of original birth or sin. ORiginal sin stands not in the following of
Adam, (as the Pelagians do vainly talk) but it is the fault and corruption of
the nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam,
whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is of his own
nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusts always contrary to the
spirit, and therefore in every person born into this world, it deserves Gods
wrath and damnation. And this infection of nature does remain, yea, in them
that are regenerated, whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...),
which some do expound the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affection, some
the desire of the flesh, is not subject to the law of God. And although there
is no condemnation for them that believe and are baptized, yet the Apostle does
confess, that concupiscence and lust has of it self the nature of sin.

X. Of free will. THe condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he
cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to
faith and calling upon God: wherefore we have no power to do good works
pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing
us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have that good
will.

XI. Of the J^stification of man. WE are accounted righteous before God, only
for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our
own works or deservings. Wherefore, that we are justified by faith only, is a
most wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed
in the Homily of Justification.

XII. Of good works. ALbeit that good works, which are the fruits of faith, and
follow after Justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity
of Gods judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and
do spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith, in so much that by them a
lively faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by the fruit.

XIII. Of works before Justification. WOrks done before the grace of Christ,
and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they
spring not of faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive
grace, (or as the School-authors say) deserve grace of congruity: yea, rather
for that they are not done as God has willed and commanded them to be done, we
doubt not but they have the nature of sin.

XIV. Of works of supererogation. VOluntary works besides, over and above Gods
commandments, which they call works of supererogation, cannot be taught without
arrogance and impiety. For by them men do declare that they do not only render
unto God as much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake
then of bounden duty is required: whereas Christ says plainly, when ye have
done all that are commanded to you, say, we are unprofitable servants.

XV. Of Christ alone without sin. CHrist in the truth of our nature was made
like unto us in all things (sin only except) from which he was clearly void,
both in his flesh, and in his spirit. He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by
sacrifice of himself once made, should take away the sins of the world: and sin
(as St. John says) was not in him. But all we the rest (although baptized, and
born again in Christ) yet offend in many things, and if we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

XVI. Of sin after Baptism. NOw every deadly sin willingly committed after
Baptism is sin against the Holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant
of repentance is not to be denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism.
After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall
into sin, and by the grace of God (we may) arise again, and amend our lives.
And therefore they are to be condemned, which say they can no more sin as long
as they live here, to deny the place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

XVII. Of Predestination and Election. PRedestination to life is the
everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of the world were
laid) he has constantly decreed by his counsel, secret to us, to deliver from
curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to
bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor.
Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called
according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in due season: they through
grace obey the calling: they be justified freely: they be made sons of God by
adoption: they be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ:
they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy they attain to
everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the spirit of Christ mortifying the works of
the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God: so for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
Devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into wretchlesness of most
unclean living, no less perilous then desperation.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture: and in our doings that will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the word of God.

XVIII. Of obtaining eternal salvation only by the Name of Christ. THey also
are to be had accursed, that presume to say that every man shall be saved by
the law or sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his life
according to that law, and the light of nature. For holy Scripture does set out
unto us only the name of Jesus Christ whereby men must be saved.

XIX. Of the Church. THe visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful
men, in the which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly
ministered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred: so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of ceremonies,
but also in matters of faith.

XX. Of the authority of the Church. THe Church has power to decree Rites or
Ceremonies, and authority in controversies of faith: and yet it is not lawful
for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods word written,
neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to
another. Wherefore although the Church be a witness and a keeper of holy Writ,
yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same
ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.

XXI. Of the authority of general Councels. GEneral Councels may not be
gathered together without the commandment and will of princes. And when they be
gathered together (forasmuch as they be an assembly of men, whereof all be not
governed with the spirit and word of God) they may err, and sometime have
erred, even in things pertaining unto God. wherefore things ordained by them as
necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be
declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture.

XXII. Of Purgatory. THe Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons,
worshipping and adoration, as well of Jmages, as of Relics, and also
invocation of Saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no
warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God.

XXIII. Of ministering in the congregation. It is not lawful for any man to
take upon him the office of public preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in
the Congregation, before he be lawfully called, and sent to execute the same.
And those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and
called to this work by men, who have public authority given unto them in the
Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lords vineyard.

XXIV. Of speaking in the Congregation in such a tongue as the people
understands. IT is a thing plainly repugnant to the word of God, and the
custom of the Primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church, or to
minister the Sacraments in a tongue not understanded of the people.

XXV. Of the Sacraments. SAcraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or
tokens of Christian men's profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses,
and effectual signs of grace and Gods good will toward us, by the which he
does work invisibly in us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and
confirm our faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism, and the supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures: but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they
have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not o^dained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them And in such only, as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation: but they that receive them
unworthily purchase to themselves damnation, as S. Paul says.

XXVI. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the effect of
the Sacraments. ALthough in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with
the good, and sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the
word and Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name,
but in Christ's, and do minister by his commission and authority, we may use
their ministry both in hearing the word of God, and in the receiving of the
Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such, as by faith, and
rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil
men.

Nevertheless, it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that enquiry
be made of evil Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have
knowledge of their offenses: and finally being found guilty, by just judgment
be deposed.

XXVII. Of Baptism. Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of
difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from others that be not
Christened: but it is also a sign of Regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by
an instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly are grafted into the Church:
the promises of the forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of
God, by the holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed: faith is confirmed, and
grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God. The Baptism of young children is
in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the
institution of Christ.

XXVIII. Of the Lords Supper. THe Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of
the love that Christians ought to have among themselves one to another: but
rather it is a Sacrament of our redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to
such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the bread which we
break, is a partaking of the body of Christ: and likewise the Cup of blessing
is a partaking of the blood of Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many superstitions.

The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.

XXIX. Of the wicked which eat not the body of Christ in the use of the Lords
Supper. THe wicked, and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do
carnally and visibly press with their teeth (as S. Augustine says) the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of
Christ, but rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the sign or
Sacrament of so great a thing.

XXX. Of both kinds. THe Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the
Lay People. For both the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and
commandment, ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike.

XXXI. Of the one oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross. THe offering of
Christ once made, is that perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction
for all the sins of the whole world, both original and actual, and there is
none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifices of
Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the Priest did offer Christ for
the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, were blasphemous
fables, and dangerous deceits.

XXXII. Of the marriage of Priests. BIshops, Priests, and Deacons, are not
commanded by Gods law, either to vow the estate of single life, or to abstain
from marriage: Therefore it is lawful also for them, as for all other
Christian men, to marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same
to serve better to godliness.

XXXIII. Of excommunicate persons, how they are to be avoided. THat person
which by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from the unity of
the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the
faithful as an Heathen and Publicane, until he be openly reconciled by
Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has authority thereto.

XXXIV. Of the traditions of the Church. IT is not necessary that Traditions
and Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly like, for at all times they
have been diverse, and may be changed according to the diversity of countries,
times, and men's manners, so that nothing be ordained against Gods word.
Whosoever through his private judgment, willingly and purposely does openly
break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to
the word of God, and be ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be
rebuked openly, (that other may fear to do the like) as he that offends
against the common order of the Church, and hurts the authority of the
Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak brethren.

Every particular or national Church, has authority to ordain, change, and
abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority, so
that all things be done to edifying.

XXXV. Of Homilies. THe second Book of Homilies, the several titles whereof we
have joined under this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine,
and necessary for these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were
set forth in the time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be
read in Churches by the Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be
understanded of the people.

Of the names of the Homilies.
1 OF the right use of the Church. 2 Against peril of Idolatry. 3 Of the
repairing and keeping clean of Churches 4 Of good works, first of Fasting. 5
Against gluttony and drunkenness. 6 Against excess of apparel. 7 Of prayer.
8 Of the place and time of Prayer. 9 That common Prayers and Sacraments ought
to be ministered in a known tongue. 10 Of the reverent estimation of Gods word.
11 Of alms-doing. 12 Of the Nativity of Christ. 13 Of the Passion of Christ. 14
Of the Resurrection of Christ. 15 Of the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ. 16 Of the gifts of the holy Ghost. 17 For the
Rogation days. 18 Of the state of Matrimony. 19 Of Repentance. 20 Against
Idleness. 21 Against rebellion.
XXXVI. Of consecration of Bishops and Ministers. THe book of Consecration of
Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of Priests, and Deacons, lately set
forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at the same time by
authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to such Consecration
and ordering: neither has it any thing that of it self is superstitious and
ungodly. And therefore, whosoever are consecrated or ordered according to the
Rites of that book, since the second year of the aforementioned King Edward, unto
this time, or hereafter shall be consecrated, or ordered according to the same
Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated and
ordered.

XXXVII. Of the civil Magistrates. THe Queens Majesty has the chief power in
this Realm of England, and other her Dominions, unto whom the chief government
of all estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all
causes does appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign
Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief government, by which Titles
we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended, we give not
to our Princes the ministering, either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments, the
which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen do
most plainly testify: but that only prerogative which we see to have been
given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is,
that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the civil
sword the stubborn and evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
weapons, and serve in the wars.

XXXVIII. Of Christian men's goods, which are not common. THe riches and goods
of Christians are not common, as touching the right, title, and possession of
the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast. Notwithstanding, every man
ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to give alms to the poor,
according to his ability.

XXXIX. Of a Christian man's oath. AS we confess that vain and rash swearing is
forbidden Christian men by our Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle, So we
judge that Christian Religion does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when
the Magistrate requires, in a cause of faith and charity, so it be done
according to the Prophets teaching* in justice, judgment and truth.

LX. The Ratification. THis Book of Articles before rehearsed, is again
approved, and allowed to be holden and executed within the Realm, by the assent
and consent of our Soueraign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God of England,
France and Ireland Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. Which Articles were
deliberately read, and confirmed again by the subscription of the hand of the
Archbishop and Bishops of the upper House, and by the subscription of the whole
Clergy in the neither House in their Convocation, in the year of our Lord God,
1571.

THE END.
Books Newly Printed.
Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria. The tears, sighs, complaints and prayers of
the Church of England in four Books by J. Gauden D. D. Folio. The Refuter
Refuted or Dr. Hammonds (...) defended by a third person, 4.

