OBSERVATIONS UPON Prince RUPERT'S WHITE DOG, CALLED BOY: Carefully taken by
T. B. For that purpose employed by some of quality in the City of LONDON.

Printed in the Year, M DC X LIII.

OBSERVATIONS Upon Prince RUPERT'S White Dog called BOY.
Right Worshipful,
SInce the unfortunate death of Mr Blake, I have, according to the direction of
the two Secretaries you named to me, had a strict eye upon Prince Ruperts
Doggecalled BOY; whom I cannot conclude to be a very downright Devil, as is
supposed* or a spirit sent to nourish division in Church or State (though I
must confess the Irish Papists are very familiar with him in private) but
certainly he is some Lapland Lady, who by nature was once an handsome white
woman, and now by Art is become an handsome white Dog, and has vowed to
follow the Prince to preserve him from mischief. Which I doubt not to induce
you to believe, when I shall have delivered you my Observations, first of his
Qualities, next of his Behavior to others, and lastly, of Others Behavior to
him.

I. For his Qualities.
1. IN the first place, He can Prophecy. I mean not as our Master Green the
Haberdasher does Prophecy, that is, expound the Scripture by private Spirit,
but he prophecies of future events; and his masters footman, a Laplander, does
expound him. Among other things, he has prophesied, that the King shall enter
London before May Day next, with threescore thousand horse and foot; that the
Dog him self shall be Courted, that heads, more round then his own, shall
bow to him; that he shall ride in a City Pageant triumphantly overlooking the
people, and be feasted by a lawful Lo. Major; and that the City, Lastly, shall
profer him two tubbs of Custard-stuffe a week to bathe in, which he is not yet
resolved to accept of. And it is thought that his Prophecies (for now at last
they begin to turn our own arts upon us) will be printed here in Oxford in
opposition to M. Bookers Almanacks.

2. He has the art of finding out Concealed goods, for since the King has
been resident in the University, he and the Heads of Houses have discovered
the plate, that the Lo: Say, and Sir John Seton could not; which for fear it
may hereafter fall into such hands (I desire youto conceive I speak their
words) the University desires may be melted down in New Inn Hall (an house
that accounts casting of Dollers lawful) and coined for the use of the King
and true Parliament.

3. He is endued with the gift of Languages, which yet he has the art to hide
very well. For with a kind of generous confidence he mounts the Table and the
cupboard under a pretense of courting his Master, and by that cunning means
has his care oftener then his Barber has: for the Prince takes but little care
of his head. Besides he whispers those of the Noble men that are most true to
the King, as often as the spirit does M. Case, or those godly Teachers, that
are most true to the Parl. Some of great place and good account, who love to
eves. drop all informations, have sworn to me they plainly distinguish the
accents of the Dogs Language to sound like our Hebrew. Whereupon I advised with
some of the Professors here, (who in their hearts incline to our Side) who out
of curiosity pressed near, but they told me his whispers then seemed to them
to be a mixed language, somewhat between Hebrew and High dutch; which, (they
say) if any, was most probably the language of the Beasts before the curse. He
discourses ordinarily with some Masters of Art, and many times understands
them more, then it is possible they should understand one another: which kind
of discourse they truly call Chopping of Logique. This Quality admits him into
all company, whose relations he relates to his Master, and his Master again to
the King, and thus all our Spies are discovered, and BOY does that which many
of the Kings own Servants will not.

4. He is weapon-proofe himself, and probably has made his Master so too, my
self and the rest whom you have employed to be of the conspiracy against him,
have always failed of our attempts, as if something more then witchcraft watched
over him. Once I gave him a very hearty stroke, with a confiding Dagger. but it
slided off his skin as if it had been Armor of Proof nointed over with
Quicksilver. Besides he has been tempted with pieces of capon and other
choice morcels, as well seasond all, as poison and extemporary prayer could do
it: but the Cur as obstinately rejected them, as if he had known before hand
what they were, so that they hurt him no more then the plagueplaister, sent in
the Letter did Mr. Pym. That which they say of him, that he usually sets his
mouth as a trap, and catches bullets as they fly, (th^ugh you shall never see
him but with a brace hanging under his t^ile, as if he had but lately swallowed
them, and were still ready to void them) upon my credit is a mere slander: But
it is most certain that he does things near as strange. For when his master
the Prince has forgot to put his characters between his shirt and his skin,
some bullets he blows by, others he breaks the force of, so that they either
no more touch him, then if they were aimed at the edge of a Penknife, or if
they do, do him no more harm, then they would have done, if he had his
characters about him. He is of too much valor himself; and though what my L.
Brooks told you in a speech at Guild Hall, about our very Dogs being killed, be
in the thing true enough, yet notwithstanding his Ld has wrote a book of
truth, by his favor I must tell him, he was mistaken in the person that did
the execution; for, upon my word, the Kings men killed our men; and none but
the Princes Dog killed our dogs.

5. and lastly. He can go invisibly himself, and make others do so too. He
has often been where nobody has seen him, and done that that nobody else
could. Who think you conveid Oneal out of the Tower? even BOY. Who conveid the
L. Dighy first into Hull, afterward out again? even BOY. Who got Leg out of
prison? even BOY. Who released Bamfeild? verily BOY still. Yet who all this
while less suspected then BOY? and now, if ever, I beseech you have an eye to
your selves; for he goes oftener between Oxford and London, every week, then
the three Carriers do he conveies Letters without being broken open, and
brings money without being robbed. He it is that lays the Aprentises Design
in one shape, and then leads them on to the Action in another: one day he is
Phillip the Shoemaker, and another day Tom the Barber. And when he would find
out our counsels, he mingles himself with the good Aprentises; sometimes
appears like Ezechiel, M. Bostock the book binders boy; and sometimes like
Nathaniell, M^. Greenes Freeman. Under these disguises he brings us false
Informations, and carries them true, and certainly no one else infuseth into
the Apprentices what they should do for the King, and what against my Lord Say.
This he does himself. Then upon my certain knowledge he does usually break a
black cloud about Prince Rupert too, in which he goes as invisible as our
Church, or our Faith does, or as our Charity should. And by this mystical
means it was, that the Prince so often passed our Guards undiscovered, and by
so many disguises entered those Towns of Ours, which the book to that purpose
sets down very edifyingly. By this means he was the Appleman at Dunsmoreheath,
the Netseller in Coventry, and the Old woman in Warwick: By this means he is
all things and nothing, and no doubt is often at our Common Council in London,
marking out some of Our Citizens for death, and some of their wives for life,
some of Our Aldermen for plunder, and some perhaps for sport: Which tokens
because they proceed from the assistance of this Dog, and are fastened on us,
we may truly call the Marks of the Beast upon the Godly.

II. For his Behavior to Others.
2. FIrst in respect to Civil (or rather uncivil) affairs, I find it very
Loose, and Scrumpet-like. For he salutes and kisseth the Prince, as close as
any Christian woman would; and the Prince salutes and kisseth him back again as
savorily, as he would (I will not say any Aldermans wife, but) any Court-Lady,
and is as little offended with his Breathing. Then they lie perpetually in one
bed, sometimes the Prince upon the Dog, and sometimes the Dog upon the Prince;
and what this may in time produce, none but the close Committee can tell. Next
to his Master, he loves the King, and the Kings Children, and cares very little
for any other. For, (that I may give you a late observation,) When Our six
Aldermen delivered the City. Petition, the Dog lay just before Alderman Garret,
with his eyes fixed on the King and his Master, and with one foot on the Kings
toe, and another on Prince Charles his: and whiles Master Skinner was reading
the Petition, though he read it so that few conceived what they meant by it,
yet the Dog joged them still in the right place, not a pithy period, or good
word escaped him, as if he had known the meaning of it as well as the Bearers
themselves did: But, what was most remarkable; when that Iuditious and
Alderman-like Clause came (the King should return into their safe Custody)
this Devil. Dog pressed the little Prince his foot so hard, that he was forced
to hemme a loud to recover his Spirits: By which we may see plainly, this Dog
likes not the Kings return to London without His Army.

Next in respect to spiritual Affairs; In all exercises of Religion he
carries himself most Popishly and Cathedrally. He observes our Fasts, no more
then we do their Feasts; He never is at any private Prayers, and very seldom
at any conscionable Sermons. But as for public Prayers, he seldom or never
misseth them: and he no sooner enters the Quire, but he presently trotts up
toward the East End, where there is a Painted window above and an Altar below,
both which with the Rayles make up one great Idol. Then he is much taken with
their Cope, and Surplices, and singing Books, and (since some of the Gentlemen
of the Chapel are come down) with the singing men too. But above all (as has
been observed) as soon as their Church Ministrel with the long lock begins to
play his Arbitrary Iigg, he he as attentive as one of us private Christians are
at S. Antholins, and marks the Tune, as if there were Doctrine and Use in it,
and if he could write shorthand, without all peradventures he would take it,
as some of Our great Ladies do Sermons now in London.

III. For Others behavior to Him.
3. FIrst, (I remember I told you before of his Masters kissing him, but not of
his way of wooing him,) Prince Rupert never courts him without an express
detestation of the Roundheads, so that he commonly takes the name of Gods
Children in vain. How much better were it to court him with Yea, and Nay, then
to use such Blasphemies and Profanations? But the Reprobate Dog takes it all
so well, that he is not pleased with any one that speaks to him civilly, or
accosts him otherwise then Cavalier-like.

Next, all men in general make much of him, and the truth is, they dare do no
otherwise; For if they do, they are sure to hear of it in one misfortune or
other. It Is observed that most of the Gentlemen that were killed at Edgehill had
injured the Dogs reputation some way or other, and forgot to give him
satisfaction before they went to the Battle. The Lo: Taaff did but speak
angrily to him, and the same morning was shot in the mouth for it. The Lo:
Bernart Stuard kicked him the night before the Battle, for harkening what he
said to a fair Lady, and this spightfull Curre got him shot in the very same
toe that kicked him. The King himself never dines nor sups, but continually He
feeds him. And with what think you? even with Rumps and Sidesmen of Capons, and
such Christianlike Morcells. And if this be not to profane, I know not what
is. For let His Majesty profess, and profess, as long as He will, I beseech
you mark how I can come over him. Either he knows this Dog is, or is not a
Witch; If he knows he is a Witch, he profanes against that place of Scripture
that says, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. If he knows he is not a
Witch, then he prophanes against that other place, Cast not that which is holy
unto Dogs. For if the Rumps and Sidesmen in crammed foul be not the holy
parts, I discern not which are. But to return. Majesty may do any thing (as
they say) and therefore it is thought the King will shortly call a Council of
War, and in imitation of Our proceedings will make him a new Officer of State,
Sergjeant Major General BOY. Truly, truly, the Kings affection is so
extraordinary to him, that some in the Court envy him, and others nourish fears
and jelousies of him. I heard a Gentleman Usher swear the other day, that it
was a great shame the Dog should sit in the Kings Chair, as he always does:
and a great Lord was seriously of opinion, that it was not well he should
converse so much with the Kings Children, left he taught them to swear before
they knew what an Oath was.

One thing of very great moment I had almost forgot, and that is this. When
ever the Kings Council is persuading His Majesty to an accommodation, and
resoluedly pressing Him to return to His other Council the Parl. in comes
this enemy to Peace, and the Parliaments purposes, and (as if he could turn
men's minds, as his Master does the Wind before a Battle, by untying a knot of
his Handkerchief) presently they speak of Blood, and War, and the Destruction
of London, and vow they have not power to think of any thing else. Now
consider, if it be accounted Witchcr^ft to make men Impotent in their Bodies,
what is it to make them impotent at their minds?

These particulars I thought good to send you, that out of so many you might
pick what is of most consequence for the good of the Commonwealth, and the
promotion of a Resormation.

To sum up all. I beseech you now consider, That this Dog was once a Woman,
but is now a Profane Metamorphosis Dog; that he Prophecies as well as my Lady
Davis, or Mother Shipton could; that he helps the Colleges to their lost
spoons and two-eared pots; that he speaks as many Languages, and as hard ones
as Satan, or Master Broughton; that he is as shot free as if his skin were
voted Impenetrable; that he can be invisible when he will; insomuch that he is
often smelt where he is not seen; that he communicates with that bloody Prince,
as his familiar; that he loves Organs, and true singing, and such Diabolical
Charms; that he has his private revenges still going; and (what is above all
this) that he discountenanced the Aldermans Petition; and tell me then Is not
this a Dog that is no Dog, but a Witch, a Sorceresse, an Enemy to Parliament,
(that is, to Church and State) a mere Malignant Cavalier-Dog, that has
something of Devil in or about him?

Sir, I desire you that I may be quit of all further employment in this nature;
For it is impossible to destroy him, until the Colonies of new England come in
to help us: they know how to order these Dog-Witches better far then We.
Brotherly assistance may then perhaps do something. In the mean time you may
do well to move it in the Common Council, that in their next Petition they
would insert a Clause about his Removal from the King. Thus I commit you to
the Protection of both Houses, I rest

Your worships most faithful, and diligent servant, T. P.

FJNJS.

