THE Whole Proceedings of the Siege of Drogheda in IRELAND, With a thankful
Remembrance for its wonderful delivery.

Raised with GODS special assistance by the Prayers, and sole valor of the
besieged, With a Relation of such memorable passages as have fallen out there,
and in the parts near adjoining since this late Rebellion.

Written by Nicholas Bernard, Deane of Ardagh in Ireland.

This shall be written for those that come after, and the people which shall be
born shall praise the Lord, Psalm. 102. 18. So that men shall speak of the might
of thy mavelous acts: and I will also tell of his greatness, Psalm. 1456.
LONDON, Printed by A. N. for William Bladen, 1642.

IT is ordered this fourteenth day of July 1642, by the Committee of the House
of Commons in Parliament concerning printing, that this Book entitled the siege
of Drogheda in Ireland, etc. be forthwith Printed, and that the same be printed
by W. Bladen, and that this Book be not printed nor reprinted by any other
without his consent.

John White.

To the honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the house of Commons
now assembled in Parliament in England.
NAture teaches every thing to affect its own preservation, and Reason for
the same end, compels this Book under your Honorable Patronage, whether it
tends as to its proper Center, in the maturity of whose wise and pious
resolutions rests terror and dread to the Rebels, and the only hope of relief
to our miserable distresses in the Kingdom of Ireland: and to be Isa. 58. 12.
the Repayrer of the Breach, and the Restorer of Paths to dwell in, is so
Honorable a Title, that there can be no greater invitation.

That application of Vid. Melchior. ^^^^dast. (...) Pap^.
Ba^onius (in his exhortative to Paul the fifth) of those two commands given to
Saint Peter, Job. ^1. 17
Feed my sheep, (...) 11. 17.
kill and eat, i. e. (says he) preserve the Catholics, and kill the
Heretics, have been in their interpretation the sum of the popish bloody
Conspiracy for this Kingdom, for the extirpation of which Idolatrous rout,
howsoever we find there needs no farther incitement then your own Religious,
zealous inclinations, yet we cannot but humbly declare our affections to it
also (they like a viperous seed having endeavored to eat out the hearts of
such as nourished them,) That we would in a fair medicinal way have healed
Babylon cannot be gain said, but proving such a fretting gangreen, what help is
there but an amputation.

What charitable acts, courteous carriage, friendly informations we have
over-flowed with to them, and what ill fruits have been produced from them
toward us, needs no further witness, so that for the most moderate of them,
at least a compelle intrare, can be their only favorable expectation, Which
howsoever Saint M^a primitus Sententia erat neminem ad unitatem Christi
cogendum, non dum enim expertus eram quantum mali eorum (viz, Donatistarum)
auderet impunitas. At haec opinio mea demonstrantium superabatur exemplis: nam
prinio appohebatur mihi civitas mea, quae cum tota esset in part Donati ad
unitatem Catholicam Timo^e Legum Impertalium conversa est, quem nune videmus
ita hujus vestrae animositatis perniciem detestare, ut in ea nunquam fuisse
credatur, and multas alias civitates etc. August. Epist. 48. ad Vincentium:
Videlicet ibidem gratulationes and gratiarum actiones eorum qui ab Haresi
timore l^g^m redierunt. Objectiones solvuntur. Epist. 50. ad Bonifactum lib. 2.
contra Petil^^num. c. 8^. Lab. 1. contra Gandentium. cap. 9. and 24. L^b. 1.
contra Parmen. cap. 10 lib. de Vnitate Ecclesiae cap. 20.
Augustine had bin once against, yet upon the experience of that good issue, it
had in clearing his own City Hippo of Heresy, and other parts, he changed his
mind in urging it.

This Sent. August. (number Heterodoxi metu poenarum ad sidem Catholicam cogi
possunt) collect^ a Matthew. Merula. vide cap. 7. in conclusione, cum
cohortatione ad Zelum contra Sectarios hujus temporis.
Merula indeed applies to us, and by the example of this Father, exhorts the
Emperor and Princes of Germany, to alter their course in a present
suppressing the Religion of the Reformed Churches. But Becanus the lesuit
proceeds further to move them without any more ado to the killing of us,
(whom he asperseth with the blot of Heresy) after the example of Moses so
condemning the worshippers of the golden Calfe, the hanging up the heads of the
people at Baal peor, by Elias, Iehu, in slaying the priests of Baal. And after
the applying to us those mortal precepts in the Law against (...). 24. 16
Blasphemers, D^^t. 17. 12.
Disobeyers of the chief Priest, and D^ut. 13. 14.
enticers to serve other gods, and answers of all pleas that might be alleged
for our toleration, concludes, ^^^etici (...) per^^bant pa^em Christianam quam
ho^icidae and ^^res, ^t hi puniuntur ^oenacapitis, ^^go multo m^gis illi qui
sunt pernitiosiores. Nam cum pax Christiana sit duplex. Ecclesiastica and
Politica: Homicidae and ^^^es tantum perturbant politicam, Haretici utramque.
Mart. Becan. c^p. 15. de paenis Haereticorum, quaest. ^.
We ought to be slain rather then thieves or murderers, as being far more
pernicious to Church and Commonwealth. Nay, Scioppius in his Classicum Belli
sacri, charges the Emperor with it as his duty, to slay our very S^ul
hujusmodi mandatum acce^^t, Percute Amaleck interfice a viro usque ad muherem,
and parvulum and lacta^^em. Nota infantes Hareticorum Deus occidi and jubeat,
ne adultio^^s facti patrum scelete impli^^^tur* in o Deuteronomy. cap. 13. 9. 15.
STA^IM percuti^s etc. Non audias, neq^e par^^^ ei oculus tuus ut miscrearis:
sic Imperator, interficere debes ^uemcunque etc. idque statim ut David in Psalm.
101. ^n m^^^^in^ interficrebam (hoc est) ut ex^rti fuerant, disperderem ^.e. ^^
nullus inveniretur p. 12. 18 19 79. 83.
Children and infants, after the example of Saul's command for Amaleck, and the
Israelites for the Cananites, that he should not spare neither his eye have
pity. Nulla r^gravi^s Deum offendere potest Caesar quam ^arcendo ^^reticis
bello captis: exemplo Sau^^^, 1 Samuel 15. ^^. Ergo (...) etiam atque etiam
Imperator, ut si quando t^^s and Dei perduelles d^vin^ and humano jure mori
jussos, in potestatem t^am ^edeg^^is, ^^e^s (...), and gladium in vindictam
malorum ubi d^tum, s^c feri^tu^^ ger^^, si^itiore quam Saul paena afficiaris,
saltem ut quod Regi A^h^b s^^ilem ob^a^sam Deus cominatus fuerit, in te tu^sq^e
(...) u^ndo ^^^tias ^e^ic him est, page 80. 78. Terreat te Imperator (...) R^gi
^cles^ph^t cla^s^s, ^urique Ind^c^ jactura* terreat te illa (...) 2. c^p. ^0.
37. page 86.
Denounces a judgment upon him and his, if he should so much as give any
Quarter to the chiefest of us, by the warning of Saul's rejection for reserving
Agag, and Ahabs threatening that his life should go for dismissing of Benhadad.
Cum Turcis, Mahumetanis, Ethnicis, Hebraeis faedus tibi facere Imperator licet,
ut Deuteronomy. 20. 5. (Cum civitatibus quae a te valde procul sunt foedus inire
poteris, etc.) non autem cum haereticis, qui vicini sunt, qui pleraque nobiscum
habeant communia, de his praecepit Deus ut nullum omnino permittes vivere*
occidatis omnem animam viventem etc. page 81. 82, 83. Gasp. Scioppii
consiliarii Regii Classicum belli sacri, sive Heldus redivivus, hoc est ad
Carolum q^in^um Imperatorem suasoria approbat. authoritat. super. ut omne
lectiore, and memoria dignum, and omnibus perutile.
With Turks and Heathens he allows him to make a peace, but for us that
partake with them in some common principles, no plea can be admitted to
reprieve us from a present slaughter of old and young, not saving alive any
that breathes: whom else where he terms Gasp. Sciopii Scorpiacum i. e. remedium
adversus haereses, ab ipsis Protestantibus Scorpionibus petitum.
Scorpions, and therefore to be killed as soon as we are born.

Which horrid Counsel is justified by Haeresis cum alte radices egit, non nisi
ustionibus and sectionibus, seu bellorum vi and impetu ac violentia exs^indi
debet. Praecipitar, Deuteronomy. 17. ut qui sacerdotis Imperio de Religionis
controversiis, se non submiserit interficiatur. An^mitius tractabimus eos qui
corr^^c^nte Christi Evangelio a Catholica fide deficiunt? Quid nos facere
convenit nisi ut Zelum imitantes Regum veteris Testamenti eos mature emedio
tollamus. Hac enim laud Helias, Iehu, and alii celebrantur. Non esse
crudelitatem occidere Ha^^ticos sed pietatem: saeva est clementia parcere, etc.
I^a^. Paul. Windeck. deliberatio. de extirpandis haeresibus. Antidot. 10. and
11.
Windeck, in the like application and exhorcation to the burning, killing, and
all other violent course of war for our extirpation, by the Presidents of
zealous Kings and Magistrates in the old Testament, whom such as are Christians
(he says) ought to exceed, accordingly as Heresy under the Gospel is the
more damnable, concluding all clemency to us to be cruelty, and that which
might seem cruelty to be piety. This, with much of the like, is the sentence
they have decreed against us in their Schools, published in their Books,
exhorted Princes to in their Doctrines, and accordingly made this Kingdom the
bloody stage wherein they have acted it to the full, in murdering and drowning
without distinction of sex or age. Now whether these evil servants may not be
justly judged out of their own mouths, (whose Religion has bin long agon by
the Bishops of this Kingdom decreed to be Heretical and Apostaticall) or
recompensed according to their own works upon us, (which have been so horrid
and barbarous as all Heathen and Turkish story are to seek for presidents) I
leave it to your Honorable wisdoms to determine only, I am sure no stricter
bonds can be taken of them to secure us for the future, then those, which they
have broken at this present, even that treble obligation of nature, oaths, and
favor, wherein they are still supported by their Clergy, as if they did God
good service. And indeed what hopes can there be of peace, where a Kingdom is
not at one in Religion? which as our woeful experience shows it, so reason is
sufficient to evince it, and I am willing to give a Jesuit leave to speak it
for me. Nulla unquam familia fuit in qua dissentiens Religio pacem non
turbavit, exemplo sit discordia, inter Isaac and Ishmaelem, inter Jacob and
Laban, inter Mosen and uxorem Sephoram, quomodo ergo in toto Regno pax and
concordia sperari potest ubi Religionis and fidei fumma est discordia. Qui olim
conjunctiores quam Judaei and Israelit^^? At postquam altar contra altar,
templum contra templum erectum est, mox inexplabili dissidio dissecti and
dissociati sunt. Becanus, de poems Haereticorum. Quaest. 6.
What family (says he) was there ever where a difference in Religion made not
a breach? see it in Isaac and Ismael, Jacob and Laban, Moses and his wife
Zipporah, and if so, what concord can be expected in a whole Kingdom, where
there is much more disagreement, who were nearer a kin then Israel and Judah,
but as soon as Altar was erected against Altar, they were soon divided in an
irreconcilable war. The argument me thinks is probable, only let the
application be to themselves, and the endeavors to this Honorable Parliament,
so to fan, and thoroughly purge the floor of this our Church, that there be no
such Cananites left in the Land, to be thorns, and pricks in the e^es of our
posterity hereafter, of whose Idolatrous falsehood, and murderous projects we
in this late besieged Town of Drogheda, (so thirsted for by them) have had too
much experience, wherein the service that has been performed in the unanimous
defense of it, by my Lord Viscount Moore (whose laborious vigilance and large
expenses in the want of supplies elsewhere deserves a special remembrance:) Sir
Henry Tichburn our valiant Governor, with the rest of our courageous Captains,
and Commanders, may merit a prime place in your honorable favor. A Collection
of some passages in which (being by many desired as seasonable for the present,
and profitable for the future) I have in the midst of other distractions and
employments presumed in this rude form to present to this Honorable House,
whose paternall bowels we find already have yearned upon us, and in the
continuance of whose indulgent care with an Application to his Majesty, all
our hopes are deposited, And I doubt not but this poor and mean offering
shall the rather gain acceptance, in that it is derived from such who have
these many months lived the next door to Martyrdom. GOD, in his goodness
prosper all your designs, for for the reducing of this Kingdom to due
obedience, refining and enlarging of our Church, and the returning of a more
settled peace to this disjoynted Island, which must be the daily prayers, and is
the belief of

Your Honors most humble and devoted Servant, N. BARNARD.
Droghedah, May, 25. 1642.
To the Reader.
THou have here the earnest of a succeeding bloody History which by some other
hand hereafter may be perfected, and may well be entitled the Martyrologue of
Ireland, for the present thou may apprehend this Relation, as an abridgment
of the whole, wherein each of their parts have been in some measure acted, and
by the touch of this pulse only in this one member, thou may give the
righter judgment of the malignity in the body. This town was for a long time
accounted the forlorn hope on both sides, upon the success of which each built
their several issues, As often were we buried in the fear of our friends, as
in the boasts of the Rebels. For a while the Southside toward Dublin remained
clear, but Northward we heard of nothing but bloodshed, and desolation, in
fifty or sixty miles compass the houses of God were deserted of their Pastor
and people, and possessed by such as were neither, so that we took our selves
to be only reserved either like Job's Messengers to relate it, or like Aaron
between the living and the dead, to pray for them, which (as for our selves)
has not been in vain, for here the plague was stayed. And indeed, seeing they
were so presumptuous as to make Religion the cause, we joined issue with them,
like Eliiah with the Priests of Baal, and God has answered us from Heaven, in
accepting our sacrifices, and rejecting theirs, though they whipped themselves,
till the blood gushed out upon them.

For the subject matter of this Narration believe it to be true, much I was a
witness of my self, the rest I (have received from men of trust, the whole
has been viewed by several of our Captains, whose attestation may add a
further strength to thy persuasion, and the impartiality of it may be rather
credible, as being written by him, who is without the least relation to any.
For the style thou may accept of it according to the distractions it was
accompanied with, and the have I have been put too, by the so many mistakes
and falsehoods printed by others already, wherein my self has suffered none of
the least.

If thou shall find the thoughts of these Popish Projectors, full of horrid
Conspiracies and treacheries, their mouths of falsehoods and lies; their hands
defiled with blood and all their paths tracked with Rebellion, wonder not at
it, for it is no new thing under the Sun, and he must needs be a stranger in the
World, that cannot produce multitudes of the like Presidents before.

Do thou find them in these justified and encouraged by their teachers
ma^vell not neither; it is their usual doctrine lineally descended from their
Ancestors of which I might easily present thee with a great bundle. On the
otherside, when thou shall read of Gods wonderful preserving so weak a Town,
so many months besieged by such a multitude, in the want of clothes, meat, and
money; sixteen thousand one night assaulting us at once (or if we may believe
their own List, three and twenty thousand who by a few were repulsed with the
loss of many hundred of theirs, and of ours not one so much as hurt: many
Sallies made out by little parties in the face of such great bodies* with the
like continued success, and that great deliverance of us from five hundred of
the chiefest of them (having t^o^sands more attending then at the Gates) who by
a treachery, while we were in our beds, had got within our bowels, and so
continued undescryed an hour or two, whose shout of triumph upon the very Key
was our first alarm, yet, by the gleanings of a few, were all either slain or
routed and without any considerable loss of ours. The twice relieveing us in
that extremity of scarcity, when by all it was conceived impossible, in so
sudden and so fitting a wind and tide in every circumstance appearing to be the
very answer of our prayers; I say, when thou shall meet with these, and diverse
more of the like nature how easily may thou be drawn to confess (as even our
Town papists have been compelled to themselves) that God has fought for us,
and declared himself to be the Parent of our Religion, by his being so tender
a Nurse of it: Howsoever let the experience of Gods handiwork in so little a
model, beget a confidence of much more in preserving the whole Kingdom (now
so undermined) against the gates of all hellish plots whatsoever. This, or the
like fr^it is aim of this Relation which obtained, he has his full desire,
who is

Thine, in him by whom all things consist, N. Barnard.

Authori, Lectori, Operi.
Worthy Divine, which Attribute's as due;
As my respects, almost prescribed to you;
The wonder-working virtue of your pen,
Buries alive, makes the dead live again;
Raising the prospect to succeeding age
Of Miracles above the Rebels rage.
When that had swollen so high (like the proud Tower)
No hand could reach it but Diviner power.
And that, by means despic'd, suppressed it so,
As confused Babel fell, or Jericho.
All times hence learn, no force or council shall
Rise against Heaven, but for the greater fall.
When God's the object of a trust, the Whale
Proves Jonah's bark, the Sea poor Jacob's wall.
Nature submits to him that framed it, and
Means with events are both in his command.
A careful eye through all this Story led,
Will often think it ore unwearied:
And know the glory of the Author is,
This narrative is Truth's, and Time's, not his.
Some of the special Passages in this RELATION.
THe many homebred Treacheries we were delivered from the first fortnight by
Master Lewis Moors vigilance. page 1

The coming down of Sir Henry Tichbourns Regiment, coldly welcomed by the Town
Papists, November 4th. page 7.

The general Declaration of the Catholics of Ireland. page 8.

The Rebels plundering my Lord Moors house of Mellifont, p. 12.

Their many pretended Treaties and presumptuous speeches, p. 15.

The defeat of 600. of our foot, at the bridge of Gillingstowne, three miles
from us, p. 16.

The surprisall of a Chester barque at the Skerries, with English passengers,
page 17.

The Rebels burning all our Corn and Hay near us, p. 17.

A skirmish at the Green hills not halse a mile from us, where an hundred of
them were slain, p. 19.

A Dominican Friar sent from them to demand the surrender of this Town, p. 21.

The Oath taken by the Papists of this Kingdom as it was delivered us by the
said Friar, p. 22,

The Protestation of the Governors and Captains of Drogheda, for the keeping
of the Town, with an Oath taken by them, and offered to the Aldermen, and
others, but refused, p. 23.

The general Onset by sixteen thousand, December 20. when not a man of ours
was so much as hurt page 25.

The Motives moving the Catholics to take Arms, page 23.

A treacherous plot by the opportunity of a great Ice prevented, p. 34.

A skirmish, January 7. when an hundred of the Rebels were killed, and about an
hundred forced into the River, with diverse the like, p. 35.

The miserable scarcity of victuals growing upon us, Our welcome relief,
January 11. by Captain Stutfield, page 37.

The wonderful preservation of us from the Invasion of five hundred of them,
January 12. p. 38.

The Pinnace in her return running aground desperately attempted by the
Rebels, p. 42.

Two bragging Letters, one of Sir Philem O Neals, and another of Colonel
Plunkets, p. 45.

Diverse Sallies made out to get in forage, to the death of multitudes of the
Rebels, taking their Ensigns, and no loss of ours, p. 51.

The woeful extremity of famine, after the Town had been sifted, and all
possible relief near hand adventured for, p. 36.

Our relief the second time, February 20. wherein Gods special hand was
evident in diverse particulars, page 57.

The same day the Rebels beaten off from our walls when they had mounted many of
their scaling ladders, page 59.

Diverse horrible cruel acts committed upon the English Protestants near us,
page 20.

The killing of three hundred of the Rebels at the bridge of Gillingstone, in
revenge of the like number of ours at the same place, p. 62.

The burning of Morlenton and Colpe with diverse of the like, and routing them
on the South side, p. 64.

March the 5th. Their routing on the North side at Tallagh-holland, when seven
of their Captains with three hundred others were slain, p. ^7.

The taking possession of four of their Castles on each side of the River: Of
the taking of Atherdee, about eight miles from us, with the battle there when
four hundred of them were killed, p. 74.

The admirable providence of God in the quick taking of Dundalke, about 16
miles from us, March 26. with which we accounted our Siege fully raised, page
75.

An Appendix of some other occurrences in the prosecution of our victory since,
which give some light to the former, page 80.

The Names of the several Captains, as they came in for our defense at
DROGHEDAH.
October. 26. 1641.
THe Lord Viscount Moore of Droghedah, with his troop of Horse consisting of
sixty six.

Sir John Nettervill, Captain With their two half standing Companies,
Rockley, Captain
Seafowle Gibson, Captain His Company of the English Inhabitants and other
Protestants were to the number of six score.

November. the fourth, 1642.
Sir Henry Tichburne, Colonel and Governor of the Town, his Company of Foot.

Sir John Borlase Captain, These three, though having been before Officers of
the field, yet out of their zeal to the present service came as private
Captains.
L. Colonel Byron Captain. L. Colonel VVenmond Capt.
Jacob Lovel, Sergeant Major, who died in the Siege. Captain Chichester
Fortescue. Captain Will. Willoughby. Captain Edw. Billingsley. Captain Lewis
Owens. Captain John Morris.
The Troops of Horse.
John Sloughter Captain, Lieutenant to Sir Thomas Lucas, Commissary General.

Thomas Greymes, Lieutenant to Sir Adam Loftus.

November. the tenth.
Captain Henry Bryan. Captain Patrick Trevor. Captain Foulke Martin.
November the two and twentieth.
Christopher Roper Sergeant Major, These 3 Captains escaped very defective in
their Companies from the defeat at the bridge of Gellingston.
Captain William Cadowgan. Captain Charles Sownsley
Fifty Horse, under the command of Sir Patrick Weymes Captain, Lieutenant to
the Earl of Ormond.

February the twentieth with our second relief.
Captain Richard Borrows. Captain Edward Trevor. Captain William Hamilton.
When all the aforesaid Captains (excepting the Regiment of Sir Henry
Tichburne) were appointed to be under my Lord Moors command.

WE whose names are here underwritten, who have been and continued Captains
within the Town of Droghedah, during the Siege, and so eyewitnesses of most
things which have fallen out in it, Having duly and diligently read over this
Book, entitled, The Siege of Droghedah, do hereby according to the several
times of our coming thither, and according to our best remembrance confirm
this following Narration to be wholly truth: and do testify it to be in each
particular very impartially and fully related. As witness our hands this 11 of
June, 1642.

Seaf. Gibson. Io. Sloughter. Rob. Byron. Rich. Borrows. Phil. Wenman. P.
Wemys.


The Lord Viscount Moore of Droghedah, his Confirmation of the truth of this
following Narration.
HOwsoever the known integrity of the Author is a sufficient testimony of it
self, yet (having the second time read over this Book entitled The Siege of
Droghedah, where I have been an eyewitness of what has been done from the
beginning of it,) I do hereby (according to the attestation of the six other
Captains, and in answer to the desire of such as have conceived it necessary)
confirm this following Relation to be wholly truth, and in each particular to
be fully and very impartially written; (only declining throughout such
passages as may concern my self.) As Witness my hand th^s 22 of June, 1642.

MOORE.

THE Siege of Drogheda in IRELAND, OR A Relation of such memorable passages as
have fallen out here, and the Towns near adjoining, from the beginning of this
late REBELLION.
THe 23 of October, 1641, was the fatal Day pitched upon by the Papists of
this Kingdom of Ireland, with one consent for the utter ruin of the
Protestants and the true Religion professed by them here, and doubtless had
taken effect accordingly, had not the special providence of God prevented it
in a timely discovery at the root, which was to have surprised the Castle of
Dublin, undertaken by the Lord Mac-Guire, and as they say cast upon him by some
sacred Lot: but that morning he was taken himself and committed close
prisoner, where he had in his thoughts provided the like lodgings for others.
The fact was horrid in the aim, desperate in the attempt, crafty in the
project, bloody in the fruits, close in the carriage, undiscryed till the very
Eye of the morning for execution* general in the extent, being a Catholic
Cast indeed (like those Romanists for the whole Coat of our Savior) at the
ruin of the whole State at once. This though thus stopped at the head, yet
wrought not so full a cure, but that it broke out in deadly issues through most
parts of the Body of the Kingdom* into which it is not now my purpose to
range, leaving it to the several relations of others. The chief intent of
this discourse is to give thee a true account of what has f^lne out within
this besieged Town of Drogheda, wherein I have be^^ (...) this ^hole Winter my
self.

The news of the foresaid discovery posting from Dublin hither, was met with
the same night by much of the like Nature out of the North, The trea^herous
surp^^^all of Castle Bl^^y, Newry, Carrick, Charlemom, Monahan with others came
in thick like Jobs ^essengers one upon another, all confidently assured by
their Surprizers that Dublin was taken already. These reports howsoever
cred^bl^ enough by the conditions of such who were the Actors, yet the
suddenness of them bred not at first a full persuasion, till we received a
double and treble Confirmation by the flight of many to us stripped, and
wounded, in whom we began then to apprehend the draught of our own Picture
next* but whether by some Skeen abroad, or Sword at home, or both, lay in an
even balance, for each man to conjecture.

Our first succor was my Lord Viscount Moore, being then at Mellifont, about
three miles from us, who by the sad news of his sister the Lady Blany, and her
childrens imprisonment, had a warning piece given him of their affection
toward himself, came with some part of his Troop, hither at midnight, knocked
up the Major and Aldermen, invited them to some speedy resolution for their
own defense, as supposing there might be some Vipers harbored within their
own Bowels, they presently promised him very fairly* cursed the Rebels foully,
but made preparation very slowly, Whereas upon Muster days they were wont to
appear in many hundreds well armed, now not above forty could be found.
Pitchforks marched instead of Pikes and Birding-peeces were taken for Muskets,
so that we began to suspect many of them had cursed themselves.

My Lord conceiving his continued presence might be prevalent, instantly had a
house prepared, removed his whole Family hither and (which was our chief
strength) guarded us with his troop of Horse, consisting of above threescore,
very completely provided* caused many old Pieces cast into a blind Dangeon to
be drawn out and scoured, at each Gate Northward some to be mounted, others
planted before them, disburthened a Ship of a Merchants ly^ng at the Habours
mouth, of four more, and with good words drew from them some competency of
powder, rounded the Town walls, had some weak parts further strengthened, The
North Port made up strongly, reviewed the two half standing Companies, whereof
one was altogether suspected, pressed the Town to a show of two hundred men,
the Major part proving (as we found them afterward) but a show indeed.

Having thus for the present endeavored such a defense, as the weakness of
the means could afford, and sinding the Rebellion still gathering as it cowled,
his Lordship in a black dark night posted privately to Dublin, acquainted the
State with further danger then they had been sensible of, and of what
consequence the safety of this Town must needs be, not only for the North but
for Dublin, and the whole Kingdom, and in the Council Chamber amongst diverse
other Lords made this very exemplary motion, offered to make up his own troop
a full hundred, and to raise a hundred foot at his own charges, but it was not
accordingly answered by others, (though applauded by all) for the present all
he could obtain was a Commission to Captain Seafowle Gibson, for the command of
a hundred men with Arms and Munition sent down with him the next day, who was
no sooner returned, but (such was the love of the English Protestants
Inhabitants to him) that within two hours his Company was full with those
Volunteers without pressing one, who mustered and took the Watch that night,
and indeed could not be eased of it many nights afterward, whose continued
vigilance and toil in assisting my Lord Moore from the beginning, deserves a
special remembrance, Both of them (before any farther succor came) watched in
their own persons ten nights together.

By this time the Rebels had taken Dund^lke, and Dromiskin, and had advanced so
far as to pillage all the English Protestants within five miles of us, whose
example so took with our Neighbors near us that they endeavored to prevent
them, in making a prey of the residue themselves, miserable spectacles of
wealthy men and women utterly spoiled and undone nay stripped stark naked*
with doleful cries came daily flocking in to us by multitudes, upon whom as
our bowels could not but yearn, so we failed not to receive with all
charitable welcome as coming from the next door to Martyrdom. Our Papist
Townsmen made light of it, some discovering themselves too far by their smiles,
being more ready to fill up the measure of that iniquity of their brethren,
then to relieve them, many false Allarmes had we by ringing of the Towle sele
Bell, as if the enemy were at the Gates and the time chosen when we were either
going to Church or at it, as it were of purpose to disturb us. Their numbers
multiplied beyond all conceit all which we found afterward to be but feigned
and sprung from some ill affected within only to cause the greater conf^^^on.
Promises of Assistance daily assured us by Letters, and accordingly expected we
found still failing us; Our former Governor, Sir Faithful Fortescue posting
to Dubl^^* and f^nding further delaye^ resigned up his Commission and by hi^
disheartening Letters gave us over, who though willing to h^^ard his life for
us yet was loath to lose his reputation also.

In the midst of these distra^tions* seeing little hope in man and perceiving
our feare^ within ^quali^ing our feare^ without we be^ooke our selves to God.
I sent privately to all the Protestants in the Town^ man by man (being not
tho^g^^t safe to give any more public notice) presently to mee^ at the
Church* who with the rest of the strangers fled to us from the adjoining
Towne^* made up a great Congregation; We there spent the time in a sorrowf^ll
confession of our sin* acknowledged Gods Justice in their punishment* begged
pardon implored his succouring of us (who were now for the profession of his
name like the three children in the fiery furn^ce.) and so we entered into a
solemn vow, and covenant with God that if in this extremity, he should in his
goodness preserve such a handful of us from the multitude of those whom we
saw were instantly ready to swallow us, we would be more diligent in serving
him in righteousness and true holiness all our days which was sealed with
such an abundance of tears that flowed from all sorts, that we rise with
confidence that he, who had so prepared the heart^ would open his ^^^e to hear.

Being encouraged with these first fruits we appointed a solemn fast, some
three days after, when howsoever our meeting was conceived by the chief to be
very hazardous, (from whom that very morning I received some such advertisement
of a suspected Plot, by that opportunity) yet we put our selves into Gods hands
as our sole refuge and with a small guard of Soldiers continued it the whole
day, which was blessed with the increase of our former affections, and so from
that time forward we kept it weekly.

Immediately we found some fruit of our prayers. Plots secretly conceiving and
near their birth proved abortives by their discovery, which seeing they had
not the heart and strength then to bring forth, I will not be their Midwife to
deliver them to the world. Our enemies were more then dared to be known our
strength but small and soon reckoned yet did very memorably. Great success
was given to our Designs within as without. My Lo. Moors horse were of
necessity put upon service every night, about thirty scouted without the Walls
a mile or two, the rest guarded the streets, and walked the rounds within,
sometimes as they had intelligence of an opportunity with some foot, they
marched out by break of the day, amongst the thickest of the Rebels, but they
were still too light of foot, and dared not approach them in any fight, only
much stolen goods were regained, abundance of cowes recovered and restored in
the market place to as many as could own them: about 200. of the Rebels were
slain as they were found robbing in diverse Companies, about fourscore brought
in as Prisoners, whereof (such was our mercy) but six of them were hanged, one
of them confessed expressly that his charge was only to ^obbe the Clergy (which
he was taught was not so much as a venial sin) and which he performed
accordingly to the ^ndoing of some three or four many Friars and Priests were
busy in posting (...) and fro, till they were stopped, some upon the pretense
that they wan^^d vi^tualls, craved leave to depart, and were officious in
giving the Rebels their Benidictions, who had a quarter of a year before
enjoined the vulgar one fasting day extraordinary each week for the good
success of some special design, for the Catholic cause which we dreamed
not of, and yet their want appeared evidently to be but feigned, by the charity
of the townes-people to the meanest Prisoners, whom they not only pitied, and
publicly cried out against our hard usage of such poor harmless people, but
were so charitable in releeving them with meat and clothes, that they make
little suit to be released, then whom it may easily be believed, their Priests
and Friars were of much more value.

Two several nights I must not forget the Relation of: when upon no light
grounds we had good cause to be suspicious of some traps laid for us, one night
dangerous speeches were given out, which might bear the exposition of some
Massacre, one of no mean quality was heard to say to his neighbor, This
night will be our opportunity; another in Irish to his fellow in the street,
Now will be the time or never, which when he suspected an English Protestant
over-hearing, and understanding him charged him instantly with silence,
somewhat was in it, that one of the chief of the Town (who seemed to love me
truly) wished me not to lodge within my own house that night, but to accept of
his. About Fleven a clock as we were expecting some mischief, it fell so out
that a Post from Dublin brought us the news, that the ^ewry was taken again
by the Scots which being so confidently affirmed, and instantly rumoured
through the Town, I verily believe did us good service, though it proved but
like the surmised noise of a great host in the Syians ears, which broke up
the siege of Samaria, howsoever the present belief o^ it took that effect,
that the Countenances of the Townsmen were apparently altered; The next
morning in their courteous carriage to the C^ptaines and Officers to whom the
day before they could not dissemble a good look^.

But when upon inqui^^e they had found this news to be but Counterfeit ^^yne,
they returned again to the Design of another night work (when a Lord Son,
and a noted Papist, being then by his turn with the Town Arms, and his own
standing Company Captain of the Watch) there was some further attempt given
(as being the last night of any hope, knowing that a thousand men were upon
their much within eight miles of us, and would not ^a^l^ to be with us the
next.) At a house over against the main Guard where his own men were he took
some small oceasion to quarrel, and with base language to abuse my Lord Moore*
(who wisely bauked it as conceiving tha^ time of the night not to be seasonable
for an uproare.) Comm^nded the Rebels, mainta^ned that they were not Rebels,
and the like; Nay, proceeded so far as twice to ask his Lieutenant (being a
Protestant) What side he would be of if there were any Commotion. In fine, it
was so apprehended by all the Commanders in the room, that they presently
stood upon their Guards with their Pistols spanned under their cloakes
expecting some Watchword from him either to the main^ Guard, or to some other
confederate, unknown elsewhere. And for prevention, some struck betwixt him
and the Window toward the street; My Lord Moors horse were privately drawn
up ten stood always before the door, and the rest in several divisions
guarded the streets to keep all within. The Protestant English Soldiers to
the number of Sevenscore, were silently called up also, which when he perceived
he did his best to make up things again, but they had gone too far to be so
easily cured, and there were other circumstances not long before, which made
the suspicion smell the stronger, as his changing many of his foot Company from
Protestants to Papists* and those to be of his own servants and Tenants; Most
nights when he and the Town had the Watch, the Pieces mounted upon the Gates,
were found stopped with Garlic of purpose to break them; that whole day was
he continually passing from one Fryerie to another, whether for B^nedictions or
Consultations we wot not, and that very night he went his first round as
Captain of the Watch (which then was only for the North side) and might have
been dispatched in half an hour, he was above three hours before his
return, altogether confirming our jealousie^ in his being now laying the
tr^un^ and disposing of all things for the perfe^tion of some Treachery. But
doubtless had the Enemy kept his hour* and according as was threatened and
expected approached the walls that night, things had not been so concluded. But
thanks be to God who took of the wheels of their resolutions, that the
mischief that they had devised, they had not the courage to drive on to any
perfection.

In the midst of these distractions, whereas others with good cause were
deserted of their Pastors, I was deserted of my Congregation: most of the
better sort fled to Sea, and with very affectionate expressions entreated me to
the like, presuming by the barbarous cruel usage of others of the Clergy my
danger to exceed theirs, those who could not fly came about me for the
contrary; I was soon resolved (as indeed never admitting any other inclination)
not to leave them in their misery, but to live and die with them, remembering
that of our Savior, that the Shepherd should hazard his life for his sheep, as
that of Saint Ambrose to Iustina the Empress when he was commanded either to
receive the Arrians, or to leave Millain answered, Non prodam lupis gregem mihi
commissum hic occide, si libet,

But one of the chiefest cares that lay upon me even more then my life, was
that great treasure of my Lord Primates Library, which I had the happiness to
be trusted with in his absence. We heard of the daily rudeness of the vulgar
in burning and cutting in pieces the papers and books of such of the Clergy
already made a prey of (as in especial the Bishop of Meaths, and the Lord
Conways Library) the Manuscripts howsoever invaluable, yet by their mean
clothing likely to be least respected by such illiterate hands. No Barques left
in the harbor to remove them, the best course which the misery and necessity
of that time would afford was not neglected, but none could promise safety. At
length God who uses to be then most seen in helping when al sense fails
allaid much of this and our other fears by sending us a competent strength of
a thousand foot, and a hundred horse with able Captains under the command of
Sir Henry Tichburne who was also made Governor of the Town, whom as long
expected, so was November the fourth joyfully received by us, But by the Town
as coldly and discourteously, making him to wait for his lodging till nine a
clock at night in the street (though come in by two) and at length was
compelled by his own Authority to provide one himself, with diverse other
particulars which I will not trouble the Reader with. But it was so resented,
that howsoever the Town Arms offered their service that night, yet it was
rejected, and notwithstanding the wet, long, and heavy march that day, three
hundred of the Soldiers were drawn out of the several Companies to continue
the Watch that night, wherein our vigilant Governor took a voluntary share
himself also.

The next day being the fifth of November and the thankful remembrance ^or our
delivery from the Papists Conspiracy in England we kept it solemnly with an
addition of the like for our preservation in part from this also, which though
it were the younger sister, yet being in its own Country got the prehe^inence.

Before it was not well taken to call it Rebellion, but only the act of some
disc^ntented Gentlemen. But now we took heart to speak as we thought; To this
Regiment the State was pleased not long after to add three Companies more* so
that now besides the Town Arms, we were fifteen hundred foot, and a hundred and
threescore horse, by which our fears of meeting daily at the Church w^^^ cured
and we encouraged to double our weekly Fasts, when by turns each division of
the Regiment might ^artake of one and by our frequent adm^nitions endeavored to
prevent these vices usually incident to Soldiers, as also in regard that by
their continual Watches they could not attend the public Prayers offered
twice every day in the Church where (as best agreeing with our present estate)
we used that form appointed in King James his Reign, (when all the Ref^r^ed
Churches were conceived to be in the like danger, Anno 1628.) by the assistance
of some of my Brethren here, each part had it (with one fitted to our present
condition) upon their Guards evening and morning* and there was reason that
where Religion was the cause, the better success might be expected, if it
could be inf^sed into the defenders of it.

Not many nights after here crept out in the twilight this following
Declaration, framed as it appears upon the presumption the thing contrived had
been effected, which was found in the stree^s and by the wax at each corner
seemed to have been some where affixed. And howsoever we had seen before
some other imperfect ones, yet by the draught and fairness of the hand with
other circumstances we apprehended this to be the most authentical.

The General Declaration of the Catholics of Ireland.
WHereas we the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom of Ireland have been
continually loving and faithful subjects to his Sacred Majesty, and
notwithstanding the general and heavy oppressions suffered by subordinate
Governors to the ruin of our lives, honors, and estates, yet having some
liberty of Religion from his Majesty out of the affluence of his Princely love
to us we weighing not corporal loss in respect of the great immunity of the
soul, are inviolably resolved to infix our selves in an immutable and pure
allegiance for ever to his Royal Majesty and Successors.

Now it is that the Parliament of England, maligning and envying any graces
received from his Majesty by our Nation, and knowing none so desired of us as
that of Religion, and likewise perceiving his Majesty to be inclined to give us
the liberty of the same, drew his Majesty's Prerogative out of his hands
thereby largly pretending the general good of his Majesty's Kingdoms, But we
the said Catholics and loyal Subjects to his Majesty do probably find as
well by some Acts to pass by them the said Parliament touching our Religion,
in which the Catholics of England and Scotland did suffer. As also by threats
to send over the Scottish Army with the Sword and Bible in hand against us,
That their whole and studied plot both was and is, not only to extinguish
Religion (by which we only live happily) but also likewise to supplant us and
raze the name of Catholics and Irish out of the whole Kingdom. And seeing
this surprise so dangerous, tending absolutely to the overthrow of the liberty
of our consciences, and Country, and also our gracious Kings power forced from
him, in which and in whose prudent care of us our sole quiet and comfort
consisted, and without which the fear of our present ruins did prescribe
opinion, and premonish us, to save our selves.

We therefore as well to regain his Majesty's said Prerogative being only due
to him and his successors, and being the essence and life of Monarchy, hoping
thereby to continue a strong and invincible unity, between his Royal and ever
happy love to us, and our faithful duty and loyalty to his incomparable
Majesty, have taken Arms and possessed our selves of the best and strongest
Forts of this Kingdom, to enable us to serve his Majesty and defend us from
the tyrannous resolution of our Enemies.

This in our consciences as we wish the peace of the same to our selves and
our posterity is the pretense and true cause of our present rising in Arms, by
which we are resolved to perfect the advancement of truth, and safety of our
King and Country. Thus much we thought fit in general to publish to the
world, to set forth our innocent and just cause, the particulars whereof shall
be speedily declared. Dated October 23. 1641.

God save the King

After the Soldiers in some good order were quartered Sir Henry Tichburne our
Governor took a diligent view of the Walls: Consultations were had for the
better fortifying of them* The Mill-Mount conceived a very defensive place, for
the guard of Meath-side, the weaker part of the Town, and so accordingly were
mounted four pieces of Ordnance, and there soon appeared good cause for this
preparation, The whole County of Louth (scarce a Gentleman that was a Papist
excepted) were drawn into this Conspiracy, so that we were beset on that side
Northward with five thousand, or as their own list reported it eight thousand.
The infection did so spread, that it not only tainted, but broke out in the
faces and lips of some of our Aldermen, one St^nley (who was a Town Burgess
for the Parliament) took himself highly promoted to be a Captain with them;
others who not long before seemed to do good service in the discovery of the
like (whose Letters I had seen deeply exclayming against those courses) now
ran the same way also; Nay, the very Sheriff of the County (who had been so
favored as to continue Knight of the Shire also) was a Leader in that
Rebellion too, He with Stanley came in hither often upon protection as joint
Commissioners from the Rebels upon some pretended Treaties, whom howsoever for
some reasons according to a Commission for that purpose, it was not thought
amiss to protract things by such like parleys, yet we gave little heed to any
thing they said, being persuaded which way so ever they looked they rowed
another. The subject of much of their discourse was a desire to do the Town
good service which might be the more credible in regard of some estates they
had in it. Their extraordinary affection to my Lord Moore and his Family,
inviting him for his safety to retreat to Mellifont again, or if that were not
sure enough, a stronger Castle was offered him, as diverse letters to that
purpose I have often seen from many, remembering him of the security his Father
lived in at that same place during all Tyron's Rebellion, and therefore his
son who had deserved better of them, could not but be confident of the same.
Nay, proffered to make him General, at least of all Mead and Louth, That what
ever losses himself, or tenants had sustained should ^ll be repaid to a penny,
which was often seconded by diverse other Agents, But the depth of all (as the
following fruits declare) was but to have made a prey of him, and his, and so
to have weakened the Town of an active and zealous supporter, who still as
before was very forward to give the life to every design for its
'preparation', which had appeared in giving a stop to many of their crafty
Plots by the way here. Before this Regiment came to us, at the earnest request
of the said Sheriff of Louth, the State was so far moved as to send down
three hundred Arms, for the defense of that County (who had not then declared
themselves) with about forty more for the Guard of Dundalke, but the suspicion
of their treachery senting stronger here then possibly it might 20 miles
further were by my Lord Moore stopped in their passage. The Lords Justices
having likewise about a fortnight before sent five hundred Arms to the Lord
Gormanstones house, about five miles from us, at his Petition for the arming of
Mead, upon whose fidelity they still presumed, according to the pattern of
their Ancestors, yet now receiving an intimation of some plot of the Rebels to
surprise them, were under the care of Lord Colonel Wamman safely conveyed
hither, with whom there ^ame also a Fortnights Pay for the Regiment, but was
not supplied with any more money in twenty two weeks after, which as the
former offer of the state aggravates the falsehood of the Rebels: so this later
advances the honor of this service here, in their so zealous continuing their
unanimous defense of this Town, notwithstanding so little encouragement.

The Parliament time now drawing on, my Lord Moore was necessitated to a second
journey to Dublin, where as he was not backward in a free and full declaring
himself against some Excusers of this Rebellion, so was he not unmindfull of
this Town, and Country adjoining; But propounded a second motion, exceeding
the former, viz. that seeing Sir Henry Tichburnes Regiment consisting but of
one thousand Foot, and one hundred Horse, was not of that number and strength,
as to secure the Town, and to issue far out for the prevention of any
further approach of the Enemy; He offered to raise six hundred men more at
his own charges, to cloth them and give them pay till a supply of moneys
should be sent out of England, conditionally that the four Compantes in the
Town over and above the former, and not yet affixed to any Regiment might be
added to his Command to make up a thousand. By which Dundalke, Atherdee, and
the whole County of Louth might possibly have been secured. But it was not so
readily accepted as it merited. Thus by this forward and Noble offer, his
affection to the cause being fully discovered, and being (as I have been
informed) the only Lord in the Pale (excepting the Earl of Kildare, and the
Lord of Hoath) who was a Protestant, the malice of the Rebels was further
enraged, and presently took the advantage of his absence, to draw up to his
house of Mellifont, to the utter spoiling and piliaging of it, as will appear
by the Relation following, which disaster he has been since assured by them,
was the fruit of his former motions, as being done the next day after his
return.

Of the Rebels Plundering the House of Mellifont, and their cruel Barbarous
dealings there, November. 25. 1641.
UPon the one and twentieth of November. being Sunday, as we were going to Church
in the morning, there came a rumor to our Governor of the Rebels intention to
beset Mellifont, about three miles from us; Whereupon he presently was sending
o^t to the former strength there a further supply of two hundred Foot, and a
troop of Horse; But as the Drums were beating, there marched down the hill of
Tallihascot, about two miles from us Northward a thousand men, (as they seemed)
giving many shot as they came; This gave a stop to the issuing out of the
former forces, as interpreting by that and other Circumstances their aim was
rather to surprise the Town, but by the issue it appeared the plot was only to
divert us, there being at that same instant about Fifteen hundred from other
parts drawing toward Mellifont. The force left there to defend it against some
Pilferers, besides a few servants of the house, was only twenty four
Musquettiers, and fifteen Horse, two Scouts they had abroad, one of whom was
cut off, the other pursued to the very Gates; about an hour before their
coming Mac-Maghon sent a note (which I saw) to the Warders of the house (as
he styled them) that if they would give it up, they should have quarter, and
withal a Bullet for a token.

The quartermaster of the Troop returned a short answer, they would all dye
rather then yield, and a bold Scotch-man standing by, bid the messenger to
advise his Master to make his Bullets bigger. Many messengers were with all
expedition dispatched hither with letters fowed up in their clothes, for the
safer conveyance, but we heard not of them. All ways being thus stopped, and
finding no hope of any further relief, they prepared themselves for their own
defense, for any promise of quarter, by the experience of their falsehoods to
others they gave little credit to; They accounted themselves but dead men, and
so were resolved to sell their lives at as dear a rate as they could, shook
hands, and encouraged one another. The Enemies Horse and Pike were placed upon
the top of the hill* amongst whom is confessed were some, who not many days
before professed the quite contrary. Their Foot marched over the Garden sides
in multitudes, whom these few of ours so received, that they fell all back
about forty yards, and so accordingly retreated four or five times; In
brief, they killed sevenscore of them, and had made them up so many hundreds,
but for want of Powder, having at the most but Six shot, some but Four; not a
man of them was hurt till all was spent, they had cut their Bullets into
halfes, and to make even with their Powder, they rammed in five or six
together, whereby each shot was the death of many, and in conclusion when all
was spent, they broke as many Muskets as they could against the walls. The
Sergeant who had the command of the Foot behaved himself very valiantly, by
the Confession of the Enemy, and at their entrance slew many with his Halbert.
Half a dozen placed in a little outward Castle killed some of them, as they
were marching down the hill, amongst whom was one of the chief Captains, in
rich stolen clothes, at whose fall there was a great cry. These at last being
promised quarter, and yielding, yet they wounded, and threw them out at the
windows.

The Horse who could do but little good within, when they saw them pressing so
thick to the very Gates, opened them, and gave them a desperate Charge, and so
made their way through them, though by their pursuers scattered diverse ways
before they came hither. The number of the slain in all of our side were
thirteen (whom a Friar (for none of our Clergy durst venture thither) was so
forward for a deed of Charity, as to procure them burial in the Church
adjoining, and one man finding life in him (notwithstanding at least forty
wounds) brought him home on a Carre; The course they took with him was the
same they did with others* they first stripped him, lest he should bloody his
clothes, and then a dozen of them together run him through, and hacked him
with their Skeenes, leaving him for dead. But the most barbarous act was the
killing of a grave comely old Gentleman, of above fourscore years of age, who
after he had opened the Wine-seller, and was giving them all possible courteous
entertainment, and filling wine to them, of a sudden run him through. A poor
old blind man that had been the Porter (who could make no resistance) they
knocked down; another as old as he they cut his throat, so enraged, that they
slew the very dogs they found, broke the windows, took up diverse of the
Plankes in the Chambers to seek for moneys, searched the peoples mouths for
it, ripped the Featherbeds to take away the Tikes, carried away the Hangings, and
other furniture that was portable, cut in pieces all the Coverings of the
Chaires and Stools, (many of which were very rich) broke with their Clubs a
Closet of Glasses, and Gallipots full of such Ingredients as they were
incapable of, took away abundance of provision in the house, of Cattle and
Horses abroad, and what they could not carry they destroyed, to the loss of my
Lord Moore, at least 2000. pounds. The fair Haggard of Corn they thrashed and
took away afterward by leisure; The Women they stripped all stark naked; The
Chapel they made their quassing room, broke the Pulpit, and all the seats,
threw a fair Church Bible into the Mill-Pond, broke the very Bell; Their best
language to them all was English dogs* Whoores and Rogues* Heretics, and the
like.

After the departure of these, came a ruder troop of the baser sort of
Churles, some of the very Tenants and near neighbors, who drew away the Iron,
and Brass, and other wooden lumber, leaving not so much as a door, or Iron
bar in the windows; And so of a most pleasant habitation in one night, became
a most rumous desolate place. By all which may easily be judged the truth of
their former promises, if the owners had been so persuaded, as to ^ave trusted
their own persons there also, who (as we have had late credible information)
were entered in the first List among such as should have bin surprised but such
as were trusted with it had not the Courage to attemp^ it, as the like care was
taken of this Town also; And yet one merry passage con^luded this Tragedy, by
a Basket of Tulips, and other such like roots, which these Rebels finding so
carefully laid up, took them for some rare dainties, and so fell to eating
them with butter, which had that present operation, that for a week after most
of them deemed themselves po^soned, and cursed the Heretics, as if that bait
had been laid there of purpose.

After this they yet desisted not to multiply their parleys daily, and in
regard my Lord Moore was one of the Lords authorized by Parliament to treat
with them, they more thick than before applied themselves to him, renewing still
their former protestations of love to him and his, wished him to leave the
Town for his own safety, pressed their former honorable offer to make him
their General, that full satisfaction should be given him for his losses at
Mellifont, (though I believe many of their estates could scarce have compassed
it.) And to clear themselves of that hateful aspertion of Rebellion assured
him to show that good warrant for what they did, which should give all the
world satisfaction, importuned him very earnestly for a meeting. The place and
time agreed upon his Lordship with some few adventured out of the Gates, but in
stead of them found some straggling fellows gathering, which gave him just
cause to suspect some treachery, and so retreated, (which since he has been
assured of.) Yet that night they came to the Gates to excuse it, and upon
promise of saftie entered, but neither spoke nor showed any thing to the
purpose, still confirming our opinions of them to be false accusers, and
speakers evil of dignities, utterers of great swelling words of vanity, and
Inventors of lies in hypocrisy, according to which we ever found their
continuance. And yet to put an end to those shadowy pretenses, a motion was
made of cessation of Arms* till a Messenger were sent from each withal
expedition into Scotland, and so to procced according to the return of the
Kings pleasure, but they could not hear of that ear neither, though some
answered they had sent one of their own already for the same end, which yet we
weighed in as light a belief as the other.

Some scattered speeches have I heard fall from them, scarce worth the
gathering up, they talked a little confusedly of the Kings Prerogative, of an
Act passing in England, that every Papist should be presently hanged, That they
would have the Lord Deputy be always of the Irish birth, of their former heavy
pressures, freedom of their Religion and the like, the later of which they
very presumptuously and confidently avouched.

Often have I heard them acknowledge (which we knew very well our selves) that
many of the Priests and Priers have been the chief movers of them* Our
Alderman Captain said a Friar lately came from Spain, threatened him, if he
did not readily join with them, he should presently have his head struck off
and hanged behind him, whom yet, we knew, needed no such spur to put him
forward. Nay, he acknowledged that a titular Popish Bishop of theirs made a
large Oration unto them by way of incouragment in this Rebellion, assuring them
they should all be saved and reputed as Martyrs that died in that quarrel, One
Dowdal of Killalee confessed that when his Brother went first out, his own
mother upon her knees dissuaded him, but a Priest urged him to it and
prevailed, whose example himself not long after followed.

After this we had a rumor of O Relyes advancing this way wards, from the
County of Cavan, The day before whose coming to Platten (a Castle within two
miles of us) one Darcy, the Master of it, was so courteous as with great
protestations of welcome solemnly to invite most of our Captains to a Feast
thither, which if obtained, they had been all hand-somly c^tched in a snare by
him.

This Rely having taken Kels, Arbracen, the Navan, we might easily foresee a
possibility of besetting us on the Southside also toward Dublin* whereupon our
Governor entreated the State to a further s^^ply, who after a long expectation
sent it down, but unfortunatly the foot miscarried by the way as follows.

Of the defeat of six hundred foot, with their Ammunition at the Bridge of
Gillingstone, within three mil^s of Droheda.
ON Saturday the two and twentieth of November, six hundred Foot and fifty
Horse set out of Dublin, but so late that they marched but six miles, to Swords
which as soon as we understood, a Post was sent from hence to warn them to
mend their pace and not to fail of reaching hither, the next day, both for
their own safety and ours, and in expectation of them accordingly our Governor
iss^ed out with a competent force of Foot, and Horse to meet them, but the
Soldiers mutined against their Commanders, and would not march any further
then Balrudhery (which was but six miles more) though they were offered double
pay to invite them through. The next day being the twenty third of November, a
little on this side the Bridge of Gillingstone, (when they thought all danger
was past) in a great stubble field they were met with by at least 2000 of the
Enemy, who (being a mighty fog) were within Musket shot before they were
discryed.

The Captains presently began to draw up their men into a Battalia, and entered
the field, The Soldiers seemed at first to be over-joyed to meet them, The
Rebels making a stand, they did so also, But it so fell out as they were ready
to give fire, one of the Officers (who dying in the place prevented the like
punishment for it) commanded a Countermarch, in which they being compelled to
take a Ditch were disordered, and the Enemy judging it a flight gave such a
shout that frighted them into a further confusion, and so presently charging
them were routed, most were slain, many escaped hither with their Arms but
more without, two of the Captains were killed, the other escaped with one
Ensign. The fifty Horse (who were my Lord of Ormonds) made their way through
them without the hurt of one man. The causes of this disaster are diversely
pleaded by the Soldiers and Commanders, which I will not take upon me to
determine.

This accident was our greatest loss, and our Enemies gain, by the large
portion of powder, match, arms, and moneys, which were made a prey of, yet
some good was produced out of this evil, being the occasion whereby our foes
were discerned from seeming friends, for till now the Lords of the Pale were
Neuters, but upon this success they all instantly discovered themselves of
what stamp they were of, after whose Copy our Townsmen began to improve their
hands also,

As Soon as the Scout that morning brought us the news of the Enemies marching
that way, our valiant Governor made out presently with six hundred foot and
two troops of horse, but before he could reach the place, the Rebels were fled
with the carriages, as being the main thing they aimed at, but that falsehood
of our Neighbors on the Northside of us appeared evidently, two of their
Commissioners (the Sheriff and our Alderman) were at that instant in parley
with us, from them, and as soon as the certainty of the ill news came, joy
might be discerned in their smiles, who, by much of their discourse to me that
morning, it was clear they were of the Plot: fears they presently multiplied
upon such as were apt for them, what bloody fellows they were, and desperate,
giving also an assurance of a prosecution that night and the like, which in
reason being probable enough, the whole Regiment stood to their Arms, and were
appointed their several Guards upon the first Alarm, but they had not the
hearts to proceed.

Not long after this, the Rebels took the opportunity of another advantage also
in the surprizall of a Chester Bark at the Skerries whose owner upon great
presumptions is believed to have been corrupted to it by three or four of our
Popish Merchants aboard her, who against the desire of the rest of the English
(which was to have been for Dublin, or any other Port) would put in no where
but there, and ran her aground also, which in regard of the open Harbor, and
the fairness of the weather it could not be but a voluntary act. And it
further appeared by the mirth of the Merchants as soon as she was stuck, their
present violent rifling the English who had some good sums of moneys, before
any Boat came out from the Rebels, That Bark was fraught with some
extraordinary provision of Powder and Ammunition for them, amongst which there
was a Harquebush made of purpose at Chester, at the charge and direction of one
of our Town, The Papists in her, were welcomed by the kind greeting of the
Rebels but the poor Protestant English robbed of all they had, their Letters out
of England intercepted and detained. As soon as they were landed desiring a
safe conduct hither, the Lord Netherfield out of a pretense of favor would not
suffer them, but sent them to Dublin, assuring them he would not fail to take
this Town within two days, and then they would be prisoners again, of which he
had so strong a persuasion that the rumor was confidently given out, and
believed in Dublin, before the attempt. So sure did a simple Alderman of ours,
who was with them expect it, that to mediate for the saving of one of their
lives, and giving him a shilling to carry him to Dublin, he compelled the poor
man to make over his house and what else he had here, thinking to have taken
possession of it instantly, in due form of Law. Nay, their boasts then were to
this purpose. That they might easily see the cause was of God, it had so
prospered; that Gods special hand was in it in so sudden giving up the Kingdom
into the hands of the Catholics. Which since by the contrary event on our
side, has been retorted unto them otherwise, in our wonderful delivery from
them.

Now were we fully besieged on all sides, blockt up as well by Sea as Land, all
ways of intercourse toward Dublin stopped, Sentinels placed so thick night and
day, that none could pass unsearched: diverse ways were daily tried for the
safe conveyance of Let^ers, some sowed up in the Collers of their doublets
soles of Boots, Buttons, in Searcloaths clapped upon fained soars, but seldom
did any escape their scrutiny above once. And now upon this confederacy betwixt
Mead, and the County of Louth, they began to style themselves the Catholic
Army.

This proved it high time to add what else could be effected for our
strengthening the Town. Brestworks were made before every Gate, Platforms in
such places where the walls were defective, some for Sentinels to stand on,
others for pieces to play upon, abundance of Morning-stars (as they call them)
terrible weapons upon a wall, a world of Crescets; to give light in a dark
night round about the Town, an Iron chain crossed the River, and which had
been our chiefest improvidence) a command to all near hand to draw in their
corn and hay, but was prevented by the Rebels, who about one a clock at night
before that resolution, fired at least a thousand pounds worth of several
corn at once, a horrid sight by the grain destroyed, horrible by the season,
but more lamentable as being lost by the negligence and mere dullness of the
Owners, who had been commanded to reduce it, and accordingly all helps offered
them for the same end, before. By this act which redounded to the loss of the
whole Town, might easily be interpreted their intentions, for the prevention of
which (though a little too late) the Soldiers adventured our at several
Ports, and brought in the residue that had escaped them. And by their example
we proceeded our selves to burn many houses near the walls, which they had
referred only to shelter themselves in their approaches from the shot.

The Skirmish at the Green-hils.
DEcember the 3 was the first fruits of any skirmish between us at S. Lawrence
Gate and West Gate, there issued out about 350 foot, and two troops of horse
for the securing some carriages, sent out for Corn at the Green-hils about half
a mile of, yet it so fell out that by some notice given to the Enemy by a party
of their own within, a multitude met them unexpectedly half way, who (being a
mighty fog) were all in Battalia, and within Musket Shot before they were
descryed, The report of their number by such as had taken a dark view was 3000
(yet somewhat mistaken) who instan^ly gave such a shout that they were judged
not much below it, some Officers advised to a retreat, many of the Horse (which
were Papists) in the Rear ran back with confused cries to disturb those that
were at the Gates drawing out, reporting as if we had been beaten already, The
carriages were returned, and for have of crowding in, filled up the Gate. In
the midst of this confusion our men being amazed, our resolute Governor (who
must have the honor of that days service) presently light off his Horse, and
led the Foot himself by the equal hazard of whom all were revived and
encouraged, Commanded the Musketeers up the Hill, and the Pikes in that narrow
passage of the lane to open for the Horse, and so with all expedition made
ready.

The Rebels by this had charged us twice, yet hurt not a man, but as soon as our
Horse and Foot came up, they gave them at once so full and satisfactory an
answer that without any further reply, they gave up the field and so betook
themselves to their heels, their cries being now of another time, and so in our
sight from the walls were they chased a mile, or two, (the sudden breaking up
of the mist being their farther discovery) to the loss of above two hundred of
them, but not one man of ours. The Horse who in this case must needs do the
chief service, were by the ditches compelled to divide themselves, and each
took a several path, according as the scattered rout led them. Amongst the
slain there was one Priest and three Captains, of whom one was near a kin to
the Earl of Tyrone, some money was got in most of their pockets, clothes, and
arms, not a few, This good success ^o mightly flesht our soldiers, that they
were nothing but ^^^ging for the second part to the same tune.

This night we looked for a present remedy, by an onset from both ^^des at
once, but it seems they had not so soon digested their breakfast on^y not many
nights after some straggling fellows stole near the walls, and ^^^^ntured a few
shot at our Sentinels, but they proved a volley at their ^wn b^^^all, who were
instantly knocked down in their places; many nights after was continued some
extraordinary vigilance in their expecta^^^n, but we took them still to be of
more courage then we found them.

I will not greive thine eyes in relating here the many cruel bloudsheds,
barbarously committed near us upon the persons of those English, which were
found tardy in their repair hither, robbing, stripping starving, and stabbing,
were so ordinary that our ears were filled with no other news. Thou may
guess at their disposition by their usage of one and thirty prisoners, taken
at the Bridge of Gillingstone, or in the way before they could reach hither,
(whose lives they had reserved only to exchange, for as many of theirs with us)
their entertainment of them was a crowding into a dark Dangeon, and feeding
them with nothing but Garbage and Offalls, of ^^ch flesh as their Dogs could
scarce eat, allowing them neither salt nor ^ire to broyle it, and once a day
threw them in a sheafe of Beans, or some Cabbage stalks, the return of whom
was a lamentable spectacle, many being so far pined, proved irrecoverable, and
died the next day, howsoever the like number here of theirs that were released,
returned in a better hue, their faces declaring they wanted no victuals and for
other necessaries they were so fully supplied, by many of their Town-sisters,
as if they had been Martyrs.

Those of our Soldiers which were Papists, were so poisoned daily with the
Council of such, as had a dominion over their Consciences, that they stole
over the walls by dozens in a night to the Enemy, some fairly asked leave to be
dismissed, as being against the safety of their souls, to be so much as
defensive in this quarrel, every night we had allarms by some peals of shot
at one corner, or other, But at length finding the intent to be rather to
disturb our rest, then surprise the Town, they were so slighted that we
suffered them to spend their powder against the walls, without so much as
taking any notice of it, unless any approached so nigh as we were sure of the
conclusion, howsoever we were assured by all that came ^^om them that in this
dark of the Moon, we should feel their utmost, which according to their
threatening, we were not backward to prepare them an entertainment.

At length they sent an extraordinary Embassage, which for the better luck
came by a Friar one father Darcy, who not long agone had been Prior of the
Dominicans here; He accompanied by a Captain of his own name, with a Drum
beat a Parley upon the hill, and being admitted to the Gate delivered his
Commission to the Captain of the Port, the sum of which was to this purpose,
viz. That the General and Captains, of the Catholic Army had sent this
Father Darcy with others to treat with the Governor and Captains of the
Town of Droheda, to whom they were ^^ give credit as in their names, provided
first that they might have assurance of safe conduct and return, under the
hands of the Governor, before their entrance. While this was considering of,
and a protection sending them accordingly, The Friar longing till he was
delivered of his er^and, staid not for an answer, but upon the bare word of an
Officer enters, and without any further security presents himself. At his
sudden unexpected approach the Governor made him sensible of his error, which
(being out of his element) he had run into, that being come in without any
Obligation from him, he was at his mercy, whether he would dismiss him or
no, yet notwithstanding was pleased to pass it by only as an inconsiderate
act, and not taking that advantage which the Law of Arms would justify,
granted him audience, and assurance of safety, as if he had had it more
formally under his hand, as it was both conditioned and preparing, and the Drum
that came with him was as inordinate as himself, being one of our own
Soldiers, not long before run away from us, whose doom by right was to have
bin hanged.

The sum of his demand was, The absolute surrender of the Town for his
Majesty's use and service, assuring us of such deep projects and mighty
forces, that it would be impossible (not expressly excepting Gods power it
self) ever to be relieved either by Land or Sea,

The Governor with the Captains answer, was as short; that they had a
Commission from his Majesty bearing such a date for the defense of this Town
against them, but could they produce a Countermand of a Later date, either from
his Majesty, or the Lords Justices for to give it up, they were ready to obey;
In the mean time they thought themselves more able to keep it, then the
Country was to keep them. That as yet they had been put to no such distress,
as to admit of any such mean thoughts. That if they attempted it by the Sword,
they should be sure to have most of their lives first; or if by Famine, they
should hear they eat their horses hides.

Having this answer, the Friar was as weary of his stay in Town, as he was
hasty of entering, only gave us a Copy of the Oath, lately taken by the Lords
of the Pale, and (as he said) by the rest of the Pretended Catholics near
us, which the next day it came to my hands, I thought it not unfit to return
it with the interest of a short gloss, and a disswasive appendix to the taking
of it.

The Oath is as follows.
I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, and all the Angels and Saints in
heaven, promise, vow, swear, and protest to maintain and defend, as far as
I may with my life, power, and estate: the public, and free exercise of the
true Catholic Roman Religion against all persons that shall oppose the same.

I further swear, that I will bear faith and true Alleagiance to our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, his Heirs and Successors, and that I will defend
him, and them, as far as I may with my life, power, and estate, against all
such persons as shall attempt any thing against their Royal Persons, Honors,
Estates, or Dignities, and against all such as shall directly, or indirectly,
endeavor to suppress their royal Prerogatives, or do any act or acts
contrary to regal government.

As also the power and privileges of Parliament, the lawful rights and
privileges of the Subject, and every person that makes that Vow, Oath, and
Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same.

And to my power, as far as I may, I will oppose, and by all ways and means
endeavor to bring to condign punishment, even to the loss of life, liberty
and estate, all such as shall either by force practice, Counsels, Plots,
Conspiracies, or otherwise, do or attempt any thing to the contrary of any
Article, clause, or any thing in this present Vow, Oath, and protestation
contained, so help me God.

Upon the Treaty of this said Friar, who in the name of the Commanders of the
Catholic Army (for so he styled them) had demanded the surrender of this Town
as aforesaid, our Governor and Captains caused this following Protestation and
Oath to be made and drawn up as follows.

The Protestation of the Governor and Captains of the Town of Drogheda, for
their unanimous defense of it for his Majesty's use and service.
Whereas we are beset with such who pretend their attempts in taking of this
Town to be for the advancement of his Majesty's service, (which notwithstanding
we believe is but a pretext to delude the vulgar) we the Governor and
Captains of the said Town, for the further manifestation and approbation of
our loyalty, and faithfulness to his Majesty, by whose immediate Command we
are charged for the defense of his just and Royal title in it: do likewise
hereby unanimously make this following Protestation and Oath, and do enjoin it
to be taken by every Soldier and Inhabitant of this Town, as the evidence of
their faith, and truth to the Kings Crown and dignity, which we shall mayntain
with our lives and estates, and that such as shall refuse it, to be put out of
the Gates.

The Oath.
I Shall to my uttermost, endeavor the defense of this Town, against all
outward or inward attempts whatsoever, for his Majesty's service.

I shall forthwith discover any Plot, Conspiracy, or Combination, which may, or
shall come to my knowledge from without, or within, which may be any ways
intended to the prejudice of the whole Town, or to the person of the Major,
Governor, Aldermen, or any of the Captains or Officers Garrisond in it.

I shall not attempt nor consent that the Town shall be given upon any
pretense or cause whatsoever, without the consent of the Governor, Major, and
greater part of the Captains and Aldermen in it, or without special Command
from his Majesty, or chief Governor or Governors of the Kingdom.

All which I do herby swear truly and faithfully to observe and keep without
any fraud, deceit, or mental reservation whatsoever.

This Oath howsoever intending as well the safety of the Town Officers, as the
Garrison and either readily taken or offered to be taken by the Captains,
Officers, and all the Soldiers, yet being presented to the Major and Alderman,
they first delayed it, by desiring a sight of it with some time of
consideration, and at length after advise with their learned (I will not say
Religious) Council returned a flat refusal, only colored with the pretense
of endangering the favor of a fair quarter, which they expected if the Town
were taken, yet a Lieutenant of one of the Troops, (though a Papist) and
protesting his constancy in that Religion upbraided them to their faces, that
they could be no good Subjects in their refuall. And here it was not unobserved
as a just judgment of God upon some of the Soldiers for their perjury, who
having taken the Oath, and a night or two afterward stealing over the walls to
the Rebels one brake his back and another his neck, and others much bruised
themselves, lying there as examples to others that should do the like, which
was the more observable, in that before that Oath, many had climbed over, and
had no hurt.

The Rebels finding that neither their fair pretenses nor bloody threatenings
to prevail so far as to gain us to any composition for giving up the Town,
they put their resolutions into action, and so Saint Thomas his Eye was the
night appointed with one consent to give us an onset on all sides at once,
which as we had notice of by our Spies, so toward the Evening we might see
them our selves drawing nigh in several bodies of six or seven thousand, which
by their own relation is twice doubled, and lately has been confessed by one
of their chief to have been sixteen thousand, the issue of which was as
follows.

The onset given by the Rebels with their whole strength; December the
twentieth, being Saint Thomas his Eve.
THat afternoon there came certain information of that being the fatal night
pitched upon by all their forces for our ruin, who made no other account but
of swallowing us up quick, and with it very good grounds to assure us of some
assistance promised them by the Town, who at such an hour and at such an
alarm were to fall upon us, and to open a P^rt, upon which the Governor
instantly disarmed the Townforces of such Muskets and Pikes as he had entrusted
them with, and caused a search, to be made for any other Arms, and to be
gathered, all that could be found into one room. Commanded all the Townsmen
within doors upon pain of death, and about that hour set for the mutiny
within (whereby the Enemy might the securer assault us without) he was once
for trial sake thinking to have set forty Musketeers to have shot powder one
against another, and so to make a confused noise, as if the Town had been in
an uprore, and fallen upon us indeed: but for fear of some unexpected mistakes,
which might have happened by such as could not have known the mystery, he
desisted, and rested in the belief of that which evidently declared it self
afterward:

The whole Garrison of Foot and Horse, consisting of eighteen hundred, stood
to their Arms all that night, every Company being appointed to their several
Guards, unto which there was added another of Volunteers out of the able and
sufficient householders of the Town, to the number of fourscore, who proffered
themselves, and had presently a Captain and Officers appointed them of whom
seven were of the Clergy, all sorts without exception thinking it high time
now to stand for their lives. The streets were well beset with Candles. The
Crescets in the dark night being lighted, our Governor continually rounding
the Town to see all things in order, and to prevent our Popish Inhabitants,
and the Enemies concurrence at the set hour, by discerning how the night went,
caused the clock to be set back two hours, All things being in a readiness
great expectation was there of our greeting, At length about one a clock, they
began to give some warning shot (which was deemed to be rather directed to the
Townsmen then to us) which being at that distance, our Soldiers daigned not to
take notice of. Not long after at a watchword given and about the hour
prefixed, they all approached the walls, and according to their use gave such a
terrible shout round about the Town, such as I remember never to have heard
the like. The end of it was believed either to scar and confound our forces, or
to invite the Town to make good their promise: for the furthering of which some
were heard to cry out of their windows, that the Town was lost but neither had
their issue. That tumultuous cry at one gate was instantly so well answered by
the doleful Echo of a Cannon from the Mount, that we soon heard them quite of
another tune, as being the slaughter of multitudes of them: for three or four
hours was this musical discord continued, till by the mistake of the clock,
the day breaking suddenly before they were aware they took themselves to
slight, and every one invited the other to all possible speed, after whom
(being now fully discovered) were posted all sorts of shot from all quarters,
which caused many (who by turning their backs had no mind to see their own
deaths) to drop by the way: some of them by their clothes and fair horses were
deemed Commanders, scaling Ladders were multiplied in the rumor which came
often to our ears before, but we saw none now, neither was indeed the time
come, for their use. The numbers of their slain is not certain, only such as
were sent out that morning upon a view, found all the fields bedewed with
blood, here and there some limbs scattered from their bodies, many cart loads
of their dead were seen driving away, abundance left behind in ditches, which
in their have they had forgotten, whose stolen clothes and linnes proved a
better booty to their strippers then was expected, many being the very provant
Clothes taken from ours at the Bridge, as with one of them (whose head was
brought in) was found the very armor of one of our Officers slain there.

For ours (such was Gods protection of us) that there was not one man slain,
nor so much as hurt, notwithstanding at Saint John's Gate (which was the most
naked, and where Captain Moris commanded) there was the hottest work, good
language past on both sides, ours called them the Kings Traitors, they ours the
Queens, some of our Popish Soldiers who had run away, were their Guides, and
were so bold as to call their several Captains by their names as they
discerned them by their voices, some of ours by this continued acquaintance at
length grew so courteous that when they found the Enemy slow in giving fire,
deeming it might be for want of Powder, offered to throw them a Bag, if they
would but fetch it, wagers were laid commonly amongst the Musketeers who should
take of such Commander appearing more gallantly mounted and clothed then the
rest; and indeed seldom missed, but one w^n the Set. Thus this night made
choice of according to their proverb, in hope or Saint Thomas his blessing
turned the contrary, much of their blood was spilt, and by Gods especial
goodness none of ours, which that morning as soon as the storm was over; we
failed not in the Church solemnly and publicly to acknowledge, and to give him
the praise to whom it is only due.

This failing of the Town (who indeed were not at liberty to perform,) we
heard moved the Rebels to vent many hard words against them, and till they
received their excuse, threatened to put no difference between them, and us, if
ever they took it.

Not many nights after when a revengfull reply was threatened again, and by us
expected there were found chalked upon most of the Papists doors white Crosses
to distinguish them from us; which some of ours perceiving they went up, and
down; and privately wiped them out, of purpose to guide the Enemies hands
righter then their intentions; if they had entered, and set up Gallowses in
their stead, and put the white Crosses upon the Protestants doors, and indeed
they had much merited of the Rebels by the distinstion they continually made
between ours and theirs in their usage. If any of our Popish Soldiers (whose
hearts were justly suspected to be without the Gates) were sick, they wanted
neither for clothes, physic, or diet, no more then their own children, by the
private charity of the Masters of the houses where they were billited: But if a
Protestant chanced to be sick they would not give him a bit of bread, nor
afford him the least courtesy to save his life.

Their Axes, Spades and other necessaries, much wanting for Fortifications, and
cutting down of trees near the Gates which sheltered the Rebels from the shot,
they hid or denied the loan of them, till by searching they were found, and so
violent taken.

About this time was a grand Conspiracy found out, an oath administering by a
Popish Captain of the Town forces to those of his own Soldiers, and some of
ours of the same profession, for the seizing upon our Soldiers Arms, as they
were asleep in their several lodgings, and sudden killing them either in their
beds, or at their Guards. The suspicion of which Plot sented the stronger by
being revealed by a Papist, who said he was advised by a Friar to take what
Oath should be administered to him by the said Captain, who upon it was
presently committed, and by the first shipping sent to Dublin. One Dowdall a
Trooper (being as it seems of the Council) and accidentally slain by his
fellow, they were so inconsiderate as to observe it as a just judgment of God
upon him, whom they presumed had discovered it, But he revealing nothing of it,
the contrary was rather observed by us, for his knowledge of it, and concealing
i^.

Many of the Troopers, as the foot who were Papists were found some nights
within doors when they should have answered the Alarms which with other
circumstances confirmed our belief, they had been tampered with that way.

By this timely repulse of this long threatened onset, we were in the greater
hope of having the quieter Christmas, when the Moon began to favor us with her
light. Many Festivals in which, we solemnly kept as days of Thanksgiving to
God, for our many deliverances. When (with what due preparation by the
assistance of the Chaplain and others of my Brethren here could be gained) the
whole Regiment received the Communion, who with the Town Inhabitants, and other
strangers, made up such a confluence of Communicants for two or three days,
that for many years there has not been seen the like, to the envy and
regrating of our Neighbors. By this a rumor was raised amongst the Rebels, as
if all our Commanders with their Companies had taken the Sacrament never to
give up the Town, which somewhat daunted them, and as we heard moved them to
the like indeed, in their superstitious binding one another, by the sacred
link never to leave the siege till they had it. Nay, some had prefixed the
very day, but the event according to their fond belief in that particular,
proved a mere delusion. On Christmas Eve we had a care of preventing their then
customary frequent meetings, least under their pretense of Confessions, or
hearing so many Masses, some other fruit should have issued from those
assemblies.

On Christmas day a Captain of theirs sending his servant with a small wild
present to my Lord Moore, in exchange for a pottle of Wine, these following
pretended Motives were received, which I thought sit to insert as follows.

The Motives moving the Catholics of Ireland to take Arms.
OUr Royal King and Queen are by the Puritanes curbed and abused, and their
Prerogatives restrained, diminished, and almost wholly abolished, contrary to
the Rights and Power of all Monarchall Authority, and also the Duty, Allegiance
and Consciences of all loyal Subjects, which with grief we take to heart, as
faithful and loyal Subjects ought to do. The Catholic Religion suppressed
and put down in England, and the Catholics persecuted with all rigorous
cruelty, even to death; the like the Puritanes of this Kingdom threatened to
have brought hither.

That there is a Law against Catholics in this Country, whereby the Kingdom
has been often impaired and ruined with persecutions, by means whereof the
Catholics are made incapable of any Office, or Place of Commodity or profit,
to the great and extraordinary decay of the Catholics in their estates,
education and learning.

That the Government of the Kingdom is wholly in the hands of strangers, who
in their beginnings are generally poor of birth and means, and very quickly
become Noble men, and men of great estates, by oppressing and ruinating the
poor Natives.

That there has been of late great threatenings of sending great Scottish
forces, with the Bible in one hand, and Sword in the other, to force our
Consciences or end our Lives, besides a private report of a sudden surprisall
and cutting the Catholics throats, intending which way we know not, but it
has been both written and spoken by several Protestants and Puritanes.

That the Catholics were not allowed to have any Arms, or Munition (as
Protestants and Puritanes were) but stood like dead men not able to defend
themselves in such desperate dangers.

All which being by them considered, they did see no way but to attempt to
seize upon Arms, where they could get them, to save their Lives, maintain the
King and Queen, their Religion and Country.

To these, some conceiving they might carry a specious show with the vulgar, I
thought it not amiss to return an answer in the speedy unmasking of them,
which with the gloss upon the confused Oath have it seems been made more
public then they deserved, and so I leave them, though at their birth it was
not safe here to father them.

The impudency of the Sheriff of the County of Loath, with our Alderman
Captain, when they came in upon parleyes, in their bold assertions and
presumptuous hopes in matter of Religion, was unsufferable, which I will not
now run thee so far out of the way as to relate them, though what they said, we
took as from the mouth of the Catholic Camp, whose Legates they were, they
so took upon them, that a contradiction of them in arguing their Religion to
be Idolatry, and their cause Rebellion, which in story is not found ever to
have prospered long, procured me no small threatenings if the day should prove
theirs. Each Sunday they reckoned to have Mass in our Church, as their
Generalissimo, Sir Philim o Neil (I have been told by such as have been eye and
eare-witnesses) has often clapped his hands with a joyful assurance to his
^ryers, that shortly they should say him a Mass in Christ Church in Dublin:
But their ambitious thoughts were put to a stand by the way here.

After this about the end of December was there a great Ice, so that our River
of the Boyne was in a night or two so hard frozen, that it could scarce be
broken with Mallets; Horses and men might safely pass over, which giving some
advantage to those of the Enemies quarters that lay below the Bridge, made ours
also the more vigilant in their watch, and they wanted no information and
invitation from hence to take the present opportunity.

December the last, a Boy was taken in the morning very early upon the Ice,
after a course or two by the soldiers coming from the Rebels, and being
charged with suspicion of some message, at first with execrable oaths denied
it: But one threatening to hang him, and with a piece of match about his neck
beginning to hoise him, whereby he found he was in earnest, he cried out, that
if they would spare his life he would tell the truth, and so confessed, four
Aldermens wives sent him out to the Rebels, with an assurance of their safe
walk over the Ice that night, that many Horses casually had run upon it and
continued a long time without danger, that they had given him some money, and
had promised him more; That the answer returned was, that they wondered they had
it not from the men, whose judgment must needs have prevailed more with them;
That they doubted of some trap laid for them by the Governor unknown to the
women, and prayed to give them some surer notice, with a token of some Soape
and a white dish to drink a cup of Ale in. The women were examined, but had
good cause to deny it. How diligent our soldiers were night and day in
preventing any such surprisall, by breaking the Ice, may easily be imagined,
which they had no sooner done but it thawed of its own accord.

Upon New-yeares day, about four of the clock in the morning, four Companies
and a troop of Horse invited themselves to a visit of some of those quarters
Northward; but the delay they had in opening the Port, which the late frost
had unexpectedly hardened, hindered much of their design, only Captain Martin
with his Company, who gate over the wall with ropes, killed some 15. with a
Sentinel, whereas if the rest could have followed in time, they had multiplied
them near to as many hundreds, so secure were they of our not daring so much as
to approach near them, we put them to flight, burnt that Village and another
and so retreated.

January the 7^h. by break of day, about 300. foot, and fourscore horse were
pleased to take the air out at S. John's Port, killed a 100. forced a 100. more
to the River, many were drowned (amongst whom was found cast up by the water
side one Art Roe Mac-Maghon a great Commander with them) took 50. Arms,
Cowes, and other booty, to the value of a hundred pound worth, burnt their
lodgings, and after a pursuit of a mile or two by the horse, retreated, which
they did very slowly, of purpose to have invited another Body of them, not far
off, to a present revenge of their fellows: But they had seen enough of their
blood for one morning, some made an overture, but as our men faced about, they
turned their backs, whom a Drake of ours overreached, to the dropping of some
of them. In this skirmish, howsoever they wanted not showers of shot from the
other side of the River also, yet there was not a man of ours hurt, excepting
one, who (against command) continuing pillaging after all the rest were gone,
was taken tardy, and received some wounds according to his desert, but escaped
with life.

Accidentally many were slain among our selves in the streets, and more in the
like hazard strangely preserved. A Corporal of a troop once upon a nights
alarm, riding in haste toward the water side, a Sentinel apprehending his
intent (by his not answering what he was) to have made over the River to the
Enemy, shot him quite through the back, of which he dyed: The next night
another received his deaths wound by his next fellow as they fate on horseback
One (being drunk) discharging his Musket killed a man and a woman not far from
him. A woman in the twilight carrying a paile of water upon her head, a shot
from the walls at random struck through the very bottom, and hurt her not,
the bullet being found in the water, diverse casually shot through the crown of
the Hat, Arms, Breast, Collers of their Dublets, and yet had no other hurt
then sometimes razing of the skin, and the bullet hanging in their clothes.

Now victuals began to be very scarce, the best sort were confined to one meal
a day, the common soldiers food was altogether herrings and water, and no
bread at all with it. This put every one to a narrow search through their
quarters; what was found was put into a storehouse, that Corn that was still
in stacks, was threshed out immediately: But yet by reason of the want of Mills
(most of which were without the Town) little Corn could be ground but by
Quernes, too slow a provision for so many thousands of soldiers and
Inhabitants. The Milch Cowes throughout the Town were ins^antly killed, and
divided, and as soon gone as given. Coals grew so sc^rse, that for the
Guards, as all the partitions of pales in backsides had been plucked up, so all
the Orchards were cut down within the walls as without, whereby the Town
seemed very naked, and like the poor people coming in to us, stripped to it is
shame, of it is choicest O^naments. The want of Hay and Oats caused the Horses
to droope, and to be unfit for service, who in stead, were feign to take to
straw and grains, sickness and death began to reign every where, many
famished, others with a diet not used to before, fell into such diseases which
brought them to the same end.

In the midst of this extremity hearing nothing from the State (who indeed now
conceived our case to be too desperate to be supplied) our Governor thought
fit to trim up a small vessel, which being loaded with some small Pieces, and
manned with forty Musketeers, was resolved to adventure her through the Enemies
shot, with a little Friggot attending her, who in the fight should have slipped
through to Dublin. When they were ready, the Town still declared their hearts
in hiding the Pilots, so that after much search none could be found, till at
length my Lord Moore was feign to threaten to send half a dozen of the
Aldermen in them, who should be placed so, that they should be sure to be shot
first, and so accordingly apprehended two or three of them, by this scare, they
who before pleaded ignorance, in the space of an hour became such knowing men,
that they found out four or five of the chief, to redeem themselves; for
Sailors, we were yet compelled to make Proclamation, that if such as were
desired came not at such an hour they should be declared traitors, and their
wives and children turned out of the Gates, and by this course we were
presently supplied, notwithstanding when we had them, little trust could we
repose in them being Papists, doubts we had of the safety of our little fleet
also, considering the strength of the Enemies preparations against their
coming at the harbors mouth, where besides their Landforces, three Barques
were manned in expectation of them.

Our Relief, Ian. 11th.
BUt God, whose usual time is then to help when all other help and hope
fails, Jan. the 11th. relieved us with the safe coming of the Pinace, a
Friggot, a Gabbard, with two Shallops, and another vessel laden with Biscuit,
powder and other Ammunition, of both which, an extremity of want was drawing
on, the showers of Musket shot which to little purpose was powered upon them,
from each side of the River by the Enemy, and the effectual answers given by
our great Pieces, which made such breaches through the bodies of their
Companies, as fit Land-markes for them, was worth our glad attention, which was
given with great alacrity by the whole Town round about the walls. O the shouts
of joy that ecchoed from all sides at their safe arrival within the Key!
Tears were in most men's eyes for gladness, all with one consent in the very
street acknowledging it to be Gods handy-worke, and the very fruit of our
prayers, only many of the Townes-men seemed to be dejected, and at their first
entrance within the harbor, endeavored to dancke our expectation, by
intimating they might be some of the Enemies friends from Spain or elsewhere,
and that the shot was but a color to blind us till they were entered within
our bowels. In this blessing the handy-worke of God has been discerned in
diverse particulars, they had sunk a Barque in the Channel, but a great fresh
with a strong West wind had not long before thrown her out to Sea, they had two
Barques on each side, by which they had with other Boats as supporters, fixed
an Iron chain with a Cable, cross the Channel, but it proved no let to their
passage over, without so much as touching it. The Pinnace had put in by the way
at Skirries, about twelve miles off, and burnt the Enemies lodgings, with all
their Corn, and what was fit for booty they carried aboard. Now that which was
observed as a special Providence by the very Papists, was, that in one tide
they should come from thence quite up to our Key, without so much as casting
Anckor at the bar in staying for the next, and being a low ebb-tyde also, the
like of which is acknowledged not to have been known here above once in the
memory of the eldest Alderman. And it passed not without some notice, that this
relief should come upon one of our Church-dayes, when no sooner Sermon was
done, and we departed, where we had been begging that blessing, but every one
was welcomed home with the news of it. The very delays of our two little
vessels (though against our minds) was a blessing, who if they had gone out,
had run an iminent hazard by the Enemy, whose surprisall must have been their
great advantage. Thus wind and tide, and all things wrought for our good, for
which as we gave God thanks in his own house, so outward tokens of joy were
not omitted that Evening in the streets, by bon-fires, vollies of shot, ringing
of Bells, and the like. Howsoever for the prevention of any treachery, in the
midst of this joy, the Governor had all the watches twice or thrice rounded,
and was careful in the Evening, least the fruits of ours and the Dublin
soldiers greetings (who brought money with them) were not that vice of
drunkenness. But all his watchfulness could not prevent that distemper in
many, which had like to have turned the next day into as great a Lamentation.

Of the Invasion, Jan. 12th.
ANd now we are to relate our greatest preservation, wherein the special hand
of God must be confessed indeed. This night (though never before) too much
security had possessed us, and not withstanding our Governors vigilance, most
of our soldiers were drunk, nay our very watches, two parts were in the same
condition also, occasioned by the falsehood of the Popish Townes-men, who for
that end privately offered them Ale of free-cost, which poor men having been
so long strangers too, they received too liberally; Nay, the very Friars drew
in the Sentinels from their guards to drink; while the major part by this were
bound fast in a sleep, the Rebels by the help and treacherous intimation of
their own within, about four of the clock in the Morning made a breach in
the wall, and were entered of their best soldiers and chief Commanders five
hundred (as in their Letters I have seen acknowledged by themselves) who as
they came in unheard (it being a mighty blustering storm) so continued an hour
undiscryed (having for their watchword, Klan Patrick (i. e.) S. Patrickes
child) till having marched as far as the Key, they gave a shoute, whether in
assurance of victory, or to give notice to the Town, from whom (by their
confessions) they expected assistance, it matters not. But this was our first
Alarm, which our v^liant Governor hearing, instantly ran down unarmed, only
with his Pistols in his hand, and was the first that caused a Drum to beat, and
finding the watches so thin, was compelled to take the maine Guard (which fell
out to be his own Company) with the gleanings of some other b^^ Guards as all
his present strength, caused his Ensign to draw down with them to the Bridge,
while some from other Ports could be got together, where he met them just
entering, and finding their Pikes to be short of ours by a yard, charged home,
and forced them to retreat; yet they had so fair proceeded, as to overturne a
Drake that lay there of his carriage.

Our Governor by this time having gathered up a competent number of
Musketeers, succored him scone, where the first Company he met with (being yet
dark) he took by their answer to be some of his own, and so made a stand.
But one of the Rebels knowing him by his voice shot at him, but missed him,
only hit him that stood next to him, through the brim of his Hat.

Upon which discovery, ours instantly gave fire, which proved so effectual
that they presently ran back, leaving their bodies for stumbling blocks in our
way after them. My Lord Moore himself, with 15. Horse (all that could of a
sudden be got ready) came first to his assistance, and chased them up the Hill
to the dropping of many of them, and not long after each Captain getting what
number he could together, every Lane was beset, that they trod them down with
case, many crying out for quarter had it, whom some pretending to have been my
servants gate the like favor, others crept into by-corners and backsides, and
thus found some hunting work for the soldiers most of the day after, so that
there was slain within and without the Town, and taken prisoners, about two
hundred, amongst whom one was presumed to be a Priest by his gilt Breviary
found in his pocket, and brought to me by his stripper. And (if we may give
credence to a Letter which I have seen of their own (who usually in these
relations, shoot rather short then over) some of the best of their Captains
were slain, hurt, and lamed. A dreadful sight, me thought, it seemed to see
the bodies of so many dead men lying naked up and down the streets, but more
horrid to think whither their souls were posted, even to a second death also,
and yet it could not be beheld without thanks to God, who had returned their
Design for us upon themselves. In whom we might view the draught of our own
condition if the day had bin theirs. For the breach in the wall it was in such
an obscure place (in an Orchard between Saint James his Gate and the water)
that it could not be found out till the pursued directed us to it by their
flight thither, through which about two hundred sled, who (if known in time)
had bin prevented: Such mistakes were there in this dark confusion, that a
Captain meeting some twenty of them took them for his own, encouraged them,
and was leading them very confidently up to the Mill-mount, till casually by
laying his hand upon one or two of them, and finding them wet, and discerning a
trouse, apprehended his error, and made his way by his sword through some of
them, and so gate back again; yet they proceeded so far as to knock down
the two Sentinels in their way, and were come just up to the Mount-Bridge
before they were dispatched, one of whom was killed upon the very Mount it
self. The Captain who had then the command of the Mount mistook one of our
Companies for the Rebels, who (by their making haste up to the Hill, being
breathless and speechless, in not answering what they were) was just giving
fire to a piece of Ordnance upon them, had not one man being best winded, by a
timely answer saved the rest.

Without the Town were many thousands at several corners still confidently
expecting the opening of a Port, by their own party within, who stayed in
sight an hour or two after daylight: Which error of theirs when ours
apprehended, they thought good to nourish, and having taken a Bagg-piper of
theirs, caused him upon one of the Gates to dance and play very merrily, and
call to them to make haste in, that the Town was theirs; The like was
confirmed at other Gates by holding up their Caps, and using all other signs
of triumph.

By this it was a mirth to see Companies of straggling fellows leaping ditches
for the shorter way, and running out of breath for haste to the Gates, like
Birds to the snare, or fishes to the net, who should be first taken, and so
were brought in by dozens in a string, till our prisons were glutted with them.
But at length, seeing all going, and none returning, they judge it but to be
but like beasts to the Lions dens, and so that sport was ended, and yet so
strong were they of that belief that they still kept their standings, till a
Piece or two from the Mill-Mount, showed them their mistakes, by sweeping away
about thirty of them, and so by that discourteous usage, the rest of them took
their leaves of us very ab^uptly, many were slain at the several Ports by the
Musket Shot from the walls, diverse found out by the soldiers within, where they
had been by their good brethren harbored, some were men of good quality by
their clothes, who when they were stripped, were f^und double suited, a fair
skarlot disguised by a frizo, keeping it (I believe) clean for the more
glorious triumphing show after we had ^in all cut off, but blessed be God who
made us not a prey unto their teeth.

This deliverance was acknowledged by the worst of men to be Gods special
handy-worke, in their heartlesse delays at their entrance, the confasion in
their proceedings, the infatuating of their Councels, for had they but either
cut off the Guard at the Port near which they were entered, who were most
asleep, and so opened the Gate to thousands of their own Party there
attending, or made up to the Mill-Mount, where four or five Pieces were
commanding the whole Town (and where a ^unner was not to be found) or marched
but to the Bridge, and with the two Drakes there entered into the Body of the
Town, and so cut off the maine Guard, we had bin undone, and slain in our
beds, and indeed true and righteous had bin Gods Judgment for that deluge of
drunkenness, wherein most were drowned. But he showed himself rather to
delight in mercy in sparing us. It was not unobserved neither, that their shout
of victory being our first Alarm, should be our only preservation, and that in
this great hazard of us all, and slaughter of so many of them, there should be
in fight, but three of our men slain in the place, was most wonderful in our
eyes, indeed some few walking in the streets unarmed, and ignorant of their
entrance, were butchered by them (as a footman, a horseman, and a Sentinel or
two) for the preventing their discovery, as others, by some other accidents
afterward, but in fight no considerable number.

One of our soldiers that had run away, being taken now and hanged, confessed
upon the Gibbet, that a Friar had laid the plot, and others of that Fraternity
had a hand in the prosecution, as accordingly about the time of the shout there
was seen half a dozen Muskets shot out of one Fryery, at such as passed on the
other side upon the Key. Upon this, inquisition was made into some of their
Cloisters, where Powder, Match and Arms were found little becoming any of
those Orders, except the Loyallists, whose Father had bin indeed a lame
soldier. Under this pretense of searching for Rebels, some pillage was
committed in the Town against the will of the Governor, who afterward by
Proclamation had restored to the owners what could be gotten, and on pain of
death that misdemeanor restrained, though many of their Actions in this
business, had deserved a greater forfeiture.

This error overpast without any damage, as it deserved of us a special day
of thanks giving to God (which accordingly was observed) so ^^ doubled the
vigilance of our watch ever after.

The former continu^ll duty of the soldiers was very great, each Company with
their Captain and Officers, by an equal division watched every other night,
besides two Captains of the watch in their turns for each side the Bridge.
Now to this was added the assistance of forty Horse, who by several divisions
walked the Rounds all night, so that a Sentinel by their often visiting had
scarce time to wink. My Lord Moore, and the Governor, in their own persons,
each night walked the Rounds also, as surpervisors of the whole. The walls were
narrowly reviewed within, as without, and some suspected places strengthened;
the Pioners employed in slitting the wall-dike, and clearing the Orchards
without, of such Trees that yet sheltered the Enemy from the shot; the top of
the Mill-Mount round beset with Barrels filled with earth, and so every one
being encouraged with the little relief by the Pinnace, and the great
deliverance from the Invasion, looked the more narrowly to their charge for the
prevention of the like again^.

A fair wind within two days inviting the Pinace, with her attendance to a
return, gave the Enemy many a fair warning piece on each side as she passed,
but few from either replied, only upon a little Fisher Boat of our own,
staying in the rear, some shot were bestowed, through the Furs, but hurt her
not: But at length, by the unskilfulnesse, or the drunkenness of the
Steers-man, ran aground, and being left dry was taken by the Rebels, and in her
about thirty pound of Powder, two Slings, and one Harq^ebush, and fourteen
Prisoners, whom the next day they sent us upon the like exchange of their own.
The Pinace was for want of water, and some inconsideration, run aground also.
The Rebels upon this advantage played thick upon her from both sides the
River, to their great expense of Powder, and to as little purpose, till at
length at an Ebb, as she lay dry, a hundred of them under the shelter of some
Carr loades of Furs, desperately approached her, and notwithstanding the
loss of some of them ran under her very Stearne, and there with their
Pick-axes and Crows of Iron, began to buldge her, who being thus got now, not
only out of the fear of the Cannon, but of any hurt by Musket or Pike, was our
greatest hazard. Captain Stutfield (who has much deserved of us in twice
adventuring to relieve us) presently threw some Granad^'s among them, which
killed many of them, they abid six, but at the seventh with one consent they
all ran away, whom the Musket and Cannon prosecuted, and caused many to lose
their breath up the Hill, and after that never dared to adventure the like
again: The number of their slain is uncertain, but by the mighty stream of
blood it was co^jectured to be at the least threescore; for the Pinace some few
were hurt, but none killed, except a Lieutenant accidentally shot in the Head
by one of their last, as they were ready to weigh Ankor.

Whilst we saw her in this danger, the apprehension of our own loss in her,
was cause sufficient to move us publickely, as privately, to pray for her
restoring, and it was answered: for that night, by the help of a fresh, and
lightening her Ballace, with the change of a sit wind, she got off, and lanced
into the Poole, where resting her self two days, the third, with afaire
vvinde rode out in triumph, and bad us farvvell.

The Shallops and the rest most falsely left the Pinace in her distress, and
mounted over the Bar to Dublin, or else the four Barques lying by her, had
either bin reduced or fired, only a Friggot ^ef^ with us, carrying four
pieces of Ordnance, and going to assist, as far as the bar mouth stuck to
her, but had the misfortune of running aground on the other side also, where
the Rebels in the dark made a brest-vvork, and with two flings taken from
the other, played on her all the night, but paid dearly for their presumption,
in the loss of many o^ their lives. And it was here observed, that those of
ours who covvardly dared not be seen above hatches, and would not fight,
were only vvounded (the Deck being not Musket proof and those who appeared
and courageously discharged, were not hurt at all, but came off untouched. But
not long after she was freed also of that danger, and came safe in again. And
it was observed as a rare thing, that in the same Tide there was one vvinde to
bring the Friggot hither, and within one hour or two after, another vvinde as
necessary for the Pinaces restoring. Thus wind and waves, and all accidents
turned to our good, and ruin of the Rebels.

After this waste of Powder, with much loss of their own blood, we were quiet
a week after, without so much as one shot to disturb us, only they fired
many Towns upon my Lord Moors Lands, still persuading him as before, that
their making his estate thus a burnt offering, proceeded from their religious,
zealous affection to him.

After these disasters, many Drum-Parlies had we daily from them: The first
Drum (or rather Agent with a Drum at his back) was sent for little else but to
rail and curse, by which impatiency we felt their distempered pulse, and
discerned where it pinched them, some Letters we received, were so
transcendent, that they soared beyond all sense; some so vaporous, that they
vanished into mere nonsense, two of which I have bin desired to blot a little
paper with, one from Sir Philim O Neile, and the other from Colonel Plunkett
(as he styled himself) by which, being the top of their brains, thou may
the easier conjecture what might be expected from their underlings.

The Letter of Sir Philim o Neile their General (with the Errata of much false
English corrected) to my Lord Moore, upon the sending him his MAjESTIHS Speech
in the PARLIAMENT.
SIR, what prisoners we have here taken, and in a fair way, I can not
understand by the Catalogue of your prisoners, or all of them, nay not the
third part so taken, but rather some of those that under your yoke of
servitude, rather with you, then us, whose Innocence I desire and hope will
relieve them in time. I desire a true List of our soldiers taken by any of
yours, which when I see, will deliver soldier for soldier, and Gentleman for
Gentleman; As for the Copy you sent, I hold it not authentical to any from his
Majesty, for the like may be invented, and printed in Ireland, as in England.
Let it be printed where it will you please, I prefer his Majesty's
Intentions, and my own, with the rest of the Lords here of the Pale and Loath,
whose Predecessors have ever from the beginning been most faithful and loyal
to the Crown of England, and ever intends the same themselves, Inviolable and
most true and zealous loyalty, before any such Inventions, and so I rest,

Yours, as you are mine, PHIL. ONEILE.
From the Catholic Army, Jan. 14^h. 1641.

The Letter of Colonel Plunquet to my Lord Moore, and the Governor.
MY Lord Moore, and Sir Henry Tichburne, upon the word of your Drum-major, I
delivered fourteen prisoners yesterday, for which we expected this Morning at
ten of the clock as many of ours. This Bullet was taken out of the body of a
certain Gentleman on our side, and after giving quarter to those prisoners
which we sent of yours, we found many of the like fashion about them; for the
first time I was contented to wink thereat, giving them a favor in sparing
their lives, till first I had acquainted you of your soldiers proceedings,
hoping thereby that their uncivil beginnings may be by your due carfulness
hereafter amended. For the better sort of our side, we desire nothing more then
a souldier-like, and honorable kind of way. If by your answers herein we find
you intend the contrary, then shall i^ be the uttermost of my endeavors, and
with all expedition to publish unto the world, that neither will we give
quarter, or demand it. Let this my Letter remain as a testimony of our noble
Proceedings, being written by the hands of an Englishman. The Names of the
prisoners we desire in exchange of those we sent yesterday, are included in
this enclosed Note. In haste I rest,

Your Friend, Richard Plunquett.
Beawly, Jan. 15th. 1641.

Upon the former blind Infidel Letter, a stander by bestowed a pair of
spectacles, and to the latter vaparous one was given a Counterblast, each
returned with dashes according to there merit. And that I may not trouble thee
any more with things of this nature, I shall here give thee a view also of a
royal Pass of Sir Philim O Neile, found with one of his soldiers after he
was slain, wherein the plurality of his follies passing through the
multiplying Glass^ of his distempered fancy is more evident.

The PASS.
WHereas we are pleased to take into our protection the Bearer hereof, John
Grere, We therefore pray all our Colonels, Captains, and our other inferior
Officers of our Armies, and all others to whom these presents shall come, to
suffer and permit the said John Grere to pass and repasse about his and our
lawful affairs, he behaving himself soberly and honestly, without his taking
up Arms against us, the which we require all the aforesaid Officers to take
notice of this our Warrant, as you, or any of you will answer the contrary.

Phil. O Neile.
Given at Armagh, this of November.
Which thus coming to our hands, returned not without the interest of some
Annotations also, howsoever by these silly Presiden^s, thou may seriously
measure what high ambitious thoughts reign within him.

In his Letter he is so presumptuous, as by a kind of equality to instle his
own intentions with his MAJESTY'S (somewhat like that of one of their
Cardin^ls, Ego, and Rox meus) and so preferres them before the rest of the
LORDS, as if they were all to be but subsequent to his. For the ^asse, what
style could be more affecting a Royalty: As if his being called ^a^le of Tyrone
by the vulgar, Iull'd him into a dream, he had been crowned KING of Vlster. In
which we shall leave him but a while before he is wakened.

After the Pinace had taken her leave of them, some of their own Barques
followed her to Sea also, by some rumoured to be fraught with their flying
Commanders, others to be dispatched for France, or for Dunkirke for a supply of
Arms and Powder, their store of each having been lately much wasted (as I have
seen some of their Letters intimating to that purpose.) Their former blustering
strange Letters were abated of a sudden, they fell into calm, and mild
expressions, my self wanted not some respective remembrance from the chief of
the Relyes, whom indeed I had known with little suspicion of the possibility
of any such enterprise, one, whom the English had shown so much love too, as
when he was prosecuted for his Life, at the Kings Bench by great ones. A Jury
of the Engli^h Protestant Gentlemen, affectionately cleared him, with the issue
of the hazard of their own estates, who for that verdict were questioned in
the Star Chamber afterward; yet some of these men has he used most
barbarously, and kept them under a merciless bondage, upon their own Lands,
till lately by an exchange of some of their prisoners here, we received.

When they had no more prisoners of ours near hand, they off^red ^y two or
three Drums to ransom theirs. Our Governors answer was, he had no
Commission for it, but assured them of that respect that none should remove
them out of their close lodgings, that what meat they would send them, should
be duly given them, and indeed they wanted not by the charity of the popish
Merchants wives, who sent them Caddowes, Night-Caps, Meal, and Clothes, such
as they were never Masters of before, so that if the Commanders could spare
them, the men we found indifferent, whether they were released, or no. And yet
for any of our prisoners returned at any time from the Rebels naked and
starved, not a crum of Charity could be wrung from them, were it to the present
saving of their lives: Charity which in it self is ever commendable, yet with
this distinction is mistaken, and loses it is reputation, evidently declaring
the hearts of the Doners.

Often were we threatened with Alarums, men seeming to gather out toward
Evening, as if there had been some reality in it: Houses near the Town upon
Hills were fired, which were their usual Signals for an union of forces on both
sides; but they proved but bravadoes, their only refuge we found now, was
starving us: As sometimes they would approach so near us as to ask our
Sentinels if they had yet eaten their Cabbage-stalkes, or wanted Horseflesh.
Multitudes indeed dyed of the famine, many of the soldiers who had been men of
good estates, by the salt diet never used to before, fell into those diseases
which made them unfit for service, so that every Company grew very defective in
their number, a continual watching in those cold Winter Nights (the Sentinels
standing without any shelter) many without shoes or stockings (which by the
Merchants hiding their Leather and Cloth, could not be supplied) destitute of
necess^ry firing upon their Guards, in reason must needs produce some ill
effects with such as had been otherwise bread; but by degrees the poor men
learned contentedness, patiently waiting upon him, who when we were brought
to an extremity, failed us not; yet let it be ever remembered, to the honor of
the LORD Moore, and GOVERNOR, and the Captains of the Horse and ^oot, to keep
so naked a Town so long, against such a multitude, in that want both of Men,
Meat, Money, Clothes, and firing; yet duly keeping their watches every
Night, wet or frost, besides the continual Alarums, and often Sallies, whereby
they had scarce any time to rest.

Within a Fortnight, what quantity of Biscuit and Meal, we received by the
Pinace, was by so many mouths easily spent; Famine and ^luxes, with other
diseases, returned again to their former dominion over us; death began to
look more terrible within the walls then without; the Bells rested not from
passing toales, the streets frequented daily and hourly with doleful beats
of Drums, and sad Funeral Marches; the Churchyard continually ringing with
Vollies of shot at their Burials; multitudes of the English Inhabitants (to my
no small grief) wasted away also, so that what by those that left the Town at
first, and those that now left the world, by this, my own Congregation was
reduced to a small number.

The Town was put to a narrow Scruteny, Sellers were searched with spits, as
well as lofts, in each of which, much provision was found against the oaths of
the owners. In the Fryeries, against their vow of poverty, were found Trunkes
of Plate and Money, with other Treasure, which howsoever they owned them not;
yet being the goods of Rebels, it was their little praise to be the receptacles
of them.

This work was made some men's daily employment, and for a while passed few
days without reaping some fruit, and yet all that could be gotten, was no
sooner equally distributed but by so many Cravers was presently dispatched.

In this extremity some mutinies were broached among the soldiers, but wisely
stopped again: The very English as well as the Irish for want sled to the
enemy. Now fears were daily rumoured by the Rebels party within, some
bravadoes made by the Enemy in some showers of their strength in the day time
without, threatening the hazard of a thousand men, but they would make a breach
in our walls, some where or other, which was confirmed by the report of some
Pieces of Battery, Sir Philim O Neile had sent for from the North to that end,
every Night they burnt some Town or other of Corn near us, and were now in a
daily expectation of some conditions to be offered by us for a surrender, which
as we were informed, by some that came from them, they had fained already by
some lying counterfeite Letters, pretended to be wrote as from my Lord Moore,
and the Governor, to animate their soldiers in the assurance of it.

Our expectation of relief by Sea still failed us, so that we were compelled
to man out a little Friggot our selves to Dublin, with some Commissioners to
relate our misery, which we feared they were not sensible of, and after much
inconstancy of winds in driving her often in and out, at length, February the
7th. she went to Sea, passing the Bar without any prejudice by the Enemies,
only they honored us so far as to bestow two Pieces of Ordnance upon her for
a farewell, but touched her not, and yet in two several places they were
planted so near the channel (as we now find their works) that one would
think it were a wonder ever to miss.

The same day we made a sally out in the face of the Rebels Northward, burnt
two or three of their lodgings, and fetched in forage and other provision for
a sufficient bait of three or four days, the envy of which caused those near
hand to gather into a body of four or five hundred, which were soon affronted
by as many of ours readily drawing out, or rather running, so glad were our
soldiers of the fresh air, and the sight of such whom they had only heard of
before in their dark Alarums, scouts on each side discharged, and some
ambuscadoes which lay in ditches gave fire, and thus a skirmi^h passed in our
sight from the walls, but for the body of them, no provocation could draw them
to a further meeting us, then their usual stand at a long ditch cast up breast
high for that purpose: The iss^e was, some of theirs were slain, but of ours
not one, only by the breaking of a little Brasse-peece, a Gunner was hurt,
which yet gave them such a rugged salute, that very abruptly they took leave
of us; and so drawing toward Night, with shoots on both sides we parted.

That Night our Governor thought fit to make a dark inquiry of their strict
Discipline on the other side the River, twenty Musketeers stumbled upon their
Court of Guard, and killed some of them, with their Sentinels, the rest fled,
the number was uncertain; but by the cries of such as escaped, whom they heard
lamenting the slain, it appeared to be some competent number, which ours
taking their words for, without further search returned.

This good success encouraged us to many others, February the 11^^. in the
afternoon, upon some notice given us by our scoutes of that side being clear,
and good Corn still standing in stackes, there issued out forty Musketeers,
under the command of Lieutenant Greeneham, and twenty Horse under the command
of Cornet Constable to guard the rest appointed for bringing it in,
unexpectedly there appeared four hun^red of the Enemy which were newly come
out of the North, not above an hour before, and approached without doubt of
making a prey of such a handful, ours instantly drew up boldly, and were
within half Musket Shot before they gave fire, as if out of courtesy they
would give them the onser, but finding them still dumb, charged them, which so
took with them, thas they instantly shogged, and with the coming in of the
Horse were routed threescore, with a Lieutenant, and an Ensign were killed,
nine taken prisoners, with another Ensign, and several Sergeants, two Colors
brought home in triumph also, the one taken by Cornett Constable, the other by
Lieutenent Greymes.

With the Prisoners were found abundance of chained Bullets, Slugges, Hooks,
and other chained small shot, of purpose to make every wound incurable; one who
took himself to be a great Gentleman amongst them, having quarter given him,
dyed upon his examination after he was come hither, who upon his stripping,
was found begirt with a Saint Francis Girdle, by which Benediction of the
Actors, the Friars affections were evidently discovered to be the cause, what
virtue it might have for the saving of his soul, I vvot not; but for the body
it had so little, that it could not preserve it self, for he was shot just
through it, the three devoted Knots being dyed from gray to red with his blood.

The next day they sallied out further with the like success, in getting some
grain, burning two of their Towns, and taking some Prisoners. The poor
soldiers feasted themselves with their Milk and Beer (which for haste in
some places they had abandoned) loaded their backs with some more lasting
provision, and clad them with such Clothes, as had bin taken from their
fellows at Mellifont.

By these Sallies howsoever the Horse were well refreshed for a season; yet
the Foot fell now into a further extremity, the Town being sifted, and that
pillage vv^ich could be gotten (without too much hazard) being waste,
Horseflesh, Dogs and Cats began to be good me^t amongst them; which being
suddenly made known to me, we appointed the very next day (though Sunday) to
be kept in a more solemn manner then ordinary, to beg our bread of God some
way or other, to proclaim a ^ast, was but to enjoyne that which necessity
had enforced, and properly for a religious one, it should be a voluntary act:
Fasts are called Sabbaths, but with us now every Sabbath was become a Fast,
so that that distinction according to the ancient Canons could not bind us;
but still see the accepting of our very intentions, that very Sunday, February
the 14^h. was there a booty offered to us of above fourscore Covves, and two
hundred Sheep, which some Horse and Foot instantly issuing out, returned with
the spoil of, by that time we were going to Church, whereby my subject was
turned to thanksgiving, That as David, we might acknovvledge, I did but say I
would confess, and thou forgavest, etc. Thou preventedst me with thy loving
kindness, etc. And still this was with the loss of some of our Enemies, but
of ours (notvvithstanding the shot as thick as Hail from the other side of
the River) not one man so much as hurt, a Horse was only shot through the
ear. The popish Tovvnes-men could not dissemble their sadness at the sight of
this relief; but it appeared in their faces, and speeches, and casually a
Horse at the Gate slipping out of his Riders hand, and running through the
Town, some of them could not but express their joy in hope one Horseman had
been slain.

Another Sally was made two days after, on the other side, with a hundred
Foot, and a troop of Horse, to secure the bringing in of some Corn, a mile and
a half off; but by some secret notice given to the Rebels by those of their
own party within, fifteen hundred from diverse parts suddenly beset them,
our men ran not away; but having called back their Forragers, made a fair
orderly retreat through them to the killing of nine of the Rebels (as has
been since confessed by themselves) and of ours none so much as hurt, only
some straglers of poor unarmed men and women, who (against command) to get
some Corn) stayed too long behind, they barbarously and basely butchered,
without giving them any quarter, to the number of twenty or thirty, which was
revenged not long afterward.

Now Sir Philim O Neile being returned out of the North, came very short of
those braggs he made when he went, which were nothing but of great Pieces
of Battery, and so many thousands of men which should be able to eat us up
instantly; but in stead of that stately march, he invisibly stole hither, lying
at Beauly, a mile and a half from us, three or four days unknovvne, and
brought but forty Horse with him, and half of those unarmed, by which we
suspected the Scotch had not used him very kindly in th^se parts; yet as soon
as he was discovered, he sent a message to my Lord MOORE, That he had taken
all the Towns in the North but two, which were also at his pleasure. That the
whole Kingdom was in the like case, and still wondered DROGHEDA should be so
singular as to think to hold out, and to be delivered out of his hand (see a
little RABSHECAH) yet again protesting his Love to him, and renewing that
offer of their former honors, with assurance of being paid to a penny all
his damages: But if not, gave him warning before such a day to prepare
himself for his last; for he would then take the Town whatsoever it cost
him, and that his Lordship must look for no quarter from him.

But howsoever, we were ready against his day prefixed, yet that feared us
not so much as the extremity of Famine, which pressed, and grew every day
upon us, more and more: Insomuch, that now nothing but desperate courses could
I hear thought of, and resolved upon by such as used to be most hearty, in the
fear of the loss of all; at last, if they were not relieved by such a day,
and that very near at hand, which though the only possible means must be by
Sea from DVBLIN; yet the continuance of such a contrary wind dashed our hopes
that way also.

This utmost extremity seems to me, to be Gods only time, when most probably
he would be seen, even when all sense failed, and, methought, bespoke a
present extraordinary spending a day in his house of Prayer, (which we knew not
but might be our last) as a special trial of the fruit of those exercises,
(as sometimes the Lord of Hoasts has bidden his to prove him, in some cases of
want, if he did power them out a blessing, Mal. 3. 10. and as an evidence to
our very Enemies (who had made the cause Religion) that we were his Church, and
chosen by his special providence in relieving us, and so by a common consent,
though a private warning the next day, being Friday, and the eighteenth of
February was it thus set apart, for the begging our bread of God, which
accordingly, for the subject, I took the fourth Petition of the Lords Prayer;
This day we continued in the house of God from morning to evening, which was
blessed with much affection and many tears, we begged pardon of our former abuse
of his benefits, renewed our vows of better obedience, etc. wherein, howsoever
some confident passages of assurance of having presently an answer of our
desires, might well seem to be without warrant, yet see the event, that
evening the wind inclined* and the very next morning, from the worst of winds,
a North-West, it instantly turned to the best, a South-East, and with such
weather as we could have wished, and so continued. Nay, it went not unobserved
by the very Papists, as a wonder, that that very evening there were a world of
Roaohes, and other Fish taken with Angles, by the Soldiers, never known to be
found there in the River before, which they drew up for many hours as fast as
they could cast in. The continuance of which gave a present relief to most;
and if a Sparrow fall not to the earth without a providence, why should not we
judge it a special providence when it is for supplying the wants of his
children that cry unto him who are of much more value?

That Saturday in the evening, having some notice of the approach of our
relief, we met on the Sunday morning earlier then we used (contriving to have
done by the Tide) and in the continuance of the same former subject, and
Petition, blessed with the same affections, praying that it might now pass
through the envy and opposition of all our Enemies. Now it so fell out, that
as I was upon the very conclusion of the Sermon, a Messenger came into the
Church with that joyful tidings, that some of the Vessels were come within the
Bar, which answer of our prayers receiving upon Gods own day, in his own
house, and in the continuance of his own ordinance, we took as from God
himself, and so concluding with all possible thanks and praise to him, from
whom every good gift descends, we went out and saw the salvation of God. When
two Pinaces, six Gabbards, three Friggots, with a Shallop, came all safely to
us, and all but the two Pinaces that very Tide came up within our Key, laden
with a plentiful relief for two or three months provision; to which somewhat
was added by the way too, in the taking of a large Fisherboate of the Rebels,
laden with Herrings, going to some of their confederates elsewhere.

By a contrary wind they were compelled to put in by the way at Skerries, where
not affecting idleness, they landed some forces, and burnt some towns, and
left four Rebels hanging for land-markes, in revenge of one English man, whom
maliciously they had hanged in dispight of them, the day before. In this
relieving us, there was somewhat the very Papists took notice of, as a
special providence, (viz.) Their coming the second time from the Skerries
hither at once, without casting Anchor at the Bar; nay, notwithstanding a
Friggot was compelled to stay awhile in the rear, for the taking in a Captain
and some officers out of one of the Pinaces, yet instantly waighed Anchor, and
came up that very Tide also: which though it were so far spent, that a good
way she was compelled to come against it, yet arrived safely.

Again, as in the former reliese, Jan. 11. a Barque which they had sunk in
the Channel, was driven out to Sea by the wind, and tide, to open their
passage; so now having strongly chained together a great many Ship-masts, with
other timber, (which now we see cast upon the shore) bound with a great Cable,
and supported by seven or eight great Boats cross the Channel, the very day
before the approach of our relief, of it self burst asunder; so that though a
Shallop was sent in the front with Instruments to cut it, yet they found the
work done for them, and so was no rub at all. And lastly, that the wind
should then turn just to fit the Spring-tyde, without which it could have done
us but little service, and to be at that instant, when the very last of our
store was just spent: we must acknowledge it to be the Lords doing indeed. The
consideration of which stopped the months of all our adversaries with
admiration staggered many in their Religion, and has been a means to incline
abundance of them to us, who have even stolen into our Communion wit^out our
knowledge, till we have found them there, as plainly and evidently seeing Gods
hand in it.

While our little Fleet was thus under sail, in the Channel the Rebels spared
not their shot on both sides, which was returned them with interest; some of
ours were hurt, one man killed, but of the Rebels not afew. In one of the
Gabbards a bag of Powder, by the accident of a Match, took fire as she was
near the Key, but did no other hunt then scorch the faces of half a dozen of
them, who were soon well again; with these, besides our provision, we had a
supply of four Companies more, which, with some other independent foot here
before, made up a full Regiment for my Lord Moore, and so we were now restored
again (having by the famine been much lessened) to sixteen hundred foot,
and one hundred and fifty horse; and by this refreshment we were with some
confidence the more able to look about us.

And yet I must not forget our great and early deliverance that Sunday morning
also.

Sir Phi. O Neile marching silently with all his strength he could make, made
so bold an attempt, that about four of the clock he applied his scaling
Ladders to the Walls, and in special at one place near Saint Lawrence gate at
a low private corner (where sometimes a Sentinel had been omitted) they
brought abundance of them, two of which they had presently fixed, and on each
one mounted, the Sentinel there missing fire, they presumed higher, till he
was feign to knock them down with the butt-end of his Musket, and cry out to
the Guard, who instantly so plied the rest, with their fill of shot, that they
left thirteen of their Ladders, and many of their bodies behind them. Their
Commanders urged them, but to cut the Sentinels throat, and the Town was
theirs; but they would not be brought to look that way again, nay the
remembrance of their former repulses did so dishearten those in the very rear,
that their Capt. were fallen to drive them on like Sheep, and to delude them
with the assurance that those in the Front had taken the Town already, and the
gate opened. The like onset was given or attempted at other Ports also,
seconded with many shot from the other side the River; All our Regiment of
horse and foot were ready in a trice, and some so quickened that they were seen
upon the Walls, who had not been out of their beds a fortnight before; so
zealous was every one to keep the Town one day longer: The number of their
slain was unknown by their continual dragging the dead bodies away. But by
an English boys relation (who was Drummer to Sir Phelemy, who in his making
haste to us, stumbled over two or three of them lying together in a ditch) may
be conjectured there were some considerable store, but of ours none had the
least hurt; so that for the blessings of that one day, we may praise God with
the Psalmist (Psalm. 136. 24, 25.) O give thanks unto the Lord who has
delivered us from our Enemies, and gives food to all flesh, for his mercy
endures for ever: for which, as thou may well imagine, we did not omit our
thanks to God that day; so we conceived it worthy of a solemn day of
thanksgiving set apart of purpose in the week also, which we observed the
Tuesday following.

With this relief came a Proclamation from the State against these Rebels,
which that afternoon was published at the Market-Crosse with Drum and
Trumpet, wherein the prises set upon each of their heads, were far beyond
their worth; Sir Phelemy O Neal's valued at 1000. li. Rely and others at 800.
li. and the rest of them at 400. li. This set the Soldiers a longing for the
next skirmish, every one hoping it might be his fortune to hit right, two of
those of 400. li. weight, (as I am informed) had been dispatched by us before,
one at the Green hills, December the third, another at Drumullin, January the
seventh, who was by my Lord Moors Troop beat into the water, and so drowned;
whose body was now cast up by the River side, but his he^^ not thought worthy
the cutting off.

About this time we had some intercourse by messages of a milder nature from
other Rebels in parts more remote: A Packet of Letters were sent to my Lord
Moore out of the North, transcribed indeed by his Sister the Lady Blany, but it
was evident all was of their inditing or correcting; The sum was an offer
either of all their prisoners in Vlster for my Lord Maquire, or else my Lady
Blany with her Children and Sisters, and other Gentlemen in and near the
Castle of Monaghan for two other of their prisoners in the Castle of Dublin,
for the soliciting of which, the Lady Blany had a form of a Petition, framed
to the Lords, Justices and Council, and other private Letters, both to my Lord
Moore, and diverse of her friends, for their earnest motion and prosecution of
it for her safety, which according to the directions, after my Lord Moors
viewing them, was to be sent back to those Rebels from whence it came, to be
prosecuted by some of their own approved Agents. Though the person mentioned to
be this charitable mover, was clapped up before it came to his hand. And herein I
cannot let pass unobserved, how their malice and barbarous cruelty to some
other of their prisoners did so blind their reason, that it has now much
wronged themselves; The base treacherous butchery of my Lord Calfield, at Sir
Phelemy O Neil's own house, whether out of a pretense of favor being removed,
was no sooner entered, but as he was walking, a fellow came behind him, and with
a brace of bullets shot him quite through the back: The perfidious sudden
hanging of Master Rich. Blany, because he would not go to Mass: Their
unpattern'd falsehood to another Gentleman, who by the promise of his life, had
been drawn to Mass, and received the Sacrament; presently Maquire told him
he would never be so fit for God again, and so giving him choice of a rope, or
a with, instantly hanged him, according to which we hear they have used many
more; Their drowning of four or five hundred English at Porta Downebridge
(which for the stench of the multitude of dead bodies there, they call now in
derision Downe-sincke) And other places in the North, by three or fourscore in
companies, of men, women, and children, whom after their promise of safety,
suddenly ^^ey threw over into the rivers: At the Newry they put one hundred
English into a Gabbard with promise to send them hither, but as soon as the
tide served they took away their Sails, and Oars, and left them to the mercy
of the winds and waves, and so were cast away: it was a common thing to set
some of the English aworke with Pickaxes to break down the walls of some
Castles after the roof was burnt, and for their wages, to cut their throats
presently, to lay wagers who should strike the deepest gash with their swords
in their thighs or arms, and many such like horrid murders in cool blood,
merely for recreation sake; of which nature, and worse, thousands more might
be related, even such as no Heathen or Turkish Story can pattern for cruelty,
which I leave to the relation of others (as thou have heard of abundance
already in a book of remarkable passages) it being not my purpose to range any
further then the liberties of this Town, who (thanks be to God) have been
delivered from them, to which I shall return again.

And here I am remembered of another deliverance which fell out now also, as
(sometimes blessings like crosses, when they do come, are observed to come
together) (viz.) the emptying the Town of the Popish Townsmen (according to a
command from the State) who had been found tampering with the Rebels; An
Inventory was taken of all their goods, and put in safe custody, till they
could appro^^ themselves better then they were suspected, many of them at the
gates offered to go to Church, whom I was willing to have informed, but being
judged heartlesse, or rather double-hearted, and so the more dangerous, it was
not accepted of, till they had done a little penance in the Country, which
being Ash Wednesday, was the fittest season, yet some of the soberest sort (and
who are not molested) by those great deliverances, they have seen wrought for
us, of themselves have desired satisfaction; In which I should be glad to be
employed all day, and every day.

No sooner had our Pinaces and the other Vessels unloaded themselves of their
welcome burdens, but a North-west wind served them with such weather as they
could have wished for their return; when the same day February 26. our
Governor issued out with 220. Foot, and 120. Horse, Southwards, to a village
called Beaubecke, to secure the carrying in of some Corn and Hay from thence,
which as soon as it was fully pillaged and burnt, he advanced somewhat further
toward Smiths town, where being informed by his Scouts of five Companies
there ready to withstand him, he had the greater mind to p^oceed, his men
needing little encouragement, and so drew up to them, who no sooner felt the
smart of our shot, and the troops of Horse (which of all is most terrible to
them) ready to prosecute, but they instantly broke, every man contented to lose
his Arms to save his life; nay, some rid themselves of their clothes for the
farther speed, and so there were slain about 300. of them, two colors taken
by Sergeant Major Fortescue, and Captain Bryan, a Drum, and an Ensign taken
Prisoners, of Cowes about eightscore, with all other sorts of pillage of good
value, so many were shot in the river of Gillingstowne, that the water was all
red with their blood: The sight of those twenty or thirty unarmed men and women
murdered by them a week before, (whom they left there in the ditches
unburyed) enraged our men the more to a revenge, whom the Pyoners in the mean
time interred.

In this particular, it was observed as a part of Divine Justice, that the
slaughter of them should be in the same field, where they had defeated ours, in
which as we gave them an even repay, so it fell out also, that some of the same
Captains had a hand in it, who had b^ene then routed; whom Sir Patricke We^mes
(having the Command of the Earl of Ormonds troop) in remembrance of that
dysaster, showed them the least mercy; Colonel Preston was hard put to it, who
for haste left a Portmantua of his best clothes with his rich military belt
behind him, which fell to be the booty of a Horse-boy, in the pocket of whose
breeches was found three Letters of more worth then himself, whereby evidently
the Lord Gormanstone, Trimlestone and diverse others were first proved Traitors.

The next morning, it was thought necessary to prosecute this unexpected
victory as a probability of raising the Siege, so they were taken before they
could gather to any head again, which howsoever being Sunday, our Religious
Governor was very slow to it, as desirous rather to have spent that as a day
of thankesgiving to God, for the good success of this day, yet being for the
necessary preservation of the Corn, and other things, which they had reason to
suspect would else be instantly fired by them, he consented to it, and so very
early by break of day 600. foot, and 120. Horse, under my Lord Moors
Command (after we had by Prayer commended them to Gods Protection, (which in
the like expedition was seldom omitted) marched out with carriages, and two
field pieces. But the first Castle being within half a mile of us called
Stanime, where there was a great haggard of Corn, (which beyond their first
resolutions they thought fit to visit by the way, and where they supposed there
had not been a man) they found so entrenched, and fortefied, that it proved
more difficult then was expected, yet our men drew up boldly to them, within
pistol shot, and though it was not the intent of that days work, yet being
provoked, bestowed thousands of bullets amongst them, to the death of many of
the Rebels in their Trenches, but by the ill shots of our Gunners (who still
missed the house) with the fall and continuance of abundance of rain, whereby
their matches were washed out, they were compelled to retreat; and so came
dropping wet home, yet by Church-time, to give God thanks for their great
preservation, who though continuing so long in that imminent danger (which they
dreamed not of, at their going out) yet was there not a man lost in the place,
only some of slight wounds by poisoned bullets, and want of good medicines,
miscarryed a long time afterward, and in the mean time, some were sent to the
next village of Colpe, where they loaded themselves with their Corn, and
returned, without any opposition: And not many days after upon the hearing of
our preparation for a reply, the Rebels in the aforesaid Castle of Stanime
abandoned it of themselves, and so it fell into our hands without bestowing one
shot more.

And here it has been reckoned as a thing very observable, that in all these
onsets, invasions, and Sallies out, (howsoever multitudes have dyed of the
famine, diverse unarmed pillagers met with abroad, have been taken and
butchered, some dyed of wounds by the unskilfulnesse of the Surgeon, and the
like) there has not hitherto been killed of armed men upon the place in fight
(as I have been informed) above twelve of ours, and not one Officer; and of
those, there was but one man that was not fetched off from them, and that is
accounted the due of his too much presumption, who at the assault of a house
charged, and discharged his musket twice or thrice against the very door,
where there were many playing at him from within, and so stood as a mark for
them, without so much as stirring a foot of his ground, but of the Rebels how
many hundreds, if not thousands, have been killed, may easily be summed up in
the reading. This wonderful preservation was I believe the occasion of that
false rumor raised by them, as if some of ours had sold their Souls to the
Devil to be shot-free, and yet at other times to encourage their Soldiers
(who were continually upon their flight) they would upon most Sallies persuade
them of hundreds of ours slain with many Commanders (of whom some had dyed
often in their reports) when there was not one, nay scarce would they suffer
them to believe their own senses, that any were killed of theirs: Howsoever,
those of the soberer sort were much convinced of the cause, by the event,
apparently seeing that God was with us.

After one days rest, March the first, my Lord Moore, and the Governor went
out again the same way, with a competent number of Horse and Foot, when
(after the securing in of at least two hundred pounds worth of Corn, by four
Companyes under the command of Sir John Borlace, and the burning of such of
their lodgings, as had remained of the former days work at Colpe,) they
advanced further, their first resistance was two Companies of the Rebels,
stealing along the side of a Ditch, who being discovered Captain Billinsley
was sent with 80. Musketteers, and coming as unexpectedly upon them, as they
had intended upon us, were soon routed. A Lieutenant with thirteen Soldiers
were slain, and a Captain of the O Neales taken prisoner; the rest escaped
into the Castle of Stanime by the help of a Bogge, which stopped the horse in
their chase: the Castle of Colpe, after much hazard of such as first entered it,
by the Pikes and stones thrown of those within, whereby they were three or
four times beaten down the narrow stairs, at length was taken, where they
killed them every one, to the number of twenty six persons; and yet neither
then, nor all that day was one of ours lost. With the Captain taken prisoner,
we found many Petitions, two Letters superscribed to Sir Phelemy O Neile, with
the title of Earl of Tyrone, and General of Ireland: But yet the foundation
upon which those airy honors were built, was the condition of his taking this
Town, but that day his Excellency was much humbled (who unknown to us) had
stole over the river, only with five men, and by our unexpected approach
(being cut off from securing himself where he intended) crept into a furbush,
and so lay like a trembling Hare in his Form, till the evening, (where being
so near us) he had good luck he was not started up by so many hunters, which
needs must have been the best sport that day; Some rough abusive greetings
past and repast from each side the river, (which parted them from any other
then such a tongue combat) ours giving them lawful warning of a visit
shortly, and that not by a cowardly creeping in the dark (according to their
custom) under our walls, but at noone day, when we might be visible, asked for
their drunken General, in derision of whom, some of our Trumpeters gave some
scornful music, and for one Pistol of theirs, discharged in defiance, we
returned them ten, and for one Musket, twenty, and thus our Soldiers in their
retreat, stretching their throats to be heard with such kind of language, they
made up a merry end of that days skirmish.

Some English now, as at other times, took the opportunity to get from under
their thraldom, and informed us of some advantages, whom commonly they put in
Trowses to be taken for Irish, and in the front to be first killed, yet they
usually escaped, from these we understood by what lying practices they had kept
their Soldiers from running away lately.

March the third, some other forces marched out under the command of Lieutenant
Colonel Waineman, early in the morning, who advanced as far as Marlingtowne
about three miles from us, where by the former frights they found the Town
abandoned, so that their whole work that day was to reap what was left, for
which all sorts were permitted to go forth for pillage, the lanes were so
thickened with all sorts of grain, that the Spring seemed to be Harvest, and
the Vernall equinoctial to be mistaken for the Autumnall, such loads of Corn
were mounted upon horses, that upon the hills, they looked like moving haggards,
by which our great extremity was turned presently into plenty, and whereas our
chiefest want was Malt, the whole Town (having drunk nothing but water for a
week) were now set a brewing again, and for expression of joy there wanted no
Bonefires of three or four Towns together, whereby a clear day grew dusky by
the smoke: A fair house of one Draicots, (who by the Rebels was newly created
Viscount Marlington for his merit in the cause) made the clearest light, which
was done the rather in a just revenge of his fraudulent disarming many of our
Soldiers as they were making hither from the bridge of Gillingstone, his
Library (with what could be preserved from the fire) was brought in hither, and
sold us at very easy rates, a very fair large Parchment Manuscript of an old
Missall, consecrated to that Church of Marlington, came to my hands, the loss
of which I presume they have valued more then their houses.

By the sight of this good success our Enemies grew sick of envy, and in a
discontent left their houses; yet in the midst of this cheer, we had the fear
of a rub, by the running aground of a Friggot coming up from the Pinace with
Powder, but by being Masters of the field on that side, we were not much
troubled; the Rebels got into some Boats, and played thick upon her, whom ours
replied to as fast, many shot they made with a great brass piece, but still
missed her, at length the Pinace gave so fortunate a one, that it dismounted
theirs of its carriage, and at last when they found little fruit by their
gunnes, they assaulted us with their tongues, a company of them approaching
near the River side, called ours Rogues and Traitors, their answer given them,
was by a few Musketeers, who under the covert of some fires discharging, put
some of them to a nonplus, and the rest to their heels; And so our men being
then abroad, continued there for the securing her till the next tide at ten
aclocke at night, when they left her afloate again; And yet also to divert
their thoughts that way, our Governor caused some Musketeers about midnight
to fally out on the other side, and gave two or three vollies of shot, which
raised them through their quarters to stand upon their own defense, and so the
next tide that danger was over.

And now the Besiegers took themselves to be the Besieged, many privy
Counsels of darkness were had several nights, at diverse places they met, and
knocked their wisest heads together, but they struck out nothing but folly,
Their multiplied barrels of Powder made at Dung^non, would not take fire, yet
still they set brazen faces (their strongest defense) upon the business, in
threatening each day to take the Town, by an invisible host somewhere
approaching, great state they took now upon them, expecting we should give
them the visits, and when we did, they daigned us not so much courtesy as to
meet us out of doors. But I believe thou longest to see the conclusion, from
which I will not now long detain thee.

March the fifth, there issued out four hundred foot and fourscore horse
under my Lord Moors command; on the other side Northward amongst his own
traiterous Tenants, to Tallagh-hallon, where Collo mac Bryan, with his
accomplices had been billeted, and whither (unknown to us, or else we had
doubled our strength) had been the night before crept secretly, the whole
fraternity of Rebels to lay their heads together upon some forlorn counsels,
wanting not Sir Phelemy O Neil himself for their President; They appeared
instantly eight Colors in view, three for one of ours, many had entrenched
themselves in a square body within the Town, and so played upon advantages,
but our men (Lieutenant Colonel Byron commanding the foot) declined them not,
but with as much alacrity as their Commanders could have wished drew up boldly,
and gave fire so thick and sure, that after the Rebels had replied to three or
four ranks, they were weary of it, and so finding many dropping among them,
betook themselves to the last refuge of their heels; near four hundred,
with seven Captains were slain, and one taken prisoner, viz. Rory, Mr. Art,
Mr. Rosse, Mr. Maghon, and one Colors; which had been but the earnest of many
more, had they not (as some were seen) slipped them off their staffes, and put
them into their breeches, one Art Roe, Mr. Patricke, Mr. Art Moyle, mac Maghon,
of great repute among them, (lately created by them Lord Baron of Monaghan, and
whose head is valued beyond its worth in the Proclamation) was taken Prisoner,
who being sore wounded to the loss of one of his eyes, and perceiving by the
other his inevitable end approaching, politickly stripped himself stark naked,
and so lay as dead among the slain, till afterward upon a view by Lieutenant
Colonel Byron, who casually finding him with a Saint Francis girdle (which for
good luck he still kept about him) and deeming him by that to be a man of some
quality, commanded one of his Soldiers to cut off his head; upon the affright
of which, the Varlet roused himself, and was soon recovered of his speech,
who instantly declaring himself, and assuring that the saving of his life
should be the redemption of my Lady Blany and her children, he was preserved,
and accordingly, has wrote effectually for that welcome exchange, but as yet
we find him not so valued by them, who (having thus long failed our
expectation) he is every day in the way of preferment to be hanged; And thus
Saint Francis his Cord proved far from being a Girdle of verity, which being
given him for his preservation, proved very falsely the sole occasion of his
destruction. A hundred Muskets were taken, and Pikes covered the ground every
where, which the pursued were willing to be eased of, for the quicker speed;
others secured themselves by a Bogge near hand, who upon their gathering thick
were so roughly admonished by a Drake from us, that they soon removed their
standings farther off.

And in all this hot skirmish in sight of our very walls wherein they made their
most desperate resistance (such was still Gods goodness to us) not a man of
ours was so much as hurt by them, one of our Officers was shot in the foot,
but it was by a Soldier of our own, and the Bullet first passed through the
head of one of the Rebels. And here I must not let pass one merry passage,
they had brought with them out of the North, an old wooden Image, called Mac
Kill Murragh, (i. e. the Son of Mary) by which it is very common amongst the
Irish to swear, this venerable block did they repose much confidence in, for
the taking of this Town, and when it came first amongst them, it was received
with acclamations of joy, like the Arc in the Camp of Israel, to save them
from the Philistims, and for good luck, was this time at Tallaghhallon; But as
soon as this hot work began, his Guardian took care with the first to post
him away on horseback, and in leaping a ditch, the horse threw the fellow and
Mac Kill Murragh in the dirt, that two others were feign to take him up upon
their shoulders, and to trot with him (with the loss of some of his limnes)
toward Dundalke, as I have been since told by one of their own profession; our
Governor in the mean time with some horse and foot issued out toward Beauly
to provoke their General Sir Phelemy O Neile, (as supposing he had not yet
left that lodging) burnt Newtowne under his nose, and beat two Colors (which
was all that appeared) into the Castle, and returned the sooner upon hearing
that hot work, with an intention (if need were) to have relieved my Lord
Moore, but by that time he had marched half way, the bright firing of three or
four Towns thereabouts gave sufficient assurance of the victory, and so made
a stand; At the first blush, coming that way he was misapprehended to have
been Sir Phe^emy himself (whom as yet ours knew not had been amongst
themselves) and the number by their open March appeared to have been a thousand.

The Soldiers had got their fill of all sorts of pillage, and howsoever (in
that hot prosecution a mile or two about) they might be thought to have enough
of that mornings work, yet were they so eager to have been at it again, that
they sued to their Captains to let them meet him presently, offering to throw
all their spoil down to make an end with him at once, but upon a second
inquiry they were found to be their friends. In this my Lord Moore, by the
acclamations of all men, behaved himself very valiantly to the greater hazard
of his person, then his Captains were pleased with, was cut through the boot
with the sword of one whom (having newly discharged his Pistols) he had struck
under his horse with a half Pike, the forepart of his Saddle run through by
another, his horse hurt, all spattered with the dirt, which the thick flying of
the Bullets raised, but had no other hurt; In this desperate fight, being once
discerned, two hundred of the Rebels gathered, and made up toward him, only
crying out, This is my Lord Moore, when (the rest of the horse in several
Divisions, being upon a prosecution) he had but seven in his Company, yet he
retreated not, but charged them, many were killed, the rest scattered, and were
still lessened by their pursuers.

This famous Generalissimo, Sir Phelemy O Neil^, with his great Commanders,
fled away very obscurely, and meanly attended, unless it were with the
following curses of the whole Country, with which he is still greeted by all
sorts; many of our Gentlemen whom he had with such vain hopes deluded, has he
here left lamenting their miserable condition which they foresee deservedly
approaching.

And thus as our worthy Governor on the Saturday before had the honor in the
beginning of the raising of our Siege on the South Side by a retaliating
slaughter of so many of them at the fatal Bridge, so were we all pleased that
this next Saturday on the North-side, my Lord Moore (to whom we were beholding)
as our first succor at the rising of these Commotions, and our chief
continued su^porter in his large and liberal expenses upon all occasions, to
the great encouragement of the Captains and Commanders, by supplying them in
their extreme great necessities) should have the honor of giving them their
last in their dispersing.

The fruit of which began that very evening to appear, when some of the
English now escaping from them, came in and gave us notice that the Castles of
Beauly and Stanime on each side the river were deserted by the holders, and Sir
Phelemy with the rest of that nest being fledge, were flowne away with some
fieldpieces toward Dundalke, into each of which our Governor instantly sent
some Companies, who accordingly entered without the least resistance, rounded
the Country the next morning, two or three miles as far as Termonfecken, but
found not a man, only a world of Corn, which in that haste they had not time
to fire.

By this our Town was filled with provision, Ports began to open, our
neighbors making suit to be admitted to our Market, Castles near hand
voluntarily surrendered, the owners submitting, and all good men's hearts
rejoicing by this sudden change, begun and finished in the compass of a
week; every street ringing with praises to God the Donor, to whom we failed
not solemnly and publicly to acknowledge it often.

After the Rebels (that had so long besieged us) were thus routed, and some of
the chiefest of their Castles near, possessed by us, Letters, as well from
Lords, as other of the Gentry, came thick in to us, of which, some receiving no
answer, came and presented themselves to our mercy; in special, one Bath, who
about the middle of December had came in with his Iri^h Dart accompanied with
the Sheriff of the County of Louth, (both Commissioners from the Rebels) and
very confidently and arrogantly demanded the surrender of this Town, who at
first was ashamed to own the knowledge of me by reason of some speeches that
had then passed between us, the event of which had proved beyond his belief
or expectation. The Letters of the Lord Netherfield and the Lord of Slane, with
diverse others of the chief of the Country have I seen under their own hands
in a most humble suit to my Lord Moore, to stand their friend, some protesting
their innocence, others pretending themselves deluded by the Northern Irish,
and heavily cursing the first plotters of this business, and yet we knew they
cursed themselves, and had enough under their own hands, they little dreampt
of, to steare us right enough in our Judgment of them.

From others we had feigned Letters of the approach of two thousand of O Relyes
men, one way, and of eighteen hundred of Sir Phelemy O Neiles, another way,
and each within five miles of us: But the use they had given us of their lies,
and the contradiction which the submission of their Chief gave to it, made the
news of no value with us, yet it produced that effect, that to prevent their
dry lodgings, there issued out some competent force to Slane, burnt the Town
and the Country near it, took the Castle and pillaged it, with which the
Soldiers came laden home. And not long after my Lord Moore, and the Governor
made a Salley out another way, spent the greater part of the day in burning
forty or fifty Villages, took one Barnewall of Rahasket, who was a Colonel
among the Rebels, and a great Parleyer from them hither, and had been many
years Deputy, Custos Rotulorum of that County (as dangerous a fellow by his
natural parts, and other education as any they had,) His Castle (after a few
shot, and seeing our men appearing in a full body) he yielded, where was found
so much of bread and other victuals, ready baked, that no doubt, he expected
the return of his former Guests, besides four hundred barrels of Malt, and
abundance of all sorts of Grain, his Cellers full of Wine and Beer, which the
Soldiers Feasted themselves with, for a while; he with his two Priests, taken
with him, were (with seven or eight Friars more) cloystered in one prison here,
but since he is promoted to the Castle of Dublin.

Darcy of Plattin (two of whose Sons were Captains among the Rebels, who had
the strongest and fairest Castle in the Country is fled, leaving his Wife and
Family, with about fifty Musketteeres to defend it: This, howsoever the first
time it was denied my Lord Moore, and the Governor (as it had been before to
my Lord of Ormond) who demanded the surrender of it in the Kings name, yet the
second time hearing of our pieces of battery approaching, gave it up upon
Composition, and so we have a Garrison there also, by which our Town is
securely Flanked on both sides the River.

After this, by the escaping of many poor English from their servitude, we had
evident assurances of the treacherous messages, and plots of our Popish
Inhabitants, for the betraying this Town unto them, some who never were here
before, could name us the men, describe ^he places, by the nearenesse to such a
Tower, design the time, all which agreeing with our former informations and
suspicion, was a sure testimony.

How many Letters in the midst of these forlorn hopes, have I yet seen of
theirs in a vain comforting themselves, with an assurance (to use their own
words) that the Almighty would doubtless favor their just and innocent cause,
and their holy intentions. Another I have seen of O Relies to my Lord Moore,
that he had no news, but that powder was in making every where (to use his
own words) thanks be to God, and our good King, etc. But we knew at the same
time he was fallen sick upon the news of Sir Phelemies late routing at
Tallagh-hallan.

To relate what a change presently there was in this Town, from that extremity
of scarceness and deernesse, to what a plenty and cheapnesse things were come,
would be incredible: eggs, which during this Siege, one was a rich present,
worthy of thanks from the chiefest, were now fifteen a penny; Hens, at two
pence, milch Cowes at five shillings, Horses, which before the Siege, were
rated at three or four pounds, sold for twelve pence, nay commonly passed
among friends for a quart of Beer; The finest Wheat in the Market for eight
shillings a Barrel, Fish (to which we had been altogether strangers)
multiplied abundantly, though such a glut in reason cannot be imagined to hold
many months, by the burning so many thousand barrels of Corn, further from
us, which they could not bring in.

Many bloody murders were committed upon the English Protestants, in revenge
of this late defeat. At Atherdee, they killed all that were remaining there;
the next night near Slane, an old Gentlewoman, with her Daughter, and
Grandchilde, had their throats cut in their beds; in diverse other places they
drowned Men, Women, and Children.

The Earl of Ormond (Lieutenant General) was now not far from us with 3000.
Foot, and 500. Horse, burning the County of Mead, and on the eleventh of
March, attended with diverse Colonels and Captains, did us the honor of a
visit, and dined herewith my Lord Moore, at Droghedah, who began to recover
some competent ability, of giving such a troop some entertainment. Many at
the sight of the weakness of our Walls fell into admiration of the possibility
of our holding out so long against such a multitude. His Lordships intention of
being the raiser of our Siege thus unexpectedly prevented, (God giving that
honor before his approach to the feeble strength of the besieged) yet was very
zealous to take the fair opportunity now given him of the full routing of the
Rebels so newly dispersed, by a present, quick prosecution of them, before they
could get any head again. Which, by my Lord Moore, and Sir Henry Tichborne,
our Governors relation, finding very seasonable, and of little difficulty,
called a Council of War, viz. the Lord Moore, and our Governor, Sir Thomas
Lucas, Sir Simon Harcourt, Sir Robert Ferrald with others, These upon mature
deliberation, finding good grounds to consent with his Lordship, and conceiving
great hopes of a good and speedy success, even to the clearing of those
Northern parts, wrote to the Lords Justices very earnestly, to enlarge his
Lordships Commission, (which before was so straightened, that in the literal
sense, it could scarce stand with a liberty of relieving us, if there had been
need, being commanded not to pass over the River of the Boyne, beyond which
the greater part of our Town is seated) alleging many reasons to enforce it,
preventing an Objection in the want of victuals, by a provision undertaken by
my Lord Moore, from his own Lands near adjoining. And indeed, such a
confidence was apprehended of prevailing in this motion, that our Governor had
picked out ten Companies of our best men, fittest for that service, and my
Lord of Ormond designed the like number of less experienced Soldiers for our
guard in their room, my Lord Moore, (as the best guide in those parts) and
Lieutenant Colonel Weyneman chosen by the said Council of War to be
Commanders of them, All were ready for their march, and appointed to meet his
Lordship at Slane, five miles off.

But the Lords Justices proving still constant to their former injunction, and
renewing a stricter command for his present retreat to Dublin, that design
(so desired by our Governor as an assured means of an instant reducing the
whole County of Louth) was put to a stand, and thereupon our scattered
rebellious route, who before were in a trembling fit, now took heart again,
and gathered at Atherdee and Dondalke, whither (as we heard) daily posted
thousands out of Mead and Louth, as to their safest receptacles, and presumed,
not long after, to threaten us with another visit.

The Earl of Ormond submitting in this to the wisdom of the State, (as
presuming some other important affairs were in hand, which might justly
necessitate that command) retreated accordingly, only in answer to our
Governors request, sent him back four companies of Foot, and two troops of
Horse, with two pieces of Battery. Upon the receipt of which, my Lord Moore,
and our Governor, (who in all things have proceeded very unanimously) for the
prevention of a further multiplication of Rebels, which a longer delay might
have produced, resolved to adventure upon the same Design themselves, which
they were willing others might have been honored with; and so upon the one
and twentieth of March, with one thousand Foot, and two hundred horse, they
marched that way ward, first finished what they had left undone at Slane in
burning the Town, and some villages in the way: In the Castle there was
returned again a Garrison of twelve men, who by the presumption of the
strength of it had a good mind to hold out, but as soon as they saw our pieces
of battery, yielded, and had quarter, only one of our Soldiers formerly run
away from us, there taken, was hanged: about three miles off, some bodies of
the Rebels appearing, a party of Horse was sent out, killed forty of them, and
so pursued them, till the rest were employed in burning the Country after them;
and so continued that day and the next.

The three and twentieth day of March, they marched with fire and smoke toward
A^herdee, about a mile from the Town, in a fallow field, our Scoutes descryed
the Enemy in two Divisions, the number is diversely reported, some say 1100.
some 1500. our Governor (according to his wonted cheerfulness, upon any such
service) drew all into a Battalia, the Soldiers being of themselves as readily
disposed, and longing to greet them, a party of the Horse was sent to get
between them and the Town, and another party to stand between them and a
Bogge; a forlorn hope of a hundred men marched before to scowre some ditches,
who stumbling upon an Ambuscado of their Musketteers, beat them out, and in
pursuing them fell upon the body of the rest, who upon the sight of one of our
Divisions drawing up so nimbly after them, betook themselves to their heels,
whom our Horse prosecuted with such speed, as there were about four hundred
slain in a miles compass, besides some others in the Ditches that the very
Pyoners knocked down with their Spades, and not a few perished in the bogge,
which was the best refuge of the most.

At the foot of the Bridge ours found some resistance, by some Musketteers,
placed there in a Tower, but our Governor (disdaining so much as a rub in this
assured victory) found a passage over the river, and galled them so on the
other side, that they soon abandoned it. The passage being thus opened, the
Horse entered, and with a full Carreere chased them through the Town, yet by
that little stop, many of them were gotten too far to be overtaken. One
Lieutenant Colonel, and five Captains were slain, many fell by my Lord
Moors own hands; And (which is still Gods great goodness) not one man of
ours lost, only a horseman shot in the heel, and a horse in the hoof.

Here the Soldiers finding good pillage, and victuals ready dressed, took up
their lodgings that night: The next morning the Governor with a Party of
Horse, went out and burnt the Country two mile about, but suffered no pillage
to be brought into the Town, and so proceeded toward Dundalke, whither all
the Country next day posted with their Cattle, and what else was portable, many
foreseeing their ruins, came in and submitted, and resigned their Castles.

Upon the six and twentieth of March being Saturday (when as their bloody
design upon us was decreed on that day, so has many of our victories over
them fallen out on that day also, as that at the Bridge February the twenty
sixth, at Tallagh-halland March the fifth, and this) they assaulted Dundilke,
which the Rebels had to their uttermost fortifyed, and by reason of the double
walls, and double ditch, marish ground on the one side, and the Sea on the
other, the greater difficulty was expected. After the former defeat at
Atherdee, the streets of Dundalke were well trodden with at least a thousand
Cowes, and two or three thousand sheep, continually passing through it the
night before, attended with the lamentable cries, and the wringing of hands of
the Owners, mixed with as bitter curses of the first movers.

That morning all the poor English Protestant Prisoners, (some of which before
were permitted to beg up and down the streets) were clapped up with an
intent to have hanged them (for which they had provided them ropes) as soon as
the Town should prove to be in any hazard, who yet already had been almost
starved. We approached the Town, about nine of the clock in the morning,
planted our Ordinance upon a little hill not far from the gate, which 500 of
them within defended; A forlorn hope of an hundred of ours drew up, and gave
fire at such as were in the Gate House, and for a while th^^e was very hot
work, on both sides. At length they within, finding some of them to drop,
run away, whom ours perceiving, increased their fears by shouting, but their
Commanders beat them back to their guards, and so the same peale was rung
again by each. At length a Division under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel
Waineman, of about three hundred, resolutely approached the Gate also, and some
with pickaxes began to beat down the walls, while the rest replied to the
Tower with their shot. Abundance of great stones were powered down from a
Castle, yet by Gods goodness no great hurt to any. By the sight of our men's
continued undauntednesse, with one consent they ran all away, upon which that
Division entered, and the Horse pursued them a full gallop to the killing of
many of them. But upon the turning toward the next Gate, seeing two or three
Brass pieces planted, and five hundred more ready to receive them, they
fairly retreated, But a Castle placed at the head of that out-streete, manned
with their best Musketeers, which ours minded not, and for fear of
endangering their own men (at whose heels ours were) had yet stood dumb, now
in our return played very hot upon us, whereby ten of ours were slain, An
Ensign, one Sargeant, and one that carried the Colors for another, a Horseman
with another Horse was killed also, Lieutenant Francis Moore, was shot upon
the shoulderpiece of his Armor, which from thence rebounded upon his head,
broke the skin, and so stuck within his hair, without doing him any further
hurt, which if it had been deadly, surely he that made she shot must have
merited some extraordinary reward, for as we heard from themselves, and by all
others our prisoners coming from what Quarter soever, no man's name was so
odious with them, and so deeply maliced, and threatened, if he could have been
taken.

The loss of these men (which we were not used to) and especially of Ensign
Fortescue, which was the first Officer we had ever yet lost in fight, enraged
my Lord Moore, and the Governor the rather upon a resolution of a present
revenge, who else had contented themselves with the taking the out-Towne for
that night, and to have lodged themselves there till the morning. This Castle
standing so advantagiously, and finding it to be so well provided with good
shot, was the only Remora to their proceedings; for the gaining of this, they
set the Houses on fire near it, which howsoever before the wind was not very
fa^ourable to their design, yet no sooner lighted, but it seemed suddenly to
turn, as they would wish it, and carried the smoke both into the Town and
Castle, choking them within both; Ours also having gathered some dry Bean
stalks, made them into bundles, and filled them with Towe, and good store of
Gunpowder; the Soldiers employed in that service, took them upon their
heads, as a shelter against the stones tumbling down upon them, and under
that smoaky cloud, got undescryed to the very Castle door, against which they
laid down their bundles, and giving fire to them by a Train; blew up the
door; and some other boards; by which those within being choked, and
frighted, leapt out at a Window; for the discovery of which, a Sergeant of
Captain Owens, with five men, upon the condition they might have the pillage
of it, entered it, and by the signal of the flourishing their naked swords on
the top of the Castle, gave notice of being their own. Upon the possession of
this, all were revived, and took themselves Masters of the Town already; we
quenched the fires that had annoyed the former Tenants, and manned it with
thirty good Musquetteeres, who being within half Musket shot, played so thick
into the Town, that not a man could stir in the streets, we drew up our
pieces of Ordnance against the inward Gate, and with some ten Wool packes
(found in the Castle very opportunely) made a kind of a Bullwarke for our
Musketeers, both to save them from their Cannon, and that they might play over
them without danger of any other shot, though as soon as they perceived this
secure approach, they troubled us with neither, but left their pieces there
laden.

Our men for distinction sake, against the entry of the Town, put every one a
white paper upon his hat; The Governor took one Division with a party of
Horse, and drew by the back part of the Town toward the North-gate, (out of
which they upon the Castle had discerned the f^ight of multitudes of them)
killed forty in his way.

Sir Phelemy O Neile, who not long before had made such bragges, confidently
assured his men of the death of so many of our Commanders, and as an evidence
of it, brought forth his own clothes into the Market place all bloodyed, as
if they had been ours stripped by him, now seeing us thus encompassing the
Town, and himself like to be taken in the net also, stole away over the River
(in which, diverse in that haste were drowned) accompanied with diverse others,
who as they were going, were heard to lament their destiny, and curse that
Fatal day, scarce knowing whither to retreat with any welcome.

At a by Gate the Governor entered, first, shortened some of their journey,
whom he met there posting out, and instantly sent a Sergeant to my Lord Moore,
to signify to him, the Town was deserted, and that he might securely move
forwards, which as soon as by the second message of a Captain, with some
Musketeers, he received a confirmation of, he marched on, and accordingly
found the event, beating open the Gates, took possession of two Brass pieces,
and another with the Market place, and so about seven a clock at night, they
took the Town, without any further resistance.

The night thus drawing on, and the full tide, secured Sir Phelemy in his
flight, from our prosecution of him. The number of the slain is uncertain,
but about a hundred of them were killed, at and after the taking of it, and of
ours about fourteen, which were lost upon that unlucky Castle only.

Sir Phelemy, after he had gone two miles off, in a show of what revenge he
could make, burnt some part of a fair Castle of my Lord Moors, called
B^llymaskomlin, sentencing him all the while to be a Traitor to God and the
King.

The poor English Protestants, to the number of six-score (who had received
the sentence of death, within themselves) by this sudden entry of their
friends, being set at liberty, were almost beside themselves for joy; Pillage
of all sorts was here found in abundance, as being of late the Treasury of the
County of Lough, for the share of which, each Captain took the fortune of his
Quarter.

The Soldiers feasted themselves with all sorts of provision, which they found
dressed to their hands, Turkies and Hens were of no value, with them, that (as
I have been told) within four days, there were about 4000. eaten, it was
ordinary at one Table to see ten, or twenty couple of them, in Rank and File
cut off in an instant.

Sir Henry Tichburne our Governor behaved himself throughout the whole, very
valiantly, in the hazard of his person, with the meanest Soldier, my Lord
Moore is accordingly by all applauded, as needing rather a b^idle then a
spur, in those attempts, each Captain has gained himself much honor, and
every Soldier deserves encouragement, who shrunk not an inch from what they
were commanded. The glad news of which we were here saluted with in the
streets, the next day, being Sunday, just as we were coming from Church, in
the afternoon, where we had been praying for that blessing upon them.

This victory, the breaknecke of the Rebellion Northward (and with which I may
conclude, as completing our Siege delivery) is by all attributed unto Gods
own handy-worke, which succeeded beyond our thoughts or expectation. The
number of our men (by the so many staying behind at Atherdee, and stealing
back hither with their pillage) upon Muster that morning, were found to be but
seven hundred and fifty Foot, and two hundred Horse, and there were then near
three thousand of the Rebels within the Town, able to have beat us out, being
entered: For brass pieces, and other such Artillery they exceeded us also,
besides the defense which nature had given the place, as well as industry.

This poor Town of Drogheda, when they were the besiegers, there were (as
has been since confessed by some of their chief) sixteen thousand sometimes
besetting us, the famine pressing us very sore, so that what with death and
sickness, we had not above one thousand fighting men, yet by Gods goodness,
held out four months, and notwithstanding the homebred treacheries, their
mighty onsets and Alarmes, at last with a few were routed.

Now that this strong Town of Dundalke, every way so well provided, with men,
Ammunition, and Victuals, thus to be taken, with such a small number, and in so
short a time as one day, who can but acknowledge it to be Gods special work
indeed, putting an evident distinction between them that seek him aright, and
such as seek after superstitious vanities? That seeing they have boasted
Religion to be the cause, God has declared by the event with which he is
pleased, in supporting ours, so fraudulently undermined by theirs, in giving us
so many wonderful, if not miraculous preservations; for which, to him only be
raised a monument of everlasting praise, and thankesgiving, from us, and ours,
from one Generation to another; Not unto us, but to the King eternal,
immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be all honor, and glory, now and for
ever, Amen.

AN APPENDIX OF Some other Occurrences fallen out since, in the prosecuting of
our victory, and further discovery of diverse particulars, touched upon in the
former Relation.
UPon this quick and seasonable regaining of Dundalke (the Key of the North)
the State thought fit to continue Sir Henry Tichburne there with such an
increase of strength as was necessary, and committed the present Government of
this Town to the Lord Viscount Moore of Drogheda, who, as he has his honor
from hence, so his Lands lie about it, by which double interest, none can be
imagined to be more careful of our preservation.

About this time we received some Prisoners late Inhabitants of this Town,
very luckily escaped from the Rebels, taken at the Skirries a little before
Christmas last, upon their return out of England, one of which being my
Parishioner, and examined upon oath, I thought it not unfit to give thee a
sum of it; As soon as their Letters were taken from them, and viewed,
themselves robbed of all, and stripped, and come ashore, they were entertained
by one of the Irish Lords with this salutation, Ye are welcome out of England
to be hanged, as all of your profession must expect shortly. And not long after
in cold and snowy weather were turned out of doors without any sustenance,
often forced for want of water it self, to quench their thirst with Snow.

At Balruthery, about eight miles from us (where a Convent of our Friars sat
daily in Council against us) This party heard one Friar Malone (who was Vicar
General to the Catholic Army) assuring one of their Captains, that they
would not fail to have Mass on Christmas day in Saint Peter's Church in that
starved Town of Drogheda, and at Christ-Church at Dublin by Newyearesday, not
doubting as soon as they should take the former, the other would follow with
ease; That they would make a Bonefire of my Lord Primates Library, rejoicing to
think how they should warm their hands by it, taking what revenge they could
on it, seeing he was too far out of their reach himself; one Friar Walsh
adding this for a cause, in regard those books had been an instrument,
whereby by his writing and doctrine he had damned more souls then now were
living: And for my self, in liew of my Custodium of it, my sentence was to
have been The like was not only threatened, but done to Marlorate (that worthy
and able Divine) by the Papists at the Siege of that Town, whereof he was
Pastor, as soon as it was taken, vid. Praestantium aliquot Theologorum qui
Romans Antichrist. praecipue oppugnarunt, Effigies and Elogia per lac. Ver-heiden
Hagae 1602. in vita August. Marlorat. Anno quo Rothomagum obsessum occupatumque
fuit ab Antichristianis noster Marloratus ^cclesiae Rothomagensis Pastor fuit
comprehensus, cujus vitam laqueo abrupere illi qui Romano obstricti
Pontificiegreglos se satellites illo facto declararunt. Martyr igitur verus
quem causa, non paena facit, Anno 1562. cum Annos 56. vixisset.
hanged up by it, and afterward to have been beaten to powder. One of our
Captains who was an Inhabitant, and of whose dislike of them, they had had
some former experience, his torment was the same time decreed also, (viz.) to
have put him into a Caske driven full of spikes, and so to have rolled him up
and down till he had been dead, with diverse the like, forged out of that holy
(but bloody) Irish Inquisition.

This foresaid Vicar General (who bragged he had had his oar in many
Conspiracies before now) This party heard him often declaring the Decree of the
Army, to be this, that seeing Drogheda had been offered Quarter, and refused
it, they would kill man, woman and children of all the English Protestants,
that by Easter day they hoped England should be theirs as well as this
Kingdom; That they had a great party already, and were assured of some
foreign assistance, whereby they would plague the Puritans in London, and
have the education of the young Prince themselves, etc. Many treacheries were
by this party revealed, which had been hatched by the like, within our own
bowels: Many horrid Acts committed upon some of the Clergy, and other
Protestants, whom after they had butchered, denied them burial, and suffered
the swine to feed on them, making a mock of the greatest misery, and tearming
the most unpatterned cruelty the finest sport, in which none had their hands
deeper then those of the very Pale, derived of the ancient English, only
degenerated in matter of Religion.

The lives of these Friars, not only in dicing, gaming, and cursing, whole
nights, but also in drunkenness, whoring, committing of rapes, and such other
lasciviousness, were so lewd, as is not fit for any chaste ear to be defiled
with, and yet all their designs forsooth pretended under the cloak of
holiness and Religion.

Some other Prisoners (upon exchange of the like number of theirs) we received
also out of the County of Cavan, by whom we were informed how the same evil
spirit that reigned here, had possessed them there also, in their teacherous
betraying such who had deserved so well of them, robbing, and utter undoing
them, who had formerly saved their lives, which is too long to be crowded into
this corner, only I cannot let pass their barbarous ingratitude to Bishop
Bedell, the Bishop of Kilinore, who was so addicted to the Irish in favoring
them, and preferring them above any others, that he incurred a censure from the
best of his friends for it; yet this learned venerable Prelate of sixty eight
years of age, whose gravity might have turned the edge of malice it self, did
they put out of his house in the depth of winter, and enclosed him in a cold
Castle in the midst of a Lough, manacled his sons before his face (which
himself begged to have been so much honored also) and having robbed him of
all he had, (the Titular Popish Bishop taking possession of his books, and
Manuscripts, which he prised most) at length he was removed to a poor house,
within sight of his own, (where diverse others of the poor English Protestants
were by an honest charitable Minister of the Irish birth relieved) and there
with grief and former miserable usage dyed, whom they could scarce be drawn
to allow Christian burial (dying, says the Popish Bishop, a Heretic) and so
was laid in the outmost part of the Churchyard, as himself had desired. Such
confidence yet had some of the religious persons of that County, of a good
success, that an Abbat was heard to say in these terms, That he would not
ask it of God in mercy, but in justice, that now if the Catholic cause did
not thrive for his part, let the Devil take them, and their Religion ever
after.

But to return again to our selves, with whom, by Gods blessings, all things
still prospers in sallying out from one Quarter to another, to the death
always of some of the Rebels, and without the loss of one of ours, sometimes
twenty of our Musquetteers have adventured to take a drove of a hundred or
sevenscore Cowes from as many score of the Rebels, lying in ditches upon
advantages, and yet have cut them off by ten or twenty, put the rest to
flight without the loss of any men or cattle; Nay, some of our Garrisons
being not above sixscore horse and foot, when they have been informed of a
thousand of them gathering and attempting to burn a Village near them, have
made a party out, killed many, the rest flying, like the wicked, when no man
pursued. Some threescore horse, and Dragoneers upon intelligence of some nests
of Rebels lurking in diverse bodies to the number of five hundred, have marched
out seven or eight miles, killed one hundred of them, returned with a good
drove of Cattle, fired thirty or forty of their lodgings, and all without the
hurt of one man; As at Dundalke, (to whom we still bear an affectionate
relation) the like we hear of daily, very usually, thus giving notice one to
another, by such kind of fires, like Beacons, on the tops of hills, against a
common enemy. Much of the like good service is daily done by our Garrisons,
especially by my Lord Moors foot company at Mellifont, under the command of
Captain Constable, and at Bewly by some of Captain Gibsons company, under the
command of Lieutenant Greeneham: who let few days pass without reaping some
of the Rebels heads. Many who were taken Prisoners, were so desperate, that
being threatened to be hanged, made such haste, that they took ropes and hung
themselves; or being upon the Ladder, threw themselves off. Not long agone Sir
Henry Tichburne went with a party about four miles from thence, encompassed a
Wood, where he was told Coll. Mac Bryan had lodged with some hundreds of his
men, the night before killed about one hundred and fifty, burnt the Country
near, and without any damage.

March the 25. my Lord Moore being certified of 1300. gathered to the Na^^^n
under the Lord Gormans^ownes command, and there fortifying the Town, ten
miles from us, marched very early with two hundred horse, and some Dragoneers,
and Musquetteers (mounted on Garrons, for the quicker march) only to take a
view of their strength, took a Scoute with the Lord Gormanstownes own
saddle-horse, drew up to the Gates within half Pistol shot, killed twenty of
them, fired the Country under their noses, and all the way hitherwards,
returned with abundance of Cowes, and six hundred Sheep, and yet those who
boast so much of the cause of God and Religion, and take themselves to die in
the happiest estate of Martyrdom, had not so much faith or courage to make out
upon us, and for many that had adventured out elsewhere, were found by some
Charms It is certain, that at the taking of the Newry, a Rebel being
appointed to be shot upon the Bridge, and stripped sta^k naked, notwithstanding
the Musquetteer stood within two yards of him, and shot him in the middle of
the back, yet the Bullet ent^ed not, nor did him any more hurt then leave a
little black spot behind it. This many hundreds were eyewitnesses of, one of
which of good trust has related it to me. Diverse of the like have I been
confidently assured of, who have been provided of such diabolical charms as
follow.
thrust-free, (as they call it) who being knocked down, the point of a sword
put upon their naked breasts, it could not be made to enter, or draw the least
blood, which howsoever I was always slow of believing such fables, yet hearing
it so often protested unto me by some Officers upon their own experi^nce, I
could not but listen to it.

And for paper Charms, their Religion yields plenty of that fruit, and
commends the confidence in them, as great evidences of devotion, some of which
have come to my hands, one being lately taken, with some of those Rebels at
Dundalke, and given me, I have here inserted the true Copy of, though, I
believe, it deceived him who put his trust in it, and by the looks it seemed
to have been much worn in the carriage.

JESUS MARIA.
^



This is the measure of the wound of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ which
was brought from Constantinople unto the Emperor Charles within a Chest of
Gold as a Relic most precious to that effect, that no envy might him take,
and it has such virtue that he or she that shall readit, or hear it read,
or will bear it about them, that neither Fire, Water, Tempest, Knife, Lance,
Sword, neither yet the Devil shall hurt them. And also any woman with child,
the day that she sees the said measure of the wound of our Lord, she shall
not die any sudden death, in the time of her burden, but shall be delivered
with less pain, and whatsoever they be that desire this about them in the way
of Devotion, they shall not die any sudden death, and by the fight of
meditation on this wound, they shall gain victory over their enemies; and
further, care shall not damage them, and moreover, the day that he or she
shall read it, or hear it read, they shall not die any evil death.

And having thus stumbled upon these delusions, I shall give thee a view of one
or two more, taken at the same place, both, as the former, delivered me by one
of their own profession.

IHS
outline of Our Lady's foot The measure of our Blessed Ladies Foot.

Whosoever shall kiss it three times, and say three Ave mary's devoutly, in
honor and reverence of her, gains seventy years of pardon, and be delivered
of many perils.



Indulgences granted to the sacred grain of Saint Joan, being a name of the
third order of our blessed Father Saint Frances, and was a most godly and
virtuous Abbess, you must make no small account of them, for the Pope did
grant very many Indulgences unto them, and to other grains, and medals; They
contain the virtue of that grain carried by the Angel-keeper of Saint Joan
unto Heaven, as hereafter you shall note by the testimony of our Savior.

They have special power against Devils, for they are forced to fly out of
the bodies of men, and whosoever carries the said grain about him needs not
to fear no evil. They contain a most powerful virtue against Wildfire,
against the tempest of the Sea, and against all manner of infirmities incident
to the soul and the body of man, and especially against the Fever,
Pestilence, the Scabbe, the tentation of the Devil, and of Heresies, for they
have the virtue of the Agnus Dei.

These ensuing Indulgences were granted to these blessed grains by our Savior
and our blessed Lady, by the intercession of Saint Joan, who did impart the
same unto the rest of her Sisters at the hour of her death; First say one
Pater noster, and one Ave Maria, and you merit as many Indulgences as Rome
affords that day. After your Confession and Remission, say ten Pater nosters
and ten Ave Marias in remembrance of the most precious blood of our Savior;
and you are as innocent from sin as when you came out of the Stone, (i. e.
the Font) and if you say them for any soul in Purgatory, his sins are
forgiven him. Our holy Father, Pope Adrian the third, and Pope Gregory the
seventh, did grant unto the grain these Indulgences following. Say one Pater
noster, one Ave Maria, Anima Chri. and Sal. Regina, you redeem three souls
out of Purgatory; say the prayer of the Cross with one Creed, and you bring a
soul out of Purgatory; say two Creeds when the Priest knocks his breast at
Mass, and you bring a soul out of Purgatory; Adore the Crucifix thirty three
times, and you get remission of sins to thirty three souls; say the Creed
thirty three times, and you merit as many Indulgences, as those that visit
Saint Joan's Church.

Confess and Repent on the feast of the transfiguration of our Lord, and at
Easter, and say Anima Chri. and you obtain forgiveness of all your
unperformed oaths; say certain prayers in the honor of the blessed Sacrament
upon Christmas day, our Lady day, Saint Francis day, and Saint Cloars day, say
Anima Christi, in honor of Christ's blood, upon Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday, and you get remission of all your sins, or the sins of any other
that you pray for; adore the Cross upon Friday five times, and you bring five
Souls out of Purgatory of your own kindred; believe verily and doubt not,
that whosoever carries any part or parcel of these holy grains about him,
shall never miscarry. Anima Christi, sanctifica me, etc.

This sacred grain, ye see, is a Catholicon, good for all diseases, preserves
from all manner of evil, incident to soul as body, especially from the
temptation of the devil and heresy, but yet not their feet from being so
swift to shed innocent blood, their hands from theft, their tongues from lying,
and such like, which are near enough a kin to the Devil. This grain being
steeped one quarter of an hour, in a hotch-potch of Ave-maries, Cross
prayers, and such like ingredients, the virtue descends as low as purgatory,
the next door to hell, absolves you from perjury, and if you have any part or
parcel of these grains about you, you cannot miscarry. These medicines if
they were common, would surely undo all our Physicians, and Chirurgians, and
(as one would think) prove a great hinderance to their very Priests, whose
craft (like Demetrius the Silver Smith) would be in danger to be set at naught.

Some formal conveyances of all the spiritual goods of the Friar minors, and
the Nuns of Saint Clare, to some Gent. Our neighbors as a means of
preserving them here, and saving them hereafter, i. e. a conferring unto them
the merits of their Masses, Prayers, Fasts, Preachings, Readings, Meditations,
Devotions, etc. in some requital of their Alms to them, drawn up under the
hand and Seal of the Provincial, Anno 1640. with diverse others such delusions
(which to us they would not be known) the Originals have come to my hands, but
I will not glut thee with any more of them.

These fond scroules the silly people prize as pearls, but if they found a
Bible of ours in English, how basely would they use it, burning was the best
end, that came to all they laid hands on, as the like was the destiny of all
other Books of that nature, with which some of the owners were more grieved
then for the loss of their goods.

Nay, some Libraries of the Clergy made a prey of; they were so violent, that
as Herod, to have been the surer of the death of our Savior killed his own
Child amongst those Innocents at Betheleem, so they burnt abundance of their
own Authors also, without distinction, where at first search, they found but
any of ours.

By the death of so many men about us, having their houses, and all their
provision either burnt or drawn hither, the dogs only surviving, are found
very usually (like that judgment upon Jesabell, for the murder of Naboth)
feeding upon their Masters, which taste of Man's flesh, made it very dangerous
for the Passengers in the rodes, who have been often set upon by those
Mastives, till we were as careful to kill them also.

Not long after this, my Lord Conway with the Scot^h Forces, to the number of
about three thousand advanced from Knock^f^rgus, as far as the Newry, eight
miles beyond Dund^^ke, took the Town upon Composition of giving them their
lives that were in the Castle, which was the rather yielded to, for Sir Edward
Trevors sake, an ancient grave Privy Counselor of this Kingdom, then
Prisoner within it, who else by a battery, or the baseness of those varlets
might have been^ endangered.

This news put the Rebels about Armagh, some sixteen miles from thence, into
such a fright as they presently fired the Country, killed most of the English
remaining, burnt all the houses and the Corn, and fled to Dunganon, in the
County of Tyrone. For the Town of Armagh (Sir Phe^emy O Neile being there
himself) they burnt down every house and Creete in it, burnt the fair
Cathedral (which they had made their Masse-house hitherto) and the Steeple, so
that the Bells dropped down, the cruel murders they committed were it in any
other Country would be incredible, about a dozen of the English clapped up in the
lower Goal, they took out of the Town and butchered them; in the upper
room, where the better sort were, and some of the Clergy, they set fire to it,
intending to have burnt them in it, but they broke open the door, two of which
escaped, the rest were followed, and murdered. An old grave man, one Master
Starkey, of above fourscore years of age, Master of the Free-Schoole of
Armagh, whom I kn^w to be an innocent harmless man, and had been Sewer to
Queen Elizabeth, they took him with his two Daughters, and at Bla^ke-water,
not far from thence, stripped them and drowned them, some few escaping from
thence hither, have filled our ears with such horrid, and barbarous acts, as I
am loath to conclude with them, and indeed they are so many, that they would
make a book of themselves. Yet one particular I cannot omit, as a just
judgment of God upon him who was the Author and prime Actor in the burning
the Church of Armagh, who three or four days after run stark mad, and so
dyed within the week.

Not long after these, came other prisoners to us, escaped out of the County of
Cavan (June the first) with their mouths full of the like stories, where
abundance of our neighbors here, have been compelled to take Sanctuary, who
(though of the ancient English, yet) are reported to be more set upon cruelty
then the mere Irish. There, upon the hearing of that news of the Scotch,
having the Command of the Castle of Knockefergus, the Newry and others, they
began again to revive among the common Soldiers, their former imaginary
hopes, that the Scotch were sent to take their parts, which they were so
credulous of, that upon that ground they freely dismissed Captain Bailey with
his wife, his Lieutenant and some others of that Nation, conveying them to the
Newry, (a long journey, and so they came hither) only taking this Oath of
them: that They should but d^e as the rest of the Scotch there did; which,
howsoever the Rebels meaning was an Assistance of them, yet they there found
they must be perjured, unless (according to the practice of their Country men
thereabouts) they killed men, women, and children. The same Treaty they were
about with the rest of the Scotch in the County of Cavan, which if effected
accordingly, the Rebels shall very charitably bind them in a stricter
obligation to cut their throats then else of themselves they might be prone
unto.

Many Regiments are now landed; and more ready at the water s^de; great
preparations are making for a March into the field, with which none are more
pleased then some of ours, who have been thus long cooped up in this besieged
Town; with the good news of which thou may expect to be refreshed daily,
and before the conclusion of this Summer, there is hope of producing some good
issue, out of these beginnings in a just revenge of the blood of so many
thousand Christians, so causelessly shed by these barbarous Rebels.

FINIS.

