The Best and Happiest TIDINGS FROM IRELAND Being the Joyfullest News that ever
came to England, since the first Rebellion.

Wherein is related the Victorious Proceeding of the Protestant Army before
Kildare, April 24. a Battle of never dying memory.

Showing in a most true and exact Relation, the invincible Courage of Sir
Charles Coot, the Pearl of the World, and Captain of all Captains, as may
appear by his Heroical Fact before Kildare, April 24, 1462. manifesting to the
World by that famous Victory which he obtained over the rebels, with the number
of the men that were slam in this Battle.

Likewise the Names of three great Commanders that were taken prisoners in this
Battle, and how one of them would have stob'd himself after he was taken, With
many more Remarkable passages from that Kingdom.

Brought over by the last Post, April 30.

Imprinted at London, for H. Bluron, 1642.

A JOYFUL LETTER FROM IRELAND.
THe furious and insolent enemies have made much havoc of a great part of the
Kingdom, and made many Cities and towns of good Fame, now desolate, they have
attempted to ruin more Armagh they have laid level with the ground; so that
of that fair and Metropolitan City, they have not left any show or sign.

They have given many an Onset against the City of Dublin; but their Forces
have bin repelled, and the City defended.

Much harm is done to many Villages near adjovning unto those Cities, and have
not spared any whom they could subdue unto their power and malice. Only thus
much the Inhabitants of Kildare have bin in a very great straight.

But the Mercy of God is above all his Works, and his Power extends it self
beyond the desire of any humane expectation.

For now in the depth of all Extremity, when they were so oppressed with
Famine: the merciful God expressed his power, and when they were in despair of
all Succor or Relief, the Lord sent comfort unto them. For the very day before
the time, when they had intended and resolved to have surrendered up the town
unto the enemy, Sir Charles Coot and Captain Venman joined their Forces
together, which did accrue unto the number and strength of near upon 2000. men;
with these Forces they marched toward Kildare, either resolving to relieve the
poor distressed souls, or to dye in their defense.

No sooner did the Enemy perceive their approach, but with all speed they could
they did provide to give them Battle, which was the desire and expectation of
these two Noble and valiant Cavaliers.

The sight of these approaching Companies gave great Comfort unto the
despairing minds of the enclosed Protestants; who did now resolve either for
Liberty or Glorious Death, who immediately provided themselves to Repel the
Enemy, and gain their own Freedom. They speedily and courageously betook
themselves to their Arms, and from the Town walls gave the Enemy such a valley
of shot, that many of them were on the sudden cut off in their own security. At
which unexpected ruin, they retreated a little way from the town, thinking to
have returned into the siege better provided, and have given them present
Battle.

But in their Retreat they met with a sharper enemy then their expectation did
apprehend to be so near at hand Sir Charles aprehended the advantage of their
present disorder, occasioned by the sudden peal of Guns, sounding from the
Walls of of the town, and did not omit their opportunity, but gave them sudden
Battle; which the Enemy for a while answered stoutly, the loss on both sides
seemed for a space, to be very equal, and the Victory doubtful.

The day was half spent in this Skirmish, and much blood was shed on either
side; but at the length, being willing to conclude the battle with the Sun of
the day, did prosper the cause of the Protestants, and gave them so good
success, that there were slain of the Rebels 1700. or therabouts; besides
those who were taken Prisoners.

There were taken by the Protestants of the Rebels in this Battle three
Commanders of especial note, whose Names I thought fiit to set down for the
satisfaction of the Reader. The 1. Was Captain Oncal, who after his taking, did
vow that he had rather suffer a thousand deaths, then to be at the mercy of his
Enemy; especially such a one, from whom he scorned to desired life or quarter.

The 2d. was Lieutenant Johnson, a man of an invincible courage; who when he
saw himself taken Prisoner, offered twice to be his own Executioner, but was
prevented. The third, was Lieutenant Jones a spirit very little inferior unto
the other two, and by the report of some who were sharers in that skirmish, it
was great pity that three so noble spirits should be interessed in so
Rebellious and dishonorable a Cause.

A Declaration from both Houses of Parliament, April 26,
IT is, declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the stopping of
the passages between Hul and the Parliam, and the intercepting of Messengers
employed from the Parliament to Hull, or from any that are in the Service of
the Parliament, or any Letters whatsoever sent by any to, or from the
Parliament is a high breach of the Privilege of Parliament, which by the laws
of this Kingdom, and the Protestation, we are bound to defend with our Lives
and our Fortunes, and to bring the Violator thereof to condign punishment.

And hereby all Lords Lieutenants, and their Deputies authorized by the
Ordinance of both houses of Parliament, all Sheriffs, Justices, Majors,
Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers whatsoever, are required to give their
uttermost Aid and Assistance to all that are employed in the said Service, for
their better and more speedy free and safe Passage: And to apprehend all such
as by color of any Warrant or other Authority whatsoever, shall endeavor or go
about to hinder any that are employed about the same, and them to apprehend,
and in safe custody to send up to the Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that this be forthwith published in Print.
Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.


