A true RELATION Of the PLOT DISCOVERED IN IRELAND, AND Rising of the Papists
there, truly declared by a letter sent from one of the Aldermen in Dublin:

Showing how far they have proceeded in their rebellion, and the Towns and
Castles they have taken.

With a Proclamation published there for the suppression of the Rebels and
prevention of further mischief.

Lately printed at Dublin by command of the Lords Justices, and the rest of his
Majejesties Privy Counsel.

And now Reprinted and sold by B.W.

The true Copy of a Letter written from A Gentleman in Ireland, to his friend
in England.
Sir,
I Could not omit to write unto you, to give you to understand of a miraculous
deliverance, which the Lord in mercy has vouchsafed unto the poor Protestants
in this Kingdom, which you may perceive by the Proclamation enclosed; for I
have not time to relate the whole story, or bloody tragedy, which was intended
against us: The execution should have been on the Saturday, which was
discovered on Friday night, by a man of Sir John Clotworthy an Irish Knight,
but one of your house of Commons, and this day being the Sabbath, has been
the troublesomest day that ever I saw all my days, mixed with joy and sorrow;
joy for our gracious deliverance, and much perplexed by fears of our
approaching enemies, expecting every hour when the City should be surprised,
that for my part and many others, have had but little rest day and night for
these two days past, but how many more it is only known to God, the (...) in
the North parts of this Kingdom, taken two Lords Castles, and two Towns, one
of them of great strength and much munition in it, and as it is verily
believed, they do still increase in great multitudes: here is taken a Lord and
diverse others of note, and others the number of forty which are safe in prison
and hope of many more: the Lord is called the Lord Maguere, and the Papists
make it a Religious war which they had no cause to do, for they have had a
long time as much liberty as we have had, if not more; but their father the
Devil has set them upon this damnable act I hope to their utter ruin in this
Kingdom, if the Lord in mercy open our Kings eyes and your Parliaments hearts
to take pity upon us, for no hope of reformation is to be had here, for they
are ten for one of us through this Kingdom as is verily believed. I have
been so employed day and night these two days, that I can hardly write thus
much unto you, but desire your prayers and all good people to God and your
Parliament for us, and when more is discovered, if the Lord preserve me with
life, you shall hear farther from me, in the mean time pray for us all.

Your loving friend W.B.

A Proclamation, By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons. Io. Borlase.


THese are to make kn^wn and publish to all His Majesty's good Subjects in this
Kingdom of Ireland, that there is a discovery made by us the Lords Justices and
Council, of a most disloyal and detestable Conspiracy intended by some evil
affected Irish Papists against the lives of Us, the Lords Justices and
Council, and many others of his Majesty's faithful Subjects, universally
throughout this Kingdom, and for the seizing not only of His Majesty's Castle
of Dublin His Majesty's principal Fort here but also of the other
Fortifications in the Kingdom: And seeing by the great goodness and abundant
mercy of Almighty God to His Majesty and this State and kingdom those wicked
Conspiracies are brought to light, and some of the Conspirators committed to
the castle of Dublin, by Us, by his Majesty's Authority so as those wicked and
damnable Plots are now disappointed in the chief parts thereof, We therefore
have thought fit hereby not on^y to make it publicly known, for the comfort of
his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts of the Kingdom, but also
hereby to require them that they do with all confidence and cheerfulnes betake
themselves to their own defense and stand upon their guard, so to render the
more safety to themselves and all the Kingdom besides, and that they advertise
Us with all possible speed of all Occurrents which may concern the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom; and now to show fully that Faith and Loyalty, which they
have always shown for the public services of the Crown and Kingdom which
We will value to His Majesty accordingly and a special memory thereof w^ll be
retained for their advantage in due time. And We require that great care be
taken that no levies of men be made for foreign service nor any men suffered
to march upon any such ^retence.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin. 23. October. 1641. R. Dillon. To.
Digby. Ad. Loftus. J. Temple. Tho. Rotherham. Fr. Willoughby. Ja. Ware. Rob.
Meredith.


Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of Stationers, 1641.


