A true RELATION Of the Taking of Grafton House by the Parliaments Forces,
under the Command of Sergeant Major Skipton. With the Demands of Sir JOHN DIGBY
upon a surrender. And the Resolute Answer of Sergeant Major Skipton, to the
said Demands. As it was sent in a Letter from a Commander in the service, to
his Friend in London. With the Names of the Chief Commanders that were taken
Prisoners. The Names of the Chief Commanders that were taken prisoners.
Sir John Digby. Captain John Clarke. Lieutenant Lonfield. Quarter master
Doswell. Corporal Thorogood. Major Brookebancke. Captain Longfield. Quarter
master Collenrigge. Corporal Haynes. And 80 Troopers, all with swords,
pistols, and Carbines.


December. 29. Printed for John Wright in the Old-Bailey 1643.

A True RELATION OF THE Taking of Grafton house by the Parliament Forces, under
the command of Sergeant Major Skipton.
SIR,
I Thought good to relate unto you, the service lately performed here in these
parts. On Thursday night last, about eight a clock there was command given,
for a party of a thousand foot or thereabouts, to be ready to march the next
morning by two of the clock; whereupon they met at their Rendevouze at
Lathbury a mile here hence, where a brave parry of horse of our own, and
Colonel Norwiches met with us, and were our Van and Reare-gaurd, so we marched
with four pieces of Artillery toward Grafton Regis, six miles off from this
place, where we understood that our Enemies were enclosed in a strong house of
the Lady Craines, and the Church of the same Town: whereupon we faced it, and
leaving it on our right hand, we marched forward toward Toxiter, as though we
had been bound thitherward. But when we came within a mile of the said Town
of Toxiter, we met with a party of horse and foot that came from Northampton
for our assistance, under the command of Colonel Wettam, whereupon we faced
about, and the party of the Orange Regiment, which before brought up the Rear,
then marched in the Van, and Colonel Williams Forces followed in the Rear of
the party that came from Newport. But when we came within sight of the house,
the old soldiers of my Lords outmarcht, us, and gave the onset on the house
very courageously, and were as bravely answered, and by reason of the strength
of the walls, and well fortifying of the same, our Musketeers did them small
injury at that time; whereupon there were two of our pieces planted against the
house, and played upon it, but they did not much annoy them neither. On the
Saturday morning the Orange and Green Regiments relieved my Lords soldiers,
and when any advantage could be gained against our Enemies, we made use of it.
They within had very long pieces, and could reach us at a great distance. At
our guard we having found a convenient place to plant a piece, made use of it,
and beat down with our Sacre before Saturday night a breast work on the top of
the house, which had done us much annoyance, and also a window whereat they
shot out at us. On Sunday morning we were relieved by those Northampton forces,
under the command of Colonel Wettam, and about two hours after, he had the
guard, they within sounded a parley but through the eagerness of the Soldiers
the Drum, was shot, but not slain out right, whereupon they sent out a Trumpet
and had parley granted for half an hour, and after that another half hour,
so then they yielded themselves prisoners being in number ninescore and seven
besides Officers whereof Sir John Digby was chief, there was another Officer
of note viz. Major Brookbanck, and diverse Captains, some of them men of about
700 li, year a piece whose names are to me unknown. About two of the clock
on Sunday the soldiers entered the house, where they found great and rich
plunder, which they had for their pains; In the taking of this house we lost
about 20 men and had hurt 10, besides 9 that were hurt by our own powder, on
Christmas day before day, order was given to fire our huts which we had made in
the field, and for prevention of future inconveniences the house was fired
also, so we marched with our prisoners (guarded by those others forces that
asisted us) toward Newport, very weary by reason of the foulness of the
weather and deepenesse of the way, but praised be God we came safely thither,
where we now lie expecting relief every day, that we may come and rest our
selves. I thank God that neither my self nor any of my soldiers are hurt,
nor not one of our Regiment slain, notwithstanding we were in great danger and
hazard, I beseech God make us thankful for this preservation of us, there were
some that came to us on our guard as spectators, being a survayor of the
works, and a Captain of a Troop of Horse slain at one shot, and also a
Gunner that belonged to the Sacre, in our guard. I pray remember my love to my
neighbors, so with my best respect unto you, I rest.

Your loving friend and neighbor W. B.
Newport Pannell, 25 December. 1643.
Sir John Digby his demands.
SIR,
AS we are determined to carry our selves (...) men, and men of honor; so if
you will please to consent to conditions, fit for such we shall surrender this
place unto you.

The conditions we desire are these.
1. That we may march forth with our Arms, Horses, and Baggage, and as well
those that have not borne Arms, as those that have, may martch forth to
Oxford, in the aforesaid manner, without any violence to be offered, till they
arrive at Oxford, and have a safe conduct to Banbury.

2. That both the Soldiers, and the people of the house, may have two days
liberty after the surrender of the place, to carry away their goods, and the
Carts of the Country allowed them in, and the Soldiers may have six hours
liberty, and the house to remove Bag and Baggage, if you consent that this be
made good, by those that are here.

John Digby.

Major General Skiptons Answer.
1. To surrender all your persons Prisoners, and all Arms, Horses, Standards,
Colors, and all Provisions of War whatsoever, withal that is within the
house.

2. That you deliver all those Soldiers of ours, which have been taken
prisoners by you, and that if any of our Soldiers, Prisoners, taken by you,
have suffered in any sort by you, that your Soldiers shall expect the like
usage from me.

3. And these things being performed, I shall preserve and set at liberty, all
Women, Children, and such other persons as have not bin in arms against us.

4. And all these to be performed by you in one hour, or else present
advertisement within one quarter of an hour, after the delivery of these
Articles.

Philip Skipton.

The names of those that are taken prisoners, of the Horse.
Sir John Digby. Captain John Clerk. Lieutenant Longfield. Quartermaster
Doswell. Corporal Thorogood. Major Brookbanck. Captain Longfield.
Quartermaster Collenrigge. Corporal Haynes.
And 80 Troopers all with Swords, Pistols, and Carbins.

Prisoners taken of the Foot.
Captain Bullar. Lieutenant Wacham. Lieutenant Bigley. Two Ensigns, one
Ensign Owner.
Besides many other Gentlemen that came voluntarily:
Henry Ratcliffe. An Ensign Reformado. Archdeacon Beeley. Parson Crompton.
Parson Baning.
And 100 Foot Armed with muskets.

This is Printed according to Order.

FINIS.

