Samuelis Primitiae: OR, AN ESSAY TOWARD A METRICAL VERSION Of the whole BOOK
of Psalms.

Composed, when attended with the Disadvantagious circumstances of Youth, and
Sickness.

By Samuel Leigh.

1 Timothy 4.12. Let no Man Despise thy Youth.

Frueris quidem, etiam dum emendus,
Etiam dum componis,
Sen. Epis. 4. ad Luc. (...).

London, Printed by Tho. Milbourn for the Author, and are to be sold at the
Golden Lion in St. Pauls-Church-Yard, 1661.

To my most GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY
HOsanna's only we could once Aspire;
But now Sing Hallelujah's in the Quire.
The KING Returned, and with him Halcy'on days,
Turns mournful Elegies to Psalms of Praise.
Your Foes a Fall received, but You a Palm,
^n such a Juncture David penned a Psalm.
^en Royal Psalms (Dread Sir) to God your King;
You ours, and give Your Subjects leave to Sing.
^ee'l take our Harps, which on the Willowes hang,
Our KING in a strange Land, no Song we Sang.
^ardon (Great Prince) what is rudely here Compiled,
It Is not a Man presumes thus, but a Child.
S. L.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. TO MY Most Worthy, and much Honored Father-in-Law,
CHARLES POTTS, Esquire Son to Sir John Potts, Knight and Barronet.
Worthy Sir,
COnsulting with my self about this Libellulus, to whom I should Dedicate it,
(I concluded) to make Choice of such a Person as might ^e of Spotless
Innocence; so that in his captious Age, none should dare to ^harge him with the
least Offense, in lord, or Deed: For, justly fearing too ^^^y Faults might be
found in the Work (...) self, I desired to make some amends, (...) Dedicating
it to one free from Excep^^on, (and the rather to your self, Sir) because I
have received more Encouragement from you alone, than all men living besides.
And were I not confident, that you would somewhat bear with my Faults, I durst
not have Entitled you to this my Worthless Labor. I flourish, as if I would
say something, whereas I am indeed merely Ignorant, and acknowledge all Faults
to be my own Weakness, in undertaking so high, and pithy a Business: Yet
would I endeavor to show forth what God, out of his own Free Grace, has
bestowed upon,

Sir, Your most humble, obedient, and Thrice Affectionate Son and Servant,
Samuel Leigh*

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Kind Reader,
WHo e're thou art, that views this my poor Essays, despise them not, because
they are only the Fruits of some few hours, wherein I was detained from
School, (by bodily weakness) or for the Child-age of its Author, the Sun
having scarce run its Annual Race fifteen times, since first I viewed it; but
accept it in the Spirit that writ it, viz. Meekness, and Sincerity: I wish the
reading of it to those of mine own age, not as a Pattern, but in hopes they
will pass by my Weakness, and Remember Psalm 8.2. Out of the Mouths of Babes,
and Sucklings, the Lord ordains Strength; To whose protection he commits thee,

Who is thine in all well wishes Samuel Leigh.

I Have Perused this rendering of the Psalms in verse, and find it well done,
(so far as my leisure would give me leave to Read) and therefore cannot but
approve it, who ever had been the Author; but when I consider who is the
Author, I cannot but admire it; that a Gentleman so young, and who has not
yet passed the trivial School, should take off his mind from childish
vanities, and engage in a work so grave, and serious, and perform it with such
sharpness, is to me a wonder, and an hopeful presage, that in Riper years,
nothing, but what is Excellent, is to be expected from him.

This I testify by the Subscription of my Name. Thomas Manton, D.D.

BEing desired to View this Essay, the Version of the Psalms in Meeter, I have
(as my Occasions would Permit,) taken notice of some of them, and cannot but
highly commend the Ingenuity, and diligence of the young Gentleman, in this his
undertaking, wherein appears such Divine Breathings, as are not ordinary in
one of such tender years, and seem to be the first fruits of some further and
larger Atcheivements, wherein I should much rejoice, if he may be Encouraged

By the Subscription of Gabriel Sangar.

These to the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, and truly Virtuous LADY, THE LADY ANNE POTTS.
Madam,
I Have, according to your Order, Perused at length Mr. Samuel (your hopeful
Son's) Metrical Paraphrase of the whole Book of Psalms; which has struck me
into a twofold Admiration; one, of the Subject he chos'd to Treat of; that
leaving all Youthful and low Arguments, (suting most (as may be conceived) with
his present years) Eagle like, he soared aloft, and pitched upon a Theme
sublime and altogether Divine, discovering hereby a Spirit Angelical, rather
then Humane: The other is, his Ingenious, and also Ingenuous Expressions, void
of affectation in a matter so profound and deep. Madam, these first Fruits, in
years so tender, bespeak a plentiful Harvest of higher things for the future,
than he can undertake to name, Who is

Madam, Your Humbly Devoted Servant, Jo. Turing.
King street in Covent Garden, September the 3d. 1660.
TO THE Ingenuous Young Gentleman, the AUTHOR OF THIS METRICAL PARAPHRASE.
THe Hebrew Child (God's and the Virgin's Son)
Entered the Lists, when twice six Years had Run;
Gravel'd the Rabbis, 'maz'd the standers by,
And so Revealed his Veiled Divinity.
Even so, when Tender Years, and Youthful Brains,
Declining lighter Sports, engage their pains
To follow thoughtful Fancy, and to sease on
The Sacred Matters of Profounder Reason:
Judgment, with due proport'on, will incline,
To say they are Acted by a Sp'rit Divine.
Greenness of Youth, matters Sublimitie,
(Both thine) compared, we will say no less of Thee.
Go on, Brave Soul, Maugre Contempt, and Suit
Thy Vernal Blossoms with Autumnal Fruit.
G. H. M. A.

PSALM. I.
1 THe man is blessed, that does not walk, nor sit,
Nor stand in Sinners Way, nor God forget:
2 But in the Law of God does much delight,
And meditates therein, both Day and Night.
3 He shall be like a Tree by the River side,
Which brings forth Fruit in her due Time, and Tide:
Whose leaf shall never fade, nor fall; but still,
What ere he takes in hand, shall prosper well.
4 But with ungodly men, it is nothing so,
Like as the dust, so shall the wind them blow.
5 The wicked shall not then, in judgment rest,
Neither shall Sinners, but the Saints be blessed:
6 For why? the ways of Saints, the Lord does know;
But He the wicked quite shall overthrow.
PSALM. II.
1 WHy do the Heathen rage? what is in their brain,
To make such tumult, since it is all in vain?
2 The Kings, and Rulers of the earth conspire
Against the Lord, whom we ought to admire:
3 They say, let all their Laws, by us, be broke,
And of their doctrine, lets reject the yoke.
But he that in the heaven sits, does smile
At their own madness, who themselves beguile.
Then will the Lord the wicked turn away,
And in his fury, trouble them, and say;
Yet have I set my King on Sion, he
My will declares, and also, my decree:
For in this wise, the Lord to me did say,
Thou art my Son, whom I begot this day:
The heathen I Will thee give at thy request,
So shall all Nations be, by thee possessed:
Then shall thou break them with an Iron rod,
And as a Potters sherd, they shall be trod.
^0 Be wise therefore I say, O Kings, and hear;
^1 Serve ye the Lord, with trembling, and with fear.
12 See that ye kiss, and eke embrace his Son,
Lest in midway, ye perish e'r't be done,
When that his wrath is kindled never so small,
Blessed are they, make him their all, in all.
PSALM. III.
1 HOw are my foes increast, that vex me sore!
2 O Lord they say, thou can not me restore;
3 But thou O Lord, shall be to me instead,
Of Shield and Glory, thou lifts up my head.
4 I cried to God from Sion, he did hear,
5 I lay, and slept secured in his fear.
6 Ten thousand folks shall not make me afraid,
The Lord, he is my God, and eke, mine aid;
7 Save me therefore, O Lord, to thee I seek,
And smite mine Enemies upon the cheek;
8 Salvation does belong to God, above,
Who does bestow, upon his Saints, his love.
PSALM. IV.
1 O Lord, my God, give ear unto my call,
Who did me free, when I was worst of all;
Have mercy on me Lord, grant my request,
For unto thee, to cry, I will not rest:
2 O mortal men, how long will ye despise,
My Glory, me, and follow after lies?
3 Know ye that godly men, the Lord does choose,
If I complain, he will me not refuse.
4 Sin not therefore, examine well your heart,
And try if you, can you, your selves, convert:
5 Offer to God, the Sacrifice, therefore
Of righteousness, and trust him evermore:
6 The proudest men do worldly things embrace,
But Lord grant us thy favor and thy grace;
7 For thou thereby, shall make my heart the more
Rejoice, then those that get their corn in store;
8 I therefore will lie down, and sleep in peace,
For thou to do me good, wilt never cease.
PSALM. V.
1 GIve ear unto my words, O Lord, and hear
2 My cry, O Lord my God, and eke my prayer.
3 Hear me betimes O Lord, and not stay,
For to thee only, will I daily pray.
4 Through patience I will trust in God alone,
For wickedness with him there dwells none.
5 The foolish shall not stand in the Lords sight,
Neither shall those that do not walk upright.
6 Thou shall destroy those that do lying use;
The bloody man thou also wilt refuse.
7 Therefore I Will come, trusting upon thy grace,
Unto thy house and to thy holy place.
8 Lord lead me in thy righteousness, my foes,
For to destroy, and eke thy face disclose:
9 For in their mouths, there is no truth, their throat's
An open Sepulcher, their tongues are floates.
10 Destroy their false conspiracies to naught,
And them which also have rebellion wrought.
11 But those that put their trust in thee always,
Rejoice for their defense, and give thee praise.
12 For thou will, e're the Saints increase, and still
Like as a Shield protect them from all ill.
PSALM. VI.
1 LOrd in thy wrath, rebuke me not, for I,
Can never prosper in such misery.
2 For I am weak O Lord, therefore forbear
To slay me, for my bones are vexed with fear.
3 My Soul, O Lord, is also vex't full sore,
But Lord how long, e're thou will me restore?
4 Return unto my soul O Lord, and take
It up, unto thy felf, for thy Name sake.
5 For no dead men remembrance on thee have,
Neither have those that go into the grave.
6 So grievous is my moan, such are my fears,
That all the Night, I fill my bed with tears.
7 Mine eyes with grief do now begin to fade,
Against mine enemies Lord, be thou mine aid.
8 Ye workers of iniquity depart,
The Lord has heard the voice of my sad heart.
9 He also heard my prayer, and my request,
And did more for me, then can be expressed.
10 And those my foes, that vexed me before,
Lord put them now to shame, and vex them sore.
PSALM. VII.
1 O Lord my God, I put my trust in thee,
Save me from foes, and eke deliver me.
2 Lest like a Lion they my soul, do tear,
Which makes me daily full of dread and fear.
3 O God, if I have done what is not right,
Or that I be found guilty in thy sight:
4 Or if my quiet neighbor did molest,
Or did not save my foe with bondage pressed.
5 Then let my foes pursue my soul, and thrust
My life to earth, mine honor to the dust.
6 Rise up therefore, and put my foes to pain,
And then give ease to me, which wrong sustain.
7 Then shall great Nations know that by this thing,
Thou art their only God, and eke their King.
8 And as thou judge all, so Lord judge me,
According to mine own integrity.
9 Lord cease from wicked men, be thou the guide
Of Saints; for by thee, their own hearts are tried.
10 From God comes my defense, who saves the upright
11 Both Saints and Sinners, daily feel his might.
12 Except he change his mind, he will make fit
His Sword: he bends his bow, looks where to hit.
13 He has prepared his Darts, they will not stay;
But those which are his Enemies they will slay.
14 Lo, though they for their evil deeds contend
In travel, they will quickly come to end.
15 They dig a pit, thinking therein to set
Their brother, but are caught in their own Net.
16 Which wrong returned to him, in whom it bred;
And what mischief he wrought fell on his head.
17 I will therefore give thanks to God, on high,
And sing to him that judges righteously.
PSALM. VIII.
1 O Lord how wonderful thy works appear,
The fame thereof, surmounts the heavens clear.
2 Out of the mouth of babes, strength thou have made,
That they might make thine Enemies afraid.
3 And when the heavens, and thy works I see,
The Sun and Moon, and all in their degree:
4 Lord, what is man, I think, that thou do eye
Both him, and his wretched posterity:
5 For thou have made him also in degree,
Most like to Angels in their dignity.
6 Thou have preferred him to be Lord of all
Thy works, and that they should unto him fall.
7 As Sheep, Oxen, all beasts in field that feed;
8 Birds in the air, and Fish in Sea that breed:
9 Therefore will I say once again, what fame
Is to be given to thy glorious Name!
PSALM. IX.
1 MY heart O Lord, shall praise thy Holy Name,
And shall show forth thy works of wondrous fame.
2 I will be glad, and eke in thee rejoice:
I will sing praise to thee, Lord hear my voice.
3 When thou shall make my foes to flee from hence;
They shall all perish by omnipotence.
4 Thou have maintained my cause all with thy might,
Thou sat'st in throne to judge for me most right.
5 Thou did confound the heathen people so,
That the remembrance of them none shall know.
6 Thou have made quick dispatch with all my foes;
Thou'st burnt their town, and caused their fame to close.
7 But God for ever is, and he will be
In seat of Judgment, and true equity.
8 With Justice he will keep, and guide all those
That are unto his people friends, not foes.
9 He also will to those that are oppressed,
In time of need be their defense and rest.
10 And they that know thy Name shall trust in thee,
For their own safety and deliverie.
11 Sing Psalms to God, that does in Sion dwell,
And of his noble Acts all Nations tell:
12 For he is mindful of the blood of such
As be oppressed, remembering the humble much.
13 Have mercy on me Lord, my foes me hate,
It Is thee alone can keep me from deaths Gate.
14 I will in Sion then show forth thy praise,
And much rejoice in thee alone always.
15 The Heathen are sunck down into the pit,
Which they for others ever did make fit.
16 The Lord is known by his most just commands,
But wicked men are snared by their own hands.
17 The wicked shall be turned into Hell,
But pious men with God shall ever dwell.
18 Neither will God the needy man forget,
But in far better state he will him set.
19 Arise O Lord, lest worldlings with their might
Prevail, therefore Lord judge them in thy sight.
10 Put them in fear O Lord of thee, and then
They may well know they are not Gods, but men.
PSALM. X.
1 WHy keep thou so far from us? or why
hides thou thy face in our extremity?
2 The wicked's pride does persecute the poor,
But Lord do thou destroy the evil doer.
3 For in the lust of his own heart he does
Delight, he hates the poor, he loves sloth.
4 The wicked through his pride does wrong his soul,
In thinking thou his deeds would not control.
5 Because he prospers, he still follows lies,
Neglects thy Laws, puffs at his Enemies.
6 He says in his heart I never then shall be
Changed, nor come into adversity.
7 But in his mouth deceit and fraud does dwell,
Under his tongue breeds vanity and Hell.
8 He lies in holes, the innocent to slay,
And such as come thereby he makes away.
9 He like a Lion lurking in his Den,
To see if he can snare poor simple men.
10 He croucheth down most craftily always,
To make poor needy harmless ones his prey.
11 Thus says he in his heart, God does forget:
He does not mind whom I catch in my Net.
12 Rise up O Lord therefore, and do not rest,
From looking to the humble and the oppressed.
13 Why let'st thou wicked men thy Laws despise;
They scoff at thee, and evil do devise.
14 Thou see-est their deceit, thou understands:
The fatherless are left unto their hands.
13 Lord break the arms of wicked men, that so,
Both they, and theirs, into the pit may go.
16 The Lord is King, and by his powerful hand,
He shall destroy, the Heathen from his Land.
17 Lord thou have heard the humble man's request;
And what is fittest for him thou knows best.
18 Lord judge the poor, and help them to their right,
Which was took from them by the worldlings might.
PSALM. XI.
1 I Put my trust in God, what is your will?
To say; flee as a Bird unto your Hill.
2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, their art,
Is primely to ensnare the upright in heart:
3 The worlds foundations shall all come to naught:
But righteous men have never evil wrought
4 And God, which is most holy, and and most high,
Does look at all men in his Majesty.
5 He does in godly men take much delight:
But punish such as does his word despite.
6 Upon the wicked he will brimstone rain:
They shall all perish, there shall none remain.
7 So that ye see, his justice does delight
In holiness, h'embraceth the upright.
PSALM. XII.
1 HElp Lord, for godly men do now decay:
Both truth and faith, from sinners pass away.
2 Their words are vanity, or like a bubble:
Their lips do flatter, and their hearts are double.
3 The Lord will cut off such as not refuse
Their flatterings, but still do lying use.
4 For they have said, our lips they are our own:
We will prevail, over us there is none.
5 But for the needy's sake, God will arise,
And save the poor from all his Enemies.
6 Gods words are pure, as Silver they are tried;
They are like Gold seven times purified.
7 And since thy promise is to help, Lord then
Do thou us help, from this ill kind of men:
8 Lord, if thou leave sinners on every side,
Their wickedness will spread the world so wide.
PSALM. XIII.
1 HOw long will thou forget me Lord? or why
Hides thou thy self in my necessity?
2 In heart how long shall I tormented be?
And how long shall my foes triumph over me?
3 O Lord my God, consider me oppressed;
Lest with mine eyes, of death I be possessed.
4 Lest that mine enemies of me should say,
We have prevailed, and made him our prey.
5 But from thee, and thy mercies, I have made
My heart full merry, and my soul full glad.
6 I will sing praises to the Lord, for he
Has always bountifully dealt with me.
PSALM. VX.
1 THE Fool says in his heart, there is no God;
But Lord do thou correct him with thy Rod.
2 The Lord from heaven looked upon mankind,
To see who loved him, but he none could find.
3 They are all gone aside, they are become
Like dust upon the earth, or filthy scum.
4 What, are none good? do all work mischief still?
Eating thy people, rejecting thy will.
5 Whilst they thus rage, they shall have dread, for why?
God to the righteous race is very nigh.
6 Ye strive to shame the poor, because they call
Upon the Lord, and make him all in all.
7 But who shall hear thy people, unless thou
Perform thy promise to Isra-el now?
8 When thou brings back those that were captive led,
Then Jacob shall rejoice, Israel be glad.
PSALM. XV.
1 LORD who shall in thy Tabernacle dwell?
Or who shall live in thy most holy Hill?
2 The man that walks uprightly, and whose facts
Declare him to be just in all his acts.
3 He that backbiteth nor, nor works ill
Unto's neighbor, nor of him lies does tell.
4 That hates the vile, and honors the just,
His promise is most true, perform't he must:
5 Who puts not coin to use, nor ever took
Reward against Saints, he never shall be shook.
PSALM. XVI.
1 IN thee I put my trust, deliver me;
2 Thou art my God, my goodness cannot reach thee.
3 But to the Saints that on the earth do live,
And to the faithful I my goods do give:
Their griefs shall many be, who make not God
Their Lord, they shall be scourged with iron rod.
5 God is the port'on of mine inheritance,
If I him seek, he will me highl' advance.
6 The place my lot fell in, it did excel:
Mine heritage did please me very well.
7 I thank the Lord that caused me understand,
That rules me by his power, and his command.
8 The Lord's my God, him I will never forsake:
He Is at my right hand, I shall never shake.
9 My heart therefore is glad, and does rejoice;
My flesh does also love to hear thy voice.
10 For thou Lord wilt not leave my Soul in Hell,
Nor shall I always in corruption dwell.
11 Show me the paths of life, in thee are store
Of joys, and plea-sures, and for-e-ver-more.
PSALM. XVII.
1 GIve ear to me O Lord, hear me that pray,
From whose lips lies shall never make their way.
2 My sentence Lord it does proceed from thee,
Do thou therefore see my simplicity.
3 Thou have often tried me, but could never see
My tongue, and eke my mind to disagree.
4 From sinners works thou have preserved me, yet
5 T'uphold me in thy paths, do not forget.
6 I Have called on thee, for thou Lord wilt me hear;
And eke my voice, incline to me thine ear.
7 O God, to such as put their trust in thee,
Show forth thy strength against their Enemy.
8 Lord keep me as thine eye, from all their stings;
Hide me under the shadow of thy wings
9 From wicked men that me oppress, and those
That be mine Enemies, and eke thy Foes.
10 The are full of fat, pride and deceit, for they
11 Strive to ensnare me in their traps always;
12 Like as a Lion greedy of its prey.
And as her Whelps lie lurking, so do they.
13 Up Lord therefore, preserve me from my foes,
And smite thou them that do thy word oppose.
14 Deliver me Lord, by thy power, and then
I need not fear my foes, nor wicked men.
15 As for me, I Will behold thy glorious face,
And will be satisfied with thy Grace.
PSALM. XVIII.
1 I Love thee Lord, my Strength, for he is Just;
2 He is my all, in him is all my trust.
3 On God, who is most worthy, I will call;
He will me keep, from such as would my fall.
4 Death's sorrows commpass me, Lord be my aid;
And floods of wicked men make me afraid.
5 The Subtle Snares of Hell, round me were set,
And for my Death, there lay a deadly Net,
6 In my distress, I called the Lord, he hears
My voice, my cry enters into his ears.
7 Then was his power such, the earth did quake,
And the Foundations of the Hills did shake.
8 Smoke from his Nostrills came; from his mouth fire,
For to consume his foes, all in his ire.
9 The Lord came also from above, and he,
Did darkness cause, under his feet to be.
10 On Cherubs, and on Cherubins he rode,
Swiftly his windy wings he spread abroad.
11 Then like a Cave, dark was his secret place,
And his Pavilion, where he hid his face.
12 If you but see his brightness, you will admire,
Instead of clouds, comes hail and coals of fire.
13 He sets his Thunder down, both here and there,
Which brings upon his foes much dread and fear.
14 And at his threatenings, and his chiding cheer,
15 The springs, and the foun-da-ti-ons appear.
16 He from above sent down, that I might be
With him: from Sea he also plucked me.
17 He kept me from my foes, which were most strong:
Also from those that would have done me wrong.
18 They did prevent me, but God was my stay:
19 He took delight in me, and in my way,
20 As I was just, so he did me regard;
My hands were clean, and he did me reward.
21 For I did keep his ways, he knows my heart,
I never from him did wickedly depart.
22 I never put his Statutes far from me,
23 But walked upright from all iniquity.
24 Therefore the Lord has recompensed me right,
According to my cleanness in his sight.
25 Thou mercy to the merciful wilt show,
And eke the just, thy justice they shall know.
26 Unto the pure thou will be purity,
But with the froward thou wilt deal frowardly.
27 Thou Wilt save the afflicted man, but thou wilt bring down
High looks, thou also wilt upon them frown.
28 Thou Wilt make my candle show most clear and bright,
And bring me out of darkness into light.
29 For by thy help, I Troops discomfit shall,
And in thy strength I have leapt over a wall.
30 Gods ways are perfect, and his word most just,
He buckler is to those that in him trust.
31 For who is God? except the Lord, there is none;
So om-ni-po-tent as himself alone.
32 It Is God that girdeth me with his own strength,
And leaves me not till I be whole at length.
33 He made my feet as swift as Hindes in pace,
And for my safety set me in good place.
34 He did in order, make my hands to fight,
To break steel bows, he gave my arms the might.
35 Thou teach me; thy right hand is my Tower:
And love of thee, does still increase my power.
36 Thou'st made my feet most steadfast to remain:
37 I Have overtook my foes, and them I Have slain.
38 I so suppress my foes, they rise no more,
But at my feet they fall, I wound them sore.
39 For thou in Battle Lord have girded me
With strength, thou do subdue thine enemy.
40 Thou have also given me the neck of those
Which rise against me, and which were my foes.
41 They cried; but there was none that would them save;
Even to God, but he no answer gave.
42 I beat them small as dust before the wind,
And cast them out for ever, from my mind.
43 Thou keep'st me from such as with strife are led,
And over heathen make me to be head.
44 So soon as they me hear, they shall obey;
And strangers shall submit unto my way.
45 Strangers shall fade away, and be afraid,
46 But God does live, and blessed be mine aid.
47 For him it is, that gave me power to be
Revenged of my foe, and enemy.
48 That kept me from all warlike men, and those
That would have hurt me, and against me rose.
49 Therefore I thank thee, who are still the same,
Amongst the Heathen will I praise thy Name.
50 Thou gav'st unto thy King, of mercies store,
To David and his seed for ever-more.
PSALM. XIX.
1 THe Skies declare Gods Glory, and Commands;
The Firmament show forth the works of his hands.
2 Gods wondrous works both day and night appear;
3 Their language speaks to all that will them hear.
4 The same of them through all the world is run,
In them the Lord did also place the Sun.
5 Who as a Bridegroom does from's chamber rise,
As he that runs a race to get a prize.
6 In going forth, he rounds the world about,
Naught from his heat can hide, he will find it out.
7 The Law of God is perfect, and most sure,
It makes wise the simple and obscure.
8 Gods statutes make Men's hearts rejoice, for why?
Their just, and pure, enligh-te-ning the eye.
9 The fear of God for ever does endure,
His Judgments are most true, most just, most pure.
10 They are beyond the reach of any Money,
More sweet then honey combs, or then the honey.
11 By them I know, it is thee I must regard;
In keeping them, I shall have great reward.
12 what man is there that can his errors spy?
Then cleanse me Lord from mine iniquity.
13 And let me over sin get Victory,
That I from all offenses may be free.
14 Lord take my words and heart into thy sight;
Thou art my strength, do thou judge me aright.
PSALM. XX.
1 IN all adversity God hear thee still,
And Jacobs God defend thee from all ill;
2 And send thee help from his high Sanctuary:
3 And out of Sion, likewise strengthen thee:
4 Remembering thy offerings and sacrifice:
5 Granting thy will, fulfilling thy device.
6 We will rejoice in thee alone, and on
Thy Name we trust, grant our Petition.
7 The Lord will his Anointed only save,
And be his help, if help of him he crave.
8 In Charrets, and in Horses, some do trust,
But we will call on our God, who is most Just.
9 So we do rise, but they for ever fall:
Save Lord, and let the King hear us that call.
PSALM. XXI.
1 HOw joyful is the King; for in thy breast
He safely lies, and therein takes his rest:
2 For thou have given him his hearts desire,
And never withheld what he did once require.
3 And thou prevented'st him with manifold
Blessings, and set on's head a Crown of Gold.
4 He ask't thee life, him thou it never gainsaid,
5 But Majesty and Honor on him laid.
6 For ever thou have made me blessed to be:
I Am glad, when I thy countenance can see.
7 The King does trust in God, him he does love;
God is his stay, he therefore never shall move.
8 Thou shall stay them, that do thee once withstand,
And let them feel thy mighty power and hand.
9 As in an Oven, so burn them with Flame;
And in thy anger, put them all to shame.
10 Their fruit shall be destroyed, and even then,
Their seed may go from just and godly men.
11 For they of mischief muse against thy Name,
But have no power to execute the same.
12 Then as a mark, set them in open place,
And with thine arrows keen, hit them on face.
13 Exalt thy self, in strength, Lord, every hour,
And we will praises sing unto thy power.
PSALM. XXII.
1 My God, why do thou me forsake? or why
Helps thou me not in my extremity?
2 To thee O God, all day I cry and call;
And eke all night, yet hear'st thou not at all.
3 Thou art the joy of Is-ra-el for ever:
4 Our Parents trust thee, thou did them deliver.
5 They were delivered when to thee they cried;
They trusted in thee, and were not denied.
6 But now I am a worm, no man become,
Reproach to people, and their outcast scum.
7 All men that ere do meet me on my way,
Do grin and laugh at me. And thus they say:
8 This man did trust in God, but now we will see,
Whether he can from us, deliver thee.
9 God brought me from my mothers womb to rest,
And kept me whilst that I did suck her breast.
10 No sooner born, but I was cast on thee,
My God, thou proved a loving Lord to me.
11 Depart not from me in my present grief,
For in thy absence none can give releif.
12 There Is many Bulls which compassed me round;
Strong Bulls, whose food has been on Bashan ground.
13 They gape at me, as if they would me Slay,
Much like a Lion Roaring for his Prey.
14 I am like water shed, my bones do beat,
And I like wax do melt against any heat.
15 My strength like to a potters sherd does dry,
My tongue cleaves to my jaws, in dust I die.
16 Sinners, and Dogs, beset me in the street,
They with cursed hatred pierce my hands and see
17 I, like Anatomy, on me they stare,
When grief my flesh consumed, and bones lay bare.
18 My garments eke amongst them they divide,
My seamless coat who shall have, lots decide.
19 Be not far from me therefore, but make speed,
Thou art my strength, Lord help me in my need.
20 And from the Sword Lord, by thy mighty power,
Save me from dogs that would my soul devour.
21 From Lions eke do thou deliver me,
From horns of Unicornes, Lord set me free.
22 Unto my Brethren I Will declare thy Name,
And in thy Temple, I Will show forth thy Fame.
23 All that do fear the Lord, praise ye his Name;
Jacob and Isreal's seed do ye the same.
24 He hates not the poor, nor turns awry
His Countenance, but hearkeneth to their cry.
25 In midst of Saints, I will set forth thy praise,
And vows perform to thee behight always.
26 With plenty he shall satisfy the meek,
Their hearts shall live for ever, that him seek.
27 All coasts of the earth shall turn to thee for grace;
The heathens worship shall thy glorious face.
28 The heathens kingdom God shall have therefore,
And be their Governor for ever-more.
29 Those that be sat on earth, shall bow to thee;
To dust they go, from death none can be free.
30 A seed shall serve the Lord, so shall it be
Counted his own to all posterity.
31 His righteousness declares both all, and some
Unto a people that is yet to come.
PSALM. XXIII.
1 GOd is my Shepherd, I shall never need;
2 I drink sweet waters, in good ground I seed.
3 When I Am nigh lost, then home he does me take,
And lead me in his paths for his own sake.
4 Though I were at deaths door, I Will fear none ill,
For with thy staff thou comfortest me still.
5 Thou spread'st my head in presence of my foes,
Thou noint'st my table with oil, my cup over flows.
6 While breath does last, thy grace shall me defend,
And in thy house my life I Will ever spend.
PSALM. XXIV.
1 THe earth's the Lords, all store therein is his,
And eke the world, with those that therein is.
2 For he has founded it, it safely stands
On liquid waters. as if 'twere on Lands.
3 Gods Holy Hill into, who shall ascend
A sure inhabitant unto the end?
4 Whose heart, hands, life, are spotless and upright,
It Is such alone that are the Lords delight.
5 Such shall a blessing from the Lord obtain,
His righteousness with them shall ere remain.
6 This is the brood of them that seek thy face,
As Jacob did the Israelite in's race.
7 Open ye Gates, ye everlasting Gate,
The King let enter in his glorious State.
8 Who is this King? The strong and mighty God,
The mighty Lord in battle with his Rod.
9 Open your Gate, and everlasting Door,
And let him in, who entered before.
10 Who is this King? The Lord of hosts it is;
The Kingdom, and its Royalties are his.
PSALM XXV.
1 TO thee I lift my soul, in thee I trust,
2 Save me from shame or triumph of the unjust.
3 Let none that on thee wait, ashamed be;
Let them be shamed which work iniquity.
4 Show me thy ways, teach me thy paths in truth;
5 Thou God of my Salvation from my youth.
6 With tender mercies Lord do me behold,
And loving kindness which has been of old.
7 Remember not the sins of my youth, but take
Compassion on me for thy goodness sake.
8 God is upright, he will sinners teach the way;
9 The meek he will guide, if they upon him stay.
10 For mercy eke, and truth are all thy ways,
To such as keep thy Covenant all their days.
11 My sins are great, O Lord, set thou me free;
12 I fear, and trust, thy way to choose teach me.
13 His soul at ease shall dwell, his seed possess
14 The earth, who fears the Lord, reaps his goodness.
15 Mine eyes for ever toward God are set,
It Is he shall pluck my feet out of the Net.
16 Turn to me now, O Lord, and mercy show,
As to the afflicted thou were wont to do.
17 The troubles of my heart enlarged be,
Bring me forth of distress and misery.
18 M'affliction look on, and forgive my sin,
19 For foes to hate me without cause begin.
20 Keep thou my Soul, O Lord deliver me,
Nor let me be ashamed, I trust in thee.
21 Let just uprightness Lord preserve me ever;
22 I wait on thee, thy Is-ra-el deliver.
PSALM. XXVI.
1 JUdge me O Lord, for I have walked most just,
Therefore I shall never slide, in thee I trust.
2 Examine me, my heart, and eke reins try,
3 I Have walked in truth, thou were before mine eye.
4 I never haunt vain men, nor will I go
With the dissembler, he is my deadly foe:
5 The companies of wicked men I hate;
Nor sit with them, nor take them for my mate.
6 But will in innocence wash my hands,
And so embrace thine Alter, and Commands.
7 That I may publish with the voice of laud,
And tell of all thy wondrous works abroad.
8 Thine habitation Lord, how have I loved,
The place wherein thine honor dwell'th unmoved.
9 Reckon me not with sinners, men of blood,
10 Whose hands snatch bribes, filled full of all but good.
11 But I will walk in mine integrity;
Redeem, O Lord, and mercy show to me.
12 In Congregations I will praise thy grace,
So shall my foot stand steadfast in its place,
PSALM. XXVII.
1 THe Lord, he is my light, my health, my aid;
Whom shall I fear? of whom shall I be'fraid?
2 When that my foes against me began to brawl,
As if they would me eat, themselves did fall.
3 From whence this confidence to me does rise,
No war, nor hosts of men can me surprise.
4 One thing I do, O Lord, of thee desire,
Thy house to dwell in, and thy tents admire.
5 In time of dread, Lord thou will me secure,
In secret place upon a Rock most sure.
6 And now my head's advanced above my foes,
I Will sound thy Praises, and thy Acts disclose.
7 Hear Lord, when with my voice to thee I cry,
Have mercy on me, answer speedily.
^ When thy command to me, was, Seek my face,
My heart replied, Lord I will it embrace.
^ As if displeased, hide not thy face from me,
Thou wast my help, thou will my helper be.
^0 When parents me forsake, thou take care;
^1 My paths make plain, lest enemies m'insnare.
12 Preserve me from the fury of my foes,
who still with cruel slanders me oppose.
12 Fainted I had, unless believed to see,
In Land of th'living, Gods goodness to me.
14 Wait on the Lord, take courage and he will be,
Strength to thy heart, therefore on God wait ye.
PSALM. XXVIII.
1 O Lord my Rock, to thee I cry, be not
Thou silent, lest it pit I be forgot.
2 But hear my voice, when unto thee I cry,
With hands lift to thine Oracle on hie.
3 Draw thou me not, with wicked and pervert,
Who speak fair to their friends, but fraud in heart.
4 According to their deeds do them regard,
And as they wicked are, so them reward.
5 For God and eke his works, regard they never,
But he will destroy them and their seed for ever.
6 Blessed be the Lord therefore who lent an ear,
The voice of his Suppliant for to hear.
7 He is my strength, my shield, my hearts whole trust,
I helped am, him magnify I must.
8 The Lord's the strength of his Inheritance,
9 Thy people save, feed, bless, eke and advance.
PSALM. XXIX.
1 YE Rulers of the world, give to the Lord
2 Glory and strength, exalt him and his word.
3 His voice rules waters as himself does please;
Commands the thunder, governs the Seas.
4 Most powerful is his voice, he makes to fall,
5 The Cedar Trees of Lebanon most tall.
6 They skip like Calves or Unicorns also,
Le-ba-non, Si-ri-on, where born they grow.
7 The voice of God did flames from fire take,
8 And make the wilderness of Cadesh shake.
9 He makes Hindes Calve, and lay their fortress plain,
And in his Temple he is proclaimed by Man.
10 The Lord sits on floods, as King for ever;
11 He will give strength to's folk, and them deliver.
PSALM. XXX.
1 THou'st lift me up, therefore Lord I Will praise thee,
Nor have thou made my foes triumph over me.
2 My God, to thee I cried, thou did me heal;
3 Thou broughtst me from the grave, thou art my weal.
4 Sing to the Lord ye Saints, and eke give praise;
And in his memory rejoice always.
5 His anger, it endure may for a night,
The Morning shows his favors and delight.
6 When I enjoyed the world, I used to say,
I never shall smart, nor shall my wealth decay.
7 For thou O Lord did send me strength and aid,
But when thou hidst thy face I was afraid.
8 Therefore again O Lord, I cried to thee,
Show me thy face, and eke deliver me.
4 What gain is it, if thou destroy my days?
I said, shall dust show forth thy wondrous praise?
10 Wherefore my God, some pity I desire,
My soul do not forsake I thee require.
11 Then did thou turn my grief to cheerful voice,
Tookst off my sackcloth, made me to rejoice.
12 Wherefore my soul shall daily sing the praise
Of thee, my glory, and my God, always.
PSALM. XXXI.
1 LOrd let me not be ashamed, I trust in thee;
But in thy Righteousness deliver me.
2 Hear me O Lord; to help me make good speed,
And be thou my defense in time of need.
3 For you are my Rock, my fortress, do therefore
Lead me, and be my guide for ever-more:
4 Thou art my strength, then pluck me from that Net,
Which they for me most privily have set.
5 Into thine hand I give my soul as due,
For thou'st redeemed; you are my God most true.
6 Those that do lying vanities regard
I hate, and trust in thee alone O Lord.
7 In thee I will rejoice, thou will not see
My soul in trouble, nor adversity.
8 Nor did thou to my foes make me to come,
Thou have my feet placed in a most large room.
9 Some pity on me take, O Lord, mine eye
With grief's consumed, my soul with misery.
10 My life is spent with grief, with sighs my year;
My strength me fails, my bones consume with fear.
11 Amongst foes I am a scorn, friends are dismayed;
My neighbors when they see me, are afraid.
12 As men when once they are dead, are quite forgot;
Just so am I, or like a broken pot.
13 I Have heard much slander, fear was on each side,
When they conspired against me thou were my guide
14 For I in thee O Lord did put my trust:
I said thou were a God to me most just.
15 My times are in thine hands, deliver me,
From the hand of him which is mine Enemy.
16 Thy face to shine upon thy Servant make,
O Lord save me for thy sweet mercies sake.
17 Let me never be ashamed, on thee I call,
Put sinners to the shame, and make them fall.
18 Make dumb their lips which follow after lies,
And mischief do against th'upright devise.
19 How great's thy goodness laid up for them, then
Which fear and trust in thee; for the Sons of men
20 Thou shall in secret keep them, and them hide
From strife of tongues, and from the worldlings pride
21 Blessed be the Lord, who showed me all along,
Marvelous kindness in a City strong.
22 I said in haste, when I was much oppressed,
I was cut off, yet heardst thou my request.
23 Ye Saints love God, who does the faithful guide.
He Will give the proud according to their pride.
24 Be of good courage, for the Lord's most just,
He Will strengthen you, if you make him your trust.
PSALM. XXXII.
1 THe man is blessed, whom God forgives his sin,
2 Whose heart no guile, nor fraud, is found therein.
3 For whilst that I my sins kept close, my bones
Did waste away with daily plaints and moanes.
4 Both day and night, thy hand on me lay smart,
My moisture into dryness did convert.
5 Then to confess my fault, I did begin,
Thou did O Lord forgive me all my sin.
6 The humble man shall therefore pray to thee,
Floods shall not him destroy, he needs not flee.
7 When trouble once does compass me about,
Thou art my refuge, and do rid me out.
8 I will thee teach how thou shall walk aright,
And will thee guide, according to my sight.
9 Be not so ignorant as the Horse or Mule,
Whose mouth without a bit there is none can rule.
10 There shall much sorrow find the wicked out,
But God the righteous compasses about.
11 Be glad in God therefore, lift up your voice,
Y' upright in heart, and in him much rejoice.
PSALM XXXIII.
1 YE righteous in the Lord rejoice, for praise
Is comely to the upright in all their ways.
2 Praise ye the Lord with harp, and sing him things
Of pleasantness, with music of ten strings.
3 Play skilfully, sing him a song most new:
4 His words are all most pure, his works most true.
5 He loves right, and judgment with good will,
And with his goodness he the earth does fill.
6 For by his works alone were the heavens wrought,
And by his breath, the Hosts to pass were brought.
7 He gathers Seas on heaps, within the shore
He lays up the depth in house of store.
8 Let all the earth fear God, and let them all,
In awe of him be kept, and on him call.
9 He spoke, and it was done; he did Command;
The universe is perfect out of hand.
10 God brings to naught, those that do evil act,
He makes their device of none effect.
11 The Counsels of the Lord shall ^^and most pure,
His thoughts to all ge-ne-ra-ti-ons shall endure.
12 Blessed are all they, t'whom God their guide is known
Whom he does choose, he takes as his own.
13 The Lord looked down on men mortal by birth;
14 Considering the dwellers of the earth.
15 He fashioneth man's heart, and does it frame
Alone, he knows the working of the same.
16 A King of Hosts shall not be saved at length,
Nor shall a mighty man prevail by's strength.
17 An horse for safety is most vain, nor can
He by his strength deliver any man.
18 Behold the eyes of God, the just does aid,
With those that to offend him are afraid.
19 Their soul to death, in famine thou wilt never yield:
20 Our souls waits on thee, you are our only shield.
21 Our hearts in thee shall joy, still present be
22 With us, who daily put our trust in thee.
PSALM. XXXIV.
1 I Will bless the Lord for ever, and his praise,
Shall in my mouth continue all my days.
2 My soul shall make her boast of God my choice;
Th'umble shall hear thereof, and much rejoice.
3 O therefore, magnify with me the Lord,
And let us exalt his Name with one accord.
4 For I my self him sought, he lent an ear,
And did deliver me from all my fear.
5 Who does behold, shall see his light most clear;
They shall not be ashamed, nor need they fear.
6 This poor man, for relief, to God did cry;
He saved him from his trouble instantly.
7 Gods Angel does Encamp them round for ever,
That fear his Name, and he does them deliver.
8 O taste, and see that God is good and just,
Blessed is he, who makes him his trust.
9 Ye Saints fear ye the Lord, to him give ear,
For there is no want to them that do him fear.
10 The Lions young do rage, and suffer much;
But who fears God, no lack shall be to such.
11 Come children dear, unto my words give ear,
I will you teach how you the Lord shall fear.
12 That man that would lead long a blessed life,
13 Must keep his tongue from guile, his lips from strife.
14 From ill depart; do good, and peace pursue:
15 To such the Lord gives ear, they are still in's view.
16 Gods face is ever against the wicked train;
He cuts off those that should of them remain.
17 The Righteous cry, God does hear them ever;
Frees them from pain, and them he does deliver.
18 The Lord is nigh to such as contrite be;
The poor and meek also them (...) he.
19 The afflictions of the righteous many be;
But God from all of them do set him f^ee.
20 The Lord he does preserve their Sons always,
That none of them are broke, or do decay.
21 Sin shall the wicked slay; he that does hate
The righteous, shall be ever desolate.
22 The Lord redeems the Souls of his; nor shall
Those that make him their trust, be prone to fall.
PSALM. XXXV.
1 LOrd plead my cause with those that strive against me,
They sought to slay, but conquered are by thee.
2 Be thou my help; take hold on Spear, and Shield,
3 Against those that persecute me, win the Field,
4 Confound, and bring to shame mine enemies,
To hurt and wrong my Soul they still devise.
5 As chaff before wind, thine Angel still them chase,
6 And persecute them in dark slipry place.
7 For without cause, in pit they hid a Net,
To take my soul, which without cause they set.
8 At unawares let him be caught in thraul,
And in the Net he set for others, fall.
9 My soul thus saved, shall joyfully record,
And sound the wondrous praises of the Lord.
10 My bones shall say, Lord who is like to thee,
That poor thus say from their strong enemy.
11 False witness to my charge, lay things untrue,
Guilty would make me of what I never knew.
12 And for my good, they do reward me ill;
My soul disquieting, seeks it to spill.
13 But as for me, when they were sick, I mourned,
Clothed me in sackcloth, and my prayer returned
14 Upon my self, whilst I, like as a brother
Hung down my head, and mourned as for a mother.
15 But they rejoice in mine adversity,
In multitudes combining still against me.
Though I were ignorant, and did't not fear,
They cruelly ceas't not my flesh to tear.
16 With hypocritical feast-mockers they
Gnashed their teeth, as if they would me slay.
17 How long will thou look on, Lord rescue me?
From Dogs and Lions paws eke set me free.
18 In congregation great I Will praise thy Name,
And amongst much people I Will advance thy fame.
19 Let not my causeless foes have cause to see,
The day wherein they would triumph over me.
20 They speak not peace, but ever under hand,
mischief devise against the quiet of the land.
21 Their mouth they open wide at me, and say,
A ha, our eyes have seen it this our day.
22 This thou see, be not silent; nor from me,
23 But in thy justice wake, Lord set me free:
24 Judge me according to thy Righteousness:
Nor let my foes rejoice in my distress:
25 Let not them, in their hearts, insult and say,
So would we have it, ha he is made our prey.
26 Cloth them with shame, confusion, misery,
Who seek themselves against me to magnify.
27 But let them joy, that my just cause do love,
And sing aloud; exalt our God above,
Who does delight, and in himself, to see
His servants prosper in prosperity.
28 My Tongue it shall speak of thy righteousness,
And all my days thy praises shall express.
XXXVI.
1 THE transgression of the wicked tells to me,
From him he puts Gods fear; he will not see
2 Himself in his own eyes, he flatters still,
Whilst that his deeds be found hateful, and ill:
3 For in his mouth, sin and deceit does dwell;
Not wise, not good he does, his deeds do tell.
4 Upon his bed mischief he does devise,
Abhors not evil, does all good despise.
5 Thy mercy Lord reaches the Heavens hie,
Thy Faithfulness above the cloudy Sky.
6 Thy Righteousness, like Mountains; Truth, Seas deep;
For thou preservest man, and beasts does keep.
7 O Lord thy loving kindness does excel,
Therefore men trust under thy wings to dwell.
8 Thy houses fatness fills them to the brink,
Thy rivers pleasure in full draught they drink.
9 The fountain of life in thee alone does lie,
And in thy light a lasting light we spy.
10 To them that know the Lord, thy goodness show,
Thy righteousness to those in heart most true.
11 Let not the proud man's foot against me come,
Nor hands of wicked cause me quit my room.
12 There wicked are cast down, mine enemies
They Are fallen, and are not able to arise
PSALM. XXXVII.
1 BEcause of evil doers do not fret,
To envy wicked men do thou forget.
2 For as the grass cut down, they will fade away,
And as the herbs, they will wither and decay.
3 Trust in the Lord, do good, so shall thou dwell
In land of the living, and be fed full well.
4 Eke in the Lord delight, and then shall he,
What ere thy heart requesteth, give to thee.
5 Thy ways to God commit, and in him trust,
And he will acomplish thy desires just.
6 He will bring forth thy Righteousness in sight,
And thy just dealing, as the Noonday light.
7 Rest in the Lord, fret not, wait patiently,
Though they (...) prosper that wickedly.
1 From Anger, Wrath, and to do evil cease;
Fret not thy self, disturbing thy souls peace.
9 For evil doers shall in their demerit,
Be all destroyed, the just their land inherit.
10 For yet a little, and the wicked's gone,
Though thou them diligently seek, there is none.
11 As for the meek, they shall possess the land;
Delight in thee, none can their peace withstand.
12 The wicked plot, gnash teeth against the just:
13 God laugh's at him, for he to trial must
14 Though they draw sword, bend bow, and seek to slay
And to overthrow the just in their right way;
15 Their sword shall enter into their own heart,
Their bow be broken, to increase their smart.
16 A little that the Righteous has, is more
Then all the wicked's riches heapt up store.
17 Broken shall be the wicked's strength, and arms;
But God upholds the right'ous from all harms.
18 God knows the day of the upright, they shall
Enjoy Inheritance, perpetual.
19 Nor shall they be ashamed in the evil days,
But in the time of famine, eat and praise.
20 But wicked perish shall, Gods enemies;
As fat of Lambs consume, or smoke that flies.
21 The wicked borrow, but do not restore;
The righteous mercies reach unto the poor.
22 Such as be blessed of him, the earth shall herit;
Such as be cursed, cut off for their demerit.
23 A good man's steps, the Lord does order still;
His way delights in, saves him from ill.
24 And though he fall, he shall not quite decay,
For the hand of God, is his support and stay.
25 I have been young, am old, yet did never see
The just beg bread, nor his posterity.
26 He Is merciful, and lends, his seed is blessed:
27 Depart from ill; do good, and ever rest.
28 God judgment loves, his Saints he never forsakes;
But of the wickeds seed, no care he takes.
29. The just, the Land inherits dwells for ever:
30 His mouth speak wise, 's tongue does judgment deliver.
31 The Law of God is graven in his heart;
None of his steps shall slide, nor he depart.
32 The wicked watch the just, seek him to slay;
33 But God will not condemn, though him judge they.
34 On God wait, keep his way, he will exalt thee,
And wicked quite cut off, thine eye't shall see.
35 I Have seen the wicked in prosperity,
Spreading himself, much like a green bay tree:
36 Yet by he past; for lo, he was not sound;
I sought him, but he no where could be found.
37 The perfect man, then mark; behold the upright,
His end is peace, and glorious is his night.
38 Those that transgress, shall be destroyed together,
The wicked's ends shall be cut off for ever.
39 But of the Lord, the justs Salvation is,
In time of trouble, all their strength is his.
40 The Lord shall help, and eke deliver the just;
Them he shall save, because they in him trust.
PSALM. XXXVIII.
1 O Lord, in thy great wrath rebuke me not,
Nor chasten me in thy displeasure hot.
2 Thine arrows stick fast in me, they me goare;
Thine heavy hand oppresses me full sore.
3 Cause of thy wrath, my flesh it has therein,
No soundness, nor bones rest, 'cause of my sin.
4 For all my sins above my head are gone,
And too great burden makes me for to moan.
5 Cause of my folly, corrupt wounds smell strong,
6 I troubled am, bow down, mourn all day long.
7 My loins with sore disease have no whole part,
8 And I most feeble, roar, for grief of heart.
9 All my desires are before thee O Lord,
My groanings are not hid, thou heard'st my word.
10 My heart does pant, my strength it does me fail,
My sight is gone, my troubles so prevail.
11 My lovers, and my friends, keep from my sore,
My kinsmen alienate themselves therefore.
12 Who seeks my life, lays snares to do me wrong,
Mischeife they muse, deceit think all day long.
13 But as one deaf to them I lent none ear,
And as one dumb to speak I did forbear.
14 And as one deaf, whose mouth has no reproof
15 In thee, I hope thou wilt hear on my behoof.
16 I said, hear me, least they insulting, cry,
His foot now slips, our selves we will magnify.
17 I almost halt, my sorrows are before me,
18 I will declare my sins and griefs to thee.
19 But Enemies are lively, war most strong,
And they are multitudes that do me wrong.
20 And those that render ill for good to me,
They are my foes, 'cause I delight in thee.
21 Be thou not far from me, nor me forsake,
22 Thou God of my Salvation pity take.
PSALM. XXXIX.
1 I Will mind my ways, least that I sin, I said
Open my mouth, before wicked I Am afraid.
2 Made dumb with silence, so I held my peace,
Refrained good talk, but sorrows did increase.
3 Whilst I was musing thus, my inward flame
Moved my tongue to burst into this same:
4 Lord let me know my end, and length of life,
How frail I am, for to conclude this strife.
5 My life's a Span, mine age is naught before thee,
An hand breadth, less, nothing but vanity.
6 Thus man turmoils himself, in grief and pain,
Heaps riches up as shaddows, finds all vain.
7 Now Lord what wait I for? my hope's in thee,
8 From all my sins, and scorn of fools, me free.
9 Dumb, 'cause thou did it, I resolved to be;
10 Thy hand me slays, thy stroke remove from me.
11 When thou for sin rebukes man, in a day,
His Beauty like a Moth does fade away.
12 Regard my tears O Lord, and do me hear,
I stranger am, as all my Fathers were.
13 O spare me, that I may get strength, before
I do depart from hence, and be no more.
PSALM. XL.
1 I For the Lord did wait most patiently,
To me h' inclined an ear, he heard my cry,
2 From Pit of horror, and from miry clay,
He plucked my feet, on Rock 'stablish't my way.
3 To me he taught new Songs, to praise his name;
Those that see it, shall fear and do the same.
4 The man is blessed that makes God his trust,
Respects not proud, nor loves the unjust.
5 Much are thy thoughts, and works toward us done,
They can be told, or reckoned by none.
6 Thou'st g'ven me ears, no sacrifice required,
Sin and burnt offerings thou'st not desired.
7 Then said I, lo, I come to do thy will,
8 Thy law writ in my heart for to fulfill.
9 Taught of thy righteousness O God have I,
In Congregations great, I Will not deny.
10 Nor I from them thy faithful truth have hid,
Thy loving kindness still declare I did.
11 Hold not thy tender mercies Lord me fro,
Thy faithful loving kindness to me show.
12 Innumerable ills do me confound,
Mine iniquities have beset me round.
In number, they exceed the hairs of my head;
Therefore my heart me fails, I Am almost dead.
13 O Lord my God, therefore let it please thee,
In haste to help, and eke deliver me.
14 Shame, and confound those that seek my souls harm;
Destroy, o'^ethrow all such with thy strong arm.
15 Let them be desolate; reward of shame,
That scorning at me, cry, Ah, here is the game.
16 While such as fear thee, glad be, and rejoice;
And such as love thee, magnify their choice.
17 Poor, needy, though I am, God thinks on me;
He is my help, deliver Lord, haste thee.
PSALM. XLI.
1 Blessed man is he con-si-de-reth the poor;
The Lord delivers such from troubles sore.
2 He Will bless, preserve, keep him alive on earth,
Nor him give up to his foes will, or mirth.
3 When body's sick, the Lord's his strengh and aid:
Yea, his sick bed shall by his God be made.
4 Then said I, Lord be merciful to me,
And heal my soul, my sins they are against thee.
5 My foes do evil speak of me, and cry,
When shall we see him perish? when is Name die?
6 If me he visit, he speaks va-ni-tie;
His heart contracteth sin, abroad he will lie.
7 They that me hate, me hurt, and whisper still,
8 He Will now sure rise no more, 's diseased so ill.
9 Yea, my familiar friend, whom I did trust.
That ear my bread, his heel against me thrust.
10 But thou my Lord, be merciful to me,
And raise me to requite their cruelty.
11 By this I find I am beloved of thee,
When foes no cause have triumph over me.
12 To fall from truth, thou wilt me suffer never,
But set me still before thy face for ever.
13 The Lord of Is-ra-el be praised therefore,
Amen, Amen, say I, for evermore.
PSALM. XLII.
1 AS chasted Heart desires the water foard,
My thirsty soul longs after thee O Lord.
2 My soul for God the living Lord thirsts still,
It would appear before him, to know his will:
3 My tears have been my meat, both night, and day,
Whilst, where is thy God, upbraidingly they say.
4 My soul's poured out, when this I think upon,
For I with troops unto thy house have gone;
Even with the Me-lo-die of joy and praise,
As multitudes to God keep Holy Days.
5 Why then so sad my soul, disquieting me?
Trust God, his countenance shall set thee free.
6 O Lord, my soul does faint, to think upon
The land of Jordan, little hill Hermon.
7 Each wave of troubles to me calls another,
No sooner's one o're-past, but falls the other.
8 But thou wilt in day thy kindness show to me,
And in the night, thy song shall with me be.
It Is thee Lord of my life, that I will praise,
And eke my prayer shall tend to thee always.
9 I Will say, My rock, why forgettest thou me?
Why mourn I? cause the rage of mine enemy.
10 My foes reproach to me, is as a sword,
Whilst they thus say to me, where is thy Lord?
11 So sad my soul? why art dis-qui-e-ted?
Trust still in God, it shall be re-med'ed:
For I shall yet have cause to give him praise,
Who is my help, and so has been always.
PSALM. XLIII.
1 LOrd judge, and plead my cause, against men unjust,
From such alone me keep, thou art my trust.
2 Thou 'rt God of my strength, why do cast off me?
Why do I mourn? cause of mine enemy.
3 Thy light, and truth, send out to be my guide,
That I may tread thy paths, not step aside.
4 I Will go to God, then in exceeding joy,
And on my harp, O God, thee praise will I.
5 Why art so sad my soul? me wearying?
Trust thou in God, he shall thee freedom bring;
For I to God will always give thee praise,
Who now is my health, and has been all my days.
PSALM. XLIV.
1 We Have heard O God, our Fathers eke us told,
What in their days thou did, in times of old.
2 How thou drov'st out the heathen with thine hand,
Planting our fathers in the peoples land.
3 They got not by their sword, or strength, but by
The Arm, and Grace, of him who is most high.
4 Thou art my King, help Jacob sundry wise;
5 And through thy strength we will slay those against us rise.
6 I Will not trust bow, nor can my sword me save,
7 Thou keep us from foes, put'st them in grave:
8 In God we boast, and praise his Name for ever,
9 Yet he rejects, and does not us deliver.
10 Thou made us before our foes to flee,
And spoild'st our goods, even for our enemy.
11 Thou'st given us up like sheep ordained for meat,
Us set before Heathen, that they might us eat,
12 Thou'st sold thy people, as a thing worth naught;
No gain or profit thou thereby have sought:
13 To friends, thou make us a laughing stock,
Those that are round about us, at us mock.
14 A byword amongst heathen they me do make;
When they me see, their heads at me they shake.
15 I shamed am to hear those wicked men,
And blush, my face with red is cov'red then:
16 For why? we heard such blasphemies, and lies,
That death it is, to hear their wrongs or cries.
17 This falls on us, yet we never forget thee,
Nor falsely break thy Covenant did we.
18 Our hearts are not turned back, neither I say,
Have our steeps declined from thy way.
19 Thou'st trod me down in place where Dragons be,
Nor from the shade of death have set me free.
20 If we forget God, and an Idol choose;
21 Thou know our thoughts, us justly may refuse.
22 Thus all day long we^r killed for thy sake,
As sheep for slaughter, enemies us take.
23 Sleep not O Lord therefore, but wake; arise,
And cast us not for ever from thine eyes
24 Wherefore do hide thy face from us? or why
Do us forget in our great misery?
25 Our soul's bowed down, our belly cleaves to dust;
26 For thine own sake, us help, in thee we trust.
PSALM. XLV.
1 MY heart good matters of the King indites,
My tongue's the peen, and readily it writes.
2 Thy gracious lips, and beauty men exceeds,
God therefore blesses thee in all thy deeds.
3 Most mighty God, thy sword gird on thy thigh,
With thy great glory, and thy majesty.
4 Triumphant ride with truth, meekness, and right,
Thine hand thee teach, matters of dreadful might.
5 Thy darts most keen, in the hearts of the Kings foes be,
Whereby the people fall, and worship thee.
6 The Throne O God of truth, is thine, therefore
Thy Scepter shall endure for evermore.
7 Thou love the good, but still the evil hates,
God thee anoints with gladness 'bove thy mates.
8 Thy vesture's rich perfumed, in which you are clad,
Ivory thy Palace is to make thee glad.
9 Kings Daughters thine attendants there were seen,
At thy right hand stands the glo-rious Queen.
10 Daughter hearken, and con-si-der well,
Forsake thy fathers house where thou did dwell:
11 So shall thy beauty greatly please the King,
He is thy God, him worship in each thing.
12 Then shall his Daughter gifts to thee present;
Th'rich seek thy favor with their whole intent.
13 Most rich within's the Daughter of the King,
Like burnish't gold of Ophyr's her clothing.
14 Thus comes She to the King, in Robes all wrought,
And Virgins her com-pa-ni-ons shall be brought.
15 With gladness and rejoicing on each side,
Into the Kings great Palace to abide.
16 Instead of Parents lost, O Queen, thou wilt see,
Thy Sons to reign on earth, and Princes be.
17 Lord, ever shall remembered be thy Name,
And eke all ages shall adore the same.
PSALM. XLVI.
1 THe Lords our refuge, strength, in time of grief,
A very present help to give relief.
2 Then fear not, though Earth move, and Mountains great,
Be tossed into the Sea, as to their seat.
3 Though that her waters troubled be, and roar,
Though Mountains shake eke at her swething over.
4 For there is a River streams, whereof make glad
Gods City, Holy Place, none need be sad.
5 He Is in the midst of her, naught move her shall,
God is her help, when e're on him she will call.
6 The waters raged, Kingdoms moved were,
God utters his voice, they melt with fear.
7 The Lord of Hosts is with us, for he still
Our refuge is, defends us from all ill.
8 Behold here what great works the Lord has wrought,
The earths in-ha-bi-tants he brings to naught.
9 Her wars make cease, and break her Spears in sunder,
The Charriots burns, thus are they all brought under.
10 Be silent; know I Am God, and it is my will,
Over heathen folk to be exalted still.
11 The Lord of Hosts is with us, and it is he
Will be our refuge in extremity.
PSALM. XLVII.
1 O Clap your hands all people, and rejoice;
Shout unto God with a triumphing voice:
2 For High is God, and dreadful are his deeds;
He Is great on earth, there is none that him exceeds.
3 He shall subdue the folk under us all,
And Nations cause under our feet to fall.
4 He our in-he-ri-tance for us shall choose,
Jacobs excellency he will not refuse.
5 God with a shout ascended up on high,
With trumpets sound he enters the Sky.
6 Sing praises unto God, and to our King;
7 He rules the earth, all praises to him sing.
8 He rules over Heathen, and sits in his throne;
9 The Princes of the people joined each one
To Ab^a^^s God, who is exalted high,
That he might keep them safe continually.
PSALM. XLVIII.
1 GReat is the Lord, greatly to be praised still,
In City of our God, on's Holy Hill.
2 Mount Sion is the joy of all the Lands,
The Kings great City on the North side stands.
3 God's in her Palaces a refuge known;
4 For lo, the Kings assembled were each one.
5 They saw it, and with wonder filled were they;
They troubled were, and hasted fast away.
6 Great terror on them fell, which made them look,
As women do in travel that are took.
7 And with an eastern wind Lord, thou have broke
The Ships of Tarshish with a heavy stroke.
8 As we have heard, we have seen Lord, thou will never,
Thy City leave, but 'stablish it for ever.
9 Lord of thy loving kindness we have thought,
As midst thy temple where thou us have taught:
10 Like to thy Name for ever is thy praise,
In righteousness thy right hand acts always.
11 Let Sions mount, and Judah praises sing,
'Cause of the righteous judgments of their King.
12 Round Sion walk, do thou Her Towers count,
That thou may know to how many they amount.
13 Her Bullwarks, and her Courts, consider well.
That following generations thou may tell.
14 For this God evermore, our God is he,
And he our guide even unto death shall be.
PSALM. XLIX.
1 ALL people in the earth of this consider,
2 Both high and low, both rich and poor together*
3 For why? my mouth of wisdom it shall speak,
And eke my heart int' understanding break.
4 To parables incline mine ear, I will,
And open my dark Speech on Harp with skill
5 In evil days: then wherefore should I fear,
When 'bout my feet, mine iniquities were.
6 They that in multitudes of wealth trust most,
And in themselves do of their riches boast:
7 There is not one of them that that can redeem
His brother, or give God fit price for him.
8 It Is too great price to pay, none it can have,
9 That he should longer live, not go to grave.
10 He, Wise, and Fools sees subject to the event
Of death; when dead, strangers possess their rent.
11 They think their houses stand for ever shall,
Therefore their Lands after their names they call:
12 Yet shall not man in honor always stay,
But like the beasts soon perish, and decay.
13 And this their way, their folly is, and yet,
Posterity of what they say think fit.
14 Death on them feeds, like Sheep they lie in grave,
Their beauties fade, the just rule over them have.
15 But God he will redeem my Soul from pain,
And to himself, he will me receive again.
16 Fear not when man's great riches does increase,
17 They Will all forsake him when he does decease.
18 Yet living, he does bless himself in's deeds,
Whilst others likewise him with flattery feeds.
19 Be gathered to his people then he must,
Light never more to see, but sleep in dust.
20 Man in's honor, and knows not how't increast,
May be compared to the de-cay-ing beast.
PSALM. L.
1 THE mighty God even all the world does call,
From the rising of the Sun, unto its fall.
2 And out of Sion, which God loves best,
He will perfection shine, above the rest.
2 Devouring fire, before him you may see,
And round 'bout him it shall tempestious be.
4 To earth and heaven 'bove then call shall he,
That he may judge his folk in equity.
5 Thy Saints together to me gather now,
Those that are mine, by Sacrifice, and vow.
6 The heavens shall his righteousness declare,
For by himself all Creatures judged are.
7 Hearken my people, and Israel to me,
I Am God, thy God, I testify to thee.
8 I blame thee not, for want of sacrifice,
Or daily offerings before mine eyes.
9 Bullock, or Goat, I need not take that is thine,
10 For all the beast on thousand hills are mine.
11 All fowls on mountains, they by me are known,
All beast in field that feed, eke be mine own.
12 I would not tell thee, though I hungry were;
The world is mine, and all the fullness there.
13 Eat flesh of Bulls, drink blood of Goats will I?
14 Offer thanksgiving, pay thy vows on high.
15 Then call on me in troubles when ye be,
And I will help, then glorify thou me.
16 To wicked men says God, how is it you dare,
My words take in your mouth, Statutes declare.
17 Since me, and mine instruction thou do hate,
My word behind thee casts, as out of date.
81 For when thou saw a thief, thou with him went,
And with Adulterers gav'st thy consent:
19 Thou giv'st thy mouth to ill, art void of shame,
Thy tongue both fraud, and eke deceit does frame.
20 Thou sit'st and speak against thy brother dear,
To slander mothers Son, thou do not fear:
21 Cause I kept silence, these things have thou done,
Like to thy self, thou judge me such one.
But I Will reprove thee for thy deeds so base,
And them in order set before thy face.
22 Who forgets God, consider this for ever,
Lest I you tear, when none can you deliver.
23 He offers praise, that glorifies the Lord,
He Will bless in safety him that loves his word.
PSALM. LI.
1 HAve mercy Lord, some pity on me take;
Blot out my sins, for thy sweet mercies sake.
2 To wash me thoroughly, Lord do thou begin,
And drench me from my trespasses and sin.
3 Mine iniquities I confess to thee,
My sin before me is, Lord set me free.
4 I Have done this ill against thee, and in thy sight,
If thou me do condemn, thou do but right.
5 Behold, my mother me conceived in sin,
And I have ever since remained therein.
6 But thou desire truth in the inward part,
Therefore thou wisdom sends me to convert.
7 Purge me with Hysop, and I clean shall be,
Whiter then Snow, if thou will but wash me.
8 Make me in gladness Lord, to hear thy voice,
That the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.
9 Lord from my sins do thou turn back thy face,
And my transgressions blot from out their place,
10 Create in me, a heart most clean and true,
And in me Lord a Spirit right renew.
11 And from thy presence Lord take thou not me,
Nor let thy Spirit taken from me be.
12 Give unto me those joys which are in thee,
And eke uphold me with thy Spirit free.
13 Thus then will I transgressors teach thy heart,
And sinners shall to thee O Lord convert.
14 From guilty blood do thou, Lord, me deliver,
My tongue then shall thy Justice praise for ever.
15 Do thou O Lord open my lips always,
My mouth shall then show forth thy wondrous praise.
16 Thou love not sacrifice, else should it have,
Nor do burnt of-fe-rings of me e're crave.
17 A broken Spirit is Gods Sacrifice,
A contrite heart he never does despise.
18 Do good O Lord on thy most Holy Hill,
Build thou the Walls of Je-ru-sa-lem still.
19 Thou will our offerings accept I say,
Yea, Calves we will upon thine Altar lay.
PSALM. LII.
1 WHy boast'st in mischief mighty man, it is sure,
The goodness of the Lord shall e're endure.
2 Thy tongue like Rasors sharp mischief devise,
Working deceitfully, and forging lies.
3 Thou love not good, but thou preferrest ill,
Falsehood before truth, eke thou advances still.
4 Thou do delight in fraud deceit and wrong,
O thou deceitful and mischievous tongue.
5 God shall destroy thee from thy dwelling place,
Both thee, and eke thy seed, he will deface.
6 The just they will see thy fall, with fear, the Lord
They Will praise, and laugh at thee with one accord.
7 See him that would not take God for's defense,
Made goods, his God; was ruled by corrupt sense:
8 In the house of God I Am like green Olive Tree,
In God I trust, he does deliver me.
9 For this therefore I Will praise thee with my voice,
Set forth thy Name wherein the Saints rejoice.
PSALM. LIII.
1 THe fool in's heart, has said, a God there is none,
Corrupt are they, good works they'v done not one
2 God looks to earth, on ^ons of men to see,
If any loved him in sincerity.
3 They Are all corrupt, and fallen out of the way,
There Is none of them does good, not one I say.
4 Do not the wicked know, they feed on all
My folk, as bread; nor do they on me call.
5 There were they in great fear, and much dismayed,
Whereas there was no cause to be afraid;
His bones that thee beseig'd are flung abroad,
They are consumed, and cast off by God.
6 Give thou the people health, O Lord, fulfill
Thy Vow to Israel, made on Sion hill:
When God brings back his, that were captive led,
Then Jacob shall rejoice, Israel be glad.
PSALM. LIVE.
1 THy strength me judge, me save, thy name O Lord
2 Unto my words give ear, my prayer regard.
3 Strangers against me rise, and vex me still,
Regard not God, but seek my soul to spill.
4 But lo the Lord mine helper is, and aid,
Upholds my soul, nor lets me be afraid.
5 With ill, repay all those that for me wait,
Destroy my foes, that for me lay a bait.
6 I freely sacrifice then to thee will,
And praise thy Name, therein is comfort still.
7 He keeps me from those, that against me conspire;
Upon my foes mine eye has seen's desire.
PSALM. LV.
O Lord my God, give ear to me that pray,
Nor from my supplications turn away.
2 Attend to me O Lord, and hear my voice,
My prayer so mournful is, I cannot rejoice.
3 'Cause of the cruelty, and noise of those,
Who blemish me, and are my mortal foes.
4 My heart within me Lord, is pained much,
The deadly terrors fallen on me are such:
5 The terrors fallen on me, make me afraid,
With horrors over whelmed I Am sore dismayed.
6 O that I Would dove-like wings, I did then say,
Then could I be at rest, by flight away.
7 I Will wander far, and in desert remain;
8 And hasten my escape from storms and pain.
9 Destroy O Lord, and eke divide their tongue,
For I in their City, have seen much wrong.
10 Both day and night, these go about the wall,
Mischeif's in the midst, and sorrows eke withal,
11 Guile and deceit, in midst thereof do meet,
Nor wickedness departs from her street.
12 If foes should me reproach; I would't abide,
And from him I my self could safely hide.
13 But thee it was, which friendship did pretend,
14 And to Gods house thou went with me a friend.
15 Let death them take, let them go quick to hell,
Evil's with them, in wickedness they dwell.
16 As for me, I upon my God will call,
And he will save me, from my troubles all.
17 Morning and noon, I Will pray, and eke rejoice,
And cry aloud, for he will hear my voice.
18 My soul in peace he will keep, from wars against me,
Though Adversaries join, and many be.
19 The Lord that reigns both now and evermore,
When I complain, he will punish them full sore.
20 His Covenant of peace, they have forgot,
And those that wish their good, they value not.
21 Smoother then oil, or butter, were their words;
Their hearts conceives war, and cuts like swords.
22 Cast thou thy care on God, he will thee sustain,
Nor shall the just in troubles long remain.
23 The bloody man, the Lord shall cast always
In pit, nor shall he live out half his days.
But I O Lord in thee will ever trust,
For thou art unto me a God most just.
PSALM. LVI.
1 O Lord my God, be merciful to me,
Lest by mine enemies consumed I be.
2 To wallow me O Lord, they take delight,
And many be, which do against me fight.
3 O Lord my God, when that I am afraid,
I Will trust in thee alone, who art my aid.
4 O Lord thy word I Will praise, and trust in thee,
Nor will I fear what flesh can do to me.
5 What I e're spoke, they rest my words at will,
And all their thoughts do work against me for ill:
6 Themselves they hide most close, and for me wait;
They mark my steps, and for my soul lay bait.
7 Shall they in mischief escape? Lord on them frown,
And in thine anger, cast these people down.
8 Thou tel'st my flights, and on my tears do look,
Keep them in glass, and write them in a book.
9 My foes turn back, when that I cry to thee,
And by this same I see thou love me.
10 God and his word I Will praise, and trust mine aid;
11 What man can do to me, I Am not afraid.
12 O Lord my God, thy vows are upon me,
And I will daily render praise to thee.
13 My soul defend from death, keep feet upright,
That I may walk with such as live in light.
PSALM. LVII.
1 TAke pity on me, keep my soul in rest,
Thy wings my guard, whilst ill from me be past.
2 I Will call on God, my God who is most high,
To him, that gives me all things, will I cry.
3 From heaven he will send me safe from those,
With mercy, truth, who are my deadly foes.
4 My soul with Lions is, all set on ire,
I live with such as fret like flames of fire.
5 Their teeth like spears, and arrows I have seen,
Their tongue is sharper than a sword most keen.
5 Exalt thy self above the Heavens clear,
And let thy glory 'bove the earth appear.
6 They for my steps prepared, have a net,
My soul's bowed down, in pit they would me set:
They thought they could me catch in their own pit,
But they themselves are fallen in midst of it.
7 My heart is fixed O Lord in thee always,
In thee it is fixed, and 't shall sing forth thy praise.
8 Awake my joy, my lute, lets hear thy voice,
For I my self will wake, and eke rejoice:
9 Among people Lord to the I Will praises bring,
Amongst all nations I to thee will sing.
10 Thy mercies to the Heavens do extend,
Thy truth does go from one cloud to the end.
11 Above the Heavens Lord exalted be
Thy glory, also 'bove the earth lets see.
PSALM. LVIII.
1 YE Rulers put in trust, do ye judge right,
Are all your judgments just, even in Gods sight.
2 In heart ye muse to mischief, and consent,
Where ye should justice eye, to bribes ye'r bent.
3 The wicked from the womb, they follow lies,
So soon as born, they mischief do devise.
4 Poison in them, like serpents, does appear,
They Are like deaf adders, which do stop their ear.
5 Because they would not hear a charmers voice,
Though others he did much excel in choice.
6 Break thou their teeth, within their mouths so strong,
Which are like tushes of a Lion young.
7 Like water then, let all of them decay,
His dart he shoots, let them be broke by the way.
8 As snailes that waste, and unto slime do run,
Like one untimely born, that n're saw the sun.
9 Before young thorns, to bushes big do grow,
Gods wrathful storms shall take them ere they know
10 That God does vengeance take it. shall do the just good,
And they shall wash their feet in the wickeds blood.
11 Then shall they say, God does good men reward,
He Is God on earth that justice does regard.
PSALM. LIX.
1 KEep me O Lord from all mine enemies,
And me defend from those that against me rise,
2 Deliver me from those, work things not good,
And eke preserve me from all men of blood.
3 For lo, they for my Soul in wait do lie,
Nor wrong, nor ill against them e're make did I.
4 Themselves they fit, though I them never offend;
Wake, help me Lord, and see what they intend.
5 Then Lord of hosts of Is-ra-el arise,
And smite all those that mischief still devise.
6 Th'at night return, like dogs that go about,
From place, to place, the City quite throughout.
7 They belch, their lips are Swords, they nothing fear,
For what say they, there is none our words can hear:
8 But thou O Lord, make them a laughing stock,
The Heathen folk deride, and at them mock.
9 The strength I have against foes, all comes from thee
My God, thou art a sure defense to me.
10 The God of mercy he shall let me see,
Mine own desire upon mine enemy.
11 Destroy them not, lest that my folk forget,
But scatter them, and in a pit them set.
10 For their ill words confound them in their pride;
Their lies, and oaths, let all the world deride.
13 Consume them in thy wrath, let them not be;
That Jacobs God does rule, let all men see.
14 At noon they run apace, like dogs they cry,
Throughout the street they run about, and spy.
15 Lord let them wander up and down for meat,
And grudge 'cause they can nothing find to eat.
16 But I Will show forth thy strength, thy goodness praise.
For thou art my defense in all assaies.
17 Thou art my strength O God, I Will sing to thee,
The God of my defense thou wilt ever be.
PSALM. LX.
^ O God thou'st cast us off, but turn again;
Be not displeased, but with us remain.
^ The earth thou'st broken, and made it to quake,
Restore her breaches for she now does shake.
^ Thou'st shown hard things to people that are thine,
Thou'st made them drink a deadly cup of wine:
^ Thou'st g'ven to them a banner that fear thee,
Because of truth that 't may displayed be.
^ So that thy might may keep such as thee fear,
That they may have thy help, this of me hear.
^ I will rejoice, God spoke in's holy place,
Sichem, and Succoths, he will divide by pace.
^ Gilead is mine, Manasses mine beside;
Ephraim's mine head, my law does Judah guide.
8 In Mo'b I Will wash, over Edom make shoe flee;
Philistine triumph thou because of me.
9 Who will me bring into the City strong?
To Edom guide me, lest I go a wrong.
10 Wilt not, which haste forsook us, and our Coasts,
And would not take into thine hand our hosts.
11 Give us thy help from those that us disdain;
The help that man can give us, is but vain.
12 Through God our Lord, we shall do valliantly,
It Is he alone treads down our enemy.
PSALM. LXI.
1 O Lord my God, I make my prayer to thee,
To me give ear, from trouble eke me free.
2 When that my heart's overwhelmed, to thee I Will cry,
Lead me unto the rock that is most high;
3 For thou have been to me a shelter strong,
A Tower from those that would have done me wrong.
4 In thine own house I ever will endure,
Under thy wings I trust, to be secure,
5 For thou have heard my vows; fulfill the same
With gifts, reward all those that fear thy Name.
6 Full long the King in life, thou will maintain,
From age to age, o shall endure his reign.
7 He shall abide before the Lord for ever,
Get truth and mercy, which may him deliver.
8 So will I praises sing unto thy Name,
I Will pay my vows, and eke fulfill the same.
PSALM. LXII.
1 MY soul on God alone thou shall attend,
For why? my hope in him does whole depend.
2 He is my rock, defense, and eke my aid,
There Is no pretense shall make me much afraid.
3 Ye wicked that do mischief use, shall fall,
Like rotten fence ye be, or tot'ring wall.
4 Whom God does love, ye seek to put to the worst,
Ye lie, with mouth, he is praised, with heart he is cursed
5 My soul wait thou on God I thee desire,
He Will give to thee, what thy heart shall require.
6 He only is my Rock and my defense;
If I him trust, I nere shall move from thence.
7 My safety is in God, my glory eke,
Rock of my strength, defense if I him seek.
8 Trust him always, ye folk with one accord,
Pour out your hearts, and say this is our Lord.
9 The Sons of men are found in balance light,
Like things most vain they are of little weight.
10 Trust not in wrong, become not vain in stealth,
Though you wax rich, set not your heart on wealth.
11 God once has spoke it; twice to mind I call,
That power unto him belongs all.
12 Thou also Lord in mercy do exceed,
And rendrest man according to his deed.
PSALM. LXIII.
1 O Lord my God, seek thee betimes will I,
My Soul thirsts after thee in Land most dry.
2 Thy power, and thy glory, eke to see,
So as in Sanctuary I Have seen thee.
3 Because thy love surmounteth many days,
My lips therefore shall give to thee due praise.
4 Thus will I praise thee while I live, I will
Lift up my hands in prayer unto thee still.
5 My soul is filled with thee, as fat most sweet,
My mouth shall sing such songs as are most meet.
6 When as in bed I meditate on thee,
7 The shadow of thy wings deliver me.
8 My soul sticks close to thee, thy hand's my stay,
9 Who seeks my soul to spill, do thou them slay.
10 Th'sword shall them slay, men on their flesh shall feed,
The Foxes which do seek their prey at need.
11 The King shall rejoice, that does profess Gods word,
And liars mouths be stopped, and slain with sword.
PSALM. LXIV.
1 LOrd to my voice give ear, hear me that pray,
And me defend from those that would me slay.
2 Hide me from those that in deceit do lurk,
And eke from those, iniquity that work.
3 Who whet their tongues, like as men whet their swords,
And bend their bows to shoot their bitter words.
4 That they may hit in secret place, the just;
They quickly shoot at him, no God they trust.
5 In wicked works they have decreed, and say,
Let Us use deceit, there is none dare bid us nay.
6 What way to hurt, they muse within their heart,
What snares to use, they all consult their part.
7 But God will shoot at them, and with them fight,
He shall them wound, and put them all to flight;
8 Their evil tongues shall work themselves such blame,
That who their faults see, wonder at the same.
9 All men that see, of Gods great works shall tell,
And all his doings they shall know full well.
10 The just shall trust in God, and shall rejoice;
So shall the pure in heart be glad in voice.
PSALM. LXV.
1 IN Sion Lord, for thee, e're waits praise,
And to thee I Will perform my vow always.
2 For that thou do unto my prayers agree,
All folk both far and near shall trust in thee.
3 Iniquities against me prevail always,
For my transgressions, purge them all away.
4 The man is blessed thou takes in the Court to dwell,
With goodness of thine house it shall excel.
5 Hear us O God, our health from thee does rise,
The hope of earth, and of Sea coasts likewise.
6 Which by his strength he makes the mountains stand,
With strength, they are beset, and with thine hand.
7 Which makes boistrous Seas to be most still,
And governs all tumults at his will.
8 The folk that dwell on earth, shall dread, to see
Thy signs, the morn, and noon, shall e're praise thee
9 When the earth is dry, and thirsts more and more,
Then with thy drops do thou increase her store.
Thy floods do ever flow in every thing,
The seed and corn thou make up to spring.
10 Thou breaks her clods, with wet her furrows fills,
Her fruits are blessed, thy drops on her distills.
11 Thou deckst the earth with fair and pleasant crop,
Thy clouds of rain great plenty they do drop.
12 Whereby the desert great increase shall bring,
Hills shall therein rejoice, and eke forth spring.
13 The pastures flocks shall feed, and cover the earth,
The corn so increase, that men shall sing with mirth.
PSALM. LXVI.
1 YE men make joyful noise to God always,
2 Sing forth his Name, and glorious make his praise
3 How great thou art in all thy works (say ye,)
Thy foes for fear, against, will they seek to thee.
4 All earth shall sing unto thy holy Name;
I Will worship thee, my soul shall do the same.
^Behold, and see what things the Lord has wrought;
Mark well, what he for man to pass has brought.
^The Seas he dried, therein a way they had;
They went on foot most dry, their hearts were glad.
^By power he rules, and eyes all men for ever,
Triumphing rebels he will not deliver,
^Ye people, bless the Lord our God always,
With joyful voice sing ye, eke of his praise.
^Who keeps our souls in life, all by his love,
He looks to our steps, we shall not slip nor move.
^0 Though like to silver, Lord thou did us try,
^1 And broughtest grief on us that we should ly.
^2 Though thou let men, our heads over ride and reign,
Though we through fire and water run, for pain.
Yet sure I am, thou did it for best,
Thou brought us in a place of wealth, and rest.
13 Into thine house I Will go, and daily pray,
There to apply my self, my vows, and pay.
14 Which with my mouth I spoke in all my smart,
And which I made in dolor of my heart.
15 Burnt offerings I Will give thee, fat ox, and rams;
My sacrifice shall be, of goats, and lambs.
16 Come forth, and hear, all ye that fear the Lord;
What for my soul he'th done, I will record.
17 Full often to mind, his goodness I do call,
I make great speed to show forth his praises all.
18 If I in heart regard iniquity,
The Lord will never hear me when I cry.
19 But verily the Lord hears my desire,
And grants me, what of him I do require.
20 Blessed be God, who hears me when I pray,
His mercies from me he takes not away.
PSALM. LXVII.
1 THe Lord in mercy grant to us his grace,
And cause on us to shine his glorious face;
2 That all the folk on earth may know thy way,
And saving health, amongst nations great I say.
3 Let all the people praise thy holy Name,
And thee extol, my soul shall do the same.
4 Let all the world rejoice, and sing with mirth,
For thou with truth, and right, do guide the earth.
5 Let all the people praise thine Holy Name,
And thee extol, my soul shall do the same.
6 Then shall the earth yield forth her great increase,
And then to bless us thou will never cease.
7 God will us bless; and then both far and near,
Shall have great cause his holy Name to fear.
PSALM. LXVIII.
1 GOds foes shall flee, when that he does arise,
And scattred shall be all his enemies.
2 As fire melts wax, and the wind blows smoke away,
So in Gods presence the wicked shall decay.
3 But just men before the Lord shall much rejoice,
They shall be glad, and cheerful in their voice.
4 Who rides on the skies, sing praises to his Name,
His Name is Jah, let us magnify the same.
5 He that is above, within his holy place,
Is Childrens Father, judge of widows case.
6 Houses he gives unto the comfortless.
But rebels brings into a great distress.
7 When thou did march the Egyptians from among,
And brought thy folk through desert wide and long,
8 He made it rain so fast, the earth did quake,
His mighty presence made Mount Sion shake.
9 Thou washed thine heritage with store of rain,
When weary 'twas, thou did with it remain.
10 Thy chosen flock dwelt there, and thou have store
Of goodness got, for those which are thy poor.
11 God gave the Word, great company were those
That set it forth, for they of him were chose.
12 Kings of great Armies fled apace with toil,
And she that staid at home shall part the spoil.
13 Though ye'mong pots have lain, y'out shine the dove,
Whose wings beneath like silver, gold, above:
14 When in it God scatted Kings, both high and low,
It was like Salmon Hill, as white as snow.
15 Though Bashan be an hill both great and high,
Yet Sion does it much exceed: then why
16 Brag ye, ye Hills? to leap, cease will ye never,
God Sion loves, and there he will dwell for ever.
17 His Armies thousands are of warriors strong,
He eke in Sinai is them, all among.
18 Thou'st gone on high, and captive led them all,
Which long since kept his chosen ones in thrall.
Thou'st gifts received; and he that did rebel,
Thou did subdue, that he with thee might dwell.
19 Blessed be God, who pours on us his grace,
From day, to day, he is God of our Solace.
20 He Is God alone who is our Salvation ever,
And who from grief and pain does us deliver.
21 But God shall wound the head of's enemies,
And the hairy scalp of those that ill devise.
22 From Bashan, I, he said, my folk will bring,
From depth of Seas, and from the liquid spring.
23 Their feet shall dip in the blood of those, my Name
That hate, the tongues of their dogs shall do the same.
24 They Have seen how thou do all thy foes deface,
And how thou go into thine holy place.
25 Singers, the Van lead, Minsterells the rear,
Damsels in midsts of Timbrills playing were,
26 Let Israel's Congregation praise the Lord,
Let Jacobs seed do the like with one accord.
27 Their chief was Ben. But Juda made the hosts,
With Zebulun, Napthali, in their coasts.
28 As God has given the power, so Lord command
The thing in us thou'st wrought, ever to stand.
29 Thy temple in gifts, give the Lord will we;
Kings at Je-ru-sa-lem give praise to thee.
30 Rebuke great spear-men, that prize war, not peace,
As Bulls and Calves, their tumults cause to cease;
Till they submit, and tribute to thee yield,
Scatter thou them, and make them quit the field.
31 Princes from Egypt then shall come to see,
And Ethiopia stretch her hand to thee.
32 Ye Kingdoms of the Earth, sing to the Lord,
And to our God all praises due afford.
33 To him that rides upon the Heavens high,
That was of old, his voice does pierce the sky.
34 All strength to God ascribe, praise him aloud,
His strength mounts Is-ra-el, and's over the cloud.
35 O God, thy holiness is dread e're more,
Jacobs God gives us strength, praise him therefore.
PSALM. LXIX.
SAVe me, O God, lest waters me over spread;
So nigh my soul they come, I Am fore afraid.
2 I stick in mire, and almost drowned be;
I feel no ground, the seas so over flow me.
3 With crying often I faint, my throat is dry;
Mine eyes me fail, while I look God on high.
4 My foes that hurt my soul, with hate are led;
In number they surmount the hairs of my head:
They vex me causlesse, prosper, and are glad,
And make me give the things that I never had.
5 O Lord, thou know the foolishness of me;
Nor are my iniquities hid from thee.
6 Let none that seek, and wait on thee, have shame.
7 Because I Have born reproach, that bears thy Name.
8 Unto my brethren, stranger I became,
And to Mothers son, I alien am.
9 For the zeal to thee I bear, they fall on me;
I grieve to hear their checks, and taunts at thee.
10 I wept, chastned my soul with fast, yet they,
To give me great reproach, do not delay.
11 Of sackcloth also, I my garment made;
As of a Proverb, so of me they said.
12 They speak against me that sit within the Gate,
And drunkards frequently of me do prate.
13 Lord then I pray, that when it pleases thee,
Thou will always send down thine aid to me.
14 Let me not sinck, but from the mire me keep;
From enemies, and from the waters deep;
15 Lest with the waves, the depth should me devour,
And that the pit should shut me in her power.
16 O Lord, to me give ear, for you are most kind;
As thou art merciful, have me in mind.
17 Hide not thy face from me, O Lord, for I
In trouble am, but answer speedily:
18 Redeem my soul, O Lord, do thou draw nigh,
And me deliver from mine enemy.
19 Thou know what shame, and troubles, fall on me,
For all mine enemies before thee be.
20 Reproach, and heaviness, my heart have broke;
I looked for pity, but none eased the stroke.
21 And in my meat they also gave me gall;
When thirst, they gave me Vinegar withal.
22 Lord make their table then become a snare;
That prove their trap, where they thought well to fare.
23 Blind thou their eyes, that they may never see;
And to themselves a terror let them be:
24 Thy wrath, and indignation, on them pour,
In thy displeasure, cease on them each hour.
25 Let thou their dwelling place be desolate;
Let none dwell in their tents, but all them hate.
26 Where thou do smite, they wound without relief;
Whom thou do wound, they still augment their grief.
27 Add sin unto their sin; nor let them come
28 Into thine own account, or the righteous sum.
29 But poor O God, and sorrowful am I,
Let thy salvation set me up on high.
30 Then with a song I Will praise thy holy Name,
And with thanksgiving magnify the same,
31 This Offering far, please thee better shall,
Then either Ox, or Bullock, from the stall.
32 The humble shall see this, also the meek;
Your hearts shall live, which after God do seek.
33 He hears the poor, nor prisoners does despise;
34 Earth, Seas, him praise, and all above the skies.
35 He Will Juda's City build, and Sion save,
Much people there, their dwelling place shall have.
36 Seed of his servants there inherit shall,
Who loves his Name, shall it possess withal:
PSALM. LXX.
1 MAke haste O God, make haste, me to deliver,
Make haste to help me, you are my God for ever.
2 Put them to shame, which do my soul pursue;
Put them to flight, that seek to make me rue.
3 For a reward of shame, turn them away,
That scornfully at me, do cry, Aha.
4 Let all those that thee seek, be glad, rejoice,
Such as thee love, thee magnify in voice.
5 But I poor, needy am, deliver me;
Thou art my help, Lord therefore set me free.
PSALM. LXXI.
1 O Lord my God, I trust in thy great Name,
Let me therefore never be put to shame.
2 And in thy righteousness deliver me,
Incline thine ear, and also set me free.
3 Be thou my rock, to whom resort I may,
Thou said thou would my fortress be always.
4 From the wicked's hands O Lord deliver me,
And from those hands that work iniquity.
5 Thou art my hope, in whom I daily trust,
Even from my youth, to thee, I had a lust.
6 Thou have me kept e're since that I was born,
Therefore I Will praise thee, evening and morn.
7 As to a wonder, folk to me do throng,
But thou to me O Lord, art refuge strong.
8 Let thou my mouth be filled with thy praise,
And of thine honor let me talk always.
9 Refuse me not, when age my limbs does take,
Though strength me fail, do not my soul forsake;
10 For all my foes would take me through deceit,
And they that for my soul do daily wait,
11 Say, God's forsook him, let us him threaten ever,
For there is none, that now can him deliver.
12 O Lord thou need never absent from me be,
But in great haste, do thou give help to me.
13 Confound my foes, and make them all as dirt,
And let them be consumed that seek my hurt.
14 But I will hope in thee, even all my days;
Still more, and more, I will set forth thy praise.
15 Of thy great goodness forth I Will daily send,
But of thy benefits I know none end.
16 Yet will I go, with thy good help, O God,
Thy saying health alone I Will set abroad.
17 O God thou have me taught, even from my youth,
And hitherto I have declared thy truth.
18 And as in youth, thou wast my only stay,
Forsake me not, 'cause now my hairs grow gray:
Till I, thy Might show, to those that be here,
That our seed may thee know hence many year.
19 Great is thy justice; all men may it see,
Thy works are wonderful, who is like to thee?
20 I felt sore trouble, yet thou did me save,
Thou did me help, and bring me from the grave.
21 Thou shall increase my greatness, more, and more;
Thou giv'st me comforts on each side great store.
22 Therefore thy truth to praise, with lute I Will sing,
My harp shall sound thy praise, O Isreal's King,
23 My lips will joy, when I shall sing to thee,
And eke my soul, for thou have set it free.
24 My tongue shall talk of thee, all the day long,
For thou'st consumed those that would do me wrong.
PSALM. LXXII.
1 THe King, thy judgments give; instruct him well
Therein; with his Son, Lord let thy justice dwell.
2 That he may rule, and judge thy folk aright,
And eke defend all those that have no might.
3 The mountains shall bring to the people peace,
And little Hills in justice shall increase.
4 That he may make the poor and needy strong,
And eke destroy those that would do them wrong.
5 To fear thee then, all ages shall be sure,
So long as Sun, or eke Moon shall endure.
6 Make him to the just, like to fields new mown,
And like as drops refresh the Land new sown.
7 The just shall in this time, be all at peace,
Till the Moon shall leave to waste, and to increase.
8 He shall be Lord of Seas, the Land throughout,
And of the Rivers all the earth about.
9 They that in deserts dwell, shall in him trust,
And all his enemies shall lick the dust.
10 Great Lord of Isles, then gifts unto him brings,
Of Sheba, and of Seba, gifts from Kings.
11 Kings shall adore, and worship him even all,
Him eke obey, and serve all Nations shall.
12 The needy cries, he them deliver will,
And him that has no helper from all ill.
13 The poor and needy likewise he does save,
The helpless souls, from him their safety have.
14 He shall redeem them from foes, power and might,
And precious shall their blood be in his sight.
15 Of Sheba's gold they gifts to him shall give,
Prayers for him shall be made, and he shall live.
16 A little corn upon the mountains thrown,
Shall spring like trees, in Lebanon full grown.
They of the City likewise shall be seen,
To spring as grass, and flourish ever green.
17 His name shall e're endure, and all men shall
Be blessed in him, and eke him blessed call.
18 E're blessed be the Lord, even Isreal's King,
Who only does most strange and wondrous thing.
19 Blessed be his holy name Eternally,
Who fills the earth with truth, Amen say I.
PSALM. LXXIII.
1 INdeed, God good to Israel does endure,
And unto those that are in heart most pure.
2 But as for me, my feet to slip were nigh,
3 I ^h' wicked grudged in their prosperity.
4 Their strength is firm, for they have no bands in grave;
5 No grief nor plagues, like other men they have.
6 Pride therefore 'bout them compasses like chains,
And violence like clothes with them remains.
7 They are so feed with fat, their eyes out s^art.
They have more earthly goods, than wish can heart.
8 Their life is most in boasting of their wrong,
Which they have done even simple men among.
9 Against the living Lord they set their tongue,
Their mouths do walk throughout the earth so long.
10 His folk then turn to see their prosperous state,
And all must drink the same cup, follow the same rate.
11 These worldly things, how can God understand,
They say, since wicked rule both sea and land.
12 See how in riches wicked men increase,
They thrive with worldly goods, and live in peace.
13 Then why do I, from wickedness refrain;
My hands, and heart, I Have washed, and all in vain.
14 For all day long I have been plagued with shame,
And scourged each morn, as subject unto blame.
15 If I Would thus say, misliking mine estate,
I judge thy saints, as folk unfortunate.
16 When I did think, this matter great to know,
To heavy 'twas for me, and painful too.
17 Till I went to Gods holy place, and then,
I understood the ends of all those men.
18 Surely in slip'ry place thou maid'st them sit,
And sling'st them down into the utmost pit.
19 How they are brought to naught in little time,
Terrors of death on them do quickly clime
20 As dreams when one awakes, so Lord are they,
For in thy sight they shall even all decay.
21 Yet thus my heart was grieved, and much oppressed;
22 I foolish was before thee, and like a beast.
23 Yet with thine hand, thou hold'st me always fast,
24 To glory bring'st me, by counsel, at last.
25 In skies above, Lord, whom have I but thee?
In earth but thee, there is none delights me.
26 My flesh and heart me fail; God fails me never,
He is my portion, and my strength for ever.
27 For lo, those that in any one do trust,
But thee, shall be destroyed, for thou art most just.
28 But I Will draw nigh to God, with him I Will dwell;
In him alone I Will trust, his deeds I Will tell.
PSALM. LXXIV.
1 O God, why have thou cast us off for ever?
Why do thou not thy pasture sheep deliver?
2 Think on the folk, that thine have been so long,
Which thou'st redeemed, and brought from bondage strong.
Have mind therefore, remember it full well,
Thy Sions Mount, where thou were wont to dwell.
3 Lift up thy feet O Lord, against all those,
That to thy holy place, are deadly foes.
4 Amidst thy folk, thine enemies roar all;
For signs, they ensigns set upon a wall.
5 As men with axe, hew trees on hills that grow,
So shine their swords within thy Temple now.
6 The carved work thereof, they break once at,
With hammers, bills, they do they care not what.
7 Thy Sanctuary they consume with flame;
They pull to ground, the place set for thy Name.
8 They said in heart, let us them out of hand
Destroy, they burnt Gods houses through the land.
9 We see no signs, no Prophet's us among:
There is none with us that knows how long
10 Lord, when will thou thy foes against, end this shame,
And those destroy, that curse against thy Name.
11 From foes, why do thou draw thine hand away?
Plucked from thy breast, and with it all them slay.
12 Lord you are my King, and evermore have been;
Yea, thou, to do me good, was oft-times seen.
13 Thou by thy strength, did waters deep divide,
Therein thou brok'st the Serpents head; he died.
14 Thou break'st Whales heads, and gave them for meat,
To those in deserts, that they should them eat.
15 Thou water made come from rocks hard and high;
And seas that were most deep thou did dry.
16 Both day, and night, by thee were first begun,
Thou have prepared light even by the Sun.
17 Of earth, thou did appoint the ends and coasts,
Thou found'st out Summer heats, and Winter frosts,
18 Consider Lord thy foes, thy folk would shame,
And foolish men have often blasphemed thy Name.
19 Thy Doves to foes, Lord, do not thou deliver,
Neither forget the needy ones for ever.
20 Thy Covenant, Lord, have respect unto,
From the earth's dark place, springs cruelty and woe.
21 Let not the oppressed ones, Lord, come to shame,
But give poor, needy, cause to praise thy Name.
22 Stir up thy self therefore, plead thine one cause,
Lest the foolish thee reproach, that break thy laws.
23 Forget not thou the voice of thine en'my,
Since foes, tumults increase continually.
PSALM. LXXV.
1 TO thee, give thanks we will, for that thy Name
Is nigh, O God thy wonders show thy fame.
2 When I thy folk receive, I Will judge aright,
3 Though earth's dissolved, I Will bear them with thy might.
4 I said to fools, act not so foolishly,
And to the proud, set not your horns too high.
5 Lift not your horns high, nor with stiff-neck speak,
6 No honor does from the worlds four quarters break.
7 But God is judge, he sentence gives aright;
Abaseth, and exalts, in his might.
8 For in his hand he bears a cup that is red,
With mixed wine, which he pours on their head.
The dregs thereof, his foes their fill shall drink,
And wring them out, in cups filled to the brink.
9 But I Will declare his works, his praises sing,
Ever to Jacobs God, and Isreal's King.
10 The wickeds horns, and strength, cut off will I,
But the righteous shall be exalted high.
PSALM. LXXVI.
1 IN Judah God the Lord, is known full well,
His Name is great in City Is-ra-el.
2 In Salem is his Tabernacle, he,
His dwelling place has made, in Sion be.
3 And there he break the shaffs of bows, the shield,
the sword, and battle he o'rethrew in field.
4 Thou art more rich, more strength in thee is found,
Then those that rob on mountains high and round.
5 The proud through thee are spoiled, and fallen on sleep,
There is no man of might himself can can keep.
6 O Jacobs God, at thy rebuke, did fall
Both charret, horse, none of them moved at all.
7 Thou dreadful art, what man the courage has,
To bide thy sight when thou art once in wrath.
8 Thou judgment caused to come from sky at will,
And to be heard; the earth feared, and was most still.
9 When God arose, in judgment, for to save.
The meek of the earth that were nigh to the grave.
10 The wrath in man, that reigned now, gives thee praise,
Hereafter Lord restrain their rage always.
11 Make vows, pay them to God, that nigh him be,
Bring gifts to him, for dreadful sure is he.
12 For he will cut off all Princes of great birth;
He dreadful is to all the Kings of the earth.
PSALM. LXXVII.
1 I With my voice unto the Lord did cry,
With voice I spoke, he heard me instantly.
2 In grief I sought the Lord, no rest I took
By night, my soul all comfort good forsook.
3 When I on God do think, my grief's the more,
I could scarce speak, my breath was stopped so sore,
4 Thou keest'st my eyes awake, my speech is gone,
5 Both ancient days and years I think upon.
6 I commune with mine heart, my song I mind,
And for my Spirit, I much talk do find.
7 Will God the Lord e're cast us off therefore?
And will he friendly be to us no more?
8 His mercies 'gain come to us will they never?
And does his promise fail us eke for ever?
9 Has God forgotten gra-ti-ous to be?
He mercies eke in wrath shut up has he?
10 At last, lo this my weakness is said I,
His mighty hand can help, who is most high.
11 I Will think upon the works of th living Lord,
His mighty works I gladly will record.
12 Yea, I Will declare all works thou did devise,
And will not spare to tell thy counsels wise.
13 Thy ways O Lord are holy all abroad,
Who is so great in strength as thee our God?
14 You Are God, who wonders do, both near and far,
Thy strength among the folks thou do declare.
15 Thou do defend thy folk even with thine arm,
Joseph, and Jacob's seed thou keep'st from harm.
16 The waters saw the Lord, and were afraid;
Depths of the Seas were troubled, and dismayed.
17 From clouds came rain, from skies a sound, O God,
Thine Arrows also, went forth all abraod.
18 The voice of thunder made all things to quake,
The lightning made all earth to fear and shake.
19 Thy path's in waters deep, in Seas thou'st gone,
But where thy footsteps are, it is not known.
20 Thou led'st thy folk like to a flock in the land.
Moses and Aaron guides them by their hand.
PSALM. LXXVIII.
1 Give ear my people to my law always,
Incline your ears to that which I shall say.
2 In parable, open my mouth I will,
Dark sayings old, I Will utter eke with skill.
3 Which we have heard and know, ye friends of old,
The self-same thing have often unto us told.
4 We will not hide them from their children dear,
Showing the folk to come, the Lord; and fear
His strength also, that wonderful has been,
And eke his works, that true and great, were seen.
5 Jacob had law, how Is-ra-el should live,
Willing our friends the same their Sons to give.
6 That they, their Sons, that were not sprung up so,
Should know the law, and teach their seed also.
7 That they their hope in God, might ever set,
And keep his laws, and not his works forget.
8 Not like their fathers, rebels in God's sight,
And would not frame their hearts to know him right.
9 Though Ephraims children armed were always,
Yet they turned back, of battle in the day.
10 They kept not vow, nor would walk in Gods law,
11 But quite forgot Gods wonders that they saw.
12 He wondrous things did to their fathers hands,
In Zoans fields, and eke in Egypts lands.
13 He parted Seas, and caused them through to pass
The waters all together gathered was.
14 He also with a cloud them led at day;
And in the night, with fiery light always.
15 He water brought, from dry land, which he clave,
And drink to them, as in great Seas he gave.
16 He Seas drew from the rock, which he did keep;
They run so fast, they made great places deep.
17 Yet for all this, their sins did much increase,
And moved the most high to wrath in the wilderness.
18 In heart they tempted God, who is most just,
By asking naughty meat, even for their lust.
19 Yea, they against God did speak, and they said,
In The wilderness, can God a table spread?
20 He struck the rock, and floods forthwith did flow,
Can he give to his folk, bread? flesh, also?
21 For this, Gods wrath was with Jacob, and's seed,
He kindled fire, Is-ra-el against, with speed.
22 Because they in the Lord, belief none have,
Nor do they trust, that he can e're them save.
23 Though he bad the Clouds above, to break in sunder,
24 And Manna rained for meat, as dreadful wonder.
25 Men eat the Angels food, at their request;
26 The east wind blew, Gods power brought in the southwest
27 He rained flesh, thick as dust, and fowl as sand,
28 And them he cast, where all their tents did stand.
29 Then did they eat, and all men had their fill;
He gave them what they could desire with will.
30 Whilst they did eat, Gods wrath upon them fell;
31 He slew their chief, the choice of Is-ra-el.
32 Yet they to sinning fell, and did him grieve,
He wonders wrought, yet they would not believe.
33 He then in vanity, consumed their days,
And made them eke in trouble be always.
34 When he them plagued, they sought him instantly;
35 Knowing their strength, and help, was God on high.
36 Yet with their mouths, they flatter still the Lord,
And with their tongues, dissemble they his word.
37 For all their hearts, with him were not aright,
Nor did they keep his Covenant in's sight.
38 But he forgave them their iniquity,
And slew them not, but many times did he
Advise himself, and turn his wrath away,
And did not stir it up all in a day.
39 Thinking they were but flesh, and as the wind,
That cannot well return by his own kind.
40 Yet often they him provoked, in the wilderness,
And in the desert, eke they did no less.
41 They turned back, and tempted God full soon,
And limited even Isreal's holy One.
42 They thought not on his hand, nor yet did they,
That they delivered were, think on the day.
43 In Egypts land, his signs how wrought had he;
His wonders in the field of Zoan be.
44 And how he turned their Rivers into blood,
So that they could not drink in all their flood.
45 He sent great sort of flies, which them annoyed,
And eke of frogs, which most of them distroy'd.
46 He gave their stock unto the Catter-piller,
And all their labor to the Grass-hopper.
47 He smote their Vines with hail, that they were lost,
And all their Sycomore trees with the frost.
48 Unto the hail he also gave their stock,
And to the thunderbolts he gave their flock.
49 He cast on them his wrath, and anger strong,
And evil spirits eke all them among.
50 To wrath he made a way, spared not the least,
And gave the pestilence to man and beast.
51 He smote the firstborn, that in Egypt came,
The chief of men, and beasts, in tent of Ham.
52 But his own folk, he did preserve, and keep
Them in the wilderness like unto sheep.
53 He leads them safe, no fear e're on them lies,
But th'seas most deep o're-whelm'd their enemies.
54 He brought his to the coasts of 's holy land,
Even to the mount which he got by's strong hand.
55 H' cast heathen out, their lands he did devide,
Made Isreal's tribes even in their tents abide:
56 And yet the Lord most high they tempted still,
They him provoked, would not obey his Will.
57 But as their fathers turned back, so did they,
Like bows that will not bend, but start away.
58 They made him angry, with their places high,
Their Idols him provoked to jealousy.
59 God then was wrath, for Israel no care took,
60 The tent Shiloh placed among men, he eke forsook.
61 His strength God gave into captivity,
And eke his Ark unto the enemy.
62 Gave them to the sword, wrath with his heritage,
63 Young men are burnt, maids had no marriage.
64 By sword the Priests also perish't each one,
There was no widows left, him to bemoan.
65 Then God to awake, as one from sleep began,
Refresh't with wine, even like a valiant man.
66 He smote on the hinder parts his foes even all,
And put them to a shame perpetual.
67 Moreover he did Joseph's tent refuse,
And Ephraim's tribe he would in no wise choose.
68 But Judah's tribe chose where he thought to dwell,
And Sions mount, which he did love full well.
69 He also built his temple high, and sure,
Like to the earth, for ever to endure.
70 Then David chose he, him to serve, and keep
His folk, he took him from the fold of sheep.
71 From keeping th'ews with young, God did advance
Him, to feed Israel and his inheritance.
72 So he with faithfulness of heart them fed,
And eke, with skilfulness of heart them led.
PSALM. LXXIX.
1 THine heritage Lord the gentiles would defile,
They heap Jerusalem, thy temple spoil.
2 The bodies of thy Saints abroad they cast,
Th'flesh of thy Saints the beasts devour, and waste.
3 They shed their blood quite round Jerusalem,
Like Seas, and there was none would bury them.
4 Thus we become a shame the world throughout,
A scorn to them that are us round about.
5 How long, Lord, will thou set against us thy ire,
And shall thy wrath e're burn against us like fire.
6 On those which have not known thee, pour the same,
On all those realms which called not on thy Name.
7 For they both Jacob and his seed destroyed,
They Have left his dwelling place both waste and void.
8 Bear not in mind, O Lord, our former faults,
For we are low, then help in all assaults.
9 Eke for thy Names sake, Lord help us for ever,
Quite purge away our sins, and us deliver.
10 Then wherefore should the heathen say abroad,
We care not now, for what is com'd on their God?
Require of them O Lord, even in our sight,
Thy Servants blood, which they spilt in despite.
11 Let the prisoners sighs Lord come e're before thee,
Who Are judged to die, with strength Lord set them free.
12 E-ven to those, that would blaspheme thy Name
Them seven fold repay for do-ing the same.
13 So we thy pasture sheep, will give thee praise,
All ages teach, to do the same always.
PSALM. LXXX.
1 O Thou great Shepherd, that Is-ra'l do keep,
That leadest Joseph, and him feeds like sheep.
Thou God, that dwells on Cherubins most bright,
Set forth thy self, with all thy beams of light.
2 Before Ephrim, Ben, Manasses, eke likewise,
Show forth thy strength to help us, and arise.
3 Turn us again, thy face to shine cause thee
On us, and then we shall in safety be.
4 O Lord of Hosts, wilt angry be always
Against thy folk, and wilt not here them pray?
5 Thou give them both bread and tears to eat;
Yea, tears they drink in measure full and great.
6 Thou make us strife, to those that round us be,
And we are laughed at by our enemy.
7 Turn us again, thy face to shine cause thee
On us, and then we shall in safety be.
8 From Egypt thou O Lord, a vine brought have,
Thou'st planted it, and out the Heathen cast.
9 Thou did prepare a place, and set it fast;
And it grew great, and filled the earth at last.
10 Hills covered were, with shade that from it came,
And Cedars strong, with branches of the same.
11 Unto the Sea her boughs so big she sent,
And eke her branches, to the River went.
12 And broken down her hedges then, why have?
That all which pass thereby may make it waste.
13 The Boar out of the wood, wastes it each hour,
And wild beasts of the field do it devour.
14 O Lord of Hosts, from Heaven look again,
We thee beseech, and this thy vine sustain.
15 Thy plant, I say, whom thy right hand has set,
Support always, and do not it forget.
16 They cut it down, and eke it burn with fire,
And we all perish, through thy frowning ire.
17 Let thy right hand them keep, thou keep'st so long,
And with his Son whom thou have made so strong.
18 So will we not at all go back from thee,
Us quicken, and call on thy Name will we.
19 Turn us again, thy face to shine cause thee
On us, and then we shall in safety be.
PSALM. LXXXI.
1 SIng to the Lord our strength, with pleasant voice,
To Jacobs God, and eke in him rejoice.
2 Sing Psalms, prepare your instruments most meet,
And eke strike up of every string most sweet.
3 Blow up your Trumpet in the new moon I say,
In the time appointed, on our solemn day.
4 For this a statute is to Is-ra-el,
A Vow which Jacobs God did make full well.
5 With Joseph this was made, when that he came
From Egypt, that his seed might do the same,
When God prepared to bring him from that land,
Whereas that speech, he did not understand.
6 I from his shoulders, the burden took away,
And set him free, from burning brick of clay.
7 When thou in grief, did call to me and cry,
I answered thee in thunder secretly:
At the waters of discord, I did thee prove,
Whereas, Gods grace with mutt'ring thou did move.
8 Here O my folk, to you I Will testify,
O Israel if thou wilt hearken unto me.
9 Thou'st serve no strange God, in the land abroad,
Nor shall thou serve a strange, or foreign God:
10 From Egypt I thy God did set thee free,
Then ask me much, and I will give it thee.
11 But my folk would not hearken to my voice,
Neither would Is-ra-el in me rejoice.
12 So I them gave unto their lusts, and will,
And let them walk in their own counsel still.
13 O that my folk had heard me all their days,
And Is-ra-el had walked in my ways.
14 I soon should have subdued their enemy,
And turned my hand against their adversary.
15 Who hate the Lord, submit to him should be sure,
And then they all, for ever should endure.
16 He would them feed even with the finest wheat,
And honey from the rock they all should eat.
PSALM. LXXXII.
1 Amongst men of might the Lord our God does stand
To plead the truth, with Judges of the Land.
2 How long will ye in wickedness proceed,
And eke accept of wicked men indeed?
3 The poor and fatherless do thou defend,
To the needy, and afflicted justice send.
4 The poor and needy man do thou deliver,
And rid him from the wickeds hands for ever.
5 They nothing know, nor will they understand,
The in darkeness walk, no curse is on the Land.
6 The Lords above, ye are even Gods I Have said,
All of you are the Sons of your great aid.
7 But ye shall dye like men, and so decay,
I Will all of you destroy, and pluck away.
8 Up therefore Lord, judge the world with all thy might
And eke all Nations take, as thine own right.
PSALM. LXXXIII.
1 O Lord my God, do not refrain thy tongue,
Hold not thy peace, nor silent be too long.
2 Behold thy foes, see how they rage and cry,
And those that hate thee, hold their heads on high.
3 Thy folk against they consult and use deceit,
Eke for thy hidden ones they lie and wait.
4 They Have said from be-ing great, let us stroy the same,
That we no more may think on Isreal's Name.
5 For they have consulted all with one consent,
And eke against thee their wickedness is bent.
6 The tents of Edom, and the Ismalites,
The Hagarens, and eke the Moabites.
7 Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek conspire,
The Philistines against thee rise, with those at Tire.
8 And Ashur eke, with them in league will be,
He Will also help Lot, and's posterity.
9 As thou serv'dst the Midianites, serve them each one,
As to Siser, Jabin, at the brook Kison.
10 Whom thou in Endor, Lord, did slay by night,
That they like dung lay open in thy sight.
11 Their Nobles make like Orch, Ze-eb, yea,
Their Lords as Zebah, and as Zalmunna.
12 Who said, let all of us, throughout the Land,
God's houses fair, receive into our hand.
13 Make them O God like wheels that cannot stay,
Or like the chaff, which winds do blow away.
14 As fire that burns, the woods both far and nigh,
And eke as flames, that hills consume most high.
15 So let thy tempest, Lord, on them be laid,
And let thy windy storms make them afraid.
16 And eke their faces all fill full of shame,
That they O Lord may seek thy holy Name.
17 Let them be troubled all, for thee therefore,
Let them be put to shame for ever-more.
18 That men may know Gods Name Jehovah is,
That he is most high, and that the earth is his.
PSALM. LXXXIV.
1 O Lord how pleasant is thy dwelling place,
And eke the tabernacles of thy grace!
2 My soul does long, Gods courts on high to see,
And for the living Lord my heart shall be.
3 The sparrows find out room, where they may rest,
And swallows for their young do get a nest.
Thine Altar by, these birds may sit and sing,
O Lord of Hosts, thou art my God, and King.
4 Blessed are they, in house that dwell with thee,
They praising of thy Name shall ever be.
5 Who put their strength in thee, blessed are they
In heart, who seek unto thine house the way.
6 Passing through Ba-ca's veil, they wells dig still,
They look like springs, for thou their pits do fill.
7 From strength to strength they go, faintness shall not be,
The God of Gods in Sion they do see.
8 O Lord of Hosts, hear me that to thee pray,
And Jacobs God, give ear to me always.
9 O God our shield, behold us with thy grace,
And look upon thine own anointed's face.
10 I Will rather in thy courts, one day abide,
Then be elsewhere a thousand days beside.
I Would rather keep the door of the house of God,
Than dwell in the tents of wickedness abroad.
11 For God will glory, grace, and worship give,
No good withhold, from those that purely live.
12 O Lord of Hosts, that man shall blessed be,
That wholly does depend, and trust in thee.
PSALM. LXXXV.
1 LOrd thou'st been merciful unto thy land,
And thou have rescued Jacobs seed from band.
2 Thy folks iniquity, thou have forg'ven,
And thou have also covered their sin.
3 Thou'st also took thy wrath most sore away,
And thou from wrath, that is most fierce do stay.
4 God of our health, convert us all to thee,
And let thine anger cease amongst us to be.
5 Will thou be angry Lord, and not return?
And shall thy wrath, unto all ages burn?
6 Wilt not again, let us revived be,
That we thy people, may rejoice in thee?
7 O Lord declare thy goodness in our wealth,
And be to us an aid, and saving health.
8 I Will hear the Lord, who to his Saints speak peace,
That never they return to foolishness.
9 His health to them that fear him, is at hand,
That they may dwell in glory in our land.
10 Mercy, and truth, meet in one and the same place,
Justice, and peace, each other do embrace.
11 Truth from the earth flourishes pleasantly,
And righteousness looks from the heavens high.
12 Yea God shall give you things most good, in peace,
And all our land shall yield forth her increase.
13 Justice shall before him go, like guide or stay,
His steps he will keep, and lead them in the way.
PSALM. LXXXVI.
1 LOrd bow thine ear, for poor, and weak am I,
And needy eke, then listen to my cry.
2 Preserve my soul, Lord, for I holy be,
Thy servant save, who trusts still in thee.
3 Be merciful to me Lord, for I cry
To thee, O Lord, my God uncessantly.
4 Comfort thy servants soul, with pain that is pined,
For unto thee I lift my soul and mind.
5 For thou art good, thy gifts of grace are free,
Thy mercie's great to those that call on thee.
6 Give ear, O Lord, when that to thee I pray,
And hearken to thy suppliant always.
7 For in the day of trouble, upon thee
I Will call, for thou will quickly answer me.
8 Among the Gods there is none like thee does shine,
Nor are their works to be compared to thine.
9 The Gentiles, which thou did make and frame,
Shall worship thee, and glorify thy Name:
10 For thou art great, all power is thine own,
Thou wondrous things do, thou art God alone.
11 Teach me thy way, thy truth, I will walk meek,
Unite mine heart with fear thy Name to seek.
12 O Lord my God, my heart shall give thee praise,
And I will glorify thy Name always.
13 Thy mercy showed to me, most great is it,
For thou'st delivered me from the lowest pit.
14 The proud against me rise, with men of might,
They seek my soul, and have not thee in sight.
15 But thou art meek, full slack and slow to wrath,
Long-suffering, thy truth no measure has.
16 Turn to me, and strength to me apply,
Thy servant, and thy handmaids son am I.
17 Some sign me show, that all my foes may see,
And be ashamed, 'cause thou Lord comforts me.
PSALM. LXXXVII.
1 GOds city is upon the holy hills,
2 Sion he loves, more then where Jacob dwells,
3 Glorious things are spoke of thee, abroad,
O city of the living Lord, our God.
4 On Ra'ab I Will look, and bear in mind the same,
And Babylon shall learn to know my Name.
Lo, Philistine, Tire, E-thi-ope likewise,
A folk long since were born, and there did rise.
5 'Twas said of Sion, diverse men of fame,
Have there sprung up, and God does stay the same.
6 When God the people counts, it shall appear,
That this man at the first did spring up there.
7 The trumpeters, and singers there shall be,
And all my springs are composed by thee.
PSALM. LXXXVIII.
1 O Lord, thou God of my deliverie,
Both day and night, before thee I often do cry.
2 Lord let my prayer before thee often appear,
And to my cry do thou incline thine ear.
3 For in my soul I grief and trouble have,
And eke my life does draw nigh to the grave.
4 Like those that go to pit, I Am in thy sight,
And like a man that has no str^ngth, nor might:
5 Free among the dead, like the slain, that lie in the Land
Whom thou destroy'st, and cuttest from thine hand.
6 Yea, thou have laid me in the lowest pit,
In darkness eke, and in the depths of it.
7 Upon me sore lies the wrath of thee,
With all thy waves thou'st much afflicted me.
8 Thou friends put'st from me, make them hate me sore,
I am shut up, and can come forth no more.
9 My sight through grief me fails, I call thee God,
To thee always my hand I stretch abroad,
10 Will thou show wonders to the dead always?
And shall the dead arise, and give thee praise?
11 Or shall thy kindness Lord be taught in grave?
With those that die, shall truth her honor have?
12 Shall they that lie in the dark, thy wonders wot?
Thy justice eke, where all things are forgot?
13 But I O Lord to thee did call apace,
My prayer shall early come before thy face.
14 O Lord, why castest thou my soul from thee?
Why hidest thou thy glorious face from me?
15 From my youth up, I Am grieved, and like to die,
I bear thy terrors, distracted am I.
16 Thy wrath most fierce does heavy on me fall,
Thy terrors eke, do me oppress withal.
17 They compass me as waters at the tide,
And eke with streams beset me on each side.
18 Lover, and friend, far from me thou have put,
In darkness thou have mine acquaintance shut?
PSALM. LXXXIX.
1 THy mercies, Lord, to sing I never will spare,
With mouth I ever will thy truth declare.
2 I said thy mercies ever shall remain,
Thy truth in heaven shall appear most plain.
3 God says, with mine elect I Have covenant made,
I Have sworn my Servant David to persuade?
4 Thy seed I Will stay, and stablish it full fast.
Thy throne I Will build, for ever it shall last.
5 The heavens shall thy wonders praise O Lord,
Thy Saints within thy Church thy faith record.
6 Who Is like the Lord in all the clouds abroad?
Among Sons of men, what one is like our God?
7 God among his Saints, is greatly to be dread,
Of all 'bout him in terror to be had.
8 Lord God of Hosts, what one is like to thee?
On every side, thy truth is seen to be?
6 The raging Sea, thou rulest at thy will,
The waves thereof that rise thou make still,
10 Rahab in pieces, as one slain thou'st broke,
And from thine arm comes enemies dead stroke.
11 Heaven is thine, thine is the earth also,
The world thousound'st, that all things should thee know.
12 Both north and south, O Lord, thou made the same,
Tabor, Hermon, rejoice shall in thy Name.
13 Thine arm is mighty powerful, through the land,
Thou art most high, and strong is thy right hand.
14 Justice, and judgment, do thy throne embrace,
Mercy, and truth, advance before thy face.
15 The joyful sound that know, blessed is the folk,
For such O Lord, shall in thy favor walk.
16 Such in thy name rejoice shall all the day,
Thy justice in exalted be shall they.
17 For why? their glory, strength in thee does ly,
Thy favor in, thou wilt lift our horns on high.
11 For God the Lord defense to us does bring,
The Holy one of Israel is our King.
19 Thy will to Saints, in visions thou did show,
Thou told'st thy mind to them, that they might know:
A man of might I Have chose your King to be,
And set him up, among the folk for me.
20 My servant David I have searched out,
I him anoint King over all the rout.
21 With whom my hand shall aid, and eke remain,
Mine arm also with strength shall him sustain,
22 His enemies they shall not him devour,
Nor Sons of wickedness, over him have power.
23 Before his face I will beat down his foes,
That hate him without cause, I Will plague all those.
24 My mercy, and my truth, in him shall lie,
And in my Name I Will lift his horns on high.
25 I Will set his kingdom over both sea and land,
He shall embrace the flood with his right hand.
26 He shall depend on me, and thus shall say,
Thou art my fathers God, and eke my stay.
27 I Will make him my firstborn on earth, that springs,
His might I Will make above all earthly Kings.
28 My mercy I will keep for him in store,
And eke my covenant for evermore.
29 His seed I Will also make to endure always,
And eke his throne to last as heavens days.
30 If 's Sons my Law, and judgments in w'ont stay,
31 My Statutes, and Commandments if break they,
32 Then with a rod their sins visit will I,
With stripes them scourge for their iniquity.
33 Yet I Will not quite, my kindness from him take,
Nor shall my faithfulness him ere forsake.
34 I will in no wise break my covenant,
Nor will I change, that from my lips has went.
35 Once by my holiness now sworn have I,
I made to David promise, I Will not lie.
36 His seed for ever shall endure, and be,
And eke his throne, even as the Sun before me.
37 And as the moon for ever stands fast,
As witness true, so shall his kingdom last.
38 But thou do now cast off, and eke reject,
You Are wroth with thine anointed, and elect.
39 Thy servants now thou'st quite undone, took down
Unto the ground also, his Royal Crown.
40 Thou pluck'st his legs up, him to confound,
And thou have brought his strong holds to the ground.
41 He Is spoiled by all that pass that way throughout,
He Is made a scorn to neighbors all about,
42 Against him that are, 'bove him thou'st set all those,
Over him rejoice thou have made all his foes.
43 Thou'st made his sword blunt, that should foes withstand
To him in war, thou giv'st no upper hand.
44 Thou'st made his glory cease the world quite round,
And thou have cast his throne down to the ground.
45 Thou have much shortened his youth, and Name,
And eke, thou have him covered with shame.
46 How long Lord, wilt thy self hide? wilt never turn?
Still shall thy wrath like fire against me burn?
47 Remember thou my time consumes fast,
Why made thou men like things most vain to waste?
48 What man, death sore his eyes shall never have?
Shall he his soul deliver from the grave?
49 Thy loving kindnesses O Lord where are?
Which in thy truth, to David thou did swear?
50 Remember what does on thy servant ly,
The reproach of folk, born in my breast have I.
51 Wherewith thy foes O Lord blaspheme thy Name,
Th'anointeds steps they cease not to defame.
52 Blessed be God, both now, and eke always,
Praised be his Name. Amen, Amen, I say.
PSALM. XC.
1 LOrd, thou have been our sure defense, and rest,
So long time past as cannot be expressed.
2 E're mountains were, or earth, or world abroad,
From age to age, for ever thou art God.
3 Thou grindest man like dust, or clay, and then
Thus do thou say, Return ye sons of men.
4 For many years, as now are in thy sight,
When it is past, it is as the watch of the night.
5 When thou them scatterest, as sleep's their trade,
And like the grass, whose beauty soon does fade.
6 It springs in the morn, and grows presently,
At noon it is cut quite down, and waxes dry.
7 For through thy wrath, our might is much decayed,
And of thy wrath we are full sore afraid.
8 Thou'st set our iniquities in thy sight,
Our secret sins are in thy favors light.
9 Thy wrath us kills, thereof does naught remain,
Our years consume, and cannot be called again.
10 Full threescore years and ten, we live on mold,
Who sees four score, is counted wondrous old.
And yet the strength, the which we look upon,
Is naught, but grief, for they as blasts are gone.
11 Who once does know, what power thine anger has,
And fears thee, according to thy wrath.
12 Lord teach us, while on earth we do remain,
TO apply our heart even wisdom to attain.
13 Return O Lord, how long wilt in wrath proceed?
Thy Servant favor show, help him at need.
14 O fill us early with thy truth always,
That we may much rejoice even all our days.
15 Thou have us plagued, but now Lord make us glad,
For all the years that we have trouble had.
16 Thy work, let to thy servant Lord appear,
And eke thy glory to their children dear.
17 Thy grace let stand upon thy servants thus,
And what we take in hand, prosper to us.
PSALM XCI.
1 HE that in secret place dwells of the most high,
Shall 'bide under his wings eternally.
2 I Will say of God, he is my 'fence most just,
My fortress eke, for in him I do trust.
3 Sure from the fowler he shall be thy 'fence,
And also from the noisome pestilence
4 His wings thee'l save, and keep thee safely there;
His truth shall be thy 'fence, instead of spear.
5 Thou shall in no wise fear, nor be affright
Of shafts that flee by day, or else by night.
6 Nor of the plague that walks in dark so fast,
Nor yet of that, which at noonday does waste.
7 Ten thousand at thy side destroyed shall be,
But there no harm at all shall come to thee.
8 Thou shall behold it only with thine eye,
And see the reward of those act wickedly.
9 Because thou'st made the Lord thy refuge be,
And trusts in him, thy sure defense is he.
10 There shall no evil fall upon thy face,
Nor shall the plague come nigh thy dwelling place,
11 For he will give his angels charge over thee,
In all thy ways they shall thy keepers be.
12 They shall thee bear, even their hands upon,
Lest that thou dash thy foot against a stone:
13 On Lions, and on Adders eke thou'st tread,
Dragons thou shall, under thy feet lay dead:
14 Because he e're has set his love on me,
I Will him protect, my Name aright knows he.
15 When he for help does cry, I Will answer give,
Him take from grief, in honor he shall live.
16 with long life, I him e're will satisfy,
And show him my salvation from on high.
PSALM. XCII.
1 It Is good to give thanks to the Lord, our King,
And to his holy Name all praises sing.
2 To show in morn, thy loving kindness bright,
And eke thy faithfulness in every night.
3 Upon ten stringed instruments most sweet,
With all the mirth you can invent most meet.
4 For through thy works, thou Lord have made me glad,
I will triumph in the works thine hand has made.
5 Thy works are great, thy thoughts are deep also,
6 A brutish man of this does nothing know.
7 When wicked men, as grass do spring up fast,
They, when they flourish, ever shall be waste.
8 But you are most high, and thou do reign therefore,
In every place, both now, and evermore.
9 Behold, O Lord, behold, thy foes I say,
How all that sin shall perish, and decay,
10 Like the Unicorn thou shall my horns lift high,
With oil most fresh, anointed be shall I.
11 The wish upon my foes mine eyes shall see,
Mine ears shall hear those, that do rise against me.
12 The righteous flourish shall like the Palm Tree,
Like Cedars eke, in Lebanon that be.
13 Those that are planted in the Courts of God,
They spring apace, and flourish all abroad.
14 They still in their old age, forth fruit should bring,
They shall be fat, and also flourishing.
15 To show that God upright is in his will,
He is my rock, in him there is none ill.
PSALM. XCIII.
1 THe Lord does reign with glory goodly dight,
To show his strength, he'th girt himself with might.
The earth he'th made, and shaped it so sure,
Naught can it move, it firmly does endure.
2 The world was made, thy seat was set before,
In time of old, thou have been ever-more.
3 The Floods, O Lord, the Floods do make a noise,
The Floods I say, have lifted up their voice.
4 The Lord is mightier than the waters, yea,
He makes a greater noise than the waves of the Sea.
5 Thy Testimonies are most sure always,
And truth becomes thine house, O Lord, for ay.
PSALM. XCIV.
1 O Lord, to whom all vengeance does belong,
Show forth thy self most valiant, and most strong.
2 Show forth thy self, for thou the earth do guide,
Reward the proud according to their pride.
3 How long shall wicked bear the sway in voice?
How long shall they thus triumph and rejoice?
4 How long, O Lord, shall the wicked take their fill,
Shall they rejoice, whose works are ever ill?
5 Thy Flock, and Heritage, they vex full sore;
Against thy folk they rage, still more and more.
6 To Slay the Widows, Lord, they do not cease,
And still they do destroy the fatherless.
7 Yet say they, God shall not our deeds epsy,
Neither shall Jacobs God this thing once eye.
8 Ye brutish men, some knowledge learn, arise,
And eke ye fools, when will ye once be wise?
9 He that the ear does plant, hear shall not he?
And he that forms the eye, shall he not see?
10 Who scourge the Heathen, shall not he punish too?
Who knowledge teaches, shall he not eke know?
11 The thoughts of man are known, by God on high,
That they are all corrupt, and vanity.
12 That man is blessed, whom thou do keep in aw,
And through chastisement, teach him in thy law.
13 Whereby he shall, in trouble quiet sit,
When wicked men shall fall into the pit.
14 For God will not refuse, his folk to take,
His heritage, he will no time forsake.
15 But judgment shall to righteousness convert,
Those follow't shall, that are upright in heart.
16 Who will arise against evil dor's with me,
And stand against the workers of iniquity?
17 Unless the Lord had been my rock and 'fence.
My soul, it had almost dwelt in silence.
18 When I did say, I am now like to fall,
Thou did provide to stay me up withal.
19 In The multitude of thoughts, within my mind,
Thy comforts, do delight my soul I find.
20 Will thou draw nigh, with wicked men to sit,
Instead of law, which mischief still commit.
21 For they consult against the men most good,
In counsels, and consult against guiltless blood.
22 But yet the Lord is my defense, and lock,
He is my God, my strength, and eke my rock.
23 He'st cause their mischiefs, themselves to annoy,
They Will fall in malice; God shall them destroy.
PSALM. XCV.
1 O Come unto the Lord, and let us sing,
Let Us make a joyful noise unto our King.
2 Yea, let us come, and to the Lord give praise,
In singing Psalms, let us rejoice always.
3 For why? the Lord's a great and mighty God;
A King above all Gods, in the world abroad.
4 His are the secret places of the Land,
The strength of Hills he also has in's hand.
5 The Sea is his, for he the same has wrought,
And eke the earth he framed out of naught.
6 O come, and lets worship the Lord therefore,
And let us bow down to God for evermore.
7 For he is our God, for us he does provide,
We are his flock, he feeds us, he is our guide.
8 To day if ye'l hear, harden not your heart,
As in the grudging day, ye did in the desert.
9 Your fathers tempted me, me for to prove,
My works they saw, yet they did still me move.
10 Twice twenty years they grieved me, I did say,
They err in heart, they have not known my way.
11 Wherefore I kindled wrath against them in breast,
And swear they should not come into my rest.
PSALM. XCVI.
1 O Sing unto the Lord, a Song most new,
Sing to the Lord on earth that is most true.
2 Yea, sing to God, and to his holy Name,
Show forth always, Salvation by the same.
3 Among Heathen speak his honor round about,
His wonders show, even all the world throughout:
4 The Lord is great, we should him greatly praise,
He Is to be feared 'bove all the Gods always.
5 For Heathens Gods are Idols, that will fade,
But yet our God, the heathen he has made.
6 All praise shall dwell for ay, before his face,
Strength shall excel within his holy place.
7 All folk give thanks, unto the Lord always,
With might ascribe, unto the Lord, I say.
8 Give glory, due to Gods most holy Name,
Go to his Courts, with gifts unto the same.
9 worship the Lord, within his Temple bright,
Let all the folk be fearful at his sight.
10 Tell all the world, the Lord does reign above,
He'th set the earth so fast, it cannot move.
And that it is he, that rules with princely might,
To judge the folk with equity, and right.
11 The Heavens, and the earth shall much rejoice,
The Sea, and all therein shall make a noise.
12 The field shall joy, with all things on the earth,
The Woods, and every Tree, shall sing with mirth.
13 Before Gods face, and coming of his might,
When he shall judge, and rule his folk aright.
PSALM. XCVII.
1 THe Lord does reign, let all the earth rejoice,
Let multitudes of Isles him praise in voice.
2 Darkness, and Clouds, are round about him gone,
Justice, and judgment, dwell about his throne.
3 A fire before him goes, the World throughout,
And burns up his foes, even round about.
4 His ligh-te-nings did to the world appear;
Whereat the earth did look, and deadly fear.
5 The Hills, like wax, do melt even at Gods sight,
Even at the presence of the Lord most bright.
6 The Heavens show his justice all abroad,
That all may know the glory of our God.
7 Shame sure will come on those, serve Idols vain,
On those that love dumb Pictures to maintain.
8 Sion heard, glad was, Juda did rejoice,
'Cause of thy judgments, they have set forth their voice.
9 For thou art high, in all the earth abroad,
And art exalted 'bove all other God.
10 All that fear God, hate all things that are ill,
He saves his Saints, from such, as would them spill.
11 The light is sown, even for the just man's part,
Gladness, and mirth, for the upright in heart.
12 Ye just, in Gods great holiness rejoice,
Be thankful to him, both in heart and voice.
PSALM. XCVIII.
1 O Sing to God, a new and pleasant Song,
For he has wrought his wonders, great and strong.
With his right hand, he does his foes devour,
And victory get with his arm and power.
2 The Lord makes known his saving health and might,
He shows his justice in the Heathens sight,
3 To Israel, truth in mind he does record,
All earth has seen the goodness of the Lord.
4 A joyful noise, make to the Lord always,
In him rejoice, and eke to him give praise.
5 Play on the Harp, and Psalms unto him sing;
6 With Trumpets eke, rejoice before our King.
7 Yea, let the Sea, for joy, both roar and swell,
And eke the earth withal, therein that dwell.
8 Let floods rejoice, and clap their hands apace;
The Mountains eke, before the Lord his face.
9 He Will come to judge the World, and every wight,
And rule the folk, with justice, and with right.
PSALM. XCIX.
1 THe Lord does reign, though folk do rage full sore,
He sits on Cherubs, though the world does roar.
2 God's high, 'bove all, in Sion is his seat.
3 He Is holy, let all praise his Name most great.
4 The Kings strength loves judgment, equity, and right,
Which he in Jacob executes with might.
5 Exalt then God, th'Lord, for he is most holy;
Before his footstool, worship all lowly.
6 Moses, Aaron, were among his Priests, and eke
Samuel among those, that to his Name did seek.
7 They called, God heard, and from Clouds Pillars spoke,
They kept his Statutes, nor his Ordnance brake.
8 Thou answredst them, O Lord, and them forgave,
Though vengeance on their follies thou would have.
9 Exalt our God, him worship at his hill,
For he most holy is, in all his will.
PSALM. C.
1 ALL Lands make joyful noise, before God rejoice:
2 Him serve with gladness, and with pleasant voice.
3 Know the Lord, is God, it is he that has us made,
Not we our selves, we's sheep are, he is our aid.
4 Enter his Gates with praise, his Courts with the same,
Be thankful to him, bless his holy Name.
5 For God's most good, his mercy does endure,
His truth unto all ages, is most sure.
PSALM. CI.
1 MErcy and judgment eke I Will sing to thee,
2 I Will wisely do, until thou come to me.
3 My heart shall walk within my house in light,
I Will set no wicked thing before my sight.
4 Who falls, I hate, they shall not cleave to me,
Ill hearts shall from me part, no ill I Will see.
5 I Will slay him, that is friend sland'reth privily,
The proud heart, I Will hate, and him that looks high.
6 Mine eyes on the faithful of the Land shall stay;
He me shall serve, that walks in perfect way.
7 He that deceives, in my house, shall not dwell,
Nor shall he often see me, that lies does tell.
8 The wicked of the Land, soon slay will I,
Ill doers eke, from the City of the most high.
PSALM. CII.
1 MY prayer hear, Lord, my cry let come to thee.
2 In troubled times, hide not thy face from me.
3 Incline thine ear to me, hear when I call,
A smoke consumes, as the herb does fade, I fall,
4 My heart like grass, is scorcht, and withered
So ^ore, that I forget to eat my bread.
5 With groanings sore, my bones cleave to my skin;
6 As deserts Pelican, such case I Am in.
7 As sparrow 'lone on house, so watch do I,
8 Against me, is sworn, my raging enemy.
9 For I have ashes eat, instead of bread,
And with my drink, my tears have mingled.
10 'Cause of thine indignation, and thy frown,
For thou'st me lifted up, and cast me down:
11 Like shadow that declines, my days do pass,
And I my self, like to the withered grass.
12 But thou O Lord, for ever shall endure,
Unto all Generations, firm and sure.
13 Thou shall arise, and Sion mercy show,
For th'time, to show her favors, is come now.
14 For in her stones, thy servants pleasure take,
Favors her dust, Lord, do not her forsake.
15 The heathens then, O Lord, thy Name shall fear,
Thy glory ring, through kingdoms, far and near.
16 When God shall Sion build, appear shall he,
In glory great, and magnanimity.
17 The prayer of the destitute he will regard,
Not them despise, but give them due reward.
18 For future age, this shall be writ always,
That those here-after born, may give thee praise:
19 For he looked down even from his holy place,
Beholding earth, with his most glorious face.
20 To hear the groans of those, that prisoners are,
And those that were condemned to die, to spare.
21 Mount Sion in, for to declare Gods Name,
And in Jerusalem, advance his fame.
22 When people gathered are, both far, and near,
To serve the Lord, and in his Courts appear.
23 My former strength he weakened, in the way,
My days he shor-te-ned: Thus I did say,
24 Midst of my days, away Lord, take not me,
Thy years, throughout all generations be.
25 Of old, thou'st laid the foundations of the Land,
The heavens are the works of thine own hand.
26 They perish shall, but thou shall still endure,
They shall wax old, and change like a vesture.
27 But you are the same, thy years for ay shall be,
28 Thy servants sons, shall daily stand before thee.
PSALM. CIII.
1 SOul bless the Lord, bless thou his holy Name,
And all within me do likewise the same.
2 Still bless the Lord, my soul never cease to be,
Mindful of him, who still takes care of thee.
3 Who gave thee pardon for thy faults, who still
Makes well thy pain, and sickness at his will.
4 Who does redeem thy life from death, and who
Does tender mercies daily to thee show.
5 Who feeds thee with good things, so that thy youth,
Like as the Eagles, so he still renew'th.
6 The Lord with justice, executes those,
Who are not friends unto his Saints, but foes.
7 The Lord to Moses, did his ways declare,
His acts, unto the Isralites lay bare.
8 The Lord is merciful, though we him grieve,
Slowest to wrath, and quickest to forgive.
9 He will not always chide, nor will he cause,
His wrath, both now, and ever-more to pause.
10 Nor yet according to our sins, has he
Rewarded us, but in a higher degree:
11 As far as it is 'twixt earth, and heaven above,
Such is his mercy to us, such his love.
12 Such space as it is 'twixt East and West, such he
Removes from us, both sin and misery.
13 Like as a Father loves Children dear,
So does the Lord, if we him truly fear.
14 The Lord that made us, knows our fashion just,
How weak we are, and how we are but dust.
15 And how the days of man are few; for they,
Like as a flower, quickly fade away.
16 Whose gloss, and beauty, stormy winds disgrace,
And make it loose the sweetness of that place.
17 But yet the Lord, his Saints will ever love,
Their Children shall be blessed from above.
18 To such as keep his Covenant, and do
His Will, and his Commandment also.
19 The Heaven is the footstool of the Lord,
The Earth he rules, both by power and word.
20 Ye Angels great in power, praise ye the Lord,
Which to obey, and do his will accord.
21 Ye Noble Hosts, and Ministers, strive still
To execute his pleasure, and his will.
22 Yea, all his works, praise ye his holy Name,
In every place, soul do likewise the same.
PSALM. CIV.
1 BLess God my soul, O Lord thou art most high,
With honor thou art clad, and Majesty.
2 Who as a Garment, clothes thy self with light,
Who stretchest out the Skies, like Curtains bright.
3 Whose Chamber beams do lie in waters low,
Who makes Clouds Charrets, rides on wings that blow.
4 Who Angels Spirits makes, Ministers a flame;
5 Who laid the Earth, that none can move the same.
6 As with a garment, thou'st it clothed with the deep,
Thou'st made the waters 'bove the Mountains keep.
7 At thy rebuke they fled, there none would stay,
From the thunders voice they hasted all away.
8 They go by Hills, by Vales their way they take,
They go to the place, which thou for them did make.
9 Thou'st made abound, that they o're't may not pass,
That they turn not again, to cover the grass.
10 He sends the springs into the streams, most strong,
Which runs the Mountains, and the Hills among.
11 They drink do give to each beast of the field,
The Asses quench their thirst, which are most wild.
12 The dwelling place of fowls, eke by them are,
Which among the branches green, do sing most rare.
13 The Hills, eke from his Chambers, watreth he,
All earth's filled with thy works which they do see.
14 For beast, he grass; for man, he herb does sow;
That he may food 'cause from the earth to grow.
15 And that which makes man's heart glad, namely wine,
And oil, to cause the face of man to shine.
16 Gods Trees are full of Sap, they nothing want,
Lebanons Cedars, there the Lord did plant.
17 Where birds for safety go, and make their nests,
For the Stork the Fir Tree, her house is, there she rests.
18 The Hills for the wild Goats, a refuge is most high,
Rocks are for Conies, that they there may lie.
19 For Seasons, he appointed has the Moon,
The Sun knows when it is up, t'must go down soon.
20 When it is night, thou make darkness sleep,
Wherein all beasts, out of the Forests creep.
21 The Lions young, do roar after their prey,
From God the Lord, they seek their meat always.
22 The Sun does rise, they get together then,
And presently they couch down in their Den.
23 Man goes forth, unto his work full soon,
And to his labor, there he stays till noon.
24 In Wisdom Lord, thy works each one thou'st wrought,
Thy Riches on the earth, are past man's thought.
25 So is the great wide Sea, wherein are all
Unspeakable things creeping, large, and small.
26 The Ships go there, the Levi'than eke I say,
Whom thou have given leave, therein to play.
27 These all on thee do wait, O Lord, that live;
That in due time, thou meat to them may give.
28 That thou them giv'st, they gather from the Land,
They Are filled with good, when thou openest thine hand.
29 Thou hides thy face, they troubled are, and mourn,
Thou take their breath, and they to dust return.
30 Thou sends thy spirit forth, they newborn are,
Thou do renew the earth, that was most bare.
31 For evermore, Gods Glory shall endure,
He shall rejoice in's works, that are most pure.
32 The earth trembles, when he on it does look,
The Hills he touches, instantly they shook.
33 Whilst that I live, unto the Lord I Will sing,
And whilst I be, I Will praise give to my King.
34 My Meditation on him, shall be sweet,
I Will glad be in him, he is my help most meet.
35 Sinners destroy, ill men let be no more;
Bless thou the Lord, my soul praise him therefore.
PSALM CV.
1 GIve thanks to God, upon his Name eke call,
Make know his deeds, among people great and small.
2 Unto the Lord our God, high Psalms eke sing,
Talk of the wondrous works, even of our King.
3 Glory in God, and in his holy Name,
Let the heart rejoice, that seeks to do the same.
4 Seek God, the Lord his strength, and aid therefore,
Yea, seek his face both now, and evermore.
5 His wondrous works, let still be in your heart;
Nor let his judgments from your mind depart.
6 Ye Seed of Gods own Servant, Abraham;
Ye Jacobs Sons, Gods chosen do the same.
7 He is our Lord, our strength, our aid, our God,
His Judgments are, in all the earth abroad.
8 The Covenant, which he to his has made,
He has performed, according as he said.
9 Which Covenant, he made to Abraham,
His Oath, he made with Isa-ac by Name.
10 It stood for Law, That Jacob might obey,
For Covenant to Is-ra-el for ay.
11 Say-ing the Land Ca-na-an, to thee I Will give,
The Lot of thine Heritage, wherein thou'st live.
12 When they were but a few, in number, men,
Yea, very few, and strangers in it then.
13 When they from one place, to others did walk,
One Kingdom from, unto an other folk:
14 He would have none, ever them ill to make;
But he reproved Kings, even for their sake.
15 Say-ing, touch not him, whom my King I Have made;
And to my Prophets, do no harm, he said.
16 Moreover, he a famine called on the land,
The staff of bread he brake, by his strong hand.
17 A man before them he sent, Joseph by Name,
He sold, for servant was, by doing the same.
18 Whose feet they hurt with fetters, them upon
On him also they even laid iron;
19 Until the very time that came his Word;
The Word it tried him, even of the Lord.
20 The King he sent him loose, also did he,
Even the peoples Ruler, set him free.
21 Lord, over all his house, eke he him made,
Ruler over all his substance he was said.
22 His Princes eke, he might at pleasure bind;
Shows Senators, how they should wisdom find.
23 Is-ra-el also into Egypt came,
And Jacob, sojourned in the land of Ham.
24 He eke his people, did much multiply,
And made them stronger than their enemy.
25 To hate his people, eke he turned their mind,
And eke to deal with his Servants, most unkind.
26 Moses he sent, his love to them he shows,
And Aaron eke, his Servant whom he chose.
27 His signs, he likewise showed unto them,
His wonders also in the Land of Ham.
28 Darkness he sent, he there made darkness dwell,
Against his word, they did not yet rebel.
29 The waters he turned to blood, the fish he slew;
30 Frogs did destroy the Land, in Princes view.
31 He spoke, and diverse sorts of flies appear,
And lice in all their coasts, both far and near.
32 He gave them rain for hail, and in their Land,
The flames were mingled, all at his Command.
33 Fig Trees and Vines he smote with his great hosts,
And brake the trees that were in all their coasts.
34 He spoke, and Locusts every where abound,
35 And Cater-pillars eat the fruit of the ground:
36 He also smote, and eke distroy'd at length,
The firstborn in their Land, chief of their strength.
37 He brought them forth, with riches them among,
All men amongst their tribes, were very strong.
38 Egypt was glad, when they did thence depart,
For the fear of them did fall upon their heart.
39 Cloud for a covering, he spread by day,
And fire by night, to guide them in the way.
40 They ask't, he brought them quails; and eke them fed,
With Manna, Angels food, the heavenly bread.
41 He opened the rock, then waters forth did flow,
In places dry, there he did wonders show.
42 Even for his holy promise thought upon,
To Abram made, full many years agone.
43 And so brought forth his people, with much joy,
And them set free from those, did them annoy.
44 The Heathens Lands, he gave them to possess,
The peoples labors, that did them oppress.
45 That they his Statutes might observe always,
And keep his Laws, the Lord see that ye praise.
PSALM. CVI.
1 GIve thanks unto the Lord, and eke him praise,
For he is good, his mercy lasts always.
2 Who utter can the mighty works of God?
Who can show forth his praises all abroad?
3 Who judgment keeps, God ever them does bless,
And him, who does at all times righteousness.
4 As thou thy folk love, so love me, I pray,
With thy Salvation, visit me always.
5 That I the good of thy chosen ones may see,
And may rejoice in their felicity.
6 Our Fathers with, we have done wickedly,
With them we have commit iniquity.
7 In Egypt they, thy wonders learned not,
The number of thy mercies, they forgot.
8 Nevertheless he saved them, for's name sake,
That he, his mighty power known might make.
9 The red Sea he eke rebuk't, and up it dried,
As deserts through, through depths he did them guide;
10 And saved them from the hand of their great foe,
And set them free, from enemies also.
11 The waters covered their foes each one,
And of their enemies there was left none.
12 Then they believed his word, and sang his praise;
13 They soon forgot his works, and eke his ways.
14 They lusted very much, in the Wilderness;
In desert place they tempted God no less.
15 And God them gave, what they did then request,
Leanness he sent into their inward breast.
16 They Moses eke, in Camp did much despite,
And A-a-ron, in whom God took delight.
17 The earth opened, and Dathan did devour,
Abirams troop it covered each hour.
18 A fire their company, in kindled then,
The flame thereof consumed the wicked men.
19 A Calf in Horeb, for themselves they made,
The molten Image eke, they worshipped.
20 Their honor eke, and glory thus changed they,
Like Ox that grass, like Horse that eats hay:
21 They quite forgot their God, and holy King,
Which had in Egypt done a wondrous thing.
22 Won-de-rous works in Land of Ham did he,
Things dreadful to be known, even by the red Sea.
23 Therefore, 'cause they themselves show so unkind,
Them to destroy, he purposed in his mind.
Had not his chosen Moses stood in the way,
To cease his wrath, lest that he should them slay.
24 Yea, they did all his pleasant Land despise,
Believed his word, not, and did ill devise.
25 In The tents they murmured, the did not rejoice,
Nor did they hearken to their Saviors voice.
26 Therefore against them he lifted up his hand,
Them to destroy, e're they could see that Land.
27 Among Nations eke, to slay their seed with his sword,
And eke, to scatter them, through Lands abroad.
28 To Ba-al-peor eke they joined their head,
And ate the sacrifices of the dead.
29 Thus they to anger daily him provoke,
Which makes him plague them with his heavy stroke.
30 Then stood up Phi-ne-as, who did the deed,
And so the plague was staid, the people freed.
31 For good, that counted was to him therefore,
All generations to, for evermore.
32 They also angered him, of strife at the Well,
That for their sakes, with Moses it went ill.
33 Because, they him provoked, into a heat,
He spoke by roat, his fervor was so great.
34 They did not kill the Nations, nor that Land,
Concerning whom the Lord did them command:
35 But were amongst heathen, and their works did learn;
36 They served a snare, yet could they not discern.
37 Both they, and eke their sons, did act much evil,
They sacrificed their daughters to the Devil.
38 Yea, most unkindly guiltless blood they spilt,
Their childrens blood, without all cause of guilt.
Whom they to Canaan gave, with wicked hand,
And so with blood, polluted all the land.
39 Thus they, with their own works were spoiled, and went
A whoring after what they could invent.
40 Gods wrath was kindled, against his folk therefore,
For his own heritage, he did abhor.
41 And he them gave into the Heathens hand,
Who them did hate, over them had great command:
42 They were oppressed, by their deadly foe,
And brought under subjection also.
43 They still provoked, he oft-times set them free,
But were brought low, for their iniquity.
44 Yet when they were in much extremity,
He them regarded, and did hear their cry:
45 He called to mind, what he to them had swore;
And he, for them repented much therefore.
46 He also those, to pity them, made glad,
That carried them, when they were captives led.
47 Save us O Lord our God, to thee we pray,
From Heathen folk, eke gather us always:
That we, may thanks give to thine Holy Name,
That in thy Praise, we may adore the same.
48 Blessed be the God of Is-ra-el for ay,
Praise ye the Lord. Amen let all men say.
PSALM. CVII.
1 GIve thanks to God, for he is good always,
His mercy does endure, both now, and ay.
2 The redeemed of the Lord, let him say so,
Whom he has kept from the hand of their great foe.
3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the East,
From the North, from the South, yea even from the west.
4 They wandered in Solitary way,
No City they did find, where they could stay.
5 Hungry, and thirsty, the were, 'cause they did want;
Their Soul within them, also it did pant.
6 Their trouble in, to God they all did cry,
He them set free from their extremity.
7 And he them led forth, e-ven by the right way,
That they might go to the place, where they might stay.
8 O that men would unto the Lord give praise,
His goodness for, unto poor Souls always!
9 The longing Soul he satisfies at will;
The hungry Soul, with goodness he does fill.
10 Such as be in the depths of darkness found,
Affliction in most toilsome being bound.
11 'Cause they Rebel'd against Gods great Majesty,
And eke contemned the Counsel of the most High.
12 Therefore he brought the hearts down of each one,
They all fell down, to help them there was none.
13 Their trouble in, to God they all did cry,
He saved them from all their misery.
14 From darkness he them brought, for his own sake,
Their bands in sunder eke, for them he break.
15 O that men would unto the Lord give praise,
His goodness for, unto poor Souls always!
16 For he, the great strong Gates of Brass has broke,
And cleft the Iron Bars, even at one stroke.
17 Fools for their sins, do feel much misery,
The afflicted are, for their iniquity.
18 Their Soul, all manner of good meat does hate,
And they draw near, e-ven unto Deaths Gate.
19 Their trouble in, to God they all did cry,
He saved them from their great misery.
20 He sent his Word, and them did heal with joy,
He them set free, from those would them destroy.
21 O that men would, unto the Lord give praise.
His goodness for, unto poor Souls always!
22 And let them sacrifice with thankful voice,
His wondrous works declare, and so rejoice.
23 Such as in Ships into the Sea descend.
Their merchandise, through fearful floods to end.
24 The works of God, the Lord, these men do see,
His wonders eke, where deepest waters be.
25 For he commands, the stormy winds obey,
And lifts up the waves thereof, I say.
26 To the skies they mount, to the depths they fall again,
Their soul is melted, 'cause of their great pain.
27 They stagger much, they reel both to and fro,
They Are almost mad, like drunken men they go.
28 Then in their pain, to God they all did cry,
He saved them from their great misery.
29 He makes the storm a calm, even at his will,
So that the waves thereof, which raged, are still.
30 They Are glad when rest is come, which they did crave,
And are brought to that place which they would have.
31 O that men would unto the Lord give praise,
His goodness for, unto poor souls always!
32 Let them, the folk amongst, praise his holy Name;
Where elders be, let them eke do the same.
33 He rivers makes, like deserts to be found,
And water-springs he turns into dry ground.
34 A fruitful Land, full barren he does make,
Of wicked men, revenge he does then take.
35 He deserts turns to water, that does stand,
And into water-springs, he turns dry land.
36 There he makes dwell, those that most hungry are,
That for their use, a Town they might prepare.
37 And Vineyard plant, and sow good seed in field,
Of their increase, which pleasant fruit may yield.
38 He blessed them, they multiplied in peace,
He suff'red not their Cattle to decrease.
39 Again, they minish't are, and brought full low,
Oppression, through affliction, and sorrow.
40 He puts contempt on Kings, makes them to stray
In wilderness, where that there is no way.
41 But yet the poor he brings from troubles deep,
And often augments their train, like flocks of sheep.
42 The man that is just, shall see it, and rejoice,
And all iniquity shall stop her voice.
43 Who so is wise, and will these things record;
Such shall perceive the kindness of the Lord.
PSALM. CVIII.
1 O God, my heart is fixed, I Will sing always,
Even with my glory, and thee give due praise.
2 Awake, my harp, sweet melody to make;
And I my self, right early, will awake.
3 O Lord, among people thou shall praised be,
Among Nations great, thou shall be praised by me.
4 Thy mercy for, is much 'bove the heavens high,
Thy truth does reach beyond the cloudy sky.
5 'Bove Heavens high exalt thy self O God,
On earth display thy Glory all abroad.
6 So that thy might may keep, such as thee fear,
That they may have thy help, this from me hear.
7 I will rejoice, God spoke in's holy place,
Sichem, and Succoths, I Will divide by pace.
8 Gilead is mine, Manasses mine beside;
Ephraim's my head, my law does Juda guide.
9 In Mo'b I Will wash, over Edom make shoe flee,
Philistine triumph thou, because of me.
10 Who will me bring into the City strong?
To Edom guide, lest that I should go wrong.
11 Wilt not thou, which have left us, and our coasts,
And would not take, into thy care, our hosts,
12 Give us thy help, from those that us disdain?
The help that man can give us, is but vain.
13 Through God, our Lord, we shall do valiantly.
It Is he alone treads down our enemy.
PSALM. CIX.
1 O Lord my God, hold not thy tongue always,
Even thou, that art the God of all my praise.
2 The mouth of the wicked out, against me is broke,
With lying tongue they have against me spoke.
3 With hatred they me compassed about,
And eke against me fought, a cause without.
4 My love for, they my adversaries are,
But I do daily give my self to prayer.
5 They eke have ill, for good rewarded me,
And for my love, they all most hateful be.
6 A wicked man over him set, eke let stand,
The dreadful Satan, even at his right hand.
7 When he is judged, let him condemned be,
And let his prayer become iniquity.
8 Let Us days be few, let others take his place,
9 Let Us wife a widow be, 's Sons fatherless.
10 Let Us Sons be Vagabonds, and beg their bread,
Wandering from place, to place, for to be fed.
11 Let the Extortioner catch all his store,
Let strangers spoil his labor, got before.
12 Let none be there, him mercy to extend,
Let there be none to be his childrens friend.
13 So let his seed for ever be destroyed,
And in succeeding age their name be void.
14 Let not his fathers sins, from Gods thought, fall,
Nor's mothers faults be done away at all.
15 But in Gods sight let them remain for ay,
That God from earth may cut them clean away.
16 'Cause he no mercy showed, but at one stroke,
He strove to slay those that in heart were broke.
17 He cursing loved, 't shall be unto him ^o;
He hated good, it shall be far him fro.
18 As he with cursing clad, himself so 't shall,
Like water, oil, into his bowels fall.
19 As garment, let it be to him for ay,
As girdle, that he may be girt always.
20 Let this the reward be of my foes from God,
Of them, who speak against my soul abroad.
21 But do for me O God, for thy Name sake,
Thy mercy's good, thy hand from foes me take.
22 For I am poor and needy, pity me,
My heart is sore with grief, and misery.
23 Like the shadow when it does decline, I Am gone,
Like the locust I am tossed, now, and anon.
24 My knees through fasting, feeble grow, and weak,
My flesh me fails of its farness eke.
25 Reproach to them I was, even for thy sake;
When they looked on me, they their heads did shake.
26 O Lord my God, some help of thee I crave,
According to thy mercy, Lord me save.
27 That this is thine own hand, that they may know,
That thou, O Lord, this self-same thing did do.
28 Let them curse, but bless thou, let them have shame,
When they arise, let the friend joy in thy Name.
29 Let foes be clad with shame, and let them cover
Themselves with shame, with mantle, as all over.
30 My mouth shall thanks give to the Lord always,
Yea, I among multitudes will ^ound his praise.
31 For he shall be, even at the poors right hand,
To save him from those that his soul withstand.
PSALM. CX.
1 GOD said to my Lord, sit on my right hand,
Till I thy foes, thy footstool for make stand.
2 The rod of thy strength, God shall from Sion send,
Rule thou in midst of foes, unto the end.
3 In day on which thy power they shall see,
Free-offerings the folk shall offer thee.
With holy worshipping they'st offer all,
The births dew's the dew, that from the morning fall.
4 God swore he will not repent, what he does say,
M^lchized^k like, thou art Priest for ay.
5 The Lord on thy right hand, that is thy stay,
Shall wound for thee, great Kings, on's wrathful day.
6 Th'heathen he will judge, fill the place with bodies dead,
Over diverse Towns, in sunder smite the head.
7 He shall drink of the brook, even in the way,
Therefore shall he lift up the head that day.
PSALM. CXI.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, the Lord my heart shall praise,
Th'uprights assembly in, now, and always.
2 Gods works are great, of all them they are sought,
That pleasure therein have, or any thought.
3 His work is honorable, and most sure,
His righteousness for ever does endure.
4 His wondrous works to be thought on, he'th made,
The Lord most gracious is, from wrath most stayed,
5 To those that do him fear, meat given has he,
On's Covenant, he e're will mindful be.
6 The people he has shown of's works, the power,
The Heathens land, he may give them each hour.
7 The works of his hands are verity most pure,
All his Commandments they are most sure.
8 They all stand fast, both now, and eke anon,
In truth, and eke uprightness, they are done.
9 He has redemption ^^nt, 's folk to deliver,
His Vow command(...) blessed be's Name for ever.
10 Gods fear, the first step to, true wisdom's found;
Who keep his laws, with prudence they abound.
PSALM. CXII.
1 THE man's blessed, that fears God, and walks upright,
In Gods Commandments, that takes much delight.
2 His seed on earth they shall be much increas't,
Those that in heart upright are, shall be blessed.
3 Riches and Wealth, in's house shall be always,
His righteousness 't does endure for ay.
4 Unto the just, from darkness comes light,
He gracious is, of mercy full, and right.
5 A good man shows favor, and does lend,
All his affairs do unto wisdom tend.
6 Surely he shall not moved be, for ay,
The just shall be thought on, now, and always.
7 Of tidings ill, he shall not be afraid,
His Heart is fixed, trusting in his aid.
8 His heart is fast, afraid he shall not be,
Till his desire upon his foes he see.
9 He 'th given to the poor, his justice shall for ay
Endure, he shall exalted be always.
10 The wicked shall see it, and be grieved thereat,
Their whole desire shall melt away like fat.
PSALM CXIII.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, show forth his wondrous fame:
All ye his servants, praise his holy Name.
2 Blessed be the Name of God the Lord always,
From this time forth, and ever more I say.
3 From the rise of the Sun, to the going down of the same,
Let praised be the Lord's most holy Name.
4 The Lord's 'bove all is glory, 'bove the Heavens high;
5 Who Is like to God, who dwells above the Sky?
6 He does abase himself, to see we know
Things 'bove the Sky, and in the earth below.
7 The poor, out of the dust, he ta(...) always,
The needy ones from dunghill(...) does raise:
8 That he may set him, Princes (...) to walk,
Yea, even with the Princes of (...) folk.
9 The barren he makes children bear, therefore
Praise ye the Lord, both now and evermore.
PSALM. CXIV.
1 WHen Is-ra-el did out of Egypt go,
And Jacobs house from language strange also.
2 Judah his Sanctuary was, Is-ra-el
His large Dominions, wherein he did dwell.
3 The Sea saw it, and fled before his face,
Jordan was driven back out of his place.
4 The Mountains high, like unto Rams, did skip,
The little Hills, like dancing Lambs, did leap.
5 What ailed'st thee, O'Sea, that thou thus fled?
And Jordans streams, that thou wast backwards led?
6 Ye Mountains high, like Rams, why did ye skip?
And little Hills, like Lambs, why did ye leap?
7 Tremble thou earth, at the presence of the Lord,
Before Jacobs God, dread all with one accord.
8 Which turns Rocks, to standing waters clear;
From flint, makes fountain water to appear.
PSALM. CXV.
1 NOt to us Lord, Thy Name let the glory take,
Even for thy Truth, and eke thy mercies sake.
2 Why should the Heathen say, where is God their love?
3 He has done what he pleased, our God's above:
4 Their Idols, Gold are, made by men they be;
5 They Have mouths, but speak not; eyes, but cannot see.
6 They having ears, hear not, we know full well;
They noses have, yet have no sense to smell;
7 They hands, but feel not; feet, but they walk not;
There Is none of them that speaks through his throat.
8 They that them make, are like unto them just,
And so is every one that in them Trust.
9 O Is-ra-el, trust in the Lord always,
He is their help that trust in him for ay.
10 O house of Aaron, trust ye in his Name;
11 For he is their help and shield that do the same.
12 God has been mindeful of us, he will us bless;
To Israel, Aarons house, he will do no less.
13 Who fears the Lord our God, he will bless them all;
Who ere they be, let them be great or small.
14 The Lord he shall increase you more, and more,
Both you, and yours, you children shall have store.
15 You are the blessed of the Lords, say I,
Which made the earth, and eke the Heavens high.
16 The highest Heavens are the Lord's above,
The earth to men he gives, of his free love.
17 The dead praise not the Lord, neither do they,
That into silence do go down that way.
18 But we will bless the Lord our God always,
Praise ye the Lord, from this time forth for ay.
PSALM. CXVI.
1 I Love the Lord, because he hears my voice,
I am his Suppliant, he is my choice.
2 He has me heard, therefore on him I Will call,
And whilst I live, make him my all in all.
3 Hells pains, and eke deaths sorrows set me round,
Naught sorrow but, and trouble there I found.
4 Upon the Lords great Name then did I call,
I pray thee Lord, my soul free from this thrall.
5 God gracious is, to mercy bent is he,
6 He simple keeps; I low was, he raised me.
7 O thou, my soul, return unto thy rest,
God has much kindness unto thee expressed.
8 For thou deliv'red have my soul from thrall,
Mine eyes from tears, and eke my feet from fall.
9 In land of living, before the Lord I Have walked,
10 I have believed, was grieved, therefore I Have talked.
11 In haste, I thus said: All men liars be:
12 What shall I render God, for's gifts to me?
13 The wholesome cup of saving health I Will take,
Unto the Lords great Name my prayer I Will make?
14 Unto the Lord my God, I Will pay my vow,
In presence of his people, even now.
15 The death of those, in whom God takes delight,
Most precious are, in his most glorious sight.
16 Thy Servant Lord, I am, I do confess,
Thine Hand-maides Son, thou'st loosed me from distress.
17 The sacrifice of prayer, I Will offer thee,
Thy Name, shall still, be called upon by me.
18 Unto the Lord my God, I Will pay my vow,
In presence of his people, even now.
19 In all the Courts and Temples of the Lord,
Let Sion praise his Name with one accord.
PSALM. CXVII.
1 O All ye Nations, to the Lord give praise,
All ye his folk, both now, and eke always.
2 For he is merciful, his truth for ay
Indures, praise ye the Lord, therefore, I say.
PSALM. CXVIII.
1 GIve thanks to God, for he is good always,
His mercy does endure both now, and ay.
2 Let Israel say, his mercy lasts for ay,
3 And eke the same, let Aarons household say.
4 Those that fear God, even now let them say,
That he, his mercy eke indures for ay.
5 I called on God, in grief, he answered me,
In place most large, he also set me free.
6 The Lord is on my side, I will not be
Afraid, what man or beast can do to me.
7 God takes my part with those that do help me,
My wish on them that hate me, I shall see.
8 It Is better to believe the Lord, most just,
In Princes great then to confide, or trust.
9 It Is better to believe in God, most just,
In Princes great then to confide, or trust.
10 All Nations living, compas't me about,
But in the Name of God, I Will them blot out.
11 They all beset me, compast me about,
But in the Name of God, I Will blot them out.
12 They came 'bout me like Bees, but in Gods Name,
I quenched their fiery thorns, I Will 'stroy the same.
13 That I might fall, thou sore have thrust at me,
But God he helped, and eke deliv'red me.
14 The Lord is my defense, my strength, and song.
And he also, my Savior, is most strong.
15 In the dwellings of the just, there is health and joy,
The Lords right hand triumphs valiantly.
16 The right hand of the Lord's exalted high,
For his right hand, things works valiantly.
17 I shall not die, but live, and all abroad,
Declare the wondrous works, even of our God.
18 The Lord my God, have chastened me sore,
But unto death he has not g'ven me over.
19 Open the Gates of Righteousness always,
I Will enter them, the Lord alone to praise.
20 Gods Gate, in which the just to enter are,
21 I Will give thee praise, for thou have heard my prayer.
22 The stone, which builders oft-times did refuse,
Is now become the chief stone, which men use.
23 This is the doing of the Lord, most high,
It mavelous does seem even in our eye.
24 This is the day, which God the Lord has made,
We will rejoice, and eke in it be glad.
25 Save now my God, O Lord beseech thee I,
I thee beseech, send us prosperity.
26 Who comes in the Name of God, blessed is he,
Out of Gods holy house, blessed you have we.
27 He who has shown us light, is God the Lord,
On the Altars horns bind the Sacrifice with cord.
28 Thou art my God, I will show forth thy praise,
Thou art my God, I Will thee exalt always.
29 Give thanks to God, for he is good always,
His mercy does endure both now and ay.
PSALM. CXIX.
1 Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
Who daily walk in the Law of God, their stay.
2 Blessed are all they, from's Laws that never depart,
But him to seek, do wholly bend their heart.
3 They do no wicked thing, nor go astray,
But daily walk uprightly in his way.
4 Thou have commanded us, O Lord, on high,
Thy Precepts for to keep, not go a-wry.
5 O that my ways, directed were by thee,
To keep the Statutes thou prescribest me!
6 Then shall no shame over cloud me, when I shall
My self give up, to keep thy Precepts all.
7 I will thee praise, with uprightness of heart;
When I Have thy judgments learned, I Will never depart
8 Thy Statutes; all Laws also keep will I,
O Lord my God, leave me not utterly.
BETH.
9 By what means shall a young man's life amend?
By setting's self, on Gods laws to attend.
10 I have thee sought with my whole heart always,
From thy Commandments never let me stray.
11 Thy word has still been hid within my heart,
Nor has transgression caused me to depart.
12 O blessed Lord, to me thy Law lay bare,
13 My lips, thy judgments all, they do declare.
14 Thy testimonies in, I much rejoice,
Above all treasures I make them my choice.
15 I meditate thy law in all my days,
And have respect will I unto thy ways.
16 I will delight my self thy Statutes in,
And not forget thy word; that were a sin.
GIMEL.
17 Let me thy servant, of thy bounties taste,
That I may live, and not thy word off cast.
18 Open mine eyes, that so I may behold,
The wondrous things, which thy word has foretold.
19 On earth I am a stranger, do not hide
Thy Law from me, that still in truth would 'bide.
20 My soul breaks for the longing that it has
Unto thy judgments, even in thy path.
21 Thou have rebuk't the proud, they cursed be,
Which err from thy Commandments, and from thee.
22 From me remove reproach, contempt, O Lord,
For I still with thy precepts do accord.
23 Princes did sit, and often against me speak,
Yet will not I, thy Servant, thy Laws break.
24 Thy Testimonies in delight I Will have,
And take them for my Counselors to th'grave.
DALETH.
25 My soul does cleave unto the dust, O Lord,
Quicken thou me according to thy word.
26 I eke declared have, thy ways abroad,
Thou have me heard, teach me thy way O God.
27 Teach me O Lord, thy Precepts all to know;
And so I shall thy wondrous works forth show.
28 My soul for grief does melt away, I see,
According to thy Word strengthen thou me.
29 O Lord make me, a lying tongue refuse,
And let me know, how I thy Law may use.
30 Thy ways of Truth, I always made my choice;
Thy Judgement's in my view, I heard thy voice.
31 I Have stuck unto thy Statutes, and thy Name;
Therefore O Lord, see me not put to shame.
32 For I will run the way of thy Commands,
When thou'st enlarged my heart, and eke my hands.
HE
33 The way of thy Commands, O Lord me teach;
So shall I keep them, ever without breach:
34 Me knowledge give, thy laws shall never depart
From me, I will them keep with my whole heart.
35 Make me O Lord thy paths, in walk, upright;
For I in them, will set my whole delight.
36 Incline mine heart, thy Laws with to accord,
And eke from avarice, defend me Lord.
37 Lord, let mine eyes no vanity behold;
But in thy way O Lord, let me be bold.
38 Stablish thy Word, unto thy servant here,
Who is devoted even to thy fear.
39 Turn back the shame, of which I am afraid.
Thy Judgments good are, Lord thou art mine aid:
40 After thy precepts Lord, I much do long,
Thy Righteousness in, therefore make me strong.
VAU.
41 Thy mercies let come to me, eke O Lord,
Let me have health, according to thy Word.
42 So shall I answer him, that is unjust,
Who me Reproacht; for in thy Word I trust.
43 Quite from my mouth, take not of truth, the word;
For I have hoped in thy judgments Lord.
44 So shall I keep thy law continually;
45 Thy Law I seek, I Will walk at liberty.
46 Thy Testimony of, I Will speak before Kings,
I Will not ashamed be of thy wondrous things.
47 In thy Commandments, I Will my self delight,
Which I have loved, I will walk upright.
48 Thy Laws unto my hands, I Will lift on high;
And thy Statutes in practice put will I.
ZAIN.
49 Remember thou, unto thy servant, the Word,
In which thou have caused me to trust, O Lord.
50 This is my comfort, in my misery;
For thine own Word, has often times quickened me.
51 I greatly scorned am, even by the proud;
Yet from thy Law, my self I Have never bowed.
52 Of old, thy judgments I Have thought on, O Lord,
I Have comforted my self still in thy Word.
53 Horror has took hold on me, 'cause I saw,
The wicked thee forsake, and eke thy Law.
54 Thy Statutes Lord, have been my daily song;
When as in Pilgrimage I went along.
55 By night, I have remembered thy Name,
I Have kept thy Law, Lord let me not have shame.
56 This favor I obtained, because I did
His precepts keep, and from them never slid.
CHETH.
57 Thou art my strength, and portion eke, O Lord,
I often have said, that I would keep thy Word.
58 I did thy grace entreat, with my whole mind,
Like to thy Word, let me thy mercy find.
59 I Have tried my life, and eke my secret heart,
My feet, unto thy Law, I did convert.
60 I made great haste, in no wise would I stay;
Thy precepts all I keep, without delay.
61 The wicked, for their prey, me before them set,
Yet would I not thee, nor thy Law, forget.
62 At midnight I Will arise, and thanks give thee,
Because of thy just judgments toward me.
63 I am a friend to those that fear thy Name,
And eke that fear thy precepts without shame.
64 The earth is full, thy mercy of, always;
Teach me thy Statutes, Lord, both now and ay.
TETH.
65 Thou have dealt well, thy servant with, O Lord,
According to thy promise in thy word.
66 Me judgment good, and knowledge eke me teach,
For I have kept thy precepts without breach.
67 Before I punished was, I went astray,
But now I Have kept thy word, and will for ay.
68 Thou art good, do good, and art just, O Lord,
Teach me thy Statutes, and thy holy Word.
69 The proud against me, they forged heavily,
But with whole heart, thy precepts keep will I.
70 Their heart's as fat as grease, yet are they slight;
But in the Law of God, I much delight.
71 It Is good for me, that I afflicted was,
That I thereby, may learn to give thee praise.
72 The Law of thee, is far unto me more,
Than if I had of gold and silver store.
JOD.
73 Thy hands have made me, and me framed eke,
Me knowledge give, that I thy Law may seek.
74 They that thee fear, to see me will rejoice,
'Cause I have hoped in thy glorious voice.
75 I know the judgments are most right of thee,
And that in faithfulness thou'st punished me.
76 Thy mercy show, a comfort for, O Lord,
Thy Servant to, according to thy word.
77 Thy mercy show me, both by day and night,
That I may live; thy law is my delight.
78 Let th'proud be shamed, who wrong me without cause,
But I will meditate still on thy laws.
79 Let those that fear thee, turn, and eke me own,
And that have eke thy testimonies known.
80 My heart, let sound be, in thine holy Law,
That make me break it, may no shame, nor awe.
CAPH.
81 My soul does faint for thy salvation great,
But I still hope in thee, in my retreat.
82 Mine eyes me fail, for thine own word; and say,
When will thou comfort me, and be my stay?
83 For I am dried, like bottle in smoke set,
Yet do I not thy Statutes, Lord, forget.
84 Teach me what number of my days there be,
And vengeance show on them that trouble me.
85 The proud have dug pits, and spread their net
For me, because thy laws they do forget.
86 All thy Commandments most faithful be,
They persecute me falsely, help thou me.
87 On earth they almost me consumed; yet,
Nor thee, neither thy Laws, did I forget.
88 After thy loving kindness quicken me,
So shall I keep the word, promised by thee.
LAMED.
89 For ever, Lord, to us thou have made sure,
Thy word in heaven ever to endure.
90 Thy truth unto all ages is for ay,
Thou stablish't have the earth, not to decay.
91 As to this day they still continue shall,
Ordained by thee, for they are thy servants all.
92 Unless thy Law had been my whole delight,
I should in affliction perished quite.
93 I Will never forget thy precepts, nor yet thee,
For with them thou have often times quickened me.
94 I am thine, save me, for thou have me bought,
For with whole heart, thy precepts all I Have sought.
95 The wicked watch me still, for to destroy,
But I Will thy Truth consider, mak't my joy.
96 Of all perfections end, I Have seen, O God,
But thy Gommandments are exceeding broad.
MEM
97 How do I in thy Law delight always!
It is my Meditation all the day.
98 Thy Word has taught me, wiser for to be,
Then all my foes, for they are still with me.
99 My teachers all, in knowledge I excel,
'Cause I thy Laws keep, them to others tell.
100 More than the aged, I do understand,
Because I keep thy Precept, and Command.
101 My feet I have refrained from the evil way,
That I thy Word may keep, make it my stay.
102 I Have not departed from thy judgments yet,
For you are my teacher, I Will not them forget.
103 How sweet unto my tast's, thy word always!
Doubtless no honey half so sweet as they.
104 Thy precepts through, I understanding get,
Therefore, I each false way from me do set.
NUN.
105 Thy Words a Lamp, my feet for to direct,
A light unto my paths, in all respect.
106 Lord I have sworn, and it perform I will,
Thy Righteous Judgments ever to fulfill.
107 I am afflicted much, quicken O Lord,
My fainting soul, according to thy Word.
108 O Lord, accept my lips pure offering free,
Thy Righteous Judgments also teach thou me.
109 My soul continually is in my hand,
Yet I thy Law forget not, nor command.
110 The wicked folk, for me have laid their snare,
Yet from thy precepts, I did never err.
111 Thy Law's mine heritage, I Will never depart,
Thy Testimonies still, rejoice my heart.
112 I Have set my heart to keep thy law always,
In perseverance that shall last for ay.
SAMECH.
113 I hate vain thoughts, but love thy Law, O Lord,
114 Thou art my hiding place, I trust thy word.
115 Ye evil doers all from me depart,
For I Will on Gods Commandments set mine heart.
116 That I may live, thy promise me uphold,
Of hope let me no shame have, but be bold.
117 Uphold me Lord, and then full safe am I,
Thy Laws I Will love, and that continually.
118 Them that err from thy ways, thou'st trod to ground,
For their deceits are falsehoods, that abound.
119 Thou like earth's scum, the wicked turn'st away,
Therefore I love thy testimonies ay.
120 For fear of thee, my flesh does tremble much,
I Am sore afraid, thy judgments they be such.
AIN.
121 Judgment, and justice, eke O Lord, I Have done,
Let me not be oppressed by any one.
122 My surety thy servant, be even for good,
Let not the proud m'oppress, nor seek my blood.
123 Mine eyes do fail for thy Salvation Lord,
And for thy just, and eke thy faithful word.
124 In mercy Lord, do with thy servant deal,
Thy Statutes teach me, they are my choice weal.
125 Lord I am thine, me understanding give,
That I may know thy precepts, by them live.
126 It Is time for thee to work, bring folk in aw,
For they imperiously make void thy Law.
127 Therefore thy Statutes pure, O Lord, I love,
Above choice treasure, yea choice gold above.
128 So I Will esteem thy precepts all, for ay,
Most right they be, and I Will hate all false way.
PE
129 Thy Laws are wonderful even in the deep,
Therefore, O Lord, my soul them all does keep.
130 The entrance of thy word, does make folk live,
Unto the simple it does knowledge give.
131 I opened my mouth, and eke did pant,
Thy Laws, and eke thy precepts of for want.
132 Be merciful to me, keep me from shame,
And eke me use, as those that fear thy Name.
133 Set m' in thy word, let no iniquity
Me rule, or have Dominion over me.
134 Deliver me from those, would me oppress,
So will I keep thy Laws in righteousness.
135 Thy face upon thy Servant make to shine,
Thy Statutes teach me, that they may be mine.
136 Great streams of water run quite down mine eye,
'Cause the break thy Laws, follow iniquity.
TSADDI.
137 Most just, and righteous, eke art thou, O Lord,
Upright are all thy judgments, and thy word.
138 The testimonies thou'st enjoined for ay,
They righteous are, and faithful eke are they.
139 My zeal, it has consumed me, O Lord,
Because my foes forgotten have thy word:
140 Thy word it is most just, and eke most pure,
Therefore thy Servant will in it endure.
141 I small am, and as scorn before men set,
Yet do I not thy precepts, Lord, forget.
142 Thy righteousness, it is most just always,
And eke thy Law, it is the truth for ay.
143 Trouble and grief me hold, they eke me spite,
Yet thy Commandments are my delight.
144 The righteousness thy Laws of is for ay,
Me knowledge give, that I may live always.
KOPH.
145 I cried with my whole heart, O Lord me hear,
I will thy Statutes keep, and eke thee fear.
146 O Lord my God, save me, to thee I cry,
Thy testimonies all, then keep shall I.
147 I cried to thee, before day break, O Lord,
And eke did hope, and trust in the glorious word.
148 Mine eyes prevent the watches of the night,
That meditate thy word in, Lord I might.
149 For the kindness sake, my voice let come before thee,
According to thy judgment quicken me.
150 That follow after mischief, nigh they draw,
They far are from thy precepts, and thy Law.
151 You Are near, O Lord, therefore, on thee I Will call,
And thy Commandments, they truth are all.
152 Touching thy Laws, I them have known always,
That thou have founded them, even for ay.
RESH.
153 My grief consider, eke deliver me,
For I thy Law forget not, nor yet thee.
154 Plead thou my cause, eke set me free, O Lord,
Quicken thou me, according to thy word.
155 Salvation's far from those, that wicked be,
For they thy Statutes seek not, neither thee.
156 O Lord, my God, thy mercies many be,
According to thy judgments, quicken me.
157 Both foes, and followers, many are mine,
But from thy Laws, yet do I not decline.
158 I saw the sinners, and was grieved O Lord,
Because thy Law, they kept not, nor thy word.
159 Consider Lord, how I thy Precepts love,
According to thy Statutes, eke me move.
160 Thy word, from first to last, is true and pure,
Thy judgments just do all for ay endure.
SCHIN.
161 Princes me persecute causeless, O Lord,
But the heart of me, in aw stands of thy word.
162 Even at thy word, I do rejoice in mind,
Like one, that wealth does in abundance find.
163 Of lying tongues, I hate, both great and small,
But I do love thy Laws, and Precepts all.
164 Sev'n times a day, O Lord, I do thee praise,
Because thy judgments, they are just always.
165 Great peace have they, which in thy Law delight,
For nothing shall offend them, nor them spite.
166 O Lord, I Have hope't in thy Sal-va-ti-on,
And thy Commandments I all have done.
167 My soul has kept thy Testimonies right,
And I exceedingly in them delight.
168 I Have done all that, which thou have said to me,
For all my ways they daily are before thee.
TAU.
169 My cry, let come unto thine ear, O Lord,
Me knowledge give, according to thy word.
170 My supplication eke, let come before thee,
According to thy word, deliver me.
171 My lips shall speak, and also utter praise,
When thou'st me taught thy Statutes and thy ways.
172 My tongue, thy word, and works shall eke lay bare,
All thy Commandments most righteous are.
173 Thine hand let help me eke, and with me close,
For I thy Laws, and Precepts all have chose.
174 For thy Salvation I have longed, O Lord,
I love to act thy Law, and hear thy word.
175 My soul let live, and it shall give thee praise,
And eke thy judgments let me help always.
176 Lost sheep, as I have strayed, thy servant seek,
For I thy Laws think on, and Precepts eke.
PSALM. CXX.
1 IN my distress, unto the Lord I cried,
My prayer he heard, my suit was not denied,
2 My soul, O Lord, from lying lips deliver,
And keep me from deceitful tongue for ever.
3 O thou false tongue, what shall to thee be given?
Or what be done to thee, who thus do sin?
4 Arrows most keen, from the Almighty's hand,
Shall thee consume, as fire at his Command.
5 Wo's me that I constrained am, to dwell
In Meshech, Kedars Tents to me's a Hell.
6 My soul has too long dwelt with them, that hate
A peaceful Life, and Solace in debate.
7 I am for peace, but when I speak, they are
For times most troublesome, and eke for war.
PSALM CXXI.
1 UNto the Hills I will lift up mine eyes,
O Lord, from whence my help does all arise.
2 My help from God comes, who did heaven frame,
And eke the earth, blessed be his holy Name.
3 Thy foot, for to be moved, he will not see,
He does not slumber, that preserves thee.
4 Behold, even he that Is-ra-el does keep,
'S not given to slumber, neither will he sleep.
5 The Lord thy keeper is, and eke thy shade,
On thy right hand he is, he has thee made.
6 The Suns bright beams shall not by day thee smite,
Nor shall the Moons white frost, thee hurt by night.
7 From evils all, the Lord shall thee preserve,
And keep thy soul, in safety, him to serve.
8 In all thy ways, he shall thee keep therefore,
From this time forth, and that for ever-more.
PSALM. CXXII.
1 I Much rejoyc't, when as the people said,
Let Us go into the house of God, our aid.
2 Our feet within thy gates, most firm shall stand,
O thou Jerusalem, chief of the Land.
3 Jerusalem is builded most compact,
No foreign foes mischief on us can act.
4 The Tribes of God go up unto the same,
Into his house, to glorify his Name.
5 For there are set the thrones of judgment still.
For David's house, Gods word for to fulfill.
6 O Pray ye then for Jerusalem's peace,
Let them that love her, prosper, and not cease.
7 Peace be within, and eke thy walls surround,
Prosperity within thy gates abound.
8 For my dear friends, and brethrens sake, I Will say,
Peace be within thy Palaces, for ay.
9 'Cause of the house of God, the Lord most high,
I Will seek thy good, and eke felicity.
PSALM. CXXIII.
1 LOrd unto thee, mine eyes lift up will I,
O thou that dwell in the heavens high.
2 As Servants eyes, on Masters fixed be,
We eye thee Lord, till mercy flow from thee.
3 Have mercy on us Lord, thou God on high,
For with contempt we are fill^d exceedingly.
4 Contempt has filled our soul, for we have born,
Reproach from those, that do us proudly scorn.
PSALM. CXXIV.
1 If It had not been the Lord, our strength, and stay,
Who on our side was, now may Israel say.
2 If God had not our part took against our foes,
When lewd and wicked men against us rose:
3 They Would us devoured in their wrathful ire,
And quick consumed us, as a furious fire.
4 Then had the raging floods us over powered,
The streams thereof would have our souls devoured.
5 The waters in their pride, without control,
Have us devoured, and eke o're-whelm'd our soul.
6 Blessed be the Lord our God, and guide for ay,
Who'th not us given unto their teeth for prey.
7 Our soul's escap'^ as bird from th'fowlers snare,
The snare is broke, and we escaped are.
8 Our help still lies in Gods most holy Name,
Who both the heaven, and the earth did frame.
PSALM. CXXV.
1 They Will as mount Sion be, whom God does guide,
Which cannot be moved, but ever does abide.
2 As mountains are Jerusalem about,
So God is with his folk, all end without.
3 For the wicked's rod, shall not on th'righteous be,
Lest they should turn unto iniquity.
4 Do good unto the good, in them delight,
And eke to them, that are in heart upright.
5 The wicked shall be, with those act wickedly,
But Israel shall be loved by God on high.
PSALM. CXXVI.
1 WHen God did turn Sions captivity,
Like them that in a dream were, so were we.
2 Then did they laugh, and sing, even so that they,
Among the heathen, God has done great things, did say.
3 Has done great things for us, the Lord our choice,
Whereof we all are glad, and much rejoice:
4 As streams in the south turn our captivity,
5 They that do sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
6 He that goes forth and weeps, bearing good seed,
Shall come again with joy, and sheaves indeed,
PSALM. CXXVII.
1 EXcept God to the house do set his hand;
For what man does unto it, 'twill never stand.
Except the Lord the City in, keep guard,
In vain it is, that men do watch, and ward.
2 To rise up early, sit up late it is vain,
He gives his rest without turmoil, or pain.
3 Children are th'in-heritance of the Lord,
The fruit of the womb, is also his reward.
4 Strong, swift as Arrows, in the Mighty's hand,
So are youths children, at the Lords command.
5 Happy's the man of such that has great store,
He Is not ashamed, be his foes before.
PSALM. CXXVIII.
1 BLest's every one, that fears the Lord above,
And walks still in his ways of truth and love.
2 Thou'st eat the fruit of thine hand, and happy be,
In all thy ways it shall be well with thee.
3 Thy wise on thy house side, as fruitful Vine,
Children like Plants, thy table round betwine.
4 Behold that thus the man is blessed, that shall
Still fear the Lord, and on his Name still call.
5 The Lord shall out Sion thus bless thee,
And all thy life, his Churches good thou'st see.
6 Yea, thou shall see, thy Childrens Children well,
And also peace upon his Is-ra-el.
PSALM. CXXIX
1 MAny a time afflicted me have they,
Even from my youth, now Israel may say.
2 Oft-times from youth, they have afflicted me,
But never prevailed to work my misery.
3 The plowers plowed deep upon my back,
Long furrows make, to make my bones to crack.
4 But God is righteous, he'th in sunder cut,
The wicked's cords, which they for me have put.
5 Let them be all consumed, and turned away,
That Sion hate, and would his Saints dismay.
6 Let them like grass on house top wither still,
Ere it grow up, so perish in its ill.
7 Wherewith the mow'r cannot his hand fill,
Nor he, that binds his sheaves, his bosom still:
8 Nor do they wish, that passing by the way,
The blessing of the Lord upon you stay.
PSALM. CXXX.
1 OUt of the depths, to thee Lord did I cry,
Hoping, that thou my suit would not deny.
2 Lord let the ears of thee, who art my choice,
Attentive be to hear thy Plaintiffs voice.
3 O Lord, if thou should mark iniquities,
Who could once stand before thy purest eyes?
4 But much forgiveness, Lord, with thee is there,
That all men may thee reverence with fear.
5 My soul does wait for God, the Lord most just,
And in his word I hope, and also trust.
6 My soul does wait for God, even more I say,
Then those, that watch for the breaking of the day.
7 God's merciful, let Israel in him trust,
It Is he, that souls redeems, he is most just.
8 He shall most early wake, and eke arise,
Israel redeem from his iniquities.
PSALM. CXXXI.
1 MY heart, Lord, is not haughty, nor mine eyes,
In things most high, I do not exercise.
2 Surely I have my self behaved most mild,
My soul is, even as a weaned child.
3 Let Israel hope in God, the Lord, therefore,
From this time forth, and eke for ever-more.
PSALM. CXXXII.
1 REmember David, Lord, thy servant true,
And his afflictions have still in thy view,
2 How he did swear unto the Lord above,
An oath to Jacobs God, whom he did love.
3 I surely will no Tabernacle spread,
Nor build an house, nor come into my bed,
4 I Will not give sleep unto my drowsy eye,
Nor slumber to mine eyelids give will I.
5 Until a place, for Jacobs God, I find,
An habitation answering my mind.
6 We heard of it, at Ephrata, even there,
We found it in the fields, where woods appear.
7 We Will go into his Tabernacles all,
Before his footstool, worship him, and fall.
8 Arise, O Lord, and come into thy rest,
Thou, and thy Ark of strength, by me possessed.
9 Thy Priests with justice let be clothed about,
And eke thy Saints, for joy let them still shout.
10 For the Servant, David's sake, O Lord, I say,
Lord turn not thine anointed's face away.
11 God swore in truth, he will not turn from it,
He David told, his seed should on's throne sit.
12 If that thy Sons will keep my Law, therefore,
Thy Sons shall sit in the throne for evermore.
13 God Sion chose, therein there is great space,
He has desired it, for's dwelling place.
14 This is my rest for ay, herein I Will dwell,
I have desired it, and like it well.
15 Her victuals I will bless abundantly,
Her poor with bread, I eke will satisfy.
16 I Will cloth her Priests with safety round about,
And all her Saints, aloud for joy shall shout.
17 I Will there make David's horn bud out most brave,
I lamp ordained, for mine anointed have.
18 His foes I Will cloth with shame, and them pluck down,
But on himself much flourish shall his Crown.
PSALM. CXXXIII.
1 BEhold how good it is, and how't seems well,
For brethren all, in unity to dwell.
2 Like precious balm, poured on Aarons head,
That drencht his beard, and round his garment spread.
3 As dew on Hermon hills, and Sion fell,
So God commands his blessing there to dwell.
PSALM. CXXXIV.
1 BEhold, and bless the Lord, all ye that stand
By night, in the house of God, at his command.
2 Lift up your hands, unto Gods place above,
And bless the Lord for's benefits, and love.
3 The Lord, that heaven made, and earth did frame,
Thee bless from Sion, praise ye's holy Name.
PSALM. CXXXV.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, praise ye his holy Name,
Ye servants of the Lord, do ye the same.
2 Ye that do stand in the house of the Lord,
And in his courts, his praises loud record.
3 Praise ye the Lord, he is good, ye praises sing,
TO sing praises to his name, 's a comely thing.
4 For God himself to him has Jacob chose,
He Israel for's peculiar treasure knows.
5 For I do know that God, the Lord is great,
Above all other Gods has placed his seat.
6 He does what e're he please in heaven, hills steep,
Within the Sea, and in all places deep.
7 He Vapors daily causes to ascend,
From one part of the earth unto the end.
He makes lightning for the rain in measure,
He brings the wind forth of his hidden treasure.
8 Who Egypt firstborn smote even in one night,
Both man, and beast, to make them more afright.
9 Who tokens sent, and wonders midst of thee,
On Pharaohs servants, whilst the Saints went free.
10 Who did great Nations slay, and them annoyed,
Ye mighty Kings he took, and them destroyed.
11 Sihon of Amorites, Og of Bashan,
Those Kings, and all the Kingdoms of Cana'n.
12 He gave their Land, as heritage to dwell,
Unto his chosen people Is-ra-el.
13 Thy Name O Lord for ever is most sure,
Thy memory all ages through, endure.
14 For God will judge his people in the event,
And likewise for their wrongs he will repent.
15 Idols of heathen, works of men they are,
Silver and Gold, cannot with God compare.
16 For mouths they have, yet speechless still they be,
The Eyes also have, yet have they none to see.
17 They eke have ears, yet hear they not a sound,
And in their mouths no breath there can be found.
18 They that them make, are like unto them just,
And so is every one, that in them trust.
19 bless ye the Lord therefore, O Is-ra-el.
And also ye in Aarons house that dwell.
20 And Levi's house, praise ye his holy Name,
All you that fear the Lord, do ye the same.
21 Bless ye the Lord, who does in Sion dwell,
And in Jerusalem, his praise forth-tell,
PSALM. CXXXVI.
1 GIve thanks unto the Lord, for he is most pure,
His mercy eke, it does for ay endure.
2 Give thanks unto the God of Gods, always,
For's mercy does endure, both now and ay.
3 Give thanks unto the Lord of Lords, for he,
And eke his mercy shall for ever be.
4 To him, that wonders does even in men's view,
For he his mercy shall for ever show.
5 To him that did by wisdom heaven frame,
For's mercy dures for ay, blessed be his Name.
6 To him that stretched out earth the seas above,
For's mercy dures for ay, blessed be his love.
7 To him that lights did make most great, and pure,
For's mercy does both now and ay endure.
8 The Sun he made, to rule the day most clear,
Fo^'s mercy does both now and ay appear.
9 The Moon and Stars by night, do bear their sway,
For's mercy does endure both now and ay.
10 To him, that Egypt smote in their firstborn,
For's mercy dures at evening and at morn.
11 Who Israel, them from among, did bring,
For the mercy dures for ay, of God our King.
12 With hand most strong, and arm stretched out most pure,
For's mercy does for ever-more endure.
13 To him in parts, which did th'red sea divide,
For's mercy does both now and ay abide.
14 For's Is-ra-el, through the midst often, he made way,
For's mercy does endure both now, and ay.
51 But he therein, Pharaoh and's hosts o'rethrew,
For he to his, shall mercy ever show.
16 To him, which the desert through did with his walk,
For's mercy dures for ay unto his folk.
17 To him, which smote great Kings without delay,
For's mercy does endure both now and ay.
18 Who Kings slew, and none of them would d'liver,
His mercy for it does endure for ever.
19 As Sihon, who of Amorites was King,
For's mercy it through Kingdoms e're does ring.
20 And Og of Bashan King he eke did slay,
For's mercy does endure both now, and ay,
21 Their Land an heritage for eke he gave,
For's mercy dures for ay, his folk to save.
22 Even unto his Servant Is-ra-el,
For's mercy does with his for ever dwell.
23 Who in ou^ low estate did us deliver,
For he and eke his mercy dures for ever.
24 And has redeemed us even from our foe,
For's mercy dures for ay to us below.
25 Who in due time does food to all flesh give,
For's mercy dures for ay, his folk shall live.
26 O give great thanks to God above always,
For's mercy does endure both now, and ay.
PSALM. CXXXVII.
1 WE all sat down by th'floods of Babylon,
And wept, when that on Sion we thought on.
2 In midst thereof, upon the Willow tree,
Our harps, and other instruments hanged we.
3 For they us taunt, that wasted us full sore,
And they to whom we prisoners were before.
4 O how shall we our Gods high praises sing,
In foreign Nations under a strange King?
5 Jerusalem, if I neglect thee yet,
Let my right hand its cunning quite forget.
6 Let tongue to mouth cleave, thee forget if I,
If I prefer not thee 'bove my chief joy.
7 Remember Lord even Edoms cruelty,
Against thy Jerusalem, in'ts misery.
Raise it, cried they, lay't level with the ground,
No stone upon a stone, let hence be found.
8 But thou, O Babylon, destroyed shall be,
He happy is, that so rewards thee.
9 Happy is he, that takes thy little ones,
And dasheth them in streets against the stones.
PSALM. CXXXVIII
1 WIth my whole heart, O Lord, I will thee praise,
To thee before Gods I will give thanks always.
2 I Will worship, toward the temple, praise thy Name,
Thy kindness, truth for, the word's above the same.
3 The day when I cried, O Lord, thou answered'st me,
My weak'ned soul, strengthened was by thee.
4 All Kings on earth thee praise with one accord,
When they shall hear the words even of the Lord.
5 Yea, they shall speak, and of thy praises sing,
For great's the glory of the Lord our King.
6 Though God be high, yet the poor he does respect,
The proud he knows a far, does them reject.
7 Though I in grief walk, thou will me revive,
Thou Wilt stretch thine arm against those, that with me strive.
8 What me concerns, the Lord will perfect still;
His mercy's ay, forsake me he never will.
PSALM. CXXXIX.
1 O Lord thou have me searched, my heart, and ways,
Thou see my secret motions, all my days.
2 Thou know my sitting, rising up also,
Thou understands my thoughts, though far thee fro.
3 My lying down, and path's compast by thee,
Acquainted with, thou all my ways do see.
4 For in my tongue, lo there is not a word,
But's altogether known to thee O Lord.
5 Thou'st me beset behind, before also;
By thy right hand, thou teach me to go.
6 Such knowledge is too wonderful, and high;
Beyond my reach, I cannot it discry.
7 Even from thy Spirit, whether go shall I?
Or whether shall I, from thy presence fly?
8 If I ascend to Heaven, thou art there,
Or bed in Hell make, thou art every where.
9 Or if I take the wings of morning day,
And dwell in the utmost parts even of the Sea,
10 Even there also, thine hand shall lead me out,
And thy right hand shall compass me about.
11 Or if I say, darkness shall cover me;
In The darkest night thy glorious eyes can see.
12 Darkness, and night, hides not from thy face,
Yea, dark is light to thee in every place.
13 For all my reins possessed are by thee,
In Mothers womb thou still did cover me.
14 I Will praise thee, for I Am wonderfully made,
Thy works are great, my Soul know's thee its aid.
15 My limbs, though secret made, not hid from thee,
But in earths lowest parts wrought curiously.
16 Thine eyes did see me in unperfect frame,
Thou writes my several parts, perfects the same.
17 How precious are thy thoughts to me O Lord?
How great's the Sum of them for to record.
18 If reckon them I should, they pass the sand;
When I awake, I Am still at thy commmand.
19 As for the wicked, them thou wilt surely slay;
Depart from me, ye bloody ones, I say.
20 For they are still speaking wickedly against thee,
Thy foes thy Name in vain often take, I see.
21 Hate I not them O Lord, that hate thee still?
Hate I nor those, against thee that set their will?
22 Yea, them with perfect hatred hate do I,
I count them as my utter enemy.
23 Search me O Lord, and also try my heart;
And know my thoughts, I Will never from thee depart.
24 An I see in me if there be wicked way,
And lead me in thy truth, O Lord, for ay.
PSALM. CXL.
1 ME keep, O Lord, from the evil man's intent,
Preserve me from the man, that is violent.
2 Which mischiefs in their hearts think on, and are,
Daily together gathered for war.
3 Their tongues, like Serpents, sharpened they have,
Under their tongues does Adders poison cleave.
4 Keep me, O Lord, from the wickeds hands also,
And eke from him, who would my steps o're-throw.
5 The proud a snare, and cords for me did hide,
For me they spread a net by the highway side:
6 I said unto the Lord, you are God my choice,
Therefore, O Lord, hear thou thy Servants voice:
7 O God, and eke of my Salvation aid,
In day of war thou'st made me not afraid.
8 The wicked's device, Lord, further not, nor grant,
Lest they themselves exalt, force us to want.
9 As for their heads, that compass me all over,
Let the mischief of their lips, and tongues them cover.
10 Let them in fire be cast, and there remain,
And from deep pits never to rise again.
11 Let no ill speaker long live here below,
Ill hurt shall the violent man, and him o're-throw.
12 I know God will the afflicted's cause maintain,
And the right of the poor shall e're with them remain.
13 Surely the upright shall thanks give to thy Name,
The just shall live in thy sight, and do the same.
PSALM. CXLI.
1 TO thee I call, make have O Lord on high,
Hear thou my voice, when unto thee I cry.
2 As incense let my prayer ascend to thee,
My hands up lift, as sacrifices be.
3 Set thou a watch O Lord my mouth before,
And of my lips be keeper of the door.
4 To any evil thing put not mine heart;
In th'practise of lewd works give me no part.
5 Amongst those that sin work, Lord, do not me seat,
Neither let me once of their dainties eat.
6 It Is good for me, if good men do me smite,
And me reprove, like oil 't shall me delight.
7 When th'judges are in stony place o're-thrown,
They'st hear my words, they are sweet, like them there is none.
8 Our bones are scattered at the mouth of the grave,
As when on earth, one wood does cut and cleave.
9 But I, Lord, lift mine eyes to thee most just,
Do not forsake my soul, in thee's my trust.
10 Me keep from the snare, which they have laid for me,
And th'gins of those, that work iniquity.
11 Let the wicked men, into their own nets fall,
Even whilst that I escape their dangers all.
PSALM. CXLII.
1 I Cried unto the Lord, even with my voice,
And made my prayer unto my God, and choice.
2 To him my deep complaint, I poured out,
Showed him the grief, which compast me about.
3 When spirit was o're-whelm'd, my path thou knew,
For me asnare they laid, close from my view.
4 I looked about, saw none, that would me know,
None cared for me, my refuge failed also.
5 I cried to thee, you are my defense I said,
In The livings Land, my portion and mine aid.
6 I Am brought full low, attend unto my cry,
Me keep from foes, that stronger are then I.
7 My soul from prison bring, thy Name to praise,
Saints me shall compass, when thou do me raise.
PSALM. CXLIII.
1 Lord hear my prayer, to thee my suit attend,
As thou art gracious, answer to me send.
2 Judge not thy servant, Lord, be thou his guide,
For in thy sight none shall be justified.
3 For foes pursued my life, smite me to ground,
I Have dwelt in darkness, like men dead I Am found.
4 My spirit's overwhelmed, and eke my heart,
Within me's desolate, there is no whole part.
5 I Am mindful of times past, and meditate
Thy works, on which with hands thou did create.
6 To thee, O Lord, stretch forth mine hand did I,
My soul thirsts after thee, in Land most dry.
7 Me hear, my heart fails, hide not the face from me,
Lest like to those, that go to pit I be.
8 Cause me to hear thy love, I trust in thee,
Lift up my soul, to walk aright, teach me.
9 Me keep, O Lord, from all mine enemies,
And eke me hide from those against me arise.
10 Thou art my God, you are good, teach me thy will,
The Land of uprightness, lead me into still.
11 Raise me for thy Names sake, O Lord, my King,
For the justice sake, my soul from trouble bring.
12 All them that me afflict, O Lord, destroy,
For I Am thy servant, you are my only joy.
PSALM. CXLIV.
1 Blessed be the Lord, my strength, who by his might,
My hands does teach to war, fingers to fight.
2 My goodness, strength, deliverer, and shield,
In whom I trust, he makes my people yield.
3 Lord, what is man, that thou do knowledge take
Of him, and his, and wilt not them forsake?
4 Man is most like to vanity, and's day
Is like a shadow, that does pass away.
5 The heavens bow, O Lord, descend the same,
The Mountains touch, and they shall smoke like flame.
6 Lightning cast forth, and scatter them abroad,
Shoot out thy darts, and them destroy, O God.
7 Send down thine hand, O Lord, deliver me,
From waters great, from strangers set me free.
8 Whose subtle mouth of vanity does speak,
And whose right hand does into falsehood break.
9 I Will sing a song most new, to God on high,
With ten string instruments thee praise will I.
10 It Is he Salvation that to Kings does give,
Who David keeps from sword, makes him to live.
11 Rid me from children strange I thee entreat,
Whose mouth is vanity, whose hand deceit.
12 That our sons may as plants grow up, not fade,
And Daughters eke, as palaces be made.
13 Our garners that with store, they may be found,
And that our sheep in streets may much abound.
14 That Oxen for our labor may be strong,
Besieged by none, none in our streets do wrong.
15 In such a case who are found, blessed are all they,
Yea happy're those, whose Gods the Lord, their stay.
PSALM. CXLV.
1 FOr ever-more, O Lord, I Will bless thy Name,
O God, my King, I will extol the same.
2 Yea, every day, I will advance thy praise,
I thee will bless both now, and eke always.
3 Great is the Lord, to be advanced high,
Unsearchable his goodness, 'bove the sky.
4 From age to age, all praise thy mighty deeds,
And tell what wondrous acts from thee proceeds,
5 Of the glorious honor of thy Majesty,
I Will speak, and of thy wondrous works most high.
6 The might of thy dreadful acts men shall lay bare,
And I my self thy greatness will declare.
7 They Will utter much goodness of thee their King,
They of thy righteousness aloud shall sing.
8 God gracious is, he has compassion store,
To anger slow, he'th mercy ever-more,
9 He Is good to all, his mercy tender is,
Over all his works, for all the earth is his.
10 O Lord thy works for ever shall thee praise,
Saints shall not cease thy Name to bless always.
11 Of the glorious Kingdom, they shall talk each hour,
And speak of thy great goodness, and thy power.
12 To make the folk, thy mighty acts to know.
Thy glorious Kingdoms Majesty to show.
13 Thy Kingdom is for everlasting sure,
And thy Dominion through all ages dure.
14 The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and he
Raises up those that bowed together be.
15 The eyes of all wait upon thee, to give
Them meat in season, that their souls may live.
16 Thou openest thy bounteous hand, and gives
To satisfy the desires of all that lives.
17 In all his ways the Lord is righteous still,
He holy is in all his works, and will.
18 The Lord is nigh to them, that on him call,
In truth, he them does hear, and ever shall.
19 The desire of those that fear him he will fulfill,
He Will hear their cry, and save them all he will.
20 The Lord preserves who loves him, they are his joy,
But all the wicked he will quite destroy.
21 My mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord,
All flesh shall bless his Name with one accord.
PSALM. CXLVI.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, my soul shall give him praise,
2 Whilst that I live, I Will him exalt always.
3 In Princes put no trust, neither confide,
In Sons of men, who cannot help, nor guide.
4 Their breath does fall to earth full soon away,
And then the counsels of their hearts decay.
5 He Is blessed, that Jacobs God has for his stay,
Whose hope is in the Lord his God for ay.
6 Which heaven, earth, sea, and therein all the store,
Did make, which keeps truth, for evermore.
7 Which frees the oppressed, to th'hungry which does give,
Due food, which loses prisoners, lets them live.
8 God op'neth the eyes of the blind, and them does raise,
That are bowed down, the upright he loves always.
9 God the widow, stranger, fatherless keeps ay,
But upside down he turns the wickeds way.
10 Sion, the Lord thy God, shall reign e're more,
All ages to, praise ye the Lord therefore.
PSALM. CXLVII.
1 PRaise God, for it is good, and to him sing,
For so to do, it is a comely thing.
2 God builds Jerusalem, for there he will dwell,
Gathers in one the dispersed of Israel.
3 The broken in heart he heals, much ease they find,
And eke their wounds he carefully does bind.
4 He tells the Stars, and calls them by their Name,
5 God's great, his power and knowledge is the same.
6 The meek God lifts up, sets them on high,
But throws to ground those, that act wickedly.
7 Thanks give with praise unto the Lord, our King,
And to our God on harp, eke praises sing.
8 Who cov'reth the sky with clouds, who rain makes flow
On earth, who makes grass on hills to grow.
9 He food unto the beasts of the field does give,
To th'ravens young, which cry, that they may live.
10 In The strength of horse, rejoice he never can,
Nor takes he pleasure in the legs of man.
11 Of those that fear him, God does love the sight,
In those that in him hope, he takes delight,
12 O thou Jerusalem, give God due praise,
And eke thou Sion, bless his name always.
13 He'th made strong bars, and the gates together pressed,
Thy children eke within thee he has blessed.
14 He peace makes, be in the borders which are thine,
And eke thee feeds with wheat, which is most fine.
15 He his commands does send the earth about,
His word does swiftly run the world throughout.
16 He gives snow like wool, which fall full fast,
He scatters hoar frost, as ashes cast.
17 He casts forth ice, like morsells at that tide,
The vehement cold thereof, who can abide?
18 He sends his word, them melts, makes the wind to blow,
He causes ice to thaw, waters to flow.
19 To Jacob he his word of truth did show,
He Is law, and judgment Israel gave to know.
20 With other Nations thus dealt has not he,
They knew no laws of his, the Lord praise ye.
PSALM. CXLVIII.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, him praise from heavens high,
Yea, praise him still above the starry sky.
2 Praise ye his Name ye glorious Angels still,
Praise him ye noble hosts, that do his will.
3 Ye glorious creatures, Sun and Moon him praise,
The same perform ye brightest Stars always.
4 Yea, praise him in the highest heavens still,
Ye waters 'bove the heavens this fulfill.
5 Yea, let them praise the Lords most mighty Name,
At his command he did create the same.
5 He likewise has established them for ay,
Set a Decree, which not o're-pass they may.
7 Praise ye the Lord, likewise from earth below,
Dragons, all deeps, praise ye his Name also.
8 Yea fire, and hail, snow, vapor, praise the Lord,
With stormy winds, that execute his word.
9 Yea mountains great, and hills that be so high,
Trees fruitful, Cedars eke him magnify.
10 Yea beasts and cattle, that in forests dwell,
Things creeping, flying fowl his praises tell,
11 Kings of the earth, great Princes, People all,
Praise ye the Lord, ye judges, great and small.
12 Ye young men strong, and maidens praise his Name,
Fathers also, and children do the same.
13 Let these praise God, for's Name alone's most great,
His glory's 'bove the earth, 'bove heavens seat.
14 The Lord his peoples strength exalts still,
That Is Saints should all be praised, it is his will.
This to his Servant Israel does he,
A people near to him, the Lord praise ye.
PSALM. CXLIX.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, new songs unto him sing,
Amongst his Saints let all his praises ring.
2 In him, that made him Israel let rejoice,
Let Sions Sons be joyful in their choice.
3 Let them his Name exalt, and praise in dance,
On Timbrel, and on Harp his praise advance.
4 For God takes pleasure in his peoples peace,
He Will save them eke, to beautify not cease.
5 Let th'Saints in glory joyful be, and sing
A loud upon their bed, of God their King.
6 Let the mouths be filled with praises of the Lord,
And in their hands be a two-edged sword.
7 Vengeance to execute the heathen among,
And punishments upon the people strong.
8 Their Kings in prison there to bind with chain,
Their Lords in iron fetters to remain.
9 To execute on them Gods written word,
This honor have his Saints, praise ye the Lord.
PSALM. CL.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, him praise in's holy seat,
Praise him in the firmament of's power great.
2 For's mighty acts and deeds love him always,
According to his greatness give him praise.
3 With trumpet, praise the Lord, who is most high,
Yea, praise his Name on Harp, and Psaltery.
4 With Timbrel praise his Name, 't exalt in dance,
With Instruments, and Organs, him advance.
5 Yea, on loud Cimballs still advance his praise,
On sounding Cimballs give him thanks always.
6 Let all things living praise the Lord I say,
Praise ye the Lord, soul, praise thy God for ay.
FINIS.

