A true RELATION of a wicked PLOT Intended and still on foot against the City.
OF GLOUCESTER, To betray the same into the hands of the CAVALIERS. Discovered by
Captain Backhouse who was wrought upon to have betrayed the same by the
Solicitation of one Edward Stanford Esquire, a grand Papist but a Lieut:
Colonel amongst the Cavaliers; and by himself set forth to give the
PARLIAMENT and his Excellency satisfaction, and the better to vindicate his
own Integrity. Together with several Letters from my Lord Digby, and Sir
William Vavasour to Capt. Backhouse concerning the said Design.

4. Maii. 1644.
It is this day Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons for Printing,
that this Relation be Printed by Edward Husbands.

Jo. WHITE.
London, Printed for Ed. Husbands. May 7. 1644.

A true Relation of a wicked Plot intended, and still on foot against the City
of Gloucester, to betray the same into the hands of the Cavaliers, etc.
Were the Intentions of our Enemies, or the grounds of their practice yet
questionable, Nay were not their cause already brought to a self-conviction,
the manage of their designs, and their constant proceedings are enough to
convince the world, or amaze it. Doubtless destruction, misery, and desolation
must needs be the end of those paths of fury, malice, treachery, and
deliberate cruelty; the whole series of the Complotment is like it self; and
the Enemies of God, and the King, having desperate and horrid intendments, have
resolved upon proportionable means: For wicked purposes and mischievous
counsels can never take effect without the height of iniquity first resolved
upon, and if either shame or conscience has the power to check such an
undertaker, he mistaking his principles must needs fall off, or fail in the
enterprise. But that cause which is grounded upon truth and righteousness
prospers by the same truth. Besides, a just and an honorable action does abhor
the use of such means, and a mind truly great and noble will not blemish the
bravenesse of his end, and does rather choose to be vanquished, then to gain an
inglorious Victory. But malicious guilty persons being conscious of the
vileness of their ends upon which they are desperately engaged, have not only
hardened their hearts, and steeled their faces against the imputation of the
extract of Villainy, but oftentimes burst out into unnecessary wickedness,
almost to the preventing of their own purposes, by rendering themselves odious
to the people, the strength of their Malignity scarce permitting them to be
true to their own ends.

Thus the condition of the War on their part, forces them upon the ways of
deceit, and violence; the injustice of their cause makes it a bootlesse labor
to stand upon honorable at chievements, and their own violent malice often times
prevents the occasion, and out runs necessity. Had we to deal with an
honorable Enemy, the grand interest we have in the public cause, could not
forbid us to love their personal virtues to embrace their goodness.

It Is base and ignoble to derogate from the worth of an Enemy, as none but
Rogues would have rayled at Hanniball even in Rome: But that party daily adds
to the necessity of their just confusion, when their implacable malice shall
urge them to transgress that common right, which open hostility preserves
inviolable.

There is a kind of deceit, that is commendable; but to conspire against thine
adversary with a bosom friend of his, is a part of detestable treachery,
practiced by none but such that seek to triumph rather in revenge than glory.
For it is a point of common justice which every one demands, to be secure among
his own, and it is the greatest tyranny to enforce them either to accuse or
betray. For by this means faith and truth is quite lost, and all inte course
between man and man made void. Therefore brave men are content to submit when
over matched by power or skill; but if betrayed, their hearts can never comply,
but carry revenge to their grave. So impatient are we of delusion. Now let
themselves judge whether in this case they have not offended against that prime
law of nature, Quod tibi steri non vis alteri ne feceris. And let them know
there have been some so Noble as to scorn their tender of treason.

Let this represent to the view of the world the vileness of their actions,
and in particular the wickedness of that Plot which is discovered in this
Relation, that all men may detest their courses; that Neuters may be roused
into zeal against them, and their own Novices who are not yet desperately
hardened may shrink at the horror of these things, and fall back while there is
a possibility of returning.

The Plot runs thus:
The 19. day of November. last, Master Stanford sent unto me (in whom he
conceived he had much interest) by the hands of a good friend of mine, this
Letter as follows.

GOod Robin, It is not unknown to you that once I loved you, and therefore I
send this to advise you, whilst it is in your power to make use of it, and take
my word I am confident as yet you may not only have your pardon, but raise
your self a greater fortune, than the condition of those you serve are able to
afford you. This you may gain by the delivery, you may guess my meaning of
what place, which is not hard for you to do. You know the old saying, Fallere
fallentem non est fraus, this is the advice of him that when you shall desist
the cause, will ever be,

Your loving Friend, Edward Stanford.


This Letter being read by me, and conferring with the Messenger (my friend)
who told me, that if I would undertake the same business, I should have 5000.
l. for my reward: Instantly I went unto the faithful and worthy Governor, and
showed it unto him, and told him from whom it came, by whom, and what reward
was proposed, and withal declared my dislike thereof. Whereupon the governor
considering thereof, advised to embrace the business, and practice the
doctrine propounded in the Letter of fallere fallentem etc. and that for these
reasons.

1. That the Net which they would lay for us, might be a snare unto themselves.

2. That other Plots and Treacheries against the City might not be contrived,
so long as they had a fair probability of prevayling by this.

3. That the Country adjacent to the City (which was by the Malignant Gentry of
the Country and other evil counselors) decreed (upon a Petition by them
preferred unto His Majesty) to utter desolation, ruin and depopulation, might
by this means be preserved, and spared by the enemy in hopes to enjoy the
benefit and assistance thereof themselves.

4. That this Plot and expectation of the Enemy might be procrastinated, and
led a long at least till the Country had vented in the Market their spare
Provisions of corn and cattle which they then had, and for the doing whereof
the time was then at hand.

5. That such their hopes of obtaining the City of Gloucester, thereby
occasioning the drawing down of Forces thither, might give the Parliament
Forces in other parts of the Kingdom, the greater freedom to execute their
designs with less opposition.

6. That fair promises might allay their fury to the country, till our relief
came that we were able to feed them with harder meat, and till winter were
past that Armies were fit to march.

7. That they might in the end see the cursed and shameful fruit of such
wicked inventions, and their hopeless aim to prevail against a City United,
and attempt no more so evil.

8. That the Enemy and the world may know that the Officers and Soldiers in
the gar^ison of Gloucester are not so perfidious as to betray their trust to
dishonor themselves to all posterity for any reward whatsoever.

For these and the like reasons and upon consultation had with some other of
the chief Officers of the garrison, who approved thereof, I applied my self to
the business, without imparting any syllable of my mind to the Messenger, but
by giving of this answer to Mr. Stanfords first Letter.

Sir,
I Am bold to write freely to you by this Messenger at this time, I perceive
your desire, And I would have you know, that I shall be ready to do his
Majesty (whom I protest I honor with my soul) all the real service I may.
But there are two things that I must first propose to you, and have a grant of
them. First, sworn secrecy to as many as shall be acquainted with it, (and they
must not be many.) Secondly, there must be a Messenger between us that may
pass to you, and must not be suspected here, (which my friend would be if he
should come often) and this Messenger must know nothing of our intentions, for
which purpose I have sent one now (under my friends protection) to whom you
must procure a free pass under His Majesty's hand, he is a fellow trusty to
me, and dwells in the suburbs of the Town whereby he may come home without
suspicion; let me hear from you now by him, and where I may send to you again,
and once within 10. or 12. days you shall hear from me again; before which
time I shall consider more seriously of the business, and of some more
particulars then in so short time as the stay of this Messenger can be brought
to any maturity. Sir, you know my heart, and be assured, I am and will be, Sir,
your humble servant in all I may,

20. Novem. 1643. Rob: Backhouse. Postscript.
As for the reward you speak of, you know my estate is not great, and therefore
I shall desire you as my approved friend to manage it so, as that I may be
assured not to play an after game poorly.




This Letter being showed unto the governor, and other Officers privy to the
business, I sent it away to Mr. Stanford to Worcester, who returned me this
Letter following. Dated, 27. of Novem.

2. Letter.
GOOD Robin, I received much contentment in your private Letter, in the desire
you express to serve the King, which will give me means of doing you much
good: Your two requests shall be observed, Secrecy, and settling a safe means
for our correspondency. For the first, there shall be no body acquainted with
it, but the best friend I have in the world, my Lord Digby, who you may be
sure, will be able to perform to you what ever you shall expect for your
reward: As when you shall descend to particulars of the service you will do,
and what you desire, you shall receive an engagement from his Lordships own
hands; And therefore I pray you lose no time in proposing, for the means of
conveying our secrets do you appoint in your next Letter by this bearer the
convenientest place for you, and there I will have a trusty fellow lie Leager
to receive your Letters, and deliver you mine; and be you confident upon my
word, and faith, that you shall not fail in what shall be promised you: I will
expect your answer at Worcester, on Wednesday, and lie there on purpose to
keep a correspondence with you.


To this Letter was, by consent, as formerly, returned this Answer.

Noble Sir:
THe reality I have ever found in you, makes me the more confidently to rely
upon you. You writ me of your only best friend, that you will solely acquaint
with our intentions; I conceive it must be imparted to some more; for you must
devise and set the way amongst your selves, you know my command is of the
horse; by which means I may the more easily introduce a force without any
suspicion, but whence such force shall come, you must direct, and the
Commanders of such forces must needs be acquainted with it. Do you but lay the
plot, and be private, and if it take not one way, ere long I question not but
it will another; but I do adventure my life if I should be disclosed,
therefore I desire all secrecy. And when I hear from you again, I shall
return you an answer by this bearer, which I think will be least suspected of
any if he may but come freely to you.

29. November. Sir, Your real Servant.


3 Letter. The first of December. that no time might be lost, I received from
Worcester this 3d. Letter from the same Master Stanford.

Dear Robin, be confident I will be as secret as you can desire, and the
Officers themselves shall not know the design. Now I shall desire you to
propound some particulars which way you think most probable, and leave us alone
for the drawing down of forces; I shall expect a sudden return of this bearer
with some particulars: so in have I rest

Your assured loving friend.
Postscript.
I shall desire you to propose the way, it being far easier for you to set it
down, then for us to imagine it; and for your conditions, name them, and I
will undertake they shall be performed.




To this Letter, to make them the more confident, and the better to accomplish
our designs, this answer was given.

Noble Sir:
I Have considered of your last; by which you desire my conceit in proposal of
particular Propositions, and of my reward, to both which I shall thus propose
unto you to present to more mature judgments.

1 Whether I may not by drawing out my Troop in an evening (as I can do at
any time) meet with your forces, and bring them in upon a sudden in a
Moone-shine night at the Gate, and so master the first Guard, which may easily
be done, and not discerned till too late, my Troop being above 60. who may be
all in the rear and at your mercy, though I might my self lead in the force,
which cannot give the Alarm in the night so soon as to prevent the design.

2 Whether if I persuade the Governor to draw out a strong party of foot and
horse, upon some design to lie out all night, eight or ten miles distant from
the Garrison, (as I know I can do) and I my self stay at home, in whose
absence you may safely advance in the evening to the Town side, when I can
come out to you, and so bring you in under color of our own forces.

3 Whether if I find out a place slenderly guarded, and somewhat easy to come
in at, I may not draw off the Centries upon some pretense (as I can do) being
known to them all, and there direct your entrance.

4 Whether if I send for Hay, and give you notice of the very time of its
coming in; which must be in the night, I may not after the Carts bring in some
men as Carters, who may have Snaphance Muskets in the Carts, and some
Dragoones to fall in, in the very Rear of the Carts, who may master the first
Guards, and possess the Ordnance there, and so let in both horse, and foot,
who with such Ordnance may march through all the streets in town.

These several ways I propose for the present, but I conceive that those who
have been versed in the taking of Towns, or are better read in surprisalls of
Garrisons may make more choice of Propositions; any of which if I apprehend it
feazible, I shall gladly undertake or render my reason of dislike if I conceive
it not so. But Sir, I must once more conjure you by all the bonds of ancient
affection that ever were between us, and as you desire the progress of the
design, that you be careful to whom you impart this great secret; for if it
should be known or suspected in me, I shall be utterly ruined, and undone. This
very Letter adventures my neck, as for my reward I am right sensible of how
great concernment the business is unto your side; and albeit you know it is
utterly against my spirit to indent before hand for my reward, especially with
so gallant and noble Personages, yet the straites for money that of late I have
been put unto, having as yet received no pay at all for my self from those I
serve, and the condition of my estate and charge considered bids me a little
look to that: I was told of 5000. l. that should be given me, I shall only
expect 2000. l. to be secured, two or three hundred whereof I shall desire you
as my friend to procure me in hand as soon as may be, that thereby I may be
enabled to bear up my Port and credit, especially amongst all the common
soldiers and under officers of the Garrison, to whom I must be open handed to
engage affection, that they may readily open when I call at any time. Secondly
to engage mine own Troop, and to bind such unto me with a silver cord as I
shall find fittest for my purpose. And thirdly plentifully to reward
intercoursers between me and you, or me and such others as you shall appoint,
who may execute my command upon a sudden with all celerity and fidelity. These
things I shall thus leave unto your consideration and manage, but assuredly
know that I shall be, sir, your servant with all fidelity I may,

Robert Backhouse.
Postscript.
If you take care that the Messenger pass but safe to Tewkesbury, you may send
any thing by him very safely, and I hope ere long you and I may meet to
discourse it when all the world shall not know.


7. December. 1643.

This Letter being sent, gave Mr. Stanford such hopes of prevailing in his
design that it went to Oxford, as afterward appeared, but in the interim I
received this Letter from him.

4th. Letter.
ON Friday let this Messenger come to Worcester, and by him you shall receive
back an answer of your particulars. But by him I would have you send me word
which way you would have the moneys conveyed to you, and I doubt not but
shortly to see you a very happy man. As for the sum you require, Bultie [A
Manor near Gloucester of his] shall make it good, but you may take my word,
for I promise you, I will see it paid in ready money.

12. December. E. S.


I doubt not but the Parliament will in time make this Gentleman to make good
his promise in this Letter; on the 15th. of December. I sent this Letter
following.

Noble Sir:
I Have sent this Messenger according to your desire, and shall expect to hear
from you by him. And whereas you desire to know how to convey any money to me,
this bearer is as true as steel, and if he come but secure to Tewksbury, there
is no danger on this side; he may bring any sum in Gold with ease and safety
Thus in haste for present I take leave and rest, Sir: Your real servant with
child till I can handsomely see you.

R. B.


To this Letter I expected a full answer, and of my former, but that was not
fully ripened at Oxford, but he returned me this answer by my messenger.

5th. Letter.
Dear Robin, if you will make your self a fortune, perform really what you
have promised, for others may hereafter on the same conditions be glad t^ make
good your offers; this I do not speak that I doubt you in any thing but you
know there is no love without some jealousy; as for our meeting I will no^
fail, for I am confident you have no plot on me: But I cannot appoint it till
(...) see this bearer again, which without fail must be on Tuesday next, and
then I my se^^ will march nearer your quarters, for I do long to have
business finished, that w^ may, as we were once, be fellow subjects merry
together, and by his return you shall receive a full fatisfaction according to
your own desires, which I will be confident are as honest as once I found them.

Friday 10. of the clock.

To this Letter no answer was returned, but I sent my Messenger to Worcester
according to his desire, by whom I received these two Letters.

6th. Let^
Dear Robin: this enclosed I am very confident will be very satisfactory to
you, and let me tell you if you prove but real in what you have promised, you
cannot propose to your self a greater happiness, then I am confident you may
purchase, by really performing of what you have promised. On Sunday I shall
desire to have an answer of this enclosed, that I may as soon as it is
possible effect a meeting, for believe me it is equally wished by him that
covets to be

Your loving friend, E. S.


L. Digbyes Letter.The enclosed Letter was;

SIr:
you having so far declared your desires to serve his Majesty unto my very
good friend Mr. Stanford, I think it fit you should now receive some more
authenticke assurance of his Majesty's gracious acceptance thereof, then
perhaps you will think his bare engagement to be; therefore I do here
solemnly engage any word unto you, both as a Minister of State, and as a
Gentleman, that if you shall perform faithfully what you promise there you
shall punctually receive immediately after, such a pardon as your self shall
desire, and the sum of two thousand bounds. As for the 300. l. which you
desire in present, such a confidence I will have in your word, that as soon as
ever I shall have received your answer to this under your hand, It shall be
forthwith paid into what place soever you shall appoint, or to what person. As
for the particular ways of effecting our design, those you propose are very
rational, but the choice and disposition of that must be between you, and
those who are to execute it, with whom if it were possible you should procure a
meeting at some unsuspected place; I do propose unto you your choice of
several men, and whom of them you shall like best, and think fittest by
reason of the place where his command is to him alone, and no other business
shall be imparted, whether Sir William Vavasour commander in chief of the
forces now ^n Glocestershire, or Colonel Mynne commander of a Brigade of the
English come out of Jreland, or Colonel Washington, who is at Evesham; or
lastly whether ^he Governor of Berkly Castle; as soon as you shall sead me an
answer, you shall receive satisfaction from him, who hopes you will so behave
your self, as to make me,

Your assured friend, George Digby.
Oxford this 14th of December. 1643.

Thus may the world see how ignoble this Lord will engage his honor and
person, to insinuate into his Majesty's favor to ruin a Kingdom, to betray a
City, and many thousand innocent souls into merciless hands, and to make me
(a man ^e never saw, or he cares not whom) the traiterous actor thereof; well,
to this ^etter, by consent, as before, was given this answer.

My honored Lord,
I Have received your Lordships, and have considered thereof; And your
Lordships directions suits with what I wrote unto Master Stanford in one of my
late Letters to him, (viz.) That the Commander of such Forces as are to come
in, must of necessity be privy to the Design. As touching the choice your
Lordship proposes to me, I conceive that Sir William Vavasour will be the
fittest man.

1. First, because he is the nearest in his command unto the business,
Colonel Mynne is twenty miles off (lying then at Thornbury) Colonel
Washington, the like (then at Evesham) the Governor of Berkly fifteen, and of
an inconsiderable strength there, but Sir William Vavasours forces lie not
above twelve miles distant (then at Ledbury) and has strength enough of his
own.

2. He may best come to the Garrison undiscovered, there being toward his
Quarters no Suburbs or houses near to the Town, nor other out guards or smaller
Garrisons in his way, whereby to give any Alarm. If I hear by Mr. Stanford
from him, when will be a fit time for him, I shall upon a very few days
notice, comply with his expectation, as Mr. Stanford and I shall agree upon all
circumstances, with whom I hope to speak ere long. Thus much I thought fit to
acquaint your Honor, and rest

28 December. 1643. My Lord, your Honors most humble Servant, R. B.


At the same time was sent to Mr. Stanford, this answer to his Letter.

SIR,
SInce I received your Letter, I have received a wound, by a shot in my hand,
which has so pestered me, that I could not write unto you sooner, I have
written to the noble Lord Digby my opinion, as by the enclosed you may
perceive. Sir, I cannot suddenly ride far, but if you please to come either to
Ledbury, or to Sir John Winters Quarters, you may then in any evening meet me
in Corslane, the middle way between this Garrison and Ledbury, where you and I
may mere, and the Moon not know thereof, if you so think fit, and shall appoint
an hour, I shall not miss you a minute, for into your hands I dare throw my
self with freedom though I shall be loath to trust any other I know not, either
with my person or secret. Sir, as for my satisfaction, I am satisfied with my
Lords engagement for the main, and I shall expect the three hundred pounds
promised in hand (for the Reasons in my last Letter expressed) to be sent me by
this Bearer, with whom you may in this case send a Convoy of eight or ten good
horses as far as Corslane without any fear of us, and then it will be sure to
be safe (...) refer the business to your manage, assuring you confidently that I
am your most humble servant.

R. B.
Postscript.
Sir, I beseech you be careful of these Letters, and as secret as the night,
or I must perish miserably.




These two Letters being dispatched away to Worcester, they wrought according to
our desires, a belief and hopes of my reallity to accomplish their wicked
Design.

Whereupon, January the second, I received this Letter following from Master
Stanford.

The seventh Letter.
DEar Robin, I am so desirous of your good, which is only to be effected by
your promises, that I am a little fearful of doing any act, till it have been
debated, twice or thrice between us, least it may hinder the good service you
intend; And I am confident you absolutely resolve to perform, and be assured
this, it is not in your power to oblige them you serve, to gain so much for
your own advantage as you may the King, by going through with this business,
nor are they in a condition, thanks be to God, able scarce to promise you so
great rewards as here you shall assuredly receive. Now, dear Robin, I shall
tell you my mind, First, concerning the Moneys, I conceive it most unsafe, and
wholly unnecessary, for it is impossible he should bring it safe without a
Convoy, the greatest part of the way, and how easy that may be discovered, I
leave to you to judge.

Secondly, you cannot dispose of it to them you intended without discovery, the
business being suddenly to be executed; the Moneys I have ready, but I think
it fitter to pay it to some friend of yours, according to your directions, by
way of return, but for fifty or one hundred pounds, I think we may venture it;
And if it be taken, you may pretend you are to send me a Coach and Horses for
it.

Thirdly, for my meeting you, it will be unnecessary, till Sir William Vavasour
return from Bristoll with more forces.

Fourthly, that you must appoint some other place for our meeting, in regard of
Sir John Winters lying at Newnham.

This is the opinion of him that will ever be your affectionate friend,

E.S.
2 Ian. 1643.

To this Letter was given this answer.

Dear Sir,
I Sent on Wednesday last to you, but hear is nothing of the Messenger, I fear
his taking, which if it should be, I pray your care for his enlargement.

You writ me, that you conceive it unnecessary as yet to meet me, and the
place unfit; any place is indifferent to me; but that place from Ledbury is an
indifferent place, and free from suspicion, either by day or by night, that
therefore I shall leave to you when and where to meet; I will bring no soul
with me, but ride without sword or Pistol as to take the air, let your care
be to preserve me from any of your Scouts, for I must ride from any two, or
more that I shall see, but I shall be glad to see you; as for the three hundred
pounds, you writ me word you have it. Sir, I must tell you, that since this
business has been working in my head (which I have pretty well perfected now)
I have been enforced to take up money at a hard hand to do the things I
intended. And it is impossible that you can imagine the sundry ways that I
have laid in my head, and partly put in action to further and prepare mine
own secret intentions. And truly Sir, I must tell you, the money is so
necessary to me, that n^x^ unto my fidelity, promise, and engagement to my Lord
Digby, and your self, it is the chief moving wheel; and if there be the
least jealousy of my fidelity, I shall desire you (as my truest friend in the
world) to let me know, and then I shall crave only favor to have all papers
burnt, my counsels kept, liberty to bewail mine own unhappiness, and that I
may serve them and you in some other business of lesser trust, wherein mine
integrity may more appear with less suspicion. If the sum I desire in hand,
be thought too great an adventure, I would have you consider mine adventure,
the least line of any of my Letters being sufficient to have me hanged; and
this I have and must commit into several men's bosoms whom I never saw, but
build my faith upon your judgment and integrity, without any jealousy or
fear, which I should not do, were you not Master Stanford: for that which you
write of the danger in the passage, how easy a matter will it be for you to
command a dozen honest men to ride a long almost to Tewksbury to guard a little
money, that you may pretend you are sending to pay to save the forfeiture of a
morgage. And if you appoint but the day, how easy is it to me to send my
Troop to Tewksbury to meet a little money, which is to be paid unto me upon a
bond. I Will stand to the hazard on our side, and I know you may secure it on
yours. Well, I leave the business to your consideration, but for my self. I am
devoted to your service, whilst I am,

R. B.
3. Ian. 1643.

About the 7. Ian. Master Stanford sent me a Message by the friend who brought
the first Letter to me, by word of mouth, to meet him in Corselane the day
following, where accordingly we met; my Lieutenant scouting behind me the
while, to prevent my own surprisall; where I received 200. l. of him, and his
promise to discharge me of a bond of 50. l. wherein I was formerly bound to one
Font a great Papist, and a very friend of his. At which time the Plot was laid
by him Sir Will. Vavasour and others, who were then lately come to Tewksbury;
That I should endeavor to draw the Governor out of the Garrison with a very
stong party, toward Berkley, with assurance that the Castle should be rendered,
which Master Stanford told me should really be, so that the gaining of
Gloucester, might be the more facile, in whose absence I must undertake to get
the Gate opened, and the Word delivered to them; which Plot when I heard it
proposed, I much approved, but withal I advised that the Forces might suddenly
be drawn off from Tewksbury, assuring him that whilst they lay there, I should
not be able to draw out the Governor, which he promised should be done,
as soon as he spoke with Sir William Vavasour. This Plot if it had been thus
prosecuted by them, had been by Gods mercy of great gain to us. For we
thereupon resolved to have sent a Garrison into Berkley Castle, and with silent
Forces from Presbury Garrison to have possessed Tewksbury, and by speedy
retreating to have made that good also. But it so fell out, that they fell off
and deserted their own Plot, as will appear by the sequel. But one thing was
remarkable, that at this meeting, Master Stanford never so much as moved me to
any asseveration of fidelity to him, but desired me to send unto him within two
days, which I did as follows.

Sir,
I Have sent according to my promise, but the Governor is so intent and
serious in wayring upon the Forces at Tewksbury, that until they be removed, it
will be vain to move him to draw out any other way, but when they are Marched a
day or two I am confident, that I shall persuade his march to Berkley,
especially if he may have any assarance of their rendering the Castle (which you
told me would be) and which will occasion him to stay a day or two to settle
the same, who otherwise (out of his care of Gloucester) is apt, and wont to
make speedy retreats when he is abroad. Sir, if you come to Newnham toward
Saturday or Sunday, Sir John Winter may send you in a man to me to appoint when
I may meet you in Huntloys wood, or on the hill beyond Huntley, after you have
conferred with him, whose secrecy I shall desire you much to engage, and then
I shall agree more fully with you on all Circumstances; Sir, I beseech you know
and rest assured that I am,

Your most humble Servant in much care till, etc.
11. Ian. 1643.

To which Letter I received this answer.

DEAR Robin, the reason why you have stayed so long for an answer is this; Sir
William Vavasor sent to the Governor of Berkley Castle to draw out his whole
Garrison, which he refusing to do without the Kings or Princes special
Command; We shall now fly to one of your former propositions, being confident
you will not fail to make good any one of them, which was that you would at
any time draw out your own Troop with one more which shall be put in the Rear
of our horse, and your self to lead our Forlorn hope into the Town, which if
you will do, send but this Messenger with a note to Sir William Vavasour what
day you will meet him, and I will not fail to be there, this you must be sure
to do on Wednesday next, for the business will admit of no delay.

Yours, E. S.
16. Ian.

With this Letter I received a Letter from Sir William Vavasour as follows.

Sir William Vavasours first Letter.
SIr, I was so confident of your reallity in endeavoring to perform what you
have undertaken, that I immediately sent Orders to Berkley Castle to the
Governor, who will not obey my orders so fully as to draw out the whole Garrison
without his Majesty's special Orders, a great part he will, but would have a
Reason; I have drawn great part of the foot toward Parshoe, and endeavored
to have marched with the residue, and all the horse. But Sir Walter Pie, and
some other Commissioners were so opposite to it, that unless they might know,
and approve of my design, they would not consent to it, which I thought might
be a dis-service to you; I have quite left them unsatisfied with what I
intended, so that Sir Walter Pie is gone to Oxford with a great complaint, but
that is nothing, did it not prevent your Motion; So that now, Sir, I must
intteate you to follow what you first moved, that is, you draw out of Town your
own Troop, or one more if you can, a good distance from Town, you having the
Word may lead on the Forlorn hope, and your horse may bring up the Rear; the
performance of this will confirm your friends in their good opinions of you,
and oblige me to express my self,

Tewksbury. 16. Ian. 1643. Your humble Servant, Will. Vavasour.


Thus you see how Sir William Vavasour, a man of renown, as Fame would render
him, can smoothly insinuate to promote so foul a treachery, and would make me
believe that he will rather hazard a chiding by the King, and the displeasure
of many other Gentlemen of worth, his very friends, then that any soul should
be privy to so great a secret. Not imagining that I well knew long before, that
not only the Lord Digby, Master Stanford, Sir John Winter, Master Dutton, and
the whole Counsel of War at Tewksbury: Nay the whole Court at Oxford were
acquainted with the design, but also (for so closely did they carry this
business, which was of so great consequence to them) that Brittanicus has
blazoned me in Print long since for a Traitor, and well he might, had all that
they have let fall and divulged been really true. By which passages, by the
way, let all false hearted traitors, who for base private ends would feign be
tampering with the Enemy to betray their trusts, take heed what they do; for
they cannot keep secrets. And yet they are so wise (do them right) as never to
trust him in any Office or place of charge for them, who for any respect has
been drawn to infidelity and breach of trust by them: But to proceed, the next
day after the receipt of Sir William Vavasours Letter, with whom now I must as
with my Lord Digby, keep correspondency; I gave him this answer.

Sir,
I Am sorry to hear that our Intentions should be so frustrated, especially
since I had so far proceeded in mine own thoughts in the manage thereof. And
I Will assure you, I still find the Governor so diligent in observing the
Garrison at Tewksbury, that he has given private commands to the Officers both
of horse and foot, to be instantly ready upon notice given of your least
advance this way, for which purpose he constantly day and night keeps good
parties of Horse out as Scouts to bring him notice; Insomuch that I fear it
will be impossible for my Troop, and your Forces to join without discovery;
which how dangerous that may be unto us both, I leave to you to judge
especially when he and all his strength be at home: did not his eyes so much
look upon your strength, and the neerenesse of your quarters, then would the
proposition you now fall on be far easier effected and with much more safety.
For as I shall be glad to corfirme the good opinion my friends have of me, in
really performing what I have undertaken, being confident that they will take
care of me, who thus often hazard my life and fortune for them, so shall I be
infinite loath to draw them on upon any design that may prove prejudicial to
them, the right laying of the business is the life thereof, the miscarriage
the utter destruction both of my self and many of them, besides the utter loss
of effecting so good, and so great a business; wherein I protest I shall
think my self happy to sacrifice my life to accomplish the same according to
my desires. One mis-feazance in a business of this nature is never to be
repaired. Therefore upon the whole matter this is my Opinion, that it will be
most necessary that the Governor be drawn out with a good party when the
business is to be done, I am sure this will be with more safety on your side,
especially if the Allarm should be suddenly taken; This will searce be done
unless w^ Forces draw out of Tewksbury for the reason aforesaid, which they
may do toward Ledbury, and be near enough to do the business, and so enter
on the best [best for us I me ne] side of the Town, as I have formerly written,
and then could I give him some private information that I have intelligence
that Berkley will tender (though they remove not) and so draw him out in whose
absence (since my hand is still lame) I must keep home, and then shall have
absolute Command of the Horse, best for Scouts, and shall be able with more,
facility and safety to do the business with as much speed as you please. I
desire you to consider thereof, for) shall not be out of care till I see it
perfected, and that my good friends [the Parliament I meane] may have surther
experience of my fidelity, and that I may ever be,

17. Ian. 1643. Your Servant, R. B.
Postscript.
Sir, I beseech you be infinite careful to whom the business be imparted, and
let me in charity before hand be-speak you, that as little Towns-mens blood may
be spilt in the entry as may be, it will be better drawn after where cause is.




This Letter wrought the end for which we sent it to draw them on at the
West-gate, and best gate for our advantage, and to persuade them of my
reallitie to them.

Upon receite whereof, Sir William Vavasour sent me this Letter.

Sir William Vavasours second Letter.
Sir,
I Have Received yours, and am very inclinable to your motion of drawing
toward Ledbury, a place more feazible for me to draw my men to, then any
other, it being within the associated Counties; the Commissioners cannot
pretend against it; but we must have a little patience until the contribution
moneys are brought in, for my men are very apt to mutiny, and indeed will not
march without money. I shall with all possible conveniencie send to you, and
give you a further account of it, as also that I am, Sir,

19. Jan. 1643. Your most affectionated Servant, W. Va.


After the receipt of this Letter, I waited to hear from them till the fourth
of Feb. at which time J received these two Letters follow.

Master Stanfords Letter.
DEAR Robin, now we are come to try you, and if you love your self fail not in
what you have promised, for if you do, believe it, you are ruined for ever. And
if you intend really, give me notice by this bearer of all particulars
concerning your Town, in what condition it now stands, and in so doing you will
prove your self that which I ever wished you, and regaine me to be.

Your Friend as once I was real, Edward Stanford.


Sir William Vavasours Letter.
SIr, I am so confident of your real intentions, that I am willing to follow
your advice as far as in me lies. Sir William Waller is grown so strong, that
we must attempt something out of hand, if you will order it so that I may have
the Port on the Weish opened to me; I having the Word, will come with so
considerable a force, that I will venture to make it good against all Massies
Forces, they not taking the Allarum. Friday or Sunday next will be a convenient
time, my men are feign to march into the Country for subsistence.

W. Vavasour.


Upon the receipt of these letters, the next news we heard was, that Colonel
Mynne and S. Ledger with the Irish Forces marched to Paynswicke for subsistence,
but indeed to plunder the Country; to prevent which our Governor drew out a
party of horse and foot, where there was a skirmish, and some loss on both
sides, the next day after which, the Country of Whitestone hundred rose into a
great body, and the Enemy hearing thereof, retreated that very day toward
Tewkesbury again. This by the way, but to these two Letters I sent this answer
by approbation as before, unto Master Stanford and Sir William Vavafour. 5.
Feb. 1643.

SIr: you writ unto me for the state of this Garrison, which I shall render you
as near as I can. First, the Governor lies at the house where I dwelt, and
one Captain with him; before whose door are two Drakes, and a Centry day and
night, the great Gunnes left by my Lord General the Earl of Essex, are at the
maine Guard near the Cross before the Bell door, being three in number, and
there are several other small cutts about the Cross, in which maine Guard
there are or should be every night, about one hundred men, some Citizens of the
Trained Bands, and some selected men out of every Company. Thus for the heart
of the Tewne. Now for the Ports, the Governor is making of three Sconces, one
before the East Gate, another before the North Gate, and the third at the
Friars Orchard, where the Battery was made at the time of the Siege; all of
very great strength, but they are none of them as yet finished: there are at
these Ports several Gunnes (viz.) at the North Gate two, at the inward North
Gate three, at the East Gate one, and sometimes two, at the South Gate two, to
which Gate also the maine Guard is very near; but it is usual with the
Governor to remove the Gunnes often from one place to another. There are also
other Gunnes upon the works about the Town, and at the Key, where also the
Frigot lies with a Guard in her; as for the West Gate, there is also one Gunne,
a Demyculvering, but no Cannoneer that watches her as I could ever find, and
as yet no Drawbridge, but at all the other Gates there are Drawbridges
finished, and we are now making Draw-bridges for the West Gate, and
Overs-Bridge, which I believe will not be finished yet this ten or twelve
days, the Guards are generally careless, and many run from their duty to
drinking, much discontent being amongst both Officers and Soldiers for want of
pay; and indeed the Guards are very weak in comparison of what they have
been, and must needs be 10, as long as we keep so many out Garrisons, as
Presbury, Boddington, Huntley, W^^bary, Arlingham, Frampton, Essington,
Froster, Horsley, and Lipp^^t; all which Garrisons being now kept, have drawn
out a great number of the soldiers out of this. As for Provisions and
Ammunition, I have not been in the Granery since the Siege, but to deal
truly with you, I verily believe the Garrison is fitted for six months; for,
the Corn of Master Guyse, Master Dobbs, sir Henry Spillar, sir Ralph Dutton,
and others whom we call malignants, was brought in, indeed by my self; and
since the Country has brought much Corn into private houses. I know two men
who have laid in two thousand bushells here, and the Governor made a strict
Proclamation, that all the Citizens should make provision for six months, many
of whom have done so, and they make Powder and Match every week as much or
more then they spend. Thus have I given you a short and true relation of the
condition of this Garrison, as near as I can for the present think on, and
shall be ready to srtissie you in any other thing you shall desire by the next,
beseeching you to continue secrecy above all things, and not to conceive any
jealousy in his performance, who shall not think himself happy till he see
his engagement really accomplished and discharged, and who has hitherto throwed
himself into your hands, and resolves to rely on you in time to come both for
his life and fortune.

5. Feb. 1643. Sir: ever your many ways obliged servant, R. B.


With this Letter I sent one also to Sir William Vavasour, as follows.

Noble Sir:
I shall apply my self unto your time with all diligence, I have given Master
Stanford an account of the state and condition of our Garrison. By the time
proposed in your Letter I hope the water will be down, which will much
advantage your advance near the Town; I shall not desire to defer it longer
then the time pitched on. As for your own occasions, so for the making of
Drawbridges in your passage, which I would not have to be any impediment
thereto; For when they are made, Guards will be set at them, which may give the
Allarum before the Gate can be opened. Consule together for your own safeties
and mine; only be private, and for the opening of the Gate, and the word,
leave it to me, and rest assured that I shall be

Sir: your servant, R. B.


These two Letters answered the end for which they were intended, to beget
belief of my fidelity to them, to make them the more consident to come on
(which indeed was our chiefest care) and to answer their desire of knowing the
condition of our Garrison, which notwithstanding it was done as you perceive,
yet so as without prejudice to our selves, the least boy that comes into our
Town, being in most of the relations able to satisfy as much. Thus let the
enemies to Religion, to the Laws and Liberties of this famous Kingdom, and to
the Privileges thereof, be still deluded, but let Gods just and righteous
cause ever prosper.

That these Letters were well taken by the enemy, appears by Master Stanford
next Letter as follows.

Dear Robin I thank thee for thy constancy, and doubt not of your
perseverance in doing his Majesty acceptable service. Sir William Vavasour bid
me tell you that he cannot be ready ou Friday, or Saturday, in regard his
forces are not yet marched hither, but are on their way, where they must hault
two or three days till moneys come in, however upon Sunday or Monday we shall
not fail to be within a days march of Gloucester. And you must be sure to send
the same messenger to us who may easily find us out. On Sunday fail not of
this, for I long to see you. On Sunday without fail we shall be at Ledbury,
and expect your man.

Yours, E. S. 6th. Feb.


MY man who brought this Letter told me of Master Stanfords desire to a
handsome Gelding that I had, whereupon to make him the more confident, and to
persuade them to come on, I sent him that Gelding with this Letter, the next
day after that Arch-traitor Captain Davis had betrayed the small Garrisons of
Wesbury, and Huntley unto the Cavaliers.

Sir, I congratulate your good success yesterday at Wesbury and Huntley, and
doubt not ere long to see this County in a good and peaceable condition. I
observe businesses prosper best where least blood is spilt. My man told me of
your desire to my Gelding, I have sent him with cheerefulnes, wishing him
better for you, though it need not if he be well used. And I refer my Coach
and Horses for you also; against the time I shall observe your direction by the
return of my man, and rest ever,

Sir: your most humble servant in great care as yet, R. B.


I received no Answer to this Letter from Master Stanford, but thanks for my
Gelding, and directions to my man to come from Worcester, where he then was, to
sir Willam Vavasour to Tewksbury, from whom I received this Letter, dated 10th
Feb.

SIr: I will be in the Forest side on Tuesday next, where I will be either at
Newent or thereabouts; if you direct your servant to me, or to sir John Winter,
for whose secrecy I will answer to you, and observe any directions you will
send me, if you cannot conveniently meet me, which I must desire,

Yours: William Vavasour.


On Tuesday following, according to the direction of sir William Vavasours
Letters I sent this Letter, to master Stanford.

SIR:
IN the whole progress of the business, I have not been put unto it as now to
fulfill your expectation in sending to you my man, who was last with you, was
so affrighted, being known by your Scouts when he came last from you, that he
dares go no more, how to get another willing and faithful I know not But
hearing the Governout say he must send to sir William Vavasour about prisoners,
and his Trumpet being sick, I took advantage thereof to send mine, and have
sent this to you under pretense of exchanging a Trooper of mine in Oxford, one
Henry Hullins; I received a Letter from sir William Vavasour by my man, but
none from you and have sent according to his desire. If you march to Newent as
he wrote, it cannot be better, for from thence may you march to Upleaden, and
by Rudford, and give no Alarm to Churcham, and send but a Troop to possess
Overs-bridge, hat intelligence come not, and then may you pass clearly
undiscovered, so as you be there before the Centries or the Guard at that
bridge be set, neither of which are done before about nine of the clock at any
time. I every night as Commander of all the horse of late, have sent out
Scoutes, some toward Tewksbury, and some toward Huntley, and the Forest, and
can have the keys at my command to let them out, which has occasioned me to
think on this way, if you like it, that I may provide Scouts out of mine own
Troop to go toward the Forest, that night you appoint, who shall not be
ready till the business be done. But I can take the keys of the West-gate and
go down thither, pretending to stay for their coming, and set the Gnard,
which as I wrote is very slender usually, to drink in an Alehouse till they
come in, which time you may advance, and find no living soul but my self at
the Gate, or if one or two should be there, they shall be drunk, and you may
pretend, as I shall also affirm, that you are our own men from Churcham,
where there is a small Guard of horse and foot, and which if you disturb not,
will continue there yet a while; I would gladly meet sir William Vavasour, but
I am very fearful of notice being taken of me; and if I should meet him, I
know not him, nor he me, which may prove prejudicial to either of us, if you
desire to be sarisfied in any thing, I think I could meet you in the old place
without any notice, and I dare adventure on my knowledge of you at an escaping
distance. For the Word, when we meet I will show you a place, where (after it
is given) you shall find it in a Parchment fair written. This I think will be
very feazible; but I shall be ready, as you shall prescribe, to do any thing
in the power of

13. Feb. 1643. Your most humble servant, R. B.
Let my Trumpeter know nothing but of the exchange, but wish him to deliver any
thing you send to me, to mine own hand, which I know he will be careful in.




With this Letter my Trumpeter was stayed by Colonel Paget, from Tuesday 13.
Feb. till Thursday, upon pretense that he came too late into his Garrison. On
Thursday morning I sent to Newent to Mr. Stanford this Letter.

SIr: I wrote a Letter to you by my Trumpeter, who went to Tewksbury on
Tuesday, I perceive he is there stayed, which puts me in fear; I would desire
you suddenly to send for him, and I shall meet you at what house you shall
appoint in the old place, the more speed you make n^w the better, as before the
Draw bridges be up, so for our waiting on you, which as yet we do not, scarce
knowing that any force confiderable is come to Newent; the st^ller you lie the
more secure shall we be. The Plot I prescribe in my Letter, runs more and more
feazible in my head, I could last night have done it gallantly, I doubt not of
as fair an opportunity to express my self indeed,

Your real servant, R. B.


This Plot I prescribed as well to secure mine own person within the Gates, as
to render it probable unto them, which it seems they could not dislike, for
that very day they sent back my Messenger from Newent to me again with this
Letter.

DEAR Robin, the time is now so far spent, that it is impossible for me to
meet you, this night being resolved for the business, so that you must not
f^ile this night to draw off all your Guards from the Bridge, that we may come
secure to the Gate, and not have any Centries to hinder us, and withal you
must be sure to let me hear from you this night by six of the clock, as for
our strength we are now fifteen hundred foot and horse, if you can come your
self with your Troop, pretending to beat up a horse quarter, it would be very
satisfactory to Sir William Vavasour; you must be there by 8. of the clock, but
this we shall not press, if you think it inconvenient, howsoever you must send
the Word, being assured you will do your best to advance this design,

E. S.


Immediately as soon as I had received this letter I went to the Governor, and
a consultation we had, whether to let them come that night according to their
appointment, or to put it off. But we being provided for them, it was agreed
upon that night, I therefore presently sent this letter to Master Stanford.

SIR, I shall wait with diligence to open the Gate, which i will warrant you
shall be done, so as you come by 9. of the clock, or within half an hour
after, the Word I have sent, which occasions the later sending of this bearer,
it is, Bristoll: Be sure to come strong enough, and remember to come up by the
Bare land, which is a safer way to surprise the Maine Guard, then to come up
the main street: some in your company cannot but know the way, I rest in hope.

15. Feb. 1643. Your Servant, R. B.


Presently after the sending away of which Messenger, the Gates being shut
round the Garrison, and careful Sentinels set. The Governor called a Counsel
of War, acquainted all the Officers with the Plot, gave order that all as well
Citizens as Soldiers should continue that night in Arms, drew three pieces of
Ordnance to the West-gate, and a strong guard of Musketeers well provided with
Grenades and Ammunition, and placed four stout men in a Boat under Overs
bridge, who lay under the Arch private, with directions that upon fireing the
first Gun they should but cut a Gablerope, which being done, the bridge would
have fallen in, whereby (by Gods mercy) of necessity they must all have been
killed, drowned, or taken, there being no possible means in humane reason of a
man's escape, in this posture, preparation, and expectation, we continued all
that night watching diligently, but privately, for a happy time to have
delivered our selves, and the whole Kingdom from the future mischief of such
subtle insinuating, and bloodthirsty Enemies. But Gods time was not then come;
For albeit they did advance with their whole body, both of Horse and Foot; yet
when they came to Lassington Hill within a mile of the Town, it was fair day,
whereby they having lost their time by their own slownesse of march, they
durst not come on, but instantly retreated to Newent, as appears by this
Letter which I received from Master Stanford, on the morrow after, being Friday.

The sixteenth of February, 1643. Dear Robin,
your Messenger came so late, that we could not possibly effect the design;
yet our confidence of your best assistance made us attempt it; but it being day
before we could possibly come, we must once again desire the like readiness
from you on Saturday, or Sunday at the farthest, and then we shall not fail to
be in a readiness; it was ten of the clock before he came. I shall desire your
answer either to day or to morrow at the farthest.

Yours E. S.


THe receipt of this Letter made us believe that the Enemy had then received no
information that their design was destroyed and made known, and so much the
rather for that we kept the Gates so close shut, the next day after being
Friday, that we suffered no man to pass the Ports upon any business
whatsoever, which made us willing to see if we could salve the business by
another Letter, and to give them encouragement to come on again. Whereupon
this Letter was written, and sent the next day to Mr. Stanford with this Note
enclosed.

The note.Sir take heed what you do, the Allarum is taken by the intelligence
of two countrymen, who brought in word to the Governor of your advance this
way. The Guards are strengthened, and much puzle here is at present, whereof I
wish you to take notice from

Your Servant R. B.


The Letter. SIr I am glad you came not the last night, I hope some good fate
was in it, I was never so at my wits end, and yet for my hanging durst make no
show of it. Whilst I was writing to you, and devising to send the Messenger
cleanly out at the Gate, which I was feign to act in mine own person: The
Governor received information by two countrymen that you were marching this
way, and that some of your soldiers should give out, that the West-gate was to
be opened to them by some very near unto him. Whereupon there was an Allarum,
and one great Gun drawn to the West-gate, and the Guard there made strong;
much muttering was who should be the man to let you in; some gave out that I
was distrusted, others that it was some Townesman. In the beginning of these
buzzings I came to the Governor, who told me of his intelligence. That you
were marching for Glaucester, upon hopes of being let in. I saw how things
were, and seeing a preparation for an Allarum, the Commanders all sent for, a
new Word instantly given, and a resolution speedily to be in Arms; bethought
my self on the sudden what to do to clear my self of suspicion with the
Commanders: For as for the soldiers and peoples tattle I regarded it not; thus
therefore I declared my self. Gentlemen, you have received some intelligence
(as it seems) of the Enemies advance this night, and here is muttering about
the streets of some plot to let them in, and I am suspected to have some hand
in it, how clearly, and without exception I have hitherto carried my self both
toward you, and the business, I appeal unto your selves to judge, and for
the business, I came now to tell you, that I have received intelligence from a
friend of mine in the country, that the Enemy means certainly to be here this
night, and therefore I advise you by all means to be in readiness, and know
this from me, that they have some promise from some Citizens to have the Gate
opened, and to make the diversion from my self so much the more clear, I told
them of two men whom I much suspected, (and of whom I knew they had no good
opinion) but advised them as to be careful this night in their Arms so to set
some spies over these men's carriages, and as soon as an apparent charge could
be proved against them, which I did not doubt would suddenly be, I would bring
them to a Counsel of War, and in the mean time endeavor to search out the
business, and perfect the charge against them. This so took with them, that
they all gave applause to what I had said, desired me to take more special
notice toward those two men: And the Governor gave-testimony (I having done
him some personal office of acceptable service) of his belief of my fidelity,
to which all the rest of the Commanders assented also.

This being done, every man was repairing to his Arms, wherein I was not
backward my self to give command to the Horse to be in readiness, and to
encourage the Soldiers; But still at the. Governors elbow. But I should have
told you that as soon as I saw these things thus running, I instantly went
home, and gave my man Ned this enclosed Note, and I walked as far as Overs
Bridge with him waiting on me, to hearken whether we could hear any noise,
where (by my directions) he slipped from me, and though I could not get him to
undertake to find you out (being so used the last time he came from you, as I
wrote unto you) yet he lay in a ground beyond the Wynnyard till two of the
clock waiting your coming, and afterward lay in a Barn till morning. But I
must confess that I collected by your Letter, that it would be impossible for
you to come from Newent in due time upon so short warning, which made my care
especially after midnight a great deal the less. Yet I had resolved to have
given you notice of the Allarum being taken if I had discerned your Advance,
which I could have done my self (being tied to special place of Command) by
riding into a private back place, and discharging my Pistol for you to take
notice of, and let that be your sign if I should be driven to a strait in time
to come. Well, about twelve or one of the clock we went all to bed, the Guard
at that Gate a little stronger than ordinary, and all was quiet, and I am yet
in like favor and esteem as before, with Officers by mine expressions, and
with Soldiers by giving them money: and Ale: And for the mean Citizen, let
him mutter what he will it matters not. The great Gun is drawn off the Gate to
the Governors door, and another that was drawn that way, is drawn back to
the maine Guard. We had intelligence yesterday morning, about ten of the clock,
that you were retreated to Newent, and settling a Garrison there in quiet, and
we are in our old security again. The Vote going still that there was some
plot, and I being (as I said) set to find it out, for the more colorable
effecting whereof also, I procured the Gates to be strictly watched yesterday by
an Officer at each Gate, searce suffering any to pass out, to see if we could
take the intercourser between you and the Plotters, which course I would have
also got continued for two or three days longer, were it not for the Market to
day, which will handsomely occasion the forbearance.

Sir you write unto me for this night or Sunday, my opinion is clear, that if
you lie still at Newent, not giving us Allarums till Sunday after dinner, and
then advance your Foot to be here by nine of the clock, being a time that
people pass not so much with intelligence as in the week-dayes: And if you
send but a Troop of Horse to Overs Bridge, in the very shutting of the
evening, to prevent notice you may do it (I Will be bold to say) as easy as may
be; but that must be your first work, if you think fit to send a trusty secret
man, who is a soldier, or, but rational to me, I shall show him all the
conveniences of the passages, the place where for you to draw up undiscovered,
where to place your reserve to retreat unto, if occasion should be, where to
find the Word, and what hindrances and obsticles are possible to be in the
way. If he come to day upon a sack of oats, as from Rudford, to me along with
this bearer, I Will warrant his safe return upon my life: Consider well your time
and hour, and let me know, and I Will not fail to do the utmost in the power of
your Servant (though a little scard.)

R. E.


To this Letter I received this Answer from Master STANFORD, the seventeenth of
February 1643.

Dear Robin, Sir William Vavasour has this morning received a Command to draw
great part of his Forces on the other side of the water, but he doubts not, but
to return about the middle of the next week with a greater Force, and hopes by
that time you will prepare all things: In the interim he desires you to hold
correspondence with Sir John Winter, whom you may trust, who will be constantly
at Lidney.

Yours E. S.


According to the contents of this Letter, Sir William Vavasour did draw off
the greatest part of his Forces from Newent to meet our Convoy coming from
Warwick, but for his purpose of returning, we believed not that, but rather to
keep fair correspondence with me, that their mischievous and frivolous design
might not appear unto the world to their disparagement. Yet it is observable,
that Sir John Winter, a known Papist, and who is reported to have laid down
his Arms with other Papists, is now appointed to keep correspondency with me:
Thus would they make the world to think that Papists shall not bear Arms for
the King to maintain the Protestant Religion, and yet they shall or will be
acting something more mischievous, and destructive to the peace of the
Kingdom, than the fury of their personal Arms can effect: I pray God deliver
his sacred Majesty from such assistance. But to conclude, we not yet (by what
we received from them) certainly knowing whether they were yet sensible of
their own folly, and shame.

This one Letter more was sent to Master STANFORD, Febr. 22. or in his absence
to Sir JOHN WINTER.
SIR, According to your directions I have sent unto you again, tendering mine
own readiness, really to do you service, but withal complaining of your
infinite opennesse in the carriage of the business, it being in the mouths of
most of all your soldiers, from whom it has by sundry intelligencers been
spread here amongst both Town and Country. I have heard such things as have
made my ears glow, and had I not used all possible means to satisfy the
Officers of my fidelity to them, and that reports have rendered them various
and uncertain, I had suffered ere now. Well, the strangest relations are but
nine days wonder. I shall suffer this to wear it self off, by suffering the
relators and their hearers to rest uncertain, unsatisfied; and doubt not in due
time to manifest unto you and the world, that my heart is right in despite of
all cross reports or jealousies; only thus much let me beg at your hands, if
ever you mean to accomplish the design of a surprisall, to be more private in
your expressions, more politic in relating to your soldiers truly your own
Marches, more constant in your resolutions and prefixions, and more sudden in
your actions. If the imparting of so great a secret into sundry hands be not
dangerous; if acquainting your common soldiers with the true end of your March
be not too open; if sundry appointments, and failings of those times may not
beget suspicion of your agents; and whether surprisals ought not to be sudden
and unlookt for, I leave to you to judge. Thus much by way of caution I thought
fit to write, desiring you to consider of it: But know assuredly, that for mine
own part, I shall be ready, when you shall appoint, to perform really what I
have undertaken, and to manifest unto you that I am

Sir your Servant, R. B.


This Letter written as a lure to draw you down again, was delivered to M.
Stanford, who sent the Messenger to Sir John Winter with it, giving himself no
answer at all to it; Sir John Winter was at Bristol, but his Lady wrote that
answer should be sent by Sir John as soon as he came home, of which I have yet
heard nothing, by which we clearly conceive the business to be deserted by
them.

Now let the world judge whether these seducing Enemies have not been fitly
served in their own kind, as they like this, let them attempt to fasten their
doctrine of fallere fallentem upon me again. No let the deformity of that
doctrine, and the fruits thereof rest in the breasts of those that preach it,
who deem others like unto themselves. But let the world know, that neither
hope of honor which is but a puff, nor hope of gain which is uncertain when
attained, and sordid in such achievement, nor the fawning of such friends who
aim at their own ends, nor any other sinister unworthy end shall ever prevail
with me to undertake any ignoble action, much less any such action as this; As
to perjure my self with God having taken several oaths, and protestations to
the contrary; No the ransom of a soul is of higher value with me to betray my
Religion the most hopeful Legacy I can leave to my posterity, to betray my
Country with the Laws, Liberties, and Privileges thereof, into the hands of
Arbitrary power or Tyranny, and instead thereof to procure a never-dying curse
from all succeeding generations in this Kingdom to betray my trust, so great a
trust committed unto me by so great and worthy personages as the Patrons, and
by Gods blessing the preservers of three famous Kingdoms, to deny mine own
hand which I solemnly subscribed, with other faithful Commanders in this
Garrison, avowing unto the Herald sent by His Sacred Majesty, to maintain our
fidelities to the last drop of our bloods, to render my self unworthy of such
unspeakable and wonderful deliverance which I (amongst others) received in the
late Siege from the Almighty hand of God, thereby rendering my self not only
unfit for future mercies, but the most ungrateful wretch amongst men, to sell
my self to work so horrid wickedness, to betray my self my wife and family,
my friends, kindred, and dear acquaintance, into the hands of blood-thirsty
cruel, and numercifull people, to make my self guilty not only of all the
blood that must needs have been spilt in the forcing and sacking of so famous
a City, but of mine own blood also; for their wisdom had been more seen if
they had killed me to have saved the two thousand pound they were engaged for,
then either it, or their honesty, was in attempting to seduce me, to make me
their instrument in so foul a Plot, and to Chronicle my name amongst the
Register of Arch-Traytors to all posterity, Noe, my prayer, my heart, and hand
shall ever be for the maintenance of so just a cause, wherein if I sacrifice my
life and for tune, I doubt not of my reward with advantage. And let the great
God of heaven whose great work is now in hand, prosper his true and faithful
servants, His instruments in the furthering thereof, but let His enemies
perish, and be confounded in all such their treacherous designs, And let all
those that wish well unto the state of this Kingdom be glad, and rejoice with
us at the benefit that has accrewed unto the same by embracing of this
business (of which we are here right sensible) and that for the reasons herein
before expressed, and upon which it was first thought fit to be accepted.

This is the whole truth.

The matter it self does sufficiently vindicate mine integrity who neither
devised nor acted any part without consent and for the advantage of the
public service. And for the honor of the Action on my part so much is
unquestionable, that it were just upon them if they had all perished in the
design; they were condemned by their own Doctrine, and the law of like for
like. But the question is whether the like deceit might be retorted upon them
in this case by one who strives to maintain the repute of sincerity;
concerning which let wise men judge. First, I never passed my self over to
them by any oath or protestation, which alone admits of no equivocation, and
without which they could have no sufficient ground of trust, then whatsoever I
promised was made good, but with a cross intention, and to a contrary end,
upon which grounds I see no reason why I might not feed them with vain hopes,
when all acknowledge that by the color of an action I may lawfully deceive the
enemy into a snare. So that I am confident, that I shall stand rectus in
curia, and if not commended, yet at least acquitted in the Court of honor. And
whereas I have been traduced for a Traitor as holding correspondence with the
enemy, besides that satisfaction which this relation can give, I this declare
my self. I am assured of the justice of the cause, Religion, and Liberty, I am
assured of the extreme necessity, that puts the State upon this forcible
means and ways of resistance; I am assured of the lawfulness of the war on
our part, by the Law of God, by the law of nature, and by the laws of this
Kingdom. And such thoughts are the strongest assurance of fidelity if the
secrets of the heart could be laid open. But because Hypocrisy may be covered
with a fair varnish, there being no sufficient ground of confidence in the
consciences of men, or the goodness of their natures. To give you a clear
testimony; although no man can tell to what Center my thoughts incline, and
move; yet all conclude, that according to the principles of nature, I must
necessarily be true to my self, and work out my own welfare, according to
mine own judgment and knowledge. And this judgment is so clear against all
conspiracies of this nature, that I shall never be wrought thereunto, except it
were possible for me wittingly and willingly to contrive my own destruction;
for at the least such an enterprise represents it self full of difficulties,
and every way perilous, and if I can accomplish it, I lose my self; for if I
might hereby purchase a Kingdom it will never get me honor. And I know it is
the practice of the enemy to recompense the Traitor with some titular reward,
but no trust; Besides this discovery has put me into a condition beyond the
possibility of a relapse. And had not my fidelity and fore-knowne constancy put
me on, I might have reserved for my self a fair retreat in the time to come;
but having engaged my self by a manifest declaration, I must now needs go
through or be quite ruined.

Robert Backhouse.

The Committee of the House of Commons for the Garrison of Gloucester do think
fit that this Book be printed, 3. May. 1644.

THOMAS PURY.

FINIS.

