A NEW VERSION OF THE PSALMS OF DAVID, Together with all the CHURCH-HYMNS, INTO
METER, Smooth, plain and easy to the Most ordinary Capacities: And yet as
close to the Original Languages, and the last and best English Translation, as
the Nature of such a Work will well permit.

By SIMON FORD, D.D. and Rector of Old Swinford in Worcestershire.

LONDON, Printed by J.H. for Brabazon Aylmer, and are to be sold by Sampson
Evans Bookseller in Worcester. MDCLXXXVIII.

IMPRIMATUR.

March 17. 1636. Jo. Batteley.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD, FRANCIS Lord Bishop of ELY.
My Lord,
IT would be an offense so unpardonable in the Judgment of all others, that I
should never be able to forgive it to my self, if I should give way in my own
thoughts to the least apprehension, that these mean lucubrations of mine, in
this Version of David' s Psalms and the Church-Hymns (the last efforts of a
faint and feeble Vein of Poetry, especially at such an Age as that of mine,
wherein the floridness of fancy is wont sensibly to wither even in such as have
had far more of it then ever I durst pretend to) are any way qualified to lay
the least claim to your Lordships acceptance (on, indeed to the favorable
inspection of any Person of your Lordships Character in this Church) on the
account of any intrinsecal value in the composure of them.

But, though (in the great Apostles Phrase, as Erasmus, and Drusius, and other;
Interpreters render the original words. [(...)] Romans 1. 14.) I cannot presume,
to pretend to the payment of any Debt hereby to the Learned: Yet I may hope,
that what I have done therein, will in some measure free me from the charge of
dying in arrear to the Unlearned; whiles I thus endeavor to promote their
Edification by furnishing them with smooth and plain Expressions for the
assistance of their devotion in the praises they offer to God; which, I think I
may say, I have, for the most part, so done, as to give no just occasion of
nauseating any Person, either by the too much bluntness of the Phrases, or
obsoleteness of the Words I have used; which were the faults ordinarily
complained of, in the Metrical Translations in common use among us.

And under this consideration only (my Lord) I embolden my self (yet with all
humility) to offer the Work it self to the Test of your Lordships judicious
candor; and withal to beg your acceptance of its Dedication to you as its
Patron: Which adventure of mine, I entreat you to interpret, as a small
Testimony of the honor I have for your exemplary personal Piety and Devotion,
which very much sets off your other Episcopal Qualities, together with your
steady adherence, (at this Time especially,) to the true Interests of a Church
for which you have always had so great affection and esteem, and wherein you
now make so great a Figure: And withal, of the grateful sense I have of your
Lordships humble condescension to own a small Relation, (upon the account of
one, who is now (I am strongly confident) singing Hymns to God in the Choir of
Angels and Souls of just Persons made perfect) unto my self, who am,

(My Lord) Your Lordships most humble,

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IT has been usual with most Persons who have formerly attempted any thing
Poetically upon this Book of the Psalms, to preface something either concerning
the great Antiquity, singular usefulness, and excellent advantage of that way
of praising God, which is performed by tuneable voices, in sacred Songs, Psalms
and Hymns; or else, concerning the great Serviceableness of the Art of Poetry
to that noble end, both to assist the invention of the Composers, and the
devotion of the Singers of them. Whose labors in this Argument, render it the
less needful for me to insist much upon those Heads, to prepare thee for the
entertainment of what I here put into thy hands of that Nature: and therefore I
design to say very little of either now; farther then it may serve for an
introduction to what I am more especially obliged to acquaint thee with, in
reference to this version of mine which follows.

I think, (in the first place) that it needs no proof to any one that is but
ordinarily conversant with ancient History, that the Praises of God, and famous
Men, were the most Primitive Themes of Poetical composures: and that
accordingly the Poetry of all Nations has been most anciently employed,
toward the assistance and improvement of that general inclination of mankind
to admire and extol the divine, and humane. Authors of any eminent good to
them, in that way, with the most elevated Notions and Expressions.

Nor is it (secondly) less clear to any considering Persons, that the
declination and debasement of that noble Art, to the service of those
propensions of humane Nature which are more allied to sensuality, is a mere
perversion, and notorious abuse of it; contrived and promoted by the Artifice
of Satan, the sworn Enemy of God's Glory, and man's greatest good which in this
life he is capable of (the entertaining of it with an exercise, and employment
much of the same Nature with that of blessed Angels and glorified Saints,) with
design to turn the stream of its noblest faculties out of that pure channel,
into the foul and nasty Sinks and By-gutters, of lust and intemperance,
flattery and malice; and every thing indeed, that tends to the immersing the
humane soul the more deeply into all manner of viciousness and debauchery, by
the means of that pleasure and delight, which Poetical measures commonly
contribute to those Arguments about which they are employed.

Whence, (thirdly) it follows, (as a consequence of easy deduction from these
Premises,) that there can be no better service done to God, or Man, in this
World than that, of attempting to recover this Original inclination of mankind
to its first perfection, by assisting its noblest affections in that which is
their most proper and pleasurable intertainment; so, as that it may be
reclaimed from vice, and reduced again to a love of God and Virtue, by a kind
of holy guile: to wit, by supplanting and undermining its corrupt propensions
by the right use of that Art, by the abuse whereof they were first engendered
and nourished. And this I take to be the proper import and design of those
Apostolical Exhortations of St. Paul to the Ephesians, and Colossians, Ephesians.
5.19. Col 3.16.
wherein they are stirred up, to speak to themselves, and to teach and admonish
one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making melody in their
hearts to the Lord: as also of that of St. James, Jam. 5.13.
wherein he directs those that are merry, or cheerfully disposed, to vent their
mirth in singing of Psalms.

And to this end, it is not to be doubted, that the gift of Psalmody, whatever
it were, was peculiarly bestowed on some Persons in the Apostolical Churches.
For the Apostle Paul telling us (in 1 Cor. 14. 26.) that among the rest of the
eminent Gifts of the Holy Spirit in those Times, that was one; and in his
directions for the use of that, as well as the other there mentioned,
appointing it to be managed so as might best promote Edification: it is hardly
to be conceived, how that way of one gifted man's singing alone, could edify
many, except, by excercising the birsk and airy inclinations of men's souls in
an holy and spirtual manner, and turning those passions on which they are wont
to operate into their right channel, and thereby rendering them more spritual,
heavenly, and divine.

And this notion, Basil. Hom. de laudibus Psalm.
the great St. Basil had of the use of Psalms in the Church, many Ages since:
and from him I have it. He takes it to be the special Artifice of the H Ghost,
to endeavor the cure of the proneness of humane nature to the charms of
vicious pleasure, by inspiring holy men with sacred Poetical raptures, wherein
they mix the delights of music, with the precepts of Religion and Virtue: that
they might thereby tempt men (as we ordinarily do children to swallow
unpalatable medicines, by tempering them with honey,) to admit into their minds
and hearts the unpleasant Doctrines, which, conduce to the healing their souls,
by the pleasure they find in the harmonious measures wherein they are
conveyed to them.

This is also, the reason, why our Church in all its services, mixeth singing,
at convenient Periods, with the other offices of Liturgy: to wit, that thereby
the tediousness of sacred Exercises, may, to the generality of men, be
alleviated, by the mixing of that which pleases the ear, with that which
conduces to the sanctifying of the heart.

And from the great usefulness of this sacred Exercise to edification in
holiness and virtue, it is, that Divine Poems have been in all Ages of the
Church so greatly esteemed: and especially the Psalms of David; which have
therefore been always admitted, in large proportions, into all offices of
public worship. And thence also, to make them more useful to that great end,
diverse great men have not contented themselves with the rendering them into the
Languages of their own Countries, that so the matter of them might be
understood by the Congregations where they were read; but they have endeavored
also, to reduce them to such kinds of Meter, as were most acceptable in their
Times, that the spirit of them likewise might be diffused among Christians, and
raise their affections by their harmonious composure: The advantage of which
undertaking, was notably seen in the early days of the Church; in the diverting
the natural inclinations of the younger sort to songs of a worse constitution,
into that current, in which St. James before quoted, directs holy mirth to run.
A great assistance whereunto, was, the facility of receiving into, and
retaining in memory, those devout composures of holy Men, which were then in
esteem in the Church, by means of Poetical Measures: So that they had generally
at all times a stock of sacred Hymns stored up in their minds; and were thereby
enabled to give vent to the gayety of humor which their age and constitution
furnished them withal, in a serious and holy manner. In so much, that St.
Basil beforementioned, in the same Homily, tells us, that the ordinary
Christians in his time, sung David's Psalms, at home in their houses; and
whenever they went abroad also, they muttered them to themselves, as the
solitary entertainment of their minds, in their travels and other employments.
Ren. Laurentius de la Bar
And the Romish Prefacer to the Commentary upon the Psalms attributed to
Arnobius, speaks more largely concerning the Time of his Author, and tells his
Reader, that the Psalms then, were sung by the Plough-man over his Plough, the
Pilot at his Helm, the Rowers over their Oars, the Digger whiles he handled his
Spade, the Weaver in his Loom, the Spinster at her Distaff, and very Infants
that could not speak plain, upon their Nurses Laps: and withal, makes a
serious complaint of his Catholic Church, for being so far degenerated from
the ancient usage in this particular, that this holy exercise was not only
disused, but also, even disdained among them, which was, certainly, the Reason,
why, when the Reformation began in diverse parts of Europe, the vulgar People,
who had been long used to no devotions, But such as they understood not, were
so much taken with singing the Psalms of David, poetically translated into
their own languages, as finding that inward warmth in that exercising of
Religion, which they never felt in any before.

And this, no doubt, upon the Reformation of this our Church, in particular,
was one of the things which very much promoted it. For as the principal
Instruments in that Reformation composed the Book of Common Prayer so, as to
reduce all public offices therein to as near a conformity to the primitive
Order as might be; and especially in making the whole worship intelligible to
the vulgar, and taking care that not only the Scriptures appointed to be read,
should be translated into English, but also the Psalms of David; and these last
(though in Prose,) yet should be so pointed as that they might be sung, as they
have been ever since in Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches, by all that can
read: So diverse Persons used the best skill which those times afforded, to
diffuse that part of God's public service, more largely among the common
people, by a second version of them into English verse, in that translation
which ever since has been bound up with our Bibles, and Common Prayer Books,
and is usually sung in Parochial Congregations to this day.

Of the Persons, who then did the Church of England that remarkable service, I
can give little account beyond their Names: and those, (as to three of them)
the very Book informs me of, (viz.) Thomas Sternhold, John Hopkins, and Robert
Wisdom. Only, concerning the first of them (Tho. Sternhold) Mr. Fuller, in
his Church History, tells, me was first, Groom of the Robes, to K. Henry the
VIIIth. and afterward, of the Privy-Chamber (as he says in one place, but in
another of the Bedchamber) to Edw. VI. He had, (as appears by his Will) a
Legacy given him by King Henry. He translated for his part, 37 Psalms, by
Fuller's account; John Hopkins, 65; and the rest were done by W. W. W. K. R. W.
(that is, Robert Wisdom) and others, whose Names deserved not to be lost in
oblivion, nor their labors to be mentioned with so much scorn and contempt, as
they are by too many Persons of a profane humor amongst us, for the baldness
and flatness of the Style, and some Phrases which sound odly in the ears of
this Age, used to a sort of more refined English. It ought rather to be
remembered to their honor, that they served the Church with the best they had,
and probably, as well as the Poetry of that Age would afford: and that God has
received a great deal of praise, and the ordinary sort of Christians a great
deal of Edification and Comfort, by the use of that Version of theirs, for
above an hundred years in this Church.

And therefore, though it be to be desired, that as both English, and Poetry,
are very much improved since that time, so these holy Poems should partake also
of that improvement, by being rendered more sutably to the Genius of this Age:
yet it were (in my judgment) but decent, to bury that former Translation with
honor, for the service it has done, when ever it shall be, if ever it be,
exchanged for a better.

And now, having said so much in general, by I way of Preface to this
Translation of mine; I think fit, in the next place, to descend to some
particularities in reference thereunto, which I judge necessary the Reader
should take notice of, in order to the Judgment be makes of the sutableness
thereof, to the design aimed at by me therein.

The design aimed at, by me in this version, was not to vaunt my skill in
Poetry, for had that been my aim, I should have chosen a subject, wherein I
might have given my self greater liberty both of fancy, and language, then the
version of a book of Holy Scripture will allow me: nor was it, to entertain the
devout inclinations of the more ingenious sort of Christians, with strains of
elevated invention and expression, suited to their Genius; for this, I know is
already done by many, better then I can ever hope to do, should I undertake it.
But, that which I at first designed when I undertook this work, was merely to
render these pieces of holy writ, which are thought fit to be made parts of
God's public worship, in such a tolerable manner, as they might be for the use
of all Christians; gratifying the more ingenious and learned Parts of all
Congregations, with that smoothness and cleanness of style, which might make
them not to nauseate it; and the more ordinary sort of those holy societies
with that easiness and clearness of expression, which might not shoot over
their heads, whiles I endeavored to affect their hearts in so religious a
service.

For I considered, that most of the versions extant in this kind (at least, of
those that I have seen) were peccant, either in the one, or the other, of two
extremes: That is, either they were too Poetically done, above the reach of
ordinary capacities, and adapted only to the gust of persons of scholastical
breeding, who only are able to relish those high flights of fancy, and that
elaborate richness of language with which diverse of them are so luxuriantly
endowed, as (it may be) is hardly to be found in any of the Translatours,
either ancient, or modern, in any other Tongue, but the English: or else,
performed (by those who have pretended to amend that fault) so flatly and
slovenly, to accommodate their Versions to the cappcities of the vulgar, that
how grateful soever they were to such palates, yet they as much disrelished
those of all others, whose breeding had elevated their under standings above
the ordinary level.

Wherefore, I thought it expedient, to attempt something in the middle, betwixt
both these extremes; by avoiding those heights of fancy, or language, on the
one side, as might render the Translation unintelligible to persons of ordinary
capacities; and also, all such flatness and dullness of invention, and
expression, on the other, as might make it subject to disgust those of more
learned palates in the use thereof.

This, therefore, being my professed design, I must next acquaint those that
are pleased to be my readers, what Course I have taken in pursuance of it.

I. And(first) as to the Words and Phrases of this version, I endeavored to
keep as near to the New Translation of the Psalms, made in the Time, and by the
command, of K. James I. as conveniently I could, sometimes taking its very
expressions where they would handsomely fall into verse, and, where they would
not, I labored to give the full sense of them in other words; except now and
then, where the Original words or Phrases had something of Emphasis in them,
which I thought fitter to comply withal. And this I did, both because that
Tranflation is confessedly the best, which is extant in the English Tongue: and
also, because it is now generally in the hands of all persons, and the other,
by disuse (for the, most part) in a sort superannuated.

Wherefore, I judged it most expedient, not to give any occasion to any person
of doubtful apprehensions concerning the meaning of any Psalm, or any verse of
a Psalm, by variety of Interpretations. Which is also the true Reason, why,
(though I think their labors of great use to those who expound the sacred Text
in a way of instruction to other,) yet I have waved the senses given by the
reverend and learned Dr. Hammond, and others: and chosen rather, in such Texts,
as by reason of their difficulty, may admit of different expositions, to render
them in words expressing the strict literal sense of that Translation; then to
expound them, either according to theirs, or mine own apprehensions; that so,
those that shall sing any part of this version, where such Texts occur, may
rather apply their own sense to what they sing, then be restrained, and
confined to a determinate sense, in which, it may be, they are not satisfied.

II. I have also declined all running out into Paraphrase, beyond what, either
the Scope of any Text, compared with the context, or the general evident design
of the Psalm, or the apparent occasion of penning it, or the Emphasis of the
words themselves, or the reference they have to other Scriptures, wherein the
things uttered in any Psalm briefly and obscurely, or it may be barely glanced
at, are more largely, and professedly handled; or the like considerations, will
well allow. So that, I think, I may safely averr, that this version, is as
close to the Text it renders, as any of this kind extant; not excepting even
those, whose Authors pretend to tie themselves the most strictly and even
superstitiously to the words and phrases, either of the original Hebrew, or the
English Prose-Translation. For even the exactest of those Authors, who, to the
mangling the Syntax of words, to the making incoherent ruptures in the sense,
and the destruction of Measures and Rhythm, have so fettered themselves: yet
are fain, ever, and anon, to insert some such Particles, or Parentheses, or
Synonymons expressions, as really make Paraphrases upon the Text, though they
endeavor as much as may be to hide their so doing. And sure I am, it is closer
a great deal to the Text which I render, then that very version which has been
so long used in this Church: the Authors whereof (as might appear by several
instances,) have often altered the Texts they paraphrased, into quite a
different sense from what they naturally will afford: and made the holy Penmen
speak what they never intended.

III. As to the manner, wherein I have performed this work, take these
particulars following, to enable you to make a clearer Judgment of it.

(1.) That I have waved, (for the generality of this version) all learned
words, other then such as are by common use make familiar to English ears: and
I think, that it will be hard to find any particular Psalm, or verse of a Psalm
throughout the Book, where I have overlooked any such in my review of it. As,

(2.) On the other side, I have avoided all obsolete, course, and unhandsome
words, or phrases, such as are beneath the dignity of the matter expressed, as
also, all tautological expressions, or insignificant words, that are only
serviceable to assist the Rhythm. Insomuch, that if there be any such, they
have very narrowly escaped both mine own observation, and that of many others
who have done me the favor, on that design, to examine the Copy, and to whom I
have particularly made it my request, that they would mark all of that kind,
and inform me thereof, that I might alter them.

(3.) Next, I have denied my self, and mine own inclination, very much, in many
places the use of those flights of elevated fancy, which offered themselves to
me in the composure of the work; and since, upon frequent reviews of it,
expunged many Words, and Phrases, which seemed to me too Poetical for ordinary
capacities, to which height of fancy is as unintelligible, as learned language.
And though in some Psalms, where, in the original language it self, there is
more Poetry then ordinary, in the composure, suitable to the matters treated of
in them; it seemed but equal to me, that there should be something of
extraordinary in the rendering of them: yet I have endeavored so to govern my
invention, and language, in the translation of them, that, though there be more
loftiness of style in them then in others, yet, I think, there is not a line
difficult to be understood, even by the meanest, Person, that is not altogether
a stranger to smooth and polite English.

(4.) I have, (as I must ingenuously confess) contrary to the advice of diverse
of my learned and judicious friends, whom I consulted when I undertook this
task, made use of Rhythm at least twice in every four lines; whereof, I think
my self obliged, to give them, and others, this short account. Those that
dissuaded me from it, laid before me the danger of being too much fettered in
my invention and expression by studying to make so frequent a chime of words,
and the occasioning the drawing in of many useless and impertinent words for
cadencies sake.

But I was prevailed withal to act otherwise' then they advised; by
considering (on the other side) (1.) That our English Poetry for many Ages,
has been constantly (excepting some few instances of the contrary) managed in
that manner. (2.) That the greatest Poets this Nation has afforded, have made
use of the frequent Rhythm as an ornament, rather then a disparagement to their
Poems; and have been so happy in it, as that the most critical Readers, if they
will speak truth, must confess, they cannot mend their conceits, (or language,
so fettered.) in other expressions left at their own liberty. (3.) That there
are diverse peculiarities in the English Tongue (which, if this were a place for
it, I could easily here assign) seeming to direct to the choice of such
frequent Rhythms in our Poetry; and making it more easy to us to write in that
way, then can be done in most other languages. (4.) That English ears generally
entertain it with great satisfaction and delight, and disrelish all Poetical
compositions, (though never so excellent for all other ornamental requisites)
that are without it. (5.) And lastly, that it affords a great assistance to
memory (which in such Poems as are penned for devotional Uses, should be much
regarded) whereby, when men have lost one part of a stanza, they are enabled
more easily to recover it, by running over in their minds such words as chime
to the periodical ones of that other, which they remember. These things, and
the like, being taken into my consideration, I chose rather, to run the risk of
the dangers, and disadvantages suggested, in the moderate use of Rhythm, then
to take the contrary course I was advised to. I say, moderate use; because I
judge the proportion I have generally made use of, to be so: whereas, the
crowding it into shorter periods, as some have done, too much emasculates a
grave Poem, by spreading the matter too thin, and occasioning indeed the
drawing in many useless and impertinent words to perfect the chime, which my
disswaders were afraid, (though I hope it will appear, causelessly) my using it
at the distances I designed, would constrain me to. I must confess, the
recurring of Rhythms so frequently, has given me some trouble in some Psalms,
and Verses of others: But I persuade my self, that I have, in a competent
measure, overcome it; at least, that I can, in case any one will be so
friendly, as to let me know in what particular Instances the Rhythm has
enervated the sense, with no great labor, amend it, and yet not vary from my
intended measures in that particular.

(5.) As to the Tunes, to which I have adapted each Psalm, they are such as are
most in use among us. Such Psalms as are composed of eights and sixes, will
fall into any of the ordinary Tunes, suited to that proportion of syllables, in
the old Version. The rest of the Tunes that I have made choice of, are these.
First that of the Old 100th. Ps [ All people, etc.] To which all the Psalms
that are composed of 4 eights to a stanza, may be sung; or (according to the
matter of the Psalm) may be varied to that of Ps. 51. or the Lamentation, in
the old Psalm Book. Then to the measures of Psalm. 113. [ Ye children, etc.] I
have turned diverse of mine; that being a Tune easily sung, and withal,
sufficiently grave and solemn, as well as pleasant, and very musical. Among
those that are rendered in that Tune, is the first Meter of Psalm 119. wherein,
according to the measures therein required, every three lines make up a verse,
which reduces all of its Parts to an equality. I have not omitted that of the
old 25th. Psalm; nor that of the 148th. to both which, diverse of these are
adapted. And some few are so ordered, as that they may be sung to the Tunes of
the old 111th, 112th, and 127th. Psalms; but those have commonly others in
easier Tunes to attend them.

(6.) I have designedly, for the most part, suited the Matter of each Psalm, to
proportionable Meter, and Tune. Heroical Psalms, (those I mean, whose matter is
more lofty, and the style in which they are penned, more stately, and
majestical, if I may so say, in the original Language,) I have not only
endeavored, as far as my designed plainness would permit, to fit with a
suitable style in the English: but have also in the measures accommodated them
with the gravest and most solemn Tunes. And the like I have done to the
Penitential Psalms, and generally, to all such as are penned in a querulous and
lamenting strain: which as I have endeavored to express more pathetically, so
have I suited them to such Tunes, as most aptly comply with the Passions
delineated and represented in them.

(7.) In most of the Psalms, which are commonly sung, in the old version, if
they be tolerably there translated, I have waved the measures in which they are
therein composed, and put them in this of mine into other Measures, and Tunes,
that so, those that are used to sing them, may take their own choice of the one
or the other: which I chose rather to do, then to undertake, in all, (as I
have done for trials sake, in one, or two, of them) only, to amend the sense,
and words, where they seemed most to need it, and let the main substance of
them stand in my version: because I found it by experience, more easy to my
self, and thought it would be more acceptable to my Readers, as well as more
civil to the Authors of the former version, to raise a new frame altogether,
then to patch up an old one with such pieces, as, when all was done, would not
exactly suit with the building they were intended to beautify.

(8.) I have made a double version of diverse Psalms, some of them quite
differing each from other; and some, by addition and subtraction, or alteration
of some few words only: that so it may be at the choice of the singers, if
they affect one of the Tunes, rather then the other, in such pairs, to take
which of them they please.

(9.) I have subjoyned to the Psalms of David, the rest of the Hymns used in
our Church: to wit, that excellent one of St. Ambrose, usually called, Te Deum,
etc. the Magnificat, or Song of the blessed Virgin, Mother of our Lord; those
of Zacharias and Simeon, entitled, Benedictus, and Nunc Dimittis, etc. That of
Gloria Patri, I have adapted to all the Tunes; that it may (at choice) be sung
at the end of every Psalm. So that those, who cannot sing them in Prose, as in
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches they do; may have them at hand for their
use, in better verse, I hope, then that in which they are tendered to them in
the Common Psalm-Book.

(10.) Lastly, (for the different opinions of picus and learned Men engage me
to a conclusive Apology in this matter) I have taken in the whole Book of
Psalms into my version: and not confined my self (as some would have confined
me) to some few Psalms, and parcels of Psalms, the Matter of which is of common
concern to all Christians; because the reasons urged for such curtailing of
them, seem not to me to he cogent; yea rather, I think, I have weightier
grounds to move me to the contrary. For I know not, why those Psalms which
express the troubles which David lay under; or the personal mercies which he
received; or, refer to the particular political State of the Jews, or their
peculiar Worship; or contain promises of such mercies as God determined to
bestow on them, or Historical Relations of their miraculous preservations and
deliverances; or (lastly) such as tax them for their infidelity, ingratitude,
Idolatrous worship of false Gods, or Apostasy from the true God, etc. may not
be sung with advantage by us, though they do not immediately or directly
concern us. Considering, that (1.) the State of David, both as to his troubles
and mercies, generally, was Typical, and bare relation to Christ, and his
Circumstances: Especially, such of them, as he mentions in those remarkably
Prophetical Psalms, which are accommodated to our Savior, as being fulfilled
in him, in diverse Instances noted by the Evangelists. And (2.) the Jewish
occurrences are by the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 10. 6, 11.) said to befall them for
examples to us: And (3.) their Rites, and Ceremonies, were notably
significative of the spiritual worship of the Gospel; as the Epistle to the
Hebrews every where shows us: And (4ly.) the Prophesies made to them, are
eminently fulfilled to us: And (5ly) the miraculous deliverances wrought for
them by God, are of use to encourage our faith in like cases; yea (lastly) the
charges and aggravations of the sins charged on them are warnings (as we are
told Heb. 4. 11.) to us, that we fall not after the same examples of unbelief
or disobedience.

And, as for those Psalms, which contain Imprecations against David's Enemies;
the most of our People understand, that, as he was a Type of Christ, so, under
his Enemies names, Christ's Enemies are cursed, or prayed against, in the
Psalms that are of that nature. And they are often told, that David himself
allowed not himself to call for God's vengeance upon them, but only, as they
were looked on by him, as Enemies to God rather, and more, then to him: and
that those Imprecations themselves which he discharges against them, are
rather Prophesies of what evil would befall them, then Prayers, that such evils
might befall them. And as for the rest, that are properly imprecating, they are
(secondarily, at least) directed against Christ's Enemies, as well as God's,
and David's. Of which nature, (for instance) are those against Doeg, and
Achitophel; which are in the New Testament appplied to Judas, and his
Accomplices, the Betrayer, and Murderers of the Lord Jesus. And surely, it is
not at all (whatever some imagine) unbecoming the Gospel-temper, for
Christians, with holy rejoicing to repeat those fulfilled Imprecations: and
curse the memories of Judas, and the Murderers of our Lord Jesus.

Other Psalms there are, wherein David, indeed, prays against his Personal
Enemies, as (for instance) against Saul, and Absalom: but then, the matter of
his imprecations against them, only amounts to requests that God would divide,
and infatuate their Counsels, and dissipate, and overthrow their forces, and
convince, if not convert them, by the remarkable outgoings of his providence
against them. All which, surely, we may pray for also, without transgressing
against the meekness and gentleness, which the Gospel Spirit begets in the
hearts of Christians; whenever we have to do with professed Enemies of the
same temper with them. So that, in sum, the evil of using such Psalms as
these, lies only in the danger of misapplying them to such Persons, and in
such cases;, wherein they suite not the Design of the Holy Ghost, in deriving
them down to us; which we are to endeavor to prevent, by instructing our
People, when occasion is offered, in the right use of them, and not to debar
them the using of them altogether.

Thus much may suffice for the particular Answers to the particular Topics of
Argument, urged usually in this matter. But there is one consideration more,
which reaches to the full vindication of the lawfulness and expediency of
Christians singing all the Psalms indifferently; which (because it is, to us of
this Church, at least unanswerable) I must not omit. And that is, that the
Catholic Church, for so many Ages in all parts of the world, has thus
practiced, without scruple, or contradiction, in its Public Congregations And
our Church, in particular, makes tke Psalms indiscriminately, a part its daily
Liturgy: Dividing them into such parcels, as, they may be said, or sung,
interlocutorily, (as they are in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, as well as
other Congregations of eminent Note) throughout, once in each Month. And I know
no warrant given to any one, that officiates or partakes of those devotions
daily, to pick and choose, to use and omit or skip over, any Psalm or Psalms,
upon any of the accounts before mentioned. Nor can I imagine, what good reason
can be given, why they may not be sung in Meter, as indiscriminately, as the
Church commands them to be in Prose.

And now, Christian Reader, having given thee so large an account of my design,
and the particulars of my performance in this undertaking; it is but meet, that
I detain thee no longer in the Porch of the Edifice, but give thee free
entrance into all the Rooms of it, and leave thee to pass thy Judgment upon the
contrivance and furniture of them all. In the passing of which Judgment, I will
embolden my self to presume so far upon thy candid Interpretation of my
endeavors, as to reckon my self secure from that keen censure at thy hands
which a great Poet of our own, (too Poetically, I think) Mr. Cowley passes
upon all the former Translatours of these Holy Poems, that they do their holy
Author neither honor nor justice, and (to his thinking) revile him worse then
Shimei. For all that I desire of thee, is, to consider, before thou pass too
severe a sentence on this Work, that I designed not in this Translation: (what
he requires in such a Translation as he affects) to wit, to imitate, or
represent to thee the true Genius and Spirit of that excellent vein of Poetry,
with which the royal Psalmist wrote: But only to transcribe the Piety and
Devotion of his heavenly Poems, in words proper, and meet to beget like
religious sentiments to those which he felt when he wrote, in the hearts and
souls of such as shall with well disposed minds vouchsafe to bear a part in
these Divine Songs here tendered to them, by

( Christian Reader) Their unworthy Author, but thy servant for the furthering
of thy Edification.

Psalm I.
[To the Tune of the old 113. Psalm] Ye Children, etc.

Whom ill advice does not mislead:
Nor does he in that way remain,
Which men to sin accustomed beat:
Nor sit, where haughty scorners treat
Both God, and goodness, with disdain.

Whereto with pleasure, day and night,
His meditating Soul repairs.

Are drench't by parted streams, he shoots,
And kindly Fruit in season bears.
And as that tree preserves its leaves,
When drought all other trees bereaves:
So all speeds well which this man does.

But is like chaff, which from the five
Is toss't by every wind that blows.

The ungodly he will not acquit;
But sinners from the just divide.

But those shall quite be overthrown,
To which the ungodly turn aside.
[The same in other measures.]

Who has not bent his ear:
Nor made the sinners way his choice,
Nor sat in scorners chair.

And reads it with delight:
So as, in studying it, to employ
His thoughts both day and night.

Where parted streams are near:
Which seasonable fruit bestows
On him that set it there.
Whose leaf no weather makes to fall;
In greatest storms it stands:
So providence does prosper all
The works of this man's hands.

Shall never prosper so:
He shall be like light chaff, in the air
By winds tossed to and fro.

Stand in God's judgment clear:
Nor shall rebellious sinners then
Among the just appear.

Unto the Lord is known:
But that wherein the ungodly stray,
Shall quite be overthrown.
Psalm II.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

What madness fills their furious brain?
Why do the people thus engage
Their foolish thoughts in projects vain?

Against the Lord with vile intent:
And his Anointed to undermine,
Their plotting heads are wholly bent.

Let Us break their servile bonds asunder;
And cast the uneasy cords away,
Wherewith they seek to keep us under.

Shall laugh at their rebellious pride:
Both what they plot, and how they move,
He sees, and does with scorn deride.

He shall at last his silence break;
And with a voice, not only heard,
But felt, will thus in anger speak.

And vainly strive against my will:
I Will fix him an unshaken throne
Upon my Zion's holy Hill.
Part II.

What I proclaim, is his decree:
Thou art my Son, and on this day
Thy Father has begotten thee.

The heathen lands I will assign:
And where earths utmost limits are,
I Will give the Nations to be thine.

Such Rebels as thy Law contemn:
And, as men leaking pitchers use,
So shall thou knock and shatter them.

Mind that which is your true concern:
All ye that judge the earth, advise,
And from my mouth your duty learn.

And all your joys with fear allay:

And perish from his saving way.
Stir not that wrath, whereof the least
Effects, will to your cost declare,
That only they who on him rest,
For ever truly blessed are.
Psalm III.

How they do multiply?
How those rebellious troops increase,
That hate me mortally!

Who scoffing fret me sore:
And to my souls vexation say,
God will him help no more.

Thy favor is my shield;
My head, when men forsake my part;
Is by thy arm upheld.

(For great my dangers were:)
And from his holy Hill he bowed
To me his gracious ear.

And quietly I slept:
And when I waked again, I found
God had me safely kept.

Should me alone surround;
No fear should break my minds repose,
Or make my sleeps unsound.

Thou have disarmed their jaws:
Lord, still appear my saving God,
And own my righteous cause.

In greatest straits to save:
The people, whom thou call'st thine own
Thy blessing, Lord, shall have.
Psalm IV.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

Unto my call incline thine ear:
Thou that have freed me from distress,
In mercy my petition hear.

Thus turn my glory into shame?
How long shall lying vanity
Your foolish hearts with love inflame?

To take the godly to his care:
To answer me he will not refuse,
When I to him present my prayer.

Of him, all sinful motions kill:
Consult your hearts upon your bed,
And all tempestuous passions still.

On the Lord's holy Altars lay:
And on him with believing trust
Your fearful souls securely stay.

Do earthly-minded men enquire:
But show thy pleased face to us;
Its light alone, Lord, we desire.

More solid joys my heart possess,
Than ever they felt from corn and wine,
In the most fruitful years increase.

And with great soundness take my sleep:
For thou alone in quietness
My dwelling place, O Lord, shall keep.
Psalm V.

To my petition:
And let thy heart, what comes from mine
With favor think upon.

Do thou attentive be:
My prayer, on all occasions, I
Will still direct to thee.

My prayer to thee I Will send:
And heav'n-ward my up-lifted eyes
Shall my requests attend.

Can never pleasure bring:
And where thou dwell'st, there is no abode
For any evil thing.

Shall never stand, O Lord:
And all that work iniquity,
By thee shall be abhorred.

By thee shall be pursued:
The Lord most perfectly defies
Men of deceit and blood.

Through thy abundant grace:
And with most humble reverence bow
Before thy holy place

Because men watch me so:
The streightest way that leads to thee,
Lord, make me know, and go.

False hearts within they have:
And flatter, that they may betray;
Their throat's an open grave.

And take them off in sin:
For frequent against thee, and great
Have their rebellions been.

Their joys who trust in thee;
And glad may all that love thy Name
In thy protection be.

Thy blessings shall descend:
And, as a shield, thy favor shall
On all sides them defend.
Psalm VI.
[To the Tune of Psalm 51. or, the Lamentation.] O Lord consider, etc.

Let not its fury light on me:
And thy poor servant chasten not,
When sore displeasure stirs thee.

That under grievous weakness groans:
And let my lost health be restored,
For vexed with sickness are my bones.

With grief, too much for me to bear:
Long have I felt thy wraths effects:
When shall it long to thee appear?

And let my soul delivered be:
And, though I merit no reprieve,
Advance thy grace in saving me.

Keeps no remembrance of thy name:
And in the silent Vaults beneath,
What thankful tongue shall spread thy fame

I hope for ease when night appears:
But night does not my grief allay,
For then my bed does swim with tears.

Quite drained, no more tears could raise:
Because of all mine enemies,
My sight with very grief decays.

His ear unto my mournful cry:
Hence, hence, say I, your triumphs end,
Ye workers of iniquity.

To him, an hearing did obtain:
And I Am assured I shall be heard,
When I apply to him again.

Swollen big with rage, and hopes as great;
Be sent home quickly, vexed with shame
Of disappointment and defeat.
Psalm VII.

Such confidence in thee:
From those that do me persecute,
Save and deliver me.

That can my foe control;
He, like a cruel Lion, tear
My poor and helpless Soul.

Have done so vile a fact:
If such a foul iniquity
My hands did ever act:

So ill I did requite:
(Yea, that bad man did I release
That bare me causeless spite.)

My life should be his prey:
Yea, life, and honor both, in dust
Let my pursuer lay.

Because my foes do rage:
And, since thy Law my cause allows,
With me do thou engage.

Then shall thou be adored:
That they may see thy glory then
Return on high, O Lord.

My cause before thy bar:
Where, as thou find'st me innocent,
Or guilty, let me fare.
Part II.

But just men stay and guide:
For by the righteous God, all reins
And hearts are thoroughly tried.

It Is he that does me save:
All upright hearts a sure defense
In his protection have.

The righteous Judge's strokes:
But against prosp'ring wicked men
God's anger daily smokes.

His sword the Almighty whets:
His bow for execution bent
Inreadiness he sets.

The Instruments of death:
Against the persecuting foes,
His shafts he orders.

Conceives iniquity:
But, after all its trav'ling pains,
It brings forth a lie.

To dig a fatal pit;
But fell himself (for those he meant,)
Into the midst of it.

Fall on the plotters head:
And wrong to him shall be repaid,
From whom it did proceed.

Which he does justly claim:
And with my thankful song will raise
The highest Lord's great fame.
Psalm VIII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

Through all the earth is thy great name!
Yea the heavens themselves of vast extent,
Too narrow are, to bound thy fame.

Inspired'st to defend thy cause:
That thou might make those foes to bow,
Who with despite oppose thy Laws.

(The Palace thine own hands did rear:)
And the bright Moon and Stars espy,
Ordained by thee to sparkle there:

That thou should have him in thy mind?
Or what is his posterity,
That thou to them should be so kind?

He is, by his creation, placed:
With honor, and great dignity,
By thy rich bounty is he graced.

He is, as thy Lieutenant, set:
And all things, by thy gift, are laid,
With low submission, at his feet.

In the open fields at liberty:

In the untrodden Seas do lie.

Do all these proofs declare thy name?
Through all the spacious earths extent,
Thy noble works do spread thy fame.
Psalm IX.

Thy praises to declare:
And show forth all thy works, how great
And mavelous they are.

Thy praise I will proclaim:
And with my cheerful song express
The glories of thy name.

Be quickly put to flight:
And when their backs are turned, fall,
And be destroyed quite.

When 'twas before thee tried:
And seated on thy righteous throne,
Gav'st sentence on my side.

Destroyed the wicked were:
So that in future memory
Their names shall not appear.

Great Cities heretofore,
And lest it doubtful, where they stood,
Henceforth shall raze no more.
Part II.

When Time it self is flown:
And then, in Judgment sit shall he,
On his prepared throne.

And he shall sentence pass;
With Justice he each man shall doom,
According to his case.

Oppressed men to save:
To which in straits they may resort,
And sure protection have.

Shall thee their refuge make:
Since those that do thy help implore,
Thou never did forsake.

Who dwells in Zion's Mount:
Before all people to his praise
Let us his deeds recount.

He makes search for blood,
The meek and humble sufferer,
Whose cries to him are loud.
Part III.

By mortal foes I Am grieved:
(From gates of death, time was, when thou
Did raise me, and I lived:)
Zion's Gates, O Lord,
Will show forth all thy praise:
The safety thou do me afford,
My joyful voice shall raise.

Wherein themselves sunk down:
They hid a net t'intrap my feet,
Which justly caught their own.

To prove him God most high:
When wicked hands do twist the snare,
Wherein entrapt they lie.

The place for them assigned:
And there shall all the nations dwell,
That keep not God in mind.

(Though often they so complain:)
And though they seem quite perished, yet
Their hopes shall not be vain.

To be oppressed by might:
And let thy heathenish foes receive
Their judgment in thy sight

Their daring pride; and then
The nations of the world will own
Themselves to be but men.
Psalm X.

So far, O Lord, from us?
And wherefore do thou hide thy face,
Whiles we are troubled thus?

Do hunt the needy down:
But, by the plots themselves invent,
Let them be overthrown.

The wicked man does boast;
And covetous oppressors bless,
Whom God abhors most.

Even God he does despise:
And the eternal majesty
Each thought of his denies.

Cannot view thy Judgments high:
With scornful puffs he thinks to fright
Away each enemy.

Unmoved shall be my peace:
To me adversity, I Am sure,
Shall never find access.

Deceit, and fraud abound:
Mischief, and lies instead of truth,
Under his tongue are found.

He keeps hushed, and still:
Where, for poor innocents he waits,
To aim, and shoot, and kill.

Thus for his prey does watch:
As he lies closely lurking, when
His net the poor does catch.

And does close ambush lay;
That he may catch the impotent,
And make their lives his prey.

God does not keep in mind,
Or hides his eyes, as loath to see
The actions of mankind.

List up thy hand on high:
And when the wronged sue for right,
Forget not thou their cry.
Part II.

The all-seeing God despise?
Saying in heart, God minds not us,
Our deeds escape his eyes.

Which thy hand will requite:
Thou Orphans guardian, unto thee
The poor themselves commit.

That thus does crush the poor:
And search out all his wickedness,
Till thou can find no more.

Eternally shall stand:
Till of the heathen there be none
Remaining in his land.

And thou, O Lord, do hear:
Their hearts to pray thou will dispose,
And then incline thine ear.

And doeth' oppressed right:
That earthly men no more oppress
The righteous cause by might.
Psalm XI.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

Vex not my soul with impious vaunts:
Nor bid us to our Hill to haste,
As birds fly to their secret haunts.

Their arrow's ready on the string;
That by an unexpected blow
Their points the upright heart may sting,

Hopes, whose foundation's undermined;
Nor ask us, why we toil in vain;
For where can just men shelter find?

From plots which earthly Kings annoy:
And in his holy temple, we
His gracious presence do enjoy:
From whence he sees the secret mines
Ungodly plotters hide from day:
His eyelids try the close designs
Which sons of men in darkness lay.

The Lord does but their patience prove:
But wicked men he does detest,
And those that violence do love.

And flaming brimstone he will rain;
With horrid tempests: He prepares
This cup his foes to entertain.

So righteousness he does affect:
The upright he does highly prize,
And with his favor them protect.
Psalm XII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 113.] Ye children, etc.

The faithful from the earth are banished;
Amongst mankind few such are found:

Which their deceitful hearts devise,
And with keen tongues they closely wound.

And with proud words profanely taunt,
The Lord will surely cut away:

The lips are ours wherewith we rail;
Who shall control us in our way?

Now, faith the Lord, I will arise,
And save him from the insulting foes.

And by refiners purified,
Which sev'n times through the furnace goes.

In this, and every future age,
The righteous thou, O Lord, shall save:

The bad in numbers will abound,
When vilest men promotion have.
Psalm XIII.

Shall I never minded be?
How long, as if I were abhorred,
Hid'st thou thy face from me?

Oppressed with daily woes?
How long shall they such triumphs make,
Who are my mortal foes?

Think on my mournful cries:
And, lest I steep the sleep of death,
Enlighten thou mine eyes.

Of my prevailing foe:
And those that trouble me, rejoice
To see my overthrow.

I on thy mercy rest:
When thou do send me saving aid,
Great joys shall fill my breast.

Due praises I will give:
For thy great bounty, Lord, to me,
Has kept me yet alive.
Psalm XIV.

Has said, no God I own:
Vile thoughts! whence issue works as soul;
But good is done by none.

From heaven did cast his eye:
One wise religious man to find,
But none he could espy.

And virtues paths forsake:
None, no not one, its rules does follow,
Or better courses take.

From all ill-livers fled;
That whiles the Lord they call not on,
They make my flock their bread?

Great fear their courage quells:
For why? the heavenly majesty
Among the righteous dwells.

The poor man when he prayed:
As if his wisdom were to blame,
For making God his aid.
Zion dwell,
His peoples prayers hear:
So that from thence to Israel
Salvation might appear!

That lie in bondage sad:
His Jacobs seed shall joyful be,
And Israel shall be glad.
Psalm XV.

Fit, Lord, to lodge with thee?
Or, who shall on thy holy mount
A constant dweller be?

That works righteousness:
And what he does in heart conceive,
Does with his mouth express.

Nor does his neighbor wrong:
Nor takes up a reproach to blot
His Neighbor with his tongue.

But does vile persons scorn:
Who to his damage keeps his word,
And hates to be forsworn.

His money has not lent:
Nor can be bought by bribery,
To wrong the innocent.

By God and men approved,
Is in good case, and out of fear
Of being ever moved.
[The same, to the Tune of Ps. 100.]

The Lord with welcome entertain?
Or, who, upon his Holy Hill
A constant dweller shall remain?

That strictly works righteousness:
And what in heart he does conceive,
Does truly with his mouth express.

Whereby to do his neighbor wrong:
Nor takes up a reproach to blot
His neighbor with a sland'rous tongue.

But does vile persons treat with scorn:
Who, to his damage keeps his word,
Nor is in any case forsworn.

Has not for gain his money lent:
Nor can be bought by bribery,
To wrong a man that is innocent.

By these, and such like tokens known,
And who makes these his practice, he
Is certain, never to be o'rthrown.
Psalm XVI.

O Lord preserve thou me;
For I have constantly reposed
My confidence in thee.

My Sovereign Lord art thou:
My goodness will not pay the least;
Of what to thee I owe.

That thought my love excites:
And those in virtue that excel,
Engross my Souls delights.

Apostates shall pursue;
Who a strange God make haste to choose,
And quite renounce the true.
The blood they shed in Sacrifice,
To offer, I Will not join:
My very Lips such Deities
To mention, shall decline.

My cup by him is filled:
And whatsoever I call mine own,
Is by thy hand upheld.
Part II.

To me, contents me well:
And in mine heritage I find
All pleasures that excel.

My soul to choose aright:
Whereon my secret thoughts reflect
With comfort every night.

I do my self enure:
At my right hand he takes his place;
Whereby I rest secure.

My tongue its joys shall vent:
My flesh likewise in hope shall rest,
With death it self content.

Where souls departed are:
Nor quit thy Saint unto the grave,
To see corruption there:

Where full joy overflows:
And I at thy right hand shall be,
Where endless pleasure grows.
Psalm XVII.

My cry with pity hear:
And audience to my prayer afford,
Which comes from lips sincere.

And pass my sentence there:
Judge thou, with thine impartial eye,
What things most equal are.

Though by thee nightly tried:
My mouth too, not to speak amiss,
My solemn purpose tied.

Thy word did me restrain:
From the destroyers paths, thereby,
My feet I did refrain.

Do thou support, and guide:
For whiles thy grace thy servant stays,
My footsteps shall not slide.

Assured my God would hear:
Now also, when I speak, to me
Incline thy gracious ear.

As thou art wont, to those
That on thy saving hand depend:
And save them from their foes.

The apple of thine eye:
And over me thy wings extend
To hide me secretly.
Part II.

That deadly hate my soul,
Though round about they me enclose;
Yet let thy power control.

Wealth makes them insolent:
Out of their mouths proud speeches flow,
And haughty things they vent.

Our ways they gat her'd are:
Their eyes they still bend to the ground,
To trace our footsteps there.

That hunts, his prey to catch:
Like a young Lion, which for his,
In thickets close does watch.

And cast him down, O Lord:
From bad men's plots my soul relieve,
Who are, indeed, thy Sword.

But thy hand makes them so:
Their portion in this present life
On them thou do bestow.
Their bellies thy hid stores do fill;
They want nor wealth, nor heirs:
Their Children spend on it what they will,
And leave the rest to theirs.

In thy just favor lies:
And when I wake, thy likeness shall
Fill me with endless joys.
Psalm XVIII.
A Psalm of David in the day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all
his Enemies, and from the hand of Saul.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.]

My dearest love I vow to thee:

My fortress, that protecteth me:
My God, and strength, to which I trust:
The Horn, that saves me, when assailed:
My shield, to break each mortal thrust;
My Tower, never to be scaled.

Who worthy is all praise to have:
For thus, his succor shall not fail
Me from mine enemies to save.

Close siege unto my vitals laid:
And like a flood, the ungodly rout
Combining, made me sore afraid.

Bound fast, as with strong cords, I was:
And into snares of death I fell,
Before I knew my woeful case.

I called with distracted cries:
His ears he from his Temple bowed,
And set my case before his eyes.

The very hills foundations shook:
For, firmly rooted though they were,
They could not bear his angry look.

A smoky cloud sent to the sky:
Devouring flames his mouth discharged;
That coals were set on fire thereby.

Did in an humble posture bend:
And for the foot-cloth of his throne,
Vast darkness did it self extend.

Whose wings did swiftly him conveigh;
As swiftly, as the winds do pass,
When through the air they sorce their way.
Part II.

His Tent was in deep waters spread:
With them incompast round he was,
And clouds that in the sky are bred.

Before his brighter countenance went:
The thick Clouds cracked, and with the light,
Hailstones and Coals of fire did vent.

The Skies his claps of thunder rent:
The bowels of each shattered Cloud,
Hailstones and Coals of fire did vent.

And scattered the affrighted band:
His lightenings made them fly in have;
Before them not a man could stand.

The floods did leave their Channels dry:
At thy rebuke, their waters scared,
Before thy Nostrils breath did fly.

To the heavenly Hosts commission gave:
He took hold of me, in his love,
And did me from great waters save.

A Savior he more mighty was:
For I was hated mortally
By those, whose strength did mine surpass,

They charged me, in my woeful day:
But, though surpised in such a plight,
I found the Lord my mighty stay.
Part III.

Into a large and spacious place,
And for me great salvation wrought;
For in me he delighted was.

And dealt with me accordingly:
His bounteous goodness thus rewarded
My hands untainted purity.

In all my straits I did not start:
And wickedly, in worst of days,
I did not from my God depart.

His judgments did before me lay:
And his most righteous statutes, I
Did never from me put away.

My uprightness I made appear:
And from mine own iniquity
I strictly kept my conscience clear.
My righteousness to recompense,
When I was wronged, he did me right:
For in my hands, pure innocence
Appeared before his searching sight.

Wilt be found merciful, and kind:
The upright man, with thee, I know,
Like uprightness shall surely find.

A God, that purity does own:
But with the men that froward are,
Wilt wrestle, till thou cast them down.

Who humbled by affliction are:
But wilt stout sinners overthrow;
Whose pride their haughty looks declare.

Thou shall renew with brighter light.
And thy pleased faces glorious rays
To day shall turn my darkest night.
Part IV.

Through armed Troops I passed clear:
And strongest Forts, though walled high,
By thy assistance scaled were.

God's word, on trial, true is found:
Of those, who trust him, none shall miss
A shield to keep them sase and sound.
Who, but the Lord, is God indeed?
That honor he imparts to none:
And what God is a Rock in need?
That name besits our God alone.

And strength unto to my Loins supplies:
And, that my goings perfect be,
I owe alone to his advice.

He gave me, like the hinds for speed:
And upon every fenced place,
Through him, victoriously I tread.

So that my soes their force do feel:
My arms by him so strengthened are,
That they can break a bow of steel.

Before me do in danger set:
By thy right hand I am upheld:
Thy condescension makes me great.

Thou did before me clear my way:
My foot, in battle fixed by thee,
By sliding did me not betray.

And overtook them in the flight:
Nor did I ever turn again,
Until they were consumed quite.
With deadly wounds I did them quell,
That they could rise again no more:
Under my conquering feet they fell,
And there, lay welt'ring in their gore.
Part V.

In battle to resist my foes:
And made to bow to me at length,
The men that up against me rose.

Thou also have to me subdued:
And those that my destruction sought,
Unto destruction I pursued.

In their great'st dangers them to save:
Yea, even to the Lord they cried;
But he to them no answer gave.

Like dust by winds tossed to and fro:
And like the dirt on which men tread,
Into the streets I did them throw.

And heathens, whom I did not know,
To me submitted as their chief;
My very name did fright them so.

As soon as e're they hear my name:
Ev'en foreign nations unto me
The awe thereof shall render tame.
Strangers shall have no mind to fight,
But their faint hearts shall them dismay:
And all their forts of greatest height,
Their want of courage shall betray.

Let God, my Rock still blessed be:
And let my song his glories raise,
Who from all dangers saved me.

None to me wrong securely does:
He makes tumultuous subjects tame,
And rescues me from deadly foes.

O Lord, thou have advanced me:
And from the man of violence
Thy saving help has set me free.

will thanksfully thy acts proclaim:
And with my song continually
Advance the glories of thy name.

And gives rich mercies from his store,
To David his anointed King,
And to his seed for evermore.
Psalm XIX.
To the same Tune.

Proclaim their great Creatour's praise:
And the Star spangled firmament
His wondrous workmanship displays.

His daily providence stories:
Night likewise after night repeats
Renewed prospects of his glories.

Though various languages they use,
These Preachers, understood by each,
Nature's Religion do infuse.

And their words reach its utmost bounds:
For in them dwells the glorious Sun,
Whose constant light the world surrounds.

His golden beams adorn his face:
And as a Giant strongly limbed,
Rejoicing, he begins his race.

He makes his progress to the West:
Scattering each where both heat, and light,
With which all Creatures are refresht.
Part II.

And brings dead souls to life again:
Sure rules his Testimony gives,
Whereby true Wisdom fools attain.
The Statutes of the Lord are right,
Pure joy from thence man's heart bedews:
His pure Commandments, saving light
Into blind Sinners eyes infuse.

And endless blessedness bestows:
Most perfect truth his judgments are,
And Justice does them all compose.

Far more desirable they be:
Less sweet the purest Honey is,
When from the Combs it drops most free.

Thy servant faithful warnings give:
And very great reward attends
Those that by their directions live.

The errors of this life so frail?
O purge me from those sins do thou,
Which though I know not, I bewail.

Presumptuous sins no power gain:
So, from the great transgression free,
My uprightness I shall retain.

And thoughts conceived in my heart,
With favor, Lord, accept; for thou
My strength, and my Redeemer art.
Psalm XX.

Vouchsafe thee audience:
May Jacob's God, O King, afford
To thee, a sure defense.

When ever thou need'st it, give:
And thee, from Zion's holy place,
With strengthening help relieve.

And keep them all in mind:
And when thou burn'st a sacrifice,
May it acceptance find.

According to thy will:
And what thy counsels do contrive,
With good effect fulfill.

Our God's great name shall bear:
And whiles we fight, our hearts shall say,
Lord, the King's prayers hear.
Thus shall we War succesfully,
And joyful triumphs have:

Will his Anointed save.
For from his holy heaven, he
His gracious ear shall bend:
And his right hand shall armed be,
Strong help to him to send.

And some on horse depend:
But on our God do we rely,
His name shall us defend.

Those helps shall not secure:
But we with victory are crowned;
And stand from danger sure.

And let our King be kind:
And may his ear, to what we crave,
Be graciously inclined.
Psalm XXI

Thy strength his part to take:
In the salvations wrought by thee,
What triumphs shall he make?

No wish it spent in vain:
And the desires his lips expressed,
He did of thee obtain.

Prevented by thy grace:
The Crown of purest Gold he wears,
That, on his head did place.
And when he asked but to live,
Thy favor did extend
His life to length of days; and give
That too that never shall end.

By thy salvations aid:
Both honor, and great Majesty,
Upon him thou have laid.

Most happy have thou made:
And whiles thy face on him does shine
His heart's exceeding glad.

Assured confidence:
And the highest God's Almighty grace
His throne shall strongly fence.

O King, where e're they are:
But thy right hand shall apprehend,
And justice smite them there.

Shall in its flames be burned:
As in the heated Oven, Wood
Is into ashes turned.
Yea, the Lord's wrath with thine combined,
Its flames on them shall pour:
Thus Earth and Heaven together joined,
Shall wholly them devour.
Their fruit likewise thou shall destroy,
From the whole earth's compass wide:
Nor shall their seed a room enjoy,
Where sons of men reside.

Against thee they designed:
But could not what they meant, fulfill,
According to their mind.

So sore the rest shall fright:
Their weapons from them they shall fling,
And seek to 'scape by flight.

O Lord, with glory raise:
So shall our song thy power proclaim,
And celebrate its praise.
Psalm XXII.
[To the Tune of Ps. 100.] All people, etc. [Or the Lamentation.] O Lord in
thee, etc.

Forsaken am I thus by thee?
When, roaring, I implore thy grace,
Why stand thou so far from me?

That thou, my God, to me art deaf:
And all the night, I vent my mind
In loud complaints without relief.
Yet, the Holy one of Israel,
Is still the name that makes thee known:
And, as thou do among us dwell,
So do thou all our praises own.

Nor was their confidence deceived:
On thee, their greatest hopes they laid,
And as they hoped they were relieved.

Salvation quick in answer came:
Upon thy help they did rely,
And never were repulst with shame.

As if a worm, not man, I were:
And, under public disrepute,
I every man's reproaches bear.

When e're I meet them in their way
They shake their heads, whiles they go by,
And shooting out their lips, they say

In time of danger would him save:
But if so dear to him he be,
Now let him his assistance have.

From the strait Womb to the open air:
And when I sucked my Mothers Breast,
Thy arms her render suckling bare.
Yea, ever since from her close Womb
Thy providence did me enlarge:
Thou did my gracious God become,
And took'st me for thy proper charge.
Part II.

When grievous troubles are so near:
For none to me, but only thou,
O Lord, an helper does appear.

On every side I Am compast round:
Yea, mighty Bulls do me beset,
Such as are bred in Bashan's ground.

Their mouths against me open were,
As lions, when they hunt their game,
The fearful beasts by roaring scare.

My trembling joints asunder start:
And as the wax before the flame,
So in me melts my fainting heart.

My strength is like a pot-sherd dried:
To very dust thou have me brought,
Like those that long in grave reside.

So by the ungodly I Am beset:
Who tortured me with cruel wounds,
And pierced with nails my hands and feet.
They strained my racked body so,
My very bones might all be told:
And, as a welcome sight, my woe
With pleased eyes they did behold.

My clothes among themselves divide:
And whose my seamless coat shall be,
By casting lots they do decide.

At such a mighty distance stand:
O Lord, my strength approach with speed
And help me with thy saving hand.

Should my beloved soul devour:
Nor let the cruel dog, O Lord,
Have my dear life within his power.

Out of their paws deliver me:
For from the Unicorn's sharp horn,
I have been heard, O Lord, by thee.

With grateful voice declare thy name,
Amidst the assembled company
I Will in thy Church thy praise proclaim.
Part III.

With awful reverence declare:
All Jacob's seed his glory raise,
And every Isr'elite him fear.
For the poor man's afflicted case
With scorn he never did despise:
Nor ever from him hid his face;
But bowed his ear unto his cries.

Thy praises in my mouth shall be:
And where men fearing God do meet
I will perform my vows to thee.

So that their hearts shall ever live:
And to the Lord, whoever him seek,
Shall everlasting praises give.

And to the Lord converted be:
And all the Gentile's kindreds shall,
O Lord, devoutly worship thee.

To the earth's remotest ends to reign;
And to him, the government among
All the heathen Nations does pertain.

To him, his heavenly food shall eat:
And worshipping before his throne,
His favor prostrate shall entreat.
Yea, all that to the dust descend,
Bowing to him, shall mercy crave:
And, hopeless in themselves, commend
Their parting souls to him to save.
To His service too, they shall assign
Their issue for an holy race:
The Lord shall count them of his line,
Whom he, for his, adopts by grace.

His justice with deserved fame:
To people, yet not born, nor bred,
What he has done, they shall proclaim.
[The same Psalm in other Meter.]

Why am I left by thee?
Why, when I roar, for such a space
Is thy help far from me?

I cry, but thou art deaf:
And all night long my voice is loud
But gains me no relief.

Our Holy One's thy name;
And all the praise of Israel,
Exalts thy glorious fame.

Thou have been trusted on:
And, to thy everlasting praise,
Thou wast their Savior known.

Deliverance they received:
Nor ever were repulsed with shame,
When on thee they believed.
But I, more like a worm, than man,
Am trampled under foot:
All with reproach me entertain,
So vile they me repute.

A laughing stock am I:
They all make mouths at me in scorn,
And hold their heads awry.

In hope that he would save him:
But, if to God he be so dear,
Now let him save, and have him.

Me from the womb releast:
And wast my hope, even then, when I
Hung on my mothers breast.

Thou did me first enlarge:
To me thou did a God become,
And took'st me for thy charge.
Part II.

When troubl'ous times are near:
Because from none, but only thee,
Does any help appear.

I am encompast round:
Yea, mighty bulls do me beset,
Fed fat in Bashan's ground.
On me with bell'wing noise they came,
Their mouths wide opened were:
As Lions, when they hunt their game,
The beasts by roaring scare.

My joints all loosened are:
And as wax melts before the flame,
So melts my heart for fear.

My tongue, for very drought,
Cleaves to my jaws; to dust of death
So near thou have me brought.

The ungodly rout did meet:
And barb'rously with cruel wounds
Did pierce my hands and feet.

My bones might all be told:
And, as a welcome sight, my woe
With pleasure did behold.

My garments did divide:
And, whose my seamless coat should be,
By lot they did decide.

At so great distance stand:
O Lord, my strength, do thou with speed,
Extend thy helping hand.
O save me, lest the bloody sword
My darling soul devour:
Nor let the cruel dog, O Lord,
Have it within his power.

From them deliver me:
For, from the Unicorn's sharp horn,
I have been heard by thee.

I will declare thy name;
In midst of a religious crowd
I will thy praise proclaim.
Part III.

Exalt him every where:
Let Jacob's seed his glory raise,
And Israel's seed him fear.

The poor's afflicted case:
But kindly heard his doleful cries,
And did not hide his face.

I Will utter praise to thee:
And before all that God do fear,
My vows performed shall be.

To fill the godly poor:
Who seek the Lord, shall praise him still;
And live for evermore.
All the worlds ends, convinced, shall
To the Lord turned be:
And all the heathens kindreds fall
Down low, and worship thee.

In all the earth to reign:
And he the government among
All heathen Realms shall gain.

His heavenly food shall eat:
And humbly prostrate, at his throne,
His favor shall entreat.
Yea, all that to the dust descend,
His grace shall humbly crave:
And, hopeless in themselves, commend
Their souls to him to save.

A consecrated race:
Which he throughout each future age
To his account shall place.

His righteous works just fame:
That people yet not born nor bred,
May the Lord's acts proclaim.
Psalm XXIII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 113] Ye children, etc.

Of nothing therefore can I miss,
Which, to promote my good, I need;

All over spread with tender grass,
Where to the full he does me feed.
He leads me by the water's side,
Whose streams with pleasant smoothness glide;

And, lest at any time I stray,
In every good and righteous way
Guides me for the honor of his name.

Its dismal shade, I fearless go;
For thou art with me, even there;
Thy rod and staff do comfort me.

A table for me do prepare.
Thy oil anoints my head, and thou
Make my cup to overflow:

Me surely, whiles I here abide:
And in thy house I will reside,
Till parting breath my life shall end.
[The same in other Meter.]

A sheep of his am I:
With all that may promote my bliss,
He will my needs supply.

He makes me rest, and feed:
Pastures, through which smooth streams do pass
By which he does me lead.

Sound medicines he provides:
And for the honor of his name,
In righteous paths me guides.

No evil will I fear:
Thy Rod and Staff me comfort give,
For thou art with me there.

My Table thou do spread:
Filled by thee, my cup o'r flows;
Thy oil anoints my head.

Shall surely me attend:
And in God's house, to sing his praise,
My life I Will wholely spend.
Psalm XXIV.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

And whatsoever it contains:
The world, with all its busy throngs,
Unto him only appertains:

At first laid its foundations fast:
And on the floods, by his command,
It ever stands securely placed.

What Son of mortal man shall climb?
And unto whom will he afford
A constant dewlling place with him?

Whose heart no heinous guilt defiles:
Whose soul is not to Idols bent:
Who by no cheating oath beguiles.

The Lord undoubtedly will bless:
Whom God his Savior will repay,
According to his righteousness.

Are branches of the holy race,
Whom thou, O Jacob's God, wilt own
For the true seekers of thy face.
Lift both thy heads, thou two-leav'd Gate
And your selves off your hinges fling,
Ye everlasting doors: In state
So enter shall the glorious King.

Has he such entrance to demand?
The Lord that does excel in might;
Whom none in Battle can withstand.

And your selves off your hinges fling,
Ye everlasting doors: In state
So enter shall the glorious King.

Has he such entrance to demand?
This glorious King's the Lord of might,
Who has all Hosts at his command.
Psalm XXV.
[To the proper Tune.]


Let not my foes triumphant be,
Whiles I am put to shame.

That does on thee attend:
But make it the reward of all
That causelessly offend.
Thy holy ways do thou,
Lord, to thy servant show:
Teach me the paths thou do allow,
That I in them may go.

Teach me to keep its way:
On thee, my God and Savior, does
My soul wait all the day.

And favors manifold:
Remember, how thou have been kind
To us in days of old.

Blot out of thy record:
And in thy grace, I thee entreat,
Remember me, O Lord.

In God, promote his praise
Whence, to teach sinners he is inclined
The knowledge of his ways.

He will direct: the meek:
And show them what they are to do,
When they his guidance seek.

Made up of truth and grace;
Who do his Testimonies mind,
And Covenant embrace.
Lord, by great clemency,
Thy names great honor spread:
In pard'ning my iniquity,
Whose greatness does exceed.
Part II.

The Lord does truly fear?
In doubtful ways, to choose the best,
He will his judgment clear.

Shall that man's soul attend:
And the earth shall be by them possessed
That from his loins descend.

The Lord his secrets tells:
And all their inward doubts to clear,
His Covenant reveals.

With eyes still on him fet:
For he assuredly will pluck
My feet out of the net.

And mercy to me show:
For I Am in a forsaken case,
And very full of woe.

My heart, are much increast:
Set thou my straightened spirit at large,
That I be not oppressed.
The affliction I am in,
Behold, with all my pain:
And, by forgiving all my sin,
Its sad effects restrain.

How numerous they be:
And cruel projects they devise,
Such spite they bear to me.

That shamed I never be:
Because with confidence I roll
All my concerns on thee.

Me, and my cause protect:
For from the Lord, in all distress
Salvation I expect.
Israel,
O God, redemption send:
That all the troubles which they feel,
May have a speedy end.
Let Father, Son, and Spirit
(The eternal three, and one)
All glory now, and still inherit,
As they have ever done.
[The same. Psalm, to the Tune of Psalm 148] Give laud unto, etc


My foes proud boasts control,
By keeping me from shame.

Those that on thee
Attendant be,
Let shame be fall.
But let it poured be
On those that break thy laws;
And, by oppressing me,
Transgress without a cause.

Thy ways to tread:
And where they lead,
Teach me to go.

Thy sacred truth display:
And teach me; for on thee
I wait throughout the day.

And as thou wa'st
Through all times past,
So, still be kind.

My youthful sins, O Lord:
And my transgressions great
Blot out of thy record.
But to thy heart,
Of thy great grace,
Lay thou my case:
For good thou art.
Part II.

Procures him double praise:
Whence, men to sin inclined,
He Will teach to keep his ways.

In judgment right
And give him light,
His paths to tread.

And what he bids them, do:
In all his paths do find
God, merciful, and true.

By pardn'ing my
Iniquity,
For it is great.

The Lord does truly fear?
In doubts, to choose the best,
He will his judgment clear.

From trouble rest:
And the earth possessed
By his shall be.

The Lord his secrets tells:
And all their doubts to clear,
His Covenant he reveals.
To him i will look:
For he my feet
Out of the Net
Shall kindly pluck.
Part III.

And mercy to me show:
For very sad's my case,
And I am full of woe.

Sore griefs oppress.
From my distress
Set thou me free.

And pardon all my sin:

Whose hatred is so keen.

From sin, and shame:
For on thy name
Do I depend.

From dangers me protect:
For thy assistance I
With patience do expect.

Thine Israel
From what they feel,
And what they fear.
Gloria Patri.
The Father, and the Son,
And Spirit of Holiness,
(The eternal three, and one,)
We glorify, and bless.
So it was before
Time first began:
And so remain
Shall evermore.
Pssalm XXVI.

The upright way to keep:
My trust from God was never removed,
Therefore I shall not slip.

Search thou me narrowly:
To thee I open all my breast,
Do thou its secrets try.

As constant motives eyed:
And by thy truths most perfect square.
I did my walkings guide.

By choice I never sat:
Nor with dissembling company
Will I be intimate.
Ill livers fellowship has been
My constant detestation:
Nor shall I ever haunt with men
Of evil Conversation.

No guilt shall there be found:
So, Lord, I one of them will be,
That crowd thy Altar round,

Thy noble praises there:
And that with thankfulness I may
Thy wondrous works declare.

I Have loved exceeding well:
That Tabernacle, where thy praise
Perpetually does dwell.

With sinners souls to share:
Nor let me end my life with men
That bloody-minded are.

Contrived within their heart:
And their right hands use bribery,
Just judgment to pervert.

Will constantly pursue:
O save me then, in all my needs,
And mercy to me show.
Then on a firm and even ground
My foot shall safely rest:
And, with thy Saints encompast round,
I Will say, the Lord be blessed.
Pssalm XXVII.

Salvation is, and light.
My only strength of life is he;
Who then shall me affright?

Combined my flesh to tear:
They stumbled often; and in the close,
Quite overthrown they were.

Encamped, i will not be scared:
My soul, should wars against me rise,
This confidence should guard.

Petitioned God to give;
Which I do still resolve to crave:
Within his house to live.
That I, within his Temple may
Behold his beauteous face:
Enquire of him, and to him pray,
Within his holy place.

His Tent shall shelter me:
I, in his Tabernacle sure,
As on a rock, shall be.

Be lifted up on high,
Above my foes, whose numbers spread,
And round about me lie.
Whence, to his Tabernacle, I
Offerings of joy will bring:
And the Lord's name to magnify,
My loudest voice shall sing
Part II.

With listening ears attend:
And let thy mercy unto me
A speedy answer send.

My heart did thus reply:
Since thou thus bid'st, Lord, I obey,
For seek thy face will I.

Wrath turn me not away:
O God my Savior, thou have been
My help, be still my stay.

And Mother me forsake:
The Lord's kind bowels shall him move,
The charge of me to take.
O Lord, let thy instruction make
My soul thy ways to tread:
And for my watchful enemies sake
In a plain path me lead.

Let me not subject lie:
For they against me witness lies,
And breath out cruelty.

But faith assured me,
That the Lord's goodness yet I should
Among the living see.

Of an undaunted heart:
Wait on the Lord, and he to thee
Shall quickening strength impart.
Psalm XXVIII.

Let thy voice answer mine:
Left, if an answer thou deny,
I to the grave decline.

And grant what I entreat:
When I my craving hands extend
Toward thy mercy seat.

Lord, take me not away:
Who, whiles they speak them fair, design
Their neighbors to betray.

Repay to them in kind:
And the same measure that they give,
Let evil workers find.

What the Lord's hands have wrought;
They never shall thrive, but by him shall
Be to destruction brought.

Shall evermore be blessed:
For when I called upon him, he
Gave ear to my request.

And my protecting shield:
When in him I had confidence,
I was by him upheld.
Wherefore my heart with largest joys
Is plentifully filled:
And, in a thankful Song, my voice
Due praise to him shall yield.

His strong assistance have:
The strength which he to him shall send,
Shall his Anointed save.

Bless thine inheritance:
Let thy care feed, and thy right hand
For ever them advance.
Psalm XXIX.
To the Tune of Psalm 113.] Ye children, etc.

Ye that from mighty men derive
The noble blood that fills your veins.

And in his Sanctuary bow
Where holiness with beauty shines.

When thunder tears the watery cloud,
And hollow seas reflect the noise.

No Majesty's so loud proclaime'd,
As God is by his thundering voice.

The mighty force thereof does rend
The Cedars into shivers small:
Even Cedars firmly rooted on
The lofty crags of Lebanon
Before his powerful voice do fall.

(As wanton Calves skip to and fro)
From place to place are lightly born:
Even Lebanon, and Syrion, too,
Dance from the ground on which they grew,
Like the young Fool of the Unicorn
His voice the lightning flames does spread:

Even Kadesh -- wilderness does shake.

And where thick woods spread constant night,
Those piercing flashes day do make.
But most he is in his Temple famed,
By every tongue he is there proclaimed:

The Lord, as King, does ever live;

And bless them with assured peace.
Psalm XXX.

Exalted am by thee:
My foes thou did not gratify
With triumphs over me.

Importuned thy relief:
And thou thy help did soon apply,
To heal me of my grief.

Thou did my soul revive:
Yea, from the pit thou did me save,
That I am yet alive.

Bear thankfully in mind
How great in holiness he is,
How bountifully kind.

His grace does life conveigh:
Good men a night in tears may spend,
But joy returns with day.

'Twould never be night with me:
My foolish heart was apt to say,
I shall not moved be.

That strong my mountain stood:
Thou therefore, justly hid'st thy face,
And trouble soon ensued.

And to the Lord I cried:
With humble supplication
His ears I daily plied.

When in the pit I am?
Can silent dust thee glorify?
Can it thy truth proclaim?

And mercy on me have:
Thy saving help to me afford,
And keep me from the grave.

Into a dancing strain:
And for my sackcloth did put on
My cheerful vest again.

Express its thanks to thee:
O Lord my God, throughout my days,
My Song shall grateful be.
Psalm XXXI.

Place all my trust in thee:
O save me in thy righteousness,
And cast no shame on me.

And quick deliverance send:
My castle on a rock be thou,
Whose walls may me defend.

The rock to which I fly:
For thy names sake me therefore lead,
And guide me faithfully.

Have closely laid for me:
The strength on which my self I stay,
Is wholly, Lord, in thee.

I to thy hands commit:
The spirit which is by purchase thine,
For thou redeemed'st it.
Those that false Idol-vanities
Esteem, I have abhorred:
But whilst they rest themselves on lies,
My trust is in the Lord.

For thou did take my part:
Thou knew'st my soul when it was sad,
And laid'st my grief to heart.

A prisoner to my foe:
But on my feet a spacious room
To walk in, did bestow.
Part II.

For troubled sore am I:
My spirits fail, my belly's pined,
And grief consumes mine eye.

To give my sorrows vent:
My grief for sin so dries my bones,
That all their moisture's spent.

Therewith reproached me sore:
But chiefly they, who, dwelling near,
Conversed with me the more.
Yea, my familiar friends, for fear,
Durst not their friend to own:
They sneakt when ever I did appear,
And left me quite alone.
The dead that are quite out of mind,
Yet are not more forgot:
No more regard from men I find,
Than has a broken pot.

By many tongues dispersed;
And I was compast round with fears
Wherever I converst.
Among false Traitors every where
Conspiracies were rife:
And deep contrivances there were
To take away my life.

Firm on the Lord did stand:
For still, Thou art my God, I said,

Out of the hand of all my foes
Deliver me therefore:
And save me from the hand of those
That persecute me sore.

Thy pleased face to shine:
And for thy tender mercies sake,
To save me, Lord, incline.
Part III.

For called on thee I have:
Let wicked men be shamed by thee
And silenced in the grave.
Let those false lips be ever tied
Their silence not to break,
Who grievous things in haughty pride
Against the righteous speak.

Thy mercies treasures be!
Wrought in the sight of men they are,
For all that trust in thee.

Of men shall keep them sure:
And in thy Tent they shall be hid
From striving tongues secure.

Who love to medispens'd:
As in a Garrison, with forts
And rampires strongly fenced.

O Lord, in have I said:
Yet all my supplicating cries
Thou heardest, when I prayed.

He does the faithful guard:
And justly to the proud assign
A plentiful reward.

With courage cheer your heart:
For he, your drooping spirits to raise
Shall quickening strength impart.
Psalm XXXII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

From his transgression does acquit:
Whose sins he freely does remit,
And cover from his angry face

He charge no iniquity:
And he that in Sincerity
Resolved is to sin no more.

All the day long grief made me roar:
The fire pent up, did burn the more,
Wherewith my very bones were dried.

Thy hand an heavy burden bound;
That, like the Summer-scorched ground,
My moisture was quite drained away.

My secret guilt I did reveal:
I did not any one conceal,
Of all the sins that troubled me.
Thus I resolved, and thus I did.
To God I said, I have transgrest:
And of the sins that I confessed,
Thy pardon was to none denied.
By my example heartned, all
That Godly are, when guilt does wound,
Shall timely, whiles thou may be found,
To thee, O Lord, for mercy call.
Whence, each of them, when wrath divine
Like mighty floods aloud shall roar,
Or waves, when they assault the shore,
Shall all its force untoucht decline.
Part II.

O Lord, shall keep me safe and sound:
And joyful songs shall me surround,
When thus delivered by thy grace.

The way in which thou ought to tread:
I will thee teach, and safely lead,
And with mine eye i will manage thee.

Or Mule, which reason does not lead;
But bit and bridle both they need,
And are from mischief kept by force.

The wicked man on every side:
But those that in the Lord confide
His saving mercy shall surround

But let them in the Lord rejoice:
And upright hearts with shouting voice,
Proclaim his grace that made them glad.
PSALM XXXIII.

O let the righteous sing:
For when the upright God's praise record,
It is a comely thing.

The well-tuned Psaltry bring:
And on a ten-string'd Instrument
His worthy praises sing.

Composed, exalt your voice:
And with strings strained toth'highest key,
Make a melodious noise.

And rule of righteousness:
And all the works done by the Lord,
Its verity express.

And judgment just he wills:
His plenteous mercy, from above,
The earth all over fills.

Create the Heavens above:
His truth each Star fixed where it shone,
And as he bade, they move.

He gath'reth as an heap;
And in his Storehouse does enclose
The streams that fill the deep.

Worship the Lord therefore:
And all that dwell the world throughout,
With reverence him adore.

The word, but all things were:
And the commanding word he spoke,
Fixed all things as they are.

The Lord's great wisdom brings:
Nor do their projects, as they thought,
Effect designed things.

According to his mind:
All Generations find, his hand
Does what his heart designed.

Of any Nations bliss:
And whom he chooses for his own,
That people happy is.
Part II.

Has all the earth in view:
And of the whole race of men, there is none
That can his sight eschew,

His piercing eye did throw.
On Sons of Men, who live, and move
On this poor spot below.

And therefore knows them all:
And equally considers
The Works of great and small.

A numrous Army have:
Yea, strength of limbs, though great it be,
The mighty cannot save.

Will prove an empty thing;
His Horses mighty strength to none
Can hoped safety bring.

All them that do him fear:
To those that do on it rely,
His mercy does appear.

Their precious souls to save:
And when the dearth lays waste the Land,
To keep them from the grave.

Till he deliverance yield:
To us, who on his help depend,
He is an help and shield.

In him exceeding glad:
Because on's holy name have we
Our firm affiance staid.

And let it on us be;
According as our confidence
Is firmly fixed on thee.
Psalm XXXIV.

The Lord will ever bless:
And with my mouth continually
His praise I will express.

Her boastings shall confine:
The humble, when they hear it, shall
Their triumphs mix with mine.

To spread the Lords great fame:
And let us all our voices join,
To magnify his name.

I humbly did complains:
He heard me soon, and me releast,
And proved my terrors vain.

Their faces lightsome were:
He shamed them not with a rebuke,
But kindly took their prayer.
This poor man, whom you see, did cry
Unto him, and was heard:
And was delivered speedily
From all the ill he feared.

Does holy men surround:
Which all their enemies repells,
And keeps them safe, and found.

That the Lord gracious is:
And those that true believers be,
Are in a state of bliss.

And have your needs supplied:
To make such happy, nothing wants;
God does it all provide.

They pine for want of food:
But none that seek the Lord, shall want
Ought, that may do them good.
Part II.

Lend an attentive ear:
I will instruct you in the way,
How ye the Lord should fear.

That does desire to live?
That would to length of days attain,
And earths good things receive.
Let him from me these counsels take,
Thy Tongue from ill refrain;
And, lest deceitful words they speak,
Thy lips do thou restrain.

And honest actions do:
Make seeking peace, thy great design,
And ever it pursue.

Upon the righteous are:
And unto such men's earnest cries
Still open is his ear.

He sets his angry face:
Their very names, and memories,
Out of the earth to raze.

The Lord his ear does bend:
And out of all adversity
Does them deliverance send.

The Lord is ever nigh:
He makes the contrite spirits his care,
To save them speedily.

That do the just besall:
But the Lord's goodness sets him free,
And saves him in them all.
And though for lighter harms he groan,
God safeguards life and limb:
He feels not any broken bone,
For all are kept by him.

Shall hasten to their end:
And those that do the righteous hate,
Destruction shall attend.

The Lord does still redeem:
And no man shall be desolate,
That puts his trust in him.
Psalm XXXV.

That daily with me strive:
And against those that with me fight,
To me assistance give.

Thus armed, before me stand:

With thine Almighty hand:
Against my persecuting foes,
Lord stop thou up the way:
And to my soul, when men oppose,
I Am thy salvation, say.

That would not let me live:
And turn them back the way they came,
That harm to me contrive.

Dispersed be they in haste:
By the Angel of the Lord, behind,
And guilty terrors chac't.

Increase their flying fear:
Whiles th'Angel's sword, advanced to smite,
Pursues them in the rear.

To catch me in a pit:
When, though no harm to them I did,
For me they dug it.

From his own hidden toil:
And let the mischief he contrived,
Upon himself recoil.

In soul will joyful be:

Lord, who is like to thee?
Who work'st deliverance for the poor,
From those whose might exceeds:
And from the spoiler do secure
The poor, and him that needs.
Part II.

False witnesses did lay:

Would make my life their prey.

In sackcloth too I mourned:
And to my charitable breast
My prayer for them returned.

Unto my dearest brother:
I bowed down heavily, as one
That mourns for his mother.

Made most delightful sport:
To tell, and hear the good news, they
Together did resort.
Yea, very abjects here, and there,
Did in close meetings plot:
Where at their pleasure they did tear
My name, and ceased not.

To mock me took delight:
And with their teeth amidst their jests,
They gnasht at me for spite.

And such foul deeds control?
From these devouring lion's jaws
Set free my darling soul.
Then, where thy Saints assemble, there,
I will give thanks to thee:
And where much people gathered are,
Thy praise shall uttered be.

That hate me wrongfully:
Nor let my unprovoked foes
Wink with a scornful eye.

Though they speak wondrous fair:
Against men loving quietness,
Their heads still plotting are.
Part III.

To wound with tongues most keen:
Aha! aha! they fleering, cried,
We know what we have seen.

With thine all-searching eye:
To break thy silence, then begin,
And unto me come nigh.

To judge me by thy Laws:
My God, and Lord do thou partake
In my most righteous cause.

Let me receive my doom:
And let not them their joy express,
To see me overcome.
Within their hearts never let them say,
Aha! this likes us well:
Nor that they have made me their prey,
Let them their fellows tell.

In shame together share;
Whoever joyful in their hearts
At my mischances are.
Let them be clothed with disgrace,
And compassed round with shame:
That labor thus, me to debase,
To get themselves a name.

My righteous cause, rejoice:
Let them the gladness of their heart
Declare with shouting voice.
Yea, let them say continually,
Be the Lord's name extolled:
Who loves, in prosperity
His Servant to behold.

Will exercise my tongue:
Whole days throughout i will sing thy praise,
And never think it long.
Psalm XXXVI.
[To the Tune of Ps. 100.] All people, etc.

My heart convinced within me says,
Though his tongue own a God, he lies:
No fear of him's before his eyes.

His flattering heart does him beguile:
Until some hateful wickedness
Bewray what fain he would suppress.

And in his talk deceit does lie:
He is of wisdom quite bereft,
And all good deeds by him are left.

He forgeth mischief in his head:
In no good way engaged he is;
To him no evil comes amiss.

Heavens constant influence declares:
Thy everlasting faithfulness
The Clouds to all the world express.

As mole-hills are by mountains vast:
Thy judgments are a mighty deep;
Thy bounty man and beast does keep.
Part II.

The attainment of thy favor is!
Whence Sons of men their confidence
Place in thy shad'wing wings defense.

With dainties which thy house does yield:
And all their thirsts shall quenched be
With Rivers of delights from thee.

Perpetual springs of life do flow:
And though created light decay,
Thy face shall make eternal day.

To cheer the souls that do thee know:
Thy rigbteousness do thou impart
To all that are upright in heart.

Advance to trouble my repose:
Nor from the place wherein I stand,
Let me be moved by wicked hand.

There lie the wicked overthrown:
O'rthrown they are; and never more
Their fallen interest can restore.
Psalm XXXVII.

Ungodly men's success:
And though ill-doers prosperous be,
Thy envious thoughts suppress

As is the mowing grass:
Whose moisture dries before the Sun,
However green it was.
Trust in the Lord, and take in hand
Each good and virtuous deed:
So thou inhabit shall the Land,
And certainly be fed.

Place thou continually:
And every lawful appetite
Of thine, shall he supply.

And to his care commend:
And he shall bless each work of thine,
With a desired end.

He also shall display:
And make thy judgment shine as bright
As is the perfect day.

Nor let thy spirit grieve,
When prosperous iniquity
Which bad men plot, does thrive.

Thy wrathful thoughts restrain:
At least, when such thoughts haunt thy breast,
From evil acts refrain.

That live ungodly lives:
But on the Lord when men attend,
To them the earth he gives.
The wicked shall remain, at most,
But for a little space:
He and his name shall soon be lost
From his own dwelling place.
Part II.

The earth, and dwell at ease:
Their state is suited to their spirit;
For both abound in peace.

The just to overthrow:
He gnasheth with his teeth, and grieves,
To see him prosper so.

The Lord in scorn does smile:
Because he knows his woeful end
Is hastening all the while.

The wicked ambush lay:
The poor and needy to overthrow,
And men of upright way,

Which they for others meant:
So shall their bows to pieces start,
And fail their cursed intent.

Is, in true value, more,
Than all the wealth, which many great
And bad men have in store.
For wicked great men's potent arms
The Lord shall surely break:
But keep the just from fatal harms,
Though he be never so weak.

God's favor does secure:
The portion he to them does give,
For ever shall endure.

And blush at no defeat:
And when sore famine pines the land,
They to the full shall eat.

The Lord's wrath to provoke:
Like fat of lambs in flame consumed,
Shall vanish into smoke.
Part II.

His just debts to discharge:
Whereas the righteous mercy shows,
And is in bounties large.

The earths inheritance:
And those he curses, to their grave
Shall come by sad mischance.

So, that they are ordered right:
And in the way wherein he goes,
The Lord does take delight.
He shall not wholly be cast down,
Though he may sometimes slip,
For him, from being overthrown,
The Lord's right hand shall keep.

From youth, to the hoary head,
The Just forlorn I never have seen,
Nor his seed beg their bread.

To men in want to lend:
Whence benedictions plentiful
Unto his seed extend.

Lay up good works in store:
For that is the way to prosper still,
And dwell for evermore.

His saints his grace defends:
But bad men's seed, whom he rejects
Come to untimely ends.
Part IV.

Inheritance obtains:
His habitation there shall stand,
As long as time remains.

With wisdom overflows:
And when his tongue its silence breaks,
Great truths it does disclose.
His God's most holy law within
His heart the just man keeps:
And so observes it, that therein
He makes no sliding steps.

Against the righteous man:
And all advantages does watch
To slay him, if he can.

To fall into his hands:
Nor will against him sentence give,
When at his bar he stands.

And he shall raise thee high:
For thou inherit shall the land,
And see the wicked die.

Advanced to high degree:
He spread his boughs as fresh, and green,
As is the laurel tree.

And did no more appear:
I sought him where he dwelt, but could
Of him no tidings hear.

The just at his decease:
For who observes him, shall find
He ends his days in peace.
But wicked livers joined in sin,
Joint-ruine shall attend:
The bad man's life may fair begin,
But very foul does end.

Salvation shall receive:
And when they are in trouble, then
His strength shall them relieve.

And them deliverance send:
From wicked hands he shall them free,
S'ith they on him depend.
Psaim XXXVIII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

When thy provoked wrath does smoke;
When thy displeasure waxes hot,
Let me not feel thy angry stroke.

I cannot pull them out again:
Those darts the Almighty's hand did cast,
Sore vex me with tormenting pain.

So that my flesh it putrifies:
My wearied bones no rest have found;
'Cause Sin unpardoned on me lies.
Like drowning billows, over my head
My great iniquities are gone:
And like a sinking weight of lead,
My heavy sins do press me down.

Their noisome stench I cannot bear:
Whiles I my foolishness deplore,
Which in such guilt did me ensnare,

Distorted by my malady:
My strength continual mourning spends;
No respite has my weeping eye.

My loins are full of grievous pain:
My flesh throughout, its force does seize,
No part of it does sound remain.

And even to shivers broken sore:
Whiles, in my hearts perplexity,
I do, for very anguish, roar.

To whom my bosom open lies:
Nor need I, when I sigh, and groan,
To tell thee, what my meaning is.

The tears that make my eyes to fail,
So that their very sight is ceast;
Sad symptoms are of what I ail.
Part II.

For from my sore they stood aloof:
And, as when men infection fly,
My next of kin stood farthest off.

Deceitful snares for me do lay;
My foes of plotted mischief speak,
And meditate deceits all day.

As one that hard of hearing were:
Like a dumb man that never spoke,
To answer them I did forbear.

And like a deaf man was unmoved;
I kept resolved silence still,
And they reviled me unreprov'd.

No other help I do expcept:
And thou, O Lord my God, at last,
I know, wilt not my prayer reject.

The joys my fall in them would breed:
And for my weakness, when bewrayed,
How high they, would exalt their head.

My sorrow's constant in my view:
Whiles I my sin confess with shame,
And thence my daily grief renew.

And much increast in strength they be:
Yea, numbers great there are of those
That wrongful hatred bear to me.

Who kindness with ill deeds repay:
Because whatever's good I prise,
And virtues path's my constant way.

My Lord, and God, don't thou me leave:

But let me thy quick help receive.
Psalm XXXIX.

Speak naught but what is right:
My mouth shall bridled be, as long
As the wicked are in sight.

From speech I did refrain:
I held my peace, even from good,
But held my peace in pain.

So hot a flame did make:
It would no longer be suppressed;
Whence thus, at last, I spoke.
Good Lord, to me, thy servant, show
The measure of my days:
That I my frail life's end may know;
And how long it delays.

One hand-breadth does comprise:
Behold, mine Age, compared to thine,
A very nothing is.
Yea, surely, at a better rate
No man's esteemed by thee:
For every man, in his best state,
Is perfect vanity.

Is each man's course of life:
Vain are all things, which he does buy
With so much vexing grief.
He spends his time, to raise an heap
Of wealth, he calls his own:
But cannot be certain, who shall reap
The harvest he has sown.
Part II.

Hope for, to make me blessed?
My hopes in thee, Lord, only are,
On thee my soul does rest.

In mercy set me free:
That by my foolish enemies
I may not scorned be.
What ever I suffered for my sin,
In silence I did bear:
Because I saw thy hand therein,
My passions calmed were.

That stroke that grieves me so:
Thy hand does make my strength decay,
So heavy is its blow.

Do man correct for sin:
He like a surrow'd garment looks,
Where sretting moths have been.
Thus, while his beauty soon does fly,
And wrinkles take its place:
The frailty shows the vanity
Of all of humane race.

And hearken to my cry:
To give an answer to my tears,
Lord, do thou not deny.
For as a stranger in thy land,
I only sojourn here:
Obliged to leave't at thy command,
As all my Fathers were.

Turn me not out of door,
Too suddenly into the place
Whence I shall come no more.
Psalm XL.

Upon the Lord for aid:
And he to me his ear did bend,
To hear me when I prayed.

Out of the mire and clay:
My feet upon a rock he set,
And did my goings say.

Which many, when they see;
Shall give the Lord the sear that is due,
And trust in him with me.

A man most blessed is:
And he who proud men disrespects,
And such as turn to lies.

To numbers great amount:
And thy kind thoughts on us bestowed,
Turn to a vast account,
TO attempt an orderly discourse
Of them to thee, were vain:
If I should try't, they must, (of force)
Still numberless remain.

Thou did not, Lord, desire:
Sin Offerings thou did not prise,
Nor offerings made by fire.

Lo, Lord, I come, said I:
It Is in thy sacred volume seen,
I must their use supply.

Does inward joy impart:
Yea, all thy Laws engraven be
Upon my very heart.

Have righteousness declared:
Lo, Lord, thou know in that employ,
My lips I have not spared.

Within my heart enclosed:
Thy saving grace and faithfulness
I have to all exposed.
The truth thou have unto me shown,
At no time I concealed:
And to holy crowds that did thee own,
Thy kindness I revealed.
Part II.

O do not thou restrain:
Thy kindness and thy truth afford,
Me ever to maintain.

Am quite encompast round:
My sins do so my soul oppress,
They sink me to the ground.
Then all the hairs upon my head,
In number they are more:
And fill me with so great a dread,
That my heart faints sore.

Some saving fruit receive:
The help my needs require of thee,
Lord, hasten thou to give.

To stay me who combine:
Repulse, and shame betide them all,
That ill to me design.

And shamefully retreat;
Who, with proud scorn, Aha, to me.
So frequently repeat.

Who thy salvation love:
Let them still say with cheerful voice,
Praised be the Lord above.

Though I be poor, and need:
My God, and my deliverer,
To help me, then, make speed.
Psalm XLI.

And needy still in mind:
In troublous times he shall be sure
God's saving help to find.

On earth he blessed shall be:
His foes shall not the pleasure have.
Their wills on him to see.

The Lord shall him sustain:
His bed shall so by thee be made,
As best may ease his pain.

Have mercy, Lord, on me:
Heal then my soul, I humbly prayed,
That has offended thee.

When shall he die? (they say)
That we, to our content may see.
His very name decay.

Speaks kind, but means not so:
His heart its falsehood does descry,
When he abroad does go.

That bear me no good will:
In companies they do dispose
Themselves, who wish me ill.

But a sore sickness it is:
For he is so handled by his fit,
From's bed he never shall rise.

To whom I did reveal
My secrets, made himself their head,
And kicked me with his heel.

My life from death reprieve:
That unto them I may in kind
A just requital give.

I favored am by thee:
Because thou suff'rest not my foe
To triumph over me.

Thou, Lord, do still maintain:
And set me before thine eye,
For ever to remain.
Israel, then,
For ever blessed be:
And let all people say, Amen,
Forever blessed be he.
Psalm XLII.

His heat with running brooks:
As pants (O God,) my thirsty soul,
Whiles after thee it looks.

A thirsting appetite:
O when shall I come, and appear,
In his long wished sight!

My souls unchanged food.
Whiles they continually do say
To me, where is thy God?

My soul with grief is spent;
The times, when numbers well inclined
With me together went.
In troops the ready way we trod,
With songs of joy and praise;
Unto the sacred house of God,
On stated holy days.

Within my troubled breast?
Why do unruly passions so
Disturb thy wonted rest?
Hope still in God, for yet, I know,
In time I shall him praise,
When Is saving presence shall bestow
Upon me better days.

I sore dejection find:
Yet do I always think it best,
On thee to six my mind.
Part II.
On thee from Jordan, call I will,
In its adjoining field:
From Hermons both, and Mizar's hill,
Where yet I live exiled.

Into another goes:
The upper, to the nether calls,
Loud roaring while it flows.
Betwixt them both, in woeful case
Tossed up and down, I roll:
Whiles all thy waves and billows pass
Over my drowning soul.

Command for me by day:
And all night, (mixing songs of praise,)
To God my life I Will pray.

Have thou forgot me so?
And why, by foes oppressed sore,
Do I thus mourning go?

Like swords pierce to the bone:
Whiles of my God, they, taunting, say,
Now, whither is he gone?

Within my troubled breast?
Why do unruly passions so
Disturb thy wonted rest?
On God thy hope unshaken place;
For yet I shall him praise;
Who is my God, whose smiling face
My down-cast looks shall raise.
[The same Psalm. to the Tune of the Lamentation.] O Lord consider, etc.

Whiles for the running streams he pants,
Then is my soul, O God, for thee,
Whiles it thy gracious presence wants.

An eager thirst my soul does pain:
O, when shall I, to ease my grief,
Appear before his face again?

Drencht with salt tears is all my food:
Whiles they continually say
To me in scorn, where is thy God?

With devout multitudes I went:
With joys and praises sounded loud,
Our holy days we jointly spent.
But the remembrace of that bliss,
Compared with my present state,
A very sad reflection is:
And makes my soul disconsolate.

Why do such thoughts thy passions raise?
Hope still in God, whose saving aid
Shall yet afford me cause of praise.

Does under too much sorrow sink:
Wherefore, though thus I Am kept from thee,
I Will yet on thee, at distance think.
From Jordan's banks I Will mind thee still;
And from the Coast to the Hermons nigh;
And from this Mizar's little hill;
The places where I exiled lie.
Part II.

O'rwhelm'd with all thy waves I roll:
Whiles the one to the other, roaring, calls,
For help to sink my drowning soul.

Concerning me commands will give:
And in the night I Will sing, and pray,
Unto the God by whom I live.

Why have thou me forgotten so?
And why oppressed by the enemy,
Do I thus sorely mourning go.

Mine enemie's reproaches be;
Whiles daily, whither is he gone?
They of my God examine me.

Within my sore-disturbed breast?
Why do unruly passions so
Deprive thee of thy wonted rest?
On God, thy hope unshaken place;
For yet, I know, I shall him praise,
Who is my God, whose smiling face
Shall my dejected countenance raise.
Psalm XLIII.

Judge thou, O God, for me:
From him that would with fraud oppress,
Let me delivered be.

Do thou reject me so?
And why, by foes oppressed sore
Do I thus mourning go?

Me to conduct, and guide;
Whiles I that holy Hill ascend
Whereon thou do reside.
Then to God's Altar will I go,
Who gives me plenteous Joy:
O God, my God, thy praise to show,
My harp will I employ.

Within my troubled breast?
Why do unruly passions so
Disturb thy wonted rest?
On God thy hopes unshaken place;
For yet I shall him praise,
Who is my God, whose smiling face
My down-cast looks shall raise.
Psalm XLIV.

What our forefathers told;
Who unto us the works declared,
Thou did in days of old.

The heathen with thy hand:
Their numerous forces thou did rout,
And chase them from their land.

Which we their seed possessed:
Nor did their own arm from the hand
Of foes procure them rest.
But thy right hand, and arm, alone
Did firmly fix them there;
Because on them thy countenance shone,
And loved of thee they were.

That title thou have gained:
Deliverances by thy might,
For Jacob then command.

Our potent enemies;
And through thy name we will tread them low,
That up against us rise.

Upon my bow, or sword:

And them confound, O Lord.

And glory all the day:
And to thy name will evermore
Deserved praises pay.
Part II.

Us thy poor people quite:
Before our foes thou have us shamed,
Not leading us to fight.

With turned backs we fly:
And all we have, is made a spoil
TO enrich our enemy.
Given up, as sheep designed for food,
By thee to butchers hands:
We now lie scattered all abroad,
Among the heathen lands.

Sold unto them, we die:
So small's the price that is set on us,
Thou gettest naught thereby.

That next to us reside:
And we are compast round with foes,
That us with scorn deride.

Thereof a byword make:
And barbarous people, as they pass
By us, their heads do shake.

Confounded I became:
From my reproaching enemies,
I hid my face for shame.

They did blaspheme thee so:
Such insolence I could not bear,
From the revengefull foe.
Part III

O Lord, Whate'r we felt:
Nor in thy Covenant have we
Like traitors falsely dealt.

We have not gone astray:
Nor did our wandering steps depart
From thy most holy way.

Piecemeal thou did us tear:
And with deaths shadow covered,
In case forlorn we were.

Perfidiously forgot:
Or, to the false Gods, where we came,
Our hands we stretched out.

Since naught from him is hid?
For in man's heart no secret is
That Is not by him descri'd.

All the day long is shed:
As if for sheep men did us take,
That are for slaughter fed.

And to help us, Lord, awake:
Nor do thou, in so great distress,
For ever us forsake.

Hide thy beloved face?
Forgetting our oppression thus,
And our afflicted case?
For groveling to the ground we fall;
Our soul the dust does lick:
Prostrate to thee, till there with all
To the earth our bellies stick.

Let us thy help partake:
And save us from our enemies
For thy great mercies sake.
Psalm XLV.
[ To the Tune of Psalm 113,] Ye Children, etc. Or 127. Except the Lord, etc.

Designs a song most excellent:
And (which great thoughts to it inspires)
The Church's King's my Argument
Whence my tongue vents what it endites
As fast as nimblest penman writes.

For beauty is to be compared:
Thy lips inspired with heavenly grace,
Speak words that never from man were heard.
The ever blessed God therefore
Has blessed thee for evermore.

That all-subduing sword of thine:
And in thy glorious majesty,
With beams that suit thy greatness, shine.

Thy noble undertakings crown.
Thy meekness, truth, and righteousness,
Where ever thou come, shall hearts subdue:
And thy right hand, with great success,
Wonders never seen before, shall do.

And at thy feet shall nations lie.

And right thy royal scepter is:

And righteousness thy soul does prise:
Whence God, thy God, above all heads,
On thine, his oil of gladness sheds.

Perfumed, thy robes thy heart do cheer:
When from the Ivory Palaces,

And placed at thy right hand, thy Queen
Adorned with gold of Ophir's seen.
Part II.

And serious thoughts, my counsel hear;
Bear thou, henceforth, no more, in mind
Thy father's house, or country dear.
Thy Lord, and King, alone adore,
And he shall love thy beauty more.

Tyres daughter unto thee shall make,
And richest nations shall entreat
Thy favors humbly to partake:

Within, the Princess royal sits.

Thence, to her Lord they shall her bring;
Amidst the Virgin company,
Attending her to thee, O King.

With music loud, and shoutings loyal

The seed that from thee take their birth,
At thy appointment shall become.
Princes in all the Realms on earth,

And numerous Nations praise thee still.
[The same Psalm to the proper Tune,]

My heart prepares to sing
A noble song, which love inspires,
In honor of the King.
Words, full of richest sense,
Shall from my tongue distill:
And march, with flowing eloquence,
The nimblest writers quill.

O fairest of mankind:
All blessings God to thee, therefore,
For ever has assigned.

That conquering sword of thine,
And with such glorious Majesty,
As suits thy greatness, shine.

Ride thou with great success;
Because of thy humility,
Thy truth, and righteousness.
Thus, wonders yet unseen
Thy mighty hand shall do:

And make the nations bow.

A righteous scepter sways;
Thy throne, O God, shall therefore stand
Beyond all date of days.

Thy royal heart does prise:
And equal hatred does profess
To all that wicked is.
By God, thy God, therefore,
Anointed is thy head
With cheering oil, in richer store,
Than is on others shed

With fragrant spices filled;
From Cassia, Myrrh, and Aloes,
Most choice perfumes do yield.
Their scent thy heart did cheer,
So cordially they smell:

Thy nuptial train to swell.
All, due attendance paid,
Whiles thy most glorious Queen
In robes with Ophir's Gold o'r laid,
At thy right hand was seen.
Part II.

My counsel, daughter, hear:
Thy Father's house bear not in mind.
Nor yet thy people dear.

Thy beauty far the more:
For he is thy Lord, and does expect,
Thou should him thus adore.
Tire,
Then, royal Presents make:
And welthy'st Nations shall desire,
Thy favors to partake.
The royal Bride within
Sitts glorious to behold,
With robes, befitting such a Queen
All over wrought with gold.

Conducted shall she be,
By all her Virgin-train, and brought
Thus, mighty King, to thee.

The Court aloud shall ring:
Whiles they their entrance make into
The Palace of the King.

Shall thy wombs issue fill:
And Princes in all lands become,
Advanced at thy will.

I will record thy name:
That devout people may thy praise
For evermore proclaim.
Psalm XLVI.
[To the Tune of Psalm 113. Ye children, etc.]

To which with safety we resort,
Whenever troublous times appear:
Whence, though the earth removed be,
And Mountains hurled into the Sea;
Yet will we live secure from fear.
Yea, though the Sea's proud waves do roar,
And furiously assault the shore,
So that the rocky Mountains shake:

That by God's holy City goes,
And glad his dwelling place does make.

She Is shaken with no swelling tides:
For God to her gives early aid:

By fierce commotions, are removed;
And at his voice the whole earth's dismayed,

To guard us on our side does stand:
And our strong fort is Jacob's God.

Consider what the Lord has wrought:
What waste his hands have made a broad,

And settles universal Peace.
In sunder he the spear does hew:
Strong bows by him quite shivered are;
And ratt'ling Chariots, armed for war,
He into flaming fire does throw.

Amongst Heathens Ill exalt my fame,
And spread my praise on the earth abroad.

To guard us, on our side does stand:
And our strong Fort is Jacob's God.
Psalm XLVII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 25.] I lift my heart, etc.

And make a joyfull'noise:
Shout ye to God in all your lands,
With a triumphant voice.

For terrible he is:
Hereigneth in great majesty;
And all the earth is his.

Till they to us submit:
And nations, where soe'r they dwell,
Shall fall beneath our feet.

He shall for us elect:
A fair one he to jacob gave
The man he did affect

A cheerful shout attends:
Thither, with sound of trumpets shrill,
The Lord of Hosts ascends.
Unto our God sing praise,
All sorts of praises sing:
With praising songs his glory raise;
Sing praises to our King.

Is God to all the earth:
Whiles-praises, then, to him you sing,
Let knowledge guide your mirth.

And God their Sovereign own:
In midst of them the Lord does sit,
Upon his holy Throne.

Together are combine'd:
The Princes of the people who
To Abram's God are joined.
For unto God the shields
Of all the earth pertain:
He the universal Scepter wields,
And does all glory gain.
Psalm XLVIII.

On him should be bestowed;
From's holy Mount, and from the Seat,
And City of our God.
Zion's a delightful place,
Renowned in all Lands:
As thence toward the North you pass,
The great King's City stands.

Himself has often shown:
A certain refuge in distress,
He Is by experience known.

Designed their journey thither:
But when they met upon her coasts,
They passed by together.

Wondering at what they saw:
But troubled sore, from thence, with shame,
And haste, they did withdraw.

With inward terrors seized:
Such pains as trav'ling women take,
Them suddenly surprised.
Tarshish broken are,
Which eastern winds do wrack:
So all their forces shattered were,
When thou did drive them back.

Saw what we often were told:
The Lord of Hosts her owned; and He
Will ever her uphold.
Part II.

O God, our mind's possessed:
In midst of thy most holy place,
Its thoughts do fill our breast.

Is great, as is thy name,
Thy right hand's filled with acts, that raise
Thy justice high in fame.
Zion's Hill
In joys triumphant be:
Let gladness Judah's Daughters fill,
When they thy judgments see.

Walk round the holy Mount:
Let Us on all sides surveigh her spires,
And their just numbers count.

Her stately houses view:
These wondrous sights that you may tell
To ages that ensue.

For ever own will we:
And he that did defend us now,
Our guide to death shall be.
[The same Psalm to the Tune of Pf. 100] All people, etc.

He does from his own City claim:
And from his holy hill, the seat
In which he chose to place his name.
Zion, where the Lord resides,
Stands in a fair and pleasant place:
And does in glory far surpass
All places in the earth besides.
On its north side, the City's seen,
Which the great King for his dorh own

For their desence, a resuge known.

They, altogether passed by:

That they soon hasted thence for fear.

They were like women in their throws:
Tarshrish, wrackt,
When the east wind on them fiercely blows.

Have seen, what often we have been told:
The Lord of Hosts does her uphold,
And still will her Protector be.
Part II.

Does in our grateful minds remain:
And in thy holy Temples place,
Therewith, our thoughts we entertain.

Unto the earths remotest ends:
Thy right hand too, great praise attends,
For it with righteousness is filled.

Throughout all Zion's holy Hill:
And when thy judgments are declared,
Letgladness Judah's daughters fill

Surrounding it with strict survey:
View all her towers every way,
And of their numbers take account.

Her Palaces consider well:
That what you see with wonder now,
To after-ages you may tell.

The God that saved this glorious place,
Shall be our God, till time shall cease;
And he shall guide us till we die.
Psalm XLIX.

To what I am to tell:

That in the world do dwell.

As tend to make you wise:
In weighty points of knowledge rare,
My heart I Will exercise.

Shall my attention raise;
Whiles on my harp, tuned to my verse,
Dark things my song displays.

When guilt my courage quells;
And, to my grief, before me lays,
The wanderings of my heels.

Stored up for such a season:
And of their riches make their brags,
And think they do it with reason.

A brother cannot redeem:
With God, to ransom from the grave,
No wealth is in esteem

(That traffic fails for ever:)
That always here a man should live,
And see corruption never.

Befalls, by equal lot:
And both of them, to others, then,
Must leave whate'r they got.

To generations all:
And, as entailed to theirs, their land
By their own names they call.

Therein continues not:
But equally with beasts he dies,
And is alike forgot.
Part II.

In this fond way of theirs:
Yet all their worldly sayings are
Approved by their heirs.

Where all together dwell:
Death feeds on them, and all they have,
However they excel.
And when the eternal day shall set
An end to deaths long night:
The just o'r them that power shall get,
Which they suppressed by might.

Though death my life bereave:
God from its power shall me defend,
And shall my soul receive.

Because his wealth o'rflows:
Nor, at his house be thou dismayed,
When it in glory grows.

His title's at an end:
And after him, his pomp shall not
Into the grave descend.

The happiest man alive:
(And they are always so esteemed,
That know the way to thrive.)

Where such as he are gone:
And lodge in those dark cells below,
Where light yet never shone.

And understands not:
Lives like a beast, and so he dies,
And is alike forgot.
Gloria Patri.
To Father, Son, and Spirit, One.
True God, in Persons Three,
How, as before the world begun,
And ever, Glory be.
Psalm L.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

Once, with his thundering voice did call:
And summons gave to all the coasts,
From the Suns rising to his fall:
Zion's stately Hill,
Where strength with beauty is combined
I heard his voice, and think on it still;
For thence, therewith, his glory shined.

And thusth' awak'ning Trump shall found:
Before him shall the fire consume,
And dreadful tempests him surround.

Through all the inferior heavens heard:
And publish to the whole earth, that He
To judge his people is prepared.

(The voice shall cry,) to this Assise:
Let none be missed, who have with me
A Covenant made by sacrifice.

God's just proceedings shall express:
For he himself shall Judge appear,
To judge the world in righteousness.
Part II.

The mighty God, thy God, am I:
O Israel, then, incline thine ear,
Whiles I against thee testify.

Of sacrifice thou ought to pay:
Nor for burnt-offerings defect,
Which should be offered day by day.

For sacrifice, out of thy stall:
Thy flocks entire to thee I Will leave,
For one he-goat I will not call

All beasts within the Forest bred:
And cattle too, both wild, and tame,
That on a thousand hills are fed.

Of every bird each Mountain yields:
And claim for mine, each savage beast,
That rangeth in the unbounded fields.

I need not tell thee, I would dine:
Nor come to thee, to make a meal,
Since the earth, and all it holds, is mine.

Have I an appetite like thee?
Or is goats sacrificed blood
A drink that is savoury to me?

If thou would give, what he will take:
And pay the Highest, what thou do owe,
When vows do thee his debtor make.
Part III.

And let distress devotion raise:
Then I from it will rescue thee,
And thou to me shall render praise.

Will say to every wicked wretch,
What makes my Covenant in thy mouth?
My Statutes what mean thou to touch?

But do all sound instruction hate:
And throw'st my words behind thy back,
In wicked courses obstinate,

With him in robbery did join:
Adulterers did thee invite,
And soon thou did with them combine.

Thy tongue's still hammering deceit:

That sucked with thee thy mothers teat.

Until thou thought me wholly thine:
But I will now reprove thee home,
And set before thee all thy sin.

All ye that cast God out of mind:
For fear I tear you limb from limb,
And no deliverer you find.

As giving me the honor due:
And to him that walks in godly ways,
The High God's salvation I will show.
Psalm LI.
A Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came unto him, after he had gone in
to Bathsheba.
[To the second Meter of Ps. 125.] Those that, etc. [Or the proper Tune of this
Psalm.] O Lord, etc.

Thy bowels move,
O God, to show me saving grace:
Thy mercies store
Lord, I implore,
By them my heinous sins deface.

Iniquity:
And purge out thoroughly every stain:
O rinse my foul
Be-leperd soul,
That no one spot therein remain.
It is confessed,
I have transgrest,
Against thee, Father, oftentimes:
Before mine eyes
For ever lies
The affrighting horror of my crimes.

My sin strikes thee;
The affront is given to thee alone:
This evil I
Presumptuously
Before thy very face have done.
From whence, I must
Pronounce thee just,
Howe'r, as Judge, thou deal'st with me:
Nor too severe
Will thou appear,
Although I be condemned by thee.

Lo, I became
Polluted with iniquity:
And foul with sin
Conceived within
My sinful mothers womb was I.

Sincerity,
In the inward man thou do desire:
Into my heart
(My hidden part)
True wisdom therefore thou wilt inspire.
With hyssop scour
My soul, and pour
A cleansing bath on leprous me:
Then shall I grow
So white, that Snow,
Untrodden Snow, less white shall be.

That I may hear,
Let thy voice joy and gladness speak:
For by that voice
Thou shall rejoice
Those bones thy heavy wrath did break.

I humbly pray,
From all my sins thy searching eye:
And cancel (Lord)
That black record,
That does preserve their memory.
Part II.

Me, clean from sin
Do thou, my maker, now create:
And, that in me
Upright it be,
My spirit do thou regenerate.

Let me not quite
A miserable exile be:
Nor so forsake
Me, as to take
Thy holy spirit of grace from me.

Which heretofore
To me thy saving mercy gave:
Thy spirit free
Vouchsafe to me,
My soul from crusting falls to save.

From thy pure way,
By my instruction I Will reclaim:
And those that sin,
Shall thence begin
Their lives by stricter rules to frame.

From guilt of blood,
Ease to my soul by pardon bring:
Then, to express
Thy righteousness,
My grateful tongue aloud shall sing.

Are shut, do thou
Open, to sing thy praise, O Lord:
The glorious fame
Due to thy name
My praising mouth shall then record.

Thou do not prise;
Else I great store of them would bring:
Nor does thy mind
Contentment find
In any whole burnt-offering.

With sin's the best
Of offerings valued in God's eyes:
A Spirit contrite
Yea, broken quite,
Thou, gracious God, wilt not despise.
Zion Hill,
In thy good will,
Refreshing drops of favor rain:
And freely yield
Thy help to build
Jerus'lems broken walls again.

With right intent,
Those offerings which please thee most:
Thy Altars fire
Offerings entire
Of fatted bullocks then shall roast.
Another of the same.
The first version varied, so as to suit any ordinary Tune of Eights and Sixes.

Thy bowels move
To show me saving grace.
Thy mercies store,
Lord, I implore;
By them, my sinsdeface.
Wash me from my
Iniquity,
And purge out every stain:
Orinse my soul
Be-leperd soul,
That not one spotremain.

I have transgrest
Against thee, oftentimes:
Before mine eyes
For ever lies
The horror of my crimes.

My sin strikes thee:
Th'affront's to thee alone:
This evil I
Presumptuously
Before thy face have done.
Wherefore I must
Pronounce thee just
Howe'r thou judge me:
Nor too severe
Will thou appear,
Though I condemned should be.

Lo, I became
Stained with iniquity:
And soul with sin
Conceived within
My mothers womb was I.

Sincerity
Within, thou do desire:
And thou, my heart
(My hidden part,)
With wisdom shall inspire.

My soul, and pour
A cleansing stream on me:
Then shall I grow
So white, that Snow
Untrod, less white shall be.

That I may hear,
Lord, joy and gladness speak:
For by that voice
Thou shall rejoice
The bones that thou did break.

I humbly pray,
From all my sins thine eye:
And cancel (Lord,)
That black record,
That keeps their memory.
Part II.

Me, clean from sin
Do, thou anew create:
And that in me
Upright it be,
My Sp'rit regenerate.

Let me not quite
A wretched exile be:
Nor so forsake
Me, as to take
Thy holy Spirit from me.

Which heretofore
Thy saving mercy gave:
Thy Spirit free
vouchsafe to me,
My soul from falls to save.

Out of thy way,
By teaching I Will reclaim:
And those that sin,
Shall thence begin
Their lives anew to frame.

From guilt of blood
Ease to my Spirit bring:
Then, to express
Thy righteousness,
My tongue aloud shall sing.

Are shut, do thou
Open, to praise thee, Lord,
The glorious same
Due to thy Name
My tongue shall then record

Thou dest not prise:
Else that I would thee bring:
Nor does thy mind
Contentment find,
In whole burnt offering.

With sin, 's the best
Off offerings in God's eyes:
A Spirit contrite,
Though broken quite,
Lord, thou will not despise.
Zion Hill
In thy good will
Some drops of favor rain:
And freely yield
Thy help, to build
Jerus'lems walls again.

With right intent
Offerings which please thee most
The Altars fire
Offerings entire
Of fatted Bullsshall roast.
Another of the same.
[ To the proper Tune of the old Ps. 51.] O Lord, etc. [ Or that of the
Lamentation] O Lord in, etc.

As great, and large, as thou can show.
Many, and tender, mercies too,
I need, my guilty soul to save.
O blot my crimes out of thy mind,

From this iniquities soul stain,
That no one spot remain behind.

That my trasgressions heinous are:
And in my face does ever stare
The horrid face that I have done.

By this soul sin, have I rebelled,
For, even whiles thine eyes beheld,
This wicked deed was done by me.
So that I well deserve to bear
All curses in thy Law proclaim, d:
And, if by thee I should be damned,
My conscience must thy Justice clear.

Deformed within, I did become:
And even in my mothers womb,
I was at first in sin conceived.
Behold, that part within me, where
Thou look for truth, by sin was soiled;
But, by thy saving Grace instilled,
I hope, thou wilt teach me wisdom there.

Purge me, and clean I then shall grow:
Wash me, and I more white than Snow
Shall be, whereon no foot has trod.

Which pardon does to sinners speak:
Then shall the bones thy wrath did break,
Healed by that precious balm, rejoice.

which when I sinned I did despise:
And all my soul iniquities
Clean out of thy remembrance raze.
Part II.

Clean, and unspotted in thy sight:
And that my Spirit may be right,
To me renewing grace impart.

From thy dear face, by which I live:
And the holy Spirit whom I did grieve
O take not quite away from me.

The joys which thy salvation gave:
And let me thy free Spirit have,
Which may in goodness me sustain.
Then will I makes trasgressours know
How sad it is thy ways to leave:
And sinners counsel shall receive
From me, to make them converts grow.

O God, my Savior, set me free:
Then shall my tongue employed be,
To sing thy righteousness aloud.

Are locked up by guilty shame:
The praises of thy holy name
Then my enlarged mouth shall show.

And offerings consumed by fire:
But none of these thou did desire,
Or, when they were Presented, prise.

All sacrifices does contain:
For thou, O God, wilt not disdain
The present of an heart contrite.

Thou bear to Zion, on it fall:
And graciously repair the wall
Of thy beloved Jerusalem.

And offerings which thou do require:
Yea, to be quite consumed by fire,
Whole bullocks on thine Altar lay.
Psalm LII.

Vaunt'st thou in doing ill?
The goodness of the Lord of Hosts
To his, continues still.

A malice most profound:
As the keen rasour's ill employed,
Which whiles it shaves, does wound.

In evil take delight:
And lying speech affects thee most,
In stead of what is right.

Irreparable wrong,
Are dearly loved by thee, O thou
False, and deceitful tongue.

Thee totally destroy:
With none alive of humane race
Shall thou a room enjoy.

To righteous lookers on:
Although they laugh withal, to see
In him, God's Justice shown.

Of one, whose haughty pride
To make the mighty God his friend,
Still scornfully denied.
Who placed his foolish confidence
In his ill-gotten store:
And took encouragement from thence
Still to transgress the more.

In the house of God abide:
And unto all Eternity
Will in his grace confide.

A grateful song I Will write:
And on thy Name will I attend,
Wherein thy Saints delight.
Psalm LIII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

The God, men talk of, I disown:
Vile beasts! that works as vile have wrought,
Whiles virtuous deeds are done by none.

From heaven did cast his searching eye,
One wise, religious man to find,
But none among them could espy.

And venues paths they all forsake:
None, no, not one, its rules does follow,
Or any good course undertake.

Thus wholly from ill-livers fled,
That, whiles the Lord they call not on,
They eat my people up like bread?

With self created terrors were:
'Twas their own guilt their spirits seized,
And scared them with ungrounded fear.
For God, his bones who thee surrounded,
O Zion, did disperse abroad:
They fled away from thee confounded,
Because they were despised of God.
Zion dwell
His peoples joint devotions hear:
So that, from thence, to Israel
Some way Salvation might appear!
For when the Lord shall set them free,
That yet do lie in bondage sad:
His Jacob's seed shall joy full be,
And Israel shall then be glad.
Psalm LIVE.
A Psalm of David, when Ziphims came and said to Saul, does not David hide
himself with us?

Thy help to rescue me:
And by thy strength, O God of might,
Let me defended be.

The prayer I utter, heed:
And all the words with favor hear,
Which from my mouth proceed.

Whiles Tyrants would me kill:
Nor have they God before their eyes,
Who seek my blood to spill.

He is my help at hand:
With those by whom my soul is staid,
The righteous Lord does stand.

Who me with plots annoy:
Yea, Lord, the men that ill designed,
For thy truths sake destroy.

Then, Lord, I Will offer thee:
And thy great Name, which I so prise,
Shall be extolled by me.

My life its safety owes:
And I have seen, with joyfulness,
The scattering of my foes.
Psalm LV.

Lend, Lord, thy listening ear:
With turned face do not decline
My just request to hear.

And hear my crying voice;
Whiles my complaints to heaven I send,
And make a mournful noise.

By bad men vexed am I:
Who lay soul crimes unto my charge,
And hate me wrathfully.

Is pained grievously:
With sorrows I am sore oppressed,
As one about to dye.

So scaring is my fright:
Such dreadful horror me o'rflows,
I Am overwhelmed quite.

O that a Dove I were!
Whose wings should carry me away,
And lodge me safe from fear.

Till I got. far from hence:
And in some lonely wilderness
Should be my residence.

I would make haste away:
Nor, till the tempest me surprise,
Would I my flight delay.
Part II.

Their City's ruin thence:
For it is, notorious for debate,
And full of violence,

They range as sentinels:
And in the very midst of it
Mischief with sorrow, dwells.

With wickednesses vile:
And still within her streets do rest
Deceitfulness, and guile.

That did reproach me so:
Such carriage better bear could I,
In a professed foe.

Dealt thus, his hatred own:
For then, fore warned, I could have hid
My self some where unknown:
But 'twasa man, whom I to make
My equal did descend:
And often for my guide did take
As my dear bosom friend.

With mutual content:
And to God's House, like dearest friends,
In company we went.

That they may quick be thrown:
For in the places where they dwell,
Foul wickedness is done.
Part III.

God's speedy help will crave:
Assured that he will hear my cry,
And readily me save.

Or reach his mid day line:
I Will pray to him with earnest cries,
And he will his ear incline.

He brought me off the field:
For many (so disposed by him)
Their help to me did yield.

And them afflict he will:
For therefore him they do not fear,
Because they prosper still.
He stretched out's hands to fight with those
Who were with him at peace:
Against most sacred leagues he chose
Profanely to tranfgress.

His foes with flattering words:
Words, as with oil, and butter smoothed,
But mere unsheathed swords.

And he shall thee.sustain:
So that, propt up by him, the just
Shall still unmoved remain.

The Lord shall bring them down:
In a destructive pit enshar'd,
They shall be. overthrown.
The men that study to deceive,
And bloody-minded be,
Not half their natural life shall live;
But I will trust in thee.
Psalm LVI.
Michtam of David, when the Philistines took him in Gath.

For man would me devour:
Who daily does with me contend,
To crush me with his power.
My foes with open throat design
Each day to swallow me:
And numbers vast, that thus combine
With me to fight, there be.

O thou most high, for aid:
When their malicious violence:
Does make me most afraid.

In God, my faith does rest:
Whence against all that flesh can do,
I Will fearlesly contest.

They wrest to ill intent:
And for my hurt vile plots to lay,
Their thoughts are ever bent.

And very close they are:
They set a watch upon my feet,
Who would my soul ensnare.
Part II

The plotting heads from thee?
By thee let all that ill intend,
Cast down in anger be.

Bottle my tears, O Lord:
Each drop which from mine eyes does fall,
Does not thy book record?
When I to thee devoutly cry;
My foes are turned back:
This I foretell assuredly,
For God my part does take.

Which I have found so true:
Unto the word of God the Lord
I Will render praises due.

I do depend for aid;
Wherefore man's utmost violence
Shall never make me.afraid;

To thee I Will render praise:

To life my soul did raise.
And shall not then, thy strengthening grace
My feet frorm, falls defend,
That I my life's remaining space
May in thy service spend?
Psalm LVII.

Be merciful to me:
For my afflicted soul does stay
It self on, none but thee.
Yea, in thy wings protecting shade
My resuge I have placed:
Till these calamities so sad,
Be fully over past.

Present my earnest cries:
The God, that for me does fulfill
The things that I devise.

From heaven he shall send:
His mercy, and his truth, displaid
From thence, shall me.defend.
He shall defend me from the tongue
Of my reproaching foe:
Who not content my name to wrong,
Designs my overthrow.

That hunt, me as their prey:
With fiery men I do converse
That cruel rage, bewray.
A sort of men they are that through
Their teeth shoot bitter words:
Out doing spears and arrows too,
With tongues like whetted swords.

Above the heavens high:
And show to all the earth abroad.
Thy glorious Majesty.

My feet have often gone:
And my soul, tangled in their snare,
Was almost overthrown.
But though they just before me placed
A closely dug pit:
Yet are they fallen themselves at last,
Into the midst of it.
Part II.

My heart is fixed, O God:
The glories of thy name to raise,
My song shall be bestowed.

My Harp and Psaltery:
And in the consort to partake,
Betimes awake will I.

The people to thy name:
And to the nations, with my song,
Thy glories I Will proclaim.

Thy mercy large does stretch:
So is thy truth of vast extent,
Which to the Clouds does reach.

Above the heavens high:
And show to all the earth abroad,
Thy glorious Majesty.
Psalm LVIII.

Indeed, speak righteously?
Yo mortal Judges, is it your care
Each cause aright to try?

Act plotted wickedness:
You seem to hold its balance true,
But sway it to oppress.

Even from their birth, become:
They learned to speak, and do amise,
Even from their mothers womb.

TO a serpents likeness bears:
And to make wholesome counsels vain,
Like Asps they stop their ears.

Can keep from doing harm:
Because they will not hear his song,
Though cunningly he charm.

They venemously bite:
Yea, Lord, disarm the young Lion's jaws,
That crush the just by might.

So melt continually:
And let the arrows on their bow,
Into small shivers fly.

So let them melt, and run:
Like births that come before the time,
And never see the Sun.

God's wrath shall them surprise:
The whirlwind of his anger hot
Even living, shall them seize.

See the revenge of God:
And with a righteous Zeal, their feet
Wash in the wicked's blood.

The righteous, God rewards:
Verily, there is a Judge on high,
That justice here regards.
Psalm LIX.
Michtam of David, when Saul sent and they watched the House to kill him

Against mine Enemies:
Do thou protect me from their rage,
That up against me rise.

I thy salvation crave:
From the undeserved cruelty
Of bloody men me save.

Against my soul they lay:
Yea, mighty men together join,
To take my life away.
Yet can they charge me with no crime,
As thou, O Lord, do know:
Nor by transgressing, any time,
Have I provoked them so.

To ruin guiltless me:
Awake, and see, what they prepare,
And my desender be.
Israel, that have
All hosts at thy dispose:
Awake for my defense at last,
And visit all my soes.
Visit all the heathens, that to me
Express such cruelty:
Nor let those men find grace from thee,
That sin presumptuously.

They range the city round:
As dogs in consort join their voice,
And make an hideous sound.

So keen their Speeches are:
Yea, their mouths belch blasphemous words
For who, (say they,) does hear?

And laughest at their pride:
All the heathens thou, with scornful smile
Most justly shall deride.
Part II.

That is too strong for me:
I Will wait on God, for he (I know)
My strong defense will be.

He shall prevent me still:
My God shall let me have my mind
On those that wish me ill.

Lest we should it forget:
Let thine Arm rout them in the field
And cast them at our seet.

And cursing, they employ:
Let sudden vengeance them surprise,
And in their pride destroy.

From them confession wring:
That God, who does in Jacob reign,
To the whole earths ends is King.

The City's streets surround:
Searching for food with howling noise,
As does the hungry hound.

Range up and down for meat:
And wander whining all the night,
Without a scrap to eat.

Will with a song proclaim:
And, waking with the morning light,
Exalt thy mercys fame.
For the defense thou did afford
From dangers, was my skreen:
And in my day of trouble, Lord,
Thou have my refuge been.

I Will sing with all my skill:
For God is my desence, and he
Will show me mercy still.
Psalm LX.
Michtam of David, to teach, when he strove with Aramnaharaim, and with
Aram-zobah, when Joab returned, and smote of Edom in the Valley of Salt Twelve
Thousand.

Thou left'st us in disdain:
At us, O God, thou took'st offense:
O turn to us again.
Thy. wrath did cause the Earth to quake
That it was broken sore:
The breaches that thy hand did make,
O let thy hand restore.

Sore burdens made to shrink:
A cup of most amazing wine
Thou gave us to drink;

A banner have bestowed:
In thy religions cause, to be
By them displayed abroad.

Thy right hands power extend:
And to his prayer thy hearing ear
With wonted mercy bend.

My triumphs shall be great:
For Shechem I Will divide by line,
And Succoth's Valley mete.
is mine, Manasseh mine;
Ephr'im suppprts my cause:
To royal Judab, I Will assign
The power to give them Laws.
I Will make my washing Pot,
O'r Edom throw my shoe:
The coast of the Philistines stout
Shall yield me triumphs too.
Part II.

The City sortifi'd?
And into Edom's Country, who
Will me with sasety guide?

That did us once forsake?
Thou that to lead our hosts abroad
Refused'st to undertake?

Let us thy help obtain:
For in sad times, to give us aid,
All humane help is vain.

We valiant acts shall do:
For he shall all our Enemies
Under our seet subdue.
Psalm LXI.

Do thou in mercy hear:
And to my prayer, attentively
Vouchsafe to bend thine ear.

When ever my heart's oppressed:
To that high rock conduct thou me,
Where I may safely rest.
For in past dangers, for my skreen,
Thy help did interpose:
And my strong Tower have thou been,
To save me from my foes.

For evermore reside:
Thy wings I Will make my covert still,
Wherein I will me hide.

Thou, O my God, did hear:
And gave me the heritage
Of those that do thee fear.

And late receive him home:
His years extended shall remain
To ages long to come.

For ever shall he stay:
Prepare for him thy truth and grace,
To keep him from decay.

Eternal praises pay:
That unto thee I may fulfill
My vows from day to day.
Psalm LXII.
[To the Tune of Pf. 113.] Ye children, etc. Or 127. Except the Lord, etc.

From him alone's my expectation:
And from him comes my salvation.

My rock and my strong place is He:
Whence, greatly moved I never shall be.

Seek you your own? for you are all
A tottering sense, and bowing wall.

With studied lies they bend their force:
Their mouths me bless, but hearts do curse.

For from him is my expectation,
And from him comes my salvation.

My only sure defense is he:
Whence I shall never moved be.

Is placed in God my fortress high:
And I to his protection fly.

With hearty prayer upon him call:
He Is a sure refuge for us all.
Surely, mean men are vain; a Lie
The greatest are: against them all
Vanities self will turn the scale.

Raise no man's hopes: when riches flow,
Let none his heart on them bestow.

Yea, twice this speech I heard him own,
That power belongs to him alone.

And Justice too: for at thy bar
All mortals, as they do, shall fare.
Psalm LXIII.
[To the Tune of Ps. 25.] I lift my heart, etc.

I Will early seek thy face.
My soul, and flesh, cry, Lord impart
To me thy saving grace.
In this scorcht Wilderness,
Wherein no waters be,
My body's thirst afflicts me less,
Than does my soul's for thee.

Desirous am to see:
As in thy holy Sanct'ary
I Have had a view of thee.
For life it self is worth
Less than thy kindness dear:
Therefore to show thy praises forth,
My lips prepared are.

Thy goodness shall proclaim:
And when in prayer my hands I raise,
I Will call upon thy Name,

My soul sufficed shall be:
And my rejoicing lips shall yield
Due praises unto thee.

To mind thee I delight:
And exercise my wakefull head,
To muse on thee by night.

I have so often tried;
In thy spread wings protecting shade
I Will joyfully reside.

With restless diligence:
For thy right hand, upholding me,
Vouchsafes me sure defense.

Such pains my blood to shed,
Into the earths lower parts shall go,
To dwell among the dead.
They by the sword shall fall,
And be the foxes food:

Rejoice himself in God.
Yea, all shall joy, that swear
Devoutly by his Name,
When lying mouths thus stopped are,
That sland'rously defame.
Psalm LXIV.

And with my prayer comply:
To keep my life secure from fear
Of my strong Enemy.

And cruel things devise:
Who make iniquity their work,
Whiles they against me rise.

As men do whet their swords:
Their mouths like bended bows, they set,
To shoot out bitter words.

At him that is sincere:
His sudden hurt they do design,
And void they are of fear.
Whiles to lay snares that none may spy,
Their minds they jointly bend:
Fear not, they each to other cry,
Who knows what we intend?

To search iniquities:
And in the bottom of their heart
Their deep contrivance lies.

To shoot them too, prepares:
And whiles they think of no such thing,
Shall wound them unawares.

From their own tongues proceed:
That all mankind from them shall fly,
Who see how ill they speed.

With a religious sense:
As those who wisely think upon
His righteous providence.

Shall both rejoice, and trust:
And all the upright-hearted shall
Thence gather triumphs just.
Psalm LXV.
[To the Tune of Ps. 113.] Ye children, etc. Or 127. Except the Lord, etc.
Zion Hill,
Are, praising crowds attendant still:
Who there to thee their vows fulfill.

To be a God that hears prayer,
All flesh shall unto thee repair.

Thy mercies from us, when we pray:
Yet shall thou purge them quite away.

Before thee in thy Courts to appear,
And gain a constant dwellinig there.
Thus nigh to thee when we reside;
Out of thy Temples stores supplied,
With good we shall be satisfied.

By righteous acts of providence,
Shall give amazing Answers thence.
Thou 'rt he, on whom each one depends,
That dwells in the earth's remotest ends,
As far as the utmost Sea extends.

On firm foundations mountains vast;
Whereon his strength has set them fast.
Part II.

Quelling the raging Waves with ease:
And peoples tumults does appease.

Where ever inhabitants are found,
Thy tokens make thy fear to sound.
Both in the Coasts whence morning springs,
And those where evening spreads its wings,
Thy praise in farthest Countries rings.

And send'st. thy river from the Sky,
To quench its thirst abundantly.
Whereby the corn that men do throw
Thereon, prepared is to grow;
When it by thee is mellow'd so.

Therewith are washed plenteously;
And all their furrows fixed thereby.
And where stiff clods choke sprouting grains,
Thou break'st them small, with softening rains,
So that each spire free passage gains.
Thy blessing thus out-does our hopes,

Each path of thine such fatness drops.
The Wilderness, that is dry and bare,
Does in those fat'ning droppings share;
Which turn its sands to pastures fair.
The little hills with grass abound;
And cheerful flocks do them surround,
Whose Shepherds do thy praises sound.

The pasture grounds where they are fed;
And vales with Corn are covered.
To shouts and songs all strain their voice,
And (as partaking in man's joys)
The echoing earth reflects the noise.
Another Meter.
Zion Hill,
O God, attend on thee:
To thee their vows they do fulfill,
Whereof they debtors be.

Renowned, amongst us art:
All flesh shall readily repair
To thee, from every part.

To stop our prayers success:
Yet us from our iniquities
Thy mercy shall release.

Whom thou bring'st near to thee:
Whom, in thy courts thou take to dwell
Most happy then are we.
Happy are we, there to reside,
Where what thy House does yield,
Is richly unto us supplied
And all with good are filled.

Amazing answers send:
When on thy saving providence
O God, we do depend.
For unto thee, men seek for aid,
From the earth's most distant ends:
And all men's hopes on thee are laid,
Where the utmost Sea extends.

So firm the mountains high;
That their foundations fixed fast,
In the earth's deep bowels lie.

And all their billows lay:
And quells tumultuous peoples rage,
That swells as high as they.

The worlds remotest bounds:
Each ev'nings shade, and mornings light,
O Lord, thy praise resounds.
Part II.

When it is parcht and dry:
Thy heavenly river riches pours,
Thereon abundantly.
Earths womb, there with, thou do prepare,
And fit for fruitful seed:
From which, thus nourisht by thy care,
Springs corn that yields us bread.

Its furrows thou do stay:
And break'st the clods that do deny
The sprouting grain a way.

Does the year with goodness crown:
And every cloud from heaven drops
Abundant fatness down,

Those fatt'ning drops make green:
And the small hills, on all sides, are
Fresh, like the vales between.

Joy to the shepherd bring:
Plough'd fields, with corn are covered,
And make the Plowman sing.
Psalm LXVI.

Your cheerful voices raise

Aloud proclaim his praise.

In all thy works art thou?
Thy foes, convinced by miracle,
To thee shall humbly bow.

The whole earth shall give to thee:
And by their often repeated songs,
Thy name shall praised be.

And thence his power know:
Works full of terror he has shown
To sons of men below.

On foot men through it went:
And there to him a song we spoke,
To give our joys a vent.

His power ever sways:
Let no proud rebels then be bold
Their heads aloft to raise.

Of our Almighty God:
And with exalted voice proclaim
His praises all abroad.

By his supporting hand:
Our feet through him such things do gain,
That they unmoved stand.
Part II.

Laid on by thee, have gone:
As silver into melting heat
Is, for its trial, thrown.

When captives we were ta'n:
And on our feeble loins thou have
Laid an afflicting chain.

Over our heads to ride:
And we through fire and water went,
With patience doubly tried.
But after thou had tried us so,
Thou shew'dst us ample grace:
Thou brought us thence, and did bestow
On us a wealthy place.

Burnt offerings give will I:
And to perform to thee my vows,
I will my self apply.

I bound my soul to thee:
Which with my mouth I poured out,
When trouble was on me.
Part III.

To thee I will allow:
I Will spare no ram, nor goat, nor ox,
But each on thee bestow.

What did to me betide:
I Will tell all men that God do fear,
What for my soul he did.

And make a doleful cry:
But soon my Tongue, in songs of praise,
His name exalted high.

I did in heart regard;
The Lord (that hates hypocrisy)
My prayer would never have heard.

For he my voice did hear:
And when my prayer I did present,
He bowed his gracious ear.

When I to him did pray:
Nor did he from me, in my need,
His mercy turn away.
Psalm LXVII.

And bless us of thy grace:
To shine on us do thou accord,
With thy well-pleased face.

May to the earth be shown:
And that thy saving Doctrine may
Be to all Nations known.

Thy noble praise proclaim:
And let all Nations spread abroad
The glory of thy name.

With songs to vent their mirth:
For thou shall justly rule and try
The Nations on the earth.

Thy noble praise proclaim:
And let all Nations spread abroad
The glory of thy name.

Afford us great increase:
And God that is among us owned
Shall us with plenty bless.

To us his people dear:
And unto the earths remotest end
All nations shall him fear.
Let Father, Son, and Spirit,
(The Eternal Three, and One,)
All glory now, and still inherit,
As they have ever done.
[The same To the Tune of Ps 148.] Give laud, etc.

And blessing on us light:
And may we see his face
Upon us shining bright.

Lord, to each Nation;
And thy Salvation
To all display.

With one consent agree:

And gladly sing to thee.
For thy just Laws,
Shall righteously
Rule the earth, and try
Each persons cause.

Joint-praise, O God, to thee:

Then shall we blessed be.
God shall us bless
And men his fear
Shall every where
Through the earth profess.
The Father, and the Son,
And Spirit of holiness,
(The Eternal, Three, and One,)
We glorify and bless.
So 'twas before
Time first began:
And so remain
Shall evermore.
Psalm LXVIII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

At his appearance scattered be:
And all that spitefully oppose
Themselves to him, before him flee.

And wax does melt, when fire is nigh:
So, when God shows his angry face,
Lee wicked men disperse, and die.

At God's appearance filled be:
Yea, let them often their joys repeat,
When they his gracious presence see.
Sing unto God, his praise proclaim,
Who rides upon the heavens high:
Extol the Lord, by JAH, his name,
And joy before him plenteously.

Is Father to the Fatherless:
And in the helpless Widows case,
Will judgment pass with righteousness.

He loses Captives from their chains:
But rebels, when they lift their heads,
In parched lands he still retains.
Part II.

Vouchsafe, O God, to be their guide,
And a long march did undertake
Before them through the desert wide,

Did at God's awful presence melt:
When Isr'els God appeared in view,
Even Sinai great commotions felt.

Most plenteous drops of fat'ning rain:
Whereby, when it did faint for drought,
Thine heritage revived again.

Thy Congregations dwellings were,
Thy goodness thus dispersed abroad,
Did plenty for the poor prepare.
His word the Lords mouth uttered,
To raise his fainting peoples hearts,
And soon by multitudes 'twas spread
Into the worlds remotest parts.

Discouraged, left the field for fear:
And the spoils scattered when they fled,
Women that staid at home, did share.

Yet shall you like a Dove be decked,
Whose wings and feathers, purest gold
And Silver, from the light reflect.

By force of Gods Almighty hand:
Like Salmons Snow, in Garments white
Arrayed was the joyful Land.

Is like fat Bashans hill renowned:
Yea, even for height it may compare
With any hill in Bashans ground.

With Zion strive for preference?
This hill God's love prefers still,
And honors with his residence.
Part III.

The Lord of Hosts has still at hand:
Yea, many, many thousands more
Of Angels march at his command.
In midst of them, continually,
In's holy place he does appear:
As when his glorious Majesty
On Sinai's mount he did declare.

Thoudid'st in triumph mount the Sky:
And led'st those foes bound in a chain,
Which held man in captivity.
Great gifts thou have received too,
For men, even such as did rebel:
Which thou upon them did bestow,
That the Lord God with them might dwell.

From whom all saving mercies come:
Who with his bounties does us load,
So that each day augments the sum.

He, and no other God, can save:
And unto God the Lord alone,
Belong the issues from the grave.

The head of all his wilful foes:
Yea, the hairy scalp (though never so sound)
Of each, that on, transgressing, goes.

My people from Og's mighty hand:
And from proud Pharaoh's cruel sword,
Through Seas I Will bring them safe to land.
That with the blood of foes again
Thy foot, O Israel, may be red,
And even thy dogs their tongues may stain
In tearing the intralls of the dead.

Thy Ark into its holy place,
That march of thine, my God, and King,
A most delightful prospect was.

Followed by Instruments well set:
With whom fair Damsels went along,
Who skilfully did timbrels beat.

His praise in all Assemblies tell:
Bless ye the Lord, who ever spring
From the ancient stock of lsrael.
Benjamin, with his Head,
And Judahs Prince, with his company;
Are present there: and all that lead
Zebuluns Tribe, and Napthali.

(O Jacobs seed) does strength command:
O God, for us, what thou have wrought,
Support with thine almighty hand.
Part IV.
Jerusalem's the place
O God, wherein thy Temple stands:
Kings therefore shall implore thy grace
With presents brought from foreign lands.
Let spearmens troops though never so fierce,
At thy rebuke, therefore, be scared:
The peoples calves do thou disperse,
With all the bulls that lead the Herd.
Till every one of them submit
With silver coined to acknowledge thee:
And all that do in war delight,
Let them before thee scattered flee.
Egyptian Princes own
Themselves the subjects of our God:
And Ethiopian Nations, soon
Their hands before him spread abroad.

Ye earthly Kingdoms every where:
The praise that to the Lord belongs,
Let their exalted voice declare.

Upon the highest heavens sat:
His voice, a mighty voice, behold,
He utt'reth from his Throne of state.

Whose glory rests on Israel:
Whose strength that rends the cloudy Sky,
All creature-forces does excel.

O God, that Israel do own:
His peoples mighty strength is he;
Blessed, therefore, be God alone.
Psalm LXIX.

Save me, O God, I pray:
For on all sides they me beset
To take my life away.

And feel no solid ground:
Whiles by an overflowing flood
I Am likely to be drowned.

My voice for help to call:
And while I look to God in vain;
My very eyes do fail.

In multitude exceed:
For number, with the hairs they vie,
That grow upon my head.
Their power too, than mine was more,
Who me designed to slay:
Then (forced by might) I did restore
What I never took away.

(If any such there were,)
Or, if of sins I guilty be,
To thee they do appear.

Let none of thine be blamed:
Nor let one soul that worships thee,
On my account be shamed.
Israel)
For thee I bear disgrace,
And for thy sake, that shame befell
Me, that now clouds my face.

My kindred did disclaim:
And to my mothers sons, therefore,
An alien I became.

That it consumes me quite:
And what reproaches levelled are
At thee, on me do light.
Part II.

With tears and fasting tame:

Their byword I became.

Against me evil spoke:
And every drunkard, with his mates,
On me lewd songs did make.

Thy saving help I Will crave:
In thy abundant mercy hear,
And in thy truth me save.

My feet from sinking keep:
Save me from hearts of malice full,
And from the waters deep.

Nor the deeps me devour:
Let not the pits mouth shut me up,
As one within its power.

Thy tender love I find;
And in thy mercies multitude,
Be thou to me inclined.

From me thy servant clear:
But in my troubles, let thy grace
Move thee with speed to hear.

To it redemption send:
And lest my foes on me incroach,
Thy saving help me lend.
Part III.

O Lord, are known to thee:
And all my foes that me defame,
Thou perfectly do see.

But I Am bemoaned by none:
For some to comfort me I look,
But cannot light on one.
In stead of Cordials, on the Tree
To eat, they gave me gall:
And Vinegar they tendered me,
To quench my thirst withal.

To them who thus me treat:
And may the wholsom'st things that are,
Prove traps to catch their feet.

Thick darkness seize their Eyes:
And that their loins may ever shake
A palsy them surprise.

Do thou upon them send:
And in thine angers scorching heat,
Do thou them apprehend.

The place where they reside:
And let all dwellers thence be chased,
That none therein abide.

They persecute the more:
And fret with speeches full of spite
The wounds thou made before.

Their guilts accounts increase,
And by repentance never come
Into thy righteousness.
Out of the book of living souls
Let them be dashed clear:
And where the Lord the just enrolls,
Let not their Names appear.
Part IV.

And sorely grieved am I:
O God, vouchsafe thy saving grace,
To set me up on high.

Exalt God's holy Name:
And with my thankful verse I Will raise
His most deserved fame.

Than Ox, or Bullock, prise:
Though proved by horn, and hoof, to be
Of age for sacrifice.

Of gladness to the meek:
And all your drooping hearts revive
Who God devoutly seek.

My case does make it plain:
And who foe'r his prisoners are
He will them not disdain.

His praises to declare:
The Sea likewise, and all therein
That moves, a part shall bear.
For God will save his Zion still,
And Judah's Cities rear:
His Servants shall its houses fill,
And buy possessions there:

To the succeeding race:
Where, they that love his name, shall live
In a sure dewlling place.
Psalm LXX.
[To the Tune of Ps. 25.] I lift my heart, etc.

To rescue me, I pray:
Lord, lose no time, when danger's near,
Help, help, without delay.

Who me to slay combine:
Let them disgracefully retire,
That do my hurt design.

And shamefully retreat;
Who often, Aha, Aha, to me
With scornful pride repeat.

May ever joy in thee:
And those that love thy saving grace,
Still say, God praised be.
But I am poor, and need;
O God, make have, I pray:
Lord, my deliverer, make speed;
Let not thy help delay.
Psalm LXXI.

Thy promised help I claim:
Let not my hopes defeated be,
Lest I be put to shame.

A kindly bended ear:
And cause me to escape, O Lord,
The evil which I fear.

To which I may resort:
I Am safe, if thou shall so command,
Who aft my rock and fort.

My God, do thou me free:
Nor let the unjust and cruel man
Lay violent hands on me.

With fixed confidence:
On whom from youth my faith is staid,
Not to be moved thence.

To whom my birth I owe:
And whose protection, all my days,
Has held me up, till now.

The crowd about me throng:
But I thy sole protection own;
Thou art my fortress strong.

Thy glories to display:
And let thy worthy praises fill
My mouth throughout the day.
Part II.

When age does me assail:
Forsake me not, when vigorous strength
My withered limbs does fail.

Hard things against me speak:
And often together they advise,
Who my destruction seek.

Now, now, fall on, and take him:
For there is none to take his part;
Both God, and man, forsake him.

Be far from me in need:
Let not my hopes belong delayed,
But rescue me with speed.
Confounded, and consumed be those
That would not let me live:
Reproach and shame befall my foes
That harm to me contrive.

My soul throughout my days:
And still improve my skill to pay
The tribute of thy praise.

I daily will declare:
Though all account their numbers pass;
For numberless they are.

All works I set upon:
And I Will proclaim, when they succeed,
Thy right'ousness alone.
Part III.

Did guide my youthful days:
And hitherto, thy works divine
live published to thy praise.

Which thy old servant wears:
Nor let thy care for him grow slack,
Now, as he grows in years.
Spare me at least, until my pen
Have wrote of all thy praise:
And made thy strength and power be seen
To these, and future days.

And when thy works I see,
Astonished, and amazed I cry,
O God, who is like to thee?

Thy providence me gave:
But thou shall me again restore
Even from the gaping grave.

Shall grow from day today:
And with thy comforts I shall be
Surrounded every way.

Shall in a song be shown:
My lute, and harp shall sound aloud,
To Isr'els holy one.

My lips express its joys;
Which thence into my song shall flow,
And raise my singing voice.

Thy justice shall proclaim:
For they that me designed to slay,
By thee are brought to shame.
Psalm LXXII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

The grace to govern by thy Laws:
And teach his royal Son to show
Just favor to each righteous cause.

When men to his Tribunal come:
And in the poorest subjects case
Pronounce an uncorrupted doom.

With all the blessings peace can give:
And little hills, by righteousness,
Like happy fruits to men derive.

And do their helpless Orphans right:
Breaking to pieces potent men,
Who their inferiors crush by might.

Shall last as long as humane race:
Maintained by it, whiles Sun does shine,
Or Moon appear with various face.

Or showers that soke the parched ground:
All sorts of blessings shall come down,
And from his government redound.
The righteous greatly shall increase,
As long as he the scepter sways:
And all his realm abound in peace,
Till the moons borrowed light decays.

The limits of his Empire wide:
And from the River to the end
Of all the earth, where men reside.

Shall bow before; his Majesty:
And all that enmity profess,
Licking the dust, shall prostrate lie.

From Tarshish, and its Islands too:
Sheba's on him, and Seba's King,
Shall royal Donatives bestow.

In humblest postures be adored:
And by all Nations shall he be
Obeyed, as their Sovereign Lord.

From violence he shall him save:
The poor oppressed man likewise,
Who can no other helper have.
Part II.


When fraud and force them overbear:
And precious shall their blood b' esteemed

Presents of Sheba's purest gold:
Men daily praise to him shall give,
And by their prayers his Crown uphold.

Even from the mountains tops shall make:
Each handful shall such plenty breed,
Its crop like Lebanon shall shake.
Yea, Zion's Citizens shall grow
Thick, as the great that hides the ground:

Continues ever more renowned.
A name his issue shall possess,
Whiles the Suns motion governs Time:
For every nation shall him bless,
And every one be blessed in him.

The God that Israel does own:
The wonders wrought in the earth abroad
Who works by himself alone.

When time it self no more is found:
May the earth be filled with his fame,
And all Amen, Amen, resound.
The Father Son, and Spirit one
Eternal God, in Persons three:
As was before the world begun,
Now, and for ever honored be.
Psalm LXXIII.

(No more objections start:)
That God is good to Israel,
Even all the pure in heart.

My faith with doubts was tried:
My feet were almost overthrown;
So sorely did they flide.

The foolish prosper'd so:
And, seeing how the wicked thrived,
I did uneasy grow.

And quit it easily:
Nor, rackt with pains, as others be,
Feel they themselves to die.

Concern nor them at all:
Yea, plagues, which rarely others spare,
Do rarely them befall.
Whence, clothed with violence, and scorn,
They look as big and bold:
As they that do themselves adorn
With robes, and chains of gold.

For fatness seem to start:
And their prosperity exceeds
The wishes of their heart.

And talk most impiously:
They boast how they by rapine thrive,
And the highest God defy.

Vollies of wicked talk:
And quite throughout the earth, at large,
Their Tongues unbounded walk.

Often in their herd delight:
Till in large draughts they swallow down
Their impious errors quite.

How does the highest know?
Or how can God such notice gain,
Of what is done below?

Lo, in the world they thrive:
Vast riches to their share do fall,
Beyond the most alive.
Part II.

My heart I Have cleans'd in vain:
And from my hands have washed away
Every unrighteous stain.

God's heavy strokes did bear:
Each morning under lash I past,
When he did others spare.

Which hasty passion bred:
Because they laid a stumbling block
Before thy righteous seed.

My reason did revolve:
The more I found, too hard it was,
For reason to resolve.

For counsel did attend:
And there informed, I understood
The wicked's fearful end.

But slippery withal;
From thence, deserted by thy grace,
They caught a deadly fall.
How have I seen them swept away
By death, as quick as thought?
With dreadful circumstances, they
Were to destruction brought.

When men from sleep arise:
So when thou wak'st, their painted bliss
O Lord, thou shall despise.
Part III.

They wrought me grievous pains:
The thought, they had so far prevailed,
Did sorely sting my reins.

And ignorance possessed:
That in thy sight deservedly
I owned my self a beast.

Still in thy sight I stay:
By my right hand thou hold'st me fast,
From falling quite away.

Shall guide me faithfully:
And my departing soul receive
To glory, when I die.

Have I, but thee alone?
And my desires on earth, can rest
Excepting thee, on none.

And frail my body is:
But God's my hearts assured Fort,
And my eternal bliss.

From thee, do ruin seek:
Thou will destroy all those, with thee
Who marriage-faith do break.

My faith is settled there:
That I, O Lord, with thankful voice,
May all thy works declare.
Psalm LXXIV.
[To the Tune of the Lament.] O Lord in thee, etc. Or Psalm 51. O Lord
consider, and.

As if thou would never own us more!
Against the flock that bears thy name,
Why does thine anger smoke so sore?

The inheritance, that cost thee dear:
To this mount Zion, Lord, be kind,
For thou have long resided here.

Our endless ruins crave thy aid:
See, how thy foes a fearful waste
Within thy holy place have made,

With shouts their impious throats they tear:
Their standards on thy walls are set,
Sad tokens who are masters there.

Men's strength in felling trees was known:

In breaking sacred carvings down.

They kindled a devouring flame:
And rased with polluted hands
The seat devoted to thy name.

Let Us kill them, and root out their race:
And all God's houses through the Land,
At once they did with fire deface.

Nor do thou us one Prophet send:
So that, there is none can tell us, when
These doleful times will have an end.
Part II.

Shall we their vile reproaches hear?
Will thou, whiles they blaspheme thy name,
Triumphing foes for ever bear?

Why hid'st thou thus, as loath to smite?
Out of thy bosom, Lord, at length,
O let it loose, to do thee right.

My Sovereign Lord, and King has been;
Whose works throughout the earth abroad,
Have made his saving power seen.

'Twixt which thy strength a path did make,
And in its waves thy powerful hand
The heads of mighty Dragons brake.
Leviathan the great
In pieces broken were by thee:
Whom thou bestow'd'st on them for meat,
Who dwellers in the desert be.

To make new springs a passage plain:
And mighty streams their Channels left,
Retreating to their springs again.

For this, thou did from that, divide:
When thou prepared had the light,
Thou made it in the Sun reside.

Were fixed by thee, where now they are:
Both summer-heats and winter-frosts,
Thou do appoint to part the year.
Part III.

The enemies reproaches bear:
And how with impious blasphemy
Thy name the foolish people tear.

Thy turtles soul relinquish not:
And let not thy poor flock, O Lord,
By thee for ever be forgot.

For though in earths obscurest cells
We hide for safety, yet we find
Even there, all cruel'rapine dwells.

Let notth' oppressed return with shame:
But give to thy afflicted poor,
Occasion, yet, to praise thy name.

Wherein thine own concern does ly:
Remember, how the foolish man
Reproaches thee continually.

Of thy blasphemous enemies:
For. still to thee ascends the noise
Of those that up against thee rise.
Psalm LXXV.

To thee, we thankful are:
Because thy mighty name to be
Near us thy works declare.

A righteous Judge to be:

Laid all its weight on me.

Deal not so foolishly:
And to the wicked. I will say,
Lift not your horn so high.

To lift your horn so high:
Nor with stiff necks Gods providence,
And Sov'raignty deny.

Do winds promotion blow:

And lays another low.

There is a cup of wine:
The wine is red, its spirits move,
And mix themselves therein.
From thence, he fills for every man,
What shall to him befall:
But all the wicked men shall strain
Its dregs, and drink them all.
Jacob's God, with praise,
Will sing continually;

All just men's horns on high.
Psalm LXXVI.
[To the Tune of Psalm 113.]. Ye children, etc.
Judah's holy Land alone,
The Almighty God is truly known:
His name is great in Israel:
Jerusalem's the place, in which
He did his Tabernacle pitch,
And there he does in Zion dwell.

There all that shields and swords did bear,
Were routed, and made haste away:
Zion, art a famous place;
Thy glory does all mounts surpass,
Where the earths great robbers lodge their prey.

A Lethargy did them invade;
Their very hands did seem misplaced.
Jacob's God,
Chariot, and Horse, unmoved stood;
A fatal sleep on both was cast,
Thou, even thou, deservest fear:
For in thy sight who may appear,
When once thine anger kindled is?

When thou thy Judgments known did make,
In dreadful thunders from the Skies.

And through the earth against their foes
Their cause in judgment did maintain,

Procures thee praise: and all the rest,
That would break forth, thou shall restrain.

Vowed presents to the dreadful King
All ye that round, his coasts remain:

And terrible examples gives,
To all that in the earth do reign.
Psalm LXXVII.
[To the Tune of the Lament.] O Lord in thee, etc.

When with my voice to God I cried,
With a loud voice I cried to him,
And he to me his ear applied.

My Spirits all night long did waste:
No cordials gave my soul relief,
For I all comforts from me chased.

But thoughts of God me sorely pained:
O'rwhelming grief my Spirit did seize,
And seife me most, when I complained.

But those short slumbers thou do break:
My trouble so oppressive grows,
It even choaks me when I speak.

On times that have been vanished long:

Ease to my spirt by a song.
Thus, from all company retired,
Discourse with mine own heart I had:
And, (as my present case required,)
A diligent enquiry made.
Part II.

His people, that his aid implore?
Will he, that was so very kind,
Show them no favor any more?

As never to be recalled again?
For ever is his promise vanished?
And shall all ages find it vain?
Has he disused his grace so long,
As to forget all use of it?
And is his Anger waxed so strong,
As to lock up his mercies quite?

Are my disease. I Will therefore heed
What miracles in former years
The right hand of the highest did.

In faithful memory I Will hold:
And often revolve with grateful thought,
The wonders thou have done of old.

Shall my sad hearts diversion be:
And with my tongue I will relate
What praise thy deeds have purchased thee.
Part III.

Where thou resid'st, O God, are known:
What God is there, or ever was,
For greatness, like the God we own?

Thy God heads evidences are:
For that thy strength all Gods exceeds,
In all men's view thou did declare.

Thy mighty Arm thou did extend;
Thy people sprung from Joseph's stem,
With all from Jacob that descend.

Thou to the waters did appear:
Thy frightfull presence did them awe,
The depths themselves so troubled were.

Upon the earth discharged their load:
The Skies did thundering noises vent,
And scatter killing shafts abroad.

Thy lightenings lent the world its light,
When day was thence by tempests scared:
And the earth did tremble at the fright.

Where none before had ever gone.
Through mighty waves thy passage lay,
By no remaining foot steps known.

By shepherds under their command:
Thou led'st thy people through the deep,
By Moses his, and Aaron's hand.
Psalm LXXVIII.

My people bend your ear:
And what shall from my mouth proceed,
With due attention hear.
My mouth by way of Parable,
Dark sayings shall unfold:
Which We have heard, and know them well,
Concerning times of old.

Unto us to reveal,

Or just, we should conceal.
That the after-age may understand
The strength the Lord has shown:
And all the wonders of his hand
May, to' his praise be known.
Jacob's seed
By testimony bind;
And all that were of Israel bred
By Law he so enjoined.

Their seed those works to teach;
Whereby (conveyed from hand to hand)
They might all ages reach.

And all his Laws obey:
Nor any of his words forget,
Nor choose their Fathers way.
For they a rotten-hearted race
Of stubborn Re'bels were:
A race, whose spirit unsettled was
In God's most holy fear.
Whence Ephraim's posterity
Though armed with sword, and bow;
At the first brush, to the enemy
Their turned backs did show.

But disobeyed his Law:

His wonders which they saw.
Part II.
Egypt, in their Fathers eyes,
Great miracles he wrought:
But chiefly, in the field, that lies
Great Zoan round about.

The way by which they past:
The waters on an heap he laid,
Like to a mountain vast.

Before their hosts to go:
And to give light to them by night,
A cloudy pillar too.

The solid rocks he clave:
Whence, drink, to help them in distress,
As from the deep, he gave.

Great streams for their supply:
Streams, which like mighty rivers swelled,
They ran so plenteously.

More sinful yet they were:
And by provoking him t'excess
The highest God did dare.

Their hearts tentation gave:
Whiles, for their lust, not for their need,
They meat of him did crave.

Of God, they uttered:
For, can he, in this desert place,
(Said they) a Table spread?

With an effectual blow;
So that the Waters gushed out
And streams did overflow.
But can he make the obedient rock
Supply us, too, with bread?
Or thence, with such another stroke,
With slesh his people feed?

Did against Jacob swell:
And in his breast fierce anger stirred
Against his Israel.

To fix their confidence:
And would not trust, though they had tried
Almighty Providence.
Part III.

For their supply he sent:
And flung wide open heavens doors,
To give his bounty vent.
Manna from thence on them he rained,
Heavens corn, for them to eat:

So filled he them with meat.

Beneath the heaven wide:
The Southern wind he loosed too
From its accustomed side.

That scattered dust's not more:
And feathered fouls, in number, like
The sand on the Ocean shore.

The Camp where they did dwell;
They took them without net, or shot,
God bade them, and they fell.

Of what they lusted for:

For filled, they longed for more.
They ate, but scarce had time to chew,

God's wrath the fattest of them slew,
Even the youth of Israel

Far more they sinned yet:
And greater Infidels did grow,
For all his wonders great.
Part IV.

In vain, by sitting still:
Or, tired with travel to no end,
They did their years fulfill.

They prayed, and did repent:
And after God betimes they sought,
As truly penitent.

He was their fortress known:
And he that Israel did redeem,
Was the highest God alone.

'Twas all but flattery:
And though their tongues thus sugared were,
They did their hearts belly.

They uprightness did want:
Nor were they steadfast all the while,
Unto his Covenant.

His mercy did employ,
To pardon their iniquity,
And did not them destroy.
Yea, turned his anger many times
Into another path:
Nor did he, for their heinous crimes,
Excite his utmost wrath.

That flesh their matter was,
Endowed with breath, which like the wind,
Nor to return, does pass.
Part V.

To him displeasure give?
And in that wild and desert place,
How often did they him grieve?

When, with presumption great,
To the holy one of Israel
Their fancied bounds they set.

Of what his hand had wrought:
When therewith he from the enemy
To them salvation brought.

In Egypt he had shown.
What wonders in the adjoining land
To Zoan he had done.

Their rivers, till they stank:
Yea, loathsome gore filled every floods
That none their waters drank.

Did sorely them annoy:
And frogs, in numerous companies,
Did all the land destroy.

The fruits for which they toiled:
And what they labored hard to save,
Devouring locusts spoiled.

That all their fruit was lost:
Their fruitful fig trees too were spilled
With an untimely frost.

As to destruction doomed:
And all their flocks, abroad surpised.
By lightning he consumed.

(A troop sent out from Hell:)
And through their hands, the hottest flame
Of anger on them fell.

Their lives he did not spare:
But through life's passage, sent them death,
In pestilential Air.
Egypt died,
Where the destroyer came;
The strength of all that did reside:
Within the Tents of Ham.
Part VI.

As sheep kind shepherds do:
And did his flock conduct with care
The howling desert through.

Secure from cause of fear:
But their pursuers covered
With the Sea-waters were.

He led them through the Land:
Even to the holy Hill, whose ground
He gave with mighty hand.

The Tribes of Israel in:
Their tents, and lands, he set them out
By the dividing line.

And did him angry make:
To keep his Testimonies they
No carefuil heed did take.

With a deceitful heart:
Like a false bow which strength does lack,
And fails the shooters Art.

With Altars built on high:
And wirh their graven Images
Inflamed his jealousy.

So greatly in his breast,
That his beloved Israel
Thenceforth he did detest
Shilo pitched, then,
He could no more abide:
Where once he chose to dwell wirh men,
He loathed to reside.

He did permit to go:
And into the hand of the enemy
resigned his glory too.

His people so abhorred;
That he did leave them to the rage
Of the destroying sword.

Their maids unmarried lived:

Nor were their widows grieved.
Part VII.

Then did the Lord arise:
And champion like, whom wine has warmed,
He charged his enemies.

There, they were sorely pained:
Whence, when the pain was vanished quite,
Perpetual shame they gained.
Joseph's ground
His rifled Tent refuse:
And Ephr'im's Tribe which once he owned,
Thenceforth he did not choose.

To Judah he removed:
And his fixed seat in Zion placed,
The mountain which he loved,

A lofty Palace 'twas,
Firm as the earth, which never strays
From its appointed place.
David too, he did promote,
(A servant of his own;)
And from his sorry shepherds cote,
Removed him to a throne.

When God did him advance,
His people Israel to feed,
His own inheritance.

With faithful spirit did;
And managed them with skillful hand:
Both ways, an able guide.
Psalm LXXIX.
[To the Tune of the Lament.] O Lord in thee, etc. Or Ps. 51. O Lord consider,
etc.

Of that dear Land which thou do own;
Thy holy House they have profaned;
Jerusalem on heaps is thrown.

They give to ravenous birds to eat:
And all devouring beasts they feed
With Saints flesh as their daily meat.

Thy holy City, spilt they have:
And no kind hearted man is found,
To give to one of them a grave.

We Are scost at, as by thee forlorn:
And all that round about us lie,
Our miseries deride, and scorn.

Thine anger? shall it never expire?
Whiles any fuel does remain,
Shall jealousy in thee be fire?

Heathens, to whom thou art not known:
And Gentile Kingdoms, that refuse
Thy holy name to call upon.
Part II.
Jacob's holy race
With open throat they swallow down:
And his delightful dwelling place,
With wrathful hands have overthrown.

The iniquities of ancient date:
But speedily to us be kind;
Before thy kindness come too late.

On thee, our saving God, to save:
Raise thy names glories from our fall,
That still thou may that Title have;
And purge our heinous sins away,
To make thy pard'ning mercy known:

Whither's the God of Israel gone?
For shedding of thy servants blood,
Let us on them thy vengeance see,
Amongst the heathen foes aloud
Thus may our God proclaimed be.

Lee into thy remembrance come:
And let thy mighty power save,
Those whom to cruel deaths they doom.

Even sevensold disgrace, and shame:
For the reproaches, Lord, which they.
Have cast upon thy holy Name.

Thou feed'st, will ever give thee praise:
And leave in memory, a stock,
To yield thee more in after days.
Psalm LXXX.
[To the same Tune.]
Israel do keep,
And leadest Joseph's seed like sheep,
Betwixt the Cherubins appear,
(For there thou dwell'st) and thence us hear,
Ephr'im and Manassch too,
With Benjamin, thy glory show:
Stir up thy wonted strength, and where
We need it, let thy help appear.

And re-possess us of thy grace:
For, if on us thy face do shine,
All our salvation's coucht therein

Signs of thy smocking Anger see?
So that, (for that does most us grieve)
Thy peoples prayers thou wilt not receive.

And tears they drink in measure great,

And all our soes joynt-scorn are we.

O God of Hosts, and clear thy face:
For, if on us thy face do shine,
All our salvation's coucht therein.
Part II.
Egypts Land
Thou broughtest with thy mighty hand:
And hence thou did the heathens throw
To plant it, where they long did grow.

In depth of earth thou layd'st its root;
Till thus manured, it greatly spread,
And all the Land replenished.

Which it resreshed with its shade:
And its large boughs (so big they were)
With goodly Cedars might compare.

That to the midland-sea they reached:
Her branches too extended wide,
Even to the famous River's side.

Lies she exposed to violence?
Eeach Traveller makes that his way,
And takes her grapes for lawful prey.

Makes bare, and undermines her root:
And all the Beasts the field does breed,
Upon her tender branches feed.
Part III.

From heaven cast a look this way:
And let thy tender heart incline,
To visit thy forsaken vine.

Which thy right hand did set alone:
And keep that royal stem from wrong,
Which for thy self thou made so strong.

And into flaming fire it is thrown:
And all its branches are defaced
By thy displeasures killing blast.

O let that hand support always:
And save that son of man from wrong,
Whom for thy selfthou made so strong.

Nor any more our God forsake:
Revive us, and thy holy Name,
By calling on it, we'll proclaim.

Lord God of Hosts, and clear thy face:
For when that face on us does shine,
Our sasety is secured therein.
Psalm LXXXI.
[To the Tune of Psalm 25.] I lift my, etc.

Exalt your singing voice:
And to the praise of Jacob's God
Let Us make a joyful noise.

And tune it to a song:
Unto the Pseltry let us sing,
And the harp that is sweetly strung.

Blow up the Trumpet shrill:
This solemn feast from year to year.
Must be observed still.

That does all Israel bind:
The holy God of Jacob this
Has for a Law enjoined.

In's way through Egypts Land,
To Joseph for a Testimony
He strictly did command.
Within that land, my ear
An uncouth language filled:
A language I was forced to hear,
Wherein I was not skilled.

From loads that on them lay:
And set his hands at liberty
From moulding potters clay.

Entreating me to save:
I saved thee: but therewithal
My law in charge I gave.
From thence I did it give,
Whence frightfull thunders fly:
And at the stream, where thou did strive
With me, I did thee try.

To what your God does say:
O Israel, if thou will hear
My precepts, and obey:

A foreign God to thee:
Nor any sacred worship give
To a strange Deity.

From Egypt did thee save:
Thou shall be to the full allowed
Whatever thou can crave.
Part II.

My Israel would not hear:
And when I put it to their choice,
Refused me to fear.

Them to their sinful will:
And they, as their own hearts inclined
Its counsels did fulfill.

My people had complied;
That Israel had been so wise,
As to make me their guide.

I should have tamed soon:
And turned my hand against their foes,
Till they were overthrown.

Had flattered them, at least:
And they their happy days restored
For ever had possessed:

By him they had been filled:
And honey for their constant meat,
The rocks should have, distilled.
Psalm LXXXII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 122.] I did in, etc.

God stands in Court unseen,
With earthly Gods he judges there:

Partial in judgment be:
And the unrighteous cause prefer?

The poor and fatherless;
And help the oppressed to their right:

And let them be no more
The wrongful prey of men of might.

But on in darkness go;
And the earths foundations remove

Deputed Gods ye are,
And all the Sons of God above.

So must your Deities:
Thus, greatest Princes still have done.

And judge the earth with right:
For all its Nations are thine own.
[Another Verse. of it, To Ps. 100.] All people, etc.

When they in Court assembled are:
Among the Gods he sits unseen,
When they their Judgments do declare.

Unjustly to subvert the Laws?
And where the wicked great man sues,
Respect the person, not the cause?

And give the oppressed man his right:

And save him from the oppressors might.

But blindly judge without remorse;
So that, all the earths foundations are,
By them removed out of course.

And all the Sons of God most high:

For Princes must, like others, die.

Through the earth, what men have judged wrong:
For o'r all Realms, to thee, to reign,
Does by inheritance belong.
Psalm LXXXIII.

Thy self to rest compose:
And do not always hold thy peace,
But check thy haughty foes.

Do rage tumultuously:
And those by whom thou art abhorred,
Lift their proud heads on high.

Against thy people dear:
Against thy hidden ones, combined
In secret plots they are.

Quite root the Nation out:
That th'odious Name of Israel, may
For ever be forgot.

They manage their debates:
Against thy holy Majesty
They are confederates.
Edomites,
And Ishmaels savage line,
Do with malicious Moabites,
And Hagar's seed, combine.
Gebal's, and Ammon's forces, knit
With Amalek, conspire:
And Philistines themselves unite
With them that dwell at Tire.
Assyrian too, is of the knot,
And does with them contrive;
Whiles to the incestuous race of Lot
He does assistance give.
Part II.
Midian's forces perished,
So let it fare with them:
As Sisera's and Jabin's sped
Near Kishon's ancient stream.
Endor in a total rout,
Whose numerous troops were killed:
And their dead bodies, spread about
Like Dung, manured the field.
Zeeb's and Oreb's fate attend
Their Nobles, as their doom:
To Zeba's and Zalmunna's end
Let all their Princes come.

Who proudly boasting said,
Throughout the land God's Houses shall
Unto our own be laid.

And let them never stay:
Or like the chaff, which wind dispells,
And scatters every way.

There Is not a bush scapes sree:
Or flames on woody mountains take,
And do not leave a tree.

Like a tempestuous blast:
So let them with thy storm be scared,
And never stand, for haste.

So fill their face with shame:
That turned from heathen vanities,
Lord, they may seek thy name.

With endless griess be spent;
And let them be with shame surprised,
And perish in the event.

Alone, Jehovah call;
The whole earth's sovereign Lord to be,
And highest over all.
Psalm LXXXIV.
[To the Tune of Ps 113.] Ye children, etc.

Thy Tabernacles unto me!

Driven from thy Courts whiles I remain,
My heart, and flesh cry out for pain,
Whiles absent from the God of life.
Yea, whiles in undisturbed nests,
Each sparrow there, and swallow rests,
And near thine Altar lays her young,
Enjoyed by me is their abode,
O Lord of Hosts, my King, and God,
Whiles I am kept from thence so long.

Thy holy house, are daily there,
Still sounding forth thy glorious praise!

To see thee, will not let him tire,
Nor feel the length of toy I some ways.

In Baca's valley sink a well:
And rain from heaven their pits does fill.

In prefence of their God, at length,
They all appear on Zion Hill.
Part II.

And lend to me thy gracious Ear;
Thou God that Jacob's seed do own:

And thine anointed's countenance yield
In wonted grace to look upon.

Where thy religious flock resorts,
Unto my soul more comfort gives,
Than do a thousand spent elsewhere:
May I be but a Porter there,
I Will envy no man's bliss that lives.
The richest Tents of wicked men
Would yield me no Tentation then;
Though I might them as Lord, possess.

Will comfort and protection yield,
When griefs and dangers me oppress.
Both grace, and glory, will he give
To such as do uprightly live;
And no good thing to them deny.

The blessed men beyond compare,
Who firmly do on thee rely.
Psalm LXXXV.

Thy fore afflicted Land;
And Jacob's captived seed restored
From cruel Masters hand.

From their provoking sin:
And thy indulgence did remit
The errors they were in.
Thou made all thy wrath to cease,
And into kindness turn:
Thy Anger's heat thou did suppress,
And would not let it burn.

O God of our salvation:
Turn us to thee, and then restrain
Thy wrathful indignation.

For ever in thy breast?
Shall Anger reach from Age to Age,
And never be suppressed?

That they may joy in thee?

Lord, let us saved be.
Part II.

For he will speak words of peace
To all his Saints: Provided, they
Abstain from foolishness.

To such as do him fear:
To plant his glory in our Land,
Still to inhabit there.

There fixed their meeting place:
And righteousness and peace therein
Each other do embrace.

As if'twere planted there:
And righteousness to men below,
From heaven shall appear.

God shall our Nation bless:
And our improved ground shall bring
A plentiful increase.

Justice shall go before:
And teach us how to imitate
The object we adore.
Psalm LXXXVI.

For very poor am I:

Lord, does on thee rely.

Be merciful to me:

Do lift it up to thee.

Forgiveness to bestow:
Thy plenteous grace to every one
That begs it, thou will show.
When ever I devoutly pray,
Lord, listen unto me:

For thou will answer me.

To thee none equal are:
Betwixt their works, and thine, the odds
Is great, beyond compare.

Thee, Lord, who did them frame:
Devoutly they shall thee adore,
And glorify thy name.

And thou art God alone:
Yea, every great and wondrous deed
Is by thy power done.

It Is rules my life i will frame:
Unite my heart to thee, that I
May fear thy holy name.
Part II.

To thee, i will render praise:
And unto all eternity,
Thy names due glory raise.

To a vast bulk do swell:
My soul delivered by thee
Was from the lowest hell.
O Lord, the proud and violent
In great assemblies rise;
To seek my life: but never meant
TO have thee before their Eyes.

And graciously kind:
In truth and mercy plentiful,
And not to wrath inclined.

Thy servant mercy have:
Thy handmaids sore distressed Son
Employ thy strength to save.

To put my foes to shame;
When they behold, that helped by thee,
And comforted I am.
Psalm LXXXVII.
[To the Tune of Ps. 100.] All people, etc.

The Temple built by God's command:
Zion's gates therefore, above
All Jacob's dwellings have his love.

Of thee, thou City of our God,

Rahab's, and Babylon's great Name.
Tire, Ethiopia, Palestine,
With all men's praises want not mine:
Of each of whom it may be said,
His birth therein some great man had.
Zion said,
The highest its foundations laid:
And none so many men of fame
As call her mother, ever could claim.

Her Sons with honor shall record;
And to each name his pen shall add,
This man his birth in Zion had.

His praises sung in holy Quires:
And all the springs that furnish me
With holy songs, in Zion be.
Psalm LXXXYIII.

My cries to thee ascend:

And to my cries attend.

My life draws nigh the grave:

No strength at all I have.
Among the dead, by thy hand slain,
Who in the pit do lie:
So lost, that thou do naught retain
Of them, in memory.

Thou lay'st me far from light:

I feel thy anger's weight.

Admitting none that knew me:
Yea, made me so abhorred thou have,
That even they eschew me.

(Such, Lord, my sorrows be:)
And with outstretched hands, my prayers
I daily make to thee.
Part II.

Shall they thy glory raise?

Thy truth destruction praise?

Where naught but night does dwell?
How shall thy righteousness be known
In dark oblivions cell?

My earnest cries I vent:
And every day, in servent prayers,
My earlyest thoughts are spent.

Reject my soul's request?
Why do thou turn thy face a way,
And leave me thus distressed?

With great afflictions rackt,
Thy terrors so upon me lie,
They do my mind distract.

It Is current bears me down:
Thy terrour's deluge sinks me so,
I drown, dear God, I drown.

They made a mighty tide:
And with united strength beset
My soul on every side.

That loved me cordially:
And my acquaintance, covered close,
In dark concealment lie.
[Another Version to the Tune of the Lamentation.] O Lord in thee, etc.

Thy help I never ceased to crave!
With mournful cries, both day and night,
I have appeared before thy sight.
Whiles humbly I implore thy grace,
Let me behold thy pleased face:
And let thine ear to me be bowed,
When ever I raise my voice aloud.

My sinking spirit finds no rest:
And those few dregs of life, I have
Remaining yet, draw near the grave.

For men descending to the pit:
And like a sick man I appear
Whose strength no cordials can repair.

Who in the grave forgotten lie:
Yea, even by thee forgot they are,
Whole hand cut off, and laid them there.

(The most retired room of death,)
Into the depths thou have me thrown,
So dark, that light there never shone.

Cannot bear the burden of thy wrath:
With all thy billows overflown,
Into those depths I sink, and drown.

All that of my acquaintance are:
Made me abhorred by them thou have,
And in close prison locked me fast.
Part II.

The afflicted state wherein I lie:
And with outstretched hands, I pray,
And call on thee, Lord, day by day.

Thy miracles of mercy spread?
Or shall dead men rise up, and raise
Their voice on earth to sound thy praise?

Just honors from the silent grave?
Or, who thy faithfulness shall tell
To those, that in destruction dwell?

In the dark regions of the night?
And who thy goodness shall declare
Where all things else forgotten are?

And still resolve, with bended knee,
My morning prayers, whiles I present,
All other suitours to prevent.

Reject my soul, and slight my pain?
Why, when I so implore thy grace,
Hid'st thou from me thy smiling face?

Have ever ready been to die:
And whiles I Am scared by them, I find,
Thy terrors e'n distract my mind.

That o'r my drowning head it flows:
Thy terrors so affrighting be,
They even make an end of me.

On every side close siege do lay:
As drowning waves together met,
The sinking vessel overset.

Far off, mean while, thou have removed:
And those to whom I best was known,
Concealed in darkness, me disown.
Psalm LXXXIX.

My mouth shall never cease:
And to all Ages I Will record
Thy tried faithfulness:

Unto all Ages sure:
Thy faithfulness thou fixed have,
With the heavens to endure.

(said' st thou) a Covenant made:
To David too, my oath I gave,
Confirming all I said.

To wear their Fathers crown:
And t'all succeeding times, I will
Raise thee a lasting Throne.

Of wonders wrought by thee:
And praised, where thy Saints do meet,
Thy faithfulness shall be.

May with the Lord compare?
Or who, of all the mightie's race,
To him resemblance bear?

Of God, should all possess:
And all that round about him are,
Deep reverence should express.

For strength, thy equal found?
Or in what God, alike to thee,
Does fairhfulness abound?

Is governed by thy will:
The waves thereof thou do assuage,
And all their fury still.
Egyptians were
And fell among the dead:
Before thy mighty Arm, for fear
Thy foes dispersed, fled.
Part II.

So is the Earth thine own:
The world, and all that is therein,
Thy hand did found alone.

Thou both of them, did frame:
Tabor, and Hermon too, shall boast
Of thy most glorious Name.

Thy hand in strength exceeds:
Yea, thy right hand all hands excells,
For doing mighty deeds

Have fixed their dwelling place:
Mercy and truth, are ever known
To go before thy face

Thy silver Trumps alarms:
For whiles they march at thy command,
Their hearts thy favor warms.

They triumph mightily:
And in thy righteousness, shall they
Be lifted up on high.
For in thy help, their forces place
Their hopes to purchase praise;
And we, assured of thy grace,
Our horn aloft will raise.

All our protection lies;
And Israel's most holy one
Our royal Sovereign is.
Part III.

In visions of the night:
Sufficient help I Have laid upon
A Savior full of might.

Have to my work appointed;
With oil out of my Sanctuary
I David have anointed.

Establish him with might:
And my strong Arm shall him supply,
With help to keep his right.

With power shall him oppress:
Nor shall he be afflicted by
The Sons of wickedness.

My power shall subdue:
And all his spiteful enemies,
My vengeance shall pursue.

Shall guard him all his days:
And his victorious horn on high
My glorious name shall raise.

Into the Sea shall stretch:
And the success of his right hand
O'r greatest rivers reach.

A God thou art to me:
And for my safety I will fly
Unto no rock, but thee.

That he is my firstborn termed:

By Covenant confirmed.

To wear their Father's Crown:
And as the days of heaven, I will
Fix him a lasting Throne.
Part IV.
David's line,
My righteous Law forsake:
If they my Judgment shall decline
For rules of life to take.
If by the will courses they pursue
My Statutes be profaned;
And if they shall neglect to do
The things that I command:

My rod's severity:
And visit them with stripes severe,
For their iniquity.

I did to him entail:
Nor like them, will I fickle prove,
Or cause my faith to fail.

On any terms to break:
Nor shall that ever be repealed,
Which once my lips did speak.
David, by my holiness,
Once firmly sworn was I:
My oath was in these terms express;
To David I Will not lie.

For evermore remain:
Yea, till the Sun shall cease to shine,
His Throne will I maintain.

It shall not be suppressed:
Whiles she in heaven keeps her place,
This truth she shall attest.
Part V.

Thine own anointed King:
And in displeasure, have him cast
Off, as a loathsome thing.

By which thy servant reigned:
And, throwing it upon the ground,
Thou have his crown profaned.

That did his State assure:
His Castles thou have overthrown
That did his Realm secure.

But spoils him as he goes:
And every one that dwells nigh,
On him reproaches throws.

Thou have advanced high:
And given great triumphs to all those
That hate him mortally.

Is blunted quite by thee:
And in the day of battle, Lord,
Thou suff'redst him to flee.
His glory that so brightly shone,
Is now by thee defaced:
And levelled his royal Throne
Unto the ground thou have.

Old Age upon him came:
And thou extinguished have his praise,
And covered him with shame.
Part VI.

Shall thy wrath never expire?
Shall it burn on, till fuel fail,
Like a consuming fire?

Of life must have an end:
Why have thou formed every man
His days in vain to spend?

From death exemption have?
Can he preserve his life, one day,
From the devouring grave?

Lord, is it now withdrawn?
Which, unto David thou did swear,
And laid'st thy truth to pawn.

Reproached thy servants are:
How the great men's reproaches, I
Within my bosom bear.

Cast on us by thy foes:
Whereby they blast the ways, wherein
Thine own anointed goes.

All blessing given be:
From henceforth to Eternity;
Amen, Amen, say we.
Psalm XC.
[To the Tune of Psalm 113.] Ye children, etc.

Has been to us, Lord, as a place,
That yields a safe and sure abode:

Or made this habitable Earth;
Thou wa'st, as still thou will be, God.

Return to dust, must haste away,

For all that time before thy sight,
Like a three hour's short watch by night,
Or yesterday, when past, appears.

To death insensibly we slide.
Our change in that of Grass is shown,

We slourish: but ever night decay,
Wither, and are, like it, cut down.

Whence troubles sore upon us light,


And all our years do quickly end,
And vanish like a tale that is told.
Part II.

Fourscore, perhaps, live strongest men:
And yet is such men's firmest strength
Naught else, indeed, but grief, and pain.
And cannot long it self sustain:
For Age alone will kill at length.

It is, as none can fear too much.

That they may be to wisdom bent;

And turn to them without delays.

And make us joyful till we die,

Unto the days wherein thou have
Afflicted us in Ages past,
And the evils felt in former years.

And let their feed thy glory know:
Let the Lord's beauty on us shine;

Lord, stablish thou: and stable make
What ever we virtuously design.
Psalm XCI.

Of the highest does reside;
Protected by the Almightie's grace,
In safety shall abide.

I, of the Lord, will say:
My God, to whom I will resort,
My faith on him to stay.

Shall surely shelterthee:
And from the noisome Pestilence
Thou shall preserved be.

Safe shall thou lie, and warm:
His truth shall like a buckler, shield
Thy breast from mortal harm.
The dreadful terrors of the night
Shall not thy heart dismay:
Nor shall the arrow thee affright
Which flies in open day.

Whose walk in darkness lies:
Nor that sad evil shall thou fear,
Which at high Noon destroys.

And dead at thy right hand
Ten thousand lie: the infection shall
From theeat distance stand.

To view the slaughter made:
And wicked men's reward to see,
By heavens just Judgment paid.
Part II.

Thy habitation made:
(The Lord my sort, to which I fly,
When dangers me invade:)

Lest in an evil case:
Nor shall one plague, to seize on thee,
Approach thy dwelling place.

Shall thee to them commend:
And in all ways of thine, with care,
Their charge they shall attend.

To bear thee up on high:
Lest any stone should hurt thy foot,
That in thy walk does lie.

Shall boldly tread upon:
The Dragon, and the Lion young
Thy foot shall trample down.

Deliver him will I:
And since he knows my holy Name,
I will advance him high.

And never him forsake:
I Will save, when trouble him befalls,
And his name glorious make.

Shall fully answered be:
And my salvation, while he stays,
He shall with pleasure see.
Psalm XCII.

The Lord's deserts proclaim:
And with our voice, O God most high,
Sing praises to thy Name.
That we thy kindness should expraess
As soon as morning's light:
And celebrate thy faithfulness,
At the approach of night.

We should our voices raise:
And on the harp, and psaltry vent
God's meditated praise.

Much gladness I conceive:
And the great acts thy hands have done,
To me great triumphs give.

Deep do thy counsels lie:

Fools cannot them epsy.

When like the grass they spring,
And evil doers, when most green
They grow, and flourishing;
By means of that prosperity
For ever are undone:

On thine Eternal throne.

For lo, thy foes shall die:
And all those men shall scattered be
That work iniquity.
Part II.

My horn advance shall I:
And with fresh oil my lg shall be
Anointed plenteously.

Delight my pleased eyes:
Whiles wicked adversaries fall,
Who up against me rise.

The just, oppressed, shall flourish:
And with the Cedars strive for height,
Which Lebanon does nourish.

Where God the Lord does dwell:
Still watered with the dews of grace.
Shall thrive and prosper well.

In age much fruit shall bring:
And in the winter of their days
Grow fat and flourishing.

For righteous men takes care:
And that the rock of my defense
Is from injustice clear.
Psalm XCIII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.

And decks himself with Majesty:
The Lord does gird himself with might,
In battle to maintain his right.
Whereby the world does stand secure
And does unmoveably endure.

Who never did begin to be.

Their swelling waves assault the shore:

The mighty waves do roar in vain.

Our faith against all storms secure:
And in thy house, Lord, holiness
Is ever, the most comely dress.
Psalm XCIV.

justly requited are:
O God, to whom revenge belongs,
In majesty appear.

To do thy people right:
And their insulting Enemies,
As they deserve, requite.

Exalt themselves in pride?
How long shall wicked men be seen
In triumph thus to ride?

Hard things, too hard to bear?
And all that work Iniquity,
Their lgs with triumph rear?

Thy portion they oppress:

And slay the fatherless.

The Lord sees not they cry:
Neither shall Jacob's God on us
Cast a regarding Eye.

From reason take advice:
Ye foolishest of people, when,
O when, will ye be wise?

Who planted the hearing Ear?
And, if he gave us Eyes to see,
Must not his sight be clear?

Can he not still do so?
Is want of knowledge his defect,
Who teaches man to know?

Man's secret thoughts descries:
And knows them to be vain and slight,
When they conceit them wise.
Part II.

O Lord, does keep in aw:
And causes him to understand
His duty from thy Law.

His soul a calm may have:
Whiles Justice, for his heinous crimes,
Does dig the wicked's grave.

His chosen people quite:
The inheritance he will protect,
Which is his own by right.

Shall yet return again:
And all that upright hearts possess,
Shall follow in its train.

Ill doers me opptess?
Or stand with me against the men
That work unrighteousness?

Himself, my soul to save:
Ere this time long, it had gone down
Into the silent grave.
Part III.

My self for lost did yield:
When, Lord, thy mercies timely aid
My falling soul upheld.

Often up and down do roll:
But then, thy comforts still I find,
Delight my troubled soul.

Claim fellowship with thee:
Yea, though it mount the Throne, and there
Mischievous Laws decree?

With murtherous intent:
Judicially to shed the blood
Of persons innocent.

My sure protection lies:
And God, that takes me for his own,
My rock of refuge is.

Injustice will repay:
Yea, by our God, even in their sins,
They shall be snatched away.
Psalm XCV.
[To the Tune of Psalm 25.] I lift my, etc.

Advance our singing voice:
To our salvations rock (the Lord)
Let Us make a joyful noise.

Before him let us go:
And in rejoicing Psalms express
How much to him we owe.

A God most mighty is:
Yea, King of Gods: For God there is none,
Whose greatness equals his.

In the earth, are in his hand:
And all the strength of mountains steep,
He has at his command.

The Sea, for he it made:
The dry Land too, 's at his dispose,
Who its foundations laid.

With bodies bended low:
And kneel before the Lord, to whom
Our very selves we owe.
For he is our God, and we
Fed by his bounty are:
His sheep are we, our shepherd's he,
Who takes of us the care.
He calls to us, To day,
Whiles yet it is at your choice;
With hardened hearts let none delay
To hearken to my voice.

(For fear of like success,)
Of those provoking tempting times,
Within the Wilderness.

Then tried what I could bear:
And where they did my wonders see;
They proved my patience there.

They forced me to say,
Alas! in heart this people errs;
They have not known my way.

And all my kindness ceast:
And I excluded them by oath
Out of my promised rest.
Psalm XCVI.

In a new song declare:
And let the spacious Earth accord
With us its part to bear.

And bless his holy Name:
His saving grace, from day to day,
Let our joint-song proclaim.

His excellent renown:
And from us let all people know,
What wonders he has done.

And such his praise should be:
With holy fear to be adored
Above all Gods, is he.

Are only such in Name:
But it is the Lord, that is God alone,
For he the heaven did frame.

Before his glorious face:
Beauty, and sStrength, united are
Within his holy place.
Part II.

Give God the honor due:
Unto the Lord, let them ascribe
Both strength and glory too.

Unto his Name belongs:
With presents come into his sight,
Amidst religious throngs.

With reverence appear:
Yea, let the whole earth before his face,
Adore, with awful fear.

The Lord does reign above:
It Is he, that does the world uphold,
That nothing it remove.
The people he shall judge with right,

Let Seas their roaring waves unite,
To make a joyful noise.

A sense of gladness show:
And all the trees shall do no less;
Which in the woods do grow.

The Lord at's coming meet:
For he is at hand, the earth to call
Before his judgment seat.
On the whole world, he is prepared
His righteousness to show:
And by his Law of truth declared,
Shall all men's trials go.
Psalm XCVII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 113.] Ye children, etc.

Let all thy Islands entertain
The welcome news with joyfulness:

Upon a throne that is firmly founded
On Judgment, and on righteousness.

To burn his enemies, does pass;
Which does devour them every where:

Which did the gazing World affright;
The earth it saw, and shook for fear.

Did melt, where ever his presence came:
For Lord of all the earth is he.

Whiles they his righteousness declare,
And make all men his glory fee,
Confusion Idol-servers seize,
That boast of graven Images;
And by all Gods be our's adored:
Zion joyful made,
And rend'red Judah's Daughters glad,
When they beheld thy Judgments, Lord.

Above all earthly Majesty,
Yea, do all Gods excel by far:

Of every one that fears the Lord,
By whom Saints souls protected are.
From wicked hands he will, set them free.

Which upright hearts shall reap with joys:

His holiness in mind record,
And thank him with a cheerful voice.
Psalm XCVIII.
[To the Tune of Ps. 100.] All people, etc.

For he has acted wond'rously:
His holy Arm, and right hand strong,
Have gotten him the victory.

Wherein his saving power is known:
His Justice in the heathens sight
He has displayed with great renown.
Israel
He has at last recalled to mind:
To all that in the earth do dwell
Has our great God's salvation shined.

Unto the Lord their voices raise:
Let loudest shouts express their joys,
And well-tuned songs advance his praise.

Tune all your voices Psalms to sing:

Rejoice before the Lord the King.

And breaking, make one roaring noise:
Let all that in the world do dwell,
Join throats and raise one shouting voice.

And with clapped hands together found:
Let ecch'ing hills each other greet,
And those joynt-joys at once rebound

The earth with righteousness to try:
And judge the people every where,
Throughout the world, with equity.
Psalm XCIX.

Let heathen Nations quake:
He sits between the Cherubins;
Let the earth's foundations shake.
Zion does appear,
Clothed with great Majesty:
Advanced above all people, there,
His Throne is set on high.

In songs of praise express:
For full of terror is thy Name,
And great in holiness.

Thou settlest equity:
Thou set'st all things in Jacob right,
By judging righteously.

And with devotion due
Approach the footstool of his throne,
For that is holy too.
Thus Moses did, and Aaron, when
Among his Priests they came:
And Samuel, in the crowd of men
That called upon his Name.
Upon the Lord, with reverence,
They did devoutly call:
He heard them from his seat, and thence
He gave them answers all.

From whence to them he spoke:
The Testimonies and the Laws
He gave, they never brake.

In pardons oftentimes:
Even when thou had advanced thy rod,
To scourge us for our crimes.

By all exalted be:
And on his holy hill adored:
For greatly holy's he.
Psalm C.
[To the Tune of Psalm 148.] Give laud, etc.

Let Us vent our holy mirth:
With joy be he adored,
By all that dwell on earth.

Come, let us express
Our thankfulness
With all our might.

Who us of nothing made:
He did the work alone,
And had from us no aid.
His flock we are,
His pasture sheep:
Whom he does keep
And feed with care.

When into's gates we go:
And when his Courts we crowd,
Pay him the praise we owe.
Our thankfulness
Let Us there proclaim;
And his great Name
For ever bless.

His goodness ever taste:
And when time fails to be,
His mercy still shall last.
His verity
Our faith secures:
For it endures
Eternally.
Psalm CI.

United, Lord, shall be:
And, (since they both to thee belong,)
I Will sing of both to thee.
I Will wisely walk by rules severe,
(Such as thou likest best:)
And guide my house with heart sincere:
When will thou be my guest!

Nor join with them that do:
Their works, who virtues paths decline,
With hatred I Will eschew.

Him will I quite discard:
No wicked man will I befriend,
Or, in the least, regard.

Shall have no dwelling here:
And him, whose heart and looks are high,
Nigh me, I will not bear.

My favor shall enjoy:
And, but strict livers, I will none
In my affairs employ.

That practices deceit:
And him that uses lies to tell,
I Will banish from my sight.

The land throughout I Will rid:
And in God's City none shall dare
Hereafter to abide.
Psalm CII.
[To the Tune of P. 51.] O Lord consider, etc. Or the Lamentation. O Lord in
thee, etc.

Into thy presence speedily:

When times of trouble seize on me.
But when I call, do thou attend,
And a kind answer quickly send.

To clouds of smoke, dissolved to air.
And as the fire burns furnace-stones;
So does continual grief my bones.

And I forget to eat my bread.

So that my bones cleave to my skin;

That in the howling deserts cry.

So spends his nights as I have done;

Upon me foul reproaches cast:
And they that are quite mad with rage,
Against my life by oath engage.

I tasted ashes more than bread:
And if I drank, my tears filled up
The emptied space within my cup.

And kindled wrath thou did me treat.
For when thou had advanced me, thou
With the same hand did lay me low.

And I, like withered grass do fade.
Part II.

From all decay, or change shall be:
And thy great works in memory
Shall live through all Posterity.

To Zion laid in ruins low:
For the utmost time thy self did set
To favor her, is now complete.

Even of her hopeful stones, delight:
And look on with compassion just,
Each smallest handful of her dust.

Make heathen Nations dread thy name:
And all crowned heads on earth, comply
With thy most glorious Majesty.
Zions walls the Lord shall rear;
And in his glory shall appear;
He shall regard the poor forlorn,
And not reject their prayers with scorn.

Recorded to posterity:
That so the Lord's deserved praise
The children, yet unborn, may raise.

He cast his favorable eye:
From heaven, where his Throne is set,
He viewed the earth beneath his feet.

To hear his lamentable moans:
And set poor slaves at liberty,
By cruel masters doomed to die.

In Zion's gates, the Lord's great Name:
And in Jerusalem declare
How worthy praise his actions are.

In acts of solemn worship meet:
And Kingdoms come, with joint accord,
To do their homage to the Lord.
Part III.

And did contract my Ages lengch:

O take me not, said I, away:
Thy years, dear God, when mine are past,
Throughout all generations last.
Thou, when old time had first its birth,
Laid'st the foundations of this earth.
And the vast heavens did spread aloft,
Which thine Almighty hands had wrought:

Whereas no time can thee decay:
Yea, they shall all become at last
Like garments quite by Age defae'd.
And as a vesture changed by thee,
Shall at thy pleasure modeled be.

Enjoy'st an Age without an end:

Establish still before thy face.
Psalm CIII.
[To the Tune of 113.] Ye children, etc.

And all the powers that are in me,
Excite to bless his name will I:

And with a grateful care, record
His bounties in thy memory.

And heals whate'r disease thee grieves:

Whose kindness so to thee abounds,
That on all sides it thee surrounds;
And grace thy head encompasseth.

With plenteous goodness; and thy youth
Like the Eagles, is renewed again.

And executes judgment true,
When men oppressed of wrong complain.
Moses know
His ways, and did great wonders show
Before the seed of Israel.

His anger is but slow of pace:
And in him does rich mercy dwell.

Nor does his kindled wrath abide
For ever burning in his heart:

He never yet unto us gave:
Nor paid us after our desert.

As vastly large his mercies are,
As is the space 'twixt earth and skies.

Has from us at like distance set,
As from the west, the east quarter lies.
Part II.

By nature, to their Children dear:
The Lord, to all that fear him, shows.

Best understand the frame of man:
And that we are but dust, he knows.

Resemblance bear to fading grass,
Which does with fragrant flower grow:

does sharply blow, is quickly gone:
Nor does its place, it longer know.

Not subject to the least decays,
With them that him devoutly fear.
His righteousness that never ends,
To childrens children he extends,
Who from their loins descended are.

If they observe his Covenant,
And mind his precepts to obey:

Has fixed his throne on the heavens high,
And o'r all Kingdoms bears sway.

And do excel in power and might,
Join all your throats the Lord to bless:
Ye, who before his presence stand,
Ready prepared at the command,
TO obey his word with cheerfulness:

His mighty hosts, and servants all,
Who do his will with joynt-accord:

Where ever his vast Dominion lies,
And (Soul) with them, bless thou the Lord.
The same Psalm,
[To the Tune of Ps. 148.] Give laud, etc.

God's praises to proclaim:
Let all thy powers combine
To bless his holy Name.

And bear in mind,
How wondrous kind
Thou have him found.

And heals what ever thee ails,
Whose mercy thee relieves,
When death thy life assayls.

Whiles every where
With kindness dear
He thee surrounds.

Into thy craving mouth:
And Eagle like, renews
The vigor of thy youth.

Does judge for all
That on him call,
When crushed by might.
Moses face to face
His ways he did reveal:
And mighty acts of grace
He showed to Israel.

Of mercy has:
And slow to wrath
Is evermore.

Nor still keeps anger keen:

As our deserts have been.
Nor any time
Did he requite
Us, as he might,
For any crime.

How great his mercies are:
All those of humane kind
They do excel by far.
As far indeed,
As does the height
Of heaven bright
The earth exceed.

By his abundant grace
Removed from us do see,
At the most distant space:
As heavens side
Toward the East,
Is from the West
Removed wide.
Part II.

Toward their children bear,
Those constantly do find
From God, who do him fear.
For, surely, he
Well know's our mould,
And mind's, untold,
That dust we be.

Are man's uncertain days:
Which when sharp winds do pass
Upon it, soon decays.

And to the place
Where once it was,
No more is known.

To those that fear him sure:
And as they ever were,
For ever they endure.
His righteousness
To their next seed,
And those they breed,
He does express.

His Covenant fulfill;
And mindful hearts apply
To do his holy will.

In heaven stands,
Whence his commands
All Kingdoms own.

Who do excel in might:
Who to his holy word
Still hearken with delight:
And ready stand
Always to do
What he to you
Gives in command.

Who serve him faithfully:
Throughout all lands and coasts,
Where his Dominions lie,
Let all him bless;
And with them join,
Thou soul of mine,
His praise to express.
Psalm CIV.
[To the Tune of the Old 100 Ps.] All people, etc.

My God, thou art exceeding great:
Thou cloath'st thy self with Majesty,
Such as beseems thy royal seat.

Thou art encompast round about:
And the vast roof of heaven bright
Thou like a curtain stretched'st out.

On waters hanging in the Air:
The clouds he has his Chariot made,
Whose wheels the winged winds do bear.

His servants fiery flame surround:

By him to its fixed center bound.

As in a garment, lay the land:
Above the tops of mountains steep,
Did the surrounding waters stand:

They sled, and durst not disobey:
Thy rattling thunder's frightfull noise
Made them in haste to post away.

And furrowed vales descending low,
A way for the ebbing waters made,
Into the place thou sent'st them to.

Such as they never must exceed:
Nor, may they ever pass those mounds,
The earth again to overspread.
Part II.

Which run with noise among the hills:

And untamed Asses drink their fills.

Does build her artificial Nest:
There, with their well tuned throats they sing,
And on the shady branches rest.

He from his chambers moistness drops:
Thy works effects the whole earth supply,
Whereof all parts reap proper crops.

And wholesome herbs which man does need:
Earths Issue, thus, he thought it good,
Out of their Mother earth to feed.

Which from sad hearts does banish grief:
And oil, to make his face to shine,
With bread, the staff of humane life.

(Quite un-manur'd by humane care,)
The Cedars in dry Lebanon,
Yet full of vital moisture are.

Within those lofty Cedars makes:
And in the streight-limbed Fir-trees boughs,
The grateful Stork her lodging takes.

Whose craggy tops their Castles are:
And hollow rocks the Coneys use,
And fortify their dwelling there.
Part III.

Does her appointed seasons own:
And when the Sun has run his race,
He knows his time of going down.

And then, do all the beasts of prey
Under the covert of the night,
Forsake the dens they kept by day.
Young Lions, then, range here and there,
And boldly hunt their food abroad:
But when they find no prey to tear,
They roar, and call for meat to God.

And darkness flies his rising light:
They all together haste away,
And lurk in dens as dark as night.

And busily abroad employed,
Till evening shades on earth are spread;
Pursues his labors un annoyed.

Thy works? for with admired skill,
Thou have performed them all, O Lord;
And with thy wealth the whole earth do fill.

Is stored with creatures great and small:
Which in such multitudes there creep,
No number can comprise them all.

And swiftly pass from port to port:
And there is Leviathan, whom thou
Have made, therein himself to sport.
Part IV.

Wait all on thee for timely food:
Thy gifts they gather; and thy hand
Supplies them all with what is good.

In trouble, pined with want, they mourn:
Thou take away their breath, they die,
And to their mother-dust return.

Which, soon creates another race:
Renewed they are, by thee, O God,
And the earth puts on another face.

And in his works rejoices much:

And fires the mountains with a touch.

The Lord's praise shall be sung by me:
And when I cease from that employ,
At the same time i will cease to be.

Are those, which on my God I spend:
And in that service, to my grave,
Great cheerfulness shall me attend.

Let them no more the earth's burden be:
But soul, praise thou the Lord, and call
On all good men to join with thee.
To Father, Son, and Spirit, (one
Eternal God, in Persons three;)
As 'twas before the world begun,
Now, and for ever glory be.
Psalm CV.

To call upon his name:
Among the people, let us declare
His deeds of glorious fame.

In Songs, and Psalms of praise:
And all the miracles express
He did in ancient days.

Proclaim with boasting voice:
And let their hearts, who ever they are,
That seek the Lord, rejoice.

Before his Ark of might:
And with devotion evermore
Appear before his sight.

The wonders he has done:
The judgments which his mouth declared
Devoutly think upon.
Abraham, that was
His servant, and his friend:
And you his chosen Jacob's race,
That from his loins descend.
He is the Lord, whose judgments sound
Through all the earth abroad:
Who has, by solemn Cornant, bound
Himself to be our God.

Through all the ages past:
Which in full force, by his command,
A thousand more, must last.
Part II.
Abraham,
He first of all, did make:
Next, to Isaac to perform the same,
A solemn oath did take.
Jacob too, that gracious grant
He did by law assure:
And to Israel by his Covenant
For ever did secure.
Canaans Land (therein said he)
To thee I do assign:
To theedivided shall it be,
By the surveigher's Line.

Few, very few, they were:
Nor could one foot of it command,
For they were strangers there.

As Pilgrims, visited:
And took one Kingdom in their way,
As to the next it led.
He suffered them no wrong to take,
Where ever they did reside:
And even Kings, for their dear sake,
He did not spare to chide.

Touch not to do them wrong:
Nor any Prophet injure ye,
That does to me belong.

He for a famine called:
And bread (life's staff,) by his command,
Throughout it wholly failed.
Part III.
Egypt, whence they bought their food,
Before them Joseph went:
Whom for a slave they sold, but God
Him on his errand sent.

The Egyptians did detain:
And did his tender ankles wound
With a strait Iron chain:

By the issue true appeared:
By God's word long he had been tried,
But at the last was cleared.

Then sent, to set him free:

Both Realm, and Family.
With full commission, at his will,
His Princes to chastise:
And teach his Senators the skill
In Council to advise.
Canaan, Israel,
At last, to Egypt came:
And Jacob for a whiledid dwell
Within the tents of Ham.
Part IV.
Egypt, God his servants seed
Wond'rously multiplied:
So that in strength they did exceed
Those that their growth envied.

To hate them inwardly;
And to contrive, on that pretense,
To waste them craftily.
Moses sent,
And Aaron whom he chose:
And they from him to Pharaoh went,
His message to propose.

They showed, when there they came:
And wondrous miracles they did,
Within the Land of Ham.

They never did rebel:
He darkness sent upon the Land,
And darknese on it fell.

The fish that there did breed:

No place from them was freed.

Into all Egypt came:

Hail mixed with sulfurous flame.

It vines, and Fig Trees brake:

Marched, at the word he spoke.

Their teeth, no herb did spare:
And through the Land, where they did light,
They peeled the Country bare,
Egypt bred,
Fell by the Angels hand:
Their lustiest youths were smitten dead,
The strength of all the Land.
Part V.

God thence his people.sent;
Not one in all their Tribes, was sick,
Nor any impotent.
Egypt was, when rid of those
Whose stay had cost them dear:
To hire them to be gone, they chose,
Of whom they lived in fear.

When the hot Sun shone bright:
And with a fiery pillar led
Them in their march by night.

Of quails the people fed:
And, whiles they had a mind to eat,
From heaven sent them bread.

The waters gushed out:
And in that dry and thirsty place,
Like rivers ran about.

To's servant Abr'am, thought:
Egypt, very glad
His chosen people brought.

The heathens fruitful soil:
And made them the unexpected heirs,
To all their sweat, and toil

And statutes all their days:
Wherefore, as he gives you the cause,
Give ye the Lord his praise.
Psalm CVI.

For very good is he:
His mercy too, from all decays,
Remains for ever free.

The Lord's most mighty deeds?
Began any praise not-make him lefs,
Whose worth all praise exceeds?

Observe, and never stray:
Whose footsteps at no time decline
The just and righteous way.

O Lord, remember me:
And let me, through thy saving grace,
Be visited by thee.

Let me with gladnese see:
And with the triumphs they express,
Let mine united be.

And done Iniquity:
And we, their followers in sin,
Have acted wickedly.
Egypts Land,
And many mercies there,
Because they did not understand,
By them forgotten were.
But at the Sea, (where in their need
They had his help bespoke,)
At the red Sea, they murmured
And did his wrath provoke.

Concerned for his own name:
A great deliverance he gave,
To raise his power's same.

Which did before him fly:
And through the depths he did them guide,
As through the desert dry:

Whose hatred was extreme:
And from the power of their foes
Their lives he did redeem.

Not one was left alive:

And praise to him did give.
Part II

They suddenly forgot:
And for his counsel, (in their haste,)
They did resuse to wait.

They lusted greedily:
And tempted God, with rude address
Their longings to supply

Whereto they had a mind:
But whiles they, fed their craving Just,
They surfeited, and pined.
Moses in their breast,
And in then camp rebelled:
And against Aaron the holy Priest
Of God, their envy swelled.

And Dathan swsllowed:
And covered the rebellious band
His mate Abiram led.

Among the factious crew:
And as they sacrified, the flame
The usurping Levites slew.
Horeb of collected Gold,
An Idol God they made:
And to a calf cast in a mould,
Religious worship paid.

God, who their glory was,
They changed, to the similitude
Of the Ox that eats grass

Who had their Savior been:
Although they had the wonders great,
He wrought in Egypt, seen.

Of Ham were newly shown:
But tbose amazing things, his hand
At the red sea had done.

He would destroy them quite:
And had, if Moses had not stayed
His hand, advanced to smite.
'Twas he, that stood in the open breach,
God's anger to allay:
And prevalently did beseech
His wrath to turn away.
Part III.

And trusted not his word:

To hearken to the Lord.

By oath he did profess,
He would destroy them utterly
In that wide Wilderness.

To nmke their feed to fall:
Till through all regions, far, and near,
He had dispersed them all.
Baal-Peor's shame, likewise,
They shamelesly complied:
And feasted on the sacrifice
Of dead men deify'd.

His wrath they did provoke:
Till in, upon them all at once,
The plague with fury broke,
Pbinehas Justice do,
With righteous Zeal possessed:
He the impudent offenders slew,
And then the infection ceast.

Was counted righteousness:
And by all Ages he decreed
It should be thought no less.

They did him angry make:
So that even Moses checked by God,
Ill fared for their sake.

His constant temper was:)
He unadvisedly did speak
In that provoking case.

Which God forbad to do:

And learned their manners too.

Great mischiess them surprised:
And made their Sons and Daughters die,
To Devils saerific'd.

To Canaans Idols vain:
Which blood of Innocents, so shed,
The very Land did stain.
Part IV.

Much guilt they did contract:
And with the Idols, which they made,
Did filthy whoredoms act.

Did with fierce wrath engage:
So that he grievously abhorred
His chosen heritage:

Into the heathens hand:
Their mortal foes they did obey,
Who had them at command.

Yet they were forced to bear;
And could themselves no way redress,
For slaves to them they were:

They took, and vexed him often:
Till, for their great iniquities,
They very low were brought.

Unto him, and he heard:
And with an heart compassonate,
Their sorrows did regard.

He did recall to mind:
His love, and mercies manifold,
To pity him inclined.

Himself; but all their foes
Under whose bondage they did groan,
To pity did dispose.

Once more, do thou us bring:
To thank thy Name, and make our boasts
Of thee, whoise praise we sing.
Israel owned,
Be blessed eternally:
Amen, let aithe people sound;
Praise ye the Lord most high.
Psalm CVII
[To the Tune of the old 100 P salm] All people, etc.

And ever merciful is he:

Thus, we have found him still to be.

of enemies who them oppressed:
And gathered from the heathen Lands,
From North to South, from East to West.

Wandered within the desert wide:
In paths untrod, and found no Town,
Or City, where they might abide.

And parcnt with thirst their throats were dry:
No sustenance they there could find,
But ready were to faint and die.

Their. doleful case they did express:
And he did hear them readily,
And save them out of ail distress

He did conduct them, as their guide:
That there they roight no longer stray,
But find a City where to abide.

His praise, when men his goodness find;
And see the wondrous works he does,
When to starved travelers he is kind!

Their hungry appetites with food:
And bountifully satisfies
The longing soul with what is good.
Part II.

In the dark shades of death reside:

And the high God's counsels did deride.

He humbled their rebellious hearts:
Till plunged in helpless miseries,
In vain all helpers took their parts.

Their woeful case they did express:
And he did hear them readily,
And save them out of all distress.

And shade of death they labored under,
To them desired freedom gave,
And brake their iron bands in sunder.

His praise, when men have found him kind;
And seen the wonders that he does,
For those whom cruel fetters bind.

Wide open fly, at his command:
And the strong bars of iron grates
Are cut in sunder by his hand.
Part III.

Transgressing sore, provoke their God:
When, in sore sickness, for their crimes,
He lays on them his smarting rod.

Even those, that liked them most before:
And drawing near death's dismal gates,
Despair of living any more.

With sorrow for their past excesses:
He does his ready help apply,
To save them out of their distresses.

When Drugs and Doctors cannot save:
That past their hopes, they are restored,
And rescued from the gaping grave.

And ever keep in grateful mind,
The wondrous works he does to raise
The weak and sick, of humane kind.

As do their gratitude express:
Psalms, to his honor let them sing,
And spread his works with joyfulness.
Part IV

Of the vast Sea, in ships descend;
And both their persons, and their goods,
To the great waters trust commend;

See the Lord's works displayed there:
For often in the deepest Seas,
His greatest wonders acted are.

With a tempestuous fury raves:
And from the bottom which they hid,
Into vast mountains swells the waves.

Until they seem to touch the sky:
But visit soon those vaults again,
Where the wide-yawning deep does lie.

On the uncertain billows tossed:
As drunkards stagger to and fro;
And all the Pilots skill is lost.

Their hopeless state they recommend:
And he his ready help applies,
Which does their sad distresses end.

And calmeth the disturbed Seas:
So that their waves by him suppressed,
Do their tumultuous swellings cease.

With joyful hearts they shout, and sing:
And have a prosperous gale at last,
Them to their wished Port to bring.

Where ever men his goodness find:
And be his wondrous works renowned,
Wherein he is to Sea men kind.

Amidst the congregations great:
And let them celebrate his praise,
Where the assembled Elders meet.
Part V.

He turns into a wilderness:

For the possessours wickedness.

Into the dry and desert field:

That they may there a City build.

Their wealth by industry' sincreast:

And fruitful Cattle they are blessed.

And into low condition thrown,
By cruel Tyrants force oppressed;
And under grievous troubles groan.

Whose might the poor does over-bear:
And makes them wander to, and fro,
In Deserts where no paths appear.

Out of his troubles sore and deep:
And spreads his large posterity,
In families, like flocks of sheep.

These various turns of providence:
And wicked mouths shall stopped be,
As destitute of all pretense.

To heed these things addicts his mind?
For every such assuredly
Shall the Lord's loving kindness find.
Psalm CVIII.
[To the same Tune.]

With cheerful readiness, O God:
The glories of thy name to raise,
I Will with my glory sing aloud.

To praise the Lord, my Psaltery:
And, in the consort to partake,
(Right early too) awake will I.

The people to thy holy Name:
And to the Nations, with my song
Thy glorious praise I will proclaim.

Does thy large spreading mercy stretch:
Thy truth likewise of vast extent,
Unto the lofty Skies does reach.

And raised above the heavens high,
Show forth to all the World abroad,
The glories of thy Majesty.

To rescue me thy servant dear:
Unto my prayer an answer send,
And make thy saving strength appear.
Part II.

My joyful triumphs shall be great:
For Shechem I Will divide by line,
And Succoth's fruitful valley mete.
Gilead is mine, Manasseh mine,
Ephraim shall support my cause:
To royal Judah I Will assign
The power to give the Nations Laws.
Moab I Will make my washing pot;
I Will over Edom cast my shoe:
The coasts of the Philistines stout,
Shall yield me glorious triumphs too.

The City strongly fortified?
And into Edom's Country, who
My forces shall with safety guide?

Who did in anger us forsake?
And to conduct our hosts abroad,
Will thou refuse to undertake?

Let us thy saving health obtain:
For in sad times to give us aid,
We find all humane help is vain.

We valiant acts through him shall do:
For he shall all our Enemies
Under our conquering feet subdue.
Psalm CIX.

All praise I can express:
Whiles wicked mouths wide opened be,
O hold not thou thy peace.

Talk with large liberty:
Against me whiles they vent their spleen,
They use their Tongues to lie.

With words of bitter spite:
And though no cause in me they found,
They did against me fight.

Yet I for them did pray:

With hatred to repay.

To have him at command:
And at's right hand, to charge him, let
Accusing Satan stand.

Let him be cast therein:
And when he mercy begs, his prayer
Be turned into sin.

And short'ned be his life:
Do thou his children Orphans make,
And widowed be his wife.

And wandering beg their bread:
When in their desolate abode;
They can no more be fed.

Snatch all his goods away:
A Stranger be's his Executor,
And on his labors prey,

Let no man else be kind:
And let his Orphans in distress,
No where compassion find.
Part II.

Of all that from him came:
And in the third descent, at least,
Extinguished be his Name.

Be minded by the Lord:
And how his mother did transgress,
Still be it on record.

Let that record appear:
Till earth have lost the memory
That ever such persons were.

For needy men's relief:
But those to death he did pursue,
Whose hearts were cracked with grief.

Give thou him what he loved:
And blessing, which he did reject,
Be far from him removed.

Let on himself recoil:
Through him may they like water, pass,
And pierce his bones, like oil.

So let them him surround:
And as his girdle's straightly tied,
Let them on him be bound.

Done by my foes repay:
Those that employ malicious Tongues,
My life to take away.
Part III.

By thy great Name inclined:
And let my rescue come from thee,
Because thy mercy's kind.

With poverty oppressed:
My heart is Wounded grievously,
Within my pained breast.

When it draws near to night:
And locust-like, tossed up and down,
I know not where to light.

My knees are feeble grown:
So very low my flesh is brought,
That all its fat is gone.
Yet in this lamentable case,
Reproaches have I born:
My foes beheld my pined face,
And shak'd their heads with scorn.

My God deliver me:

'T was done by none but thee.

And when they rise to fight,
Whiles conquering joys thy Servant fill,
Put them to shameful flight.

Be my subdued foes:
And in confusion like a cloak,
Let them themselves enclose.

Shall sing triumphant songs:
Yea, give him ample praise will I,
Amongst rejoicing throngs.

The Lord himself stands by:
And by just Providence does clear
Whom men have doomed to die.
Psalm CX.
[To the Tune of the Old 100 Psalm.] All people, etc.

At my right hand take thou thy seat:
Till I thine Enemies shall make
A stool, whereon to set thy feet.
Zion hill,
The Lord shall put into thy hand:
Wherewith(though much against their will)
Amidst thy foes thou shall command.

Whereon thy royal head is crowned,
Shall willingly thy Laws obey:
In holiness such beauty's found!
Nor shall such converts then be few,
Born of thy words immortal seed:
But numberlest, like drops of dew,
Which early mornings womb does shed,

Which he irrevocably swore:
By the order of Melchisedeck,
I Will make thee Priest for evermore.

Who armed, for, thee appears to fight:
Through mighty Kings who thee withstand,
Stirred up by righteous wrath shall smite.
The heathen shall he judge, and spread
The bloody field with bodies slain:
And smite down those among the dead,
Who over many Countries reign.

That Is offered to him in his race:
Wherefore with dignity supreme
The Lord his raised head shall grace.
Psalm CXI.

I Will join, to do the same;
Where the upright meet, I Will bear my part,
To glorify his Name.

Are works of great renown:
To those that Jove to search them out,
They shall be clearly known.

Each work of his procures:
And in records of endless same
His righteousness endures.

Still to be kept in mind:
He Is full of great compassion,
And graciously kind.

He did in plenty grant;
Nor will he any time forget
His holy Covenant.

He made his people know;
That the heathen Nations heritage
He might on them bestow.

Are truth and judgment tried:
And all the; things that he commands,
Steadfast, and sure abide.

Do all men, always bind:
For uprightness, and verity
In their whole frame are joined;

Them his eternal Law:
Whence, for his holy Name they have
A reverential awe.

For it prescribes the ways,
Wherein, who walks, is truly wise;
And ever lasts his praise.
Psalm CXII.

Of him that stands in awe:
And feels true pleasure in his breast,
Whiles he observes his Law.
The uprighr man's succesfull seed
On Earth shall mighty grow:
To all that from his loins are bred,
All sorts of blessings flow.

And fill his house with store:
And in its fruits, his righteousness
Shall last for evermore.

Rejoicing light shall rise:
Who, merciful, compassionate,
And charitable is.

And ready is to lend:
Whiles yet he does his own affairs
With prudent care attend.

The righteous here attains:
And in eternal memory
When he is gone hence, remains.

Shall not make him afraid:
His heart is fixed against all fear,
For on the Lord it is staid.

No fright shall it surprise:
Till his desire performed he see
Against his Enemies.
His riches scattered to the poor
Shall yield him endless praise,
And the honor he does thence procure,
His Horn aloft shall raise.

To see the just prevail:
For very envy shall he pine,
Because his wishes fail.
Psalm CXIII
[To the Tune of Psalm 148.] Give laud, etc.

Your masters praise proclaim:
And all with one accord
Give praises to his Name,

This day let us bless,
And never cease
To do the same.

His praises should extend
To the remotest West,
Where he his race does end.

The Lord is high:
Beyond the Sky
His glory's seen.
Who to the the Lord our God
Is like, or ever was?
Aloft is his abode;

Himself, to spy
How all things go
In the earth below,
And heavens high.

The dunghill did embrace,
He from the dust does raise
With Princes him to place

Upon the throne
Among God's own
Dear people set.

He gives a fruitful wom!
And she that did despair,
A Mother does become.
With children stored:
And full of joys,
She tunes her voice,
To praise the Lord.
Psalm CXIV.
[To the Tune of Ps 113.] Ye children, etc.
Israel Egypt did forsake,
And Jacob's seed left those that spoke
A Language that did grate their Ear:
Judah sanctified,
And chose in Israel to reside;
To set up his Dominion there.

Turned it, two ways at once, to flight,
And Jordan did in haste retreat:

And little hills like little lambs:
Their fear was so exceeding great.

And, Jordan, what put thee to flight,
That in such haste thou did retreat?

And ye small hills like little lambs?
Of such great fear, the cause was great.

The Lord, that made thee, does appear;
And Jacob's, God his face does show:

And flints dissolved, into a spring,
Whenever he commands, do flow.
Psalm CXV.

We fight our heathen foes:
Thine, not our own praise, we design,
When we do them oppose.
Whiles then in war thou helpest us,
Thy truth and grace renown:

Whither's your God now flown?

In heaven his glorious throne:
And well we know, what us betides,
He, as he pleased, has done.

Of gold and silver wrought:

Behold, or utter ought.

Which hear not them that call:
And comely noses too they have,
But do not smell at all.

Their feet do never walk:
And through the hole bored for a throat,
They neither breath, nor talk.

That set them up for Gods:
'Twixt men that trust in such repose,
And them, there is little odds.
Israel, in the Lord,
Repose thy confidence:
To such as trust him he will afford
Both help, and sure defense.
Part II.
Aaron's seed;
He is their help and shield:
Trust in him all, that do him dread,
Like help to such he will yield.

And he will bless us still:
To Isr'el's house he will be kind,
And it with blessings fill.
To Aaron's house, that bless us all,
His blessings he will afford:

Of them that fear the Lord.

And your Posterity:

Who made the earth and sky.

Belong unto the Lord:
But earth, (the footstool of his throne,)
To man he does afford.

Praise not the Lord; but we
Henceforth for ever will him bless.
For ever praised be he.
Psalm CXVI.

And he shall have it all:
Because his goodness did him move
To hear when I did call.

And my request fulfill:
The longest day I have to live,
I Will call upon him still.

Did my faint heart enclose:
When hellish pains me seized, and when
My soul was full of woes:

And urged him by his Name:
Deliver, Lord, my soul, I said,
And soon deliverance came

Do equally abound:
Yea, from our God, in man's distress
Is store of mercy found

Will a Protector be:
I was in low condition, when
His mercy helped me.
Now, since (my soul) thy sorrow's past,
Return unto thy rest:
Since thus to thee, the Lord, at last,
His bounty has expressed.

My soul from death recall;
Dry up my tears, and stay my feet,
When I was like to fall.

I Will order all my ways,
Amongst the living whiles his grace
Shall lengthen out my days.

And sad complaint did make:
Yet I believed; and t'him, therefore,
With good success I spoke.
Part II.

Not one does truth retain:

Requite the Lord again?

We God's salvations own,
I Will take, and with the holy guests,
His name I Will call upon.

Unto the Lord I Will pay:
Whiles all his people me surround,
Now, on this solemn day.

The Lord does value high:
But sets by far the greatest price,
Upon them, when they die.

Thy handmaid did consign:
Yea, by thee, Lord, from bondage freed
I Am rendered doubly thine.

Such as thy favors claim:
And when I call on thee, will sing
The praises of thy Name.

Unto the Lord I Will pay:
Whiles all his people me surround,
Now, on this solemnday.

Yea, in the midst of thee,
Of thee, Jerusalem, I Will say
Praise ye the Lord with me.
Psalm CXVII.
[To the Tune of Ps. 148.] Give laud, etc.

Ye dwell in the earth abroad:
Sing praises every where
Unto the Lord our God.
And (as y' are bound)
Ye people all,
Both great and small;
His praises sound.

He daily does extend:
His love no measure has,
His saving truth no end.
For to his word
He Is ever true
To us, and you;
Praise ye the Lord.
Psalm CXVIII.

His mercy ever lasts:
Israel now say, we see,
His mercy never wast's.
Aaron say,
His mercy never ends:

No age his mercy spends.

I called for helping grace:
Who answered, and did me release
Into a spacious place.
Because the Lord takes part with me,
I will not be afraid:
For how can man successful be,
To hurt, whom he will aid?

My helpers he befriends:
Whence I shall see, what I presage,
My haters feanfull ends.

Then in man's mortal seed:

Then Princes, in our need.

And did me sore annoy:
But in the Lord's Almighty name,
I will them all destroy.

And my destruction sought
But in the Lord's Almighty name
I Will bring them all to naught.

But like a feeble flame
Of thorns, I Will quickly quench them, armed
With God's Almighty Name.

Me, with a mortal pass;
Have found, thou could not have thy will;
For God my helper was.
Part II.

My song I do direct:
And he my Savior does become,
When I his help expect.

Where righteous men reside:
The Lord's right hand their foes repells,
With valor often tried.

And is exalted high:
All his insulting foes it quells
And conquers valiantly.

What ever my dangers are:
But live, and with my vital breath,
The Lord's great works declare.

With his correcting hahd:
But yet, he has not given me o'f,
To be at death's command.

The gates of nighteousness:
That I the Lord's deserved praise
May in his house express.

Into his house does lead:
The righteous must go in thereat,
His holy Courts to tread.

And praise on thee bestow:
For thou have heard me, and to thee
I all my safety owe.
Part III.

The builders did disclaim:
Is now become the head corner stone,
And strength of all the frame

Has brought to pass alone:
And wein great amazement stand,
To view what he has done.

The Lord has holy made:
And we thereon, will, (as we ought)
With holy mirth be glad.

Us with salvation bless:
Now, Lord, let all our actions have
A prosperous success.

Who Comes in his Name:
From the Lord's Sanctuary blessed
Be you that him proclaim.

Whose light does us surround:
Let Us then to the horns of the Altar, lead
Our sacrifices bound.

Thy everlasting praise:
Thou art my God, whose holy Name
My grateful song shall raise.

Still find so good a friend:
Whose mercies never lessened be,
Nor ever have an end.
Psalm CXIX.
[To the Tune of Psalm 113.] Ye children, etc.

Who shun defilements in their way,
And by God's Law direct their pace:

Which his just testimonies give;
And with their whole heart seek his face.

Of any known iniquity:
And keep his ways, never straggling

Obliged to keep thy precepts stand,
With utmost care and diligence.
O that, by thy assisting grace
Thy Statutes with a constant pace
To walk in, thou would me direct!

Thy servant, when alike to all
Commands of thine he bears respect.

How righteous all thy Judgments be,
I Will praise thee with an upright heart:

My utmost care and industry,
O do not quite from me depart.
Part II.

How may a man in youth prevent?
To heed thy words his only way.

And seek thee with an heart entire:
From thy commands never let me stray.

I Have hidden in my heart, O Lord,
To keep me from offending thee.

And love thy blessedness to impart:
Thy statutes therefore teach thou me.
Of all the Judgments of thy mouth,
(The Oracle of perfect truth,)
To talk, has been my business still.

Wherein my soul like pleasure has
To theirs, who have all wealth at will.

Upon thy precepts shall be spent:
And on thy ways my heart I Will set.

Thy statutes shall me fill with joy;
And I will not thy word forget.
Part III.

Thy favor then to him afford,
That he prolonged life may gain:

Thy Law to look into, and prise
The wonders which it does contain.

O do not then to me deny
The light which thy commandments give:

I have a longing appetite;
No time without them can I live.

Not making thy commands their way,
Rebuked, and cursed are by thee.

I have, and never besides them stepped;
Remove reproach and scorn from me.

Did to destroy thy servant, treat:
But I thy Statutes thought upon,

The counsel to which I repair:
And my delight's in them alone.
Part IV.

Perform thy word whereon I trust:
And from all dangers set me free.

And thou to me did bend thine ear:
Thy holy Statutes teach thou me.

Lord, make thou me to understand:
Thy wonders so shall I declare.

But my impaired strength's decay
According to thy word repair.

And out of thy abundant love,
To me thy laws sound knowledge give.

And on thy Judgments still did look,
To teach me how I ought to live.

Have been the rule I walked by:
Whence let me never with shame depart.

I Will run, and never thence decline,
When ever thou shall enlarge my heart.
Part V.

That I in their straight way may go:
And to the end I Will it pursue.

Shall keep thy law: yea, I Will apply
My heart entirely thereunto.

Make me to go: for therein has
My ravished soul delights entire.

Lord, render thou my heart inclined:
And freed from worldly wealths desire.

From all vain objects turn mine eyes:
And in thy way enliven me.

Who is devoted to thy fear,
Let, by the effect, established be.
Help me, with reputation clear,
TO escape the foul reproach I fear:
For thy good Judgments I confess.

In me a longing appetite:
Quicken me in thy righteousness.
Part VI.

Lord, let thy saving mercies haste
To bring my sorrows to an end.

To give to him that does me jeer,
When on thy word I do depend.

Plead thy words certain verity:
For in thy Judgments hoped I have.

With constant diligence by me:
No part thereof I Will ever wave.

I count true liberty of will:
For I from love thy Precepts seek.

Thy testimonies are the things
Of which I Will never blush to speak.

My heart on thy Commands is set,
Great pleasure thence to me accrues.

To grasp thy dearly loved commands;
And on thy Statutes ever muse.
Part VII.

Unto thy servant, call to mind:
For thou have made me hope therein.

My consolations surest ground,
And often thereby revived have been.

From proud and scornful men: but yet
I did not from thy law depart.

Unto our ancient Fathers shown,
And cheered with them my drooping heart.

For those ungodly wretches sake,
Who from thy laws obedience fell.

To cheer me under griefs and wrongs,
Whiles I on earth a stranger dwell.

By night, upon thy Name have thought;
Repaid, thereby, for want of sleep.

And more than I can utter, had;
Because I did thy Precepts keep.
Part VIII.

Whence I Am resolved in my heart,
That I will keep thy words, with care.

Extend to me thy saving grace,
Which in thy word thou do declare.

My wandering footsteps did apply,
When I reviewed my former ways.

I did not long debating stand:
But hastened to it without delays.

Of robbers laid unrighteous hands:
But I have not forgot thy law.

The thanks to thee; which every day
Thy righteous judgments from me draw.

All such, as thee sincerely fear;
And do not from thy precepts stray.

To fill the earth from end to end,
Teach me thy statutes to obey.
Part IX.

For, as thou did engage thy word,
Thy servant favor has received.

With saving relish make me know:
For thy commands I have believed.

I fondly went astray from thee:
But to thy word keep closer now.

And goodness do to man impart:
Thy statutes then, teach me to know.

But my whole heart I will apply
Thy precepts to observe aright.

Excluding all religious sense:
But in thy law do I delight.

That I so smartly felt thy rod:
Thy statutes thence I learned to prise.

Than bags of silver coined or gold,
Although their sum ten thousands rise.
Part X.

The knowledge, then, of thy commands
Enable me to comprehend.

When e're they cast their eyes on me:
Since on thy word my hopes depend.

And when thy judgments made me smart,
Thou chast'nedst me with faithfulness.

Thy servants heart with comfort stay,
Who pleads for it thy word express.

Lest I my life in sorrows end:
For in thy law delight I find.

Me utterly without desert;
And I will still thy precepts mind.

And all that taught by thee, have known
Thy Testimonies, turn to me.

In love unto thy statutes sound;
That I may never ashamed be.
Part XI.

My soul, through sorrow, faints away;
But in thy word my hope is placed.

Whiles on thy word I think; and say,
To comfort me, when will thou haste.

Quite parcht, and dried with grief I look:
And yet in mind thy Statutes bear.

Expecting, till thou judgment give,
On those that my pursuers are?

Whereas thy law no man permits,
Such false and treacherous acts to do.

Then help thou me in my distress,
For wrongfully they me pursue:

That all my earthly succors failed:
Thy Precepts yet, I never declined.

And I shall keep whiles I Am alive,
Thy testimonies in my mind.
Part XII.

Forever does thy word abide:
Unmovable, as is thy seat.

It Is firm as earth it self, which stays,
Where thou at first did fix it, yet.

As at the first thou did ordain:
For all things servants are to thee.

Upon thy law I Would perished quite,
When thou so fore afflictedst me.

For they alone did me revive,
When I to gates of death was brought.

O save a servant, Lord, of thine,
For I thy Precepts still have sought.

Prepared to take my life away:
But I thy testimonies mind.

Have limits set: but the utmost bound,
Of thy commads, never hope to find.
Part XIII.

The love, wherewith thy Law I prise!
On it I think throughout the day.

Beyond my crafty'st Enemies:
And with me still those lessons stay.

In knowledge, since my thoughts to know
Thy testimonies were inclined.

Than all my Elders have attained:
For I thy Precepts kept in mind.

From thee, to any evil way:
That strictly keep thy words I might.

With an unsound, backsliding heart:
For thou instructedst me aright.

Thy heavenly words! more sweet by far,
They be, then honey to my mouth.

Get knowledge; and therefore defy
All ways that disagree with truth.
Part XIV.

And yields my feet a certain light,
Whereby my path I clearly see.

For I have sworn, and will fulfill
The solemn oath I made to thee.

According to thy faithful word,
O quicken thou my soul again.

Which with my mouth I freely give;
And make to me thy Judgments plain.

I so exposed to dangers stand:
Yet do I not thy law forget.

Yet never did I from the way
Thy Precepts taught me, turn my feet.

To take them for my heritage,
For ever, with a joyful heart.

And thereunto my heart inclined,
With purpose never thence to start.
Part XV.

With perfect hatred I defy:
But dearly do thy law affect.

Let thy divine protection yield:
For from thy word I help expect.

For I Am resolved, I Will never start,
From what my God commands me.

For I upon thy word depend;
Nor let my hopes defeated be.

My soul, and it shall be secure:
And I Will respect thy Statutes still.

Thou trampledst under feet like clay:
Their false designs thus prosper'd ill.

Like dross thou putt'st them all away:
Whence I thy testimonies love:

Upon my flesh a trembling comes:
Such fear in me thy Judgments move.
Part XVI.

To wicked men's oppressing might,
Do not therefore abandon me.

And let not proud oppressors rage
Trample down him that serves thee,

With looking for thy saving aid;
Whiles thy just word is unfulfill'd.

(For I to that aloneappeal,)
And make me in thy Statutes skilled,

Make, then, thy testimonies known
To me, that I may serve thee right.

To stop the progress of thy foes:
For they thy Law have voided quite.

Treasures of Gold it self, I love,
Of gold, refined with utmost care.

To be throughout, all righteousness:
And to all false ways just hatred bear.
Part XVII.

Wherefore my soul with strong desire,
Them to observe exactly, strives.

Into man's mind with lightsome beams:
And knowledge to the simple gives.

Till thy commands me satisfied:
For love to them did me inflame.

Such, as thy goodness never denis,
To those that love thy holy Name.

And let no sinful habit gain,
A reigning power over me.

From man's oppressing cruelty,
If thou in mercy shall me free.

The beams of thy well-pleased face:
And teach me what thy Statutes say.

My watered cheeks: it grieves me so,
That thy just Laws men disobey.
Part XVIII.

And to thy judgments do impart
The image of thy righteousness

To us commanded, righteous be:
And do abound in faithfulness.

To see mine Enemies forget
Thy words, that should their lives direct.

And does the strictest test abide:
Whence dearly he does it affect.

Yet am I not induced thereby
Thy righteous precepts to decline.

Thou in thy nature do possess:
And there is no law for truth like thine.

But thy commands, to me impart
Delights, that rich amends do give.

A righteousness that never dies:
Then teach me them, and I shall live.
Part XIX.

Incline thine ear, O Lord, to me:
And from thy Statutes I Will not swerve:

Deliver me, I said, and I
Thy testimonies will observe.

And chased the shadows of the night,
Upon thy word my hope is placed:

Sleep from my wakefull eyes was gone:
The thinking on thy word, it chased.

To hear my voice thy bowels move:
After thy Judgments quicken me.

And act designs far from thy Law,
For very mischievous they be.

And all those promises are true,
Which are annexed to thy commands.

And from them learned it long ago,
That their soundation ever stands.
Part XX.

And safety unto me impart;
For I retain thy law in mind.

And, as thou have engaged thy word,
Let me thy quickening mercy find.

From the whole race of wicked men,
Who do not by thy Statutes live.

Mixed with thy Judgments in thy word:
O think on them, and me revive.

Yet do not I one jot the less
Thy testimonies (Lord) obey.

To see how opposite they lived,
To what thy holy word does say.

And let thy loving kindness move
Thy tender heart me to restore.

And all thy Judgments do remain
Righteous, and firm for evermore.
Part XXI.

Unjustly me pursued have:
But thy pure word does aw my heart.

As he possesses who has found
Great spoils in which none else has part.

But great affection in my breast
I bear thy true and holy Law.

Just praises to thy name I pay;
Which thy just Judgments from me draw.

In which thy Laws true love does rest:
They shall by nothing be dismayed.

Thy promise did my hopes sustain:
Whiles thy commandments I obeyed.

Thy holy testimonies were:
To them my love so strong has been.

The Precepts which thou did command:
For all my ways by thee are seen.
Part XXII.

And give me understanding clear,
According to thy word, O Lord.

Admittance unto thee; and save
Him that depends upon thy word

Instructed thoroughly by thee,
My lips thy praises shall express.

And its commands shall be my song,
For all of them are righteousness.

Extend thy hand; for I have made
Thy Precepts my continual choice.

Expecting when thou will me save;
And in thy Law I do rejoice.

Due praise to thee, then will I give:
And let thy Judgments give me aid.

Thy just commandments quite forgot;
Like a lost sheep though often I strayed.
[Another Version of the 119 Ps To the usual Tune.] Blessed are they, etc.
Part I.

To shun foul ways of sin:
Who the Lord's Law with constant care
Observe to walk therein:

The ru'es that guide their pace:
And their whole hearts whole business make
The seeking of his face.

One wicked action do:
His ways, which wandering lusts confine,
They constantly pursue.

By thy Command are we,
That kept with strictest diligence
By us thy Precepts be.

My ways so straight could lay:
That from thy Statutes, wilfully,
My steps might never stray!

Which does loose lives pursue;
Whiles unto all Commands of thine
A like respect I show.
From an heart filled with love unfeigned
Thy praise I will declare:
When, taught by thee, I understand
How just thy Judgments are.

Thy Statutes keep will I:
And leave me utterly.
Part II.

To cleanse his way, O Lord?
Let him take constant heed thereto,
According to thy word.

To seek thee, I applied:
From that which thy commands enjoin
Let me not wander wide.

My heart laid up have I:
That awed by it, I might not sin
Against thy Majesty.

Derived to us from thee:
That I may know the way to bless,
Thy Statutes then teach me.

By thine own mouth declared,
My lips (inspired with holy love)
To speak have never spared.

Walk with an heart most glad,
Its joy abounds, and runs as high,
As if all wealth I had.

Thy Precepts I Will direct:
And, sted fastly in them to go,
Thy ways I will respect.

My whole delight will set:
Nor shall my faithless memory
Thy holy Word forget.
Part III.

Thy servant so afford,
That my frail life prolonged may be,
To keep thy holy word.

That so I may behold
The amazing wonders, which thy Law
In figures does infold.

I Am but a stranger there:
O let not thy commands be hid
From me, my course to steer.

Sore broken is, and pained:
After thy Judgments to enquire
No time has it refrained.

Who, swollen with haughty pride,
From what thou giv'st them in command,
Profanely turn aside.

Have ever been by me:
From the reproach and scorn I bear,
Do thou then, set me free.

Thy servants blood to spill:
But I, mean while, did meditate
Thy Statutes to fulfill.

My souls entire delight:
And from them daily counsel take,
To guide my life aright.
Part IV.

Cleaves fast through grief, and pain:
Perform thy word, on which I trust,
And quicken me again.

My voice thine ear did reach:
That I their errors may repair.
To me thy Statutes teach.
The way, wherein thy Precepts lead,
Make me to know, and walk:
Then all thy wondrous works to spread,
My tongue shall freely talk.

Consumes, and melts away:
O let thy word, on which I rest,
Repair my strengths decay.

From me do thou remove:
And thy Laws knowledge unto me
Grant of thy tender Love.

By choice mine own I made:
And all the Judgments of thy mouth
Before mine Eyes I laid.

Did constantly adhere:
The shame of foul Apostasy,
Lord, let me never bear.

By thy Commands enjoined:
Whereto I find my heart (thy grace
Enlarging it) inclined.
Part V.

Thy Statutes recommend:
And I from it will never stray,
But keep it to the end.

And I shall keep it still:
Yea, my whole heart, possessed with awe
Thereof, shall it fulfill.

What thy Commands enjoin:
For in that path I joy to go,
Whereto they me confine.

Do thou incline my heart:
And let no worldly wealths respect
From them my love divert.

Too apt on them to stay:
And quicken me with more delight
To travel in thy way.

Unto thy servant dear,
Who has himself by solemn vow
Devoted to thy fear.

Which I so greatly dread:
For(though bad men thy Judgments blame,)
In goodness they exceed.

Thy Preceps I have sought:
Quicken me in thy righteousness,
TO obey them as I ought.
Part VI.

Me from my foes to save:
So, Lord, dispatch to me with haste
The mercies which I crave.

Unto my scornful foes,
Who me reproach, because my trust
I in thy word repose.

In thy true words defense:
For on thy Judgments I have laid
My hope, and confidence.

Will, in no case, omit:
But, unto all eternity
Observe, and practice it.

I Will count it liberty:
For every precept, Lord, of thine
Seek out with care do I.

Even where Kings present are:
Nor will I, daunted with their frown,
To speak of them forbear.
And since on thy Commands my heart
Its dearest love has set:
Their study shall to me impart
Delights exceeding great.

To each divine command:
And, moved by love, my studies bend
Thy Statutes to understand.
Part VII.

Unto thy servant passed:
On which (thy grace enabling me)
My hope is firmly placed.

Most solid comfort have:
For when I was about to die,
Reviving strength it gave.

The proud did me deride:
But from thy Laws strict measures, yet,
I have not turned aside.

To mind I did recall:
From whence I did great comfort raise,
To cheer my heart withal.

Upon me, when I saw
How proudly wicked men despised,
And quite forsook thy Law.

I, as a stranger, bare
In this life's pilgrimage; my songs
Thy holy Statutes were.

By night I broke my sleep;
And thereby kept my Soul in frame,
Thy holy Law to keep.

(And more than I can speak;)
Because such constant care I had,
Thy precepts not to break.
Part VIII.

To be my portion, Lord:
And, with full purpose, I have said,
That I would keep thy word.

In prayer did seek thy face:
According to thy word, impart
To me thy saving grace.

My wandering footsteps turned;
When I my former ways did try,
And for their errors mourned.
I did not long debating stand,
But laid delays avide:
And unto what thou did command,
My heart with haste applied.

To make my goods their prey:
Yet still I kept thy Law in mind,
That I might it obey.

To render thanks to thee:
For greatly I thy Judgments prise,
Because they righteous be.

And lives in thy fear;
I own for my beloved friend,
And my companion dear.

The earth throughout do fill:
Thy Statutes then teach me, that I
May from them know thy will.
Part IX.

With me thy servant, Lord:
For I the effects thereof have felt,
According to thy word.

Do thou unto me give:
For I do all commands of thine
With firm belies receive.
When from affliction I was freed,
Out of thy ways I stepped:
But ever since, with greater heed,
Thy holy word I kept.

All that is good bestow:
Then teach thou me, how good, and just,
Thy Statutes are, to know.

The proud did lies invent:
But I thy precepts to obey,
My heart have wholly bent.

Enclosed, all sense have lost:
But thy most holy Law is that
Which me delights most.

I clearly now discern:
That, scourged by thy chast'ning rod;
I might thy Statutes learn.

I now do value more,
Then sums of gold and silver coined,
When heaped in greatest store.
Part X.

And fashioned by thy hands:
Instruct me then, how I may frame
My life by thy Commands.

To see my troubles end:
Because upon thy word for aid
My hopes did still depend.

I know, they righteous be:
And thou dealt'st like a faithful friend,
When thou afflicted'st me

To ease thy servants pain:
And let thy faithful word thee move
To comfort me again.

Near me, my life to save:
For in the study of thy Law
A great delight I have.

Who me perversely use:
But on thy Precepts I my heart
Engaged have to muse.

And unto me repair:
With every one, to whom well known
Thy testimonies are.

And honest heart affect:
So shall no crime in me be found,
Nor shame on me reflect.
Part XI.

Until thou do me save:
Supported, only, by the hope
Which in thy word I have.

Thy word fulfilled, decay:
And often, when will thou comfort me?
My earnest wishes say.

Do wrinkled I appear:
Yet do I not forget to look
Into thy Statutes dear.

The aid thy grace bestows?
When will thou Judgment execute
On my pursuing foes?

To take me, dug pits,
They dealt with me far otherwise,
Then thy just Law permits.

All thy Commandments be:
They persecute me wrongfully;
Help then, and rescue me.
Almost of all that ever I had,
On earth by them berest;
(To help me in a case so sad,)
I never thy precepts left.

And carefully I Will heed
Those testimonies while I live,
Which from thy mouth proceed.
Part XII.

For ever stands fast,
With equal firmness thou thy word
For ever settled have.

Abides from race to race:
As earth unmoved does still possess
Its first appointed place.

Where, at this day they stand:
For all of them thy servants are,
And under thy command.

My souls entire delight;
I had in mine affliction, then,
With sorrow perished quite.

I Will evermore retain:
By which, when I was like to die,
Thou quick'ned'st me again.

Thine own vowed servant save:
For I enquired constantly
After thy precepts have.

Have waited me to take:
But I thy testimonies will
My daily study make.

In creatures, I have spied:
But thy commands, in their extent,
Do spread exceeding wide.
Part XIII.

Unto thy Law most dear?
My meditations all the day
On it employed are.

For ever fixed remain,
Of greater wisdom I Am possessed,
Then ever my foes could gain.

Me understand much more,
Then all the teachers which I had,
Ever understood before.
Men, far my elders, I exceed
By far, in knowledge deep:
Because I do thy precepts heed,
And diligently keep.

Never from its rules to stray;
My feet I thereunto confined,
And shunned each evil way.

Nor in my duty failed:
The Lessons which thou on my heart
Had printed, so prevailed.

To my enlight'ned mind?
A less sweet relish does my mouth
In purest honey find.

I through thy precepts get:
Wherefore, the hatred which I bear
To all false ways, is great.
Part XIV.

A Candle is to me:
And yields a clear and certain light,
Whereby my path I see.

And will perform it too:
That what thy righteous Judgments bid,
I will observe, and do.

Afflictions great, and sore:
According as thy gracious word
Does bind thee, me restore.

(I humbly thee beseech,)
Which with my vowing mouth I give;
And me thy Judgments teach.

Exposed to dangers great:
No dangers yet, wherein I stand,
Make me thy Law forget,

To take my feet, have laid:
Yet from no precept, Lord, of thine
To shun it, have I strayed.

And with unaltered choice,
Mine heritage for ever make:
For they my heart rejoice.

My heart I wholly bend,
To keep thy righteous Judgments, till
My days in death shall end.
Part XV.

Great hatred do I bear:
But for thy Law I do retain
A Love exceeding dear.

And a protecting shield:
And lest my hopes from thee should start)
Thy word has them upheld.

That work iniquity:
For I my God's commands declare
That I Will keep faithfully.

Make thou thy grace my prop:
That I may live, and never be
Ashamed of my hope.

Secure shall I remain:
And to thy Statutes all my days
Firm love I will retain.

Thou troddest to the ground:
So that the treacherous plots they laid,
False to themselves were found.

From the earth thou do remove:
Whence I, their ends, when I behold,
Thy testimonies love.

For fear of thee, does quake:
Thy Judgments, when thou art displeased
My courage so does shake.
Part XVI.

Were ever just and right:
O do not me abandon, then,
To be oppressed by might.

Do thou for him engage:
And let me never be oppressed
By their insulting rage.

Whiles thy salvation stays:
So many fears my faith assail,
Because thy word delays!

With him that serves thee:
And, of thy special grace, reveal
Thy Statutes unto me.

Do thou on me bestow
Such understanding, that I may
Thy testimonies know.
It Is time for thee to show thy might,
And therewith, Lord, to aw
Bold sinners who, endeavor quite
TO annul thy sacred Law.

So, that to me they are
Of value, more, then gold, yea more
Then finest gold can bear.

In every thing they say,
Most right; and do, for love of them,
Hate every erring way.
Part XVII.

Filled full with wonders deep:
My soul therefore, with greatest care,
Does them resolve to keep.

Dark souls a saving light:
The simple thence the grace receive,
To know their duty right.

And panted earnestly:
Such longing, to be satisfied
With thy commands, had I.

No other grace I claim,
Then thou, O Lord, art wont to show
To those that love thy Name.

Thy words just rules restrain:
And suffer no habitual sin
Within my heart to reign.

Of men, set thou me free:
So, what thy Precepts do command,
Shall be observed by me.

Upon thy servant dear:
And what thy Statutes do enjoin,
Make plain to me, and clear.

Rivers of tears do glide;
When I behold, how men despise
To make thy Law their guide.
Part XVIII.

All righteousness does dwell:
And thine, (O Lord) for uprightness,
All Judgments do excel.

In righteousness abound:
And are to all that are inclined
To keep them, faithful found.
I Am even wasted with the heat
Of zeal, stirred up by grief,
To see my foes thy words forget,
That should direct their life.

So very pure does prove:
That therefore with a strong desire,
Thy servant does it love.

And men with scorn me treat:
Yet am I not induced thereby,
Thy precepts to forget.

Does in thy nature dwell:
And that'tis truth it self, no less
Does make thy Law excel.

Upon my soul have seized:
But thy commands such pleasures give,
By which all griefs are eased.

Thy testimonies have:
Give me to understand thy ways,
And I shall escape the grave.
Part XIX.

Lord, hearken to my cry:
And from due sense of gratitude,
Thy Statutes keep will I.

Out of my dangers deep:
Then will I, rescued by thy aid,
Thy testimonies keep.

The dawning of the day:
Which, whiles I did to thee present,
Thy word my hopes did stay.

Sleep, earlier left mine eyes:
I, on thy word to meditate
Before 'twas set, did rise.

Thee, Lord, to hear my voice:
Judge thou my cause, and in thy love,
My drooping soul rejoice.

My persecutour draw:
But in so doing, they decline
The farther from thy Law.

To save, whom they would kill:
And, doing what thou do command,
Thy truth shall keep me still.

Have been for time long past:
And founded, as they are, by thee,
I know, they still shall last.
Part XX.

At liberty me set:
For I, through wilful negligence,
Thy Laws do not forget.

That I discharged may be:
And, as thy word has promised,
In mercy quicken me.

From all the wicked crew,
Because they so neglectfull are
Thy Statutes to pursue.

And just thy Judgments be:
Inclined by them both, afford
Thy quickening grace to me.

And many foes I have:
Yet, do I not, (induced by fear)
Thy testimonies wave.

Who did thy word forsake;
Oppressed with grief, and pity too,
My tender heart did ache.
Mind, Lord, with what a tender love
Thy precepts I embrace:
And let thy righteousness thee move,
To give me quickening grace.

From the beginning's sure:
And thy just Judgments every one,
For ever shall endure.
Part XXI.

Who never gave them cause:
But yet thy words most holy fear
My heart from sinning aws.

In me, as large each way,
As does the heart of him possess,
Who finds ample prey.

All lies of every kind:
But for thy Law, within my breast,
A perfect love I find.

Thy praises I declare:
This duty I thy Judgments pay,
For very just they are.

Who love thy Law attends:
Their hearts enjoy such sweet repose,
That nothing them offends.

For thy salvations aid:
And thy Commandments faithfully
Have, whiles I hoped, obeyed.

A love that does exceed:
Whence in my soul, an earnest care
To keep them all, is bred.

Thy precepts I obeyed:
For all my ways, I understand,
Before thy face are laid.
Part XXII.

Come near before thee, Lord:
Sound understanding give thou me,
According to thy word.

To thee a free access:
According to thy word, me save,
Out of my great distress.

(So just they are, and good:)
My lips, with thy due praises fraught,
Shall utter them aloud.
Thy holy word, my tongue shall be
Most ready to confess:
For all commands which come from thee,
Are perfect righteousness.

From dangers me to save:
For what thy precepts do command,
I freely chosen have.

With longing appetite:
And what from me thy Law required,
I did with great delight.

Preserve it then alive:
And let thy Judgments in my need,
To me assistance give.

He strays with wandering feet:
For thy commands, even then, to keep,
I do not quite forget.
Psalm CXX.

When I was in distress:
And unto me his ear he bowed,
And did me thence release.

O Lord, my life defend:
And from the false-tongn'd Enemy
To me deliverance send.

By doing others wrong?
Or, how shall thou rewarded be
O thou deceitful tongue?

Shall all thy wounds return:
And thee, that did such lasting harms,
Juniper coals shall burn.

Of Meshech I abide!
And have a loathsome dwelling place,
Where Kedar's Sons reside!

With him that peace defies:

Them so; to war they rise.
Psalm CXXI.
[To the tune of Ps.25.] I lift my, etc.

To the Hills that send me aid:

Who earth and heaven made.

That it shall never slide:
His wakefull eye that keeps thee,
No slumbering nod shall hide.

That Israel does keep,
No slumber ever does surprise;
Nor ever can he sleep.

As often as foes invade,
Does like a valiant Champion stand:
And hides thee like a shade.

The Sun shall never smite:
Nor shall the cold, and watery Moon,
Distemper thee by night.

Thy soul shall fear no ill:

By him protected still.
Psalm CXXII.
[To the Tune of the 100 Psalm.] All people, etc.

Up to God's House, I joy'd therein:
Jerusalem) we'll set
Within those sacred gates of thine.
Jerusalem is well compact;
Each part on other does depend,
A City built in form exact,

Thither, the Lord's twelve Tribes ascend,
(For Isr'el's Testimony's there:)
That on the Lord they may attend,
And gratefully his Name declare.

Thrones fixed for David, and his seed:

For well shall all that love her, speed.

Within thy walls for ever dwell:
And may thy stately Palaces
In all prosperity excel.

By wishing peace to thee, I bless:

I will promote thy happiness.
Psalm CXXIII.
[To the Tune of the Old 120 Ps.] In trouble, etc.

O thou, above the Skies
Who have thy fixed seat:

Their servants looking stand,
Some favor thence to get.
And as the maiden stands,
And looks on her hands
On whom she does attend:
The Lord our God, so we
Do look unto, till he
His mercy to us extend.

Some mercy to us afford.
For none we find elsewhere.
No time are we exempt
From very great contempt,
Which from our foes we bear.

Which daily we have born
From those that, quiet sat:
And haughty Enemies
Do very much despise
Our very mean estate.
[The same. To the Tune of Ps. 25.] I lift my, etc.

Thy favor to entreat,
Who far above; the lofty Skies
Have fixed thy royal seat.

And wishtly look upon
Their mistresses or masters hand
To get some gracious boon
With longing looks, so we
Our wishes upward send,
Unto the Lord our God, till he
His grace to us extend.

Some favor to us yield:
For with contempt, exceedingly
We, by our foes are filled.

Filled with contempt we are:
And proud men's scornful usages
With great regret we bear.
Psalm CXXIV.
[To the Tune of the Old 100 Ps.] All people, etc.
HAD not the Lord been on our side,
May rescued Israel now say;

When men combined us to slay:

Their wrath to such an height was grown:
The floods with such a force did drive,
The strong tide had our soul o'rflown.

When the proud waves swelled to a Sea:

(The Lord be blessed they missed their prey.
The bird that breaks the foulers snare,
And thence escapes with joyful flight,
Resembles us: for thus we are
From broken snares escaped quite.

Is in the Lord's most holy name:
For he alone did break the snare,
Whose hand the heaven and earth did frame,
Gloria Patri.
To Father, Son, and Spirit; one
Eternal God in Persons three,
As was before the, world begun,
Now, and for ever, glory be.
Psalm CXXV.

Shall be as Zion Hill:
Which cannot be removed thence,
But keeps its station still.
Jerusalem;
So does the providence,
Wherewith the Lord environs them,
His people ever fence.

From just men's lots shall cease:
Lest them continual sufferings urge
To practice wickedness.

Thy mercy, Lord, impart:
And let all those thy goodness know,
Who are of upright heart.

Forsake true virtues way;
And in the crooked ways of vice
Impenitently stray:
The Lord shall send unto the place,
Where evildoers dwell:
Whiles he vouchsafes eternal Peace
Unto his Israel.
Psalm CXXVI.
[To the tune of Ps. 25.] I list my, etc.
Zion's captive state
The Lord did turn again:
No idle dream which men relate,
To us could seem more vain.

To be a real thing:
Our mouths with laughter filled were,
And loud our tongues did sing.
The Lord great things has done
For them, even heathens said;

Great things our hearts to glad.

Like streams in southern Fields.
The seed; which whiles men sow, they mourn,
Glad harvest often yields.

To sow his seed in tears;
Shall joyfully bring home, (no doubt,)
His sheaves with filled ears.
Psalm CXXVII.
[To the Tune of the Old 100. Ps] All people, etc.

The Lord vouchsafe his helping hand:
In vain, by guards the City's kept,
Except the Lord those guards command.

To purchase hardly earned bread:
When those that God affects, are
Within such sleepless labor, fed.

Whom he will favor with increase:
And it is a mercy he bestows,
When the wombs fruit does Parents bless.

The houses they increase, support:
As arrows by a Giant shot,
Against the foe, maintain the Fort.
Happy's the man, whose quiver filled
With such keen shafts, does him defend:
To's enemies he shall not yield,
Who in the Gate with him contend.
Psalm CXXVIII.
[To the Tune of Ps. 148.] Give laud, etc.

Whose heart his fear does awe:
That walks in the path
Prescribed by his Law.

Upon the gains
Thou earn'st with pains,
In plenty blessed.

As grapes on wall-vines found:
Like olive-plants, thy seed
Thy Table shall surround

Lo, thus shall he
On all sides be,
That fears the Lord.
Zion Hill,
His blessing shall thee give:
And, whiles thou live, still
Jerusalem shall thrive.
Thy seed's increase
Shall please thee well;
Whiles Israel
Abounds in peace.
Psalm CXXIX.
[To the tune of Psalm 113.] Ye children, etc.

May Israel now, delivered, say,
Afflicting foes have me assailed.

Afficted me, to choke my growth;
But hitherto have not prevailed.

Large furrows on my waled back,
(Sad marks of grievous slavery:)

Who cut in sunder every cord,
That served the wicked's cruelty.

That are God's Zion's spiteful foes;
And let them all be backward turned.

Like corn that grows on houses tops,
Which before harvest comes, is burned.
Wherewith no reapers hand is filled;
Nor does it to the binder yield
Enough to make a sheaf withal:

Salute the harvest men, and say,
God's blessing on your labors fall.
Psalm CXXX.
[To the tune of the Old 100 Ps.] All people, etc.

To thee, O Lord, aloud do cry.

The voice of my entreaties hear.

Who, Lord, can stand before thine eyes?

There is forgiving grace with thee.

Its hope is fixed on his word.

That watch to see the dawning day.
Yea, more it waits for him, I say,
Then those that wait for dawning day.
Israel;
For with the Lord does mercy dwell.
And plentiful redemption is
With him; for men that do amiss.

From all their sins shall Israel free.
Psalm CXXXI.
[To the tune of Psalm 25.] I lift my, etc.

O Lord, nor scornful eye:
Nort' undertake, am I inclined
Things for my reach too high

Weaned from the mothers breast:
As the weaned babe, is meek, and mild,
At her will fed, and dressed:
So, surely, I demeaned
My self, O Lord, to thee:
And did with quietness attend,
How thou would manage me:
Israel
Upon the Lord depend;
And all distrustful thought repel,
Henceforth, till time shall end.
Psalm CXXXII.
David, and his vexing care,
O Lord, remember thou
Jacob's God he swear,
And made this solemn vow.

Nor shall my bed me ease:

No sleep my eyes shall seize:

Wherein the Lord may dwell:
A settled house for Jacob's God,
That does in might excel.
Ephrata's adjoining Field
There of we heard a sound:
And after search, the place beheld,
Within its woody ground.

Devoutly will we go:
And at his footstool we'll adore,
With bodies prostrate low.

Where thou may rest at length:
And with thy constant presence grace
Thy Ark of mighty strength.

Be clothed round about:
And let thy Saints their joy express
In a triumphant shout.
David's line
Extend thy promised grace:
And cause thy favor still to shine
On thine Anointed's face.
Part II.
David sworn
Will never render void:
By the Issue of thy body born,
Thy Throne shall be enjoyed.

My Covenant keep with care:
If they my testimonies heed,
Which I to them declare:
To those too, that from them shall spring,
Like favor shall be shown:
That there shall never want a King
Of them, to fill thy Throne.
Zion is the chosen Hill,
Whereon the Lord will dwell:

Because I like it well.

That she shall nothing need:
And with sufficient bread her poor
My providence shall feed.
He vested round about,
Shall with salvation be:
And all her Saints aloud shall shout,
That joyful sight to see.
David's horn I Will make to sprout,
And there I have appointed
A Lamp, (that never shall go out,)
To give to mine Anointed.

That are his foes, surround:
But with a crown of great esteem
His head shall still be crowned.
Another of the same.
[To the tune of the Old 100 Ps] All people, etc.
David, Lord, with all
His troubles to remembrance call,

To Jacob's God he thus did vow:

Nor rest my self upon my bed;

No slumbering nod my lids shall close:

Wherein the Lord may still reside:
A fixed seat, wherein may dwell
The mighty God of Israel.
Fame told us, that near Ephrata,
The place by God appointed, lay.
And in the adjoining woody ground,
At last, by search, the spot we found.

He now resides, we'll, then, appear:
And with our bodies bowed, before
His holy footstool, we'll adore.

And enter on thy fixed seat:
Rest there, from all removes at length,
Thou, and thy holy Ark of strength.

To thee, be clothed with righteousness:
And all thy Saints, with shouts of joy,
To welcome thee, their throats employ.
David's race.
Vouchsafe to extend thy promised grace:
So that none of them, when they pray
Therein, with shame be turned away.
Part II
David past,
And will observe it to the last:
The children that thou do beget,
Inherit shall thy royal seat:

And never from my Doctrine swerve:
Those, also, that from them descend,
Shall fill thy Throne till time shall end.
For of all places, Zion Hill,
The Lord did choose of mere good will:
That Is the beloved seat, on which
He, for a dwelling place, did pitch.

Shall be my everlasting rest
There will I dwell, and not remove
For I thereon have fixed my love.

And bless the plenty I bestow:
None of her poor stall ever need
For I will fill them all with bread.

With my salvation I Will surround
And all her Saints with shouting voice
In all these blessings shall rejoice.
David's line there born,
I Will raise up my salvation's Horn:
For in my Counsel I Have appointed
A Lamp from thence for mine Anointed.

Shall him with fraud or force oppose:
But on his head, his royal crown
Shall ever flourish with renown.
Psalm CXXXIII.
[To the tune of Psalm 25.] I lift my heart, etc.

And profits thence arise;
When those whom Brotherhood unites,
True love together ties.

By that sweet ointment spread:
Which was in his anointing, spent
On holy Aaron's head.
There onely't did not rest;
But his beard drenched through:
And the upper border of his vest,
From thence it did bedew.

That fall on Hermon Hill:
Or those which heaven on the tops
Of Zion does distill.
Where a most blessed dew
The Lord on such men sends,
Throughout this life, and after, too,
In that that never ends.
A Second Version.
[To the Tune of Psalm 148.] Give laud, etc.

And profits do accrue,
When brotherhood unites
Men linkt in friend ship too.

As th'ointment shed
On A'ron's head,
Of richest price.
That sacred head alone
Engrossed not its smell:
But from it trickling down,
Upon his heard it fell.
Nor did it rest,
Till its sweet dew
Descended, to
The bord'ring vest.

Which fall on Hermon's Hill:
Or those on Zion's tops,
Which fatt'ning clouds distill.
Where God such friends
With life does bless,
And happiness,
That never ends.
Psalm CXXXIV.
[To the Tune of Psalm 148.] Give laud, etc.

Who are at his command,
Bless him with one accord
Whiles in his house ye stand,
For its defense,
Throughout the night,
Till morning light
Discharge you thence.

Your hands to God on high:
And say, the Lord we bless,
Who made the Earth and Sky.

Thee, ( Israel) bless
With happiness,
From Zion Hill.
A Second Version.

Your voices jointly raise:
And all with one content accord,
His holy name to praise.
Yea, whiles in courfes, by command,
Ye in his house attend;
Each night wherein on watch you stand,
In holy worship spend.
With hands before him stretched out
To him make your address:
And rev'rendly, with hearts devout,
Say ye, the Lord we bless:
And add, the Lord who this vast frame
Of heaven and earth did rear,
From Zion (where he placed his name)
Bless thee, his people dear.
Psalm CXXXV.
[To the Tune of the Old 100 Ps.] All people,etc.

Bestow its well deserved Praise,
Ye servants of the Lord proclaim
Your master, and his glory raise.

Wherein the Lord keeps his abode:
Who in his Courts are near at hand,
To do the service of our God:

And to his names just honor sing:
For goodness does in him abound,
And praising God, 's a pleasant thing.
Jacob, of his mere good pleasure,
The Lord has chosen for his own:
And Israel, as his proper treasure,
He keeps unto himself alone.
For, that the Lord is very great,
I, by undoubted proofs, do know:
Our Lord from his Imperial Seat,
Looks, on all Gods, as much below.

Accordingly, has brought to pass:
In heaven, earth, seas, in each of these,
His power does reach the deepest place.

Steams from the earths remotest ends:
He makes, by lightenings, way for rain,
And winds out of his treasure sends.
Egypt's Land
With one almighty stroke he flew:
The weight of his destroying hand
Fell on the men, and cattle too.

O Egypt, in the midst of thee:
Even Pharaoh felt what he could do,
And all his Court, as well as he.

Sihon, who the Am'rites did command,
He killed and Og of Bashan too,
And all that reigned in Canaan's, Land.

Did for an heritage dispose,
An heritage to Israel,
Whom he for his own people chose.
For ever, Lord, thy mighty name
The honor it bath got, retain's:
And the memorial of thy fame,
Through each successive Age remains.
Part II.

The Lord will judge them innocent:
And though he let them suffer long,
Yet will he, at the last relent.

Of melted gold, and silver, wrought:

With them behold, or utter ought.

Which hear not those that on them call;
Organs of breath they seem to have;
But through them never breathe at all.

That make, and set them up, for Gods:
'Twixt them, and all that do repose
Their trust in them, there is little odds.
Israel, bless the Lord.
May Aaron's issue do the same
Levi's Tribe his praise record,
And all that fear him, bless his name.

Sound the Lord's praise from Zion hill:
And through the place of his abode,
Let every mouth his praises fill.
Psalm CXXXVI.
[To the proper Tune.]

His goodness you have tried:

All other Gods beside.
For we are sure,
When all times past,
His mercy vast
Will still endure.

Pay we our thanks unto:

Amazing wonders do.
For we are sure, etc.

Did frame the heavens wide:

Above the swelling tide.
For we are sure, etc.

Did make great lights to shine:

Did to the Sun assign.
For we are sure, etc.
Who did the Sky adorn
With Moon and Stars by night:

In Egypt's Land, did smite.
For we are sure, etc.
Israel he brought
From that oppressing Land:

With stretch'd-out Arm, and hand.
For we are sure, etc.
Part II.

Who did the Sea divide:

His Israel did guide.
For we are sure, etc.

Proud Pharaoh, and his bands:

Through pathless deserts sands.
For we are sure, etc.

That out against them came:

Great Kings of mighty fame.
For we are sure. etc.
Sihon, that did command
The mighty Amorite:
Og, that ruled the Land
Of Bashan, he did smite.
For we are sure, etc.

Wherein they once did dwell,

To's servant Israel.
For we are sure, etc.

When we were very low:

From the hands of every foe.
For we are sure, etc.

Unto all flesh does give.

Of heaven, by whom we live.
For we are sure
When all time's past,
His mercy vast,
Will still endure.
Psalm CXXXVII.
[To the Tune of the Lamentation.] O Lord in tnee, etc.
Babylon,
As we poor Captives sitting were;
We Zion's ruins thought upon,
And with each thought, we dropped a tear.

Our harps, to us now useless, hung:
(Those harps to whose sweet melody
We formerly God's praises sung.)

For they who had us captives made,
When they were in a merry vein,
Come play, and sing, insulting, said.
Quite out of season, they that cast
Our walls on heaps, our Temple, fired,
And laid our native country waste,
Of us a Zion song required.

To play, with hearts so full of woes?
Sing Zion's songs in foreign Lands?
Or the Lord's Hymns to cheer his foes?
Jerusalem, of thee
So slight a memory retain,
May my right hand forgetful be,
Ever to touch a string again.
Or if, whiles thou lie waste, I sing,
For greatest cause of private joy:
My tongue unto my palate cling,
Whiles, in that sort, I it employ.
Edomite,
Who in Jerusalem's sad day,
Cried, down, down with it, raze it quite:
And its foundations open lay.

O Daughter of proud Babylon:
Blessed be the man that pays thee all
The mischief thou to us have done.

That snatcheth up thy little ones;
And, while their mothers wailing stand,
Knock's out their brains against the stones.
[Another Version of the same Psalm.]
Babylon,
Where we were captives kept,
We sat, and Zion thought upon;
And whiles we thought, we wept.

To suit our mourning,) were
Hung up by us, as useless things,
On willows growing there.

(To add to all our wrongs.)
Come, play, and sing, insulting, said,
One of your Zion songs.

Said we, forget our woes?
Sing Zion's Hymns in foreign Lands,
God's songs to cheer his foes?
Jerusalem) of thee
Such slender thoughts retain:
May my right hand forgetful be
To touch a string again.

For greatest private joy:
My tongue unto my palate cling,
Whiles thus I it employ.
Edomite,
Who, when we ruined were,
Said of Jerus'lem, raze it quite;
Lay its foundations bare.

Daughter of Babylon;
Blessed be the man, that pays thee all
The mischiefs to us done.

That takes thy little ones,
And tears them from their mothers breast,
To dash against the stones.
Psalm CXXXVIII.

Lord, shall supply my tongue:
Whiles, before the earthly Gods, I raise
Thine honor with a song.

Will prostrate worship thee:
And thy great name to magnify,
I will employed be.
But chiefly, for thy tender love,
And truth, I Will spread thy fame:
For thou, thy word have raised above
All else, that makes thy name.

Thou answer'd'st me again:
And when my soul did faint away,
Thy strength did it sustain.

To thee deserved praise;
When from thy mouth they shall receive
The knowledge of thy ways.

They shall rejoice, and sing:
For great's his glory, and great praise
It to his name shall bring.

To the humble favor shows:
Whereas, the men that lofty be,
A great way off he knows.

Encompassed round, do live:
Yet, when I Am most disconsolate,
Thou shall my soul revive.
Thy mighty hand thou shall extend
Against my wrathful foes:
And thy right hand shall me defend,
From them that me oppose.

For me did undertake:
Thy mercy's endless: do not, Lord,
Thy handy work forsake.
Psalm CXXXIX.
[To the tune of the Old 100 Ps.] All people, etc.


Thou, what I think to take in hand,
Long ever I think, do understand.

And compasses the paths I tread:
Asleep, awake, at home, abroad,
Thou know all my ways, O God.

Thou understand'st, when it is but meant:
Before, behind, beset by thee,
Thy grasping hand I cannot flee.

With all my search cannot descry:
So high it is, the thought were vain,
To fancy I could it attain.

Go from thy Spirits company?
Or, whither can I take my flight,
To hide me from thy piercing sight?

Or, if my bed I make below,
Where outer darkness shrouds me round;
Yet even there, thou will be found.
Part II.

And the utmost Seas my dwelling make:

Even there, thy flying prisoner hold.

The shades of darkest night I choose:
Though all things else were wrapped in night,
Yet round about me, 'twould be light.

Midnight turns noon, before thine eye:
Darkness, and light, in this agree,
That they are both alike to thee.

They were, before thou made them mine:
Within the womb thou cover'd'st me,
Yet did through its close covering see.

The amazing skill that did me frame:
Though all thy works great wonders are,
I Am sure, with that, none may compare.

Of all that rich embroidery,
Where with I was throughout composed,
Though in the obscurest cell enclosed.

No dust of me, thy sight escaped:
No joint was lost, not one misplaced,
As if the account by book were cast.
No shape, at first, my matter bare,
Nor was this, here, and that part, there;
But time gave each, proportion due,
And made it, what I wondering view.

Of how great price, O Lord, they be!
And if their number I would count,
To what a sum must they amount!

Then all the sands on the Oceans shore:
Thee, whenever I awake,
Lord, privy to them all I make.
Part III.

The wicked: whence, to such I say,
Hence, bloody minded men; for none,
That are by God abhorred, I Will own.

Reproaching thee, 's their daily Theme:
And all thy foes with mouth profane,
Do take thy holy name in vain.

Hate those, that haters are of thee?
And does not grief my heart surprise,
When wicked men against thee rise.

So perfectly I them detest:
And count them enemies to me,
Who foes professed are to thee.

my heart, if it be thus, or no:
Search every thought, and see, if I
Falsely pretend sincerity.

To any wicked way inclined.
And if thou fee'st me apt to stray,
Lead me in the everlasting way.
Psalm CXL.

O Lord, deliver me:
And from the oppressor violent,
preserved let me be.

A mischievous design:
Those, who to raise unrighteous war
Against me, do combine.

And are with poison swelled:
The Adders deadly venom is
Within their lips concealed.

O Lord, my life assure:
Who have, with cruel purpose, meant
My downfall to procure.

With cords to draw the net,
Which they have spread by the high ways side;
Wherein to catch my feet.

Thou art my God, by choice:
Hear the requests, which I have made
With supplicating voice.

So strongly rescued me:
My head, upon the day of fight
Has covered been by thee.

Which wicked men pursue:
Lest they in their successes vaunt,
Their crafty 'st plots undo.

That thus beset me round;
Let the false tales which they compose,
On their own heads rebound.

Let fiery wrath them seize:
And into deep pits may they fall,
Whence they may never rise.

Firm on the earth abide:
Mischief shall hunt the violent,
Until he be destroyed.

(So I my self assure:)
The cause of each afflicted man,
And right of helpless poor.

Unto thy name shall pay:
And upright men, by thee sustained,
Shall in thy presence stay.
Psalm CXLI.

For I complain to thee:
When with my voice to thee I cry,
Lord, hearken thou to me.

Do thou as incense prise:
And the hands, which I with them extend,
As the evening sacrifice.

Lord, watch thou with thy grace:
And keep the portal of my lips,
That thence no evil pass.

Nor let me ever comply
With wicked men, to practice sin,
Although they treat me high.

For that I Will kindly take:
Their just reproof shall fall so light,
My head it shall not break.
But as an oil of great esteem
I shall it ever prise:
And in requital pray for them,
In their calamities.
part II.

In stony places are:
My words sweet relish they shall own,
And them with pleasure hear.

On all sides scattered lie:
As when on the earth men wood do cleave,
The chips dispersed fly.

Mine eyes do I direct:
My trust is fixed on thy word,
Don't thou my soul reject.

The snare that is laid for me:
And from the evil doers trap
Let me preserved be.

Let wicked hunters fall:
And guide my feet, till I am past
The danger of them all.
Psalm CXLII.
[To the tune of psalm 25] I lift my heart, etc.

To him my voice did cry:
Entreating him, my soul to aid,
My voice I strained high.

My case I did present:
And unto him I did declare
The grief I underwent.

But thou did guard my way:
When men, where I was wont to pass,
A privy snare did lay.

But none would know me there:
Void of all refuge did I stand,
None for my soul would care.

Thou shall my refuge be:
And all the time I here reside,
My portion lies in thee.

For I do much decline:
From my pursuers me defend,
Whose strength exceeds mine.

That I may praise thy name:
Then shall the righteous compass me,
Whiles I thy grace proclaim.
Psalm CXLIII.
[To the Tune of the 100. Ps] All people, etc. Or Lamentation. O Lord in thee,
etc.

And humble supplications bend:
To me in truth, and righteousness,
A quick and gracious answer send.

By thee in rig'rous Justice tried:
For none that lives, may hope, that he
Shall, on its terms, be justified.

My life unto the ground is thrown:
And shut up in the dark, with those
That to the grave long since are gone.

My spirits safety's desperate:
And with amazement, in my breast,
My very heart is desolate.

The days of old, I think upon:
And all the works of providence,
The wonders which thy hands have done.

With servent importunity:
My soul thirst's for thee, as the Lands
Do gape for rain, when partcht and dry.
Part II.

And do not hide thy face from me:
Lest, like to those that do descend
Into the silent grave, I be.

From thee, on whom my self I roll:
And let me see my duty clear,
For unto thee I list my soul.

Of such as are my mortal foes:
My help in thy protection stands,
Wherein my trust I do repose.

Me, in my life thy will to express:
Thy spirit is good, let it conduct
Me to the Land of uprightness.

With quickening grace revive thou me:
That I thy Justice may proclaim,
Set thou my soul from trouble free.

All foes that do my soul oppress,
Do thou cut off; for unto thee
My self a servant I profess.
Psalm CXLIV.
[To the Tune of the 100 psalm.] All people, etc.

By whom, in every righteous war,
My unskilled hands instructed are:
And who my fingers taught to fight.

My Tower that saves me from my foes:
My shield, wherein I trust repose:
Who quell's my people under me.

Such notice of him, Lord, to take:
Or, what is his Son, that thou should make
Account of any thing so vain?

(A thing that next to nothing is:)
His days do vanish in a trice,
As quick as empty shadows fly.

The mountains touch, and they shall smoke:

And killing shafts upon them spend.

And rescue me from waters great,
Which me on every side beset:
From children of a foreign Land,
Whose promises, when ever they treat,
Proceed from mouths most vain and light:
And, when with them their faith they plight,
In their right hands they hide deceit.

I Will on the Psaltery present;
And on a ten string'd instrument,
Thy praises will I sing aloud.
Part II.

Salvation to the greatest Kings:
Who to his servant David brings
Deliverance from the hurtful sword.

From children of a foreign Land;
Whose mouth speaks lies, and their right hand
Is full of fraud, and treachery.

So flourish may our youthful Sons:
Our Daughters be like corner stones,
Carved to adorn a princely Pile.

Abundance of all sorts of grain:
That in our streets our sheep may ean,
And multiply ten thousand fold.

Our Land invaded by no foe:
That out of it none captive go;
Or in our streets complain of wrong.

In such a thriving case as this:
Yet, happier far, that people is,
Which by the Lord their God is owned.
Psalm CXLV.
[To the Tune of Psalm 148.] Give laud, etc.

Thy glory I will raise:
And evermore I Will sing
Thy names deserved praise.

Thy praise proclaim:
And bless thy name
Eternally.

Great praise deserves well:
His greatness, all that we
Can search out, does excel.

Each, shall engage
The foll'wing age,
Still to proclaim.

With honor I Will declare:
And thy works magnify,
So full of wonders rare.

Of the acts of might
Which I recite,
With terror great.

What they observe, impart:
To keep in memory
How very good thou art.
And with their tongues,
They shall express
Thy righteousnest,
In grateful songs.
Part II.

And great compassions has:
Much mercy in him dwells;
And slow he is to wrath.

His creatures all,
In general,
Do daily prove.

Some ways thy praise express:
But by thy Saints it is paid
With greatest willingness.

Thy Kingdoms glories:
And tell the stories
Of all thy might.

The mighty Acts of God:
And make the glory seen
With which he reigns abroad.

It Is roval state
All ages date
Shall quite out-last.
Part III.

The Lord in mercy stays:
And such as are bowed down
His gracious hand does raise.

When they would eat:
And filled with meat
In season be.

What all their wants supplies;
And every thing that lives,
It fully satisfies.

God's Justice shows:
And all he does,
Most holy is.
To all that on him call
The gracious God is near:
He Is near, I say, to all,
That pray with hearts sincere.

But ask, and have:
And them to save,
Their cry he will hear.

Whose love to him, is true:
But every wicked man
To ruin he will pursue.

And let all flesh
Concur to bless
His name always.
Psalm CXLVI.
[To the tune of Psalm 113.] Ye children, etc.

And what thou call others to,
The same be done, my soul, by thee.

The longest day I have to live:
Yea, till I wholly, cease to be.

Nor in men's Sons put confidence,
Whose strength cannot themselves defend:

Return to senseless lumps of clay,
And all their fine devices end.

Who makes the God of Jacob his;
And trusts for help upon the Lord

With all that does therein reside,
Framed out of nothing by his word.
Who keeps truth for evermore,

By righteous judgment, to their own:
The Lord on famisht men bestows
The food they want: and he does loose
Men into loathsome Prisons thrown.

And makes the cripples stand upright,
Who are by weakness bowed down.
The Lord the righteous does affect:

In contreys where they are not known.
The mournful widows he relieves,
And sustenance to Orphans gives:
But overturn's the wicked's ways.
Zion, reigns.
And through all ages King remains.
Give him therefore Eternal praise.
Psalm CXLVII.
[To the tune of the Old 100. Ps.] All people, etc.

'T is good, all praise should be bestowed:
Yea, cheerfully his praise to sing,
Is both a good and Comely thing.
Jerusalem, laid waste, and bare,
The Lord does graciously repair:
And from strange lands wherein they dwell,
Gathers the outcasts of Israel.

And gently binds up their sores.

And knows the number of them all

His understanding's infinite.

And on the ground the wicked lays.

In cheerful songs your thankfulness:
And to the harp's well-tuned string,
With raised voice his praises sing.

Rain for the earth he does prepare.
And on each barren mountain's brow,
In plenty causes grass to grow.
All beasts with meat he does supply:
And feeds the young Ravens, when they cry

Unto the Lord yields no delight.
No man's swift legs him joyful make.
When flying foes they overtake.

Men fearing him their hopes do place.
Part II.

Do thou, Jerusalem, proclaim:
And let thy Gods due honors fill
(O Zion,) all thy sacred Hill.

Wherewith thy gates repel thy foes:
Thy children too, with blessings, he
Does prosper in the midst of thee.

And settles peace in all thy bounds:
Who makes thee to the full to eat
The fatness of the finest wheat.

And what he bids, is quickly done.

He spreads on the earth like wool.
And hoar-frosts, sprinkled every where
Like scattered ashes does appear.
Rain, to icy morsels turned, and thrown
By him on the earth, skips up and down.
And who can find the man so bold,
That dares out-stand his piercing cold.

And soon are melted by a thaw.
He causes his warm wind to blow,
And makes the ice bound waters flow.
Jacob shows;
His word, and judgments Israel knows.

His favor has thus dignified.
His Judgments only you have known,
Wherefore praise ye the Lord, alone.
Psalm CXLVIII.
[To the Tune of Psalm 25.] I life my heart, etc.

From heaven his praises sound:
Yea, from above the starry sky,
Let his loud praise rebound.

Their voices, him to praise:
And all the heavenly hosts combine,
His glorious name to raise.

That rule the day, and night:
And be to him like honor done,
By all the stars of light.

Which all heavens else, exceed:
And all ye waters, do the same,
Above the heavens spread.

And spread his glorious fame:
For by his all creating word
They, what they are, became,

Each of them in its place:
And he has made a firm decree,
Which none must ever pass.
Part II.

Through all the earth below:
Ye whales, and all ye seas profound,
His worthy praises show.

And vapors, praise the Lord:
And all ye stormy winds, that blow
According to his word.

With hills, and hillocks, all
Fruit-bearing trees, which bend with weight,
And cedars straight and tall.

With every creeping thing:
Birds, of whatever kind, and name,
That exercise the wing.

And people that obey:
Sage Judges, that with equity
The peoples causes weigh.

O'd men, and children small:

Have praises from you all.
For there is no other name
So excellent as his
Above the whole earth, and heavens frame
His glory raised is.

His people's horn will raise:
Who ever excel in sanctily,
From him inherit praise.
Those who their pedigree
From Israel derive:
That near to him related be;
To him due praises give.
Psalm CXLIX.

A new composed song:
Let Us make his worthy praises ring,
Amid'st the holy throng.
Israel
Unto their maker sing:
And all that in mount Zion dwell,
Be joy full in their King.

In praise unto his name:
And their melodious voice advance,
His honor to proclaim.

Upon his people dear:
The meek, with his salvation graced
Most glorious shall appear.

This honor entertain:
And on their beds their singing voice,
To sound his praises strain.

With praises to the Lord:
And let their hands with courage wield
A sharp two-edged sword.

And measure that they gave:

And nobles to enslave.

Wherein upon record,
This honor on all Saints is cast.
Wherefore praise ye the Lord.
Psalm CL.
[To the tune of the Old 100 Ps.] All people, etc.

Before him in his holy place:
Praise him in his strong firmament,
Whose Arch includes so vast a space.

Give him, whose greatness has no bound,
Praise, like himself, praise infinite.

His praise with Harp, and Psalt'ry, sing

With the Organ, and well tuned string,

Praise him with cymbals sounding high.

The Lord's great name to magnify.
Praise, praise for ever, praise the Lord.
The End of the Psalms.
CHURCH-HYMNS Appointed to be read or sung at Morning and Evening Prayer.
Te Deum Laudamus. The excellent Hymn of St. Ambrose.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.
WE give thee praise, O God most high
We own thee for our sovereign Lord;
O Father, from Eternity
Who art through all the earth adored.
The heavens, and all powers therein
Of Angels blessed, their voices raise:
Both Cherubin, and Seraphin,
Eternally do sound thy praise.
They, holy, holy, holy cry,
Lord God, that do all Armies sway:
Who do thy glorious majesty
Throughout all heaven and earth display.
The Apostles glorious company
Enthroned with thee, do praise thy name:
The glorified society
Of holy Prophets, do the same.
The martvr's noble Army, gives
Thee praise, from whom they have their crowns:
Thy holy Church, where e^ it lives
Dispersed throughout the world, thee owns.
Infinite, as thou art, do shine;
They all adore, and glorify.
With thah true, only, Son of thine.
That Son, to whom thou have ordained
All, as to thee, should honor give:
With the Holy Ghost; at whose command
Those comforts are, which us revive;
To thee, O Christ, all glory be:
(The King, to whom it does pertain:)
Begat, before all time began.
Yet, when lost man thou came to save,
And for that end did man become:
Thou did thy native glories wave,
And not abhor the Virgins womb.
When thou death's pangs had triumphed o'r,
From heaven long thou did not stay:
But, entering there thy self, before,
For all believers made a way.
Thou, with the Father's glory decked,
At God's right hand do take thy place:
From whence, as Judge, we thee expect;
Whose sentence on us all must pass.
Thy servants therefore, bought by thee,
With thy most precious blood, thee pray;
Help them, that they may quitted be,
In the strict Judgment of that day.
Among the Saints their names record,
Who are with endless glory crowned:
Bless all thine heritage, O Lord;
And keep thy people safe, and found.
Them govern, and advance for ever,
Who, day by day thy praise Proclaim:
And whiles the world endures, will never;
Omit the worship of thy name.
Lord, keep us through the present day,
That we be not o'rcome by sin:
Have mercy on us, Lord, we pray,
upon us, let they mercy shine.
And let the effects thereof descend
On those, who place their trust in thee:
And, seeing I on thee depend,
Lord, let me never confounded be.
The Canticle, Benedicite; or the Song of the Three Children ( as it is called.)
[To the Tune of Psalm 148.] Give laud, etc.
O Bless the Lord on high,
All ye his works most rare.
Extol his majesty,
Who made you what you are.
Advance all praise:
Advance his same:
And make his name
Renowned always.
Blessed may the Lord by you
His mighty Angels, be:
Ye heavens bless him too,
Which we, admiring, see.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him ye waters bred
Above the exten'ded skies:
Bless him, his forces, spread
Through all his royalties.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him, thou glorious Sun,
And Moon that give us light:
The like by you be done,
Ye Stars of heaven bright.
Above all praise, etc.
O all ye soaking showers,
And gentle drops of dew,
Bless him, that blessings pours
Upon the earth by you.
Above all praise, etc.
Ye winds that do beget
Those fatt'ning drops, him bless:
With wasting fire; and heat
Producing fruitfulness.
Above all praise, etc.
Him let cold winter bless,
And scorching summer too.
Bless him, ye frosts, which dress
The earths plants with hoary dew.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him, ye piercing colds,
And frosts, that lock the ground:
With snow, and ice, that holds
The swiftest rivers bound.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him, both day and night,
That measure out our years:
Bless him, refreshing light,
And darkness, big with fears.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him, ye clouds of the air
With frightfull thunders swelled:
And lightenings, which us scare
From thundering clouds expelled.
Above all praise, etc.
The Lord be blessed by
The earth, which his mercies fill.
Bless him, ye mountains high,
With every little hill.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him, all growing things
Which the earth in green do cloth:
Bless him, ye wells, and springs
Conducing to their growth.
Above all paise, etc.
Let every sea and flood
Blese the great Lord above:
Great whales, with all the crowd
Which in the waters move.
Above, all praise, etc.
Let all the fouls that fly,
Join notes to bless his name:
Bless ye his majesty,
All beasts too, wild, and same.
Above all praise etc.
Bless ye the Lord, who ever
From humane loins are bred:
Bless him, his people dear,
From Israel who proceed.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him, ye Priests, ordained
To feed his Altars fire:
And all, who waiting stand
To serve, as they require.
Above all praise, etc.
Bless him, just spirits departed,
And entered into peace:
Yea, let all humble-hearted,
And holy men him bless.
Above all praise etc.
O bless him Ananias.
Let Misael him bless.
And, with both, Azarias,
Bless him, whom all confess.
Above all praise, etc.
Benedictus. Or the Song of Zacharias.
THE Lord, the God of Israel, be
By us, his people, blessed:
By whose redeeming visit, we
Secure from danger, rest.
Who our Salvation's mighty Horn;
(Foretold in ancient days)
Of's servant David's lineage born,
Has now thought fit to raise
According as his promise ran,
Proclaimed by holy men,
Who, ever since the world began,
Inspired by him have been.
That we from all our mortal foes
By him should saved be:
And from the cruel hands of those
That hate us, should be free.
He called to mind his gracious grant
To our fore fathers past:
And his most holy Covenant
He has performed at last.
The sacred oath, which solemnly
To Abraham he gave:
That from the hends of the Enemy
He would his people save:
That freed from fear of men, in peace,
His work we might attend;
In holiness, and righteousness,
Until our lives should end.
And with his Prophets, the highest God
(Dear child) shall reckon thee:
Before the Lord, to clear his rode,
Thou shall employed be.
The Doctrine of Salvation, thou,
Shall to his people preach:
That he will forgive their sins, and how,
Thou shall them truly teach.
Proclaiming God's most tender love,
Which amply he declares;
In that the dayspring from above.
To sinful men appears.
TO enlighten those dark souls that lay
Where death it is shadow casts:
An guide our feet into the way
Of pence that ever lasts.
Magnificat. Or the Song of the Blessed Virgin.
HIgh thoughts of thee, O Lord most high,
Within my soul I have:
And in my Spirit glad am I,
In God that does me save.
For to his handmaids meanness, he
Such great regard expressed:
That, by all foll'wing Ages, she
Shall be Pronounced bless.
For he whose power is infinite,
(To make me great in fame)
Has shown in me his glorious might;
And holy is his name.
And ever does he Acts of Grace
For such as do him fear:
Great instances whereof, from race,
To race, he makes appear.
His mighty Arm he stretches out,
And haughty men subverts:
Disabling them to bring about
The projects of their hearts.
The mighty, from their lofty seat,
Flat to the ground he lays:
And humble men to honors great
His gracious hand does raise.
The hungry, he does richly fill,
With what his needs supplies:
But to the rich man's craving will,
What he desires, denies
He holp his Israel in their need,
As once he did assure
Our Father Abr'am, and his seed,
For ever to endure.
Nunc Dimittis. Or Simeon's SONG.
[To the Tune of the 100 Psalm.] All people, etc.
THY weary Servant, now, O Lord,
Hopes thou will give him his release:
That so according to thy word,
He may depart this world in peace.
My life by thee prolonged has been,
Till I thy Jesus might behold
But now, since him mine eyes have seen,
Their love to all sights else, is cold.
For that blessed Jesus, long prepared
To save lost souls of humane race;
Now, at the last, thou have declared,
And shown before all peoples face:
A glorious light, in open view,
To Gentiles, that in darkness dwell:
Whence greatest glory does accrue
Unto thy people Israel.
The Hymn of Gloria in Excelsis, at the End of the Communion Service.
[To the Tune of Psalm 100.] All people, etc.
ALL Glory be to God above,
With Peace on all the Earth below:
And may all streams of grace, and love,
To all mankind from heaven flow.
Thanks, blessing, glory, worship, praise,
Great, as thy glory, we present,
To thee, the King that heaven sways,
O Father, God omnipotent.
O Jesu Christ our Lord, and God,
The Fathers sole begotten Son,
Pure Lamb of God that bar'st the load
Of sin for all the World, alone.
Thou whose sufficient sacrifice
Forth' whole Worlds sins did satisfy:
Who pay'd'st the meritorious price,
Which all the World was ransomed by.
Thou, who, (exalted from the grave,)
Do at the Fathers right hand sit:
On us poor sinners mercy have,
And to thine ears, our prayers admit.
For to thee, only, Lord, we bow,
Thou, Christ, art, the only holy one;
And in the Father's glory, thou,
With the Holy Ghost, do reign alone.
Gloria Patri.
Suited to all the former Tunes, both of Psalms, and Hymns. [To the Tune of
Psalm 100.] All people, etc.
TO Father, Son, and Spirit, (One
Eternal God in Persons Three:)
As was, before the world begun,
Now, and for ever, glory be.
[To the tune of Ps. 113.] Ye children, etc. To supply the want of a Stanza,
when the Singers shall think fit to break any Part of a Psalm set to that Tune,
so, as to make it incomplete without it.
UNto the Eternal Three and One;
The Father, with his only son,
And the Holy Ghost, all glory be:
So 'twas, before all Time begun,
Now is, and when Times glass is run,
Shall be to all Eternity.
The same Hymn adapted,
To the Tune of Ps. 25. I lift my Heart, etc.
LET Father, Son, and Spirit,
(The Eternal Three and One:)
All glory now, and still inherit,
As they have ever done.
The same
to any ordinary Tune, used in PSALAMS composed of EIGHTS, and SIXES.
To Father Son, and Spirit, (One
True God in Persons Three:)
Now, as before the world begun,
And ever, Glory be.
The same Hymn,
[To the Tune of Ps. 148.] Give laud, etc.
THE Father, and the Son,
And Spirit of Holiness,
(TH Eternal Three and One)
We glorify and bless.
So 'twas, before
Time first began,
And so remain
Shall evermore.
A POSTSCRIPT, TO THE Christian Reader.
Christian Reader.
IN the Preface, I acquainted thee, that [where ever this version of mine runs
out into Paraphrase, ( let me add here, or seems to do so,) it is occasioned
either by the Context of the verse Paraphrased; or the general design of the
whole Psalm; or the Emphasis of the original words, and Phrases: or the
reference of any Passage to other Scriptures.] Now, that thou may be the
better able to judge, how I have kept to these measures: I think it not amiss to
give thee, as to each of these particulars, a few Instances.

1. As first, for the Context: confer Ps. 2. 4, 6, 9. and 2, 3. Ps. 11.2, 3.
with v. 1. Ps. 48. 12, 13 Ps. 73. 1 l. 1, 2. with v. 3, 4, 5. As also, v. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. Ps.75. 2. with v. 4, 5, etc.

And to this Head, may be reduced, those Emphatical Epithets, amplifying the
subjects to which they are applied, where the matter treated of, seemed to
require them: and several pregnant Phrases spread larger, to make them more
intelligible, and affecting.

2 For the Design of the Psalm Confer the Title of Ps 18. with several
expressions in it. And the Titles of other Psalms, or the Contents, by our
Translatours prefixed to them, with the Psalms to which they are prefixed.

3. For Emphatical Words or Phrases in the original; he that understands that
will see reason, for the rendering, (...) Ps. 1. 3. parted Streams: (...), Ps.
5. 8. men watch me: (...) Ps. 18. 5. strong cords: (...), v 26. wilt wrestle:
so also, (...), Ps. 19. 10. drops most free. (...) Ps.ps. 29. 1. ye that from
mighty men derive etc. (...) Ps. 35. 15. halting day: (...) Ps. ps. 40. 6. --
did bore: (...), Ps. 55. 20 profanely transgress: (...), Ps. 74. 23. Ascends:
(...), Ps. 78. 47 Pig-trees, seeing that word, in the masculine Termination, is
so interpreted, Ps 105. 33. (...), Ps 89 31 profaned: (...), Ps. 148 7. lastly,
(...) in the shorter stanza, so often repeated, in the Benedicite, Above all
praise And many other Instances I might add of the same nature, but that this
Postscript would thereby become too large. ^ 4. As to the Scriptures related
to. Confer Ps. 8. 2. and Mat. 21. 16. and Luke 10. 21. Ps. 18. 19 and 1. Sam.
22. 1. 23. 19. 24. 3. Ps 22. 16. and Mat. 27. 35. v. 18. and foh. 19. 23, 24.
Ps. 24 6. and 1 King. 6. 32, 34. Ps. 40. 6. and Exodus 21. 6 Heb. 10. 5. v 7.
and Heb. 10. 9, 14. Ps. 45. 2. and Job 7046. Ps. 51. 7. and Levit. 14. 6. Ps.
68. 18. and Ephesians. 4. 8. Ps. 69. 21. and Mat. 27. 48. Mark. 15. 23. Ps. 78. 48.
and Exodus 9. 19, 20: v. 52. and Deuteronomy. 32. 10 Ps 83. 9. and Judge 5. 21. Ps 104.
2. and 1 Timothy 6. 16. Ps. 105. 6. and If. 41. 8. Ps. 106. 18. and Number. 16. 35.
v. 28. and Hos. 9. 10 v. 30. and Number. 25. 6, 7, 8. v. 33. and Number. 20. 3, 12.
Ps. 110. 3. and 1 Pet 1. 28. Ps. 118. 26. and Luke 19. 38. Ps. 134. 1. and 2 Chronicles. 8 14. v. 3 and I King. 14. 21. Number. 6. 24. etc. To which the candid
Reader may add (from his own experimental acquaintance with the Phrase of the
Scriptures) many others of like nature: by which he will be able to justify
many allusive expressions, wherein I see cause to recede from the Phrase of the
Prose Translation, to comply with the Text alluded to; as more emphatically,
and significantly answering the genius, scope, or texture of the Psalms wherein
they are made use of by me in this Version.

To conclude. I have through the long stay of this Book in the Press, had the
liberty of taking a more strict review of it, in the sheets as they were sent
me: and in that review, have noted. some things which I saw cause to desire had
been altered in the original Copy before it was put into the Printer's hands.
But seeing a great part of it was wrought off without my knowledge: I am fain to
take the occasion of this Postscript, to add some of the chief alterations
here, and adventure them, to the candid Judgment of the Reader, to take, or
leave them as he sees cause. For instance. Ps. I. I. some Persons suggesting
their thoughts to me, that it had been better, if I had there observed and kept
to the very Terms of [ walking, standing, sitting, ungodly, sinners,
scornful:] as also [ counsel, way, seat,] as having all of them an Emphatical
Climax, much heightening the sense: in compliance with them; (though I think
the versision as now it stands every jot as good for substance, yet I offer
this alteration of the whole verse, Ps. 1.

V. 1. GReat happiness that man betides,
Who walks not where the ungodly guides:
Nor in the way by sinners worn,
Securely stands: nor takes his seat,
Where proud men stretch their wits to treat
Both God, and godliness with scorn.
Ps.17.2. [ Tribunal] being a word not readily understood by ordinary persons,
alter line 1. thus,

[Before thy judgment seat me try]

Ps. 18.38. read [Before my feet they conquered fell.]

Ps. 29.9. l. 3. [Bright day those piercing flashes -- ]

Ps. 32.2. [He's blessed to whom the Lord atton'd
Imputes not iniquity:
And he, by whom hypocrisy
Is, from his very heart disown'd]
Ps. 34.15. read [And, to hearken to their earnest cries,
He never does forbear.]
Ps. 37 26. [For he, to needy men to lend,
Is readily inclined:
Whence those who from his loins descend
Great store of blessings find.]
V. 32. l. 1, 2. [The wicked lays sly plots to catch
The just and holy man.]
Ps. 40.9, 10. [Lo, Lord, thy self can testify,
My lips I never spared.
Thy justice I did not suppress
Within my heart enclosed:
Thy saving Grace, and faithfulness
I have to all proposed.]
Ps. 45 (2 Version.) Sons born of thee etc.

v. 16. l. 2. read

Ps. 48. v. 2. (2 Version) [The Lord abides.]

Ps. 51. v. 5 (3 Version.) [From my motherswomb,

Together, sin, and life, derived.]

Ps. 52.9. [Thy Work for ever to commend,
My song shall it recite:]
Ps. 55.13. [But 'twas thou, one, whom -- ]

V. 20. [With out-stretcht hand he fought -- ]

Ps. 59.11. [Slay them not quite, lest (Lord our shield)
My people it forget.]
Ps. 102.7, 8, 9. alter thus.

The bird that on the house tops alone
Spends wakefull night, like me does moan,
8. Yea, all day long no joy I see,
Tired out with foes reproaching me.
Foes, that like men quite mad, etc.
Against my life, etc.
9. Whence my food, etc.

Ps. 119 162 l. 1. alter thus.

Thence does such joy in me abound.

Ps 123.2. l. 1, and 2. thus As servants looking stand Unto their masters hand,

Ps. 126.6. l. 2. thus. And sow's choice seed in tears:

Thus far, the Press had prevented me, before I could make, the last review
which I intended, of the original Copy: but from thence forward I have taken
care to prevent it, by sending up beforehand, the amendments and alterations to
be inserted in the Text it self: as also all second versions of any of the
remaining Psalms, except one of Ps. 117. which here I sender thee; Ps.117. [ To
the tune of Ps. 100.] All people, etc.

[Let all mankind express their mirth
unto the Lord in joyful songs:
And pay him from all Lands on earth
The praise that unto him belongs.
For, from his plenteous mercies store,
Great kindness he does us afford:
His truth, likewise, lasts evermore.
For ever, therefore, praise the Lord.]
And now, I have no more to desire of thee, Christian Reader, but, that before
thou read, thou will correct the Errata of the Press, as thou art here
directed; except; where thou find them corrected to thy hands which labor
(in the grossest, at least;) I hope, by the care of a friend, thou will be in a
great measure prevented in.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface p. 13. l. 13. r. made. Psalm 17. 11. line I. read, us.. Ps. 22.
18. (Version 1.) l. 1. r. see. Ps. 38. Title, r. [To the Tune of Ps. 51. O
Lord, consider, etc. or the Lamentation, O Lord in thee, etc.] Ps. 41. 4. l. 3.
r. thou. Ps. 48. 4. (Verse.2) l. 2. r. altogether. v. 9. l. 3. r. Temples holy
place. Ps. 50. 2. l. 2. r. combined, v. 16. l. 4. r. teach. Ps. 51. v. 10. l.
3.(Verse. 1) r. new create. Ps. 66. 9. l. 3-r. strength. v. 15. l. 3. r. nor
ram. Ps. 68. 32. l. 4. r. your. Ps. 71. 18. l. 1. r. don't. 1. 6. r. wrought
off. Ps. 72. 17. l. 2. r. evermore. Ps. 77. 16. l. 4. r. sore. Ps. 78. 7. l. 3.
works. v. 35. 1. 1. r. they. v. 54. l. 4. r. gained. Ps. 88. v. 3. l. 4. r.
envied. Ps. 92. 12. r. But as Palm Tree grow. Ps. 104. 4. r. flames. Ps. 109.
11. l. 3. dele his. Ps. 115. 1. l. 5. r. Against them, then, by aiding us.. Ps.
118. 13. r. thought. Ps. 119. (1. Verse) v. 9. r. word, 's.v. 62. l. 2. r.
due v. 72. l. 3. r. to. v. 147. for, and chased, read had chased; or rather,
dispersed. (Verson 2.) v. 12. l. 3. r. bliss. v. 82. l. 1. r. mine. v. 84. l.
3. r. When shall thy Judgments take effect v. 120. l. 4. r do Ps. 126. 5. l. 2.
r. harvests. Ps. 127. v. 2. l. 4. r. without. Ps. 129. 2. l. 2. r. check. of.
131. 3. l. 3. r. thoughts Ps. 132. v. 16. l. 1. (1 Version) r. Her Priests
invested. Ps. 136. 1. l. 6. r. time's. Postscript P. 455 l. 4. r. version.

Books Printed for Brabazon Aylmer.
THE Works of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge: Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury: in Four
Volumes in Folio.

The First containing Thirty two Sermons, preached upon several Occasions; an
Exposition of the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue; a Learned Treatise of the
Pope's Supremacy; a Discourse concerning the Unity of the Church: also some
Account of the Life of the Author, with Alphabetical Tables.

The Second Volume containing Sermons and Expositions upon all the Apostles
Creed: with an Alphabetical Table; and to which may also be added the Life of
the Author.

The Third Volume containing Forty six choice Sermons upon several Subjects,
which an Alphabetical Table: which are the last that will be printed in English
of this Learned Author.

The Fourth Volume containing his Opuscula: viz. Determinations, Conc. Ad
Clerum, Orationes, Poematia, etc.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions: in Three Volume in 8o By Dr.
Tillotson Dean of Canterbury.

The Rule of Faith: or an Answer to the Treatise of M. J. S. entitled
Sure-footing, etc.


