DAVEIDOS: OR A Specimen of some of David's Psalms IN English METER.

With Remarks upon the Late TRANSLATORS, By Mr. JOHN PHILLIPS

LONDON; Printed for William Keblewhite, at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1798.

THE PREFACE
IT was the Complaint of a Person no less eminent in the Church of England,
then Dr. Don, Dean of St. Paul's, that the Psalms of King David, I mean as they
were translated into English Meter in his time, and by that means being adapted
to the Vulgar Tunes, were made a considerable Part of the Public Worship,
should be admitted into the Church in such an undecent and unmannerly Dress.
That Great Person, who himself expressing his own Thoughts and Notions with so
much Rapture and Sublimity, must certainly be deemed a competent Judge, in his
Poem upon the Translation of the Psalms by Sir Philip Sidney and his Sister the
Countess of Pembrook, cannot forbear condoling the Misfortune of these
Celestial Hymns, so rudely handled by other Pens. Says he,

The Songs are these, which Heavens High Holy Muse
Whispered to David, David to the Jews:
And David's Successors in Holy Zeal,
In Forms of Joy and Art do re-reveal
To us so sweetly, and sincerely too,
That I must not rejoice as I would do,
When I behold that these Psalms are become
So well attired abroad, so ill at home;
So well in Chambers, in thy Church so ill,
As I can scarce call that reformed, untIl
This be reformed --
Since the Death of Dr. Done, several Persons have attempted to redress this
Grievance with more Zeal then good Success; for Zeal and Poetry are two
different Inspirations that do not always accompany one another. Men may be
good Men, eloquent Divines, most excellent Preachers, yet but very bad Poets.
Sandys of later times, and Buchanan before him, both adventured to imp their
Muses Wings with Cherubims Feathers, and suffer 'em to expatiate in the Tempes
of Fancy and Exuberancy; yet Cowley in his Preface to his Pindaric Odes, ranges
both those Great Men among those that have not hit the Mark. For, says He, All
the Translators of the Psalms of David, even Mr. Sands Himself (for in despite
of Popular Error, I will be bold not to Except him) are so far from doing
Honor, or at least Justice to that Divine Poet, that, methinks, they revile
him worse then Shimei. And Buchanan himself, who much the best of them all, and
indeed a great Person, comes, in my Opinon, no less short of David, then his
Country does of Judea. And the Reason of this he gives to be, because that none
of these People have sought to supply the lost Excellencies of another
Language, with new ones in their own. To this I cannot forbear adding, That all
the Translations which I have hitherto seen since his time, are equally as
guilty of their Predecessors Faults, and are so far from supplying us with the
Excellencies of our Language, that where they are forced, for their
convenience, to gloss upon the Sense of the Text, they rather deform the
Granduer of the Sacred Authors's Style with flat and insipid Notions of their
own, and Expressions no less improper, mean, and vulgar. They fetch in Rhimes
by the Head and Shoulders like so many obstinate Delinquents, and bind 'em with
the Chains of Impropriety and Incongruity to Words and Sentences altogether
forced and foreign from the true Signification: and all this, to patch up a
Clink in the Close. And while they pretend to be Reformers of others, sin
against the very Idiom of the Language which they pretend to be Masters of.
Unrivaled, of which the Translators N. B. and N. T. seem to be proud off, is
an Epithet by no means proper for God: And Incarnate, ten times worse for the
Messiah. For Incarnate is a word more frequently taken in an ill then a good
Sense. We say of Women that are continually Brawling and Scolding, that they
are Devils Incarnate. And therefore Words that admit of a twofold and dubious
Signification, are to be carefully avoided in a Sacred Translation. Their
Cadences, which ought to fall with the greatest ease and softness imaginable,
are harsh and violent, rather like the Shogs and Rubs of Carts and Coaches
against the Posts in the Street, then natural Closes. Of this number are The
feathered Throng, spoken of Birds. His rains from Heaven parched Hills
recruite; and Storms, the swift winged Steeds with which he flies. Really, not
good Sense. And make the angry Sea comply -- Let all the World, O Lord,
combine, to praise, etc. Then shall the Teeming Ground a large Increase
disclose -- These Expressions will serve in a Ballad, but there is nothing of
Flight, nothing of Curiosity in 'em. Of the same nature are, A thousand dewy
Sweats distilled -- Thy word unsealed the Springs -- You who the Lord adore,
your Vows before him lay -- Thy rattling Thunders roard around -- As Floods
through ancient Forests roar, or Mountain Shrubs surprise -- God for their
Diet finds a way -- When great they seem, like some large Cloak, let shame be
round 'em rould -- But enough of these Blunders in General, little superior to
Hopkins and Sternhold: for they do so Scaturire, that it would almost require a
Transcription of the whole to repeat 'em all. In short, the Poetry, more
especially N. B. and N. T's is very ordinary, and insipid, not to be called
Poetry; the Contexture nothing better then Linsey Woolsey, and the Stuffing
mere Thrums.

To come to particulars, I would fain know how N. B. and N. T. could pick out
of these words, Beterem javinou Sirothekem Atad, in the 58th. Psalm, Ante
spinae Vestrae crescant in Rhamnum, this piece of ill sounding and spropositous
Sense, E're Thorns can make the Fleshpots Boil; 'twas certainly before Dinner;
For I cannot see the least ground in the words for such a Pie Corner
Expression. In the 95th. Psalm the Text runs thus, Ki El Gadol Jehova, ou melek
Gadol gnal Col Elohim. Quia Deus Magnus Jehova, and rex Magnus super omnes
Deus. These words N. B. and N. T. thus Translate.

For God the Lord, enthroned in State,
Is with unrivaled Glory great,
A King Superior far to all,
Whom by his Title God we call.
Here are no less then two Blunders to supply the conciseness of the Text;
unrivaled Glory, hardly warrantable; whom by his Title God we call, of which
there is nothing at all in the Text; only it was a hard Shift which might have
been supplied with much better words. These occurred to the first Glances of my
Eye, and I was unwilling to examine any farther for fear of meeting many more. I
shall say nothing farther at present of their Translation, but that it is too
full of He'ls and He Is, deformities not to be endured in true and elegant
Poetry.

As for the Psalms that have lately appeared under the Name of Mr. Milbourn,
they may be truly said to be his: For the whole is an exuberant Paraphrase,
with little of David in it; insomuch that they may be rightly called David's
Psalms in Disguise. For why should this Gentleman spend such an exuberancy of
words upon only Ahsre ha Isch, in the first Psalm, Beatus Vir, A thousand
Blessings crown his Head -- Or how it could come into his Mind to fancy the
dreadful Sound of the last Trumpet in the word Mischphat, which signifies in
that place no more then an Assembly, which is plain from its being coupled with
the word Gnadath, which signifies Caetus. Or lastly, how could he extract such
an effluvium from the first words of the second Psalm, Lummat Ragschou Goiim,
ou leummim yehegou Rik.

God's wife Decrees are fixed and strong
As his Eternal Throne;
Why then should Heathen Fools so long
His Sacred Power disown?
Vain are their hopes, vain every thought,
And all their words are vain,
For what Gods mighty Hands have wrought,
God's mighty Hands maintain.
What is this to the Purpose? nothing I Am sure to the Text: And besides the
Elegancy of the double expostulation is lost. Such Paraphrases as these rather
mislead then Instruct. And therefore Benedicat Deus operi and Authori.
Paraphrases are nothing to our Business.

There is in the last place a small Specimen printed for the Company of
Stationers for the reforming of old Sternhold and Hopkins, but it begins so
unfortunately, that I dare be bold to assert, that the Honor of reforming
those Authors is not reserved for that Gentleman. For the first Psalm instead
of being reformed is rendered ten times worse then it was before. There is such
a Hysteron Proteron in the two first Lines, that stumsently (...) bles you at
the very Threshold, and presently calls for a Candle to light you to the Sense.

The Man is blessed, by ill advice,
To walk, who does forbear.
The rest is much of the same Form and Style; from whence we may safely
conclude, that the Expressions of Sternhold and Hopkins are too beggarly
already to want any more Patching.

It may be objected in defense of these Gentlemen, that they condescend to a
mean and vulgar way of expressing themselves, for the better understanding of
the Common People, and in compliance with their Capacities. But whose fault is
that, the People are no better taught? At least I am sure it would be much more
for the Honor of the Public Worship that they should be better instructed,
then to sing the Praises of God in undecent and incongruous Language. It Is the
General Opinion, that the Psalms of David, in their Original Beauty were the
most exalted Productions of a divine and soaring Genius, and withal, the
Perfection of the Hebrew Idiome, and that they were enriched with a Copious and
Eloquent Conciseness which our Modern Languages cannot reach, without the help
of Paraphrase and Circumlocutions. However those two Assistances are very
warily to be made use of; by no means too profusely; yet so as to supply the
vacuums of our own Language with those Beauties of the English Idiom, which
come the nearest to the Grandeur of Style and Meaning of the Author: And to
this a due Consideration of the Subject of the Psalm, and the Occasion of the
Author's writing it, and the Connection and Coherence of the Sentences will very
much contribute.

It Is true that there are some of these Psalms that are written with a
plainness befitting the Subjects of Penitence, Prayer and Confession.

On the other side, there are others so truly Poetical, and full of sublime
Rapture, that if they be not followed with a Spirit and a Fancy in some measure
adequate, they must of necessity loose their Luster.

Seeing therefore that Specimens are come into the Mode, and that so many have
so good an Opinion of themselves as to believe their Offerings worthy of the
Public View, I thought it now my time to be not Semper Auditor tantum,
especially having by me so many as I have of David's Psalms, some long since
Translated, and others of ^ later Date. I know I shall not wait for Censure,
having adventured to pass my Judgment so freely upon others. But for that, my
Years and Education may in some measure bear me out.

The Method which I took, that I might avoid the Rock which others had dashed
against, was in the first place to throw off the Shackles of Rhyme, a weight
that lies a little too heavy upon Fancy and Invention, but which I would never
be a Slave to. In the next place, I had the Assistance of the Original it self,
the Latin, and Greek Versions, together with the Chaldee Paraphrase, all which
I examined with the best Judgment I had. Nor was I without the two English
Translations, not refusing to look upon Sternhold and Hopkins, sometimes,
whether by accident or no, not far distant sometimes from the Point.

As for my Talent in Poetry, I leave that with the rest for others to judge of:
Only this I must add, that whoever he be, who has not that Talent in some
measure above N. B. and N. T. whatever his other Properties or Perfections are,
shall never obtain much Credit by Translating David's Psalms.

I will not insist upon the Use and Benefit of the Singing Psalms in Churches,
which would savor too much of inclining to Self-interest. It Is sufficiedt for
me, that the Church of England has approved the Custom, and given 'em
admission into their Congregations. And truly, since the Voices of the People
are so much reformed to what they have been, by the many Organs set up in
several Churches in this Ciry, it is but Reason that the Words they Sing should
be reformed as well. By whomsoever it be done, I shall not envy that Honor to
the Person who does it as it should be. Nevertheless as I have showed my self
ready to serve the Public, I should account it among the greatest Felicities
of my Life if such a Work as this should Crown the end of my Days.

PSALM I.
Blessed is the Man who in the Paths
Of Sinners never strayed;
Nor listened to the Scorners Charms,
By wicked Counsel swayed.
But in the Law of God, the Lord,
Does place his whole Delight;
And to observe his pure Commands
Does labor Day and Night.
He, shall be like a goodly Tree
That by the water grows,
Whose timely fruit makes early have
To ease the tender Boughs.
His verdant Leaf shall never fade,
But Winter's rage withstand;
For still desired Success shall crown
Whatever he takes in hand.
But no such fixed Happiness
Shall the ungodly find;
They Are like the Chaff blown from the Earth.
By every gust of Wind,
Nor shall the wicked dare to stand,
Where (...) in Judicio aut loco judicii.
God-like Justice pleads,
Among the (...) in Coetu Justorum.
Righteous, still afraid
To show their guilty Heads,
For the Omnipotent well knows
The ways of righteous Men;
But in their bold career destroys
The Scoffers hateful Train.
PSALM II.
WHY do the Heathen, drunk with rage,
Such frantic uproars make?
Why do the People vain designs
So vainly undertake?
The Kings and Rulers of the Earth,
In deep contrivance bold,
Against the Lord and David's Throne
A solemn League do hold.
Proudly they cry, come let us cast
Their servile bands away;
Let us in sunder break their cords
That bind us to obey.
But he that dwells in Heaven above,
Shall laugh them all to scorn;
And in derision of their Craft,
Their Plots to folly turn.
Then in his wrath he shall rebuke
The blindness of their ways,
And in his hot Displeasure vex
The remnant of their days.
But he has set his King on high,
The King he always loved;
And fixed his Throne on Sion Hill
That never shall be moved.
Concerning him will I declare
Heavens firm and high Decree,
Thou art my Son, he said, this day
Have I begotten thee.
Ask but of me, the Heathen shall
Be thy Inheritance;
To every corner of the Earth
Thy Empire shall advance.
For they with rods of Iron bruised,
Before thy feet shall fall;
Like Potsherds into pieces broke,
So shall thou break them all.
Now therefore, O ye Kings be wise,
And to my Words give ear;
And all ye Judges of the Earth
My timely Precepts hear.
With fear and trembling serve the Lord,
Submissive to his Law;
When ye rejoce, rejoice in Him
With a Religious Awe.
Lest he be angry, to the Son
Obedient Homage pay;
For fear ye perish, in the Paths
Of Error led astray.
For ye must die, if once, his Wrath
Be kindled in his Breast;
But they that trust in him are safe,
In his Protection blessed. (...) Osculamini filium, ne irascatur. Some of the
Rabbis atttibute the ne irascatur to God the Father, and so turn it this way,
Osculamini filium, ut sedet Iram putris. Simile est hoc Regi, qui ira percitus
est in cives. Iuerunt igitur Cives and rogaverunt filium Regis ut sedaret iram
patris.

PSALM III.
When David fled from his Son Absolon.
O Lord, how numerous are they grown
That trouble my repose,
Many are they that still increase
The Burden of my Woes.
Many there be that scoffing say
To my disturbed Soul,
His God no more shall be his Aid,
Nor our Designs control.
But Thou art the secure Defense
On which my hopes rely;
Thou do my Honor still maintain,
And lift my head on high.
I called, I cried unto my God,
When I was weak and faint;
And from his Holy Hill he heard
The voice of my complaint.
I laid me down, and slept secure,
And safely rose again;
Regardless of my present fears,
For God did me sustain.
I will not their ten thousands fear,
By thousands multiplied,
Though in the midst of all their Power
Hemmed in on every side.
Arise, O God; the Lord appears:
For on the shameless (...) Gena, Maxillas. (...) Dentes.
Cheek
They now are smitten with Reproach,
That did my Ruin seek.
And more to disappoint their Rage,
Thy all-o'recoming Power
Has broke their Fangs envenomed force,
So eager to devour.
Salvation thus belongs alone
Unto the Lord above,
Who for his People keeps in store
The Blessings of his Love.
PSALM IV.
THou Great Defender of my Cause
Unto my cries gave ear;
My God relieved me in Distress,
And heard my humble Prayer.
Proud Sons of Men, how long will you
My Honor thus despise?
That please your selves in vain Designs,
And wander after Lies?
On Judah's Throne the Lord has placed
(...) Segregavit sibi Benignum seu potius sanctum; for the word signifies both.
A righteous Sovereign;
And he will surely hear my Voice,
When ever I complain.
With trembling then his Power confess,
And strive to sin no more;
Ponder at Night upon the Deeds
Ye did the Day before.
In your Retirements most remote,
Your treacherous hearts upbraid;
And every evil thought chastise,
When on your Pillows laid.
Let Justice be your Sacrifice
With an unfeigned zeal;
Then hope in God, and to his Throne
For mercy still appeal.
Men say, that our forsaken Cause
No friends will now embrace,
Therefore, O King of Heaven, unvail
The Brightness of thy face.
For greater joy my cheared heart
Has in thy favor found,
Then they had ever when their wheat
And wine did most abound.
Therefore will I lie down in Peace,
And take my due Repose,
For only from the Lord himself,
My safe Protection flows.
PSALM V.
POnder my Words I thee implore,
My mournful Words, O Lord,
And also to my secret Sighs
Thy gracious Ear afford;
Hearken with speed unto the sound
Of my continual Cries;
For at thy Throne, my God and King,
My sad Soul prostrate lies.
Lord in the Morning hear my Voice,
For at thy Heavenly Gate,
My early importuning Prayers
Thy answer boldly wait.
For thou art not a God that do
In wicked Works delight,
While every froward friend of Sin
Is banished from thy sight.
The wayward Fool shall not enjoy
the splendour of thy Face;
Those hidden Glories shine remote
from their detested Race.
The busy forgers of untruth
shall perish undeplor'd;
Such sons of Blood and deep Deceit
Thou always have abhorred.
But I will to thy House approach,
Emboldened by thy Grace,
And pay the Tribute of my Vows
Within thy Holy Place.
Teach me to shun those crooked Paths
Wheren my Foes are led;
But in thy ways, from wandering safe,
Direct me how to tread.
For in their Mouths there is no truth
Or care of Promise made,
Corrupt within, like cankered Flesh
With rottenness decayed.
Their slanderous Throats are like the smells
Of open Sepulchers;
Whose flattering Tongue in vile defense
Of falsehood only swears.
But let their own Designs, O Lord,
Their own Confusion be;
Subvert them in their heaps of Sin,
Proud Rebels against Thee.
But they that trust in Thee, let them
Triumph for evermore,
Let them rejoice in thy defense,
Who thy great Name adore.
In Showers of Plenty upon them
Thy Blessings shall descend;
Them shall thy Favor, like a Shield,
In all distress defend.
PSALM VI.
OH! do not in thy Anger, Lord,
My secret Shame detect;
Nor while thy Fury yet remains,
My guilty Soul correct:
For I am weak, O therefore, Lord,
In mercy me restore;
And with thy heavenly Balsom heal
My Bones, with trembling Sore.
My heavy Soul tormented lies
Oppressed, with inward Grief;
My God, how long will Thou delay,
Ever Thou afford Relief?
Return, O Lord, and my sad Soul
From horrid Death defend,
Oh! for thy holy Mercy's sake,
Some speedy succor send;
For who within the Cells of Death,
Can praise Thee under Ground?
Or who in the Infernal Pit,
Thy Wonders can resound?
Weary with groaning every Night,
In Tears I bath my Bed;
And all the Day my watered Couch
Supports my drooping Head.
The luster of mine Eyes is fled,
By sorrow chac't a way;
Mine Eyes are sunk, to see my Foes,
Now bear triumphant sway.
Be gone, be gone, all ye that toil
In Works of Wickedness;
Heaven's King has heard my weeping Voice
With ptomise of Redress.
Pleased with my Prayers, the Lord received
My humble Sacrifice,
And soon his reconciled Ear
Was open to my Cries.
Now shall he so my Foes perplex,
So tame their growing Pride,
That they shall run with speedy flight,
Their sudden Shame to hide.
PSALM VII.
O Lord, my God, I have reposed
My Confidence in Thee,
From them that persecute my Soul
Now then deliver me:
Lest greedy of my guiltless Blood,
They do my Soul devour,
As the fierce Lion rends the Prey
Within his ravenous power.
O Lord my God, if justly they
Charge on me this Offense,
If I have acted any Crime
To stain my Innocence;
If ever the kindness of my Friend
I willingly forgate,
Or rather have not saved those
That bare me causeless hate;
Then let my Foes pursue my Soul,
Not knowing whom to trust;
Let them tread down my Life to Earth,
My Honor to the Dust.
Else Lord, arise, and in thy Wrath
Against my Foes appear,
That thy confirmed Promises
My Innocence may clear.
Then shall thy People worship Thee,
To quiet Peace restored;
Oh! therefore, for thy People's sake,
Advance thy Strength, O Lord.
Nor do I fear but thou will give
Just Sentence on my side;
When Thou my clear Integrity,
And Righteousness have tried
Second Part.
Confound, O Lord, ungodly Men,
That vent their Spleen in vain,
But guide the Just, and make thy ways
Unto their Footsteps plain.
For though the secret Bosom hides
Our Thoughts from Mortal Eye;
Yet like unfolded Leaves, all Hearts
Before Thee open lie.
Therefore will I in God alone
For Aid and Succor trust,
Who still preserves the Righteous,
And still protects the just.
Jehovah is a righteous Judge,
And patient in his Power,
Suffering the Wicked to provoke
His Anger every Hour.
But if the Wicked will not turn
From Sin's alluring Charms,
He whets his Sword, and bends his Bow,
His Sin-revenging Arms.
Chased by such Instruments of Death,
No place shall give them Rest,
He makes his Arrows sharp to pierce
The Persecutor's Breast.
Behold, they travel all in vain
Their Mischief to bring forth,
For Mischief is the thing concealed,
Though Folly be the Birth.
Deep Pits they dig, in hopes to catch
The Righteous there betrayed,
But reel themselves into the Grave,
For others Ruin made.
For on their own forsaken Heads
Their plotted Mischiefs fall;
And while they study to revenge,
Feel Vengeance first of all.
Therefore with Thanks will I extol
The pleader of my Right;
And his protecting Truth in Songs
Of Lasting Praise recite.
PSALM VIII.
O Lord our God, how ought the World
Thy wondrous Name to prize,
For thou thy Glory have advanced
Above the starry Skies.
The tender Babes and Sucklings cry
In witness of thy Fame,
And to the Heav'n-contemning Crowd
Thy Providence proclaim.
While I the Heavens behold, the work
of thy Almighty Hand,
The Moon and Stars in order fixed
By thy divine Command:
Then deeply reasoning with my Soul,
I these discourses make,
Oh! what is Man, that thou have wrought
Such wonders for his sake.
For little lower in degree
Then happy Angels placed,
Thou have his Rare Seraphic Form,
With Heavenly Beauty graced.
Over all the Works that Thou have made
He bears lordly Sway,
All Creatures with submissive Awe
His ample Power obey.
The profitable Sheep, and Ox,
To hardy Toil decreed;
And all the Beasts that in the Field,
Or in the Desert feed.
The winged Fowl and lesser Fish
That in the Rivers keep,
With all the larger Fry that haunt
The secrets of the Deep.
Therefore, O Thou, over all the World
Chief Lord and Governor,
How powerful is thy wondrous Name,
How wonderful thy Power!
PSALM IX.
WITH my whole Heart will I sing praise
Unto the Lord our God:
The noble Acts which thou have done,
Will I declare abroad.
I will be glad, I will rejoice
In Thee, O thou most High!
And in my Hymns thy blessed Name,
For ever magnify.
For thou have put my Enemies
To ignominious flight,
That they with shame before Thee fall,
And languish at thy sight.
Thou by thy Power have still maintained
my just and righteous Cause,
Commanding from thy starry Throne,
Obedience to thy Laws.
Thou have rebuked the Heathen's Rage,
and wicked Men destroyed;
Their Name is perished from the Earth,
Of all remembrance void.
Insulting Enemies! no more
Your desolations boast,
For like the Cities ye laid waste,
The Fame of you is lost.
But he that dwells above the Stars,
For evermore shall Reign;
He has prepared his Royal Throne
True Judgment to maintain.
To all the Nations of the Earth,
Will he his Truth declare,
His chosen People unto Him
For Justice shall repair.
The sure Protector of the Poor,
Will he at length appear,
In time will he the sad Complaint
Of their Affliction hear.
And therefore they that know thy Name,
Shall on thy Help depend:
For still on them thy Guarding Power
Never fails to attend.
Second Part.
Sing praises therefore to the Lord
That does in Sion dwell,
Unto the People all his Works
In Songs of Wonder tell.
He strictly searches for the Blood
Of them that are oppressed,
And bears in mind the Poor's complaint,
Until they be redrest.
Have mercy on me, O my God,
In pity of my grief;
Behold how near the Gates of Death
I beg thy swift Relief.
That rescued so, on Sion Hill,
Thy praise I may set forth;
And thy Salvation loudly sing
In Songs of sacred Mirth.
Sunk are the Heathen in the Pit
For others Ruin made,
Their Feet are taken in the Net
which they in secret laid.
Oh! Justice still to be admired,
By just Examples taught:
For still the wicked dig the Snares
In which themselves are caught.
Headlong to the forgotten Grave,
Ungodly Men descend;
Untimely Death mows down the proud,
That against Heaven contend.
For always will he not forget
The Poor when they complain,
Nor shall the Humble in Distress,
For ever wait in vain.
Up Lord, and let not Man prevail
Against thy Celestial might,
But on the Heathen take revenge,
So guilty in thy fight:
Let them in dread of Thee despair,
That in their deep distress
They then may know themselves but Men,
And Thee their Lord confess.
PSALM X.
WHy so far distant from us, Lord,
Do thou conceal thy Face?
Now that our Troubles most require
The Comfort of thy Grace.
For wicked Men, the vexed Poor
Of all their Peace deprive,
But Lord, confound them in the Plots
Which they themselves contrive.
They boast of all their Hearts desire
With Power and Riches stored;
In friendship with the Covetous,
They scom the living Lord.
Such is their Pride, that after God
Their Folly never sought,
And hold the knowledge of his Name
Not worthy of a thought.
They prosper in their wicked ways,
And from their scornful Eyes
So far remote thy judgments are,
That they thy power despise.
He faith in his deceived Heart,
What cause have I of dread?
For I shall never now be moved,
Nor danger reach my Head.
His Mouth is full of vile Untruth
And cursed Blasphemy;
Under his Tongue Deceit and Fraud,
Like poisonous Adders lie.
In private Villages he waits,
To slay the Innocent;
In secret Holes his leering Eyes
Against the poor are bent.
He lurketh as a Lion lurks,
The humble to defeat,
And merciless devours the Poor
Entangl'd in his Net.
With courteous Bow and lowly Cringe,
He bends his treacherous Knee,
Thus falls the Poor, in heaps betrayed
By smooth Hypocrisy
Then in his wicked Heart, says he,
God has forgot their Cries,
He shall for ever vale and hide
Their misery from his Eyes.
Second Part.
Now then arise, O God, arise,
Lift up thy Potent Hand;
And succor thy afflicted Poor,
That have so long complained.
Wherefore should wicked Men blaspheme,
And thus thy power despise,
Their God is otherwise employed
Then to regard their Cries.
For sure thy all surveying Eye,
Their Tyrannies beheld;
Severely marking open Wrongs
And Malice most concealed.
Since therefore it remains in Thee,
The Feeble to defend,
To Thee the Poor commits their Cause,
The Orphans only friend.
Break thou the Strength of evil Men,
O God, whom we adore;
Pursue their bold Impieties
Until they be ho more,
Then shall thy rescued Poor confess
Thy everlasting Reign,
While deep Perdition swallows up
The Ungodly and Profane.
But the Petitions of the Poor,
Thou will in Mercy hear,
With thankful Hearts by thee prepared,
To reap the Fruits of Prayer.
Then shall thou judge the Fatherless,
And give the Poor his right,
Nor shall the haughty Tyrant more
Oppress him With his Might.
PSALM XI.
GOD is my Hope; then to my Soul
Why speak ye bitter words?
And say, fly to the desert Hills,
Like the affrighted Birds.
Behold, the Wicked bend their Bow;
And ready is the Dart,
With fatal Aim directed still
To pierce the Righteous Heart.
All the Foundations of his Hope
Are quite cast down, they cry:
Lord! what have good Men done, that they
must thus forsak'n dye?
But high in Heaven, the Immrotal God
Has fixed his Azure Throne,
And thence on poor afflicted Souls
In pity will look down.
Thence he beholds the Ways of Men,
With a discerning Eye,
Approving Right, detesting Works
Of bold Impiety.
On them will He rain all his Plagues
Together summoned up;
Brimstone and Fire, in dismal Storms,
The Portion of their Cup.
For God, the God of holy Truth,
Will Righteous Men embrace;
And to the Just with Favor show
The brightness of his Face.
PSALM XII.
HElp Lord, Oh help, for godly Men
Chased from the Earth, are fled;
The Faitful seem to lie concealed
Among the forgotten dead.
The common Talk of Neighbors now,
Is all but Vanity,
For what their double Hearts intend,
Their flattering Tongues deny.
But let Dissemblers perish, Lord,
From the corrupted Earth;
And the triumphing Boaster find
The folly of his Mirth.
Who say, that by such Tricks of State,
We will our Names extol;
Are not our Lips and Tongues our own?
Who shall our Pride control?
When moved with the loud Complaints
And Sighings of the Poor,
I will arise, says God, and them
To quiet Peace restore.
Nor are thy Promises, O God,
Dispersed in the Wind,
More pure then Silver are thy Words,
Though many times refind.
Now therefore keep thy Promise, Lord,
Amd save thy chos'n Race;
For now Impiety prevails,
And potent Wrong takes place.
And well thou know when violent Men
Are lofty in command,
The godly languish, ill prepared
Their fury to withstand.
PSALM XIII.
HOW long will thou forget me, Lord,
In this afflicted plight?
How long will thou conceal from me
Thy all-restoring Light?
How long shall I in deep suspense,
Consult my weary Soul?
How long shall my insulting Foes
Thus lawlessly control?
Consider, Lord, and hear the Cries
Which my loud Sorrows make,
And least I sleep the sleep of Death,
Keep thou mine Eyes awake.
Least in their Triumphs thus they sing,
We have prevailed at length:
Least their proud Trophies they advance,
I hat have pulled down my Strength.
Yet are my Hopes in God, my King,
His Fame will I advance;
And though forsak'n, sing of Him,
For past Deliverance.
PSALM XIV.
THE Fool has said, there is no God;
For Men are all now grown
Abominable in their Works;
Not one upright, not one.
The Lord looked down from Heaven, and viewed
Man's all-corrupted Race;
To see who would seek after Him,
Or Holiness embrace.
But Lord, they blindly all obeyed
Blasphemous Ignorance,
There was not one that gave his mind
Thy Worship to advance.
Vain workers of Iniquity!
That will not understand,
How they like Bread my People eat,
And have my Laws profaned
But Fear shall soon surprise 'em all,
When dreaming least of fear,
For in defense of the Upright,
The Almighty will appear.
For they have proudly laughed to scorn
The Counsels of the Just;
And in derision held the Poor,
That make the Lord their trust.
Oh that the Lord to Israel
His promise would fulfill,
And send Salvation to his Church,
From Sion's holy Hill.
Then when thy People shall return
From heavy Thraldom free,
Triumphant Jacob shall rejoice,
And glad shall Israel be.
PSALM XV.
WHO shall inhabit, Lord of Hosts,
Thy Holy Place, s0 pure?
Or whom shall Sion's sacred Towrs
In fixed repose secure?
The Man whose Life is incorrupt,
And blameless in thy sight;
Who from his Heart, the Friend of Truth,
Continues still upright.
Whose Tongue never vented vile Reproach,
His Neighbor to defame,
Nor ever harbored false Reports
To prejudice his Name.
Who lowly in his own esteem
Does wicked Men despise,
While they that truly fear the Lord
Are precious in his Eyes.
Who always faithful to perform
His Vow and Covenant both,
Though to his harm he sometime Swears,
yet changes not his Oath.
He that tormenteth not the Poor
With griping Usury;
Nor to defeat the Innocent
Ever took accursed Fee.
The Man thus blameless in his Life,
Of Heaven's great King beloved,
Shall prsoper in his holy Hill,
And never be removed.
PSALM XVI.
THou great preserver of my Life,
Continue my defense;
For in thee only, Oh my God,
I fix my Confidence.
My quiet Soul to God has said,
Thee only I adore,
Not all my heaps of treasured Wealth,
Can add unto thy Store.
But my Relief I give to them
That are on Earth upright,
To them in Virtue that excel,
Who are my chief Delight.
They shall heap sorrow on their heads
Whose giddy Ignorance
Thy Truth forsakes, of Idol Gods
The Worship to advance.
I will not of their Sacrifice
In any sort partake,
Nor yet so much as of their Names
The smallest mention make.
The Lord is my Inheritance,
The Portion of my Rest;
My sacred Lot shall thou maintain,
First by thy Aid possessed.
In places far for Pleasure famed,
My Lot is measured forth;
I have a goodly Heritage,
The Garden of the Earth.
Praised be thy Name, thy Grace inspired
My Knowledge of thy Will;
Teaching my Slumbers in the Night
Thy Precepts to fulfill.
The Lord I set before me still,
On whom my Hopes relied:
While he directs my wary Steps,
My Feet shall never slide.
My Soul rejoiced from Tyrant Death
To be for ever free,
My Flesh, in hopes of future Life,
Likewise depends on thee.
For sure thou will not leave my Soul
Within the Grave asleep;
Nor let thy Holy One abide
Corruption in the Deep:
Rather instruct me how to find
That fair and goodly way,
Which leads me to those blissful seats
Of never-setting Day.
There, in thy Presence to behold
The Eternal Stores os Bliss,
And all those Pleasures that surround
The Throne of Paradise.
PSALM XVII.
COnsider well my case, O Lord,
And to my Cause give ear,
And with thy wonted Grace attend
To my unfeigned Prayer.
Yea, let thy own avenging Wrath
The Sentence execute;
And with an equal Eye regard
The Right of my Dispute,
For thou by Night did prove my Heart,
And saw st my Innocence;
For I resolved my wary Lips
Should utter no Offense.
Whatever the wicked did advise,
Thy Precepts guided me;
For led by them, I ever shunned
The Paths of Cruelty.
Preserve me in thy Holy Paths,
O thou most faithful Guide,
That while I walk the ways of Truth,
My Feet may never slide.
I called upon thee, for said I,
My God will surely hear;
Hear me, O God, and to my words
Bow down thy Gracious Ear.
Show us thy wondrous Mercy, thou,
The World's great Governor,
And save thy People from the Proud
That spurn against thy Power.
Keep me, O Lord, as thou would keep
The Apple of thine Eye,
Under the Shadow of thy Wings
Let me in Safety lie,
Protected from the Hate of men
That would my Life confound;
From those that greedy of my Soul
Each Day beset me round.
Second Part.
In their own Fat and Plenty closed,
They boast their high Success;
And pampered with their cursed Wealth
Their Scorn of thee express.
Way-laying us on every side
With restless toil, they lie;
Fixing their Eyes upon the ground
Our private Steps to spy.
So hunts the Lion all the Night
His hunger to allay,
So hunts the eager Lyon's Whelp
For his unwary Prey.
Up Lord, and disappoint their Rage,
And my sad Soul set free;
From thy consuming Sword, the Sword
Of them that evil be.
From Men, the fatal Instruments
Of thy avenging Ire;
From Men that in this World possess
Their cruel Heart's Desire.
For whose supply the secret Earth
Her treasures opens wide;
From whence their pampered Appetites
Are duly satisfied.
Whose Offspring greatly numerous
Yet have their ample Shares,
And their divided Substance leave
In plenty to their Heirs.
But as for me, in Righteousness
Let me behold thy Face,
And waking, of thy Glory full,
Let me thy Love embrace.
PSALM XVIII.
THee will I love, O Lord, my Strength,
My Rock, and my Defense,
My Soul's support, my God, my Might,
My only Confidence.
The Shield that does preserve my Life
From frequent Dangers free;
My saving Health and Refuge still
In all Adversity.
The Pangs of Death environed me
On every side distressed;
The wicked, like the rolling Waves,
To my Destruction pressed.
The Chains of Death about my Life
Were like a Circle thrown;
Entangl'd in the Snares of Death,
My hopes were almost gone.
Then did I cry unto my God,
And call upon his Name,
He heard my soon-admitted Voice
That from his Altar came.
Then trembled the amazed Earth,
As with an Ague shook;
Their deep Foundations the high Hills
With sudden fear forsook.
His kindled Wrath sent forth a Cloud,
Whose substance brightly burned;
And in his Fury Gnalab Gneschan be Affo, Ecsh Miffiou Tokel, Gechalim Baguacou
mimmennou.

Ascendit famus ah excandescentia tua, Ignis consumet ex ore ejus, pruinae
arserunt ab^e.


Coals of Fire
The Hills to Ashes turned,
Then, the wide Arch of Heaven he bowed,
And gloriously came down,
While Darkness hovered underneath,
The Footstool of his Throne.
High mounted on, the Cherubims,
He pranc'd the lofty Air,
While on their Wings the obedient Winds
The Illustrious Chariot bare.
Second Part.
Then in the Region of the Clouds
He pitched his gloomy Tent,
And as a Curtain round him drew
The watery Firmament.
But when he purposed that the World
His Brightness should admire,
Those Clouds to wondrous Meteors turned
Of Hail and Coals of Fire.
The rattling Thunder loudly then
Brake through the vaulted Sky,
And through the spacious Air was heard
The Voice of the most High.
He sent his Lightnings, and dispersed
His Foes of Succor void;
Nor ceased he to increase those Flames
Till they were all destroyed.
The affrighted Sea, at his Rebuke,
Her Channel then displayed;
And where the World's Foundations were
In vast Abysses laid.
His Angels from their starry Seats
Came down by his Command;
And from the Surges of the Deep
They drew me safe on Land.
He saved me from my strongest Foes
That bare me deadly Spite,
Deprived of other Force to shun
The Pressure of their Might.
Prevented by their crafty Hate
I saw my Ruin near;
But my Upholder was the Lord
Who led me out of fear.
He brought me to a spacious Place,
A place of Liberty;
He brought me forth, to show the World
How much he favored me.
According to my Righteousness
The Lord did me reward,
And to the pureness of my Hands
His Mercy had regard.
Third Part.
Because I walked in the ways
Most pleasing to the Lord,
Nor in contempt of his Commands
Forsook his Holy Word.
For every Day and every Hour
His Laws before me lay;
His Statutes did I not contemn,
Nor vainly cast away.
And in my Duty to my God
I kept my self upright,
Shuning those Pleasures, whose soft Charms
My Frailty did invite.
Therefore according to my Truth
The Lord did me reward,
And to the cleanness of my Hands
His Favor had regard.
To them that Holy are, will He
As pure and Holy prove;
And be upright to the Upright
That labor for his Love.
He will be likewise justly true
Unto the pure in Mind;
But to the Froward and Perverse
As dangerously unkind.
Thus to the Humble and the Poor
His favor shall be shown,
But as for proud and Haughty looks
They shall be soon cast down.
The Lord shall make my Taper yield,
A clear and distant Light;
My day redawning shall no more
Give way to irksome Night.
For I, assisted by my God,
Have mighty Hosts subdued;
And mounting Walls of dreadful Height,
Have slain a Multitude.
The ways of God are Incorrupt;
His Faith is purely tried;
To Mortal Men a sure defense
Who in his Faith abide.
For who is God besides the Lord,
Our King and Governor?
And who is mighty, save our God,
The Fountain of all Power?
Fourth Part.
It Is God that Girds me round with Strength,
And lades me with renown;
While all my dangerous Attempts
Desired successes Crown.
He made me, for the Race of War,
Then is the Roe more Fleet,
And on the Highest places set
My soon Victorious Feet.
My hands, he teaching how to fight,
Gives courage to my skill:
And He enabling, my strong Arm
Can break a Bow of steel.
The shield of thy All-saving Might
Thou gav'st me from on high,
And thy Right Hand preserves me still
Among the Troops that dye.
When Thou in Battle for my steps
Made room among the slain,
In Heat of all Incounters safe
My feet thou did sustain:
Then I pursued my Enemies,
And took'em in the Chase;
Nor would retire, till they were all
Consumed before my face.
The wounds I gave them, soar and deep,
Disabl'd 'em to rife;
Under my feet their sullen Pride
Now in dishonor lies,
In Battle girded with thy strength
I fought my daring Foes;
And by thy Aid fubdu'd, they fell
That did my power oppose.
With Broaken Limbs they grovelling lay,
Submissive to my will,
That all my stubborn Enemies
I then might save or kill;
For succor loudly then they cried,
But there was none to save;
Even to God they made their Moans,
But He no Answer gave.
Fifth Part.
Then did I pound'em small as dust
That flies before the Wind;
And trod 'em on the Ground like Clay,
Despised of all Mankind.
Thou have preserved me in despite
Of my contending Foes;
That still with eager Violence
My Honor did oppose.
And thou have made the Heathen stoop
To my subduing Sword;
Strangers that knew me not before,
Now serve me, as their Lord.
When they but hear my Name, they yield,
Not able to withstand;
And distant Kings their proffered Realms
Submit to my Command.
Though far remote, in dread of Me,
Their fainting hearts sink down;
They tremble in their Lurking holes,
In fear of my Renown.
Jehovah lives: Blessed be the Rock
Of my Deliverance;
And let the God of my defense
His Glorious Name advance.
Thou Great Preserver of my Life,
Even Thou have set me free,
From those that pressed my injured Soul;
The Sons of Cruelty.
Therefore, O Lord, over all the World
Will I extol thy Fame;
And study still new Songs of Praise
In Honor of thy Name;
Most tenderly do Thou preserve
Thy dear Anointed King:
And wilt show mercy to his Throne
For ever flourishing.
PSALM C.
To the Proper Tune. Clangite Jehovae.
OH all the Earth, sing loud to God,
And every Region Praise his Name,
Serve him with Gladness, and with Songs
Extol his everlasting Fame.
For know ye, that the Lord is God,
He made us, and our days decreed;
We are his People, and the sheep
That in his goodly pastures feed.
Oh enter then his Gates with joy,
And fill his Holy Courts with Praise,
Give thanks to him, and bless his Name,
That Name which Heaven and Earth obeys
For the free Mercies of the Lord
Endure to all Eternity;
Nor does his Truth e're fail the Hopes,
Of them that on his Truth rely.
Another way.
With shouts of Joy let all the Earth
The Praises of the Lord Proclaim;
With cheerful Hymns and Odes resound
The Adoration of his Name.
For he, the Parent of the World,
First made us, and our days decreed;
We are his People, and the sheep
That in his goodly pastures feed.
Enter his Gates with praise, and fill
His Holy Courts with cheerful Songs;
Extol, applaud and celebrate
His Power, to whom all Power belongs.
For still in an Eternal Stream,
His Goodness and his mercy flow;
His Truth endures from Age to Age,
The same over all things here below. (...) Laetitia. (...) Canticum laetum,
sive cum clamore. (...) Clangite, voeifermini. These three Words denote a
cheerful Service of God, and not that morose Devotion which some are pleased to
affect. (...) Comprehends all those Words.

PSALM CI.
Misericordiam and Judicium.
MErcy and Judgment are the Theams
I hat wake my tuneful strings;
Of them I sing and sing to thee
Great Sovereign of Kings.
Wisdom and justice are the Props
That my soft Rule sustain;
Behold, since thou did fix my Throne,
The Method of my Reign.
For in the Uprightness of my heart,
To Privacy restrained,
A true Example there I walked
Of Sovereign Command.
No wicked Deed my Regal Power
Did meanly Countenance;
Nor fawning Falsehood in my Court
Did her proud Head advance.
They that with sullen Envy muse
Disturbances of state,
I still abhorred their vile Converse,
Chief Objects of my Hate.
He that with baneful slander sought,
His Neighbor to enthral;
Like to the Proud, without Remorse,
Did by my Justice fall.
But to the Virtuous of the Land,
My favor still was shown;
Religious Officers did shine
Like stars about my Throne.
The fraudulent contrives of State
My Councils never knew;
Them that by lies their Pomp upheld,
My Anger did pursue,
Betimes will I exterminate
The Wickeds growing Race;
No Harbor shall the Ungodly find
Within thy Holy Place.
PSALM CXXXVII.
WHen from our Country Captive led,
Upon the Banks we sat,
Of Babylons remoter streams,
Bewailing our hard fate;
Then lofty Sions ruined Walls
Our thoughtful woes surveyed;
Those Walls no more for us to see,
All now in Ashes laid.
Straight from our Eyes, grown big with tears;
A Briny Deluge fell;
Our Sobs and Sighs suppressed the words
That sought our Griefs to tell.
Upon the pensive Willow Boughs
Our Lutes untuned hung,
And our neglected Harps lay by,
As carelessly unstrung.
Come, Captives, leave your fruitless Moans,
Our taunting Spoylers cried,
And Sing us one of Sions Songs;
But sadly we replied;
Ah! who can now those Airs repeat
With which our Temple rang?
Who so distressed as we can sing
As our blessed Fathers sang?
Shall Babylon our songs deride
So charming to the Ear?
Shall a Profane and Foreign Land
Our sacred Music hear?
No, dear Jerusalem, no, no,
If ever I forget
Thy vast Affliction, and thy share
Of misery so great,
First let my nimble joints, benumbed,
Forget their Active Skill;
No more let tuneful Lute or Harp
Their Artful Touches feel.
First to my dry and Parched Roof
My useless Tongue be glew'd,
Unless thy joys, and Songs of Praise,
Be once again renewed.
Lord, curse thou Edoms traitorous Race
That in our ruin revell'd;
Sack, burn, destroy and kill, they cried,
Let all be lowly levelled.
And thou, Fierce Babel, when thy Tide
Of Triumph once shall turn,
Oh may thou then, a Victor now,
Thy sadder ruin Mourn.
Full happy He, who spoils thee then,
As thou have laid us wast;
And makes the taste those bitter woes
Which thou have made us taste;
Who from the wailing Mothers Breasts
The tender Babes shall tear,
(...) Dissipabit allidendo; which can never be done, but that the Blood must
sprinckle and scatter about.
And with their Blood the rugged Stones.
And Pavements all besmeare.
PSALM CXLVIII.
To the Common Tune and Measure.
LET Highest Heaven extol
The Praises of the Lord,
And all the seats of Bliss
Melodiously accord.
Let Angels Praise
Him with sweet Hymns;
And numerous Hosts
of Seraphims.
Praise him both Sun and Moon
That govern Day and Night,
Praise him ye lesser Stars
In number infinite.
The Spears above,
And Spears below,
And waters that
Beyond 'em flow.
Praise ye the Lord all These,
Praise ye his Holy Name,
The supreme Architect
That reared the wondrous Frame,
He said the Word,
And all was made,
From times decay,
Securely laid.
And as in Heaven above
So Praise the Lord on Earth,
All Monsters which the Land
And which the Sea bring forth.
All Dragons fierce,
And Whales that sweep
The Vast Abys
ses of the Deep.
And all ye Meteors,
The wonders of the Air;
Fire, Snow, and rattling Hail
Jehova's Name revere.
Tempests and Storms,
And Hurricans,
Performing still
What He Ordains.
Mountains and lesser Hills,
Valleys, and Fertile Glades,
Trees happy in their Fruit,
Or yielding useful shades.
Cedars that mount
To pompous height;
And variously
The Hills delight.
All Creatures, Flocks and Herds
That People the wide Fields;
And every creeping thing
That copious Nature yields.
The larger Fowl,
And lesser Crowds,
That Chirp and Sing
Among the Woods.
All Monarchs of the Earth,
All Nations far and near;
Princes and Rulers too,
That swelling Titles wear;
Beauty and Youth
With all their Charms;
Declining Age,
And Babes in Arms.
Praise ye the Lord all these,
And magnify his Name,
For only He alone
Can our just Praises claim.
So great his Fame,
His Power no less,
That Heaven and Earth
Do both confess.
He has advanced in Fame
The Strength of Israel,
His chosen People They,
Who in his Favor dwell.
Therefore to Him
Your Voices raise;
To Him alone
Sing Praise, sing Praise. (...) Celi Celorum, which includes the whole
structure of the Heavens.

(...) Aque quae sunt superne, vel super coelos. The Rabbis observe the
Derivation of Shamaim from Shem, Illic, and Maim, Waters, because they say that
Waters are there, and that the Heavens are Composed of Fire and Water.



PSALM CL. Hallelujah.
PRaise ye the Lord, Praise him within
His Holy Residence:
Extol him for the Boundless fame
Of his Omnipotence.
Extol him for his mighty Deeds
That fill the World with Wonder;
And for the Triumphs of his Power
That Numbers cannot Number.
With lofty Trumpets Martial Sounds
Extol his Puissance;
While the Far-ecchoing Drum Unites
The Chorus in a Dance;
Praise him with Harps, and Harpsichords,
With Flutes and Violins,
While the Majestic Organ joins
To grace the Vocal Hymns.
Praise him with Cimbals softly sweet;
Praise him with Cimbals loud,
Let every Creature that has Breath
Extol the Living God.
FINIS.

