A VERSION OF SOLOMON's Song of Songs.

Together with The XLV. PSALM.

By JOSEPH STENNETT.

Isa. 54.5. -- Thy Maker is thy Husband, the LORD of Hosts is his Name. --

Ephesians. 5.32. This is a great Mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church.

LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar,
and Andr. Bell at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhil. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
THO it is generally agreed that this Poem was composed by Solomon, yet some
have denied that he wrote it by Divine Inspiration; and make his Design to be
only that of celebrating his Amors with Pharaoh's Daughter, or some other
person. This was formerly the Opinion of Theodorus Mopsuestanus, and was
condemned in the 2d Council of Constantinople: and Grotius of late in his
Annotations on this Book declares himself to be [Hoc canticum] est (...) inter
Solomonem and filiam regis Aegypti, interloquentibus etiam choris duobus, tum
juvenum tum virginum, qui in proximis thalamo locis excubabant, nuptiarum
arcana sub honestis verborum involucris hic latent; quae etiam causa est cur
Hebraei veteres hunc librum legi noluerunt nisi a jam conjugio proximis.
Creditur autem Solomon, quo magis perennaret hoc scriptum, ea art id
composuisse, ut sine multa distortione (...) in eo inveniri possent quae Dei
amorem adversus populum Israeliticum exprimerent, quod and sensit and ostendit
Chaldaeus hic paraphrastes; nec aliter accepit Maimonides. Ille autem amor
typus cum fuerit amoris Christi erga ecclesiam, Christiani ingenia sua ad
applicanda ad eam rem hujus carminis verba exercuerunt laudabili studio. H.
Grot. in Cant.
much of the same mind; tho to qualify the matter a little he tells us, It Is
thought that Solomon, the better to eternize this Book, composed it so
artificially, that without much straining there might be Allegories enough
found in it to express the Love of God to the Israelitish Nation; which the
Chaldee Paraphrast perceived and declared, and Maimonides understood it no
otherwise. And this Love being a Type of the Love of Christ to his Church,
Christians have laudably exercised their minds in applying the words of this
Poem to this purpose. But with how little reason any have presumed to deny the
Divine Authority and spiritual Design of this Book, will appear when it is
considered; That it has always been numbered among the Canonical Books of the
Old Testament both by Jews and Christians. The Title given it by the Chaldee
Paraphrast is, Songs and Hymns, which Solomon the Prophet, the King of Israel,
uttered by the Spirit of Prophecy before the Lord, the Lord of all the World.
The extreme Reverence the Jews had for it, as containing Divine Mysteries of
the highest rank, was the reason of their prohibiting their Children to read it
(as well as the first Chapter of Genesis, and both the beginning and end of the
Prophecy of Ezekiel) till they arrived at 30 years of Age. They call it The
(...)
Holy of Holies, and say its Divine Authority was never so much as controverted
among them by any but the Profane. They say the Name [Solomon] mentioned in
this Song is sacred, and to be ascribed to the Messiah, the Prince of Peace.
And the most celebrated Christian Writers, both Ancient and Modern, so
generally agree in the Divine Original of this Song, that it is as needless as
it would be endless to name 'em.

It Is true, this Poem treats of two Lovers, sometimes under the character of a
Shepherd and Shepherdess, and sometimes under that of a Prince and Princess.
But does it thence follow that it has not a Mystical Sense, designing to set
forth the mutual Love of Christ and his Church, when it is so usual a thing to
find Allegories in the Divine Writings? The 45th Psalm celebrates the same
mystical Espousals, and very much in the same strain (a Version of which I
therefore added at the end) and John the Baptist gives the Character of
Bridegroom to our Blessed Savior, John 3.29.
as well as John the Apostle. Rev. 19.7, 9.
The Apostle Paul uses the same kind of Language, Ephesians. 5.22-33. 2 Cor. 11.2.
when he alludes to Marriage, in speaking of the mystical Union of Christ and
the Church. Indeed it may be allowed that here are diverse Allusions to Solomon
and his Queen, their Court and Gardens, etc. and the rather because Solomon was
an eminent Type of Christ; but Long majora canuntur, and a Greater than
Solomon is here, as is evident not only from what has been already said, but
from the improbable things that will result from the contrary supposition. For
instance, if Solomon were one of the principal Subjects of this Song, is it to
be imagined that he would speak so largely in his own praise, and magnify his
own Beauty to so high a degree? On the other hand, is it likely he should one
while so plainly set forth the defects and imperfections of his Bride, and at
another time extol her to the Skies? Is it to be thought he would make her so
amorous and importunate in her inquiries after him? or that he would represent
his Queen running unattended through the streets of Jerusalem in the night to seek
him; and so exposing her self to all manner of Affronts and Abuses, contrary to
the rules of Decency? This no way agrees with the modesty and reservedness of
her Sex (especially in those times, and in that place) nor with the greatness
of her Quality: for in this part of the Song she is not considered as a
Shepherdess in a Country Cottage, but as a Princess in her City-Palace. Now all
this, and much more to the same purpose, which for brevity sake I for bear to
mention, will very well bear a mystic Sense, and may easily be accommodated to
Christ and the Church. For it is no wonder if Solomon speaks highly in the
praise of this Heavenly Bridegroom, and represents this Bride sometimes veiled
with Blemishes and Infirmities, and sometimes without any Defect, shining with
Beauty and Glory; because the various conditions and frames of the Church of
Christ make her appear very much to differ from her self, when viewed in
different respects and at different times. It Is no trespass on her Modesty, but
an addition to her Glory, to represent her Love to Christ extremely fervent.
Her diligent Inquiry after him in the night, when withdrawn from her, after she
refused him admission, her Sorrows and Afflictions in seeking him, her
transports of Joy when she finds him, all suit very well with what passes
between our Savior and his Spouse while she continues in this lower World.

It is likewise worth observation, that the Tower of Lebanon spoken of in this
Book, Chap. 7.4.
which in all appearance is the same with the House of the Forest of Lebanon
mentioned 1 Kings 7.2. was not built till a considerable time after the Temple
was finished, and yet Solomon was married to Pharaoh's Daughter at least some
time before the finishing of it, as appears by comparing 1 Kings 3.1. with chapter
6.38. and chapter 7.1, 2. And therefore, if this Song had been a kind of
Epithalamium made immediately on their Marriage, this Building in Lebanon would
not have bin alluded to in it.

As to the nature of this Poem, it is a kind of Pastoral, tho some parts of it
contain Descriptions more agreeable to a Prince's Court than to a Shepherd's
Cottage. This mixture of City and Country, and sudden passing from simple and
rustic to noble and magnificent Descriptions, was no doubt highly esteemed in
the Hebrew Poesy (whatever account our Moderns make of it) since we have such
instances of it in this Poem, which was composed by the wisest of Men, and the
choicest Piece of a thousand and five whereof he was the Author; as appears by
the Title given it of The Song of Songs, which signifies the most excellent
Song, Rev. 19.16.
as The King of Kings and Lord of Lords denotes in Scripture the supreme King
and Lord.

The Form of it is Dramatick: The persons speaking and spoken to, are the
Bridegroom, the Bride, the Friends or Companions of the Bridegroom, and the
Companions of the Bride, who are called the Daughters of Jerusalem. As by the
Bridegroom Christ is represented, and the Church in general by the Bride; so
the Companions of the Bridegroom seem to signify the Prophets, Apostles, and
other Ministers of the Word of God; and the Daughters of Jerusalem, young
Converts, or such as are inquiring after Christ and his Religion.

If any are shocked at the Style and manner of Composure, as thinking the
Figures some of them too bold, and not natural, the Transtions too abrupt, etc.
let 'em consider that the Gust of all Ages and Nations is not the same, and
that that is a very graceful Expression in one Language, which seems very mean
in another. They that would judge accurately of the Style of this Poem, should
be well acquainted with the Language in which it was originally written, and
with the Genius and Customs of the Age and Nation in which it was first
published. These none can now pretend to be thoroughly versed in; therefore it is
more modest and becoming to lay the fault on our own Ignorance, if we don't see
that Beauty and Elegancy, which the ancient Hebrews did, in a piece composed by
one who, by the testimony of God himself, had the highest intellectual
Accomplishments of any man in the World, and who wrote it by the special
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit too: And instead of puzzling our selves and
others by too nicely criticizing on its external Form, to seek a more useful
and agreeable Entertainment, in getting a solid and experimental knowledge and
relish of those Spiritual Mysteries it contains.

I have attempted in the ensuing Sheets to give a Version of this Divine Drama;
in which I have endeavored to keep as close as I well could to the Terms, or
however to the Sense; to be modest and sparing in paraphrasing; to leave
Passages capable of various probable Interpretations in such terms as might be
differently applied. I have endeavored carefully to pursue the Ideas of the
Divine Poet; yet not to tie my self only to his Terms so scrupulously as quite
to neglect the Air of our English Poetry. No body expects a Translation in
Verse from any Language can be performed verbatim, or as strictly as one in
Prose. I have consulted the Original Text, and various Commentators on
occasion, and taken the liberty to differ from our English Translation in some
places where I thought it reasonable. For instance: chapter 1. 17. instead of
[Rafters of Fir] I say [Galleries of Brutine-tree.] Chap. 2.7. chapter 3.5. and chapter
8.4. I take to be the words of the Bridegroom, and that he charges the
Daughters of Jerusalem not to awake the Bride till she pleases; whereas our
Translators supposed the Bride now speaking, and charging them not to awake the
Bridegroom till he pleases. And since I am speaking of these Texts, it may not
be amiss to advertise by the way that the Adjuration here made by the Roes and
Hinds of the Field is not to be understood as if the Party speaking swore by
these Creatures: Heb. 6.13.
for as God swears only by himself because he can swear by no Greater, Deuteronomy.
6.13.
so it is unlawful for his Creatures to swear by any thing below him. Matt.
5.34-36.
But these words may either signify, I adjure you who are by [or among] the
Roes and Hinds, etc. or else may be taken for a kind of Obtestation, whereby
these Creatures are called to witness against the Daughters of Jerusalem, if
they should not observe the solemn Charge given 'em; as Heaven and Earth are by
a Prosopopoeia called on by Moses to testify against the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
30.19.
and the Stone that Joshua erected is termed a Witness, Josh. 24.27.
and Hearing ascribed to it. Chap. 5. 10. the Bridegroom in our English
Translation is said to be the chiefest of ten thousand: This I think might
better be rendered (...) Vexillum gerens, cui subsint december hominum millia.
Ayant une enseigne de dix mill hommes. Mercer in loc.
[Carrying the Banner over ten thousand men] I therefore turn it thus:

Under his Standard marshaled are Ten thousand Youths, but none so fair.

What is called most fine Gold in our Bible, I render [ the finest Gold, the
Gold of Fez:] for there is (...)
another word just before (...) that signifies fine Gold; therefore I take this
to be the proper Name of a part of Africa still called the Kingdom of Fez: and
perhaps because there was plenty of pure Gold in this Country, the Arabians
term fine Gold Fez. (for Mr. Ainsworth in his Annotations on this place, tells
us it is so called in the Arabic Tongue.) I have throughout noted which Party
is speaking, according to the best judgment I could make. How I have succeeded
in these matters, must be left to others to judge.

I have composed it in such a measure, and divided it into such parts as might
render it fit and easy to be sung in the Worship of God. If any should scruple
so to use it, because the sense of it is (in many places at least) obscure and
difficult; I desire them to consider that many of the Psalms are liable to the
same Objection (particularly the 45th, which treats of the same subject of
Divine Love) and yet these are not laid aside as useless to this purpose,
because dictated by the same Spirit with those that are more plain and easy to
be understood. The obscurity that is found in this or other parts of the sacred
Writings, should excite us to the greater diligence in searching after the mind
of the Holy Spirit, that we may improve both in Grace and Knowledge. And the
Providence of God has furnished various helps to this end, and some in our own
Language: The Learned and Judicious Mr. Ainsworth's Annotations on this Book
very well deserve to be perused by such as aspire after the knowledge of those
excellent things of which it treats.

What is represented to pass between Christ and the Church in general in this
Song, is in a great measure applicable to the Transactions between him and
every particular Christian. Here we may discern the pious Soul convinced of
Christ's Loveliness and Worth, inflamed with Love toward him, and earnestly
desiring and seeking intimate Communion with him, tho she meets with many
difficulties in her way. We afterward find her transported with joy upon the
reception of many signal favors from him, and very ample demonstrations of his
Love, which are attended with the most grateful expressions of Love on her
part. After this, through her negligence and the power of Temptation, she grows
cool and languid in her Affection to him, upon which he as it were retires and
hides himself from her; he withdraws the manifestation of his Kindness, the
want of which alarms and awakens her from her slothful Frame, and seems to fill
her with almost as much Sorrow as his Smiles gave her Pleasure: her joyful
Raptures are now turned into Sighs and Complaints. However, she resolves to
seek her absent Lord, till she finds him: her Zeal revives: she makes great
protestations of the Sincerity of her Love, and resolutions of her future
Constancy: she diligently enquires after him, and at length, after having past
through many Dangers and Difficulties, she meets with him. Their renewed
Communion then furnishes 'em both with the sublimest and most endearing
Expressions of Joy and Love; and they take the greatest complacency in each
other's Society, by turns describing one another's Beauty, till at last she
seems impatient of longer delays, and to desire a yet fuller and more perfect
enjoyment of her Beloved Lord, by a Translation from the Kingdom of Grace into
that of Glory. This seems to be the general Plot and Design of this Divine Poem.

And those gracious Souls, who are truly converted to God, and have experienced
the renewing Influences of the Divine Spirit to maintain their spiritual Life;
who have a spiritual relish, or (to use our Savior's Phrase) savor the things
that be of God (tho themselves are accounted the foolish things of this World)
will easily find much intelligible and instructive matter in this Holy Song,
while the wise men of the World are posed with Mystery, and stumble at it. Not
but that the wisest and most learned Christian may find some difficulties in it
(as well as in many other parts of the Scripture) capable to exercise his pious
Industry.

To conclude, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
If the whole Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all Good Works: Then this
part of it is useful to these purposes: And we shall do well to attend to the
Apostle's Exhortation, who says, Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in
all Wisdom, Col. 3.16.
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs,
singing with Grace in your hearts to the Lord.

And if this small performance shall by the Divine Blessing any way contribute
to the strength of those pious Affections which devout Souls bear to the
Blessed Jesus, it will be the satisfaction and joy of him who esteems it the
highest Honor in the World to be a Servant and Friend to the Heavenly
Bridegroom; and heartily wishes Grace may be with all them that love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity. Ephesians. 6.24.
Amen.

J. S.

To Mr. Joseph Stennett, on his Excellent Version of the Book of Canticles.
LET untuned Souls Poetic Flights despise,
Who to the Heights of Verse could never rise,
Insensible to all the Charms of Wit,
And lofty Sense, in flowing Numbers writ;
Whilst I (unskilled to imitate) admire
The Hebrew Song of Songs tuned to an English Lyre.
Sublime the Theme! This Sacred Poem treats
Of Love Divine, with all its charming Sweets.
Under a King's and Shepherd's Name concealed,
The Love of Christ is to his Church revealed:
He, tho the Sovereign Lord, God over all
Blessed for ever, condescends to call
His Church, collected from the wretched Race
Of sinful Adam (when adorned with Grace)
His Royal Bride; and as a Bridegroom loves,
With soft Endearments all her Passions moves.
Her mighty Joys she does in transport tell,
As on the Subject she could ever dwell.
But ah! too soon forgetful of her Bliss,
She grows secure; and then she grows remiss,
Till her provoked yet constant Lord withdraws,
And gives her time to mourn her Fault and Loss.
Then Cares and Fears possess her troubled Soul,
And anxious Doubts within her Bosom roll.
No Ease, no Quiet can the Fair One find,
Till his Return restores her peaceful Mind.
The inspired Poet thus in Mystic Lays
The Church's Duty sings, her Savior's Praise.
The Prince and Preacher both in one combine,
And with strong Reason courtly Language join,
To beautify a Subject so Divine.
But all these Beauties were to Us obscured
By distant Time and Place (yet just secured
Of the true Sense in rough unpolished Prose)
Till You (Preacher and Poet too) arose
To storm the Heights of Sacred Poetry,
And boldly set the Smiling Captive free,
Tho in an English, yet a charming Dress:
Great the Attempt, and equal the Success!
Jos. Collet.

CHAP. I. Song of Songs.
PART I.
The Bride.

His Kisses breath a Love Divine:
No Juice the generous Vine can bear,
May with thy sweeter Love compare.

Around their liberal Odors spread,
And with their Odors spread thy Fame;
Sweet as rich Oils diffused thy Name,
Thy Name the Virgins Hearts inspires
With sacred Love and pure Desires.

We'll run, we'll fly into thy Arms.
Me, happy me! the King of Kings
Into his Bridal Chambers brings!
Joy sits upon our Hearts and Tongues,
Joy tunes our Thoughts, and tunes our Songs.
We'll think upon this Love of thine
More than full Bowls of sparkling Wine:
For every Soul that is Good and Just,
Loves Thee, my Dear, and love Thee must.
PART II.
Jerusalem,
(Fair Offspring of a noble Stem)
Tho, I confess, my Skin is brown,
My comely Features you must own:
I Am black as Tents of Kedar are;
As Solomon's Curtains I am fair.

Survey my Face, and then despise:
The Sun has viewed me many days,
And scorched my Beauty with his Rays.
My Mother's Sons against me fired
With an uncomely rage, conspired
To make me keep and dress their Vines,
Through Winter Storms and Summer-shines;
While that loved Vineyard of my own
With Weeds and Thorns is all o'regrown.

O tell me whither do retire
With thy loved Flock, thy joy and care?
Where do thou feed 'em? tell me where?
Where giv'st 'em soft repose at noon?
For why should I, as some have done,
To other Pastures turn aside,
Where thy Companions Flocks abide?
The Bridegroom.

Than all thy Sex beside can boast?
I Will be thy Guide, if thou would know
How to my Fields and Folds to go.
The Footsteps of my Flock you see,
Follow them, as they follow me:
Beside those Shepherds Tents repair,
There feed thy Kids, and fold 'em there.
PART III.

Thee, O my Love, I may compare
To a fair set of goodly Steeds
Of that famed race which Egypt breeds,
To Pharaoh's pompous Chariot tied,
When he in solemn State does ride.

(Jewels become such Cheeks as thine)
And Chains of Gold fit to be worn
On Royal Necks, do thine adorn.

Powdered with Studs of Silver, make.
The Bride.

Among his welcome Favorites,
My Spikenard shall the Board perfume,
And breathe its Sweets all round the Room.

Is my beloved Lord to me:
Him in my Arms I will embrace,
My Bosom make his resting place.

A cluster from the Camphire-Tree,
Whose odorous Gum in drops distilled,
Engedi's fertile Vineyards yield.
The Bridegroom.

Art Thou, beyond what others are!
Thy Eyes, that flame with spotless Loves,
Are chaste and bright, like those of Doves.
The Bride.

How Aimable do Thou appear!
Come let us here securely rest,
Our Bed with pleasant Greens is dressed;

Our House is built with Cedar Beams;
The Galleries, contrived to be
For spacious Walks, with Brutine-tree
CHAP. II.
PART I.
The Bridegroom.
Sharon's Field,
The Lilly that the Valleys yield;
Which paint the Fields with White and Red,
And far and near their Odors spread.

The Vale beset around with Thorns;
So bright my Love appears among
The brightest of the Virgin-Throng.
The Bride.

Amidst wild Shrubs encompassed round;
So fair my Dear appears among
The fairest of the Youthful Throng.
To his cool Shade I did retire,
There sat me down, with great desire
To pluck his Fruit, which gave delight
Both to my Taste, and to my Sight.

Which splendid Banquets used to grace:
To entertain me there, he spread
Love's conquering Banner over my head.

With Goblets crowned with generous Wine!
Treat me with Apples, these will prove
A Cordial now I Am sick of Love.

May his Right Arm me round enfold.
The Bridegroom.
Jerusalem,
(Fair Offspring of a Noble Stem)
Since here my Love now rests secure,
I with a solemn Charge adjure
You by the nimble Roes and Fawns,
That run and skip along the Lawns,
Permit her soft repose to take,
And no indecent Clamor make,
Nor jog her as she slumbering lies,
Till she her self is pleased to rise.
PART II.
The Bride.

And now I see him swiftly move:
Over haughty Mountains how he trips!
Over Hills and Rocks how fast he skips!

That runs and leaps along the Lawn:
Now by the Wall he stands I see,
Now through the Window looks at me:
His Face now through the Lattice shows,
His Beauties all their Charms disclose;

His Voice, his charming Voice I hear:
"Rise, rise, my Love, make no delay,
"Rise, my Fair one, and come away;

"The Rains abate, the Spring comes on;

"To please the Scent, and please the Eyes:
"The Birds begin to chirp and sing,
"To welcome the returning Spring:
"The Turtle in our Plains we hear
"Proclaiming the reviving year:

"And to the warmer Air exposes:
"The fruitful Vine begins to bloom,
"Her tender Buds the Air perfume.
"Rise, rise, my Love, make no delay,
"Rise, my fair one, and come away.
PART III.

"And in the secret Cliffs reside,
"O let thy Face to me appear!
"Nor let me fail thy Voice to hear!
"That melting Voice of thine is sweet;
"And in thy Face all Graces meet.

"Which in our Vineyards ravage make:
"Strive to defeat their ill designs;
"For tender Grapes adorn our Vines.

His Pasture among the Lillies is.

When gloomy Shadows fly away,
Turn, my Beloved, turn again,
Nor let me call and beg in vain:
Be like a Roe or nimble Fawn,
That runs and skips along the Lawn;
Such as the Hills of Bether breed,
Such as the Hills of Bether feed.
CHAP III.
PART I.

My Dreams and Slumbers fled away;
Waking I missed my Soul's delight,
I missed him in the shades of Night:
I called aloud, and called again;
I sought him, but I sought in vain.

View every corner up and down;
Search every Lane, and every Street,
Till I my Soul's Delight can meet:
For him I asked, and asked again;
I sought him, but I sought in vain:
I found not him; but I was found
By them that walk the City round,
The Watch that guard the Walls by night:
Saw ye, said I, my Soul's delight?

And found my Soul's Delight at last:
Fast in my Arms my Dear I caught,
And to my Mother's Lodgings brought,
Into the joyful Chamber where
I drew at first my vital Air.
The Bridegroom.
Jerusalem,
(Fair Offspring of a Noble Stem)
Since here my Love now rests secure,
I with a solemn Charge adjure
You by the nimble Roes and Fawns,
That run and skip along the Lawns,
Permit her soft repose to take,
And no indecent clamor make,
Nor jog her as she slumbering lies,
Till she her self is pleased to rise.
PART II.
The Friends of the Bridegroom.

Expiring Aromatic Gums,
Sweet as the Altar's Fumes, that rise
In Pillars to propitious Skies?
Such sacred Odors flow from her,
Perfumed with Frankincense and Myrrh;
And all rich Powders of the store
The Merchant brings from the Eastern shore.
Solomon's Bed of State,
Where threescore mighty Champions wait;
All other Champions these excel,
That head the Tribes of Israel;

The warlike Sword, and warlike Shield:
Each on his Thigh his Weapon bears,
To guard the Court from nightly fears.
Solomon
Was made of Wood from Lebanon;

The Bottom Gold from Ophir brought,
With Tyrian Purple lined above,
The Middle paved with mystic Love
For the Daughters of Jerusalem,
(The Offspring of a Noble Stem)
Sion's Daughters, bright and fair,
Like that blessed Stock that did you bear,
See how King Solomon appears,
How bright's the Diadem he wears!
Crowned by his Mother's Royal Hand,
This smiling Day the nuptial Band
Him to his lovely Bride has joined,
And Tides of Joy overflow his Mind.
CHAP. IV.
PART I.
The Bridegroom.

Art thou beyond what others are!
Thy Eyes that flame with spotless Loves,
Are chaste and bright like those of Doves.
They shine beneath thy curling Locks,
Which seem like Goats in numerous Flocks,
That on Mount Gilead's brow appear,
Climbing to find sweet Pasture there.

A set of Teeth in even rows,
Like Flocks of Sheep of equal size,
Just as they from the Water rise,
And to be shorn from washing come,
Bearing their snowy Fleeces home;
Or like the pretty Twins they bear,
When none of 'em abortive are.

Are like a Scarlet-colour'd Thread:
When with thy sweetest Voice they move,
Their Graces still more charming prove.
Thy Temples, shaded with thy Hair,
And Cheeks, like cut Pomegranates are;
As those abound with purple Veins,
In these a blushing Tincture reigns.

In that illustrious Neck of thine,
Like David's Tower it seems to be,
Built for a Royal Armory:
Thy Necklace, strung with glittering Gems,
Like thousand shining Bucklers seems,
All Shields by mighty Captains born,
Which that bright Tower around adorn.

Are like two Fawns, an equal pair,
The lovely Twins of the fruitful Roe,
Feeding where Snow-white Lillies grow.

When gloomy Shadows fly away,
To the Mount of Myrrh I Will get me hence,
And to the Hill of Frankincense.
PART II.

From every blemish thou art free.
Leb'non come with me, my Bride;
From Leb'non come with me, thy Guide.
From high Amana take thy view,
From Shenir's top, and Hermon's too;
From Dens where Lions do reside,
From Hills where savage Leopards hide.

(To me by many ties allied)
My Heart is ravished with thy Charms;
My Heart is conquered by thy Arms.
One glance of Love shot from thy Eye
Has won the easy Victory:
One Chain, wherewith thy Neck's arrayed,
Has me a willing Captive made.

(To me by many ties allied)
How pleasant is this Love of thine!
How much more sweet than generous Wine!
How much thy precious Oils in smell
The best of Spices all excel!

Drops like the Honeycomb distill.
Honey and Milk's beneath thy Tongue,
Which feeds the Weak as well as strong.
Thy Garments with rich Scents abound,
Such as in Lebanon are found.
PART III.

(To me by many Ties allied)
Is like a Garden round enclosed,
Not, as the common Field, exposed:
A Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed,
And never to vulgar eyes revealed.

A fruitful Paradise compose:
There Trees, with fair Pomegranates crowned,
And all delicious Fruits, abound:
There Camphire drops, and Spikenard grows,

Sweet Cane, and Cinnamon are there,
With Aloes, Frankincense, and Myrrh:
And all choice Spices there are found,
Which fill the Air with Odors round.

The Streams, that keep their Plants alive;
From Thee their Spring and sacred Well,
Whose living Waters all excel:
From Lebanon these Waters flow,
And bless with Fruit the Vale below.

Give thou, O South, a warmer blast;
Upon my Garden kindly blow,
That all sweet Spices there may flow.
The Bride.
To's Garden let my Love repair,
Pluck his rare Fruits, and eat 'em there.
CHAP. V.
PART I.
The Bridegroom.

(To me by many Ties allied)
I Am come into my Garden, where
I please my self in gathering Myrrh,
In gathering every Spice, and Gum:
I eat my Honey from the Comb;
My Wine and Milk go sweetly down,
With plenty these my Table crown.
Come eat with me, my welcome Friends,
Eat of the Gifts kind Heaven sends;
Drink, as our Joys and Wines abound;
Drink, dear Companions, freely round.
PART II.
The Bride.

I slept, yet was my Heart awake:
A Voice salutes my waking Ear,
One knocking at the Door I hear:
My Love, it seems, was pleased to wait,
Calling and knocking at the Gate:
"My Sister, loud he cried, my Love,
"My Fair, my chaste, my spotless Dove,
"Be kind, as I to you have bin,
"Unlock the Door, and let me in:
"With trickling Dew my head is filled,
"My Locks with Drops by night distilled.

How shall I dress me? I replied;
I Have lately washed my Feet, and how,
My Dear, shall I defile 'em now?

Till through the Door he thrust his Hand;
At last my Heart began to move
With all the tender thoughts of Love.

I had no sooner touched the Gate,
My Hands with Drops of Myrrh were filled,
My Fingers sweetest Myrrh distilled;
The handles of the Lock I found
With dropping Myrrh perfumed around.

O that I'ad opened it before!
For now alas! my Love was gone,
Was gone! and I left all alone!
My Soul was ready to expire
With fear, with sorrow, and desire:
When his kind Words I called to mind,
I thought how I had been unkind!
I sought him, but I sought in vain;
I called, but could no answer gain:

By Guards that walk the City round;
These treated me with Wounds and Blows,
And aggravated all my Woes:
The Watch that guard the Walls by night,
Even took away my Veil in spite.
Jerusalem,
(Fair Offspring of a Noble Stem)
You I most solemnly adjure,
Whenever you find my Love, be sure
With my Complaints his pity move,
And tell him I am sick of Love.
PART III.
The Daughters of Jerusalem.

Than all our Sex beside can boast!
What Charms in thy Beloved dwell,
To make him other Loves excel?
Describe his Beauties, let us know,
Fair One, why thou adjur'st us so.
The Bride.

In just degrees their mixture spread:
Under his Standard marshaled are
Ten thousand Youths, but none so fair.

The Gold of Fez so much renowned:
His Hair in decent Curls appears,
Black as the Plumes the Raven wears.

Are pure and bright like those of Doves,
When in clear Streams their Heads they wet,
They Are washed in Milk, and fitly set.

Or Flowers, as sweet as they are fair.
His Lips with balmy Myrrh do flow;
Within 'em snowy Lillies grow.

Decked with Gold Rings and Chrysolite.
His Breast of polished Ivory made,
And all with Saphires overlaid.

In Golden Sockets fixed below.
His Presence bears a Noble Air,
As Leb'non and its Cedars Fair.

He Is all made up of Charms and Love!
O Daughters of Jerusalem,
(Fair Offspring of a Noble Stem)
This is my Dearest! this is He
Who loves, and is beloved of Me!
CHAP. VI.
PART I.
The Daughters of Jerusalem.

Than all our Sex beside can boast!
Whither is thy Beloved gone?
O whither is thy Love withdrawn?
Which way he turned let us but know,
We'll all to seek Him with thee go.
The Bride.

Where Beds of Spice their Sweets expire.
To's Gardens, where he feeds, and where
He gathers Lillies sweet and fair.

His Pasture among the Lillies is.
The Bridegroom.
Tirzah fair, my Love, you seem,
And comely as Jerusalem.
Among thy milder Graces now
An aweful Dread reigns on thy Brow;
Like Armies that for War prepare,
And to the Field their Ensigns bear.

Whose powerful Charms my Heart surprise!
Thy Hair, all curled in curious Locks,
Seems like those Goats in numerous Flocks,
That on Mount Gilead's Brow appear,
Climbing to find sweet Pasture there.

A set of Teeth in even Rows;
Like Flocks of Sheep of equal size,
Just as they from the Water rise,
And to be shorn from washing come,
Bearing their snowy Fleeces home;
Or like the pretty Twins they bear,
When none of them abortive are.

And Cheeks like cut Pomegranates are;
As those abound with Purple Veins,
In these a blushing Tincture reigns.
PART II.

And Fourscore beauteous Concubines,
Innumerable Virgins too,
May ever compare, my Love, with You.

Transcends 'em all her Self alone;
The only One her Mother bare,
Her Mother's tender Joy and Care.
The Virgins saw her, and confessed
None with such Beauty ever was blessed:
The Queens and Concubines admired,
And in her Praises all conspired.
The Daughters of Jerusalem.

Gay as the rising Morning Light?
Never did the Moon so fair appear;
Nor is the Sun more bright and clear.
Among her milder Graces now
An awful Dread reigns o^ her Brow;
Like Armies that for War prepare,
And to the Field their Ensigns bear.
PART III.
The Bridegroom.

To see what Fruits the Valley crown;
To see how well the Vines were grown,
How the Pomegranate-trees were blown.

Fervent Desires transport my Mind,
And Raptures wing my wondering Soul,
That nothing can my Speed control:
So Volunteers in Chariots fly,
Resolved to overcome or die.
Return, return, O Shulamite,
Thy Presence will rejoice our sight:

O Fairest Shulamite, in Thee?
In Thee bright Pomp and Terror shine,
As when two shouting Armies join.
CHAP. VII.
PART I.

Numberless Charms from Head to Feet!
Those Feet become the Shoes they wear,
Become the lovely Weight they bear;
Two beauteous Pillars they sustain,
Whose Joints the finest Work contain;
Like precious Gems, more precious still
When cut and set with wondrous Skill.

Which does with vital Juice abound:
Thy Belly promises a Race,
Heirs to thy Honor, and thy Grace.
It Is like a heap of Wheat, when crowned
With snowy Lillies all around.

Are like two Fawns an equal pair,
The lovely Twins of the fruitful Roe.

Stands that fair Neck, which seems to be
A Tower of polished Ivory.
Those Eyes, those sparkling Eyes of thine,
Like the clear Pools in Heshbon, shine
Just by Bath-rabbim-gate. Thy Nose
Methinks like some fair Turret shows,
Like that of Leb'non, which descries
The Plain where great Damascus lies.

(Thy Head, whose Beauty crowns the rest)
It looks like Carmel's Fields, and bears
A lovely Fleece of purple Hairs.
By these dear Chains the King is bound,
When in the Galleries he is found.
PART II.

How charming all thy Features are!
How they inspire refined Delight!

Thy Breasts like Clusters of the Vine,
When ripe, and full of generous Wine.

I Will reach its fruitful Boughs on high;
Thy Breasts, like Clusters of the Vine,
Shall now abound with generous Wine.
Thy Nostrils breath a fragrant Air,
Like Apples sweet, as they are fair.

Shows the right Gust of Truth and Sense;
Like sparkling Wine, that briskly moves,
Such as my dearest Love approves;
Which can inspire the Dull, and rouse
The silent Lips of them that drouze.
The Bride.

And his Desire's to me alone.

To the open Fields, and take the Air;
Into the Country we'll retreat,
And there a quiet Lodging get;

And through the smiling Vineyards stray;
See if the Vine begins to shoot,
And promises good store of Fruit;
See if her tender Grapes she shows;
See how the fair Pomegranate blows.
There will I give my Loves to thee.

Our Gates with choicest Fruits abound,
Fruits new and old with us are found;
This Store, my Love, I did provide
For Thee, who have my Heart beside.
CHAP. VIII.
PART I.

Were with me as my Brother now,
Fed by those Breasts, born on that Knee,
Which suckled and supported me.
With how much Joy I should thee meet,
Or in the Field, or in the Street!
There I Would embrace thee, there I Would kiss,
Nor should I be despised for this.

Whither Thou would as gladly come,
To my dear Mother's pleasant Seat,
Where Thou should many Welcomes meet:
Thy kind Instructions all should find
A listening Ear, and pliant Mind:
Wine mixed with Spices I Would prepare,
And Thou should freely drink it there.
The Fruit of my Pomegranate-tree
Should yield its grateful Juice to Thee.

His Right Arm should me round enfold.
The Bridegroom.
Jerusalem,
(Fair Offspring of a Noble Stem)
Since here my Love now rests secure,
You I most solemnly adjure,
Permit her soft repose to take,
And no indecent clamor make,
Nor jog her as she slumbering lies,
Till she her self is pleased to rise.
PART II.
The Daughters of Jerusalem.

Leaning upon the Arm she loves?
The Bridegroom.
At first, my Love, I raised up Thee
Under the fruitful Apple Tree;
There many a Pang, and many a Throw
Did thy Fair Mother undergo;
But after many Pangs and Throws,
Did her blessed Fruit at last disclose.
The Bride.

Like a fair Signet, on thy Breast!
Ingrave it on thy Arm, and wear
The precious Seal for ever there:
For there is so great a power in Love,
Not Death it self so strong can prove;
The King of Terrors in his Pride
By fiercer Jealousy's outvy'd,
Those Darts shine with Celestial Fire,
Those Darts a Love Divine inspire,

Conquered by the overflowing Sea:
The swelling Floods in vain conspire
To quench so pure and bright a Fire.
He whose large Stores do most abound,
Too poor to purchase Love is found;
His Offers would successless prove,
Should he give all his Wealth for Love;
Love at so high a rate is prized,
His Treasures would be all despised,
PART III.
The Bridegroom.

Does to our Family belong:
Her Breasts appear not yet, it is true;
What shall we for our Sister do,
When she begins to get a Name,
When growing Beauties spread her Fame?

She seems a Wall, for strength designed;
A Palace on that Wall we'll found,
Glittering with Silver all around:
If like a Gate, built to defend
From Foes, and to admit a Friend;
With Cedar Boards we'll fence her well,
Of lasting Strength and fragrant Smell
The Bride.

I am a Wall for Strength designed;
My Breasts are grown, and now appear
Like two fair Towers built for my Dear.
When thus I spoke, his Smiles I gained,
With them his very Heart obtained.
PART IV.
Solomon a Field possessed,
Baal-hamon Field with plenty blessed:
With Vines of noblest kind 'twas set.
This Vineyard he to Keepers let;
These for the Fruit agreed to bring
A thousand Shekels to the King.

I always keep, and fence, and dress;
A thousand Silver Shekels are,
O Solomon, thy Rightful share;
And those two hundred that remain,
To them that keep the Fruit pertain.
The Bridegroom.

And art the fairest Flower there!
Thy Voice our glad Companions hear,
Which melts the Heart, and charms the Ear.
Give me the same delight, my Dear,
Thy sweetest Voice O let me hear!
The Bride.

Nor let me vainly beg and pray:
Flee like a Roe or nimble Fawn,
That runs and skips along the Lawn;
Such as the spicy Mountains breed,
Such as the spicy Mountains feed.
Psalm XLV. To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the Sons of Korah,
Maschil.
A Song of Loves.
PART I. Verse]


What I compose concerns the King;
My Tongue the swiftest Pen that writes
Outvies, while I attempt to sing.

Like Thee for Loveliness appears;
Thy Lips, bedewed with Heavenly Grace,
Ravish each wondering Soul that hears:
For God will ever from on high
His constant Blessings Thee afford.

Make haste to gird thy Conquering Sword:

Along in Prosperous Grandeur ride;
Let Meekness, Truth, and Justice go
In Solemn Triumph by thy side.
Thy Right Hand, versed in Warlike Arts,
Thee terrible Exploits shall teach:

Thy keenest Darts shall surely reach;
The Nations under Thee shall fall.

And, as its Power extends over all,
It shall for evermore endure.
The Scepter of thy Kingdom proves
A Scepter of Impartial Right:

And Sin is odious in thy sight.
For God, thy God, in plenteous Showers
On thee the Oil of Gladness sheds;
More of that Holy Ointment pours
On Thine, than thy Companions Heads.

Thy Robes of Glory more expire,
When passing from the Ivory Rooms,
Than all thy dearest Friends Attire.

And in the Crowd of Virgins pressed;
On thy Right Hand the Brighter Queen
Stood all in Gold of Ophir dressed.
PART II.

Attend with serious thoughts to me;
Forget thy People once so Dear,
Nor long thy Father's House to see:

He shall thy Beauty still admire;
For he is thy Lord, thy Lord alone,
And does thy Worship all require.
Tyre's Stately Daughter shall attend
With Costly Presents at thy Gate:
The richest of the People bend,
And for thy Favor beg and wait.

All Inward Glories does enfold;
Her outward Garments wrought with Art,
Are made of Threads of purest Gold.

In Robes of fine Embroidery;
Her Virgin-Friends that on her wait,
Shall all be introduced to Thee.

Full Joys in every Heart shall reign,
Till the bright Gate of the Royal Court
Receives the welcome Nuptial Train.

A stock of Sons, that owe their Birth
To Thee; a Noble Race of Kings,
Whom Thou shall place over all the Earth.

To all successive Times descend;
All Nations shall thy Acts proclaim
And thy loud Praises never shall end.
FINIS.

