THE SABBATH TRULY SANCTIFIED, Or, GODLY RULES And Directions for all Sincere
Christian Professors, for the strict observation of the LORDS DAY Before, at,
and after the public Exercises of the CHURCH. With an Order from the House of
Commons, for the due observing the Sabbath Day.

As also, A Cataloge of the fearful Judgments that have happenned to wilful
infringers, and profane and Irreligious Sabbath Breakers.

By A. B. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

LONDON, Printed Ian. 31. in the year, MDCXLV.

Die Sabbath. 22. Mar.
IT is Ordered, that the Aldermen and Citizens that serve for the City of
London, intunate unto the Lord Mayor of London, from this House, that the
Statutes for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in execution, and that the
like intimation be made to the Justices of the Peace in all Counties of England
and Wales.

Hen. Elsynge. Cler. Dom. Com.

THE SABBATH DULY SANCTIFIED.
ALMIGHTY GOD (Creator of all Mankind) will have himself Worshipped, not only
in a private manner, by private persons, and families: but also in a more
public sort of all the Godly joined together in a Visible Church, that by this
means he may be known not only to be God, and Lord of every singular person:
but also of the Creatures of the whole universal World, and to that purpose,
has appointed one particular day for his own proper service, which he has
called the Sabbath, or Lords Day, and with a special Memento, has commanded
the same to be sanctified, and kept holy, which consists in two things.

First, in resting from all servile and common business pertaining to our
natural life.

Secondly, in consecrating that rest wholly to the service of God, and the use
of these holy means which belong to our spiritual life.

For the First.
1. The servile and common works from which we are to cease, are Exodus 31. 29.
30.
generally all civil works, from the least to the greatest: more particularly,

First, from all the works of our calling, though it were reaping in Exo. 31.
12, 13.
the time of Harvest.

Secondly from carrying burdens, as Carryers do: or riding abroad Exo. 34.
15, etc.
for profit, or for pleasure: God has commanded, That the Exo. 34. 2^
Beasts should rest on the Sabbath day, because all occasion of traveling or
laboring with them should be cut off from man. God gives Joh. 17. 2^ 22. 27.
Deuteronomy. ^4.
them that day a rest and he that without necessity, deprives them of their
rest on the Lords Day; the groans of the poor tired beasts shall in the day of
the Lord, rise up in judgment against him; Likewise Romans 8. 22 Deuteronomy. 2. 4 1.
Cor. 9
such as spend the greatest part of the day in trimming, and painting, and
pampering of themselves, like Iezebells, doing the Devils work upon Gods day.

Thirdly, from keeping of Faires or Markets, which for the most Neh. 13. 5. 16.
9.
part, God punishes with pestilence, fire, and strange flood^.

Fourthly, from studying any Books of Science, but the holy Scriptures, and
Divinity; for our study must be, to be ravished in spirit Apo. 1. 19.
upon the Lords day, In a word thou must on that day cease in thy calling to
do thy work: that the Lord by his calling, may do his work in thee; for
whatsoever is gotten by common working on this day, shall never be blessed of
the Lord; but it will prove like Achans gold, which being got contrary to the
Lords Commandment, brought the fire of Gods curse upon all the rest which he
had lawfully gotten. And if Christ scourge them out, as Thieves, who bought and
sold in his Temple (which was but a Ceremony shortly to be abrogated) is it to
be thought, that he will never suffer those to escape unpunished, who
(contrary to his Commandment) buy and sell on the Sabbath day, which is his
perpetual Law? Christ calls such sacrilegious Thieves, and as well may they
steal the Communion Cup from the Lords Table, as steal from God the chiefest
part of the Lords Day to consume it in their own lusts; such shall one day
find the judgment of God, heavier then the opinions of men.

Fifthly, from all Recreations and sports, which at other times are lawful: for
if lawful works be forbidden on this day, much more lawful sports, which do
more steal away our affections from the Isa. 58. 13. 14.
contemplation of heavenly things, then any bodily work or labor. Neither can
there be unto a man (that delights in the Lord) any greater delight or
recreation, than the sanctifying of the Lords Psalm. 37. 4
day. For can there be any greater joy for a person condemned, then to come to
his Princes house, to have his pardon sealed? for one that is deadly sick, to
come to a Physician, that can cure him? or for a Prodigal child that fed on
the husks of swine, to be admitted to eat the bread of life at his fathers
table? Or for him, who fears for sin the tidings of death, to come to hear
from God the assurance of eternal life? if thou will allow thy self or thy
servant Recreation, allow it in the six days that are thine, not on the Lords
day, which is neither thine, nor others; No bodily Recreation is therefore to
be used on this day; But so far as it may help the soul, to do more
cheerfully the service of God.

Sixthly, from gross feeding, liberal drinking of wine, or strong drink, Ephesians.
5. 18 19. To. 12. 11 Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Isai. 58. 13
which may make us either drowsy, or unapt to serve God with our hearts and
minds.

Seventhly, from all talking about worldly things, which hinders the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, more than working, seeing one may work alone, but
cannot talk but with others.

He that keeps the Sabbath only by resting from his ordinary work, keeps it
but as a beast; But rest on this day, is so far commanded to Christians, as
it is a help to sanctification; and labor so far forbidden, as it is an
impediment to the outward and inward worship of Almighty God.

If then these Recreations, which are lawful at other times, are on the
sabbath not allowed, much more those that are altogether at all times unlawful;
who without mourning can endure to see Christians keep the Lords day, as if
they celebrated a Feast rather to Bacchus, then to the honor of the Lord Jesus,
the Savior and Redeemer of the world? For having served God but 1 Cor. 10. 7.
an hour, with outward show, they spend the rest of the Lords day in sitting
down to eat and drink, and rising up to play, first balasting their bellies
with eating and drinking; and then feeding their lusts with playing, and
dancing: Exodus 31. ^8. 19. Aug. in tic Psalm. 91.
Against which Profanation, all holy Divines, both old and new, have in their
times most bitterly inveighed, insomuch that Augustine affirms, that it was
better to plough, then to dance upon the Sabbath day.

For the Second.
2. The Consideration of the Sabbaths rest, consists in performing three sorts
of duties; First, Before. Secondly, At. Thirdly, After the public exercises of
the Church.

The duties to be performed before the public exercises of the Church, are;

1. To give over working be times on the Eve, that thy body may be the Adoc. 2.
3.
more refreshed, and thy mind the better fitted to sanctify the Sabbath on
the next day; for want of this preparation, thy self and thy servants, being
tired with Labor and watching the night before, are so heavy, that when you
should be serving God, and hearing what his Spirit says unto the Church for
your souls instruction: you cannot hold up your heads for sleeping: to the
dishonor of God, the offense of the Church, and the shame of your selves,
therefore the Lord commands us not only to keep holy, but also to remember
aforehand the Sabbath day; to keep it holy by preparing our hearts, and
removing all business that might hinder us to consecrate it, Isa. 56. and 51.
13, etc.
as a glorious day unto the Lord; who in the other Commandments, does but
either bid, or forbid; but does both in this Commandment, and that with a
special Memorandum, As if a Master should charge his servant to look well unto
ten things of great Trust, but to have a more special care, to remember one of
those tenn, for diverse weighty reasons: should not a faithful servant that
lov^s his Master, show a more special care unto that thing above all other
businesses.

Thus Moses taught the people overnight to remember the Sabbath, and it Exo.
16. 23, etc.
was a holy custom among our forefathers, when at the ringing to prayer on the
Eve before, the husbandman would give over his labor in the field, and the
tradesman his work in the shop, and go to evening prayer in the Church, to
prepare their souls, that their minds might more cheerfully attend Gods
worship on the Sabbath day.

2. To possess that night thy vessel in holiness, and honor: that thou may
Exo. 9. 15 1 Cor. 7. 5 Genesis 35. 2 ^ Sam. 31. 5. Exo. 19. 16. Psa. 9. 22. Ec. 4.
17.
present thy soul more purely in the sight of God the next morning.

3. To rise up early in the morning, on the Sabbath Day: Be careful therefore
to rise sooner on this day, than on other days; by how much the service of God
is to be preferred before all earthly businesses; For there is no master to
serve so good as God, and in the end, no works shall be better rewarded then
his service.

4. When thou art up, consider with thy self, what an impure sinner thou art,
and into what an holy place thou go to appear before the most holy God, who
sees thy heart, and hatethall impurity and hypocrisy. Examine thy self
therefore before thou go to Church, what grievous sins thou have committed
the week past, confess them unto God, and earnestly pray for the pardon, and
forgiveness of them, and so reconcile thy self with God in Christ, Renew thy
Vows, to walk more conscionably, and pray for an increase of those graces which
thou have, and a supply of those which thou want; But especially pray that
thou may have grace to hear the Word of God read, and Preached with profit,
and that thou may recive the holy Sacrament with comfort (if it be Communion
day) that God by his holy Spirit, would assist the Preacher, to speak something
that may kill thy sin, and and comfort thy soul, which that thou may do,
pour forth thy prayers to Almighty God, who upon thine unfeigned repentance,
will enable thee, and hear thy earnest and most humble request.

Now in the Name of Almighty God (who rested having created heaven, and earth)
and of his eteanall Son Jesus, the Redeemer of his Church, who shall shottly
come on the dreadful day of doom, to judge all men according Act. 12. 31 To.
2. 12. 1 These. 2. 8.
to the obedience, which they have showed to his Commandments: I exhor^, nay I
require thee, who read these words, as thou will answer before the face of
Christ and his holy Angels, at that day, that thou better weigh, and consider,
whether Dancing, Stage-playing, Masking, Carding, Diceing, Tabling,
Ches-playing, Bowling, Shooting, Beare-baiting, Carousing, Tippling, and such
other fooleries of Robin-hood Morrice-dances, Wakes, and Maygames be exercises
that God will bless and allow on the Sabbath day. And seeing no Action ought
to be done that day, but such as whereby we either bless God, or look to
receive a blessing from God, how dare thou do these things on that blessed
day, on which thou dare not to pray to God, to bestow a blessing on it to thy
use? Hear this, and tremble at this, O profane youth of a profane age! O heart
all frozen, and void of the feeling of the grace of God; And having every day
in six, every hour in every day, every minute in every hour, so tasted the
sweet mercy of thy God in Christ, without which thou had perished every
moment, yet can not find in thy corrupt and irreligious heart, to spend in
thy Masters service that one day of the week, which he has reserved for his
own praise and worship. Let men in defense of their profaness, object what
they will, and answer what the Devil puts in their mouths: yet I would wish
them to remember, that seeing it is an ancient tradition in the Church, that
the Lords second coming shall be upon the Lords day, how little joy they
should have, to be overtaken in Lactan.l. 7. cap. 1.
those carnal sports, to please themselves; when their Master should find them
in spiritual exercises serving him. The profanest wretch, would then wish
rather to be taken kneeling at prayers in the Church, then skipping like a Goat
in a dance. If this cannot move, yet I would wish our impure Gallants to
remember, that while they thus dance on the Lords day (contrary to the Lords
Commandment) they do but dance about the Pits brink, and they know not which
of them shall first fall therein; whereinto being once fallen, without
repentance, no greatness can exempt them from the vengeance of that great God,
whose Commandment (contrary to their knowledge and conscience) they do thus
presumptuously transgress. If then Gods Commandments cannot prevail with
thee, nor Gods Word advise thee; Then let these ensuing Examples of Gods
Judgments on Sabbath Breakers, deter thee from the wilful profanation of the
Lords day.

The Lord who is otherwise the God of mercy) commanded Moses to stone to death
the man, who (of a presumptuous mind) would openly go to gather Number. 53. 2.
sticks on the Sabbath Day; The fact was small: true, but the sin was the
greater, that (upon so small an occasion) would presume to break so great, a
Commandment.

Nicanor offering to fight against the Jews on the Sabbath day, was slain
himself, and 35000. of his men.

A husbandman grinding corn upon the Lords day, had his Mill burned to ashes.

Another carrying corn on this day, had his barn, and all his corn therein
burnt with fire from heaven, the next night after.

A certain Nobleman, profaning the Sabbath usually in hunting, had a child like
a Dog, and with ears and chaps, and crying like a hound.

A flax-wife, working with her maids on the Lords day, it seemed unto them that
fire issued out of the flax, but did no harm, the nex Sabbath it fired indeed,
doing little harm; but not taking warning by this, the 3. Sunday, it again took
fire, burnt the house, scorched the woman, and two children, whereof they died
the next day: but, by the mercy of God, a child in the cradle was taken out of
the fire alive, and unhurt

At a Beare-baiting in France, on the Sabbath, 300. were slain outright,
besides diverse lamed, and grievously wounded.

A Miller dwelling in a Town called Hoult, near Westchester, grinding corn on
the Lords day, An. 1588. was found dead in his Mill by his wife, on the Monday
following, his ears, nose, and lips eaten off with Ratts.

On the 13. Ian. 1582, being the Lords day, the scaffolds fell in Paris Garden,
under the people at a Beare-baiting, so that eight were suddenly slain, Stowes
a bridge. An. 1582
and a great number hurt and maimed. A warning to such, who take more pleasure,
on the Lords day, to be on a Theater, beholding carnal sports, then to be in
the Church, serving God with the spiritual works of Piety.

At a Bull-baiting in the Popes dominions, 1603. the Bull breaking from the
Ring, killing a woman, and so (...)righted another woman, being great with
child, that she immediately fell in labor, and dyed with her child also.

Many fearful examples of Gods Judgments by fire have in our days been
showed upon diverse Towns, where the profanation of the Lords day has been
openly countenanced.

Stratford upon Aven, was twice on the same day twelve-mon^th (being the Lords
Day) almost consumed with fire, chiefly for profaning the Lords Sabbath, and
for contemning his Word in the mouth of his faithful Preachers and Ministers.

Torverton in Devonshire (whose Remembrance makes my heart bleed) was
oftentimes admonished by her Godly Preacher, That God would bring some heavy
judgment on the Town, for their horrible profanation of the Lords day,
occasioned chiefly by the Market on the day following. Not long after his
death, on the 3. of April. 1598. GOD (in less then half an hour) consumed
with a sudden and fearful fire, the whole Town, except only the Church, the
Courthouse, and the Almes-house, or a few poor peoples dwellings, where a man
might have seen 400. dwelling-houses all at once on fire, and about 50. persons
consumed with the same, and lately on the fifth of August, 1612. the whole town
was again fired, and consumed except some thirty houses of poor people with the
School-house, and Almes-houses: they are blinded, who see not in this the
finger of God, God grant them grace to change their market day, and to remove
all occasion of profancing the Lords Day, Let other Towns remember the Tower
of Siloe, Luke 13. 4. and take warning Luke 13. 4
by their neighbors chastisements, and fear Gods threatenings, Ier. 17. 27. and
believe Gods Prophets, if they will prosper, 1 Chronicles. 20. 20.

Many other examples of Gods Judgments, (as the fire lately at Oxford) might
be alleged, but if these are not sufficient to terifie thy heart from the
wilful profanation of the Lords day, It may be (if thou proceed in ^hy
profanation) the Lord will make thee the next example, to teach others to keep
his Sabbaths better. Wherefore again, and again, in the name of the Lord I
exhort thee; Nay I conjure thee, as thou tenderest the salvation of thy own
poor soul, that thou remember to sanctify the sabbath, and to keep holy the
Lords Day, if not for the love of him, who loved thee so well, that he gave his
only begotten Son, to suffer for thy sin, yet for fear of temporal
punishment here, and eternal torment hereafter in the world to come.

Oderunt peccaere boni, vertutis honor,
Oderunt peccaere mali, formidine penae.
For love of Virtue, good men from sin abstain,
For fear of punishment, the wicked do refrain.

FINIS.

