THE BOOK OF THE REVELATION PARAPHRASED; WITH ANNOTATIONS ON EACH CHAPTER.

Whereby it is made plain to the meanest Capacity.

DAN. XII. 4. -- Many shall run, to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased.

HAB. II. 2. -- Write the Vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may
run that reads it.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCXCIII.

THE PREFACE.
THere is scarce any part of Holy Writ, which has met with a more severe
entertainment in the World, than this Sacred Book: For although it has evident
Characters of its Divine Authority, and more Humane Testimony, than any other
Book of the New Testament; yet upon the increase of the Millenary Controversies
in the Church; it was first called in question, and then boldly, and impiously
rejected, by that party, whose Sentiments it oppposed, until they had found out
a way of reconciling it unto them. Into such extravagancies will immoderate
opposition transport men, and a fond Love, and heady Zeal for private Fancies
and Opinions! Neither have those who have endeavored to illustrate, and clear
the difficulties of this Mysterious Book, met with less gentle usage in these
latter ages, especially from those of our own Nation; but have been commonly
represented as Frantic Zealots, and Crazed Enthusiasts; or where such
Characters could not be fastened on them; they have been generally depressed in
the World, if their Sentiments proved contrary to what was most prevailing in
it; to the great discouragement of inquisitive Persons, and to the mighty
hindrance of Truth, and Knowledge; which never thrive better than under a
gentle, and moderate freedom. And therefore, I cannot but regret (although it
be to the Dishonor of my own Nation) the hard fate of those two excellent
Persons, Mr. Potter and Mr. Mede; the former of whom, although admirably
skilled in many abstruse parts of Learning, yet lived, and dyed in an obscure
retirement, in a remote corner of the Land; whilst the other (the Ornament of
our Church, and of the Age he lived in) was never able so much as to keep a
Horse for Health, not State, which was the height of his ambition. And I wish
I could say, that we were grown more favorable to such disquisitions; that so
a considerable person, of deep Thought, and of great insight into Mysterious
Truths, (upon whose Hypothesis the following Interpretation is chiefly
grounded, after much doubt, and trial of it) might not be permitted to struggle
with adversity, and lie under the depressing circumstances of Restraint. But,
alas, I fear that (like the Apostle Peter, Luke 9.33.
when he desired the continuance of the Glory of Christ's transgfiuration, upon
this Earth,) we know not what we say, when we wish that such men had met with
greater advantages in the World, as the present state of it is; and that we
ought not to seek Jerem 45.
great things for our selves, or others, whilst the Church is in a Sackcloth
State, and Condition; but that our Souls are to be suited to God's
Dispensations, and we are not to aim at high things, in the times of public
calamities. And whosoever makes this use of privacy, and adversity; may sooner
meet with Divine Visitations, and comforts in the most obscure corner; and with
Spiritual Illuminations in a Patmos, or a Prison; than amidst the greatest
affluence of the enjoyments of this World; and all the advantages of great
Parts, many Books, and much Learning; which too often swell the mind, and puff
up, more than edify; whereas the chief qualifications (next to Prayer, and the
Divine assistance) to the attaining to Knowledge in this, or any other part of
Scripture, are Humility, Industry, and Patience in searching; and a ready
submission to Convictions, although they prove contrary to our former thoughts,
and our present interest. For great application of Mind, is necessary to search
into the bottom of Mysterious Truths; and a man who would understand the Will
of God in this Prophecy; must during the Study of it, renounce Parties, and
Prejudices; and divest himself of his former Principles, although never so
deeply rooted, and never so seemindy rational; and closely follow that Sense,
which appears to be the meaning of the Holy Spirit. For God's Thoughts, are not
as our Thoughts; and men of the greatest strength of Reason, when they happen
upon false Principles, and too strictly adhere to them, are of all others the
most irreclaimable. It were easy to show that Alcasar (who spent twenty Years
in the Study of this Prophecy) Ribera, and other very Learned, and Judicious
Men amongst the Romanists, had scarcely missed of many great Truths, if they
had not been of that Communion; and that several truly great and good Men among
the Protestants, were misled by a too fond respect for some private Principles:
Such as were, the impossibility that so gross an Idolatry, and so Universal an
Apostasy, as is supposed in this Prophecy; should ever be permitted to
overspread the Face of the Visible Church, which yet is supposed should
actually come to pass toward the end of the Word, by Ribera, Viegas,
Victorinus, and most of the Ancient Fathers, Alcas. page 20.
and other learned Papists, chiefly upon the evidence which this Book afforded
them: And such also was their opinion of the necessity of an uninterrupted
Succession in every Church; and the impossibility of deriving it from one which
was formally Idolatrous; together with a greater Love for the outward Peace,
Unity, and Prosperity of the Church; than it is capable of, during this
imperfect State; in which they seem to have rested, without expecting one of a
different Nature: Which seem to be the chief prejudices, upon which, Grotius,
Mr. Thorndick, Dr. Hammond, and others, espoused a groundless, narrow, and
inconsistent Hypothesis, contrary to the common Doctrine of Protestants, and of
the Churches of which they were Members, and to the Scope, and genuine sense of
the words of this, and other Prophetical Books of Scripture; as has been
sufficiently shown by Dr. Moor, Dr. Cressener, and several Divines of Foreign
Churches: Whereas Mr. Mede seems to have been rewarded by God, with the best
grounded, the most consequential, and the most comprehensive Hypothesis of any
other; for his great freedom of Mind, impartial Search, and universal Charity;
which were joined in him, with a rare, and uncommon mixture, of slowness, and
yet largeness of thought. I am not ignorant, that many excellent persons, who
have shaken off the fetters of Prejudice, and Education; and have too great
Souls to he confined within the narrow compass of a Party, or a private
Interest; are yet very a verse to the Writings of those, who offer at the
Interpretation of Prophetical Scripture, if their sentiments seem to look with
a too close, and threatening Aspect upon the Age they live in: because of the
frequent falsity of such pretenses; and the ill influence they may have
(especially at some times, and seasons) upon the public peace of Church and
State. And indeed, they are not to be blamed for being cautious, and watchful
over such Pretenders; especially at a time, and in a Nation so prone to
Enthusiasm; and so easily transported into irregular Practices, upon any new,
or unusual Occurrence. But although due caution be commendable; yet a settled
aversion to, or a careless neglect of searching into Scripture Prophecies, may
be of as ill effect to the Public, as the Confidence of false Pretenders to
the Interpretation of them, or the rashness of the giddy Multitude can possibly
be: And I cannot see what excuse Learned Men can have, for not weighing and
considering, what is offered from Scripture, History and Reason, toward the
clearing up of that Prophecy, to the Study of which, the reward of Blessedness
is promised in it. Rashness, and groundless Confidence, and pretenses to
immediate Impulses, when not agreeable to Scripture, or Reason, are indeed to
be Despised; and it is fit that even those who propagate Truths after a
Turbulent and Zelotick manner, should be restrained; but when things, which may
seem something strange, and uncommon, are offered by Men of Piety, and
Learning, although with an Air of some more than ordinary assurance; it is very
commendable to search into the grounds of them; and not wholly to slight them,
although there may be a mixture of Frailty and Error in them: For God does not
now ordinarily assist after an infallible manner; and sometimes permitted even
his Prophets 1 Samuel 16.6. 2 Samuel 7.3. 2 Kings 4.27.
to Err, when their desires were too eager, and their approbation even of a
good design too hasty, and they spoke as Men, not as Prophets.

Enthusiasm, which arises from an overheated Imagination, is indeed a dangerous
Disease of the Soul; and it is, I must confess, something difficult for the
best, and wisest Men, to avoid all taint, and infection of it, whilst they are
too intent upon the Study of Prophetical Scripture; especially of those parts
of it, in which God (who has afforded us in Scripture, suitable matter for the
exercise of all our Intellectual Capacities) has condescended to the Fancy, and
Imagination of Mankind; and has entertaired them (as he has done in this Book,
if I may so speak) with a Divine Opera, representing the greatest transactions
belonging to his Church, in Sacred Emblems, and Hieroglyphics. Upon which
consideration, c^re has been taken, that no interpretation should be inserted
into the Paraphrase upon the Text, which was not thought to be justly grounded
upon the Scriptures quoted in it; and bare Imagination has not been in the
least indulged, but in the Annotations; where it is Lawful to Exspatiate, to
propose conjectures to the Learned World, and to give the raines to Fancy, but
under the curb, and restraints of Reason, and Prudence. But although Enthusiasm
(which is a false pretense to extraordinary Impulses, and Inspirations from
God) be very pernicious to the Souls of Private Persons, as well as to the
Public; yet it is certainly of very ill consequence, rashly to reject every
thing as Enthusiastic; in the performance of which, good, sober, and judicious
persons, profess themselves to have found sometimes more than ordinary
assistance, upon the due use of proper means: Because it tends to the
disparagement of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; encourages Men in a Jejune, dry
formality of Religion, without inward Life, and Spirit; and robs them of much
of that Joy, and Comfort, they might otherwise find, in harkening what God the
Lord will say unto them, by bringing natural, and revealed Truths into their
Minds, and by opening, and awakening their Ears to Discipline, and Instruction;
for God speaks once, yea, twice, but man perceives it not. For let Men of
narrow Souls, or those who have accustomed themselves only to dry Reasoning,
think what they will; it is evident enough from some Men's Experience, and from
the very Spirit, and Majesty which appears in their Discourses; that they are
raised sometimes above themselves; and are afforded a clearer, and larger
prospect, of useful, great, and momentous Truths, than their Faculties do
ordinarily arrive to; or could have reached, without Divine Assistance, And
extraordinary Truths, are not only to be expected from those, who have an happy
Concurrence of all the Endowments which complete a Great Genius; but are
frequently bestowed upon men of meaner abilities; such Oar being often found
amidst much Dross, and many Imperfections, especially of Style, and other
Ornaments, which the World too much values, and unreasonably dotes upon: God
for the Exaltation of free Grace, and that men might not Glory in themselves,
and attribute things to their own Skill; sometimes making use of the foolish,
weak, and base things of the World; to confound the Wise, the Mighty, and most
valuable things in the esteem of Men. And therefore, I hope, that men of Wit,
and Natural Accomplishments; will not disdain to look into Authors, whose way
of management may at first sight promise little; much less, rashly despise
great Truths, for not being clothed in a modish Dress: For many men, who have
true, and just Thoughts of things, are very unhappy in expressing them; and
they who much Study the Prophetical Writers (whose Style, as the ingenious
Theorist of the Earth truly observes, is rather Bold, and Noble, than Just)
will contract a swelling, obscure, and Metaphorical Style; which, elevated
Minds, and even Plato himself, could not avoid; nor the generality of the first
Plutarch, (...).
Philosophers; who are observed to have admitted a Divine Principle into their
Philosophy (the want of which is an unpardonable fault in Aristotle, and
others) as if an uncommon, and freer Style, were the effect of Noble, and
Divine Thoughts; and a too close, and jejune one, were the sign of a narrow and
an Atheistical Disposition.

But whatsoever may be thougnt of the Interpreters of this Prophecy; the
Prophecy it self is certainly worthy the utmost thoughts of all Pious, Learned,
and Ingenious Persons; whose pains will be sufficiently rewarded, by the
pleasure, Spiritual Profit, and Advantages they will reap from it. For what can
afford greater pleasure to Pious Minds, than to have a view in lively Emblems,
of the Throne of the Majesty of tne great God; and to see his Glory, and
Goodness pass before them, in Mystical representations of his Attributes, of
the Mystery of our Redemption, and the Glorious Kingdom of Christ, the Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World? Who can forbear breaking forth into
Praises, and Thanksgivings, upon reading the Songs of Victory, which the
blessed Spirits sing before the Throne or God, at the several Exaltations, and
Triumphs of Christ's Kingdom? And who is so in Love with this present World, as
not to wish that he were Dissolved, that he might be with Christ in his holy
Mount Chap. 14. 1.
? And that even this Earth, and Heavens might meit and pass away (although he
himself should suffer Loss thereby, and be saved, but so as by Fire) that he
might be with Christ, and the blessed Saints, in a New World, wherein
Righteousness shall dwell? What more grateful Entertainment for an Ingenious
Mind; than to have a prospect of all the great Transactions of the World since
Christ's Resurrection, represented as in Scenes shifted by the Ministry of
Angels, at each great change upon the Stage of this World? For this Book is a
Divine Drama, full of holy Art, and sacred Ornaments, taken from Prophetic
Symbols, and Eastern Hieroglyphics; into which the Holy Spirit has
transferred most of the Beauties, Excellencies, and Magnificence of the Old
Testamens; and the greatest part of the Types, and Figures of the Law; the
Throne of God, and the Kingdom of Christ, being the True Tabernacle, of which
Moses saw the Pattern in the Mount. And the Art observed in it, is very
admirable, and much like that of a true, and just Poem; the design of it, being
one great Action, viz. The Kingdom of Christ, to which all the lesser Actions
are Subservient as to one great End; which is carried on after a delightful, as
well as an Instructive manner, by Descriptions, Narrations, a Chorus of Angels
and blessed Spirits, and by Christ himself speaking on great occasions; as by
so many Episodical Ornaments. And may God inspire some Pious and Devout Soul,
with a Poetical Spirit, suitable to the greatnest of the Subject; with a Spirit
like that which came from him upon his Servants David, and Solomon, when in
Divine Raptures they set forth the glories of his Kingdom; for the Subject well
deserves an inspired Pen, and will outlive all which have been hitherto
undertaken, as affording the most proper matter for the Devotion and
Contemplation of the New World; and therefore may be justly recommended to all
Ingenious Persons, as worthy their most serious Thoughts, and pious Meditations.

Ribera (a learned Romanist) resembles this Prophecy to a vast Ocean full of
Deep Gulphs, receiving, and swallowing up all Human Wisdom; and the Metaphor,
although something bold, has much of Truth in it; there being few of the
Liberal Arts, and Scien^es, which the Eternal Word, the Wisdom of God, has not
made use of in it; to exercise the understanding of those who have Spiritual
Wisdom, and to confound the Wisdom of those who are wise in their own conceits.
Here the Sacred Orator may find the most Magnificent Idea's of Divine things;
and the most lively Images of what can most effectually raise Admiration, Love
and Fear, the most prevailing Passions of Mankind; viz. the Glory of God, and
of Christ's Kingdom; and the horror and dread of the Punishments denounced, and
executed in it: And all this expressed in a Style Stylus five Structura
Orationis, qualis nunquam a Mortalibus usurpata fuit, nec apud quenquam Humanum
Auctorem Extat. (...) hic vides non Humanam. Cotton. apud Poli Syn.
more than Human; whereby some of the wisest and best of all Ages, have been
induced to search into it for the Providential Fate of God's Church; and to
admire and acknowledge its profound depth, and Divine Authority, (as that great
Critic, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. 7.25.
Dionysius Alexandrinus did) even when they professed that they could not
fathom the meaning of it; which is no slight Argument of the peculiar Majesty,
and Excellen- of this Book. Neither let nice Wits be offended at the
Paronomastical Allusions may he found in it; for they are frequent in Vid.
Maimonid Duct. Dubit. 2.43. Gen 9, 27.49, 8, 16, 19. Jerem. 1.11, 12. Dan.
5.25. -- 29. Zephan. 2.4. and the Notes on Chap. 2. 1, 3.
Scripture (as they know who have skill in the Original Languages) and were
much in use in the Eastern Nations.

Those who have skill in History, and Chronology, may here exercise it, with
great Delight and Satisfaction; and every mind that has Wisdom (whether it be
in Numbers, Geometry, Architecture, Colors, Precious Stones, Meteors, or any
other parts of Knowledge here hinted at, or alluded to) ought to contribute
their skill to it, For united Endeavors best promote Knowledge; and God
himself usually joined Exodus 31.2, 3, 6. 36, 1, 2. Eccles. 4.9. Mark 6.7. 1
Cor. 12.8.
many together, Two at least, in every great, and Weighty Work: He gave Aholiab
to Bezaleel; joined Aaron to Moses; and Christ sent forth his Disciples by Two,
and Two; and raised up Two Witnesses, to testify to the Truths of this
Prophecy. And therefore, I cannot but earnestly entreat all that are
Wise-hearted, in whose Hearts God has put Wisdom, and skill in Arts (for they
are from him, and may thereby be Sanctified) to stir up the Gifts which are in
them, and to join heartily, and unanimously together, for the service of the
approaching Sanctuary, and Kingdom of Christ; for the work has been long
retarded by the noise of 1 Kings 6.7.
Axes and Hammers, that is, by Divisions, and Contentions amongst Christians
which ought not to be heard in the Building of God's House; whatsoever has
been hitherto permitted, under imperfect, and lower Dispensations.

But further; if the Hypothesis here advanced prove true; and this Book be
found to contain the great Events belonging to the Christian Church, from the
Reformation to the End of Time, and to the Kingdoms of this World, as they have
a relation to it; will it not afford a most cogent, and most illustrious Proof
for the Being of a God, and a Providence; and for the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures; and most effectually silence, the little, and unreasonable Cavils
of Atheists, and Antiscripturists? For how could so long a Series, and so great
a variety of Events, depending on rational Instruments, and free Agents,
seemingly independent on each other, and yet all tending to One End, be
revealed so long before their accomplishment; but by One Infinite Mind, or
Understanding, comprehending all things at one View, and overruling, and
conducting them all to One End? What but infinite Mind, and Wisdom could
foresee, and so exactly describe the Orderly See Chap. 6.
Succession of the Roman Emperors, by the very particular Countries from which
they came, and the great occurrences which happened under them; or so exactly
See Chap. 2, 10 6, 9-17.
foretell the very Period of the Persecution under Dioclesian; and at so long a
distance show the Souls of the Martyrs under the Altar, and the fatal overthrow
of Paganism? What else but the Eternal Knowledge, could foretell, and that so
particularly, in exact agreement with all History; the Destruction of the Roman
Empire, and the Sea Chap 8.
Various Fate of Rome, so often taken and retaken; so often Burnt, and yet not
utterly Consumed? What else but Wisdom it self, could so livelily See Chap. 9.
represent the innumerable swarms of Tormenting Saracens, the Locusts and
Scorpions of the Earth; and the mighty inroads of the Turkish Cavalry passing
the River Euphrates; and foretell the very manner, and precise time of their
taking Constantinople (which cannot therefore be the Beloved City, as Dr.
Hammond supposes) in agreement with the Opinions of the latest, and best
Chronologers, after a doubt concerning it? What else could Connect the
Saracenick Woe, with the Idolatry of the Christian Church as a Scourge to it;
and foresee, that Mahomet (a Counter-Antichrist to the Papal One) should arrive
to a Supremacy in the East; soon after the Christian See page 136, 137.
Chalifs, or pretended Vicars of Christ, had Usurped one of another Nature in
the West? What but Is. 41, 21-29.44, 6, 7.45, 21. Wisd. 8. 1.
that infinite Wisdom which reaches from one end to another, and does sweetly
Order all things; could thus declare the end from the beginning, and from
ancient times, the things which are not yet done; and unite together so many
distant Events (in agreement with the Prophecies, and Types of the Old
Testament, and the Truth of all Profane History) and make them conspire to One
End, the Kingdom of his Son? Let the Oracles of the Heathens, show any thing
like this; or the most daring Wit demonstrate (and no less evidence ought to
satisfy him of the contrary) how this could otherwise come to pass. And if this
Book be of Divine Authori^y; why should the Divinity of our Savior be doubted
of? Who is expressly called See Chap. 1. 8, 14.3, 21.5, 6, etc. 17, 14 19, 9,
10, 12, 13.20, 6, 12.21, 6, 7.22, 6, 13.
God in it; receives Divine Worship from Angels and Men; and has the same
Attributes given, him with God the Father, and is always represented in it as
One with him. For such plain Testimonies ought to outweigh the contrary
prejudices, which proceed chiefly from the Imperfection of our finite, and
limited Understandings, and their utter inability to comprehend an Infinite
Being.

But as this Prophecy is Instructive in great Truths, so does it afford
satisfaction also in many doubts: For from hence men may learn not to be too
much disquieted at great Changes, and Revolutions in Churches, and States; and
may the more readily be induced to submit to what is not evidently sinful in
them; because they are from God; and that all such great Events are some way or
other conducive to Christ's Kingdom; God often making use of the Sins of Men,
to bring to pass the Wise, and Good, but Mysterious Counsels of his Will. And
from hence also much may be learnt with relation to the Government, Read the
Epistes to the Seven Churches, Chap. 2. and 3. And Chapters 5. 6. 7. 10. 13,
18. 21, 10-27.
Worship, and Reformation of the Church, and to the abating of the warm
Contentions about them amongst Protestants; for seeing that all Church States
are as yet imperfect; and, like the Jewish Dispensation, but Temporary
Ordinances until the time of the Reformation in order to the Kingdom of Christ;
the best ought to bear with the worst, because they themselves are but
Imperfect; and instead of violent Heats, and Animosities, should endeavor to
show each other, the Pattern, Form, and Fashion of God's House, the Apostolical
Model, frequently mentioned in this Prophecy; that so they may all (according
to the expressions of Ezekiel, Chap. 43. 10-12.
in whom there is a Type of Christ's pure Church, whatsoever some triumphant
VVriters, may, with scorn enough, have said to the contrary) be ashamed of what
they have done, and of their Iniquities, and Deviations from it. And in the
mean time, until God shall reveal even this unto them; what should they do, but
in obedience to the Apostolical Precepts; Bear one another Burdens; please
others rather than themselves; in Honor Prefer one another, do all their
things in Charity; and to edification, and Peace, as well as for Truth,
Decency, and Order.

And let not any sincere, and conscientious person of the Romish Communion, be
offended at some harsh expressions he may find in this Book; for they are no
other, then the Holy Spirit makes use of; to give them a true, and just Idea of
the deformity and odiousness of Idolatry, Cruelty, and Church Tyranny in God's
sight; that so they might be the more effectually deterred from them: and to
create in the minds of Protestants, a due abhorrence of such Practices; by
Notions, and Symbols apt to raise a just indignation against them; which have
also, by God's Providence, been so deeply imprinted in the minds of the Vulgar,
that all endeavors of some Learned Men to the contrary, have been
unsuccessful, and sometimes of fatal consequence: and why should men speak
peace, where God does not; and give complemental Names to those, whom the Holy
Ghost has stigmatized, and made infamous? So that if the Romish Church be
Idolatrous, Usurping, and Cruel; he brings not a railing accusation against
it, but speaks the words of Truth, and Soberness; who applies to it the
Titles of Beast, Whore, and Antichrist. And although this charge against the
Church of Rome, has been managed by diverse arguments; yet I think by none
more successfully than by those which are taken from this Prophecy; which I
hope ingenuous Men of that Communion (and many such are there of it) will be
pleased to read, and consider; for I dare promise them that they will meet with
many Especially Chapters 13. and 17.
clear, and unexpected Proofs in it; and such as may give them satisfaction;
for I can truly say, that I have experienced their efficacy for the removing of
some of their Prejudices, which I lay under.

As for the present performance, although I find upon a cursory review, some
mistakes, and many Imperfections in it, which cannot be avoided in a work of so
great length, and difficulty; yet I can assure the Reader that the utmost
sincerity has been used; and all the diligence possible amidst frequent
indispositions of Body, and many avocations.

And as for the main gounds upon which the Interpretation proceeds; viz. The
gradual defection of the Church, the Antichristian Apostasy, especially of the
Romish Church, and the future glorious Kingdom of Christ; I hope that they have
been fully, and plainly proved in their several places Read especially Chapters
2. 3. 7. 13. 17. 20. 21. 22.
: but other less material, or abstruse things, must take the common Fate of
such disquisitions: and all that I shall desire from the Reader is, that he use
diligence in search, read the Book throughout, and be true to his Convictions;
and then I Hope, Pray, and Believe that he will not miss of Satisfaction;
humbly desiring him to remember him in his Prayers, who has spared no Pains,
nor cost in this matter, for his good, God's Glory, and the Promoting of
Christ's Kingdom.

AMEN. Even so, come Lord Jesus.
THE Argument.
THis Book is a Dramatick Prophecy, wherein is represented as in Visionary
Scenes, the great Events belonging to the Church of Christ, from his
Resurrection, Chap 1. 10. page 11. In Comaedia, sive Tragaedia, nequaquam
Spectatur Tempus illud quo Actio datur, sed potius tempus rei ipsius, cujus
datur Actio. Alcas. page 6.
to the Delivery Chap. 20. 11.
up of his Glorious Kingdom Chap 1, 7 and Chap. 20. 21. 22.
to God, and the Father: Which Kingdom is the chief Action, or End of the
Prophecy, to which all the other Actions represented in it are conducive; and
the whole is embelished by many accidental Ornaments, as by so many Episodes:
As by a description of the Chap. 4.
Throne of the Majesty of God; Songs Chap. 5. chap. 7. 10, c. 11, 16. c. 12.
10, c. 14, 1. Chap. 15. and 19.1. etc.
of Triumph, Praise and Thanksgiving; Chap. 7. 9-17.
pre-representations of Christ's Kingdom; Christ himself, and Angels speaking,
voices from Heaven, together with Thundrings, and Lightnings, and frequent
Interlocutory passages, too many to be here particularly mentioned.

It consists of two Tomes See chap. 4, 1. c. 5, 1.
of Prophecy; the former Chap 2. and 3.
of which, and the more general one, may be called the Church-Prophecy; the
latter, Chap. 5.
and more particular, the Book-Prophecy; both reaching from the Resurrection,
to the same Period of Time; and describing the same events, but after a
different manner; the first by Symbols Chap. 2. c. 3.
of Churches; the latter See Chap. 6. 1. etc.
by Symbols often taken from the Civil Occurrences of the Roman Empire; and
from others relating to the Church as Seated in it; which principally respect
the Affairs of the Church, and Kingdom of Christ; and yet are taken from civil
Occurrences, that each event might be the better distinguished, as by so many
notable Characters of time.

It begins with a general Chap. 1. 1-12.
Preface, or Prologue, wherein the Epoch Chap. 1. 10.
of the Prophecy is settled, and the Chap. 1. 5, 6, 7.
Period of it, the Kingdom of Christ: And it ends with a general Conclusion,
Chap. 22. 7-21.
or Epilogue relating to some of the great events, but especially to the Vials.

Besides the general Preface, there are also two Particular ones; the one Chap.
1. 11.-20.
prefixed to the Church-prophecy; in which Christ is represented in a Priestly
and Kingly Habit, as Supreme Lord of the Church; the Epistles are declared to
be Mystical, and are ordered to be sent to the Churches and their Angels: The
other Chap. 4. and 5.
is placed before the Book-Prophecy, in which the Throne of God is described,
the Divine See page 70.
Court of Judicature, which is to pass Sentence upon all the Actions in the
Prophecy, is settled, Christ is declared the Supreme Director of them; and
appears See page 83.
as ready to receive his Kingdom.

But because Christ (according to the Mysterious Agreement betwixt him, and the
Father) had promised by Dan. 12 7. page 83. 87. 112. chap. 10. 6.
Oath that the Beast should have his Times; therefore is the Book given into
his hands Sealed with Chap. 5. and 6.
seven Seals, which are as so many stops or delays to it, and the several
openings of them, as so many removals of obstacles to it, concerning which, see
Chap. 6.

After the opening of the Sixth Chap. 6. 12. etc.
Seal upon the downfall of Paganism, the Succession of a Christian Emperor, and
the advancement of Christ's Church in the Empire; there is given a
representation Chap. 7. 9-17.
of Christ's Kingdom (which, as being the chief end of this Prophecy, is always
kept in view in it) of which the Christian Empire and Church thus advanced were
an Emblem. But because the Mystery of Iniquity began then to increase;
therefore Chap. 7. 1-9. Chap. 11. 1. and Chap. 12.
are the Servant of God Sealed, the Woman prepares for her Flight into the
Wilderness, the Worshippers begin to retire into the Temple, and the Witnesses
prepare to put on their Sackcloth (which Visions are cotemporary, and
parallel) and not long after are Persecuted by the Chapters 11. c. 12. c. 13.
c. 17.
Beast, which carries the Woman.

A pure Church being Sealed, i. e. See on Chap. 7. 3, 4. Chap. 8. 1.-6.
covered, and secured amidst the growing Corruptions, and the Seventh See on
Chap. 7. 3, 4. Chap. 8. 1.-6.
Seal being opened at the final Victory over Paganism by Theodosius; there
appear at the opening of that Seal, on the backside See on Chap. 5. 1.
of the seventh Roll of the Book, seven Angels, with seven See Chap 8. and 9.
Trumpets, Symbols of so many Judgments upon the Antichristianizing Church, and
Empire. The Judgments of the four Chap. 8. 6-13.
first Trumpets were executed by the Northern Nations, which ended in the fall
of the Western Emperors, and the Succession of the Chap. 9, 1. Chap. 13. and
17. 8-13.
Papal Empire; the Fifth Chap. 9. 3-12.
by the Saracens; and the sixth Chap. 9. 12-21.
by the Turks, who destroyed the Antichristian Eastern Empire; and still
continue as a Woe upon the Western.

Quickly after the passing of the Mohammedan Woe, which is the second Woe, the Woe
of the sixth Trumpet, (before which, Chap. 11. 14. 15.
the Witnesses will rise, the ten Kings will hate the Whore, the Antichristian
Hierarchy will fall, and there shall be great Conversions) the feventh Chap.
11. 12, c. 17, 16. See the Notes on Chap. 18. 21.
and last Trumpet sounds, out of which there proceed seven Chap. 11. 15.
Voices, which are the Chap. 14.
Voices of the seven Thunders unsealed, (which were sealed at the beginning of
the Reformation, described chap 10.) and are as so many preparations to the
Blessed Millenuium; out of the seventh Chap. 14.19. See Notes on chap. 14. 2.
of which Voices, there issue seven Vials, containing the final Judgments upon
Antichristianism, and all the enemies of Christ's Kingdom raised to Judgment;
whereupon a Monumental See page 329. and chapters 15. 16, 18* and 19.
Pillar, as it were, is erected, with this Inscription, It is done; to show
that the Prophecy aims at a certain time of Christ's Victory over his enemies;
and of his appearing in Glory, to his Friends and Servants; whereupon also
anotner such Inscription is given, chap. 21. 6.

After the pouring forth of the seventh Chap. 16. 17.
Vial, the thousand Chapters 20-21. 22.
years Kingdom of Christ begins; which being Expired, Satan Chap. 20. 3.
is loosed for a little space, but the final Judgment comes on; at the end of
which, the Kingdom is Chap. 20, 11.
delivered up to God.

And here it is to be observed; that because the same things are represented in
the Chutch Prophecy, and in the Book Prophecy; that therefore there are many
Synchronisms, or Contemporary Visions in this Book: And because the Kingdom of
Christ, and Antichrist are Opposite; that therefore there are many (...), or
Opposite representations in it: Of which the Reader is here presented with a
general Scheme; the particulars, which are very many, being to be carefully
observed, and gathered out of the Book it self.

The Church of Ephesus Chap. 2. 1-8. See page 20. 32.
is contemporary with the four first Seals, and reaches from the Resurrection,
A. D. 33. to the beginning of the Persecution under Dioclesian, A. D. 303.

The Church of Smyrna Chap. 2. 8-12.
(in which the Synagogue of Satan arose) is contemporary with the fifth, sixth,
and seventh Seal, and lasts until the sounding of the first Trumpet, A. D. 437.

The Church of Perganus Chap. 2. 1^-15.
begins to Witness in Sackcloath at the entrance of the Apostasy, A. D. 437.
and is contemporary with the five first Trumpets, and part of the Sixth; and
with the progress of the Apostasy, to a Throne, and the slaying of the
Antipapal Witnesses, by Excommunications and Persecutions, until about the 12th
Century, or between A. D. 1100, and 1200.

Then arose the Church of Chap. 2. 18. etc.
Thyatira, witnesing against the depths of Satanical Corruptions, which
continued (during the first Slaying of the VVitnesses, and the progress of the
Mohammedan Woe of the sixth Trumpet Chap. 10.
until the Reformation, A. D. 1517.

The Church of Sardis, together with some low appearances of the Philadelphian
State (kept under by those of the Synagogue, chap. 3. 9.) are contemporary with
the Reformation; and are to last, until some more perfect Church State shall
appear; of which (if the Calculations See the Notes on Chap. 10. 7. on Chap.
11. 2 11.
frequently mentioned in the following Book, prove true) there will be some
more than ordinary appearance about A. D. 1697. when the Beasts Months end.

The Philadelphian Chap. 3. 7-13.
State, the Church of Thyatira Chap. 2. 19.
in its last works, the undefiled Chap. ^. 4.
Names in Sardis, and those also of that State (whom this Prophecy calls Them
of the Synagogue, chap. 3. 9. who shall come, and unite themselves to the
Church of Philadelphia) carry on the whole series of things (during the Sea
Chapters 14
Voices and the Vials) from the rise of that Sat, until the Glorious
Millenium; that is, if the Calculations here advanced Chap. 3. 1-7.
prove true from A. D. 1697. until See Chapters 14. and 16.
A. D. 1727. and from 1727, to 1772.

After the Millennium; Satan is loosed for a short season; Gog and Magog
compass the City, but are destroyed; and all the Enemies of Christ are Judged,
and perfectly Subdued; with which the Laodicean Chap. 3 14-22. Chap. 20.
State of the Church is cotemporary.

But besides these Synchronisms betwixt the Church Prophecy, and the Book
Prophecy, it is very observable that there are very many Visions in the Book
Prophecy, which Synchronize one with another, as is frequently observed in the
Annotations, of which here is given a short Specimen, referring the Reader to
the Book it self for a larger account of them.

Synchron. 1. The Seals and many particulars in the twelfth Chapter, are
contemporary; as will appear to any one who compares the sixth Chapter with the
twelfth.

Synchron. 2. The Barbarous Nations, chap. 8. 7. entering as Gentiles into the
outward Court; the Worshippers in the inward Temple; the Witnesses in
Sackcloath; and the Church actually flying into the Wilderness, are also
contemporary. See Chapters 8. c. 11. c. 12.

Synchron. 3. The Beast rising out of the Sea, coming into his Succession, and
into his forty two Months, and the ten Kings receiving Power all one Hour with
him; are contemporary with the Extinction of the Western Empire upon the
Sounding of the Third Trumpet; because when the former Government was expired,
Another must needs immediately come into Succession.

Synchron. 4. The Witnesses lying Dead, and the Woman hid in the Wilderness
from the face of the Serpent, are Synchronous.

Synchron. 5. The ending of the two Times, the beginning of Half Time, the
Thunders Voices Uttered, and then Sealed, are contemporary. See Chap. 10.

Synchron. 6. The full rising of the Witnesses, the Fall of the tenth of the
great City, the passing away of the second Woe, and the beginning of the seventh
Trumpet to sound, are contemporary with the End of the three Days and an Half,
of the three Times and Half, and of the 1260 days, and forty two Months, which
are in an equal Duration.

Synchron. 7. The seventh Trumpet, the Voices and the Vials; the Judgment on
the Whore; the Beast and the False Prophet; the Lamb's Wife making her self
ready, are contemporaries.

Synchron. 8. The thousand Years of Satan Bound; the first Resurrection; the
Blessed Participation of it; the New Jerusalem, the New Heaven, and New Earth
are contemporaries.

Synchron. 9. The thousand Years expired; Satan Loosed; the Gog and Magog are
together in time.

Synchron. 10. The Fire coming down from Heaven; Sathan's casting into the
Lake; the Dead Judged, and with Death cast into the Lake Synchronize; with the
White Throne, the Laodicean Saints sitting down with Christ upon it.

The (...), or Opposites are chiefly these.
The Kingdom of Christ, and of his Saints. The Kingdom of Satan carried on in
the fourth, or Roman Monarchy; first as Pagan, then as Antichristian. The
Church of Ephesus, as Apostolical. The Church of Ephesus having left its first
Love, Chap. 2. 4. Smyrna. A Synagogue of Satan, Chap. 2. 9. Pergamus and
Antipas. The Throne of Satan, Balaam, and the Nicolaitans, Chap. 2. 13, 14, 15.
the false Prophet, Chap. 16, 13. Thyatira. The Depths of Satan, Jezebel, or the
false Prophetess, Chap. 2. 20, 14. The undefiled names in Sardis. Those of the
Synagogue, Chap. 3. 3, 4, 9. Philadelphia. The Laodicean Luke-warmness. The
Lamb. The Dragon, the Beast, the other Beast with two Horns like a Limb. Chap.
13. 11. The Bride, the Lamb's Wife, chap. 19. 7. The Whore, chap. 17. Christ's
sealed ones and witnesses. The Marked Slaves of the Beast, chap. 13. 16. The
great City, the Holy Jerusalem, the beloved City, the Camp of the Saints, c.
20, 9.21.10. Babylon, the great City reigning over the Kings of the Earth, c.
17. and the City of Gog and Magog, at the four corners of the Earth, c. 20.8.
Twelve, the Apostolical Number, c. 7.4. Twenty, five, the Antichristian name,
mark, number, c. 13. 18. Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, chap. 19.
16. The Kings of the Earth, chap. 19. 19. The Armies which come in the Heaven
with Christ, c. 19.14. The Armies of the Kings of the Earth, and their Nations,
Gog, and Magog, Chap. 19. 15, 19. 20, 8.

ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 29. read 16. p. 9. l. 5. of the -- of this World, p. 13. l. 16. r.
denote, p. 14. l. 24. r. full of p. 21. l. 16. r. Romans 2. p. 27. l. 27. r.
Goods, p. 22. l. 32. r. 58. p. 41. l. 8. f. the r. that, p. 47. l. ult. r. 1
Cor. 2. p. 55. l. 26. r. Gospels. p 64. l. 15. blot out, an indifference, p.
66. l, 23. r. wilt, p. 72. l. ult. r. compare, p. 82. l. 21. r. slain, p. 83.
l. 30. r. having. p. 84. l. 30. f. in the Earth, r. on, p. 85. l. 13. r. 19.
l. 23. r, and that because, l. 30. r. brought in, l. 31. r. objects, p. 86. l.
20. r. also as well as, p. 88. l. 10. f. whence, r. where, l. 26. f. his, r.
Gods, p. 113. l. 16. f. Psalm. r. Palm. p. 149. l. 3. r. in a Cave, p. 158. l.
3. r. about it, p. 170. l. 25. r. (...), p. 174. l. 7. r. (...), p. 191. l. 22.
r. much indebted. p. 177. l. 14. r. that it, l. 15. f. that r. the p. 205. l.
7. f. Times r. Time. p. 283. l. 4. r. each of which Heads, p. 300. l. 7. r. S.
p. 344. l. 20. r. were Types, p. 402. l. 7. r. the Lord God, p. 415. l. 17.
insert, see thou do it not, I am, p. 235. blot out these words -- A.D. 1507.
within ten years of, p. 236. l. 4. r. 1529.

ANNOTATIONS ON THE REVELATION.
CHAP. I.
The Text.
1 THE Revelation of Jesus Christ [i.e. the Discovery and Manifestation of
Divine Secrets in a Prophetical Vision from Jesus Christ:] which God [the
Father] gave unto him [the Great Prophet and Mediator,] to show [or make known
by Prophetical Symbols and Representations, and actually to So the word is
taken, John 5, 20.14, 8. and in this sense God is said to show Christ; and he
to be Revealed, when he came into the World.
exhibit, or produce the Effect of every Vision in its proper time,] unto his
Servants [ i. e. those Eminent and Faithful Christians, especially Ministers,
who dedicate themselves to his Service,] things which must shortly [ i. e.
suddenly and speedily begin 1 to] come to pass [one after another;] and [or
which And is here, according to the Custom of the Hebrew Language, put for the
Pronoun Relative which.
] he [Christ] sent and signified it [ i. e. made known the Prophetical Visions
of this Book] by his 2 Angel [sometimes one special Angel sent for this
purpose, and sometimes another] unto his Servant John.

The Annotations.
1 Thus Grotius, Dr. Hammond, and most Interpreters expound these Words; this
Prophecy containing a Discovery of things which were to come to pass, in a
Succession of time one after another: of which it may be very appositely said,
That they must come to pass shortly, when they are shortly, to begin to pass
into Event; as an Army is said to be coming, when only the Vanguard begins to
appear. With which Interpretation these Words of Dr. Pocock agree (on Joel,
page 145, 150.) Of those last things, which were to be done, or in doing, to
the last of time in this world, St. John, by reason of the certainty of their
being fulfilled in due time, says, that they should be fulfilled, (...), or
shortly come to pass.

2 Michael and Gabriel are employed in Daniel; but in this Prophecy several
Angels are made use of, but none by Name; which, together with the Humane
Subordinate Ministry, employed under them, are generally called by the Name of
Angel in this Book. From this Verse we may observe the Order of Divine
Revelation; which proceeds from God the Father, as the Fountain and Original;
and is committed by him to Christ, unto whom all Power is given in the Church:
by whom it is sent to his Servants, especially Ministers, by the Ministration
of his Angels, who are under him, as their Head and Lord; and his Ministers, to
whom the Prophecy is principally directed, are also styled Angels, from their
Ministering to him in this Prophecy, together with the Angels. See on, ver. 20.

2 Who bare record [i. e. has testified and declared by his Preaching and
Sufferings, verse. 9. and in this Book] of [Christ] the Word of God, [John 1.1.
Chap. 19.13.] and of the Testimony of Jesus Christ [i. e. the 3 Gospel, 1 Cor.
1.6] and of all things that he saw 4 [concerning Christ while he abode on
Earth; and afterward in this, and the following Visions]

3 Called his Testimony, because it testified of him, declared the Will of God;
and was testified unto, or confirmed by his Miracles.

4 Here the Apostle plainly discovers himself to be the Writer of this Book,
from many Characters peculiar unto himself; as that he had given Testimony
(which is part of the Office of an Apostle in Scripture, Acts 1.8, 22, etc.)
unto the Gospel of Christ, and to the Divinity of the Word of God, by his
Preaching, and by his Sufferings for it; and that he had delivered many things
concerning Christ, of which he had been a peculiar Eyewitness; which are now
upon Record in his Gospel, in the like manner of Speech, and way of Assurance,
John 1, 14.19, 35.

And moreover, this being a Preface to the whole Book of Visions he had already
seen, these Words may very well refer unto them.

3 5 Blessed [here and here after] is he that reads [and expounds with
diligence and understanding,] and they that hear [with attention] the words of
this Prophecy, and keep [in their Minds, observe, and practise] those things
which are written therein; for the time [of their beginning to be successively
compleated] is at hand [and therefore to be regarded; and the Consideration of
it not to be put off unto a further Day, as the Jews were wont to do, Ezekiel.
12.21-28.]

5 The Divine Authority of the Revelation, the Author of the Book, and the
Subject Matter of it, having been delivered in brief, in the foregoing Verses;
St. John here declares the Fruit and Benefit which the Readers and Observers of
it shall reap by it; and very probably gives an intimation, That it ought to be
read in public Assemblies; here being mention of one (...), or Reader; and of
many, as it were, assembled to hear him Read, and Interpret, according to the
Custom of the Church. And without doubt, great is the blessing attending the
sober Study of this Book; and the due Observation of the Correspondence betwixt
it, and the Events foretold in it, must needs be a matter of extraordinary
comfort, especially to those who shall be so happy as to live near the Times of
its full completion; as Christ told Daniel, chap. 12. 12. And even what is not
so fully understood, is nevertheless (according to the Example of Daniel, and
of the Blessed Virgin, Luke 2.19, 50, 51.) to be pondered upon, and kept in our
Minds, lest we be found wholly ignorant of the great Truths contained in this
Book, when the Times of their Consummation appear; and that thereby God may be
wrought upon to make known unto us, what we do not understand; seeing he has
declared, That he that seeks shall find, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. But chiefly the Blessedness here pronounced belongs to those who
practice according to the pure and undefiled Rules of Christian Worship given
in this Prophecy.

4 John to the Seven 6 [Eminent] Churches in Asia, [the Less:] Grace [i. e. the
free and undeserved Love and Assistance of God] be unto you, and 7 Peace [i.
e.] all manner of Prosperity, especially Spiritual] from 8 him [or The] which
is, and which was, and which is to come [i. e. the Eternal and Immutable God,
Exodus 3.14. who can therefore reveal, and will certainly accomplish all which
is here foretold, and which belongs unto his Church, from the beginning unto
the end of Time:] and from the 9 Seven Spirits [i. e. the Holy Ghost or Spirit,
Zach. 4.2, 6.] which are before his Throne [i. e. is present, and of Counsel
with him who sits on the Throne, working and communicating Graces and Gifts, by
its Operations, according to his supreme Good Pleasure and Determination.]

6 The Seven Churches particularly mentioned in the 11th Verse, were the most
eminent and flourishing of those which were under the peculiar Care and
Government of John; upon which account they might be very well made choice of
by the Holy Spirit, amongst many others, which were then probably planted in
Asia Minor, now called Natolia. Some Travelers, (particularly the Ingenious
Mr. Spoon) have remarked several Circumstances of their present Condition,
answerable to the Judgments denounced against them, in the following Epistles;
which may render it something probable that they were immediately directed unto
them; although the Arguments brought by Dr. Moor, and others, seem to me to
carry with them a full Conviction, of what Grotius confesses, that the seven
Asiatick Churches are but a Pattern, and Example of the sevenfold state and
quality, successive temper and condition of the Universal Church, from the
beginning to the end of it; of which, perhaps (for it is not a thing unusual in
Scripture) there may be some intimation in their Names, as Grotius has
observed, which might probably have been made out more clearly, if we had a
more particular account of the ancient History, and circumstances of those
Churches; however that they are Mystical, and not barely Literal Epistles, I
shall endeavor to prove by observations drawn from the Text it self, in my
following Annotations; and shall not rest upon extrinsecal and more remote
Arguments, being sufficiently convinced of the frequent weakness of Reasoning
upon such Topics in these matters. But upon an impartial consideration of all
circumstances, I cannot but be of opinion, That these seven Asiatick Churches
represent the seven Periods, and Successions of the Universal Church; which in
correspondence to the Creation (a Type of God's Transactions with his Church)
is, according to the known Tradition of the Jews, after six thousand years of
Labor and Imperfection, to enjoy a seventh of Peace, Holiness, and Perfection;
from whence the Pythagoreans, whose Philosophy came from the East, took their
Doctrine of the perfection of this Number; which is in Scripture, and
particularly in this Prophecy often made use of in what relates to Christ and
his Kingdom; and is a perfect number, not upon an Arithmetical account (for the
Number Six is the first perfect Arithmetical one) but upon a Mystical; in
memory of God's having finished, and perfected his Works on the Seventb day;
and of the Sabbatical Rest of the Church, in the Seventh Thousand Year of the
World, after Six remarkable Periods of it from Christ's Resurrection, of which
more hereafter on Chap. 20. 5. Howsoever thus much is certain; That what is
contained in these Epistles, ought to be duly considered by all Churches; that
so they may avoid the Faults therein reprehended, and the Punishments threatened
in them; For what is therein written, is written for our instruction, upon whom
the ends of the World are come.

7 Peace, especially Spiritual, being the greatest of blessings, is put in
Scripture, to denote all manner of Prosperity.

8 The That is; (...), Jehovah, who is Being it self; for these Words are an
Explication of that Sacred Name. See the Interpreters on Exodus 3.14.

9 It is the Opinion of Mr. Mede, (Disc. 10.) and of Dr. Hammond, on the place,
That by the Seven Spirits are to be understood Seven Angels: But besides that
(as Grotius notes on the place) Spirits are distinguished from Angels in the
Fifth Chapter; and that Chap. 4. 5. they are called the Seven Spirits of God;
which is a Title not given to Angels in Scripture: it is not easily
accountable, why Angels should be placed in the same rank, with the Persons of
the Trinity, and that before the Son; and that Grace should be Prayed, and
Wished for from them, when all good Gifts are said, by the Apostle James,
(Chap. 1. 17.) to come from above, from the Father of Lights; and there being
no form of a Salutation, or Blessing in Scripture in the name of a mere Angel
(for the Angel- Genesis 48.15.6. is Christ, and not a created Angel) such an
Interpretation of these Words would give a greater Encouragement to
Creature-Worship, than can be imagined to have been given in this Prophecy,
which is so severe against all Idolatry, and in which this very Apostle was
twice reprehended for offering to give Worship to an Angel. And therefore there
being no necessity of interpreting the words in this Sense, it is certainly the
safest, and the truest way, in my Opinion, to understand them concerning the
Holy Spirit, represented here by Seven Spirits, in respect of his Various, but
Perfect Operations and Gifts (denoted by Seven, the Number of Perfection, as we
have already noted, and shall declare more fully hereafter) to the Universal
Church, in the Sevenfold successive State of it. Whereupon Zach. 4. the Seven
Lamps at the 2d Verse, are at the 6th Verse said to be by God's Spirit; That
is, from the Plenitude of the Holy Spirit, which in those Seven Lamps diffused
its Mighty and Perfect Operations. But although Angels are not to be placed
before Christ, yet the Order of the Persons of the Blessed Trinity is not
always observed in Scripture; not in that very Apostolic Benediction, 2 Cor.
13. where the Grace of Christ is placed first; and in this Form of Benediction,
the Holy Ghost is put before Christ, because more was to be spoken concerning
him afterward, who was therefore more conveniently to be reserved unto the
last place.

5 And from 10 Jesus Christ, who is the Faithful Witness [of his Fathers Will,
and a Prophet worthy to be believed,] and the first begotten of [or first born
from] the Dead [by his being first raised, which is a new Birth or a
Regeneration, Acts 13.33.] and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth [i. e. the
chief Ruler, and Disposer of the Kingdoms of Men, especially the four
Monarchies, which shall be broken to Pieces, and consumed by his Kingdom, Dan.
2, 44.4, 17.] unto him that Loved us [unto the Death, John 15.13.] and washed
us from our sins, in [or by] his own Blood [shed for them.]

10 Note here, the great Propriety of the Titles attributed to Christ; for he
is said to be the faithful Witness, that the following Prophecy might be the
more readily believed; and in Opposition to the Pretenses of Antichrist to New
Traditions, distinct from those delivered by him in his Gospel, the entire
Revelation of his Father's Will. (2dly) His Resurrection is mentioned, because
it was the chief Proof of his Divinity, and the Ground of our Faith; and
chiefly because that from thence is taken the Epoch, or the beginning of the
Account of the Times and Seasons of this Prophecy. The other Titles plainly
relate to the Efficacy of his Blood alone, to our Justification and
Sanctification; and to our Praises due to him alone, in opposition to Merits
and Satisfactions, Prayers to Saints and Angels, and the other Corruptions of
the Opposite Antichristian Kingdom.

6 And has made us Kings [to Reign on the Earth in his Kingdom, Dan 7.27. Rev.
5, 10.20, 6.] and Priests [to offer Spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev.
20.6.] unto God, and his Father, [and not unto Saints and Angels] to him
[Christ] be Glory [i. e. Praise and Acknowledgment of his Perfections] and
[Kingly] Dominion, for ever and ever, [in his Everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 2.44.
Revel. 11.15.] Amen [So be it, and so it will be.]

7 11 Behold he comes 12 [ i. e. he will as certainly come, as if we saw him
now a coming] with Clouds [i.e. with Power, and great Glory, Dan. 7.13. Matthew.
24.30.) and every Eye [of all Men] shall see him [coming,] and they also which
pierced him [i. e. the Jews, shall see him, feel his Power, and acknowledge
him, Isa. 40.5. Zach. 12.10. John 19.37.] and all Kindreds [Tribes, or People]
of the Earth [i.e. of the wicked, worldly, and 13 Antichristian Part;] shall
wail because of him [their Judge, whom they had provoked:] Even so 14 Amen, [ i.
e. this is a certain Truth, to be expected and desired.]

11 This Verse relates to the coming of Christ in his Kingdom at the last Day,
when the Jews, who crucified him, and all other his Enemies, shall appear, and
be judged by him. And it is worth noting, That (according to the Precepts of
Art, observed by the most Judicious Writers) we have here, from Verse 5. given
us in short at the very entrance of this Prophecy, a brief Representation of
the chief End and Design of it, The Kingdom of Christ: of which, upon all fit
Occasions we are presented with a short View; because it is the thing which all
the Events Typified in this Book, were designed to produce; and as it were the
Catastrophe of this (...) of the World (according to Plotinus's Phrase) or of
all the Transactions which have appeared on the Stage of it.

12 A Form of Speech in use with the Prophets, denoting the Infallible
certainty of what they foretold. Or, comes, may here signify, he begins to
come; as Verse 1. See Page 145. 150.
Dr. Pocock on Joel.

13 Earth is taken in this sense, sometimes in this Prophecy; as we shall see
hereafter.

14 This Word, in Scripture, is put to affirm, that the thing will be, as well
as to wish for it, and approve it.

8 [And do not doubt of the Truth, and Extent of this Prophecy; for] I [Christ,
who have revealed it] am Alpha 15 and Omega, the beginning and the ending [who
am before all things, and shall abide after them for ever,] says the Lord
[Christ] which is, [or, The That is], and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty [as well as Eternal Jehovah, who can bring to pass the Words of this
Prophecy, from the beginning of it, to the end of Time.]

15 These are the first and last Letters of the Greek Alphabet; whereby the
Beginning and Consummation of all Things, Times, and Seasons, is ascribed to
Christ: as the incommunicable Attributes of God also are, viz. his Name
Jehovah, and his Almightiness. So that this Verse contains a plain Declaration
of the Divinity of our Savior.

9 I John, who also am your Brother [in the same Faith] and Companion in
tribulation [i. e. a Fellow-sufferer with you] and in the Kingdom and patience
[or patient 15 expectation of the Kingdom] of Jesus Christ [delayed unto the
time of the end, Dan. 12.4-13. Rev. 10.4, 7.] was [in 17 Banishment] in the
Isle that is called 18 Patmos, for [preaching] the word of God, and for the
testimony of Jesus Christ [i.e. the Gospel.]

16 For so the words seem to signify, and may very well be Translated, by a
figure common in Scripture; for this Kingdom was to have begun in its full
Power immediately at Christ's Resurrection, and was then expected by the
Apostles, Acts 1.6. but was still patiently to be waited for, until the time of
the end to which it was deferred. Although the words may more properly relate to
the Patience of Christ; or to his own patient Expectation of his Kingdom, until
the times agreed on with his Father. See Chap. 3.10.

17 In the time of Domitian, about the end of the year of our Lord 95, or the
beginning of 96, as Chronologers generally agree.

18 Situate in the Archi-pelago, about 40 Miles from the Continent of Asia,
toward Ephesus, in the Sea next to the Churches to which he wrote. And as
Ezekiel and Daniel had their Visions when they were in Captivity; so also might
it be, by way of Correspondence, Ordained by God, that John should receive this
Prophecy in a place of Exile; Restraints, and places of Recess, and Retireme^
from the wicked World, affording the fittest dispositions, and opportunities
for Divine Communications.

10. I was in the Spirit 19 [ i. e. under the immediate Power of it] on the 20
Lord's day, and 21 heard [that is, perceived in my Spirit, unexpectedly, and as
it were from] behind me, a great voice, as of a Trumpet, [i. e. a very loud
voice, as the sound of the Trumpets on the solemn Festivals, Psalm. 47.5. or in
the time of War, Zechar. 9.14. to raise my attention, and to encourage me; and
to signify that Judgments were to be denounced.]

19 That is, I was not in the Body, but in a Spiritual Ecstasy or Rapture,
under the immediate actings of the Spirit of God, representing things to my
Soul, and not to my Senses, 2 Cor. 12.2.

20 The First Day of the Week, or the Christian Sabbath, instituted in Memory
of Christ's Resurrection, and called, The Lord's Day (a Phrase never used in
the New Testament, but with reference to this Day, and the Lord's Supper),
because it was blessed and sanctified by Christ's Resurrection, and the Descent
of the Spirit (intimated here, by John's saying, that he was then in the
Spirit), and instituted, and set apart by his Authority, as the Day in which
his Worship was ordinarily and necessarily to be frequented by all Christians.
And the Day is here punctually expressed (which is also exactly observed by
Ezekiel and Daniel, for the benefit of the Church, which is to take notice of
Times and Seasons), to show that these Visions commence from Christ's
Resurrection: For to that end only is the mention of this Day proper to this
Prophecy; On which he might truly style himself, The First Begotten of the
Dead; and he that was dead, and is alive.. And accordingly we are not to
suppose, as some do, that he received this Prophecy on the Annual Day of the
Resurrection; but that (according to the Decorum to be observed in Visions and
Representations) the very Numerical Day, in which Christ arose, was, as it
were, recalled, and represented unto him, as the Beginning of the Time allotted
to the Actions of the whole Representation. And from its being said, That he
was in the Spirit on that Day, it may be conjectured (seeing that every thing
in this Prophecy has a mystical sense, which yet is the primary and most
proper) that the Day of Pentecost, on which Christ gave the Gifts of the
Spirit, was joined in Vision and Representation with it; as the same Day may
happen to be the King's Coronation and Birth day too.

21 Words of seeing, hearing, and the like, signify in Scripture, the Actions
of the Inward Senses, as well as of the Outward.

11 Saying; I 22 am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: And what thou
see [in this Vision] write in a Book, [for greater security and continuance,
Job 19.23, 24.] and send it unto the seven 23 Churches which are in Asia [the
Less], unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and
unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.

22 These solemn Titles of Christ's Divinity, are here repeated, not only for
the greater Assurance of the Certainty of these Visions, but to signify, by
being placed immediately before the Command, to write to the Seven Churches;
That these Epistles relate to what was to come to pass in the End of Time; and
that they contain a Succession of Prophecy from the first to the last; and the
solemn Appearance of Christ, which follows, and the whole Preface with which
this Vision is introduced, do make it highly probable, that they were designed
for more than seven private Churches, of no very large Extent or Duration.

23 That these Cities were all in being in John's Time, is past doubt; only it
has been questioned by some, whether there were Churches as yet Erected in all
of them; which yet seems to be a groundless Scruple; seeing that the Apostle
Paul so long before professes, that he had at Ephesus a great Door, and an
Effectual one opened to him; and that the Word of God increased so mightily
throughout all Asia, that he thought good to tarry amongst them for the space
of three years, Acts 19.10, 20. and 20.18, 31. See Archbishop Usher's Treatise,
concerning the Original of Bishops, and Metropolitans; and of the Lydian, or
Proconsular Asia.

12 And I turned to see [whose] the voice [was] that spoke with me: And being
turned, I saw seven golden 24 Candlesticks [representing seven Churches.]

24 Candlesticks are Symbols, or visible Hieroglyphics of Churches; taken from
the Candlestick with seven Branches, and Lamps in it, under the Law; which was
a Type of the Church, Exodus 25.31. Numb. 8.2. Whereby is signified their Duty
of enlightening and instructing, by the purity of their Doctrine, and Example,
whereby they become precious as Gold in the fight of God. See and compare Psalm
19.10. Matthew. 5.14. John 5.35. Romans 10.15. Philip. 2.15, 16. And most,
especially the Candlestick, Zec. 4. gives great Light to the Candlestick in
this Vision.

13 And in the midst 25 of the seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of Man
[i. e. Christ walking in the midst of them, to order them, as the Priests did
the Lamps, Exodus 27.20, 21. and to protect, guide and watch over them, Levit
26.12. Matthew. 18.20.28, 20. 2 Cor. 6.16.] clothed [in the Highpriests
Vestments] with a garment down to the foot [Exod. 28, 40.39, 27. Ezekiel. 9.2.
Dan: 10 5.] and girt about the Paps with a golden girdle [of the Ephod, Exodus
28, 8.29, 5. to deno^e his Royal Priesthood; a golden girdle being also the
habit of Kings, anciently amongst the Eastern Nations, Job. 12.18.]

25 Hence, perhaps, it was, that God commanded ( Exodus 25.37. and Numb. 8.2.)
that the Lamps should be lighted on that part which was toward the midst, or
middle Branch of the Candlestick; signifying thereby Christ, to whom we ought
all to look for help, and from whom we have all our Light and Knowledge. See
Ainsworth on Numb. 8.2.

14 His head 26 and his hair were white like Wool, as white as Snow [noting his
Eternal Wisdom and Authority, Dan. 7.9.] and his eyes were as a Flame of Fire
[Penetrating all things by his Providence, with quickness, power and terror,
Dan. 10.6. Ezekiel. 1.27. Hebr. 4.12, 13.]

26 Hence may be proved the Consubstantiality and Equality of the Son with the
Father; the same Expressions being used in Daniel, concerning the Father.

15 And his Feet [especially when he comes to Judge his Church, Isa. 53.7.]
like unto fine 27 brass, as if they burned in a furnace [i. e. representing the
stability, power, glory and terror of his actions and punishments, and that his
Servants are to be purified and refined by sufferings, Dan. 10, 6.12, 10.
Malach. chapter 3. and 4.] and his voice as the sound of many Waters [i. e. his
word was powerful and terrible, like that of a raging multitude, signified by
Waters, Dan 10.6. Psalm. 93.4.]

27 See Dr. Hammond, who seems to have given the true sense of these Words;
wherein is represented a fiery flaming Appearance in Glory; taken from a
flaming Fire, in which the lower part looks like Amber (which we translate Fine
Brass), and the Flame, especially the upper part, is of a white color.

16 And he had in his right hand [i. e. under his mighty power, direction and
protection; in safety and great honor, Psalm. 18.35. Je^em. 22.24. Cant. 8 6.]
seven Stars [i. e. the Angels of the seven Churches, ver. 20.] and out of his
Mouth went a sharp two edged Sword [i e. his word, sharp, quick and powerful,
for the destruction of his Enemies, and the defense of his Friends, Ephesians. 6.17.
Hebr. 4.12.] and his countenance [i. e. the manifestation of himself, Cant.
5.15. Psalm. 4 6] was as the Sun shines in his strength [at noon, in its
greatest height and brightness; that is, very Glorious and of Majesty.]

17 And when I saw him [in this glorious and terrible appearance,] I fell at
his feet as dead [for fear:] and he laid his right hand [of power and support]
upon me, saying unto me, fear not, I am the first and the last [i. e the
E^ernal, Almighty God, who can sustain and strengthen thee, Dan. 8, 18.10, 10,
18.]

18 I am he that Lives [i. e. the living God, the Fountain and Author of Life]
and was dead [for your Sins:] and behold [now] I am alive [and that] for
evermore. Amen [i. e. This is a certain Truth.] and [I] have the Keys of 28
Hell [i. e. power over the state and place of separated Souls, to call them
back or retain them when they are departed out of the Body;] and of Death [it
self, to keep men from it; and therefore fear not; for if you were really Dead,
I could raise you up again. All which looks with a Full Eye on that great First
Resurrection.] c. 20.

28 (...). See Hammond, on Matthew. 11. and Bishop Pearson on the Creed.

19 [And upon this assurance, stand up upon thy Feet, and be of good Courage,
and] Write [in a Book unto the seven Churches, as I before commanded thee,
verse. 11.] the things which thou have seen [already, 29 in the representation
of the seven Stars, and seven golden Candlesticks, verse. 12, 13, 16.] and 30
[write also] the things which are [now in being in my present Apostolical
Church,] and the things which shall be hereafter [successively to the very end
of Time.]

29 It is manifest from the next Verse, that this is the true sense of these
Words; where it is expressly said, that the Seven Stars were Seen by him in his
Right Hand; which are therefore the things he had Seen; and were written with
the rest of the Preface, in a Book, to the seven Churches, verse 11.

30 Here he is commanded to write the Epistles to the seven Churches; the first
of which, viz. that to Ephesus, as we have there shown, refers to the State of
the then Apostolical Church, beginning at Christ's Resurrection; the others to
the following successive States of the Churches to the End of the World.

20 [Which things, present and future, are] the 31 Mystery [or the Prophetical
and Mystical sense] of the seven Stars which thou saw in my right hand
[which are the things thou have seen, and not the Mystery to be written
concerning them;] and [write] the seven Golden Candlesticks [i e. the mystery
or mystic sense of them also.] The seven 32 stars are [or signify and
represent, Genesis 41.26.] the Angels 33 [or Pastors] of the seven Churches; and
the seven Candlesticks which thou saw, are the seven Churches [or, are 34
seven Churches, that is Bodies of Christians under their several Pastors; as
well those which are now, as those which shall be successively hereafter.]

31 These words, which are of the Accusative Case, and put by way of
Apposition, plainly refer only to the things which are, and shall be; which are
here said to be the Mystery, or mystical meaning of the seven Stars; which
therefore are not referred to, as being not themselves the Mystery, but the
things which were to be mystically explained in the following Epistles. And
from hence also we are plainly given to understand, that the Subject Matter of
these Epistles is Mystical, and not barely Literal; and that they concern
things future, as well as the present.

32 Here is explained what is meant by Stars and Candlesticks, whose further
mystical meaning, as they relate to Churches then in being, and to future
Successions of them and their Pastors, is largely delivered in the following
Epistles.

33 The Ministering Spirits, which attend on God, are called Angels, in
Scripture, from their being employed as Messengers in his Service: and
therefore by the Angels of the Churches, must be meant the Pastors of them
(which are here clearly distinguished from the Churches themselves), from their
like Office of delivering God's Messages to the People, and putting up their
Prayers unto him; Upon which Account the Jewish Priest is called, The Messenger
(or Angel) of the Lord of Hosts, (Malach. 2.7.) where Angel (that I may observe
this by the way) is evidently taken collectively (as Dr. Pocock, on the Place,
confesses) for the Succession of the whole Jewish Priesthood, comprehended
there under the common Name of Levi, their Father, and spoken of as one Person;
because they were all of the fame Stock, and all separated to the same
Function. And as they are upon this Account called Angels; so are they called
Stars, from their Office of enlightening, or instructing others. By Angels
therefore in this, and the following Chapter, is meant, the Evangelical
Ministry; represented by Angels (as all other Ministerial Agents are in this
Prophecy), because the present World is subject to Angels, under Christ, the
Head of them, and the Angel of the Covenant; Whereas the World to come (that
is, the Kingdom of Christ, at his last coming, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
2.5.) is to be ruled by Christ and his Saints, and is not to be in subjection
unto Angels.

34 It is here said, That the seven Candlesticks, are, or signify seven
Churches (for so it is in the Greek); not the seven Churches, which might seem
to have determined them to the seven in Asia. The Epistles are indeed to be
sent to the seven Churches of Asia, ver. 11. But the mystical meaning of them,
is not here said to belong to the Angels, or to the Seven Churches of Asia
only, but to Seven Churches, and to the Angels of them; from whence it is
plain, that they are prophetical, relating to Seven Successions of the
Universal Church. See Mr. Book 1. Disc. 52. and page 905. Doctor Moor's
Exposition of the Epistle to the Seven Churches.
Mede.

CHAP. II.
The Text.
UNto the Angel [or Evangelical Ministry, Chap. 1. 20.] of the Church of
Ephesus [that is now planted there; and of that Period 1 of the Church, which
is mystically represented by it] write; these things says he that holds the
Seven Stars in his Right Hand, who walks in the midst of the Seven Golden
Candlesticks; [i. e. Christ, the Light of the World, who is more immediately
present with them to enlighten, guide and support them. Chap. 1. 13, 16, 20.]

Annotations on CHAP. II.
1 This I shall hereafter endeavor to make out, to be the principal, if not
only drift of these Epistles, from such Characters and Arguments, as shall
arise from the Text it self. Very good Interpreters, and particularly Grotius,
on Revel. 1.11. have thought, that the several Successions of the Church, here
represented, are intimated in their very Names, according to a way of Allusion
made use of in Scripture, as well as in Heathen Authors. For thus the God of
Ekron, whose True Name is thought to have been Baal zebachim, or the Lord of
Sacrifices, is called in derision Baal zebub, or the Lord of Flies; and
Belzebul, or the Dunghill God. And the Prophet Micah 1.14, 15. manifestly
alludes to the Names of Cities, calling Achzib a Lie; as if its Name were
derived from Cazab, which in Hebrew signifies to Lie; and the City Mareshah is
threatened to be disinherited, in allusion to its Name; and Adullam is called
the Glory of Israel, perhaps (says Doctor Pocock on the Place) from its
Situation, its Strength, or its Beauty, or some other Reason, probably taken
from its Name, as the others are, although now unknown. And such Paronomasia's,
or Allusions, may be more frequent in Scripture than we think for, by reason of
our Ignorance in the Premitive Language, and of the Story and Circumstances of
the Places, whose Names are alluded to.

2 I know [observe and approve, Psalm 1.6.] thy [good] works and thy labor 2
[in the work of the Gospel; in converting, instructing, and governing those
whom thou art set over, 1 These. 5.12. 1 Timothy 5.17.] and thy patience, [and
perseverance in it, and under sufferings for it], and how thou can not
[endure, or] 3 bear [with] them, which are evil [in Life or Doctrine, but
castest them, when they prove incorrigible, out of the Church:] and thou have
tried 4 them [by the Gospel, Gal. 1.8. 1 John 4.1. by their Works Matthew. 7.20.
and by the Gift of discerning Spirits, 1 Cor. 12.10.] which say they are
Apostles [sent and commissioned to preach the Gospel], and are not, and have
found them liars, [or False Apostles, Acts 20.29, 30. and 15.1, 24. 1 Cor.
15.12. 2 Cor. 11.13. Gal. 1.6. 1 and 2 Epist. to Timothy. 1 John 4.1.]

2 Labor also may here signify a zealous and unwearied profession of the
Gospel, amidst the greatest Discouragements, as the Word is taken, 1 Cor. 15.58.

3 These Words refer to the zealous Execution of Discipline, for which the
Church was at first very remarkable, as appears from 1 Cor. 5. 1 Timothy 1.20.
Tit. 3.10. 2. John 10.

4 It appears from Scripture, that there were many False Apostles foretold by
our Savior, Matthew. 24.11, and by the Apostle Paul, in his Admonition to the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20.29, 30. Who generally seem to have
insinuated themselves into the good Opinion of the People, by specious
pretenses of being Brethren, and by creeping into their Houses and Assemblies
unawares, and privily, and by communicating with them in their Feasts of
Charity, as appears from 2 Cor. 11.26. Gal. 2.4. 1 Timothy 3.6. Jude 4.12. and
from this place; where they are said, to pretend to be Apostles, when they were
not. For the Heretics seem to have acted more closely and subtily while the
Apostles were living than afterward; which made i^ (...) task to try and
detect them, which yet the Apostolical Church did with great Zeal and Care, by
examining their pretenses by the Doctrine they had received of Christ, and by
Gifts of discerning False Spirits, as Clemens Romanus attests in his Epistle to
the Corinthians. And this place seems to determine this Succession of the
Church to the Times of the Apostles; the Pretense of being Apostles, or
Messengers, sent and commissioned by God to preach New Doctrines, being
peculiar to that Age, and made use of by Simon Magus, and his Followers,
particularly by Cerinthus, against whom John wrote his Gospel; who pretended to
New Revelations: And it being not peculiar to Ephesus alone, but to most other
Churches, we may reasonably conclude, that by Ephesus is not understood that
Church alone, but the Church State of the Apostolical Age; which began on the
Day of Pentecost, next following the Ascension of our Savior, in the Thirty
Third Year of our Lord, about the Twenty Fourth Day of May, as Bishop Pearson
has stated the Era of the Apostolical Church in his first Lecture on the Acts.
From this place we may learn, That strict care ought to be taken in trying and
examining those who are to be sent to teach others; and that the Canon of
Scripture was settled by this Apostolical Church, she having duly tried and
rejected all other Pretenders to Apostolical Doctrines; and that the first
State of the Church was purely Apostolical.

3 And [yet thou] have born 5 [Afflictions, although thou can not bear 5 with
them which are evil;] and have [still] patience 6, and for my Names sake [i. e.
for me, and upon the Account of my Gospel] have labored 6 [in it], and have
not fainted [under it, nor under thy sufferings for it, Gal. 6.9. 2 These. 3.13.]

5 Such kind of Allusions are frequent in Scripture, as Romans 1.24, 25, 26, 28.

6 This being a Repetition of what was said in the foregoing Verse, seems to
intimate, that their Labor and Sufferings were Great, and very Remarkable; a
Repetition sometimes denoting so much in Scripture.

4 Nevertheless I have somewhat [of 7 complaint] against thee, because thou
have left [or 8 remitted, and abated something of] thy first 9 [or former,
fervent, and intense] Love [of me, my Gospel, and Kingdom.]

7 So the Phrase is taken, Matthew. 5.23.

8 So this word is rendered by Grotius and Doctor Hammond, and, I think,
rightly. And as Grotius thinks, that Love and Desire, may by way of Allusion,
be signified by the Word Ephesus, so may also the Greek Word here made use of,
intimate some Remission, or Coolness of their First Love, by the same Figure
which the Prophet Micah makes use of, Chap. 1. 13, 14. and which Grotius thinks
the Apostle uses, Romans 1.17, 28, 29. where also in the 29th Verse there is a
manifest Allusion to the Name Judah, which signifies Praise, Genesis 29.35.

9 The First Love, which the Prophet, Jerem. 2.2, calls the Kindness of Youth,
and the Love of Espousals, is usually very fervent; but is wont soon to cool
and abate in the best of Men. And accordingly the Church at first, when (as
Hierom speaks) the Blood of our Lord was warm, and the Faith of the New
Converts was Fervent, was very Zealous in all its Duties and Offices, as
appears from the Acts of the Apostles, particularly from Chap. 2.41-47. and
Chap. 4.31-37. where we have a perfect Pattern of the First Love of the
Apostolical Church, in the Church of Jerusalem; especially in their having all
things common, and calling nothing their own. And yet in a very short space, as
soon as the Number of the Disciples, and with them the Church-Revenue, was
multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Graecians against the Hebrews, even
in the Infant-Church, as we read Acts 6. occasioned by the Pride of the
Hebrews, as Bishop Pearson has shown, in his Third Lecture on the Acts; wherein
(as also in the Behavior of Ananias and Saphira) there are early Tokens and
Types given of a Declension in the Church, which proceeded so far as to this
matter, even in those First Times of the Gospel, that Paul tells the
Philippians, (Chap. 2. 21. of his Epistle to them, supposed to be written about
A. D. 59, or 62.) that all Men sought their own, and not the things of Jesus
Christ. For not only Demas forsook Paul out of Love to this present World, but
Mark grew weary of the Labor of the Gospel, and went not with Paul and
Barnabas to the work, Acts 15.38. and Peter himself, for fear of the Jews, was
guilty of Dissimulation, Gal. 2.11, 12. And the Galatians had generally
departed from the True Notions they had received of Christian Liberty, and a
Working Faith, Gal. 5.1, 6, 7. and were grown very remiss in their Acts of
Charity, Gal. 6.9. And the Churches mentioned in Scripture, are frequently
reprehended for great Enormites; so that it is no wonder that the Churches in
After-Ages proved guilty of them; the Love of many waxing cold betimes, as our
Savior foretold, Matthew. 24.12. and Paul complained, 2 Timothy 1.15. and 4.16. But
this Prophecy respecting principally the Apostasy which crept into the Visible
Church; by this passage is chiefly meant some degrees of it, which were then
advancing: John, at the close of his first Epistle, written not long after the
Revelations, warning the Christians to keep themselves from Idols, and the
Mystery of Iniquity, of which Worshipping of Angels was a part, already working,
even when St. Paul wrote his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, about the
year 49. as some think, or 53. according to Bishop Pearson; from whose Opinion,
that of a Judicious Person, well skilled in Scripture Chronology, does not much
differ; who dates the Conception of Antichrist, A. D. 55. which may very well
be called, an abating, or remitting of Love; a cleaving to the One God, being
so often described in Scripture by Metaphors taken from Chaste Love, and
Espousals; and Idolatry being so often likened to its contrary, Adultery, and
Fornication. However, it is certain, That in the Times of the Apostles,
something was even then working, which made way by degrees for the Following
Apostasy. Such, perhaps, were, (1.) A Natural Love of Quiet and Ease, and Fear
of Trouble and Displeasure; whereby, by Degrees, their Zeal was abated, which
was the Fault of Mark and Peter, who yet returned to their First Love and
Works. (2.) An excessive Esteem for some Pastors, for their Gifts, to the
despising of others; which was the Cause of the Divisions in the Church of
Corinth, as appears from Paul's Epistles to them. (3.) A Domineering and
ambitious Temper in the Pastors themselves, which was the Fault of Diotrephes,
3 John 9, 10. (4.) A Want of mutual forbearing one another; the Jewish
Christians Judging and Condemning the Gentiles, and the Gentiles despising the
Jewish. (5.) Diverse False Opinions brought by the Jewish and Gevtile Converts
into the Church; especially with relation to Angels and Departed Souls; which
are the usual Subject of Paul's Epistles; and of which he treats particularly,
2 These. 2. 1 Timothy 4.1. Col. 2. (6.) And lastly, God out of his infinite Wisdom,
permitted, even in the pure Church of the Apostolical Age, not only Errors and
Heresies to arise through the Common Imperfections of Men and Churches, but
also a Foundation to be laid for the Grand Visible Apostasy, which began very
early; and rose to a great height, not long after the Departure of Paul from
Miletum, and that from amongst the Christians themselves, as the Apostle
plainly asserts, Acts 20.28.30. And was to be carried on by some of them, or by
the man of sin; that is by a Visible Body, or Succession of Men, under the
pretense of Mystery and Godliness, and of Antiquity and Apostolicalness, as
appears from 2 These. 2. 1 Timothy 4.1. and from the second Verse of this very
Chapter.

5 Remember 10 therefore from whence [or, from what degrees of Love] thou art
fallen, and repent, and do the first Works [with the like Zeal;] or else I will
come unto thee quickly [and that on a sudden, and unexpectedly;] and will
remove thy Candlestick 11 [or Church] out of its place [and give it unto
another, Matthew. 21.43.] except thou repent.

10 Here is laid down the True Way of Reforming the Church, and of its escaping
Destruction; viz. by her considering wherein she has deviated from the Gospel;
by which Rule the False Apostles were tried, Verse 2. and in repenting of, or
forsaking her Faults: and in a zealous practice of her first good Works,
according to the Model of the Gospel. And we have here given us two different
States of the First Churches; viz. of their First Love, or Purity; and of their
Remission of it, and Deviation from it.

11 This Removal is not to be understood of the particular Church of Ephesus;
which is noted by Bishop Usher, to have continued, and to have preserved its
Metropolitical Pre-eminence entire, until the time of Constantine, whilst
others of the Seven had been deprived of it: And although there be not now at
Ephesus so much as One Christian, (which Mr. Spoon looks upon as a fulfilling
of this Prophecy) yet the Judgment here threatened, was to come quickly; and
must therefore refer to something more early than its present State. And
therefore Ephesus mystically here representing a Church State, the removing of
its Candlestick must signify, its ceasing to be such a Church State as it was
before; the Pure, Primitive, and Apostolical State of the Church, degenerating,
by degrees, and that very soon, from its First Love; and becoming a Synagogue
of Satan, in the following Succession: and its Privileges and Preheminences,
in the Kingdom of Heaven, being taken from it, and given to other
Church-Successions, according to the Denunciation of Christ, Matthew. 21.43.

6 But [yet, notwithstanding this defect,] this thou have [commendable in
thee,] that thou hate [so far art thou from suffering and conniving at] the
[unclean] deeds [or, practices] of the 12 Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

12 A sort of impure Heretics, who about the year 80 or 90, after Christ, much
about the Time of Cerinthus, taught, that it was lawful to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols; and that Matrimony was a mere Humane Institution, not
obliging the Conscience; and asserted the Lawfulness of Fornication, and all
manner of Uncleanness, fathering their Doctrine (as the Heretics then were
wont to do) upon Nicholas, one of the seven Deacons in the Acts; from which
Opinions and Practices the Church was as yet free; although it afterward fell
into some of them; and there were some, even then, who forbad Marriage, which
was one step to the increase of this Impurity of the Nicolaitans, 1 Timothy 4.3.

7 He that 13 has an [understanding] ear, let him hear [attentively, consider,
and understand,] what 14 the Spirit [speaking by the Prophets] says [by me, in
this Prophetical and Spiritual Epistle] unto the Churches [of God in all Ages
and Successions of them, for whose Uses it was written.] [And] to him [or that
person] that overcomes [the Remissness of Love, which is to be found in this
Church State,] will I give to eat of the 15 Tree of Life, which is in the
Paradise of God; [i. e. the Enjoyment of a happy State in Christ's Kingdom,
Rev. 22.2. Ezekiel. 47.12.]

13 From this Verse it seems to appear, that these Epistles are Spiritual and
Mystical, because the same Sentence is annexed to them, which Christ makes use
of at the Close of his Parables, or Mystical Discourses, to engage Attention,
and to teach, That all men were not capable of understanding them, but those
who had their Minds duly exercised in Spiritual Things: And the manner of
speaking being here altered from what it was at the first Verse, viz. from
these things says Christ, into hear what the Spirit says; Hereby seems to be
intimated, that these are Spiritual and Prophetical Epistles, spoken by the
Divine Spirit in Christ, which was to teach the Apostles all things; and show
them things to come, John 16.12, 13. Part of which are here revealed, relating
not to the single Church of Ephesus alone, but to the Churches in the Plural;
that is, all the several Periods and Successions of them.

14 The Particle, what, refers not only to the following Sentence, but to all
which went before, as appears from the Epistles to the Churches of Thyatira,
Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea; in which there is nothing that follows this
Proverbial Sentence; which must therefore have a reference to what preceded it.

15 This Promise refers to the particular Overcomers of the Evil of each
Church State, and not to the Churches themselves; for as some Men may fall
short of overcoming Vice and Error in a good Church State, so others may
overcome the Evil of a bad one. And the Promises to the several Overcomers, are
taken from the Descriptions given afterward in the latter part of this
Prophecy, of the New Jerusalem, or Kingdom of Christ; which as they have
promoted, so shall their Reward be. Now the Earthly Paradise, was a Type of
Christ's Heavenly Kingdom; and to eat of the Tree of Life, in the midst of that
Paradise, is to be refreshed and nourished with Divine Communications, in the
Kingdom of Christ; in which the Saints and Overcomers shall Reign with him. And
here we are to take notice, that the Rewards are suited to each particular
State; to be refreshed by eating in a State of Happiness, being proper to those
who are wearied with Labor and Sufferings; and a Crown in the next Succession,
being the fit Reward of the Overcomers of a state of persecution. It is also
further fit to be observed, That the Right of Primogeniture is not given to
Ephesus, but to Smyrna the Symbol of the afflicted Church State, which has the
Crown of Life bestowed upon it, the Symbol of Royal Dignity, which of Right
belongs to the First Born; and the very Kingdom of the New Jerusalem is given
to Philadelphia, of which the Key of David, and her Crown, are the Symbols:
which seems to be shadowed out unto us, in the Blessings of Jacob, (Genesis 49.
which may by way of Allegory, and as Typical, be accommodated to the Mystical
Israel the Church), where the Precedence, both in Dignity and Power, is taken
from Reuben, the First Born, because of his Instability, and having defiled his
Father's Bed; which may be Typical of Ephesus's Early Departure from its First
Love, and of the Idolatrous Apostasy which crept into it betimes; which is a
spiritual Defilement in Scripture: whereupon its Candlestick was removed out of
its place; that is, it lost the Rank of priority it was to have in the Kingdom
of Christ, which was given to the next Succession of Smyrna for it is Constancy
in Afflictions; bur especially the New Jerusalem State, coming down in the
Philadelphian Succession.

8 And unto the Angel [Verse 1.] of the Church in Smyrna 16, write; these
things, says the First 17 and the Last, which was dead, and is alive; [that
is, Christ the Eternal God, who raised himself from the Dead.]

16 Smyrna is the next City of the seven, Northward from Ephesus, and about
Forty Miles distant from it; and it is still a Metropolitical See, having yet
no more than Two Churches of Greeks in it, and One or Two of Armenians. It Is
Name may by a Figurative Allusion, be derived from a Syriack word signifying
Bitterness, to denote the bitter persecutions of the Church under this State.

17 These Attributes are made use of, to encourage them to undergo their
Sufferings, as having been already experienced by Christ, who was God, and had
vanquished Death for them.

9 I know [and approve] thy [good] works, [in the propagating of my Kingdom]
and tribulation [under persecutions] and poverty, [or extreme want, by thy
being spoiled 18 of thy Good;] but thou art [really] rich [in Grace, and in my
Esteem and Favor;] and I know the blasphemy 19 [ i. e. Idolatry] of them [or
that party,] that say they are Jews 20 [that is, boast themselves to be the
pure Christians, the true Worshippers of the one only God;] and art not [truly
so,] but are [really, and in God's Account] the 21 Synagogue of Satan [that is,
an Antichristian Congregation.]

18 As was usual in Times of persecution, Heb. 10.34.

19 Blasphemy is a Contumely, or Reproach of God, by attributing that to a
Creature which is properly his; whence in Scripture it is put to signify
Idolatry, which is the highest Blasphemy. See Isa. 65.7. 1 Maccab. 2.6. 2
Maccab. 8.4. And this Blasphemy then appeared in the Reverence paid to Martyrs,
which was the Beginning of Idolatry.

20 The Phrases and Expressions of this Mystical Book are taken from the Old
Testament, and the Jewish Economy, which was Typical of the Christian, as the
Apostle asserts, 1 Cor. 10.1-4. the Type in this prophecy, being constantly put
for the Antitype, or thing signified. And therefore, according to that usual
Figure; by Jews here must be understood, Christians, who are the mystical
Israel, or the (...), the True Israel, as Justin Martyr calls them; whose
Glory, and proper Privilege it was, to be the Worshippers of the One True God;
whilst all the World besides, were guilty of Idolatry. Now the Jews being wont
to pride themselves in their privileges; those here represented are also said,
to say that they are Jews, that is, boast of it, in allusion, perhaps, to the
Name Judah, which signifying Praise and Thanksgiving; is here, and by the
Apostle Romans 2.17-29 put to denote a Boasting Confession, joined with a seeking
the Praise of Men, as Grotius has noted on the place; and as is obvious from
the last verse of that Chapter, as I before hinted. Of which Pride of theirs,
there is an eminent instance in the very first Apostolical Church at Jerusalem,
Acts 6. where the Hebrews, or Natural Jews who came from the Loins of Abraham,
neglected, or proudly despised, the Hellenists, or Proselyted Gentiles, although
Jews by their Religion, as well as themselves. And therefore in proportion; by
Jews here must be meant those Christians who more than ordinarily boasted
themselves to be the pure Worshippers of the True God only, when yet they were
really guilty of Idolatry. For the word Jew, as Grotius notes on Romans 2.17. was
then a word significative of their Religion, rather than of their Nation; and
denoted as much as a Worshipper of the one God; or one who confessed and
acknowledged him, as the word Judah is Explained by Philo, and Interpreted by
the LXX, Genesis 29.35.

21 Satan signifies, according to the Original of the word, the Great
Adversary, the Devil; of whose Congregation, these Pretending pure Christians
are said to be, and not of Christ's, because, by their Blasphemous or
Idolatrous Practices, they did indeed, and in God's account, Worship him, and
Propagate his Antichristian Kingdom. But this was at first the Fault only of a
few of them, or of that Party that Valued themselves, and Despised others,
calling themselves Jews, or the only True, or pure Israel of God; it having
always happened so from the beginning of God's Church, that according to the
Allegory insisted on Gal. 4.25, 29. the Corrupt Party has stood most upon its
Purity, Honor and Pre-eminence; and has Persecuted, and Despised the pure one.

Now the Church of Smyrna, comprehending that Succession of the Church, in
which the great Persecutions happened; and in which a Crown of Life was at last
given them at the Empires becoming Christian: The Blasphemy here reprehended,
refers chiefly to the latter State of that Succession, when Honors and Riches
Flowing into the Church, corrupted the purity of their former poor and
suffering condition; and the reverence at first innocently paid to Martyrs; and
the introducing of Pagan Rites by degrees, under pretense of winning the
Heathens, gave a great increase to the growing Apostasy; iniquity under the
covert of a Mystery, i. e. of Piety, Religion and well meaning Zeal, making
daily progress in the Church, until it arose to an Antichristian Synagogue or
Congregation of a prevailing party amongst them. Which phrase is made use of,
in opposition to the Title given the Jews in the Old Testament; who are called
Numb. 31.16. The Congregation or Synagogue of the Lord: which the corrupt party
of this Succession had forfeited, by its Antichristian or Satanical
Innovations; as the Jews also did upon their Apostasy under Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles.
11.15. who are thereupon said to have Sacrificed unto Devils or Satan. And it
is worth Observation, that the last degeneracy of the Jewish Church, when, as
it appears from the Gospels, it became a Satanical Synagogue, consisted
chiefly, in vain Traditions, in Affecting Titles, Honors and Prehemency, in
neglecting the Spiritual Service of God, and in expecting a present Worldly
Kingdom of the Messiah, instead of a Future, Heavenly State of it, and of the
Kingdom of God within us, consisting in inward Righteousness and Peace; and
lastly in Cruelty and Persecution, and in casting out of the Synagogue of the
Lord, the true and faithful Servants of Christ. Now in whatsoever Age of the
Church there may be found such a Temper and Spirit Prevailing; so much may it
be said to have of the Synagogue of Satan in it: Much of which was visible, in
this succession, in the strifes amongst Bishops, about the Superiority and the
Prehemenency of their Sees; in their rash Censuring and Excommunicating one
another for slight Matters, as appears evidently in the Behavior of Pope
Victor; in the Oppositions made in this period to the Doctrine of the Ancient
Chiliasts; and in the introducing a great number of Ceremonies, Rites and
Customs into the Church, to bring over the Jews and Pagans to the Christian
Religion.

10 Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: [For] behold the Devil
22, shall [by evil Men, as his Instruments,] cast some 23 of you [who have the
courage not to deny me] into prison [i. e. various and grievous Tortures and
Persecutions;] that ye may be tried [fully, whether ye be perfect and entire,
James 1.2, 3. 1 Pet. 1.7.] and you shall have Tribulation [that is, one most
notable Persecution;] 24 ten days [of years:] Be thou faithful unto [the
suffering of] death, and I will give thee a crown 25 of Life [i. e. Freedom
from Persecution, Rewards and Honors.]

22 Persecutors do the Devils Work, Ephesians. 2.2. and to him Justin Martyr
frequently attributes the Pagan Persecutions, because they were promoted and
set on by his Instigation.

23 For many fell away in the Times of persecution.

24 Days, in Prophetic account, are frequently put for Years; as is evident
from Numb. 14.34. Ezekiel. 4.6. and Dan. 9.24. where the Days of the Seventy
Weeks, are understood by most Interpreters of Years. For a Day being the First,
and most Natural Measure of Time, depending upon the constant and most known
Revolution of the Sun; is put in all Languages, and particularly in the Hebrew,
to express indefinitely, a length or continuance of Time; as the Days of Herod
signify in Scripture, the Time of his Reign; and is limited to some certain
continuance, by circumstances; or according to the Will of Him who makes use of
it: as it is by God in Scripture restrained to signify a Prophetical Year, as
is evident from the places I have quoted: against which, Grotius has Objected
nothing material, as Dr. Moor has fully proved in his Mystery of Godliness,
Book 5. Chap. 15. Now the last and greatest Persecution of the Church under
Diocletian, lasting, according to all Chronologers, exactly ten Years; It is
evident that this place must refer unto it: especially if we consider that the
Vision of the Souls under the Altar, which is Contemporary with this
Succession; immediately preceeds the great Earthquake, or change of Things
under Constantine; and that no Example could be brought by Grotius, or Dr.
Hammond of a ten days Persecution, in the Times to which they limit this
passage; and that Ten, does not denote in Scripture a short time when put
indefinitely, but is always put for one of a long continuance, (it being, as it
were, the plentitude of simple Numbers) as is evident from Numb. 14.22. Job.
19.3. 1 Samuel 1.8. Eccles. 7.19.

Furthermore, seeing that the things referred to in this Prophecy, being for
the use of the whole Church, ought to be illustrious parts of History, and not
References to something not Transmitted unto us (with which shift Grotius puts
off his Reader) what more Notable part of History could be referred to, than
that of the ten Years Persecution, which gave Date to the Era Martyrum, and is
a most famous Character of Time; exactly answering in its ten Years Duration,
to the Prophetical way of Accounting a Day for a Year, and fit to be made use
of by the Holy Ghost, in Transmitting so remarkable a Period of the Church down
to after Ages.

25 A Crown denotes Regal and Triumphal Honors, and a Crown of Life is opposed
to the Deaths and Martyrdoms they had before Suffered: And hereby is plainly
set forth the Freedom from Persecution they Enjoyed under Constantine, at the
end of the Tenth Persecution; which, according to the Accurate Computation of
Mr. Pagi, in his Critical Annotations upon Baronius, began Feb. 23. A.D. 303.
and ended June 13th, A. D. 313. when the famous Epoch was Instituted of the
Churches Freedom from Persecution; mentioned by Eusebius in his Chronicon, and
by the Author of the Alexandrian Chronicon.

From which Time we may date their Crown of Life; Constantine daily proceeding
to advance and secure the Church; which enjoyed great Freedom (bating only some
short Persecutions, particularly that under Julian), until it came to its
highest pitch of External Peace and Honor, under Theodosius the Great, who
died at Milan A. D. 395. on Jan. 17. or Feb. 24. after he had given Paganism
its deadly Blow, by his Famous Defeat of Argobastes and Eugenius, A. D. 394.

11 He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches:
[Verse 7.] [And] He [i. e. that person] who overcomes, [the Persecutions, and
Evils of this Church State, and perseveres unto the End, in the Precepts of the
Gospel,] shall not be hurt of the second death, [but shall escape it, Rev.
20.6.]

12 And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos 26, write, These things, says
he who has the sharp 27 Sword, [of the Word and the Spirit,] with two edges,
[to inflict severe and sharp Judgments, chap. 1.16.]

26 Pergamos is distant from Smyrna, Northwards, about five hundred and Forty
Furlongs; and there are in it now but a few Families of miserable Christians,
and but one Church; although it was anciently the most Famous and Chief City of
Asia the Less, having been the Seat of the Attalidae, who were rich and potent
Kings; and of the Roman Proconsuls: For which Reason, as well as in Allusion to
its Name, it may be put to denote here, The exalted State of the Church; High
and Lofty Fabrics, and Things, being called, (...), by the Asiaticks: And
because of its Andr. Caesar. in locum.
excessive Idolatry, it is a fit Type of the Apostate state of this Succession,
in which the Apostasy was exalted to a Throne.

27 Corruptions daily increasing under this State, the Styleis here changed,
and Christ is represented with a sharp sword in his Hand.

13 I know thy [good] works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's 28
Seat [or Throne] is, [i. e. under the Dominion of the Antichristian Apostasy;]
and [I know that nevertheless] thou hold fast [or retainest the profession
of] my Name [and have not renounced it, by becoming Antichristian;] and have
not denied my Faith [or Gospel; no not] even in those days [or Times of
Darkness and Cruelty,] wherein Antipas 29 [ i. e. the Opposers of Popery] was
my faithful Martyr [or Witness,] who was flain [by Decrees, Anathemas, and
frequent Deaths] among you [or under your Jurisdiction,] where Satan [or
Antichrist] dwells [or has his constant Residence, in great State and Power,
2 These. 2.4, 9]

28 The Apostasy is now called Satan's Seat, or Throne; because that upon the
Churches Exaltation, under the Christian Emperors, a Worldly Kingdom, and a
Paganizing Christianity, arose by degrees, especially at Rome, to such an
height, that it became at last to have a Supremacy, or a Throne in it; to
which Satan's power in this World is likened in Scripture, viz. Isa. 14.12-14.
Luke 10.18. John 12.31. With which the History of those Times agrees; it being
evident, that from about the year 400. and odd (the precise year I shall
endeavor to determine hereafter), when Satan's Synagogue seems to have arrived
to its maturity; that the Apostasy daily increased, chiefly upon the Growth of
the Papacy, which came to have a Throne about the year 606, when Boniface the
Third Usurped the Title of Universal Bishop.

29 There might have been perhaps a Martyr of this Name at Pergamus; although
the Story of him related in the Greek Menologies, is vehemently to be
suspected, as Grotius has well noted; a Brazen Bull being not a Punishment
amongst the Romans, whose Laws were then observed at Pergamus; and the
Relations of those early Martyrdoms, being justly called in question by some of
the Learned Men of the Romish Church. But howsoever, the Names made use of in
this Book, having constantly a mystical signification, this also must be
understood after the same manner; and it will then plainly denote, The Opposer
of the Pope; that is, (by a Figure usual in this Prophecy) the whole Body, or
succession of those, who during this period, witnessed against the Apostasy of
that See; a Catalogue of whom you may find in Illyricus, Usher, and other
Authors. For (...) signifies against, or contrary; and (...) is the Old Word
for Father; from whence, by a Reduplication of Letters comes (...), or (...);
that is, Pope, or Holy Father; for which consult what is said by the
Etymoligists out of Eustathius.

And the Word Antipas, is made use of, and not (...), or (...), because this
was a Common Name, which the others were not: And because those Names would
have given a too open intimation of the Mystery designed designed by them,
contrary to the Holy Secrecy and Reserve usually observed in this Prophecy.

14 But [yet] I have a few [or some little, small] things [to object] against
thee, because thou have 30 there [where thou dwell, and amongst you,] them
[or a prevailing Party] that hold [profess and practise] the Doctrine [Precept
and Counsel] of 31 Balaam, [ i. e. the False Antichristian Prophet,] who taught
Balack [ i. e. the Princes subject to Antichrist,] to cast a stumbling block
[or an Occasion to commit Sin] before the Children of Israel [that is, the
Christians of that Age, the Spiritual Israel] to * eat things sacrificed unto
Idols, and to commit [Spiritual] Fornication [which is Idolatry.]

30 Although the Apostate Church had the Throne; that is, the Antichristian
Power, and Pre-eminence; yet the pure Church State is here blamed for having
them, or that prevailing party amongst them, although they could not help it;
because, that it had not arrived to that perfection of Gifts and Graces, as
must necessarily have cast out the corrupt party by its power and efficacy.
Thus the Apostle blames the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5. and 2 Cor. 7. that they had
not mourned, that the incestuous person might be cast out from among them; and,
for want of vehement Affections of godly Sorrow, Desire, Revenge, etc. by which
alone they could approve, and clear themselves in that matter.

31 Concerning this wicked advice of Balaam, who counseled Balack to draw the
Israelites to Idolatry, by enticing them with the Conversation of strange
Women, you may read the 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th Chapters of Numbers, and the 16th
Verse of the 31st. as also Micah 6.5. 2 Pet. 2.15. and Jude 11. together with
the Expositors on those places. Whereby is plainly signified the wicked Counsel
of the Antichristian Party, especially of the Papacy, (which, like Balaam,
pretends to Prophecy and Infallibility) whereby the Secular Powers, Represented
by King Balack, were persuaded to entice the people to Idolatry; by worshipping
Bread, and Saints, and Images. So that this Period comprehends the Times in
which these Doctrines were controverted, and at last imposed; and seems to
reach until about the year 1100. when Antipas, or the faithful Witnesses
against these, and other Errors, which had been before slain by the Anathemas
of several Councils; and lay mostly concealed and hid within the Apostate
Church; began to unite into an open and visible Body, and to appear under the
Name of the Waldenses and Albigenses, in a more direct Opposition to that
Satanical, or Antichristian Authority, which had hitherto overpowered them.
Upon which, as History testifies, vast Numbers of all Ranks and Qualities
united themselves unto them.

* To eat things sacrificed unto Idols (as appears from the Apostles Discourse,
1 Cor. 8. and 12.) was accounted by the Corinthians no fault, and was defended
by them (as Grotius notes upon the place) by very subtle Distinctions, not
unlike those used by the Papists, in defense of their Idolatry; and therefore
by it may be here meant, some lesser degrees, and plausible Entrances of
Idolatry, such as the Honors given to Martyrs, their Relics, and the like;
which they were more guilty of in this Succession, than of downright Idolatry;
and is therefore placed first here, before Fornication; but is placed after it,
in the next Succession ( Verse 2.) because flat Idolatry was then predominant,
in respect of which, the other was but of a lesser Account, and is therefore
put after it.

15 So have thou also [in which thou art not wholly inexcusable, although it be
against thy Will, Verse. 14. number. 30.] them that hold the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans 32 [ i. e. those who countenance and practice filthy Lusts,] which
thing I hate [and which therefore ought to have been cast out by thee, though
not by Power, which thou had not, yet by Mourning, and Prayer, and Eminence
in Gospel-Graces.]

32 These Deeds which were abhorred by the Ephesine Succession of the
Apostolical Church, had by this Period gained many Teachers and Approvers. And
hereby is very probably meant, those Encouragements which were given to Lust by
corrupt Doctrines, about Celibacy and Virginity; and by Indulgences and Pardons
for all manner of Sins; which being at first, only a prudent Relaxation of
Discipline, were in process of time, so far corrupted, first by the Martyrs and
Confessors, who granted them (as Cyprian frequently complains) to the Lapsi,
before Penance performed, or upon very easy ones; and afterward by the
Negligence of following Ages, still growing worse and worse; that at last,
about the year 1100. they became Scandalous Dispensations for all sorts of
Wickedness, and Encouragements for Men to take up Arms against the Enemies of
the Papacy, and Christ's faithful Antipas, or Opposers of it.

16 Repent 33 [therefore, even of the few and small Faults thou have; and
mourn, and sorrow after the most earnest and fervent manner, that these
Offenders may be taken away from amongst you, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2. and 7.] or
else I will come unto thee 34 [in Judgment, indeed, for these thy smaller
Faults; but so as not to 35 fight against, and destroy thee:] quickly [and on a
sudden:] and will fight against [and destroy] them [amongst you, who hold these
Doctrines] with the Sword of my Mouth [i. e. by my Gospel Threats, and
Judgments effectually denounced, and executed, even to utter Excision; whilst
thou shall be visited with a Fatherly Correction, and that only in case thou
repentest not.]

33 The True Church is commanded to repent; that is, of its want of such an
intense Zeal, extraordinary Humiliations, Fervent Prayers and Supplications, as
might have prevailed with God to cast those Errors and abominations out of the
Church; which Discipline is also called Mourning and Repentance, by the
Apostle, in the places I have quoted: and for want of this (which is its small,
or few things), Christ says that he will come unto them in Judgment indeed,
but not in anger, and with a Fatherly Correction, to bring them to a thorough
Reformation and Repentance.

34 Christ speaks only to the pure Church, because pure Churches are only
accounted Churches in his Esteem; although it has the same Name with the
corrupt; because that alone was visible.

35 Here is an allusion to the slaughter of the idolatrous Israelites, at the
Command (or by the mouth) of God, for joining themselves to Baal-Peor, upon the
instigation of Balaam, Numb. 25.4, 5.

17 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches,
[Verse 7.] [And] To him that overcomes [the Corruptions of this Church State,]
will I give to eat of [or to partake of, and be nourished by] the hidden 36
Manna [i. e. the secret Consolations of God's Spirit.] And I will give him a 37
white stone [that is, a Reward for his Victory, and Absolution from the
Censures and Excommunications he lies under,] and in the stone a new Name,
[chap. 3, 12. 19, 16.] written, [importing, that they are Members of Christ's
Kingdom, Children of God; and Heirs of Heaven, Isa. 62.2. and 65.15. Romans 8.16.
1 John 3.1.] which no [Natural or Carnal, 1 Cor. 2.9-11.] man [of this
Church-State] knows [the true Value of, 1 John 3.2.] saving he that receives
it [from me, and has experienced the Consolations of the Divine Mercy and
Absolution, Romans 8.16]

36 By Manna is meant the sweet Consolations which arise from the Knowledge of
God, and his Will in Christ the True Manna, John 6. Which is called hidden, in
allusion to the Manna which was laid up in a Golden Pot, and put in the Ark,
and kept in the most secret part of God's Temple, the Holy of Holies, Exodus
16.33, 34. Heb. 9.4. Whereby inward and spiritual Comforts are signified,
enjoyed by the Saints in secret, during their retired Worship at the Altar of
Incense, whilst they were under the Power of the Antichristian Supremacy: So
that the True Pergamus seems plainly to be the Type of the True Church, under
the Power of the Apostasy; and of those faithful Christians, who are in that
Church, but not of it; wishing and expecting the Coming of Christ's Kingdom,
that they might be delivered from this their Sackcloth and mournful
Condition; in which they are fed indeed with pleasant Food, but as the Jews
were with Manna in the Wilderness; the Type of a desolate State.

37 This is thought to be an Allusion to the Ancient Custom of acquitting
Criminals by a White Stone; and of giving Conquerors in the Games (to which
Paul frequently alludes) a White Stone, with their Names, and the Value of the
Prizes written on it; which none was to look upon, and know, but those who won
it: Whereby may be meant the public Acquittal, Justification, and Rewards
which the faithful Christians of this Succession should receive in Christ's
Kingdom. But because the Allusions in this Prophecy are generally taken from
the Jewish Customs, and the Old Testament; therefore it may not be altogether a
groundless conjecture, that here may be an Allusion to the Stones on the
Oracular Breast Plate of the High Priest, which had the Names of the Children
of Israel engraven upon them, for a Memorial; to signify, that Christ, our
High Priest, is always mindful of us; and to put God in remembrance of his
People: to which End it is here said, that Christ will give them a White Stone,
with their New Name, of being Members of Christ's Kingdom, the New Jerusalem
written in it; that thereby they might be in his remembrance, and he might
behold their purity (denoted by a White Color) and show mercy upon them; and
openly acknowledge and reward them in his Kingdom.

18 And unto the Angel of the Church in 38 Thyatira, these things says the 39
Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like
fine Brass [Chap. 1.14, 15. i. e. whose Providence is quick and penetrating and
whose Judgments are pure and terrible, to try the Pretenses, and punish the
Faults of this Succession, and to purge and purify it.]

38 Thyatira is distant from Pergamus about Forty Eight Miles, and there is not
now so much as One Christian Church in it. Stephanus, the Geographer, tells us,
that this City, which was before called Pelopea, and Semiramis, was named
(...), (and afterward Thyatira), by Seleucus Nicanor, upon the News he
received there of the Birth of a Daughter; Which Name may therefore denote
(according to the Allusion observed in the other Names) An idolatrous Daughter
of an idolatrous Mother Jezebel, who was, as the Scripture Notes, 1 Kings
16.31. The Daughter of Ethbaal, the King of the Zidonians; and therefore fit to
represent the Woman described, Chap. 17. of this Prophecy, who was the
Idolatrous Mother of the Apostate Daughter, or Church of this Succession; and
the Daughter of Paganism, as Jezebel was of Ethbaal the Zidonian.

39 Christ here makes himself more plainly known than he had hitherto done, and
that by his Supreme Title, the Son of God; because that his Kingdom was now to
arise more visibly out of the Apostasy, and therefore to be owned and protected
by him their Supreme Sovereign, who was to destroy their Enemies, and give them
power over the Nations.

19 I know thy Works [in order to the propagating of my Kingdom,] and Charity
[or Love and Zeal toward me, which thou have not left or abated, Verse 4.] and
Service [in thy Ministry, and toward the poor Saints, Romans 15.25, 31. 2 Cor.
8.4] and Faith, and Patience, [during the Corruptions and Persecutions of the
Apostasy,] and 40 thy Works, and the last [works of the Church typified by this
State, to be performed by them at Christ's coming to his Kingdom, Verse 25,
26.] to be more [in Number, and Quality] then the first [Works at their first
remarkable Rising out of the Apostasy.]

40 Here their Works are twice mentioned; and their last are said to be more
than their first; whereby is signified, the the Faithful of this Succession
(whom we have supposed to be the Waldenses and Albigenses) should, toward the
approach of Christ's Kingdom, do things surpassing their first Works; which yet
were very great, they having at first proselyted an incredible Number of all
Ranks and Nations; as appears from History, and even the Confession of their
Enemies; for which see Usher, Thuanus, and a late English Treatise.

20 Notwithstanding I have a few [or some little] things against thee, because
thou suffer 41 that [Notorious, Cursed] woman [2 Kings 9 34.] Jezebel 42 [
i. e. the Papal Apostasy,] which calls her self a Prophetess, [i. e.
pretends to, and boasts of Infallihility 43, and miraculous Gifts,] to
teach, and to seduce [by her cunning Devices, 2 Kings 9.22.] my Servants,
[professing Christianity,] to commit [Spiritual] Fornication [by Idolatry,] and
to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. [See Verse 14.]

41 The True Church is blamed for suffering the Apostasy, although they were
kept under by its Power and Dominion; because it was as yet so imperfect in its
Gifts and Graces, as not to be able utterly to cast out those Corruptions,
which cannot stand against the power of God's Word, when it appears in its
utmost Efficacy.

42 A fit Type of the Romish Apostasy, (1.) for Idolatry, 1 Kings 16.31, 32. 2
Kings 9.22. (2.) for Cruelty, and persecuting of God's Prophets, or Witnesses,
that protested against Idolatry, 1 Kings 18, 4.19, 2, 10. 2 Kings 9.7. (3.) for
stirring up Ahab or the Secular Magistrate, to persecute God's Servants, and to
draw them to Idolatry, by false witnessing against them, 1 Kings 21.8, 9, 10,
25, 26. (4.) for her Paint, and Whorish Attire and her Witchcraft, or subtle
Allurements, to entice to Idolatry, and keep Men in her Communion; and her
impudent impenitence, 2 Kings 9.22, 30. and lastly, for the manner of her
Destruction; which was so entire, (as that of the Apostasy will be, Verse. 27.)
that nothing remained of her, but so much as might serve for a Monument of her
Destruction, 2 Kings 9.35-37.

43 Which Doctrine began to be advanced in this Succession of the Church, by
the Schoolmen, who appeared A. D. 1200. And perhaps Jezebel might have been one
of the Prophetesses of Baal; for we read, 1 Kings 18.19. that an hundred of
them eat at her Table, it being probably their Office to provide for, and
Minister to the Prophets; which may also be further conjectured from her
conversing with them; it being usual for the Disciples of the True Prophets, to
be seized with their Enthusiasms; as Saul was, when he was amongst the
Prophets; which might be imitated by the evil Spirits in the idolatrous
Prophets.

22 And I gave her space 44 to repent of her Fornications [i. e. her Idolatry,]
and she repented not.

44 Which may be dated from the time of the more public Appearance of the
Witnesses, under the General Name of Waldenses, about A. D. 1100. or rather,
(if we compare this place with its parallel, Chap. 9.20, 21.) from the Inroads
of the Turks, into the Eastern Empire, ending in the taking Constantinople, A.
D. 1453, until the Reformation, A.D. 1517. when the Sardian State began at the
appearing of Luther; which great punishment of God upon the Eastern Empire, for
its Idolatry, having not its due influence upon the Western; God was pleased to
raise up Princes, who threw off the Romish Usurpations and Corruptions, and
openly owned and protected the Reformation; which is the Sardian State of the
Church, as it is favored by Protestant Princes; as that of Thyatira is the
Type of the True Church, under the Oppression of Popish ones; that being the
Church State immediately following the foregoing Pergamenian State, which was
under the power of Satan's Throne, in a hidden condition; having in it
Idolaters, which it could not cast out, because of the power of the prevailing
part of the Church. For Thyatira's suffering of the Woman, was not a willing
connivance, but one arising from a necessity of the great Oppression she was
under, and the imperfectness of their Church State; for if it had been a
voluntary connivance at Idolatry, Christ would not have said, that he had only
a few, or some small things against them; Neither would this State have been
approved by him so far, as to bid them hold fast that which they had already.
And this space is typified by the time of Repentance which God gave Jezebel,
which was from Elijah's denouncing Judgment against her, 1 Kings 21.23. until
her Death, accompanied with an impudent impenitence, 2 Kings 9.30-37.

22 Behold, I will cast her into a Bed 45 [of languishing, Psalm 41.3.] and
them that commit Adultery with her [by being Partakers with her in Idolatry,
Chap. 17.2.] into great tribulation, [at the pouring out of the Vials, chap.
16.] except they repent 46 of their deeds.

45 Instead of the Beds of her Whoredom and Idolatry; alluding to Jezebel's
Adultery. And it is apparent, that the Romish Church has been in a languishing
and decaying Condition ever since the appearing of the Witnesses, especially at
the Reformation, 1517.

46 This refers to some second space of Repentance afforded the Apostasy,
before the pouring out of the Vials; which may be probably the time allotted to
the uttering of the Voices, Chap. 14. by which Babylon was called to Repentance.

23 And I will kill her [Idolatrous] Children 47 [ i. e. her Proselytes and
Followers,] with death [i. e. I will certainly, and utterly destroy them;] and
[by the greatness of the Punishment] all the Churches [of the World] shall
know, that I am he which 48 searches the R^i^s [i. e. the Desires] and Hearts
[i. e. the Thoughts, and can discern the Sincerity of them:] and I will give
unto every one of you according to your works [and not according to your
subtle and fair pretenses.]

47 As the Disciples of the Prophets are called, the Sons of the Prophets; and
as Timothy and Mark are called Paul's Sons in Scripture, because they were his
Disciples, and were converted by him; so are the Proselytes of Jezebel called
here the Children of her spiritual Whoredom, as being brought over to the
Apostasy by her subtle Enticements, and by the power of those Kings and
Princes especially, who were of her Communion, and thereby had committed
Adultery with her.

48 From whence it appears, that the Apostasy made use of plausible
Insinuations to seduce Men to their Communion; and an appearance of Piety and
Religion.

24 But unto you I say, and 49 to the rest in Thyatyra [that is, the Remnant of
this Succession, which shall continue until I come in my Kingdom, Verse 25,
26.] as many [of you. I mean,] as have not [held and approved] this
[Idolatrous] 50 Doctrine [of the Apostasy beforementioned, Verse 20.] and
which have not known [so as to hold, and approve] the depths 51 of Satan [i. e.
the Antichristian Mysteries and Policies] as 52 they [of the pure Church of
Thyatira,] speak [or call them;] I will put upon you no other burden 53 [of
Command.]

49 The Church of Thyatira is distinguished into Two Intervals, viz. one
before, and at the Reformation; the other after it, which is to last until
Christ's Coming in his Kingdom, when upon the appearance of that Succession,
their last works shall be greater than their former. The first Interval is
denoted here by You; that is, you who are now in being: the second by (...),
the Rest, or the Remnant. See Chap. 3, 2.11, 13.

50 By (...) are meant in Scripture, Sentences, or Parables; and Precepts, or
Discourses tending to Doctrine and Manners; for so the Word is frequently used
in the New Testament: of which sort there were many false and erroneous ones
amongst the Jews, as appears from Heb. 13.9. and amongst the Primitive
Christians, falsely attributed to the Apostles, and Apostolical Men.

51 The profound Mysteries, such as Transubstantiation, and Infallibity, and
the deep Politic Devices of the Apostasy; are called here Satanical Depths:
in opposition to the Mysteries of Christianity, called deep things of God, and
the Depth, Romans 11.33. 1 Cor. 2.10.

52 It was the chief Accusation of the Waldenses, the pure Christians of this
Succession, that they called the Papacy, Babylon, and Antichrist; and adapted
the Prophecies of this Book to that Church, as may be seen in a Treatise put
forth by them, A. D. 1120. and printed in Perrin's History of them.

53 A Phrase taken from Acts 15.28. Where Ordinances, or Commandments are
called Burdens; as they are also Matthew. 23.4. And Christ here assures them,
that he would not charge them with any Injunctions of doing their first Works,
or repenting as he had done the other Churches; but bids them only stick close
to what they held, and maintained; approving thereby their Integrity and Purity.

25 But that [or those necessary things, Acts 15.28.] which ye have already
[believed and held] hold fast till I come [in my Kingdom.]

26 And he [i. e. that Body of Men, or those Persons] that overcomes [the
Corruptions of this State,] and keeps my 54 Works [or the Precepts and
Commandments, which I have given them, and enabled them to perform] unto the
end [of time when Christ's Kingdom shall come, Rev. 10.6, 7.] to him will I
[then] give power over the 55 Nations [or Gentiles, that is, the Apostasy, and
their Abettors.]

54 They are called Christ's Works, in opposition to the Depths of Satan; which
are the Works of the Devil, John 8.41, 44. And by his Works are meant Holy
Worship and Practice, and the most vigorous Opposition of the Apostasy.

55 As being no better than mere Gentiles, by reason of their Idolatry.

27 ( And he [or the Saints of this Church-State] shall rule them [the
Antichristian Party, and their Abettors] with a Rod of Iron, [that is, with
just Severity] and as the Vessels of a Potter, shall they, be broken to
shivers) [i. e. their Church State shall be dissolved easily and irreparably;
and I will give him power over the Nations,] even as I received [Power] of my
Father [Psalm 2.9. for they shall reign with me.]

28 And I will give him the 56 Morning Star, [i. e. these Witnesses shall first
arise, and give early Notice of the approaching glorious State of Christ's
Kingdom.]

56 A Phrase made use of by the Holy Ghost, in 2 Pet. 1.19. with reference to
this very matter; where Prophetical Scripture is likened unto a light shining
in a dark place, which yet notwithstanding its Obscurity, was a more sure word
then a Private Voice from Heaven, and which might be understood notwithstanding
the dark state we are in, provided they be not interpreted according to our own
Natural Understanding, called there, the Will of Man; nor according to a
Private Interpretation; but according to the Will of God, speaking in, and by
the Holy Penmen; which is a Public Interpretation; because it is taken from
the Common Analogy of Scripture, (Romans 12.6.) and is agreeable to the VVritings
of All the Holy Men of God; whose Spiritual Things are to be compared one with
another, that so we may have a Public Standard of Interpretation in the
Church; and because it proceeds (although in an ordinary manner) from the same
1 Cor. 6-16.12, 4.
spirit (which alone knows the things of God) which at first moved the Holy
Prophets; which is One, and agreeable to it self in all its Gifts and
Operations; and which, when it incited them to speak and write, gave them not
Prophecies of a private Sense, as relating only to private and particular
persons; but which were to be understood in a Public Sense, concerning Christ,
his Church, and Kingdom. But although they may be understood by us, yet the
Apostle tells us, that it will not be without great difficulty, until the Day
shall dawn, and the Day Star arise in our Hearts; by which the appearance of
Christ in his Kingdom is meant, who is called, Rev. 22.16. the bright and
Morning Star; the first Dawnings and Approachings of whose Kingdom may be meant
by the Morning Star; as the Kingdom in its full Glory, may be understood by the
Bright Morning Star. And therefore by the Morning Star in this place is
understood the Remnant (or the rest) of this Succession, which shall last until
the Succession of Christ's Kingdom begins; and who shall (as the Morning Star
rises before the Sun) give notice of his Approach, by some more than ordinary
works and Manifestations of it: Which we hope and pray, that the Lord will soon
accomplish (and if he has vouchsafed to his Servants any Knowledge of Times and
Seasons, it cannot be far off) by raising the poor oppressed Churches of the
Valleys; who were the Morning Star, or the first Visible Body of Witnesses,
before the Reformation; and we hope will arise, and that speedily, before
Christ's Appearance in his Glorious Kingdom; for they have hitherto shined
(according to their own Mysterious Mr. Ledger Histoir. des Vaudois.
Device, which is a lighted Taper, in a Candlestick, environed with Seven
Stars, in a dark place, with this Motto, Lux lucet in Tenebris) amidst the
Darkness of the Apostasy; And may Christ give unto them, and that quickly, the
Morning Star of his Glorious Presence. Amen, Amen, come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly.

29 He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches [i
e. this is a Mysterious Truth, worthy the utmost Consideration.]

CHAP. III.
The Text.
1 AND unto the Angel of the Church in 1 Sardis, write, These things says he
that 2 has the Seven Spirits of God, [see Chap. 1.4.] and the Seven Stars,
[Chap. 1.16, and 2, 1.] I know [and observe] thy Works, that thou have a Name 3
[or a more than ordinary Repute,] that thou live [according to Christ's
Doctrine, and art zealous in the Outward Profession of it;] 4 and [or, but] art
[indeed] dead 5 [as to the perfect Purity of Religion, and its Life and Power,
over thy Faith and Manners, Ephesians. 2.1. 1 Timothy 5.6. 2 Timothy 3.5. James 2.20.]

Annotations on CHAP. III.
1 Sardes, or Sardis, is distant about Thirty Three Miles from Thyatira,
Southward; It was anciently, as appears by its Ruins, a Magnificent, Splendid,
and Proud City, as being the Seat of King Croesus; for which Reason, (as well
as from an Allusion to the Precious Stones of that Name, which Hist. Lib. 37.8.
Pliny asserts were called so from this Place, as being first found there) it
may typifie, a splendid and stately Church-succession, which has a Name, or a
Repute in the World. It is now (as the Learned Doctor Notit. Septem Asiae
Eccles. page 133.
Smith, an Eyewitness, testifies, (who could not but weep at the sight of it)
a most miserable Village, inhabited only by Shepherds and Herdsmen, and a few
ignorant Christians, without Church or Priest; whereby may be providentially
set forth the Real Deadness of this Church State, and the Desolation it is to
suffer.

2 Sardis is thought to be the Type of the Churches of the Reformation, under
the Favor and Protection of Reformed Princes, in a condition of External
Splendour: Because, (1.) It succeeds that of Thyatira, which is the Type of
Reformed Churches, under the Tyranny of Popish Princes; to which State the
Reformation succeeded, begun by Luther, A. D. 1517. (2.) Because there is no
mention made of Balaam, or Jezebel, or Nicolaitism, in this Succession; which
shows, that they had escaped from under the power of the Apostasy, typified by
them. (3.) Because the same Title is given to Christ here, as is made use of in
the Ephesine Succession, the Type of the Apostolical Church; whereby seems to
be intimated, that the Church began now to be Reformed according to the First
Primitive and Apostolical Pattern: only it is here Remarkable, that it is not
said, that Christ holds the Seven Stars in his Right Hand, but barely, that
he has them; to show, perhaps, by the Omission of those Remarkable Words, that
they had departed from the True Apostolical Model, which Christ had or held in
his Right Hand; that is, had in great Honor. Neither is this to be taken for a
groundless, and a loose Interpretation; or a Licentious Fancy (as Dr. Hammond
calls the like Conjectures of Mr. Brightman,) seeing, that in such a Concise
Prophecy, God ( whose Glory it is to conceal a thing, Prove. 25.2.) has given
us sometimes but slender hints, or intimations of great Truths; and that the
Addition, or taking away of but a Letter in a Name, (as in the Names of
Abraham, Sarah, and Jeconiah; for which see Grotius on Jerem. 22.24.) is of
great import in Scripture. And of how much greater signification then, may be
the leaving out so material a part of Christ's Title, in a Prophecy so brief
and mysterious?

3 From whence it appears, that this Church has a Reputation in the World for
its outward profession; but is very much wanting in inward Life, Truth and
Holiness.

4 So And frequently signifies in Scripture.

5 Ephesus had only lost its First Love; but this Church was really dead, as to
the True Spirit and Power of the Gospel, and the perfect simplicity and purity
of it.

2 Be watchful [in observing the Times and Seasons of Christ's coming, Dan.
12.12. Matthew 24.42-51. Rev. 16.15.] and strengthen [or uphold, and sustain,]
the things 6 which remain [i. e. the necessary Truths which shall remain until
Christ's coming; and which thou have kept entire; but] that are ready to die
[as to the Power and Life of them:] for I have not found thy works [of
Reformation, according to the Gospel,] 7 perfect before God [so as to be able
to stand before the Glory of his Kingdom, when it shall begin to appear; or to
endure the Severity of his Trial, whatsoever Esteem they may have amongst Men,
Luke 16.15.]

6 By (...), or the rest, seems to be meant those Necessary Works, and Articles
of Belief, which they had kept alive, or entire; and were to remain, during the
following Succession of the Church, until Christ's Coming, as being Necessary
Truths, which would endure Trial; and were essential to the being of it, as a
Church: in which sense (...), and (...) is taken in this Prophecy; as (...),
signifies in Authors, the remaining, or succeeding part of the Day.

7 Filled up, or completed, as the Rude Lineaments of a Picture, are said to
be filled up by a Painter, when he comes to draw it to the Life; See Hammond on
Matthew. 5.17. Here this Church is blamed for not carrying on the Reformation to
its utmost perfection; and for suffering necessary Truths to decay, and be
almost ready to die.

3 Remember 8 therefore how [i. e. with what Sincerity and Zeal,] thou have
received, and heard [the Doctrine of Truth, at the beginning of the
Reformation;] and hold fast [what thou did then receive,] and repent [of thy
Deadness, Verse 1. thy Negligence and imperfections, Verse 2. and thy Departure
from the Principles thou have received and heard.] If therefore thou shall not
watch 9 [and wait for the Kingdom of God, Mark 15.43.] I will come on thee, as
a Thief 10 [ i. e. unexpectedly,] and thou shall not know [by reason of not
watching over the Times and Seasons which God has shown unto his Servants,]
what hour I will come unto thee [in my Kingdom, and discover thy Defects, and
Unsuitableness to it.]

8 Here they are called upon to look back upon the Model of their First
Reformation, which they had swerved from; and to hold fast those Principles,
and to repent and amend what was faulty.

9 Here is intimated, as also in the second Verse, that this Church was
careless, and slow to believe, and expect Christ's second coming in his
Kingdom, before the Day of Judgment.

10 This Phrase signifies in Scripture, a sudden and a surprising Judgment; as
Matthew. 24.42, 43. Luke 22.39, 40. 1 These. 5.2. And here is intimated the sudden
coming of the Kingdom of Christ upon this Church, to its great surprise and
amazement; occasioned by its ignorance of the disagreeableness of its own State
to it; or it is not knowing that it would have come so soon, or that she should
have been so entirely removed by its First Appearances.

4 Thou have a few Names 11 [or excellent Persons, Acts 1.15.] even in Sardis
[although almost dead;] which have not defiled [no, not] their Garments [Jude
23: but have carefully avoided all the Corruptions of this State, and have had
their Works perfect before God;] and they shall walk with me in white 12
[Garments; i. e. be favored by me, and honored in my Kingdom, and be
justified, and declared righteous:] for they are [in my sight] worthy [of it;
as having kept themselves white, or undefiled.]

11 Excellent persons, and therefore known by Name, as Exodus 33.12. God is said
to know Moses by Name; that is, after a special and particular manner. Or it is
a Metaphor, either from Moses's taking the Names of the Children of Israel,
Numb. 3.40, 43.26, 53, 54. or from the High priests bearing their Names upon
the Stones on his Breast Plate; which being the Foundation Stones of the New
Jerusalem, (Chap. 21.) the Names written on them, may be put to signify
Excellent, Apostolical Members of the Church.

But here we are to note, that these Excellent and undefiled persons, were but
a few; and therefore it is dangerous to follow the Majority, or Multitude of
this Church, according to what is observed concerning the Sardian Boet. de
Gemmis. 2. 80.
Stone that it has but a very little of a pale or white color mixed with its
red.

12 Or shining Garments, (Matthew. 17.2.) which were such as Kings used to wear,
and bestow upon their Favorites; whereby also Cheerfulness and Innocence is
signified, and Purity and Righteousness, Eccles. 9.8. Rev. 19.8.

And from this Verse we may observe, That this Church may be Communicated with
without sin; there being some of its Members (although a few) who remain in it,
without being defiled: and that the whole Church is spoken to, and is said to
have those Exellent Names, and the undefiled Names are not blamed for having,
or suffering the corrupt, as in Pergamus, and Thyatira; which are manifest
Indications, that Sardis is not an Apostatical, but a True, and a Reformed
Church.

5 He that overcomes [the Corruptions of this State] the same shall be clothed
in white Raiment [Vers. 4. Rev. 19.8.] and I will not blot 13 out his Name out
of the Book of Life [i. e. he shall be enrolled amongst the Members of my
Kingdom, Dan. 12.1. Rev. 13, 7.17, 8.20, 12, 15.21, 27.22, 19.] but I will 14
confess his Name before my Father, and before his Angels [i. e. I will make him
be publicly acknowledged and commended at the last day.]

13 This Phrase occurs, Exodus 32.32. Psalm 69.28. and seems to be taken from
the Custom recorded, Ezra 2.62, 63. where we read, That the Jews kept Registers
of the Genealogies of their Priests; in which, if a man were not found, he was
put from the Priesthood, as polluted. It was also an ancient Custom (alluded
to, as some think, in this place) of Enrolling the Names of Citizens, and
Blotting them out of the Public Registers, when they had forfeited that
Privilege; From whence also came the Custom of blotting Names out of the
Diptychs of the Church. But from whatsoever Custom the Phrase is taken, it
plainly relates to the Rewards which will be bestowed upon the Saints of this
Church-Interval in Christ's Kingdom.

14 Expressions taken from the Day of Judgment; noting the Gracious Requital
Christ will afford them, for confessing his Name in greatest purity, Matthew.
10.32. Luke 12.8.

6 He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

7 And to the Angel of the Church in 15 Philadelphia, write, These things says
he that is holy, [or the Holy, who will shortly erect a holy Church, and
Kingdom,] and he that is true [or The True; who will bring to pass what he has
promised concerning his Church;] he that has the Key 16 of David [ i. e. full
power of disposing all things concerning his Kingdom;] he that opens [a Door
to his People;] and no man shuts [against them;] and shuts [against his
Enemies] and no man opens [i. e. has Sovereign and irresistible Power; and
will conduct his People through all Difficulties, to such a Church State, as
they shall never be deprived of by their Enemies.]

15 Sardis represents those Churches of the Reformation, which have a Repute,
or Name in the World, but want the inward Life and Spirit of the Gospel; and
Philadelphia seems to be the Type of the Reformed Churches which are low in
Outward Strength and Esteem, but very strict in observing Christ's Word and
Commands; which Characters I shall not venture to adapt to any particular
Churches; but leave them to the impartial consideration of all concerned, as
they may be gathered from the Text it self. Philadelphia is distant about
Twenty seven Miles from Sardis, a City (as Strabo notes) never very Populous
and Famous, because it was subject to Earthquakes; which yet withstood the Fury
of the Smith de Statu Sept. Eccles.
Turks with great Constancy and Gallantry, when all the rest of Asia had
submitted; and has now Spoon's Voyages.
in it Four Churches of Greeks, and about Two Thousand Christians: which are no
contemptible Remarks, as to our present purpose, and would induce a Man to
think, that the Divine Wisdom has afforded us some faint Resemblances of the
little outward strength or power of this Church State, and of its strict
adherence to the Truth, and of the Ample Reward God will afford it; even in the
Fate of the City from which it is denominated. And, (if any thing be to be
gathered from the Names of these Churches) the Nature and Qualities of this
State are plainly discovered in its Name; Philadelphia signifying Brotherly
Love; as if this Church State were to be established upon that Principle, and
not upon power outward splendour and superiority, Luke 22.24-30. See Grotius on
that place, and on the parallel places in the Gospel.

16 An Expression taken from Isa. 22.22. where Eliakim (a Type of Christ, as
his very Name imports, signifying one raised, or settled by God) has the Key of
the House of David given him; whereby is denoted, Christ's Government over his
Church; a Key being an Ensign of Government; and David's House, Family, or
Court, being a Type of the Church, especially as it shall be in the New
Jerusalem, the City of David, or the Messiah, who is the Great King of it.

8 I know thy Works [to be perfect before God:] behold [and 17 let it be noted
and remarked,] I have set before thee, [or, given thee,] an open 18 door [i. e.
a hopeful occasion, and means, of freely and effectually propagating the Truth;
and a prospect of better things, and greater Liberty;] and no man [although
they shall often attempt it,] can [be able to] shut it, [or, hinder you of this
Liberty; but it shall continue accompanied with great efficacy, notwithstanding
your many Adversaries, until my coming;] for thou have a little [outward 19,
worldly] strength [Force and Power to protect and countenance thee;] and [yet
for all that] have kept 20 my Word [or Gospel; as to Faith and Practice purely
and entirely; and have discharged thy Office faithfully:] and have not denied
my Name 21 [by entertaining any degrees of Antichristian Corruptions, which
bear not my Name, or were not instituted by me, but have openly avowed and
professed my Name, as sole King and Lawgiver of my Church.]

17 Behold, is a Particle denoting the importance of the thing to be delivered.

18 This is the true Import of the Phrase: for which see and compare Hosea
2.15. Acts 14.27. 1 Cor. 16.9. 2 Cor. 2.12. Colos. 4.3. And from this, and what
follows, we may take notice, that this Church, although often denied Liberty of
Preaching the Gospel (in which sense Grotius understands the shutting of the
Door here mentioned,) should yet enjoy it, in despite of all opposition, and
never have it wholly shut against them; and that this open Door, should afford
them a Prospect, and a hope and confidence of enjoying a more perfect State of
things.

19 By Strength cannot here be understood inward and spiritual strength, or
Zeal and Courage to propagate the Truth, with all Boldness and Success; for
that was great in them, and they have a high Character and Commendation given
them for it, by our Savior; But by Strength must be understood, outward humane
Strength, Advantages and Authority, in respect of Birth, Power, Reputation for
Learning, Riches, or the like; in which the Might of this World consists, 1
Cor. 1.25-28. but especially Countenance and Protection from the Secular
Powers; of which they had but little, as having been in a patient afflicted
Condition, and under Restraints; as appears from Verse. 8, 10.

20 To keep Christ's word, denotes their faithful preaching, and professing the
Gospel, and their strict adherence to it, which is called, keeping the Charge
of the Lord, in the Old Testament; which Ministers are to do in their own
Persons; as appears from Ezekiel. 44.8. where, in a Vision of the New Jerusalem,
(when this Philadelphian State comes to its perfection) those Priests are
reprehended by God, who kept not the Charge of his holy things, but set keepers
of them in his Sanstuary for themselves.

21 By Name here seems to be meant, the Name written on his Vesture, Rev.
19.16. viz. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; that is, Supreme Disposer of all
the Kingdoms of the World, and sole Governor of his Church, which is his
Kingdom. And this strict adherence of this Church, to the Word or Commandments
of God only, is opposed to the departure of the Sardian and Ephesine
Succession, from what they had received and heard.

9 Behold I will 22 make them [who are] of the [part of the] 23 Synagogue of
Satan, [and by them, I mean those] which say they are Jews [or Pure, Primitive
Christians] and are not, but do lie [by such false pretenses:] Behold I will
make them [by my providence and inward convictions] to come and Worship before
thy Feet [i. e. to show 24 the greatest honor and submission unto thee; learn
of thee; and join in Communion with thee; although in an inferior degree of
esteem,] and to know [i. e. be convinced, and acknowledge,] that I have Loved
thee [as my pure and undefiled Church, Cant. 6. 4, 9. and have shown it by
preserving thee, notwithstanding all their endeavors to the contrary.]

22 In the Greek it is, I give, the Present for the Future, as is usual; and
them is added as a necessary Supplement; and the Words supplied as they ought
to be, may be very well rendered thus; Behold, I will give unto thee them of the
Synagogue; i. e. I will bring them, or fetch them in, and present them unto
thee.

23 By the Synagogue of Satan, is meant (as has been shown on Chap. 2.9.) those
who in the Smyrnaean Succession, introduced Blasphemous or Idolatrous Doctrines
and Practices into the Church, under pretense of Judaism or Israelitism; that
is, pure, and primitive Christianity: and therefore by Consequence, here must
be meant, some of the Reformation (that Interval, or Succession being here
described), who lie, and deceive others by the same false pretense; not into
Satanical, or Antichristian Blasphemy or Idolatry; but Defilements, (Verse 9.)
that is, Corrupt Additions to God's Worship; which are called, Defilements, or
impure Mixtures, by the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 43.8. and Lies, Prove. 30.6. Isa.
29.13. But yet we are to take notice, that they are not called, The Synagogue
of Satan; but They, or Them of the Synagogue; to signify, that only a
Prevailing Party amongst them were defiled; and that their Errors were not
Idolatrous (as theirs were who are reprehended in the Epistle to the Church of
Smyrna, called therefore, The Synagogue of Satan) but corrupt, or defiled, and
false, or lying Additions; which yet were not so much their own Inventions, as
taken up by them from Antiquity; whence they are called, not The Synagogue, but
Of the Synagogue; as being of their party, and Imitators of them, under pretext
of Conformity to the Ancient Synagogue of the Smyrnaean Succession, which first
introduced those Corruptions.

24 All which may be implied in this Phrase; to lie prostrate at ones Feet,
being the highest Act of Honor and Submission, amongst the Eastern Nations;
for so Joseph's Brethren (which may be no unfit Type of what is here foretold),
Genesis 42, 6.44.14. who had been the Authors of his Afflictions, came and bowed
down before him to the ground, when he was exalted to be the Chief Governor in
Egypt: and it being also a Custom for Scholars to sit at the Feet of their
Masters; to Worship at their Feet, may denote their learning of them, and
joining with them in their Worship, but as in an inferior degree of Knowledge
and Esteem; according to the Expressions of the Prophet, Isa. 60.14. from
whence this place seems to be taken. And the words also may be interpreted
thus, to come and worship [God] before thy Feet; according to a parallel place
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.25.

10 Because thou have kept [and observed] the word 25 [or precept] of my
patience [i. e. of the Patience which I taught, and practiced; especially in
expecting, with me, the coming of my Kingdom; and that in a low and mean
condition:] I also will keep thee [or this Church State entire] from the hour
[or sudden and unexpected time] of 26 Temptation [or general Trial;] which
shall come upon all the World to try them that dwell on the Earth [whether
their Church States are pure or no; and to purify some, and destroy others,
Dan. 12.1. Malach. 3.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor. 3.11.-15.]

25 (...) signifies a Precept or Doctrine of Patience; in the sense that (...),
or Word, is taken, 1 Cor. 1.18. and to keep the Word (as the Phrase is
frequently used in John's Gospel) is to observe that Precept; and that chiefly
with reference to a patient Expectation of Christ's Coming, as the Phrase is
taken 2 These. 3.5. and Rev. 1.9.

26 This, I suppose, is to be understood concerning the pouring out of the
Vials; as shall be endeavored to be shown, when they come to be considered.

11 Behold I come [to try and judge them,] quickly [or on a sudden after this
period of the Church begins to appear;] hold that fast which thou have
[received and kept,] that no man take 27 thy Crown [i e. rob thee of that
reward thou shall have in my Kingdom.]

27 No Churches so perfect, but that it is possible for them, if left to
themselves, to be perverted; and no Man so nigh the Goal, but he may lose the
Prize, if he be not, by the Grace of God, made watchful, and careful. And here
we are to observe, that these Promises are taken from the New Jerusalem-state
in Christ's Kingdom, and that they are made after the most ample and plainest
manner to this Church State; because of its greatest purity, and patience, in
expecting that Kingdom, and its fitness to receive it, in the near approach of
it in the New Jerusalem.

12 [For] Him that overcomes [the temptations of this poor and despised Church
State,] will I make a 28 Pillar in the Temple of my God [i. e. he shall be a
Member of a strong, fixed, and stable Church State,] and he shall go no more out
[of it, for it shall not be changed.] And I will write 29 upon him [or, upon
this Pillar] the Name of my God [Jehovah] and the Name of the City of my God
[The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35.] which is 30 new Jerusalem [i. e. the prefect
Gospel State in Christ's Kingdom, Hebr. 12.22.] which comes down out of Heaven
from my God [i. e. shall be established by God's more immediate Power, and by
abundant Manifestations of Gifts and Graces, Ezekiel. 43.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Gal. 4.26.
see on Rev. 21.2, 3.] and I will write upon him my new Name [Rev. 19.16.22, 4.
i. e. he shall be 31 a Member of my Kingdom, who am King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. See before on verse 8. and Isa. 56.5. Rev. 19.12.]

28 In allusion to the Two Pillars before Solomon's Temple, called Iachin and
Booz, from their strength and stability, 1 Kings 7.15, 21. The Apostles also
are called Pillars, Gal. 2.9. and the Church, the Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.
and Christians are compared to a Temple, and its Stones or Pillars, Ephesians. 2.21.
1 Pet. 2.5.

29 This may perhaps be an Allusion to the Inscriptions which were used to be
put upon Pillars. Hence the Title of the sixteenth Psalm is in the Greek
rendered, An Inscription upon a Pillar; and Absalom's Pillar, 2 Samuel 18.18.
might have probably his Name graven on it.

30 New is often in Scripture put for excellent, or perfect. And this State may
be called New, because the visible Glory of it did then first appear; and it
was a strange, or new thing, it being known, or believed before by few.

31 For to be called, and to be, are of the same import in the Hebrew Phrase.

13 He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

14 And unto the Angel of the Church of the 32 Laodiceans write; these things
says the Amen 33 [ i. e. The God of Truth, Isa. 65.16. who will perform what
he has promised, 2 Cor. 1.20. and will in this period put a final end to all
things;] the Faithful and True Witness [who has performed punctually, what
has been hitherto promised by the Father, and will go on to do so to the end;
although the Truths he has delivered may seem never so incredible, Chap. 1.5.]
the beginning 34 of the Creation of God [i. e. of the First Creation of all
things; and of the New Creation or Constitution of things after the
Resurrection, of which he was the first Born from the Dead, Col. 1.18. Rev. 1,
5.21, 1.]

32 This State succeeds the Philadelphian State, and therefore must be after
the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, or the New Jerusalem, of which
Philadelphia is a Type, as appears from Verse 12. It seems to be a State in
which there was a great Remissness of the extraordinary Zeal which was shown in
the former Succession, during Christ's Kingdom; and its Name denoting (as
Grotius remarks) The Judging of the People, it may from thence be probably
concluded, that it is that State, during which the great Judiciary Act of
Judging the People, or Nations, is to be performed. Rev. 20.8-15. where
occasion will be given of discoursing more largely of this Matter. It was once
a most Famous and Rich City, as this Church State is described to be at the
seventeenth Verse, but is now only a heap of Ruins, and inhabited by none but
wild Beasts; so that Monsieur Spoon, after all his search, could not find out
where its Church stood; Christ having spewed it utterly out of his Mouth.

33 Amen signifies Truth; and denotes also the End, or Conclusion; and being
put before what follows, concerning the beginning of the Creation of God,
implies, that what concerns the End of Church-states, is the chief thing
typified by this Church.

34 Christ is said to be the beginning of the Creation of God, (1.) Because he
was in the beginning with God, when all things were made by him, John 1.1. as
being the first born of every Creature; that is, being above, and before all
Creatures whatsoever, and the Cause of them, Col. 1.15-17. (2.) because he was
the beginning of the New Creation, or Constitution of things under the Gospel,
Col. 1.18. 2 Cor. 5.17. and the Author of the New Heavens, and New Earth; or
the New and Excellent State of things in his Kingdom upon Earth. And (3.)
because he is the Beginning, the First Born from the dead, Colos. 1.18. which
Title he here takes, because this Church-Period extends until the End of all
Earthly Things; when follows the beginning of the New Creation or Constitution
of things in his Kingdom of Glory. But of this more on the Three last Chapters.

15 I know thy works [and thy whole state and condition,] that thou art neither
cold [i. e. neither void of all zeal for that Philadelphian glorious State of
my Kindom, which is now withdrawn from the very new Earth, Rev. 20.11.] nor hot
[i e. nor fervently zealous for it, according to the extraordinary Love which
that State requires:] I 35 would [that I may speak after the manner of men,]
thou were cold [for then being destitute of all Love, which is the Life of a
Christian Church, thou would be in a deadly state, and fitted for
destruction] or 36 hot [for then the vehement flame of thy Love, would have
been irresistible, and unextinguishable; and all things here below, would have
been utterly contemned, in respect of me; Cant. 8.6, 7.]

35 Christ does not wish that they were cold, simply and absolutely, but
comparatively, that they were rather so, than in such a State of Indifferency,
which was dangerous to themselves, and more troublesome and displeasing, in
some respects, unto himself. And the whole Expression is taken from the manner
in which Men are wont to express themselves, when any thing is displeasing unto
them; and is not to be too Rigorously insisted upon in every part of the
Similitude.

36 By Heat and Fire is meant Divine Love in Scripture; and by Coldness, on the
contrary, is meant the absolute privation of it, which is the Death of the
Soul, whose Life consists in the Love of God and Christ. This appears from
several Expressions, especially in the Book of Canticles; where ( Chap. 8.6,
7.) the Spouse, which is Christ's Church, in its most lovely Philadelphian
State, in his Kingdom; represents the Love it has for him, by a strong vehement
flame, or heat, such a one as can be kindled only from the Lord (as the Words
may be translated), and which could not possibly be extinguished; nor could be
translated from him to any other; but perfectly contemned and rejected all
Earthly things, when they stood in competition with him. Now this being the
Love which the Spouse had for Christ, in its perfect State (which is elegantly
set forth in that Book) the Heat which is here wanting in this Laodicean State,
must be such a fervent one, as that was, which was in the foregoing State;
which was vehement, heavenly, overcoming all Difficulties, and preferring
Christ, and things above, beyond all Earthly things whatsoever; yea, counting
them as dross and dung, when compared with Christ. See Grotius, and Dr. Patrick
on Canticles 8.6, 7.

16 So then [or therefore, after all this long debate within my self, what I
should do with thee, which art so troublesome, and uneasy to me; this is the
conclusion of the whole matter, that] because thou art 37 lukewarm, and
neither cold [as some of the other Church-states were, which I have therefore
destroyed,] nor hot [to the degrees of the state of the new Jerusalem, so that
I cannot pitch my Tabernacle any longer with thee, nor take thee up unto me,
except thou overcomest the evils of this State, by following my counsels and
harkening to my rebukes, Rev. 20.11.21, 2, 3.] I will [I speak still after the
manner of men, because of your infirmity,] spew 38 thee out of my mouth [i. e.
I will wholly rid me of the uneasiness I have been under, and will have neither
thee, nor any other Church State any more upon Earth]

37 By Lukewarmness is not meant an indifferency to all Religion; but an
indifference to that higher, Heavenly State of Love and Glory, which
Philadelphia was raised to. For it is plain, from a diligent compare of this
Prophecy, that after the Philadelphian State of a Thousand Years, there is to
be another Church state; which is called ( Rev. 20.9.) The Camp of the Saints,
and the Beloved City; which must be this State of Laodicea, because it is the
only one that remains after the Philadelphian; and therefore its Lukewarmness
must be such as is consistent with the Love of God (for else the Members of it
could not have been said to be loved by Christ, Verse 19.) and is only so in
respect of the higher Fervors of the Philadelphian State, which is the Holy
Canticl. ^.6, 7. Rev. 20, 11.21, 2, 3.
City, which comes down from Heaven, like a Bride, with a most vehement Flame
of Love for Christ her Husband; and after a Thousand Years of True Glory, was
translated, or fled away with Christ into Heaven, into a Glorious State of
Eternity; whereas this State is described, as being on the Earth, (Rev. 20.9.)
and as retaining too much Love to the Glories and Enjoyments of their Earthly
State; although the Luster of the Presence of Christ, manifested, during the
Thousand Years, was withdrawn; and as not having such a vehement Love for being
with Christ, as to contemn all the Gold and Riches (which are mentioned in the
next Verse) and all the Worldly substance of its Earthly State, for a Heavenly
State with Christ; which it would have done, if it had had the Love of the
Spouse in the Canticles.

38 This is a Metaphor from lukewarm Water, which provokes Vomiting, and casts
off from a sickly Stomach what loads it, and is nauseous or uneasy to it; and
is used in Scripture Levit. 18.25, 28.20, 22. Jerem. 9.19. Ezekiel. 36.13.
to signify the utter dispeopling of a Nation: in which sense it seems here to
be taken for the total removal of this, and all other such like Church-States;
as being uneasy to Christ, because of their imperfections; who would now be no
more contented with any State but a Heavenly, Perfect, and Unchangeable one;
such a one, as no Waters could quench, nor any Floods drown, and which was to
be set, as a Seal upon his Heart, Canticl. 8.6, 7. And accordingly, Christ is
here representented, as uneasy under this State, rather than angry with it;
and as deliberating, and at last resolving what to do with it; which is
intimated by (...), an Illative Particle, noting a Conclusion drawn from
Premises deliberated of, and considered; and the Result is, That he could not
indeed destroy them in his Anger, by Fire from Heaven, as he would their
Enemies, the Nations, (Rev. 20.9.) because he had a Love for them, and they
were not cold in their Love to him; neither could he take them in the State
they were in, unto himself in Heaven; and therefore he was at last resolved to
spew all Earthly Church states out of his Mouth, and have no more such upon
Earth, by reason of the Imperfections and Corruptions they were subject to,
when left to themselves, and his more immediate presence was withdrawn from
them.

17 [And this will I do] because 39 thou say I am [still as] rich [as I was
before, and in the possession of the same Glorious State;] and [not only so]
but I am increased with Goods, and [which is more,] have need of nothing [but
am in a perfect, self-sufficient State:] and know not [such is the ignorance
of Man when left to himself,] that thou art wretched [or, The wretched, full of
wants and defects;] and miserable [or, The miserable, in a helpless condition,]
and poor [in grace, and glory] and blind [or ignorant, seeing not thy wants,
nor the remedy of them,] and naked [or i^ a shameful condition; in respect of
the former; now the Bride, and her Husband are retired, and God dwells not
with thee, Rev. 20, 11.21, 2, 3, 4.]

39 Here is shown the Ground of their Lukewarmness, and the Reason why Christ
would spew them out; because they thought that their present State was as
Glorious as their former; and as much to be chosen, as that which had the full
Glory of the New Jerusalem.

18 [And therefore,] I counsel thee [out of my Love to thee, verse 19.] to buy
[or, obtain and procure] of me [what I will freely give thee, if thou will be
sensible of thy own unworthiness, and inability of thy self to procure it, Isa.
55.1, 2.] Gold tried in the fire [i. e. the most precious and most pure Wisdom
of my Kingdom in Heaven above, Prove. 2, 4.3, 14. Zeck. 13.9. Math. 13.44, 45,
46. 1 Pet. 1.7.] that thou may be rich [in good and perfect works before
God, Luke 12.21. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.] and white raiment [i. e. unspotted and
perfect Holiness, such as is required in my Kingdom;] that thou may be
Clothed [with my Righteousness, Rev. 19.8.] and the shame of thy nakedness [or
thy shameful nakedness] do not appear [when I come to Judgment, Rev. 20.12-15]
and anoint thy eyes with Eye Salve [i. e. with clear knowledge that thou may
see and discern betwixt the dark and imperfect state thou art in, and the
glorious entire light and perfection of the former, Rev. 21.23, 24.22, 5.]

19 [Thou art the Camp of my Saints upon Earth, and the beloved City, and
therefore have I permitted the Nations to gather themselves to Battle against
thee, and to encompass thee, Rev. 20.8, 9.] for as many as I Love [and whom I
Love, I Love unto the end, John 13.1.] I rebuke [as I have done thee for thy
lukewarmness] and chasten [by afflictions, as thou have been by the coming up
of Gog and Magog against thee, Rev. 20.8, 9.] be zealous therefore [after a
higher, and a more glorious state, and that in Heaven,] and repent [of thy
lukewarmness, for to this end have I rebuked and chastened thee.]

20 [And to show what Love I have for thee] Behold [and let it be taken special
notice of,] I stand [waiting with an unwearied patience,] at the door [of the
Heart and Conscience of each person amongst you,] and 40 knock [or use frequent
and loud importunities, by the motions of my Holy Spirit, Cant. 5.2. Prove.
1.20-] if any 41 man [or any one of the Saints of this beloved City; for to
them, and concerning them, I now speak, and not of their Church State, which I
will certainly spew out of my Mouth;] hear [and obey] my 40 voice [and all that
I have loved will do so, John 10.27, 28, 29.13, 1.] and open the door [of his
Heart, by removing all wilful impediments;] I [who have now withdrawn my
glorious presence,] will come unto him, and will sup with him, and he with me
[i. e. I will dwell with him, possessing his Soul with my Gifts and Graces, and
will communicate my self after a friendly and a familiar manner unto him in my
Heavenly Kingdom, Luke 14.15. John 14.20, 23. Rev. 19, 9.21, 3.]

40 40 It was the ancient custom to knock, and call aloud at the same time.

41 Christ before spoke to the Church of Laodicea; here he speaks to the
Members of it; to whom he promises higher, and more intimate communications of
himself; although he had resolved to ease himself of their imperfect Church State.

21 To him [or that person,] that overcomes [the evils of this State, by
hearing and obeying my voice, and opening unto me,] will I grant to sit with 42
me in my Throne [in my Kingdom, whilst I judge the Nations, Satan, Death and
Hell; and then to reign with me to all Eternity; John 17.22-24. Rev. 20.8-15.]
even as I also overcame [Temptations, Sin, Death and Hell,] and am 43 set down
with my Father in his Throne [in Heaven John 17.5.]

42 Here Christ and his Saints are represented as sitting in one and the same
Throne; in allusion to the Thrones of the ancient Eastern Kings, which were
very large, and in the form of a Bed or Couch, so that many persons might sit
in them at once, Cant. 3.7.

43 Mr. Mede Page 905.
observes on this verse, that although the glorified Saints are said to sit
here with Christ on his Throne; that yet none but Christ God-Man is said to sit
with the Father on his Throne; because no Creature is capable of the privilege
of sitting on God the Father's Right Hand in his Throne; that being a Godlike
Royalty altogether incommunicable.

22 He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

CHAP. IV.
The Text.
1 AFter this * [first Prophetic Vision of the Seven Churches,] I looked [or,
I was seeing 1 in a Prophetical Vision, Dan. 4.10] and behold a door was opened
in Heaven [i. e. a Discovery was made of Divine secrets;] and the first voice
[or, the former 2 voice of Christ which I heard at first, Chap. 1.10.] was as
of a Trumpet [i. e. full of Power and Authority, Chap. 1.10.] talking with me,
which said [come up hither unto me to have a nearer access to, and
participation of Heavenly Secrets;] and I [for none else can;] will show thee
[in Symbols and representations,] things which must be hereafter [in a
Succession, one after another.]

Annotations on CHAP. IV.
* The foregoing Vision contained in the Second and Third Chapters, may be
called, The Church-Prophecy, because that in it the several successive States
and Periods of the Church, from the beginning of it, at Christ's Resurrection,
until the Kingdom of Christ, and the End of all things, are represented under
the Types of Churches, the most proper Emblem of them: and that the following
Vision (which may be called the Book-Prophecy, from its Events being
represented in a Book with Seals), to which this, and the next Chapter are a
Preface, is of the same signification and extent, shall be argued hereafter, as
occasion shall require; and may at present be gathered from some Congruities
observable in the Prefaces to each of them; as that John is spoken to here by a
Trumpet, as he was in the former Preface in the first Chapter; and is in the
like Spiritual Ecstasy as he was then in; which being Circumstances peculiar to
these Two Visions, may argue them to be of the like Nature and Import. And here
it is not improper to observe, that in this, and the following Chapter is
chiefly contained,

(1.) A Representation of the Throne, Divine Consistory, or Court of Judicature
of Almighty God, which is to pass Judgment upon the State of things throughout
the whole Prophecy.

(2.) The settling and appointing of Christ, the Lamb, newly risen from the
Dead, to be the Supreme Governor, and Director of all the Events which were to
come to pass, by giving him power to open the Book, and loose the Seals of it.

(3.) We have here a Pre-representation (as there is upon all suitable
occasions) of the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ, the chief End of all the
Visions, given us in Two Doxologies; sung by Angels, and the Representatives of
the Christian and Jewish Church; who are, as it were, a Chorus to this Divine
Drama; as the Virgins, Companions, Watchmen, and Shepherds are in the Book of
Canticles; which is a Sacred Dramatick Poem, relating to Christ's Kingdom. See
Dr. Patrick 's Preface on the Song of Solomon, and Dr. Beverley's Exposition of
it.

1 From whence Prophecies are called Visions, and Prophets Seers in Scripture.
Hammond.

2 (...) is put for (...) here, and in other places of Scripture; as John 1,
15.15, 18. 1 John 4.19. and this is the same with the first Voice of a Trumpet,
cap. 1.10.

2 And immediately I was in the Spirit [Chap. 1.10.] and behold, a Throne was
set in Heaven [i. e. God appeared as King and Judge, Isa. 6.1. Ezekiel. 1.26. Dan.
7.9.] and one [i. e. God the Father, Chap. 5.7.] sat on the Throne [i. e.
appeared in Majesty, and as in Judgment.]

3 And he that sat, was, to look upon [or was in appearance 3 and resemblance,]
like a Jasper [i. e. Glorious, Rev. 20.11.] and a Sardine 4 stone [i. e.
Glorious but Terrible, Exodus 24.10. Ezekiel. 1.27] and there was a Rainbow [i. e.
his covenant of mercy and peace, and his mindfulness of it, Genesis 9.11-16. Isa.
54.8-10. Ezekiel. 1.28.] round about the Throne [so that it might always be in his
remembrance,] in sight like unto an Emerald 5 [denoting the never failing
mercies of his Covenant; and the most pleasant, and precious promises of it,
and of his Kingdom.]

3 For he saw not God, but only his Glory; and such Appearances as denote his
Attributes and Perfections, Ezekiel 1.28.

4 It is a Blood-coloured, or Red Stone, like Fire; and therefore fit to denote
the Justice, and fiery Indignation of God, Heb. 10.27.

5 A Smaragd, or Emerauld, is a most precious Stone, of a very pleasant, and
never fading Greenness; the chief Color in the Rainbow.

4 And 6 round about the Throne, were four and twenty Seats [or, Thrones] and
upon the Seats I saw [the] four and twenty 7 Elders [i. e. the representatives
of the Jewish Church, 1 Chronicles. 24. Isa. 24.23.] sitting [on Thrones; as
participating in Judgment and Government, Dan. 7.9, 22, 26, 27. Rev. 20.4.]
clothed in white 8 raiment [i. e. Priest's Vestments,] and they had on their
Heads 8 Crowns of Gold [i. e. Regal Ornaments, Chap. 1, 6.5, 10.20, 6.]

6 They encompass the Throne, as faithful Ministers and Servants, to receive
God's Commands; and to show their Nearness and Access unto him, who was in the
midst of them, to protect, assist, and give his Commands unto them, Matthew.
18.20.

7 The Church of Israel, as it shall be advanced by Christ in his Kingdom,
being plainly called, God's Ancients, or Elders, by Isaiah, Chap. 24.23. it
seems evident to me, that the four and Twenty Elders are here put for the
Representatives of it, in allusion to the Four and Twenty Heads of the Courses
of the Priests, instituted by David, 1 Chronicles. 24. Elder, in its General Notion,
signifying a Head, or Governor amongst the Jews, as appears from Genesis 50.7.

And this Word Elder, being by this time become familiar in the Church, to
signify the Pastors or Governors of it; why may not a Title used in the
Christian Church, be put to denote the Governors of the Jewish; as on the
contrary, the Jewish Types are all along in this Prophecy, put to denote the
Christian Antitypes?

8 8 The Jewish Church seems here to be represented, (1.) by their white
Vestments, which was the Habit of the Jewish Priests, Exodus 28.39, 40.39, 27.
and (2.) by their Crowns; whereby is denoted, that they were a Royal
Priesthood, as they are called, Exodus 19.6. and that they, together with the
Christian Church, should reign with Christ.

5 And out of the Throne [of God the Father.] proceeded 9 lightnings, and
thunderings, and voices [denoting the Majesty of God, and the Terror of his
Laws and Judgments, and of the appearance of his Kingdom;] and there were seven
Lamps of Fire burning before the Throne which are [the Symbols, or
Hieroglyphics of] the seven Spirits of God [i. e. of the perfect, warming and
enlightening influences and operations of the Holy Ghost toward the Church,
Exodus 37.23. Ezekiel. 4.2. See the Notes on Rev. 1.4, 12, 20.]

9 These Words are taken from the Dreadful Appearance of God upon Mount Sinai,
at the Delivery of the Law, Exodus 19. and 20.18, 20. and signify God's
Judgments, in behalf of, and upon his Church; and especially the extraordinary
breakings forth, and signal comings of Christ's Kingdom, whereby he shakes not
the Earth only, but the Heaven; as they are set forth in Scripture by
Metaphors, primarily taken (according to the Opinion of the Learned Theorist of
the Earth) from the last general Conflagration. See, and diligently com- Haggai
2.6-9. Malach. 3.1. Psalm 18.13. Jerem. 25.30. Ezekiel. 1.13. Heb. 10.27-31. Heb.
12.18-29.

6 And before the Throne there was a 10 Sea [i. e. a large Vessel or
receptacle, 1 Kings 7.23.] of Glass like unto Crystal [i. e. pure and
transparent, as that of the Tabernacle was, Exodus 38.8. denoting Baptism and
the purity it requires; and the Blood of Christ by which we are washed and
cleansed from our sins, Rev. 7.14] and in the midst 11 of the Throne [or, just
before it, Ezekiel. 1.5.] and round 11 about the Throne [Numb. 2.2.] were four
Beasts [or living 12 Creatures, representing the pure Apostolical Church of
Christ in all parts of the World;] full of Eyes before and behind [i. e. very
circumspect and vigilant; and skilled in the past and future state of Christ's
Kingdom.]

10 The Laver, or Brazen Vessel in the Temple, for the Priests to wash in, is
called a Sea in Scripture; as all Receptacles of Waters are: of which see Exodus
30, 18.38, 8. by which is aptly represented the (...), or Baptismal Lavers of
the Ancients, which were very large.

11 11 One of the Beasts might be probably placed before the Throne, or in the
midst of it; and the other Three in just distances round about it; probably one
behind, and two on each side of it; in correspondence to the Description of
Solomon's Throne, 1 Kings 10.19. or according to the pitching of the Tents of
the Israelites, which are described, Numb. 2.2. as being over against, and
round about the Tabernacle; that is, encompassing it in a Square Figure, (as
the Learned generally agree) each of the Four Divisions being placed at the
Four Points of it, looking toward the Four Cardinal Points of Heaven.

12 For so the word (...) ought to be translated, as it is, Ezekiel. 1.5. that so
they may be the better distinguished from (...), or the Antichristian Beast.
These Four living Creatures are called Cherubims, Ezekiel. 10.2; By which is meant
Active Beings of an Angelical Nature, employed in the Ministration of God's
Providence, as appears from their Description given by Ezekiel. Now the
Representations here given, figuring something analogous to them in the Church;
they cannot be supposed to signify any thing more properly than the pure
Christian Church, represented by the Apostles; who were so extraordinarily
active in the propagating of the Gospel into the Four Quarters of the World;
and were Twelve, making up Four Ternaries of Living Creatures, or Zealous
Active Ministers of Christ; according to the Number of the Four Ternaries of
the Twelve Tribes, under the Four Standards in the Wilderness. For we are to
take notice, that this Representation of the Throne of the Majesty of God; or
this Theater, or Stage of the Apocalyptick Visions (as Mr. Mede calls it,)
exactly answers the Encampments of the Israelites; God's Throne being here
placed in the middle, as the Tabernacle was there; the Four and Twenty Elders
next, to answer the Station of the Priests and Levites; and the Four Beasts at
each Angle, Diametrically opposite to each other, against the Four Cardinal
Points of the Wind, representing Christians in the Four Quarters of the World,
in analogy to the Four Standards of the Camp of the Israelites, having in them
Figures of these Four Living Creatures, taken from the Cherubims of the
Chariot, or Glorious Throne of Almighty God, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. For which, see Mr.
Page 437, 594, 917.
Mede, Dr. Hammond on the Place, Grotius on Numb. 10.15. and Mr. Ainsworth on
Numb. 2. where he has given us the Figure of the Encampments, and has
discoursed largely on them; and Dr. De legibus Hebraeorum, lib. 3. Dissertat. 5.
Spencer.

7 And the first Beast [or living creature.] was like a Lion 13 [denoteing the
Power and strength of the Gospel and Apostolical Ministry, Genesis 49.9. Psalm.
103.24.] and the second Beast like a Calf 14 [or Ox; denoting their
Laboriousness and Usefulness, Prove. 14.4.] and the third Beast had the face of
a Man 15 [signifying Reason and Prudence;] and the fourth Beast was like a
flying Eagle 16 [noteing their activity, and quick-sightedness into the
Mysteries of the Gospel.]

13 This was the Standard of Judah, on the East side, compared to a Lion, Genesis
49.9. And the Qualities of these Living Creatures, do denote the like Gifts and
Graces, required in the Ministry, which were after an extraordinary manner
eminent in the Apostles, the Representatives of the Christian Church, and of
its State in the Kingdom of Christ; to which this appearance relates.

14 The Standard of Ephraim, on the West side of the Camp; who is resembled to
an Ox, Deuteronomy. 33.17.

15 Reuben's Standard on the South side.

16 The Standard of Dan on the North side.

8 And the four Beasts had each of them six 17 Wings, [noteing their speed,
their Reverence in God s Presence, and their humble sense of themselves, Isa.
6.2] about 18 him; and they were full of Eyes within 19 [to observe themselves
as well as to be vigilant over others;] and they 20 rest not day and night [but
are constant and incessant in the Worship and Service of God, Isa. 60, 11.62,
6. [ saying, Holy, 21 Holy, Holy, [i. e. infinitely and superlatively Holy,
Isa. 6.3.] Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come [Rev. 1.4.]

17 With Two they covered their Faces, out of Reverence; with Two their Feet,
or Nakedness, out of a sense of their own shame and impurity; and with Two they
flew, to execute God's Commands, Isa. 6.2.

18 (...), round about them; that is, perhaps at several Distances on each
side; as the Israelites are said to encamp (...), or round about the
Tabernacle; that is, at distant Points of the several sides of the Square,
encompassing it. So here each of the Living Creatures is said to have Six
Wings, (...); that is, on each side Three, one against another; one pair on
their Shoulders, with which they flew; another on each of their Breasts,
stretched upwards, to cover their Faces; and the Third about their Hips, to
cover their less honorable parts, or appearances. Andreas Caesariensis, reads,
as our common Copies do; but if (...) be to be joined to (...), as Grotius, and
Dr. Hammond think; then their Exposition may be consulted, as more commmodious.

19 The inward Eyes of these Creatures were represented unto John; the Figure,
or Appearance (which was perhaps diaphanous) being contrived accordingly.

20 This was the Practice of the Apostolical Church; as appears from Acts 2.42,
46.20, 31. Luke 2.37. 2 Timothy 4.2.

21 Here it is acknowledged by the Apostolical Church, with the Joint Consent
of the Israelitish Church; that God is a Supereminent Being; and that he is to
be worshipped incommunicably, according to his most eminent and unparalleled
Holiness; and perhaps the Divine Being, in Father, Word, and Spirit, may be
intimated in the Threefold Repetition of the Word Holy. But howsoever, in this
First Doxology, the Lord God Almighty (who is, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, God
blessed for ever,) is only mentioned, and not the Lamb; to show, that the
Belief of One God, who created all things, is the First Fundamental Principle
of Religion; Christ, as Redeemer, the Lamb slain, being not acknowledged and
worshipped, until the Second Doxology, after he had appeared before the Throne
of the Father, and had received his Kingdom; acccording to the Original Model
of these Visions, in the Book of Daniel; where ( Chap. 7.) the Son of Man is
brought near to the Father, and then had Dominion and Glory given him.

9 And when [soever] these Beasts 22 [or, representatives of the Apostolical
pure Church,] give [or shall, and are wont to give] glory [i. e. acknowledgment
of God's glorious Majesty, and Excellency;] and Honor [to God's Authority and
Pre-eminence;] and thanks [for his bounty, and gracious gifts to his Church;]
to him that sat on the Throne, who lives for ever and ever [i. e. to the
Eternal and Living God, not a dead Idol; who will open his Kingdom of Eternal
Life to all true Christians.]

22 At the fourth Verse, the Twenty four Elders are placed before the Living
Creatures, to signify the Primogeniture of the Jewish Church; Here they are
placed after them, to signify that the Truths here acknowledged, were first
clearly made known to the Christian Church; and shall be at last communicated
by them to the Jewish; which shall be excited, and provoked to Jealousy by
them; and shall at their Conversion join with them, in an acknowledgment of
these, and all other Truths of Christianity.

10 The four and twenty Elders [or Heads of the pure Jewish Church testifying
their agreement with the Christian Church, do] fall down [in great humility and
submission,] before him that sat on the Throne, and worship him that lives for
ever and ever; and cast their Crowns before the Throne [in token of Subjection
and Homage,] saying,

11 Thou art worthy [and thou only,] O Lord, to receive [the Acknowledgement
of] Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou have created all things [by thy
Power,] and for thy pleasure [or Will, the only Motive to it,] they are
[preserved in their Being,] and were [at first] created [Nehem. 9.6.]

CHAP. V.
The Text.
1 AND I saw in the Right 1 Hand of him that sat on the Throne, [i. e. of God
the Father,] a 2 Book [or Roll, Ezekiel. 2.9, 10.] written within, and on the
backside [i. e. containing a long Series of Events;] 3 sealed with 4 Seven
Seals [to denote the Obscurity of the Prophecy, and the Delay of its
Accomplishment, Dan. 12.4.]

Annotations on CHAP. V.
1 God held the Book in his Right Hand, to show his Power, and his Readiness to
deliver it.

2 This Book seems to have consisted of seven several Rolls, rolled up into
one, in the Form of a Cylinder Poli Synops. Hammond on Luke 4.17. and on the
place. Mede, page 789, 790, 791. Mori Oper. Theol. page 21. ubi formam libri
videas.
, according to the Custom of the Ancients; having seven Labels, sealed with
seven Seals; which being opened in order, there appeared in each of them, the
Seulptures, or Hieroglyphics hereafter mentioned; and the back side of the
last Roll, which is the outermost in rolling, was written upon, to show, that
there was a long series of Events contained in this Book; it being not the
Custom of the Ancients, to write on the back side of the Roll, but when the
inside could not contain all their Writing. We may divide, for Order, and
Memories sake, the whole Prophecy of this Book, into Two Tomes (as Mr. Mede
calls them) the first of which, contained in the foregoing Chapters, may be
called, The Sea on Chap. 4.1.
Church Prophecy; wherein Symbols of Churches then in being are used; the
Second (which begins here) may be called, The Book-Prophecy, because its Events
are represented by Hieroglyphics in a Book: And both Prophecies are of the
same Extent; this latter reaching to the End of Time, and determining and
distinguishing Church Successions and Affairs as well as the former; only with
this difference, that they are represented in the latter by future Occurrences
and Circumstances of the Civil State and Empire; that so the Times of their
Accomplishment might be the better known, and taken notice of, by the
illustrious Events represented in them. For as it pleased God to describe and
foretell by his Prophets the Fall of Babylon, and other Events, under several
Symbols and Representations, for the greater assurance of the Prediction (as in
Pharaoh's Dream, Genesis 41.32.) and that the thing might be the more deeply
imprinted on Men's Minds, by the Variety of the Figures by which they are
described; so has the Divine Spirit, upon the same account, given diverse
Emblems of one and the same thing in this Prophecy.

3 I shall here, once for all, endeavor to give the true import of Sealing,
which seems to have these several Acceptations in Scripture.

(1.) It denotes a secret, or an hidden Condition; as we seal up things which
we would keep secret.

(2.) It denotes Security; Thus the Stone at the mouth of Daniel's Den, and our
Savior's Sepulcher, were sealed with Seals.

(3.) It signifies Hindrance and Restraint: Thus God, Job 37.7. is said to seal
up the Hand of every man; i. e. to hinder their Work by Storms and wet weather;
and to seal up the Stars, Job 9.7. i. e. to restrain their Influences, as Satan
is said, Rev. 20.3. to be shut up, and to have a Seal set upon him, to restrain
him.

(4.) Propriety is signified by sealing in Scripture; from the Custom of
sealing Goods and Servants when they were bought; thereby to denote their
propriety in them, and to distinguish them from other Men's Servants; Hammond on
Ephesians. 4.30.

(5.) Lastly, From these, and other Metaphors, it often in Prophetical
Scripture signifies the Obscurity of a Prophecy, and the concealing of it, in
dark terms, from the Generality of the People, Isa. 8.16. and the stopping or
hindering the Events foretold by it: so that sealing and writing, and sealing
and opening, are opposed in prophetical Language to one another, and signify
as much as concealing and revealing, delaying the Accomplishment of a Prophecy,
and bringing it into effect. See the Notes on Chap. 7.2, 3, 4.

4 With reference to the seven states of Christ's Church, which were hindered
from coming into event, whilst the Book was sealed; and were to be by degrees
accomplished, and discovered upon the gradual opening of each of them.

2 And I saw a strong 5 Angel [or a mighty one, Psalm 103.20] proclaiming with
a loud 5 voice [after the manner of a Herald, Dan. 3.4.] who is worthy [for
Authority, and Ability,] to open 6 the Book, and to loose the Seals thereof [i.
e. to bring into event the things there delivered.]

5 5 To show the Weight and Concern of the thing to be delivered, as worthy to
be heard of all Creatures.

6 To open it by unsealing it, or when it is unsealed.

3 And no 7 man [or no creature, Isa. 41.28.] in Heaven [i. e. neither Saint
nor Angel,] nor in Earth, nor under the Earth [i. e. in the State of departed
Souls, from whence Christ was just come,] was able to open the Book [i. e. to
bring to pass the Events of it;] neither [so much as] to look thereon [if it
were opened; that is of himself to understand, foresee, and govern the course
of the Prophecy, and conduct it into Event.]

7 Here by a Hebraism, (consisting in describing the whole by an enumeration of
its parts) is signified, that no Creature whatsoever, was able to open the
Book, or so much as to understand it of himself.

4 And I wept * much, because no man was found worthy to open, and to read the
Book, neither to look thereon, [as fearing that I should not be shown those
things that were promised me, Chap. 4.1.]

* This weeping seems to be rather from a Despair, that things would not be
carried on to the great Kingdom of Redemption; as the Two Apostles (Luke
24.21.) were sorrowful, least Christ was not he which should have redeemed
Israel; and were astonished, as Mary also was ( John 20.13, 15.) because the
Lord could not be found, for which she wept. For Christ is represented at the
sixth Verse, as just risen from the dead, and therefore in congruity to that
appearance, what is here said, must relate to the time before he appeared, as
risen; which is also a Circumstance that confirms the fixing of the Epoch of
this Book at the Resurrection.

5 And one [or the 8 first, and chief] of the 9 Elders [or Representatives of
the Jewish Church, Chap. 4.4.] says unto me, Weep not [for thy own sake, or
the sake of the Church, which thou fear will be deprived of what is
contained in this Book; for] behold the Lion 10 of the Tribe of Judah [ i. e.
Christ, Genesis 49.9. Heb. 7.13, 14. who is also] the root of David [Isa. 11.1,
10. Romans 15.12.] has prevailed [with the Father, by his Blood and Merits], to
open the Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof [Vers. 2, 4. [ i. e. to
declare what is in it, and to accomplish it.]

8 For so One seems to signify in this Prophecy; as also it does, Dan. 10.13.
Genesis 1.4. Matthew. 28.1.

9 The Jewish Church having been entrusted with the Oracles and Prophecies of
the Old Testament, concerning the Kingdom of Christ; it is very proper, that
their Ministry should be here made use of, to declare unto John, the import of
what had been delivered therein, concerning the Merits and Power of Christ, in
revealing and erecting his Kingdom: and therefore Christ is here described by
Titles taken from what relates to the Jews; as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah;
because he came from that Tribe which is resembled to a Lion in Scripture; and
the Root of David, because he proceeded from his Stock, as from a Root.

10 No Creature whatsoever (as Man signifies, Verse 7. and Isa. 41.28.) was
able to open this Book, or look into it, but only Christ, by Virtue of his
Merits; whereby that extravagant Knowledge, which is ascribed unto Angels and
Saints in the Romish Church, and their Mediatorship, is plainly exploded, as
appears also from the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th Verses.

6 And I beheld [with great concern and expectation,] and lo [on a sudden] in
the midst of the Throne, [i. e. just before it, and next unto it,] and of the
Four Beasts, and in the midst of the Elders [i. e. betwixt God the Father, and
his Church;] stood 11 [in a posture of Defense, as Mediator and Advocate, and
in a readiness to receive his Kingdom, Dan. 7.13; 14.] a Lamb [i. e. Christ,
John 1.29.36.] as it had been [newly] stain [and just risen from the dead;]
having seven Horns 12 [ i. e. perfect Regal Authority, especially over the
sevenfold State of the Church;] and seven Eyes [signifying perfection of
Knowledge, and Providential Administrations, Zech. 3.9] which are [or
represent] the seven Spirits of God [i. e. the perfect Operations of Gods
Spirit, Zech. 4.6, 10. See on, Rev. 1.4.] sent forth into all the Earth [to
superintend, dispose, and conduct all things, 2 Chronicles. 46.9. Isa. 11.2.]

11 From Christ's being here represented, as just risen from the dead, with the
Signs of his Sufferings, fresh and bleeding; it may be gathered, that the
Epoch of these Visions, is to be taken from Christ's Resurrection, and
Ascension into Heaven; as we have observed before on Chap. 1.10.

And he is represented as standing, to denote, that he was not as yet in
possession of his Kingdom, which was due to him at his Resurrection (as the
Psalmist plainly affirms, Psalm 2, 7, 8.) but that he stood ready to receive
it; to which end he was brought unto the Father, as appears plainly from Dan.
7.13, 14.

12 Horns being the Weapons of Beasts, they are put to signify Strength and
Power, in Scripture, as Psalm 75.5, 10. and in Daniel, and this Prophecy, they
denote Kings, and their Regal Power; as the Scripture interprets it self, Dan.
8.20, 21. Rev. 17.12.

7 And he [i. e. Christ being now entering upon his Kingly Office] came [to the
Father, being brought near before him, to receive his Kingdom, Dan. 7.13, 14]
and took the Book * out of the Right Hand of him that sat upon the Throne [i.
e. received his Kingdom from the Father, and power to reveal and execute what
was contained in that Book concerning it.]

* This answers to Dan. 7.14. where, upon his being brought to the Father, a
Kingdom is given him, of which this Book is a Symbol, as being the Book of the
Kingdom of Christ: only we are to take notice, that the Book is sealed; the
Kingdom being not to appear, but by steps and degrees, according to the opening
of the Seals, until the seventh Trumpet of the seventh Seal; during which time
Christ was to sit in the patience and expectation of his Kingdom, at the Right
Hand of God, until his Father made his Foes his Footstool; according to Psalm
110.1. and 1 Cor. 15.25, 27.

8 And when he had taken the Bo^k, the four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders
[i. e. the Christian, and the Jewish Church, perceiving th t all Power was now
given unto him, of the Father,] fell down before the Lamb, [to worship him]
bearing every one of them Harps [to praise him;] and golden Vials [or Bowls to
hold Incense in, 2 Chronicles. 4.22.] full of 13 Odours, which are [i. e. signifie]
the Prayers [Psalm 141.2.] of Saints [i. e. of the living Creatures, and
Elders, and all Saints and Members of the pure Church in his Kingdom, Rev.
20.4.]

13 The Ascent of the Incense signifies the Ascent of Prayers to Heaven; and
the Odor of it their Acceptableness with God; for which see Dr. Hammond on the
place, and on Luke 1.10. And here Christ appearing for his Saints, as in his
Kingdom, makes them Priests to God, by giving them Incense. See Chap. 8.3,
4.20, 6.]

9 And they sung a new Song [of 14 singular Love and Gratitude, upon the
occasion of Christ's Redemption, and Kingdom,] saying, Thou art worthy [and
thou alone, Verse 23.] to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: for
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God [i. e. to be his Servants and
Worshippers; by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation [to be a Catholic Church and Kingdom.]

14 In this sense this Word is taken, Psalm 33.3. Isa. 42.9, 10. But it is
rather called a New Song here, because it will have been for a long time out of
use, during the Apostasy, which will have perverted the Doctrine of Redemption,
and Kingdom of Christ therein celebrated: of which Kingdom there is here given
an Appearance and Representation, signified by Music and Harps, which are the
Attendants of it in this Prophecy: Songs and Music being not made use of in
it, but upon some such Pre-appearance, until the Apostasy is at an end; as if
during the Absence of the Bridegroom, Mourning were more suitable for the
Church.

10 And have made us unto [the Service and Glory of] our God, Kings and Priests
[i. e. a Priestly Kingdom, Chap. 1.6.] and we shall reign 15 in the Earth [in
thy Kingdom, Rev. 20.4.]

15 From hence it is plain, that Christ's Kingdom is to be upon Earth, Rev.
20.4.

11 And I beheld [or, was still in Vision,] and I heard the Voice of many
Angels round about the Throne, and [round about] the Beasts, and the Elders,
[i. e. the whole Church consisting of Angels, and Men, Christians and Jews,
Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.] and the number of them [i. e. of the Angels,] was ten
tbousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands [i. e. innumerale, Heb.
12.22.]

12 Saying with a loud Voice [and suitable affection,] worthy is the Lamb that
was slain, to receive [the Acknowledgment and Possession of] power [and
Authority over all things, especially his Church, Matthew. 11.27.28, 18. John
17.2.] and of Riches [i. e. the inheritance of all things, Heb. 1.2.] and of
Wisdom [to govern his Church, as being the Eternal Wisdom of his Father, Prove.
3.16.] and [of] strength [to conquer his Enemies;] and honor [from all
Creatures] and glory [from his Father, John 17.1, 5.] and blessing [from Angels
and Saints, and all creatures, Psalm 145.10, 11. Psalm 148.]

13 And every 16 Creature [Phil. 2.10.] which is in Heaven, and on the Earth,
and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them,
heard I saying, Blessing and Honor and Glory, and Power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb [i, e. to God the Father, and his
Son Christ,] for ever and ever.

16 Even inanimatt Creatures are frequently in Scripture called upon to praise
God, by a common Figure usual to all Authors and Nations; that because they
would praise him, if they could; and are the Objects and Occasions of Praise to
Angels and Men; and are under the command of God, and subservient to his Glory,
and his Churches good; and because the very Order and Beauty of the Creatures,
especially as they shall be in the Restitution of all things, is a Real, and
Virtual Praising of God. And all Creatures, Saints and Angels themselves, are
here brought as making this Acknowledgment; to signify, that God and Christ
are the alone Objests of Worship; and not any Creature whatsoever, Exodus 20.4,
5.

14 And the four Beasts [i. e. the Christian Church] said, Amen [to this new
Song; i. e. consented, and approved of it] And [after the Christian Church, to
show that they received the clear and explicit Knowledge of Chrisi, from the
Christian Church, and to testify the Agreement there is betwixt the Old and
New Testament] the Four and Twenty Elders [i. e. the Jewish Church] fell down
and worshipped him 17 that lives for ever [i. e. God the Father.]

17 Here it is to be observed, that as the Christian Church began (Chap. 4.8,
9.) with Hymns, and Worship to God the Father; so the Jewish Church here Ends,
(after they had joined with the Christian Church in Praises and Acts of Worship
to Christ, who has the same Worship here given him with the Father) with an Act
of Worship to the Father; to show, that as all things are Of Him, so are they
also To Him; and His Glory; and that the Kingdom is to be delivered up unto
him, and that all things are to be subject unto him, who is All in All, (1 Cor.
15.24-28.) which is signified by their falling down, and worshipping him, in
token of their Obedience, and of the Subjection of all things unto him; all
Creatures also are as themselves, bowing, or being subject unto him, in the
sense that they praise him, Psalm. 2.10, 11.

CHAP. VI.
The Text.
1 AND Christ being now possessed of the Right to his Kingdom, and his sole and
absolute Power and Dominion, having been acknowledged by all Creatures in the
former Chapter,] I saw [or was in a Vision,] when the Lamb [i. e. Christ having
now the Right, and Administration of the Affairs of his Kingdom] opened 1 one
[i. e. the first, Chap. 5. 5. of the Seals [i. e. he revealed what was before
hid, and accomplished what was represented under each Seal;] and I heard as it
was the noise [or a Clap] of 2 Thunder, [i. e. a powerful, and a terrible
Voice; and efficaciously productive of its Effects. See on Chap. 1. 10.] 3 one
[i. e. the first] of the four Beasts [or the Apostolical Ministry] saying, Come
and see [and consider the Mysterious Sculpture, which is to be seen in the
first Roll of the Book, and the great Event represented by it.]

Annotations on CHAP. VI.
1 The Seals are as so many Stops and Delays to Christ's Kingdom; and the
opening of them signifies, not only the making of the Visions known, wnich
before were concealed; whereupon Prophecy is called, a sealed Book; but also
the Effect of every Vision, as the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 12.23. Phrases it; or
the several Steps and Advances made toward the Kingdom of Christ; this being
the Book of Christ's Kingdom, whirh he opened, as King, with Power and
Authority, and by actually effecting the things signified in their due and
proper times.

2 Hereby is signified the great Power and Efficacy which accompanied the first
preaching of the Gospel, whence Mark 3.17. James and John are called the Sons
of Thunder; and the utmost Force of God's Power, is called, the Thunder of
God's Power, Job 26.14.

3 One, as is usual in this Prophecy, signifies the first of the Beasts, like a
Lion, whose Station being in the Eastern part of the Jewish Camp; hereby is
signified the coming forth of the Gospel from Jerusalem, which is in the
Eastern parts of the World; whence the Gospel was first preached, and the first
Apostolical Church gathered, according to the Prediction of the Prophets, Isa.
28.16. Micah 4.2. Acts 2.41-

2 And I saw, and behold [I perceived engraven on the first Roll,] a white 4
Horse [signifying the pure and merciful power and conquest of the Gospel
Dispensation, Psalm. 45.4.] and he 5 [ i. e. [Christ] that sat on him [i. e. who
had the Power, and management of that Dispensation;] had a Bow 6 [ i. e. the
Gospel, Psalm. 45.5.] and a Crown was given unto him [as King and Conqueror] and
he went forth [from Jerusalem Mic 4.2.] conquering 7 [by the efficacy of his
Gospel, and his Ministers;] and to conquer [by degrees, until the completion
of his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.6.-8.]

4 Horses being a swift and warlike Creature (according to the admirable
Description of them given in Job, Chap. 39.) the Scripture does signify by
them, some active and powerful Dispensation of his Providence, brought to pass
by his Angels and Ministers; the Nature and Quality of which is denoted by the
diverse Colors attributed to those Horses; as appears plainly from Zach. 1.8,
10.6.2, 3.10, 3. Now the Dispensation here pointed at, being that of Christ's
Kingdom, a Bochart, Hieros. 2.7.
white Horse is attributed unto him, (1.) to denote his Power; Princes and
Honorable Persons being used to Ride, and that on White Beasts; whilst
Inferiors went on Foot, as appears from Judge. 5.10. Eccles. 10.7. (2.) To
signify the Mercifulness of his Conquest, Psalm 45.4. Zech. 9, 9.10, 3. it
being usual for Conquerors to ride on white Horses on the Days of Triumph, Rev.
19.11, 14.

5 That Christ is hereby signified, is evident from Rev. 19.11, 12, 13.
compared with Psalm 2. and 45. from whence these Symbols are taken.

6 As an Archer with his Bow (according to the Description given by the
Psalmist 7, 12.11, 2.) first menaces and threatens at a distance, before he
shoots; so Christ first appeared with a peaceable Message of Salvation to all
who would come in unto him; before he threatened, and executed his Judgments
upon the Rebellious Jews and Romans; according to the Description of his
Kingdom, Psalm 2. and 45.

7 This refers to the Great Conquests the Gospel gained by the Ministry of the
Apostles; and this first Seal seems to be plainly contemporary with the
Ephesine Succession, in its first State, when their Works and Love was great,
and their Preaching powerful as Thunder; which is to be dated from Christ's
Resurrection, A. D. 33. when he gave Commission to his Disciples to conquer, by
teaching and baptizing all Nations, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.

3 And when he [i. e. Christ] had opened the second Seal, I 8 heard the second
9 Beast [or Gospel Ministry, as yet Apostolical,] 8 say, Come and see [what
Desolations are coming upon the Earth.]

8 8 This living Creature speaks not in Thunder, as the other did, to show,
that the Gospel's Power and Purity was now something abated; Ephesus having
soon left its first fervent and intense Love.

9 The Ox, whose Station was in the Western Quarter of the Camp.

4 And [the Enemies of Christ, the Jews and Gentiles, having refused to submit
entirely to his Kingdom, Psalm 2. and 45.] there went out [from the Western
Quarter,] another Horse that was red [denoting Wars and Effusion of Blood:] and
power was given [by Christ,] to him 10 that sat thereon [i. e. who had the
Execution of this Bloody Dispensation;] to take Peace from the 11 Earth [i. e.
to engage the Men of the World, especially in the Roman Empire, in Wars;] and
that they [both Jews and Gentiles;] should kill one another; and there was
given unto him a great Sword [signifying great slaughter in War, Jerem. 16.4.
Ezekiel. 14.21.]

10 Here the Desolations of the Jews foretold by Daniel, Chap. 9. and by our
Savior in the Gospel, seem plainly to be described: For,

(1.) They were finally completed by one coming forth from the West; that is,
by Trajan and Hadrian, who were Spaniards, under whom they were miserably
slaughtered, and almost utterly extirpated. And,

(2.) Those Times were very remarkable for their mutual Slaughters one of
another; the Romans killing vast Numbers of the Jews; and the Jews, on the
contrary, almost dispeopling some of their Provinces; and fighting so
obstinately against Hadrian, that the Conqueror could not boast of the
Triumph, his Loss was so great; which is a thing so plain from all History,
that we need not quote Authors to testify it.

This Seal may reach from A. D. 66. when these Desolations began in the War
against the Jews, under Nero, by Vespasian and Titus; until the fatal Slaughter
and Dispersion of that Nation under Hadrian, who ended his War against them, A.
D. 134. and died, A. D. 138. on the Kalends of January; as Mr. Pagi has
accurately stated this Account.

11 By Earth here is meant the Kings of the Earth, who were Enemies to Christ,
the Jews and Gentiles, as Peter has explained David, Acts 4.25-27.

5 And when he had opened the third Seal, I heard the third 12 Beast [or
Apostolical Ministry,] 13 say, Come and see, [and mark diligently what you see
and hear, Verse 6.] And I beheld, and lo, a black 14 Horse [i. e. a sad, and a
severe Dispensation:] and he 14 that sat on him [or had the Execution of that
Dispensation;] had a pair of 14 Balances in his hand [to signify strict, and
impartial Justice.]

12 Like a Man, whose Station was in the South.

13 Here is no mention of Thunder, for the Reason given before, Numb. 8.8.

14 14 14 A pair of Balances is the common and most apposite Emblem of
Justice; and by a Black Horse cannot be signified a Famine, as is evident from
what will be said on the following Verse; although Blackness be reckoned as the
Effect of it, Lament. 5.10. And therefore it is most agreeable, that some sad
Dispensation, and severe state of things should be signified by it; according
to the Acceptance of Blackness, Job 30.30. Psalm 119.83. With which Emblems
the History of the Times succeeding the Desolations of the Jews under Hadrian,
does wonderfully conspire; which reach from A. D. 138. when Hadrian died, in
whom the former Seal ended, unto A. D 235. when Alexander Severus was killed on
the 14th of March, which seems to be the Extent of this Seal.

For (1.) Septimius Severus was an African; whose Country lay to the South;
the Station of the Third Living Creature, which spoke at the opening of this
Seal. And he being the first and only Emperor, that ever came from that
Country; why may not that unusual Choice be more particularly hinted at by the
Black Horse he rod on; Horses of that color being extremely valued by the
Africans (as Bochartus Hierozoic. 2.7.
has observed) out of their Resemblance to their own swarthy Complexion; and
because of their strength and firmness? And of this kind, perhaps, was that
Great and Courageous Horse, which stoopt to take him up, and carried him into
the Forum, after he had thrown his Predecessor Pertinax, in an Ominous Dream;
related by Lib. 2.34.
Herodian. Which Observation, howsoever, may serve to illustrate the
Apocalyptical Symbol here made use of; it being taken for granted by the
Expositors of Dreams at that time, that a Horse signifies Imperatorial Power.

(2.) There happened in his time, viz. A. D. 202. a bloody and a long See Pagi
in Baronium.
persecution, continuing until after his Death, which was on the 4th of Feb. A.
D. 211. of which a Black Horse is a fit Emblem; Blackness being the Symbol of
Persecutions, and Calamitous Dispensations in Scripture; as Cantic. 1.5. Zech.
6.2, 6.

3. This Emperor was very Cruel, and a Great and a Terrible Conqueror, of a
very Rigid and Rough Disposition; and very strict and impartial in
Administration of Justice, and Punishment of Delinquents; which are Qualities
very properly represented by Blackness, and a pair of Balances; especially if
we consider that this Age was the Age of Lawyers, in which Papinian and Vlpian
flourished, and were advanced to the highest Dignities, under Septimius
Severus, and Alexander Severus, the Son of Mamoea, whose strict Justice, and
Severity against Offenders, and excellent Laws, are Famous in all History: So
that the Symbols of a Balance, and the Voice from the midst of the Beasts,
cannot but belong also unto him, in a most particular manner, who was also a
great Warrior. And the Beast appearing at the opening of this Seal, having the
Resemblance of a Man, which signifies Humanity, Reason, and Prudence; the
excellent Race of the Antonines, famous for those Qualities, may be very well
included in the Period of this Seal; there having been an admirable Succession
of Emperors (excepting Commodus, and Heliogabalus, whose Reign was short,)
from Hadrian, in whom the former Seal ended, unto Alexander Severus, of whom
the Balance was a proper Emblem, his Motto being that Epitome of Justice, Do
as you would be done by; and who was also very favorable to the Christians.

6 And I heard a Voice 13 in the midst of the Four Beasts [i. e. from Christ in
his Apostolical Church, Chap. 5. 6.] say, A 15 Measure of Wheat for a penny,
and Three Measures of Barley for a penny [i. e. let exact care be observed
about necessary Food for eating;] and see thou hurt [or diminish] not the Oil
and the Wine [i e. let no Fraud be used in Drinks and 16 Medicines]

15 A Famine cannot be here described; because, that scarcity could not be
great, where Barley and Wheat were not wanting; nor even Wine and Oil, which
are rather the Comforts of Life, than the Necessaries: And therefore this Verse
refers to the strict Justice, and diligent Care observed by Severus and
Alexander, about public Provisions; for which they are signally remarkable in
History.

But this Voice being heard so remarkably, amongst the Four Beasts; that is, as
spoken by Christ, who is represented as in the midst of them, Chap. 5.6. seems
to intimate something relating to Christ's Church, and that very remarkable;
which I shall endeavor to explain, by what is offered by Dr. Beverley, a
Person of deep thought, and of great insight in these matters.

He thinks then, that by the Balances in the Rider's hand, is figured Christ's
weighing the Churches Purity in the exact Balances of the Sanctuary; according
to what is prophesied of him, by Ezekiel, Chap. 25.9, 10-25. that he (the
Prince) shall take care in the New Jerusalem state there prefigured, that their
Oblations, or Worship, shall be exact, according to the Old Standard of the
Sanctuary, from which they had swerved; of which Worship, or Daily Service,
Wheat, Oil and Wine are the Symbols, they being the constant Attendants of the
Daily Sacrifice; as appears from Exodus 29.40. Numb. 28.7. Barley also denoting
the Christian Oblation in the Sacrament, and their Praises and Thanksgivings;
because Barley was used in no Oblation, (except in that of the suspected Wife,
Numb. 5.15.) but in the Oblation of the First Fruits of their Harvest, Lev.
23.9. which was a Type of the Christian Eucharistical Oblations, as Mr. Book 1.
Disc. 51. and in his Christian Sacrifice.
M^de has shown.

And (2dly,) He thinks, that the whole Time of the Seals, is, as it were,
weighed in the Two Scales of this Balance; the one half of it, being run out
at the time when these Balances appeared to wit, A. D. 235. when Alexander
Severus's Death put an End to this Seal; for the first Seal beginning at the
Resurrection, A. D. 33. if you add to that 202 years, the Moiety of the whole
Seals, the first half-Time will fall upon the year 235. the other half
extending to 437 where he dates the beginning of the 1260 Years of the
Apostasy; which will be made out more fully in the Process of these
Annotations.

16 Wine and Oil were also used in the curing of Wounds, and for Medicines,
Isa. 1.6. Luke 10.34.

7 And when he had opened the fourth Seal, I heard the Voice of the fo^rth
Beast, 17 say come and see [what Judgments God will bring upon the Heathen
Empire for their impenitence.]

17 The Church continues still Apostolical, because the Living Creature still
speaks; although the Thunder, or mighty Power and Efficacy of the Gospel was
departed from it. And the Apostolical Ministry here calls upon him to consider,
the Obstinacy and Impenitency of the Pagan Empire, notwithstanding the Gospel
had been preached amongst them for so long a time, and that therefore God had
resolved utterly to destroy them, after he had tried, whether he could reclaim
them by his severe Judgments; amongst whom yet he preserved a Remnant of
Christians to be a Holy Seed; according to God's Denunciations in a parallel
Case, Ezekiel. 14.12-23.

Now the voices of the living Creatures, or of the Apostolical Representatives
of the Christian Church still continuing, we may reasonably conclude that the
Ephesine or Apostolical Succession lasted during these four first Seals:
amongst the Apostolical Ministry of which Succession we may justly reckon, not
only the Apostles and Apostolical Men; but the Primitive Writers and Witnesses
of these times, from Justin Martyr, to Origin; who by their Apologies,
exemplary Lives and Deaths, and Learned Writings, Justified the Christian
Religion, confuted Judaism and Paganism, and called upon the Empire to Repent;
many of them foreteling its fall, and the rise of Antichristianism upon it, and
speaking plainly concerning the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; for which,
see Mr. Mede, Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, and Dr. Cressener.

8 And I looked and beheld a 18 pale Horse [i. e. great slaughter and
mortality,] and his Name that sat thereon was Death; and Hell [or, the grave]
followed with him [as his Attendant;] and power was given unto them over the
fourth 19 part of the Earth [i. e. the Roman Empire;] to kill with the Sword
[i. e. by War] and with Hunger [i e. by Famine] and with Death [i. e. by the
Pestilence, Jer. 9.21.] and with the Beasts of the Earth.

18 The State of the Empire, from Maximin to Diocletian; that is, from A. D.
235. to A. D. 284. is here plainly Characterised.

For (1.) Maximin was a Thracian, whose Country lay Northward, according to
the Station of the Fourth Beast, the Eagle.

(2.) In that small space of time, there were above Twenty Emperors (not
reckoning the Thirty Tyrants under Gallienus,) most of them very short-lived,
and coming to untimely Ends; which is very appositely represented by Death's
sitting upon a pale Horse, instead of a Rider.

(3.) Besides the persecution of the Christians, the whole Roman Empire was
then grievously harrass'd by Cruel and Barbarous Emperors, by Civil Wars, and
Foreign Invasions; the Persians and Asiatick Scythians breaking in upon the
Eastern part of the Empire; and the Goths about the same time invading the
Western, after a most terrible manner; about the beginning of the Reign of
Gallus A. D. 251. Pagi in Baron.
or 252. as Zozimus observes.

(4.) In this Period there was a dreadful Plague, that lasted for Fifteen Years
together; which beginning in Aethiopia, went through most of the Provinces of
the Roman Empire: upon the occasion of which Cyprian wrote his Books de
Mortalitate, and against Demetrian, where that Holy Gospel-Witness, attributes
that Mortality to the impiety and persecution of the Pagans, and not to the
Innocent Religion of the Christians; and seriously exhorts the Heathens to a
speedy Repentance. And there was a Famine also, as Dionysius Eusebius. 7.22.
Alexandrinus testifies, who lived at that time: After which Desolations, it
was a frequent thing in those Countries for the Wild Beasts to ravage, and to
break in into their very Cities, and commit great Slaughters; which is a
Judgment threatened in Scripture, Lev. 26.22. Deuteronomy. 32.24. Ezekiel. 14.15.

19 The Roman Empire seems to be called the (...), The Fourth of the Earth,
because it was the Fourth Earthly Monarchy prophesied of by Daniel; after
which, the Heavenly Kingdom was to be set up. See on, Chap. 8.7.

9 And when he [i. e. the Lamb Christ.] had opened 20 the fifth Seal; I saw
under the Altar 21 [of sacrifice, Lev. 4.7. i. e. under the Power, in the
presence of, and in Communion with God and Christ;] the Souls of them [see on
Chap. 20.4.] that were slain for the word of God, and for the Testimony which
they held [i e. the Christian Martyrs, especially under Diocletian. Chap. 2,
10.20, 4.]

20 The Beasts Voice, or the Apostolic Ministry here ceases; to show, that
Satan's Synagogue was now rising in the Smyrnaean Succession; upon the Honors
paid to Martyrs under this Seal.

21 When Altar is put indefinitely, the Altar of Sacrifice is usually
understood; where the Blood of the Sacrifice was wont to be poured out: and by
being under the Altar, is signified the happy state of Martyrs under the
protection, and in the presence of God and Christ, as appears from Heb. 13.10.
Colos. 3.3, 4. compared with 2 Maccab. 7.36. Psalm 27.5. Phil. 2.17. And here
is given a plain Character of this Seal; from the Voice of the Blood of the
Martyrs, and from the change of Things immediately following it in the next
Seal; whereby is evidently signified the great Persecution under Diocletian,
whereupon the Era Martyrum was instituted; and the overthrow of Paganism under
Constantine; from whence also it is very manifest, that the Smyrnaean
Succession is contemporary with this Seal, from the like appearances, Chap.
2.10.

10 And they 22 cried [instead of the Apostolical Voices;] with a loud Voice
[thereby showing their Number, their Zeal, and the importance of their
Complaint;] saying, How long, O Lord [Christ,] holy [and therefore hateing
Cruelty and Bloodshed;] and true [to thy promises of avenging thy people, Luke
18.7, 8.] do thou not judge and avenge our Blood [to vindicate thy Honor and
thy Truth,] on them that dwell on the Earth [i. e. the Pagan Empire; for our
Persecution has been long and cruel, Revel. 2.10.]

22 As Abel's Blood did, Genesis 2.10. Heb. 12.24.

11 And white Robes [denoting Reward, Honor and Purity, Chap. 3.4.] were given
unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet
[in quiet, patiently expecting the time of God's Vengeance;] for a little
season, until their Fellow Servants also, and their Brethren [in Christ] that
should be killed, as they were, should be fullfilled 23 [ i. e. until the
Times, and the Number of Martyrs determined by God, should be completed.]

23 Hereby is signified the Martyrdoms which were to follow under Licinius,
Julian, the Arrians, and the Apostasy, until God's signal and last Vengeance,
upon the Antichristian Tyranny, under the Vials.

12 And I beheld, when he had opened the Sixth Seal, and lo there was a great
Earthquake 24 [ i. e. a great commotion, and a strange change of Affairs, Hag.
2.6, 7. Heb. 12.26] and the Sun 25 [ i. e. the chief God of the Pagans, and the
Heathen Emperor the chief Magistrate;] became black 26 as sackcloath of hair
[Isa. 50.3.] and the Moon [i. e. the next in dignity,] became as 27 Blo^d [i.
e. were Eclypsed, and lost their former Glory.]

24 It will not be altogether unseasonable to remark in this place, what
Histor. 4.11.
Socrates, the Ecclesiastical Historian, notes from frequent Observation, that
Earthquakes are the Signs and Forerunners of Changes, and Commotions in the
Church.

25 Here by Metaphors taken from the Prophetical Descriptions of the Day of
Judgment, and the last Conflagration of the World, (to which several of them
seem plainly to refer, as Dr. Burnet has observed in his ingenious Theory of
the Earth; and when the things described here by several Prophetical
Accumulations, shall be fully verified.) God's Judgments under Constantine, and
his Successors, upon the Heathen Religion, and Empire, are set out unto us:
Although the Political World being described in Scripture by Metaphors taken
from the Natural, (as appears from Isa. 51.16. Dan. 8.10.) the Heavens here may
denote what is superior in it, and the Earth what is inferior: and the Sun
may be taken for the Supreme in the State, the Moon for the next, and the Stars
for those which are next in order unto them; according to the Ancient
Symbolical, and Hieroglyphical Learning of the Eastern Nations, of which we
have an Example, Genesis 37.9, 10. Where Joseph's Dream concerning the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, is interpreted by Jacob, of himself, as Father, and Chief of the
Family; of his Wife as next, and of his Children as subject unto them. And Sun,
Moon and Stars, Hills and Mountains, being the Objects, and Places of Idolatry;
Hereby may be also signified the final Overthrow of Pagan Idolatry; as well as
of the Pagan Civil Powers.

26 A Metaphor taken from an Eclipse, in which the Sun appears black; and the
Moon of a dark Red, like black Blood.

13 And the Stars of Heaven [i. e. the inferior Deities, and Magistrates;]
fell unto the Earth [i. e. were cast out, and displaced by the mighty Power of
God;] even as a Figtree casts her untimely Figs [Nahum. 3.12.] when she is
shaken of a mighty wind [e.e. as easily, and in as great abundance, Isa. 34.4.]

14 And the Heaven [i. e. the whole superior State of the Heathen World Civil
and Religious,] departed 27 [out of sight] as a scroll that is rolled together
[so that they could not be seen;] i. e. they had no Authority, nor Esteem,] and
every Mountain [i. e. all the places of Idolatry, and of great strength and
security, Isa. 2.14-18. Jerem. 51.25. Zech. 4.7.] and Island, 28 [ i. e. all
their Provinces and Places beyond the Seas;] were moved out of their places [i.
e. the Government and Religion of them was changed and overturned.]

27 A Metaphor from the Ancient Manner of Writing upon one long Scroll; which
being rolled up, according to their Custom, what was written in it could not be
seen.

28 The Jews called all Maritime Places Islands; and all places beyond the
Mediterranean. Consult the Interpreters on Genesis 10.5. and Mr. Book 1. Disc. 49.
Mede. And hereby is meant, that no places escaped, although never so strong or
remote.

15 And the Kings 29 of the Earth [i. e. the supreme Powers subject to the
Roman Empire, Isa. 10.8. Acts 4.26.] and the great men [or Nobles, Dan. 4.36.
Mark 6.21.] and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, [or
Soldiers, Judge. 5.22] and every bond man, and every free man [i. e. all of
every rank and quality] hid themselves [for fear. Isa. 2.19.] in the dens and
rocks of the Mountains [i. e. the most secret, and most inaccessible places,
Judge. 6.2.]

29 Here, by an enumeration of the several Ranks and Degrees of Men (according
to the Scripture Phrase), all the Members of the Roman Empire are reckoned up.

From a due consideration of these Six Seals, it will be manifest that they are
Synchronous with the two first Churches, ending in that of Smyrna; when that
Period received a Crown of Life under Constantine and his Successors.

16 And said to the mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us [altho by
crushing us in pieces, Isa. 2.19.-21. Hos. 10.8.] from the face [or anger] of
him that sits on the Throne [i. e. God] and from the wrath of the Lamb, [i.
e. Christ; that we may not see and feel the misery which is coming upon us.]

17 For the great 30 day of his wrath [i. e. the appointed time of his
Judgments] is come; and who shall be able to stand [against it, oppose, or
endure it.]

30 This immediately refers to the overthrow of the Pagan Powers by the
Christian Empire; and has also a relation to the final Judgments upon
Antichrist; when the Martyrs, who are commanded to rest until that time, shall
be fully avenged; this Judgment upon Paganism, by the Christian Empire, being a
Type of the Judgment at Christ's Kingdom.

CHAP. VII.
The Text.
1 A And after these things, I saw four Angels 1 [ i. e. Ministers of God's
Providence;] standing [in a readiness to execute God's Commands] upon the four
corners [i. e. Angles or Cardinal Points, Ezekiel. 7.2. Matthew. 24.31. Zech. 2.6.]
of the Earth; holding [back or restraining,] the four winds [or Instruments of
trouble and commotion, Jerem. 49.36. Dan. 7.2. Zech. 6.5.] of the Earth; that
the Wind 2 should not blow upon the Earth 3 [ i. e. that the Roman Empire
should not be disturbed;] nor on the 3 Sea [i. e. the common People, Chap.
17.15.] nor on any Tree 3 [ i. e. the great ones, Isa. 2.13. Zech. 11.2.]

Annotations on CHAP. VII.
1 The Living Creatures do not appear, but Angels in their stead; and they
standing on the Angles of the Earth, and not on the Angles of the Throne, as
the living Creatures did; whereby is signified that the strict Apostolical
Purity was abated, as I have often remarked; as the Glory of God, and the
living Creatures in Ezekiel remove by degrees from the Temple, as it grew more
and more polluted, until they departed totally from it. Read, and diligently
Consider, Exek. 8.4, 6.9, 3.10, 15-19 11, 23.

2 Hereby is signified the Quiet which the Christian Empire enjoyed from
Constantine to Theodosius, in respect of what Commotions were before in the
Empire, whilst it was Pagan; and should be afterward upon the Death of
Theodosius; when its Ruin soon ensued, upon the Winds blowing by the Trumpets,
Chap. 8. For by the Winds not blowing, is not meant, that they should have no
Troubles and Commotions, but (according to the usual import of such
Hyperbolical Expressions in Scripture) that they should be so little, or short
(as the Tempest under Julian was) that they should be, in comparison, nothing
at all: especially in respect of those Commotions the Empire was to undergo
within a short season; which would produce great Changes in it; by introducing
a New Antichristian Supremacy with Ten Kings; whereby the Monarchick Power of
the Empire (according to its Representation in Daniel), shifted from its Iron
Legs into its Feet and Toes, part of Iron, part of Clay; and the Idolatrous
Beastian Power was to pass into the Little Horn, and the Ten Horns; all which
being to be brought to pass by great Concussions in the Empire; its present
State under Christian Emperors is accounted a Calm, in respect of what was to
ensue; the Pagan Beast being then subdued; and the Antichristian Man of Sin
being withheld; so that Christianity was then, as it were, in a quiet and
prosperous condition.

3 3 3 The whole Body of the Roman Empire, is here represented by apt Metaphors
taken from those things which are most subject to be disturbed with Winds.

2 And I saw another Angel, 4 ascending from the East [i. e. Christ] having the
5 Seal of the Living God [i. e. a Commission from him, Ezekiel. 9.4.] and he cried
with a loud voice [to testify his Love and Affection to his chosen ones;] to
the four Angels, to whom it was given [by God, who had determined great changes
in the Empire;] to hurt [by executing of Judgments] the Earth and the Sea
[vers. 1.]

4 Christ is called, the Angel of the Covenant, Malach. 3.1. and the Sun of
Righteousness, Malach. 4.2. and the Dayspring, or rising Sun from the East,
Luke 1.78. and Ezekiel. 44.2.3. the Prince of the Church; that is, Christ, and
only he, has Power to enter in at the Eastern Gate of that Mystical Temple;
from whence it is clear, that Christ is here to be understood; called so,
because he enlightens and comforts his Church; and, like the Rising Sun,
discovers Works of Darkness, and the good from the bad. See Dr. Hammond on Luke
1.78. Gregory's Observations, page 73. and Dr. Pocock on Malachi.

5 A Seal signifies a Command, or a Commission, from its being sealed with the
King's Seal, 1 Kings 21.8. Esth. 3, 12.8, 8, 10.

3 Saying, hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea or the Trees, [i. e. the Empire,
and its Inhabitants] till we have 6 sealed [or shall seal i. e preserve and
secure in secret, Ezekiel. 9.1.-4.] the servants of 7 our God [i. e. those who
serve God purely and sincerely, Nehem. 1.11.] in their 8 foreheads [i. e. very
closely and securely.]

6 Men use to Seal those things, which they would have concealed, and preserved
(as we have before hinted on Chap. 5. 1.) especially in times of danger; so God
commanded the Israelites to sprinkle Blood upon their Posts, when he would save
them; whereby, as with a Seal, he concealed and preserved them, Exodus 12. and
the Scarlet Thread, Josh. 2.18. was a Sign or Seal to distinguish Rahab from
those that perished; and Ezekiel. 9. a Mark or Seal of Distinction, Security and
Preservation is put upon the Foreheads of those that were to be saved in that
common Destruction.

And the prime and great import of Sealing, is to signify, that the True Glory
which shall appear in Christ's Kingdom, the New Jerusalem; was to be covered,
and secured, while the false, and worldly Splendour and Glory of the
Antichristian Apostasy, was chiefly visible and predominant, the True
Worshippers being now in the Temple, the Witnesses in Sackcloath, and the Woman
in the Wilderness; which are all equivalent with these sealed ones.

7 Christ as Mediator, and Head of the Church, has a joint Relation to God with
his faithful Servants, John 20.17.

8 In allusion to the Custom of the Eastern Nations, who marked their Servants
on the Forehead: And hereby is signified a close concealment and security, when
the Foreheads, or Faces of his Servants are sealed, or hid; so that they could
not be known.

4 And I heard [and therefore am certain of what I relate;] the number of them
which were sealed [or concealed, and secured] and there were sealed, an 9
hundred forty and four thousand, of all the Tribes of Israel, [ i e a pure,
Apostolical Church was preserved, but in a hidden and secret condition; the
glorious appearance of Christ's Kingdom being stopped and hindered.]

9 Israel, in this Book (as has been before observed, on Chap. 2.9.) is put
for the pure Christian Church, propagated from the Twelve Apostles; as the
Israelitish Church was from the Twelve Patriarchs. And the Number 144000. is a
square Number, arising out of Twelve, the square Root of it, denoting the
Apostolical Doctrine to be the Root (Twelve times Twelve Thousand amounting to
One Hundred and Forty Four Thousand) and Foundation of the Church; and that the
pure Church is a square Body; because,

(1.) It can admit of no other Foundation than that of the Apostles; as this
square Number can admit of no other Root than Twelve: that is, it can be
produced by no other Number multiplied into it self; which is what is meant by
a square Root in Arithmetic.

(2.) Because the Church is to be built in all After-Ages, upon this Doctrine,
multiplied by it self only; as the square Number arises from the Root
multiplied into it self. And this is not to be accounted a groundless Fancy;
but is no small part of the Knowledge of the Eastern Nations, in which Solomon,
and Moses were skilled; who were wont to wrap up Mysteries in Hieroglyphics,
and Numbers, that they might be hid from the Vulgar, and known only by Persons
fitted and capacitated for them; and at suitable Times and Opportunities; it
not being convenient that some Truths should lie exposed to all, and at all
Seasons. And accordingly it has pleased God, for the same Reasons; and that
Humane Search and Diligence might be exercised and encouraged; to make use of
the same way of Concealment; to show that all Humane Knowledge is to be
subservient to Divine, and to his Church: Whereupon he has made frequent use
of the Number Twelve, in things pertaining to his People and the Church; the
Patriarchs being Twelve, the Tribes Twelve, the Gates of Jerusalem Twelve, and
the Apostles Twelve; and the Measures of the New Jerusalem being adapted to
this Number; for the Reasons before hinted, and for others, which we shall have
a fitter occasion to mention hereafter. See the Notes on Chap. 1.20. and 20, 4.

By these sealed ones, are meant a pure Apostolical Church, preserved from the
time of Constantine, under the Calamities of the Empire; and during the
continuance of the Apostasy; so as to be Witnesses against it, but in a hidden
and concealed Condition.

For (1.) They are said to be sealed; that is, preserved, (as we have shown)
but in a hidden Condition; as the Law is commanded to be bound up, and sealed,
Isa. 8.16. and the Words of Prophecy to be closed up, and sealed, Dan. 12.4, 9.
And the Church is said to be a Spring shut up, and a Fountain sealed, Canticl.
4.12. of which the Seven Thousand, which God had reserved to himself in secret,
and had preserved from the Idolatry of Baal, 1 Kings 19.18. are a Type.

(2.) This sealing immediately follows the Downfall of Paganism under
Constantine, at the opening of the Sixth Seal in the former Chapter; whereby is
signified, that some great danger was then near, that Christ should seal and
secure his True Church, so soon after their Delivery from Persecution. And the
History of those Times clearly testify, that the True Spirit of Christianity
soon decayed, upon the Peace, Honors, Privileges, and Prosperity which the
Church then enjoyed; and that the excessive Veneration they had for Saints and
Martyrs, gave Rise to the Apostasy; upon which the pure Church became sealed;
that is, shut up and concealed; and a stop was put to its appearance in that
true spiritual Glory, which it shall have under Christ's Kingdom; for its
degenerating by degrees into a Satanical Synagogue. For sealing denotes also
the Hindrances and Lets which Christ's Kingdom has met with, by its being
overpowered by the Apostasy; which at last advancing to a Throne, wholly
covered and hid it in an obscure and sealed State, no Church being at last
visible, but the Apostatized one.

(3.) It appears from the Third Verse, that the time of this sealing lasted
from Constantine, until the sounding of the first Trumpet; i. e. until the
Irruptions of the barbarous Nations after the Death of Theodosius the Great;
during which time the Apostolical Church was under a continual sealing; i. e.
its Visible State was daily obscured and covered; until at last by the
destruction of the Empire; and the rise of the Apostasy upon it; it was closely
sealed up in an invisible State.

5 Of the 10 Tribe of Judah 11 were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of
Reuben 12 were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Gad 13 were sealed
twelve thousand.

10 The Number of each Tribe is particularised, and determined; to show, that
the Members, of God's pure Church, are not chosen casually, and at all
Adventures; but are determined by God, and that out of every Tribe, or part of
the Catholic Church. And the Numbers of each Tribe are equal; viz. Twelve
Thousand to each; to show, that each particular Church is to be Apostolical in
the profession of the entire and perfect Doctrine delivered to them; and that
they are to be firm and stable in themselves; which is the Sea the Notes on
Chap. 20.4.
Mystical signification of a Cubical Dr. Moor's Cabbala. Nicom: Gerasen:
Arithmet. Theolo. apud Photii Biblioth. page 459.
Number, such as the Chiliads, or Thousands are, out of which each Tribe
consists.

11 It is the Opinion of Mr. Mede, that the Nature, Qualities, and
Circumstances of the pure Church, are included in the true Scripture-import,
and mystical meaning of the Names of the several Tribes; which I shall
therefore, in submission to his Opinion, insist upon more particularly; because
there is good ground in Micah 1.14. Matthew. 2.23. Romans 2.29.
Scripture for such Mystical Allusions, taken from Names. Judah is placed
first; because the Government was given to him in David; and Christ came of
that Tribe; which, for the Generality, kept to the public Worship of God, and
the Rightful Kingly Succession, when the others had cast it of, Hos. 11.12. 1 Chronicles. 5.2. Heb. 7.14.

His Name signifies Confession, or Praise, (Genesis 29, 35.49, 8.) whereby is
signified, that the pure Church ought to pay a Eucharistical Service of Praise
and Thanksgiving to God; and confess him openly and publicly in his Worship.

12 Reuben is the next, because although he lost his Birthright for defiling
his Father's Bed ( Genesis 49.4. 1 Chronicles. 5.1.) yet he showed great Courage,
together with Gad, in that Noble Resolution they made of passing over Jordan,
ready Armed before their Brethren, Numb. 32. The Name signifies, See the Son,
whom God out of his Joseph. Antiq. 1.19.
Mercy sent, when he saw, and had a respect unto our Afflictions, Genesis 29.32.
Whereby is intimated, that the Church ought to look up unto Christ in their
afflicted State, as God did upon them, in their desperate Condition, when he
sent his Son to redeem them.

13 Gad signifies a Troop, as is plain from Genesis 30.11. compared with Genesis
49.19. called so, because that being situated on the Borders of the Country,
it was to be always ready in Arms; and so should sometimes be overcome by its
Emies; but should at last overcome them: whereby the State of the Church
Militant, and of the Future Victorious State of the Kingdom of Christ,
notwithstanding its many seeming Foils and Delays of Conquest, is fitly
typified.

6 Of the Tribe of 14 Aser were sealed twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 15
Nepthali were sealed twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 16 Manasses were sealed
twelve Thousand.

14 Asher signifies blessed, because he was the cause that his Mother was
accounted happy and blessed, Genesis 30.13. and because he lived in a fruitful and
happy Soil, Genesis 49.20. Deuteronomy. 33.24. Whereby is signified the Delight which
Christ has in his Church; the Fruitfulness of it; and the Blessing which they
enjoy, who have God for their Lord, Psalm 144.12-15.

15 This is the Tribe in which our Savior was very conversant, his constant
Residence being in Galilee, and most frequently in Capernaum, a City of
Galilee, in the Tribe of Nepthali, as Mr. Mede has ingeniously observed; upon
which account Nepthali is placed before his Seniors, and has received so great
an Encomium from Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.23. The Word signifies, Genesis 30.8. very great
and vehement wrestlings, or Endeavors, joined with Josepho. (...).
Skill and Cunning; or Fair Words, Genesis 49.21. By which may be signified the
frequent Wrestlings of the Church with God in Prayer ( Genesis 32.24-32. Hos.
12.3, 4) and their wrestling against Flesh and Blood, and resisting the Wiles
of the Devil, and the Powers of Darkness, with a prudent Simplicity, joining
the Wisdom of the Serpent with the Harmlesness of the Dove.

16 Manasseh signifies forgetting; whereby is intimated, that God makes all
true Christians forget all their former Toil, when he gives them Comfort and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; and that whosoever would follow him, must forget and
forsake all his Father's House, and worldly Relations; which seems to be the
Gospel-import of the Words of Joseph, Genesis 41.51. and the thing for which Levi
is praised, Deuteronomy. 33.9.

7 Of the Tribe of Simeon 17 were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 18
Levi were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 19 Issachar were sealed
Twelve Thousand.

17 Simeon signifies Hearing; whereby is noted, that God hears the Prayers of
his Church; and the Hatred with which their Enemies hate them, Genesis 29.33.

18 Levi indeed had no portion in the Division of the Land (as Dr. Hammond
notes), yet in Christ their Portion was as good as any. Levi signifies joined;
for the Church, Christ's Spouse, is to be joined unto the Lord, in Spirit and
Fervent Affection, and not unto Idolatrous Harlots; which is the Spiritual
meaning of the Book of Canticles. Read Genesis 29.34. 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. Ephesians.
5.25-33. Deuteronomy. 33.9.

19 Issachar signifies, Genesis 30 17, 18. a Hire, or Reward given by God; as
appears from the Context; from whence Page 55.
Philo, makes him to be the Type of One whose Labors are Crowned and Rewarded
by God; and that (as Apud Rivetum in locum.
Jerome remarks) with a great Compensation for slight and small Performances,
of no greater Value than Mandrakes: by which the Rich Rewards which God bestows
upon his Church, for their imperfect Services, may be not unfitly set forth.

8 Of the Tribe of 20 Zabulon were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 21
Joseph were sealed Twelve Thousand, of the Tribe of 22 Benjamin were sealed
Twelve Thousand.

20 Zabulon signifies Dwelling, Genesis 30.20. which was the Tribe upon the
Borders of which our Savior himself dwelt, Matthew. 4.13. from which place,
diligently compared with Isa. 9.1. it may be gathered, that they shall have the
greatest share of Christ's Presence, who have undergone the greatest Misery and
Afflictions; and that he will come and dwell with the ignorant, but humble
person, rather than with self-conceited and proud Professors; as Christ dwelt
with the ignorant Galileans, rather than at Jerusalem; whether he went not but
upon some solemn Occasions. See Mr. Mede upon this place; and Isa. 57.15. John
14.23. Matthew. 9.13.

21 Joseph signifies, He will add, or adding, Genesis 10.24. for God daily adds to
his Church more Blessings, and continues his Grace to those who pray unto him,
and use their own diligent Endeavors, Genesis 30, 22.49, 22-26. Deuteronomy. 33.12-17.

22 Benjamin signifies, the Son of the Right Hand, Genes. 35.18. For the
Church, which was Benoni, or the Son of Sorrows unto Christ, as being purchased
by his Sufferings and Blood; is yet unto him, and his Father, a Benjamin; that
is, much loved and regarded, as the Phrase is interpreted, Deuteronomy. 33.12* as near
and dear to him as the Right Hand, the most Honorable of the Two; Upon which
account, the people of Israel are called, the Men of God's right hand, Psalm.
80.17.

And we may observe, that Dan is here wholly left out, and Ephraim not
mentioned by Name, because they both soon apostatized to Idolatry; it being a
Custom amongst the Jews to leave out of their Genealogies and Chronologies the
Names and Times of Wicked Persons; as Er and Onan, Judah's wicked Sons, are
omitted by Antiq. 2.7. Vossius de Sibyllin. Orac. cap. 1.
Josephus, when he reckons up his Posterity.

And although they are mentioned in Ezekiel, yet that was when the whole Church
was purified, and in its Jerusalem State; whereas at this present time of
Numbering, Dan and Ephraim were the Types of the Apostasy; and were therefore
to be omitted; and not to be mentioned, but when the Righteous amongst them had
been purified, and the Wicked had been purged away by God's Judgments.

9 23 After this [Vision of the Apostolical Church secured and concealed;] I
beheld, and lo a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations,
and Kingdoms, and People, and Tongues [i. e. the 24 Catholic Church of
Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 7.14, 27.] stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb
[in communion with God, and Christ in his Ki^gdom;] clothed with white Robes,
[denoting Honor and Purity,] and 25 Palms in their Hands [denoting Victory
over Persecutions and Temptations, and the Triumphs of Christ's Kingdom.]

23 The following Vision is taken from the Descriptions given in this Prophecy
of the New Jerusalem State in Christ's Kingdom, to which only it can, in
propriety of Speech, belong; as appears from the many high Expressions made use
of in it; and from the Elders (the Representatives of the Jewish Church) having
the Precedence; which will not be until the New Jerusalem State. And yet
because that Kingdom is not to come until the Days of the Voice of the Seventh
Angel, (who has not yet sounded) therefore this Description cannot belong to
the Kingdom it self, but to some Typical Resemblance, or Pre-appearance of it:
it being usual in this Prophecy (as I have already observed) for the Spirit to
describe the several Praeludia, or faint Resemblances, and imperfect
Appearances of Christ's Kingdom, by the State of the Kingdom it self; to show
what the Church ought and might have arrived to; and that his Kingdom should
have appeared of Right at those times; if a stop had not been put to it,
according to the determinate Counsels of God, and Christ's Submission unto
them, Dan. 12.7. For the Kingdom of Christ, which should have come in its
Glory, upon the Ascension of our Savior, was retarded by the Times allotted to
Paganism, and Antichristianism; and was thereupon delayed until the Time of the
End, (Dan. 12.) Only Christ at some certain seasons puts in, as it were, his
Claim to his Kingdom, by some more than ordinary Appearances of it. Now the
Appearance here referred to, seems to be plainly, that of the Christian Church,
under the Christian Empire; which was the next remarkable Event after the Fall
of Paganism, described at the close of the foregoing Chapter; and was so
glorious a one, that it might justly be described by the State of the Kingdom
it self; Paganism having been overthrown by it, the Church delivered from
Persecution, and exalted into an unexpected, and sudden State of Prosperity,
and the Man of Sin withheld for some time, 2 These. 2.6, 7. And yet becxuse this
glorious State of things would not continue long in purity, but would be soon
corrupted by Pride and Ambition, and by the bringing in of Pagan Rites into the
Church, under the Specious Pretenses of a well-meaning Prudence, and Zeal:
therefore it pleased God, to give an intimation of this early Corruption, by
sealing a pure Church, even before he gives the glorious appearance of the
Visible Church; that a competent Number of sealed Witnesses might be set apart,
and preserved betimes in purity and integrity; before their Minds could be
corrupted by the Glory and Honors of this Exalted Church; and by the Mystery
of iniquity, which had been working in secret for a long time, and was advanced
to a Satanical Synagogue, even in the foregoing times of Persecution.

24 Whereby is pointed out the great Number of Professors in the Christian
Empire.

25 A Psalm is the Symbol of Victory amongst all Nations; whence in Ezekiel's
Vision of the Temple, (Chapter 40, and 41.) Palm Trees are so often mentioned;
which signify the Conquests True Christians are to make over Sin and
Persecution, and the Conquest they had now gained over Paganism.

10 And cried with a loud 26 Voice [to denote the Affectionateness, and the
Public Freedom of their Worship;] saying, 26 Salvation be unto our God [i. e.
let the Glory of our Deliverance be ascribed unto him, the sole Author of it,
Psalm 3.8. Hos. 13.4.] which sits upon the Throne; and unto the Lamb [the
sole Purchaser of it; to them alone let it be given, and not unto our own
Merits, or any Creature.]

26 26 Hereby also is intimated the Public Freedem of Worship they enjoyed in
the Christian Empire; and their Deliverance from their Persecutors.

11 And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders, and
the four Beasts, and fell before the Throne on their Faces, and worshipped God
[i. e. all the whole Church, consisting of Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Jews and Christians, Heb. 12.22-24. joined in the Praise of God;]

12 Saying, Amen: Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and
Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our God, for ever and ever, Amen. [Chap.
4.8-11.5, 11-14.]

13 And one [or the first] of the Elders [or Representatives of the Jewish
Church, now fully instructed by the Christian, and one with it,] answered [or
said, Matthew. 11.25.] saying unto me [to excite my enquiry after a thing worthy
of it, and out of a desire to inform me;] what are these that are arrayed in
white Robes? and whence came they?

14 And I said unto him, Sir, thou know [for I do not, and am desirous to be
taught by thee.] And he said unto me, these are they which came out of 27 [the]
great Tribulation and have 28 washed their Robes [i. e. their imperfect
performances, Luke 15.22. Rev. 19.8.] and made them 29 white [or pure and
shining,] in the Blood of the Lamb [Christ; i. e. they are purified, delivered,
and rewarded by Gods acceptance of their actions and sufferings, upon Christ's
Merits, Isa. 52.1.]

27 With reference to the New Jerusalem State, this Tribulation (noted with a
double Greek Article, The Tribulation, The Great, to show the Remarkableness of
it) refers to the Days of extraordinary Trouble, mentioned, Dan. 12. Matthew. 24.
Mark 9. and Luke 21. which shall precede Christ's Kingdom, perhaps at the
pouring forth of the seventh Vial, and the Earthquake attending it; from which
the Saints shall be delivered: but with reference to the Christian Empire, it
has a relation to the Ten Days Tribulation under Diocletian, mentioned ( Chap.
2.10.) from which they were delivered by Constantine, and to their Escape from
out of the Great Day of God's Wrath against Paganism, Chap. 6.17.

28 These are the Saints and Martyrs who had white Robes given them, Chap.
6.11. and were bid to tarry, in expectation of Christ's Kingdom, which they,
and their Successors here enjoy: whereby is set forth the Advancement of the
before Persecuted Church, and of its Confessors and Witnesses.

29 They are made White or Shining by his Blood; as Wool receives a more Noble
and shining Color by being died in Purple. And here is an Allusion to Joshua's
Change of filthy Garments, and his putting on White and Clean Priestly
Vestments; as these Saints do here in Christ's Kingdom, in which they are
Priests unto God and Christ.

15 Threfore [because they persevered under Persecution, and trusted in
Christ's Merits,] are they before the Throne of God [in communion with him, and
under his particular care in a State of Prosperity;] and serve him 30 Day and
Night [i. e. continually and incessantly;] in his Temple [of the New Jerusalem,
in the General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn;] and he that sits on
the Throne [i. e. God,] shall dwell among them [or pitch his Tent amongst them;
i. e. they shall be his people, and he will afford them his continual Presence,
Conduct aad Defense, Isa. 4. Ezekiel. 48.35. John 1.14. Rev. 3, 12.21, 3. 2 Cor.
6.16. Levit. 26.12.]

30 A Metaphor taken from the constant Service and Attendance of the Priests
and Levites in the Temple; some of which were always present in it Day and
Night, 1 Chronicles. 9.33. Psalm. 135.1, 2. Luke 2.37.

16 They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more [that is, they shall
always enjoy God's Ordinances, and his Gifts and Graces, Isa. 49.10. John
4.13.6, 27.] neither shall the 31 Sun light on them, nor any [scorching] heat
[i. e. they shall be delivered from Persecutions and Sufferings, Isa. 49.10.
Psalm 121.6, 7.]

31 The Jews express all manner of inconveniences by Heat; because of its
Extremity in those Eastern parts, both from the Sun and burning Winds, Jonas
4.9.

17 For the Lamb which is in [or about] the midst of the Throne [i. e. Christ,]
shall feed them, and shall lead them [as a good Shepherd Psalm 24.1, 4. John
4.10-14. and 21.15-17.] unto 32 living Fountains of Waters [i. e. perpetual
Comforts and Refreshments, Isa 12 3. John 7.38] and God shall wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes [i. e. remove all Causes and Occasions of Sorrow.]

32 So the Jews call Fountains, continually bubling and springing up, Canticl.
4.15. John 4 10.

CHAP. VIII.
The Text.
1 AND when he [i. e. Christ,] had opened the seventh Seal, there was silence 1
in Heaven about the space of * half an hour [i. e. there was a short respite
from the commotions which followed upon the Sounding of the Trumpets.]

Annotations on CHAP. VIII.
1 The Metaphors here are taken from the Mr. Mede. Hammond on Luke 1.1.
Ainsworth on Lev. 16.12, 13.
Temple-Service, (which shows that Church Affairs are here typified, as well as
those of the Empire) in which, at the offering of Incense, the People prayed
without in the Court in private; whilst the Priest offered the Incense; which
Prayers were very short, and the whole Service performed in silence: whereas
the offering of Sacrifice, the first part of their Service, was accompanied
with Singing, Music and Trumpets, 2. Chron. 29.25.

* See on Ver. 7. Number. 11.

2 And I saw the seven Angels which stood 2 before God, [as ready to execute
his Pleasure;] and to them were given [by God's appointment,] seven 3 Trumpets
[to denounce seven Judgments.]

2 These are expressly called Angels, and not The Spirits of God, whereby they
are distinguished from the Seven Spirits, Chap. 1.4. And by these Seven
standing before God, is denoted the Preparedness of the several Instruments and
Means required to the executing of God's Judgments by the Seven Trumpets: and
also the Majesty of the Divine Presence is expressed by them, in allusion to
the Custom of the Eastern Kings (from whose Rites many of the Descriptions in
Scripture are taken) who had Seven Princes, who saw their Faces, or stood
before them, and were the Chief in their Kingdoms, Esther 1.14. Grotius on
Matthew. 18.10.

3 Here is an Allusion also to the Temple Service; where it was the Custom to
blow with Trumpets after the Oblation of Incense (as appears from Ecclus.
50.15, 16.) strict Silence being observed before it: as here the Angels have
Trumpets given them, to prepare to sound, but sound not until the Incense was
offered.

Angel signifies in this Prophecy, not only the Angelical Spirits, but also the
subordinate Ministers employed under them here upon Earth; as has been before
shown on Chap. 1.1, 20. And therefore here may be meant by this Angel, the
Emperor Theodosius, who is the Chief Person concerned in this Vision, as we
shall show hereafter; whose Prayer, at the Head of his Army before the Battle
with Eugenius, is very remarkable in History; and also the whole Christian
Church, which joined with him in Prayer to God upon that great Occasion: Angel
being taken Collectively in this Book, for all the several Instruments made use
of in it.

3 And another Angel [or Ministering Spirit, representing the Persons employed
in the like service on Earth;] came and stood at [or, by] the Altar [of
incense; Exodus 30.1. having a Golden Censer [or Vessel to hold Incense, Levit.
16.12. Hebr. 9.4.] and there was 4 given unto him much Incense [Levit. 16.12,
13. Rev. 5.8.] that he should Offer it with the Prayers of all Saints 5 [or
Holy Chrians;] upon the Golden Altar [of Incense, Exodus 30, 3, 6, 7.40, 26.]
which was 6 before the Throne [of God.]

4 Here may be an Allusion to a Custom in the Jewish Service, of bringing the
Odors to the Priest by others, Exodus 27.20. See Maimonides in Ainsworth on
Levit. 24.2.

5 Here is also an Allusion to the High Priests offering Incense in the Temple,
while the People, called here, All Saints, i. e. the Holy and Peculiar People
of God; prayed in the Outward Court. And by what is here delivered. and in the
former Verses, is intimated, that the daily Public Sacrifice of pure Worship,
which was wont to be performed in the Outward Court, should cease, and was
about to be contracted into a retired, and a silent one, signified by the
Silence, Verse. 1. and the Incense-Worship which was within the Temple: and that
although the Saints, or Holy People, were as yet without, in the Outward Court,
not yet trodden down by Antichristian Defilements; that nevertheless it would
not be long (but about half an hour, or a short space) before that, also (which
was a Type of the Visible Church, and its Worship) should be polluted by them;
concerning which Allusion, and the Grounds of it, see more on Chap. 11.1.

6 As the Altar of Incense in the Temple, was before the Mercy-seat, Exodus
30.6, 7.40, 26.

4 And the smoke of the Incense [Chap. 5.8.] which came with the Prayers of the
Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels hand, [i. e. they were
grateful and acceptable unto him through the Merits, and Intercession of
Christ, Psalm. 141.2. Acts 10.4.]

5 And the Angel took the censer [which was now empty, the Incense being
consumed and their Prayers ended;] and filled it with fire from the Altar [of 7
Sacrifice or Burnt-Offerings;] and cast it [i. e. dispersed God's Judgment, and
fiery Indignation, Ezekiel. 10.2. Luke 12.49.] upon the Earth [i. e. the Roman
Empire; and there were 8 Voices, and Thundrings, and Lightnings [Chap. 4.5.]
and an Earthquake [i. e. extraordinary Commotions in the Empire, and great
Manifestations of Christ's Kingdom, Chap. 6.12.]

7 For there was a continual Fire on the Altar of Sacrifice, but none on the
Altar of Incense. See Ainsworth on Exodus 30.8 and on Lev. 6.12, 13. This
Service was performed in the Temple; but the Fire was taken off the Altar of
Burnt Sacrifice in the Outward Court; to show that God's Judgments (represented
by Fire, which denotes in Scripture any destructive thing) came upon them, by
Reason of the Gentilism, or Antichristian Pollutions of the Outward Court, or
Visible Church.

8 The other Seals having been distinguished by some notable Events in the
Empire; it is reasonable to think that this is so too; and there is none which
agrees better to it than the Wonderful Victory S^^a^. Hist. 5.25. Sozom. 7.24.
Howel 's History, Part 2. page 427 --
of Theodosius over Eugenius, A. D. 395.

Because, (1.) It follows in order the Event foretold in the sixth Seal, this
Victory giving the Deadly Blow to Heathenism, and perfecting what was begun by
Constantine, and some of his Successors under that Seal.

(2.) Because the following Trumpets (denoting the fall of the Empire) began to
produce their Effects not long after this Defeat: So that it exactly
corresponds, as a middle Event, with the foregoing and following ones.

(3.) The Vengeance of God fell extraordinarily upon the Pagans; and their
Defeat by a wonderful Tempest was miraculous; as Claudian the Heathen Poet
confesses, and as the Soldiers, who were present at the Battle, told (...)
^i^itat. D^i 5.26.
Augustine: which is very naturally expressed by Fire cast by an Angel from
Heaven upon Earth; Fire being a general ^^^ck on Joel 1.19.
word in Scripture, for all manner of Mischiefs and Destructions.

(4.) This Victory was followed with the entire Destruction of Heathenism; in
which appeared an extraordinary Manifestation of Christ's Kingdom; of which
Thunderings and Lightnings, and an Earthquake, are usual Forerunners in this
Prophecy.

(5.) This Victory was obtained at the Prayers of the Christians; Theodosius
having solemnly prayed to God for it, in a Public Church, when he set forward
to the Army; and earnestly begging it at the Hands of God upon his Knees, at
the Head of his Army, in the very Day of Battle; the whole Church in the mean
while observing solemn Fasts, and putting up their united Prayers to God for
his Success; which being their constant Custom, was without doubt, observed on
this extraordinary occasion; as seems to be intimated by Lib. 7.24. in fin.
Sozomen: All which is manifestly here typified by the Offering of the Prayers
and Incense of all Saints, and its Ascent before God.

6 And the seven Angels, which had the seven 9 Trumpets, prepared 10 themselves
[that men might repent during the time of that preparation,] to sound [an Alarm
of Judgments, Jerem. 4.19. Ezekiel 33.1-6.]

9 Trumpets See Ainsworth on Numb. 10. and Pocock on Joel 2.1, 15.
were used amonst the Jews on several occasions; as,

(1.) In the several Journeyings, and Removes of their Camp in the Wilderness;
whereby is not unfitly typified the several Motions of the Church in its
Wilderness-Condition, upon the sounding of the Trumpets by the Angels in this
Prophecy.

(2.) In calling the Ordinary Assemblies, and on Feast Days, and New Moons; and
on their Fast Days, when they were (according to the Observation of Maimonides)
to sound Trumpets for Fasting and Prayer, because of the Enemies of Israel,
which were coming against Israel; and because of the Approaching Winds, Rain,
and Earthquakes, Wars of Heathens with Heathens, and Pestilences, Locusts, and
Caterpillars; and because of other Distresses, mentioned out of him, by
Ainsworth.

So that the Trumpets given to the Angels, and their preparation to sound, may
be as an Admonition to the Empire, to Repent, in order to the diverting of
Judgments.

Lastly, Trumpets were used in sounding Alarms, in time of War; whence they
signify in the Prophets a Denunciation of Judgments, and a warning of the
imminent Approach of them; as they do in this place.

10 They had Trumpets given them, Verse 2. and here they prepare to sound; by
taking (as it were) their Trumpets into their Hands, and putting them to their
Mouths; whereby a Respite and Delay is signified, from the actual Execution of
the Judgment; or some lesser Judgments, preparatory to the great and fatal
ones: according to the proceedings of the Merciful, but Just God; who, after
Judgments threatened, gives time and space of Repentance; and punishes lightly,
before he comes to utter Excision.

7 [And after some short space of Quiet and Respite, Verse. 1.] The first Angel
sounded, and there followed 11 Hail and Fire mingled with Blood [i. e. a
wasting, and bloody Devastation,] and they were cast upon the 12 Earth, [i. e.
the Roman Empire,] and the third 13 part of 14 Trees [i. e. the great ones,
Isa. 2.13. Zach. 11.2.] was burnt up, and all green Grass [i. e. the common
People.]

11 This is a Description of a Thunder-storm; in which there is Blood instead
of Rain, to make the Type more dreadful: And it is an Allusion taken from the
Plague of Hail in Egypt, Exodus 9.22-35. whereby is signified a Furious and
Bloody Irruption, laying all things waste before it; as Fields and Trees are
wont to be, by a raging and blasting Tempest. The like Scheme of Speech is made
use of by Isaiah, (Chap. 28.2.) in describing the Invasion of the King of
Assyria, which he likens to a destroying Tempest of Hail, and an overflowing
Flood of mighty Waters; only Blood is here added instead of Water, to show the
Greatness of the Slaughter, which should attend it. And what fitter Metaphors
could be used to set forth the terrible Inundations of the Barbarous Nations
upon the Roman Empire; which happened in the Course of this Trumpet? For we are
to understand, that the Grotii Prolegom. ad Procop. Sherringham de Anglorum
Origin. Loccennius de Gothorum and Sueon. Orig. Howel 's History, Part 4. Cap.
1.
Goths (which seems sometimes to be used as a General Name for these Barbarous
People) were originally a People of Scythia; who coming from thence, and having
seated themselves in Scandza, or Scanzia (which comprehends Sweedland, Norway,
and the vast Tracts of Land adjoining) at length, in process of time, about
Three Hundred Years before Christ; upon the occasion of a Famine, Wars, their
great increase, or the desire of a better Soil, the usual Causes of the
Transmigration of Nations; left that Country: and after long Wanderings (from
whence they were afterward called Vandals, that is, Wanderers) through Germany
and Sarmatia, as far as the Palus Maeotis, one part of them settled there, and
were called Getae; and the other, but the greatest part of them, returned from
thence, and took up their Habitation in Dacia and Thrace; from whence they seem
to have made their first Incursions under Pagi in Baron:
Philip, or Decius, about A. D. 251. After several Fights with them in the
Times of Constantine, Valens, and Valentinian; immediately upon the Death of
Theodosius the Great, they fell like a mighty Torrent into the Roman Empire:
They first harrassed the Eastern parts of it under Alarich, about A. D. 395.
for about five Years together; and about A. D. 405. a vast number of them,
under Radagaisus, invaded Italy; who was followed by Alarich, who took Rome on
the 24th of August, A. D. 410. a great multitude of them, mixed with other
Barbarous People, having overrun Gaul, Spain, and Africa, at the instigation
of Stilicho, about the same time that Alarich first invaded Italy, A. D. 406.
From the Invasion begun by Alarich, Italy enjoyed but little Quiet, daily steps
being made to its utter Ruin (some of which were as Preparations to the
sounding of the Trumpets,) first by the Goths, then by the Huns, under Attila,
and by the Vandals under Genserick; who from the Year 430. miserably wasted
Italy, and the Provinces, especially about A. D. 455. when Genserick took Rome
which is accounted a fatal Howel 's Histor. Part 2. Page 692, 693. Mr. Mede,
Page 659.
Year, and styled by some, the Year of Vengeance: But upon the Death of Aetius,
Provinces were daily lost to the Barbarians, and the Roman Empire, which
declined from the Death of Theodosius, received a Mortal Wound; under which it
lay languishing until it expired under Augustulus, about A. D, 476. So that we
have here a famous Period of Time, from the Victory of Theodosius, upon which
his Death ensued, A. D. 395, until 476: which seems to be called One Hour, or
One entire Space, or Line of Time (for so (...) signifies, Chapter 9.15, Rev.
17.12. And therefore about half of that space seems here to be signified by
about half an hour; which will reach from 395, unto 437; which is about the
half of this whole Line of Time; and falls upon that Time, when the Barbarous
Nations (who had been before often successfully repulsed) began to make their
most Furious Impressions upon the Roman Provinces on all sides, under the weak
Government of a Woman, Placidia, the Empress, and her Son Valentinian, who was
a Child when he began to Reign; insomuch that Genserick came then to be so
powerful, as that he severely persecuted the Orthodox, from the very Year
Ricciol. Chronol.
437. unto 476. when he died. And furthermore, it is very remarkable, that
about 430, and odd, the Apostasy, which began in Image Worship, about 360.
palpably increased, as Mr. Page 589.
Mede has observed. So that the Year 437. is very remarkable on all Hands, as
being about the middle Point, or about half of the whole Hour, or Era,
reaching from the entire Defeat of Heathenism, to the entire Fall of the
Western Empire; and because it may be justly accounted the Exact Year from
which the actual sounding of the Trumpets are to be reckoned; which were but in
preparation from 395. until that time: and also because it may be with great
Reason thought to be the beginning of the Antichristian Apostasy; which from
that time generally increased, until it gained a Kingdom with the Ten Kings
arising out of the Ruins of the Roman Empire, A.D. 476. and that at One Hour,
that is, One entire Hour made up of Two Halves, the first reaching from 395, to
437. the latter, at the End of which this Kingdom began, from thence to 476.
See on Chap. 11, 2.13.5.17, 12.

12 The Fourth Kingdom, which is the Roman Empire, is called, Dan. 7.23 The
Kingdom upon the Earth, to distinguish it from Christ's Kingdom, the Heavenly
and Everlasting Kingdom: and Luke 2.1. it is called, all the World or Earth,
because most of the then Known World was subject to it.

13 It is the Opinion of Mr. Mede, that by the Fourth of the Earth, (Chap.
6.8.) is meant almost all the Roman Empire; which, upon due Compute ( says Dr.
Moor) was then one third part of the Earth; upon which account they take the
Third part to be the Symbolical and Cabbalistical Character of the Roman
Empire, according to the Genius of this Mystical Book, and the Custom of the
Ancient Eastern Nations, who gave Characters from Numbers and Proportions. But
to interpose a Conjecture, not altogether groundless; I am apt to imagine, that
as the Roman Empire is called the Fourth, Chap. 6.8. whilst it had its Imperial
Seat fixed at Rome, the Head then of the Fourth Kingdom: So that after
Constantine removed the Seat of the Western Empire to Constantinople, it is
called the Third; because its Imperial Seat was then in the Greek or Eastern
part of the Roman Empire; which was the Third Kingdom of the Earth, in Daniel.
From which time Constantinople, or New Rome, became the Chief Seat of the Civil
Empire, Old Rome being abandoned to the New Ecclesiastical Empire of the Pope;
the Western Emperors seldom coming at it, and by degrees leaving it to them:
So that even the Western Empire may be Charactered by the Third, because that
Old Rome, the Chief Seat of it, and of the Transactions of this Vision, had
lost its Civil Imperialism over the Fourth part of the Earth, and was now
forced to truckle to the third part, or Constantinopolitan Roman Empire; where
the Chief Majesty of the Empire was seated; Old Rome being never able to gain
its Pre-eminence; and the Ruin of its Civil Jurisdiction being owing to this
Action of Constantine; which will appear also the more probable, if we
consider, that the Rise and Fall of Empires is dated in Prophecy, from the like
Fate of the Imperial Seats of them. See Chap. 9, 15.12, 4.

14 This is taken from Exodus 9.25. where we read, that the Thunder Storm of
Hail smote every Herb of the Field, and broke every Tree of the Field: By which
is here signified all the Members and People of the Roman Empire, denoted by
Metaphors taken from those things which suffer most by Storms: And Trees here,
according to the Prophetical Scheme of Speech, signify the Great Ones; and
Grass, by the like Analogy, signifies the Common People.

8 And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great 15 Mountain [or City,
Jerem. 51.25.] burning with fire, was cast into the Sea; and the third part of
the Sea [i. e. the Roman Empire] became Blood 16 [ i. e. was ravaged with
bloody Wars, Exodus 7.17, 18.]

15 This Type is taken from Jerem. 51.25. where it is used concerning Babylon;
by which all along in this Book, Rome is understood. A Mountain denotes a
Kingdom, or a City, from its Strength, and Lofty Edifices and Towers; as
Annotators have observed on Isa. 13.2. Jerem. 51.25. Zechar. 4.7. And the Sea
signifies a Body Politic; because Seas are in Scripture Phrase, a gathering
together of Waters, which in this Book are put to denote People, and
Multitudes, as appears from Chap. 18.15. And therefore by the Type in this
Verse, the Confusions and Desolations (represented by the Psalmist, Psalm 46.2.
by Mountains carried into the midst of the Sea) which the State and City of
Rome then lay under, may be fitly signified; it being at this time, as a great
Mountain burning in the Sea, but not actually burnt; that is, in a consuming
Condition, but not utterly destroyed.

For (1.) Zosim. Oros. August. Civit. 5. 23.
Radagaisus was entirely defeated by Stilicho, and he himself, and almost his
whole Army, was destroyed by Sword or Famine: Stilicho being made an Instrument
by God of preserving the Empire; when he designed nothing but his own Interest,
and the usurping of it; which appeared also in another Memorable Instance, when
he Zosim. Oros. Hieron. Rubeus Hist. Raven. lib. 2.
saved the Empire from total ruin, by succouring Saul, the General of the
Army, under him, at the very time that he was put to flight by Alarick.

(2.) When Oros. lib, 7. Socrat. 7.10. Sozom. 9.6-9. Jornand. Cap. 30.
Alarick took Rome, he sacked indeed and rifled it; but burnt only some part of
it, and that contrary to the wonted Custom of the Goths, as Jornandes has
particularly observed; and left the large Church of Peter entire, for an Asylum
for the Christians.

(3.) When Athaulphus, the Goth, not long after, had pillaged Rome, and was
resolved entirely to root out the whole Roman Power; he was opportunely
diverted by Placidia, the Emperor's Sister, and persuaded to make a Petav.
Ration. Temp. lib. 6.
Peace, and retire into Spain; where he married her, A. D. 414.

(4) Attila the Hun, and Genserick the Vandal, were both hindered from firing
and destroying Rome, by the Eloquence and Prudent Behavior of Leo the Great:
And Procop. page, 359, 360, 398, 474. ex ed. Grotii.
Totilas, who had resolved to burn it, and raze it to the Ground, was diverted
by an Embassay from Belisarius; and when he afterward retook it, he rebuilt
what he had burnt and destroyed of it. So that this City, which had been so
often taken and rifled, and was so often in a burning Condition; was kept, as a
burning Mountain in the midst of Waters, continually resisting the Fire, which
would have consumed it; and will be so preserved by God, until the time of its
final Deshruction; in which, this City answers to its Type Babylon; which after
it was taken, and pillaged by Cyrus, remained nevertheless in some sort of
Glory, until the Times of Alexander; as Rome, after its first being sacked by
Alarick, continually recovered it self again; although not to the degrees of
it is former Magnificence. And as the City, so also the Empire, although
miserably harassed, was yet preserved from utter destruction, during the Period
of this Trumpet; but as a burning Mountain cast into the Sea, amidst the
contrary struglings of the People, some seeking to destroy it; others to
preserve it: the Barbarous Nations themselves contributing thereunto; as the
Goths did, by helping it against the Huns, Vandals and Sueves.

16 For these Barbarous Procop. Gothic. page 6. 512. ex edit. Grotii.
Invaders were very bloody; killing all they met, Young and Old, Women and
Children.

9 And the third part af the 17 Creatures which were in the Sea, and had Life
[i. e. the Fishes; which represent the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Roman
Jurisdictiction, Ezekiel. 29.4.] died 18 [as to their ancient Polity, they being
not now one entire Jurisdiction;] and the third part of the 19 Ships [that is,
Cities; or Goods and Merchandise;] were destroyed.

17 The Type of a Mountain being thrown into the Sea, is here further alluded
unto; And hereby is signified, that the great Mountain, or City of Rome, being
in hazard of being destroyed and consumed by its being taken and pillaged; the
Sea, or People of the Civil State, into whose contrary strivings and struglings
it was thrown, as into the Waves of the Sea, must needs suffer extremely by it;
both in their Persons, denoted by the Living Creatures of the Sea; and in their
Goods and Estates, denoted by Ships; as Metaphors most proper to the Sea, from
whence this Emblem is taken.

18 This came to pass when the Provinces of the Roman Empire about A. D. 455.
(the time when Genserick also took Rome) were divided into several Kingdoms, by
the Northern Nations, which broke into it; which is the Death of a Civil State,
when it ceases to be what it was before.

19 Cities are to a Country as Ships to the Sea; the Places wherein Men Live
and Traffic; and wherein they are fortified against Enemies, as by Ships
against the Violence of the Sea, says Dr. Hammond on the place. But Grotius's
Exposition seems to me more apposite; for, as Sea signifies People, so (says
he) Ships must, by the same Analogy, signify their Goods or Movables.

10 And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star from Heaven,
burning, as it were a Lamp 20 [denoting the fall of the 21 Western Emperor,
Isa. 14.12.] and it fell upon the third part of the 22 Rivers [i. e. upon the
Co ntries and Provinces, Magistrates, and Armies of the Roman Empire,
represented by Rivers, Ezekiel. 32.2-6.] and upon the Fountains 23 of Waters [i.
e. the Capital Cities.]

20 This is a plain Description of that sort of Comets, or falling Stars, which
for the Figure of them are called Plin. Not. Hist. 2.25, 35. Hevelii
Cometograph. page 442. where the Figures of them may be seen.
Lampadias.

21 The most remarkable Division Ricciol. Chronol. Reform.
of the Roman Empire into the Eastern and Western (whose bounds you may see in
Procopius Page 1, 2.
Vandalick History,) begun, (upon a Decree of Theodosius) Jan. 17. A.D. 395.
when Arcadius reigned in the East, having his Seat at Constantinople; and
Honorius in the West: After which time the Empire never came entirely into the
Hands of one Monarch. Now this Western Empire ceased under Augustulus, A.D.
476. when Odoacer became King of Italy, and translated the Seat of the Empire
from Rome to Ravenna; after it had enjoyed the Imperial Dignity, for 521. Years.

22 A Type taken from One of the Plagues of Egypt, Exodus 7.17-22.

23 As Seas and Waters signify the People, so do Fountains Capital Cities;
from whence the People are derived into Colonies and Provinces.

11 And the Name of the Star is called 24 Wormwood [denoting the bitter
Afflictions which he, and the Empire felt under him, R^^h 1.20. Jerem. 9 15.]
and the third part of the Waters [i.e the People of the Roman Empire] became
Wormood [i. e. were grievousl^ afflicted, and their Lives became bitter unto
them;] and many m^n died of the Waters [i. e. by mutual Slaughters, and by the
grievous Afflictions the Empire then suffered, Lament 3.15. Acts 8.23. Heb.
12.15.]

24 After the Death of Aetius and Valentinian, A. D. 455. the Western Empire
suffered extremely under weak and short-lived Princes; and by the Incursions of
the Huns, Goths, and other Barbarous Nations, into Italy, and the Roman
Provinces; especially of Odoacer with his Herulians (a People of Seythia, who
had seated themselves in Pannonia) who extinguished the Roman Empire; which
brought infinite Miseries, and a most heavy, and bitter Servitude upon the
whole People; Procop. Gothic. Hist. page 139. Jornand. de reb. Getic. cap. 46.
Augustulus (so called, because he came very young to the Empire) being also
banished, and imprisoned. Whose Fall from Imperial Dignity is aptly represented
by the Fall of a Star from Heaven, according to the like Allusion, Isaiah 14.12
--

12 And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part [Verse 7.] of the Sun [i.
e. the Roman Kingly Dignity,] was smitten [or, kided 25 and destroyed] and the
third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars [i. e. the other
inferior Powers;] so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone
not for a third part of it, and the night likewise [i e. the whole 26 Roman
dignity, and authority, was totally Eclypsed, see Chap. 6.12, 13, 14.]

25 For so to smite signifies in very many places of Scripture; it being
rendered sometimes by Killing; as Exodus 2.12.

26 Odoacer, the Herulian, reigned Sixteen Years, as King of Italy; when he was
conquered by Theodorick the Goth, who took that Title A. D. 493. and reigned
Thirty Three Years with great Prudence and Moderation, toward the Romans,
preserving the Authority of the Senate, and Consuls, and their other Dignities
and Customs; which his Successors, the Gothish Kings of Italy for some time
observed; whose Reign continued for about Seventy Six Years. But Justinian the
Emperor having made War upon Italy, for regaining it from the Goths; after it
had suffered miserably by a dreadful Famine, and a Bloody War under Totilas; it
was at last joined to the Eastern Empire: the Kingly Power being extinguished,
and Narses made Governor of it for Justinian; about A.D. 553. who being
removed from his Government after sixteen Years Administration of it; Longinus
was advanced to it, under the Title of Exarch of Ravenna, A. D. 569. When the
Consuls entirely ceased, and the Authority of the Senate was abolished; and
Rome, the Mistress of the World, became a Duchy, and was subject to Ravenna:
at which time also the Kingdom of the Lombards (who came Originally from
Scanzia into Pannonia) began in Italy, which lasted until A. D. 756. after
which, Charles the Great, who beat the Lombards out of Italy, was created
Emperor of the Romans, by Pope Leo, Dec. 25. A. D. 800. all which time Rome
was under the Government of the Papacy; as we shall see hereafter.

13 And I beheld, and heard an Angel flying [to denote speed] through the midst
of Heaven [i. e. in the meridian height of it that he might be seen, and heard
of all;] saying with a loud voice [audibly, and terribly,] Woe, 27 Woe, Woe, to
the Inhabitants of the Earth, by reason of the voices of the Trumpets of the
three Angels, which are yet to sound.

27 Here the extreme Misery, which the Empire was to suffer by the Saracens and
Turks, Chap. 9.12. and the Apstasy, Chap. 11.14. is foretold. Under the Angels
in this Chapter, are included (according to an Observation frequently made) all
those Faithful Servants of Christ, who witnessed to his Truths, and against the
Rising Antichristianism in the Church, during the Time and Course of the
Trumpets; and of the preparation to the sounding of them. Such were, amongst
many others;

(1.) Gregory Nyssen, who was a married Man; and wrote an excellent Dr. Cave's
Lives of the Fathers, Vol. 2. in the Append. page 45.
Epistle against Pilgrimages to the Holy Land.

(2.) Gregory Dr. Cave, Vol. 2. page 322, 326.
Nazianzen; who was so mightily offended with the Quarrels and Contentions of
Bishops and Councils, that he refused to come to a Synod at Constantinople,
saying, That Experience had sufficiently taught him how little good was to be
expected from Synods; and then resigned his Bishopric, which he said, he knew
not, whether to style a Tyrannical, or an Archiepiscopal Dignity; and testified
against the excessive State, Power, and Honors of the Clergy, freely Tom. 1.
page 61, 62. Orat. 1. adv. Julian.
confessing, That the Mischiefs of the Church in his Time proceeded from thence.

(3) Ambrose, who was a stout Defender of Discipline, Cave 's Lives, page 409,
410.
exercising it even upon the Great Emperor Theodosius; who with an
extraordinary Meekness and Penitence submitted unto it.

(4.) Dr. Cressener's Demonstrat. of the Apocal. in Append. page 13.
Jerome, Theodoret, Andreas Caesariensis, Arethas, and others, who plainly
testify, That Rome was to be the Seat of Antichrist; as does also Cressener,
ibid, page 30.
Augustine, and Chrysostom Cressener, ibid. page 30.
; who were excellent Witnesses to many great Truths in this Succession; the
former Augustine. Epist. ad Januar. lib. 2. Ep. 55.
complaining exceedingly of the increase of Ceremonies in his Time, and
confessing, that a more than Jewish Servitude was brought in by them; which
Expression gives light to the Reason, why the prevaling party of this
Succession, is called the Synagogue of Satan, Chapter 2.9. Although it must be
confessed, that these, and the other Great Men of this Period of the Church,
contributed much to the increase of its Corruptions; which the best of Men may
do, when God permits such Deviations from the Simplicity of the Gospel to
prevail; and does not withhold Men from being carried away with them by his
more than ordinary Restraints.

(5.) Salvian, Gildas, and the other Authors, who wrote concerning the
Invasions of the Barbarous Nations, and lived in those Times, do loudly
testify against the Vices and Corruptions of them; as also Gregory the Great,
who was a most Eminent Witness of the Approach of Antichrist in his Time; as
will be shown in the beginning of the Annotations on the next Chapter; as were
also all those Excellent Persons, who testified, during the fifth and sixth
Trumpet, against the Worship af Images, and other Corruptions; for which God
brought these Woes upon the Church. See the Protestants who have gathered
Catalogues of Witnesses, and the laborious Collections of Monsieur Allix, in
his Accounts of the Albigenses and Waldenses.

CHAP. IX.
The Text.
1 AND the fifth Angel sounded, and I saw a Star [i. e. an 1 Angel or Minister
of the Church, Rev. 1.20.] fall [or fallen,] from Heaven unto the Earth [i. e.
Apostatized from a Christian Church state, to a worldly Kingdom;] and to him
was given [by the Order, and Disposition of events, according to God's allwise
Disposals;] the Key of the bottomless Pit [i. e. a Satanical Kingdom, and an
Antichristian Authority, Rev. 2.24.]

Annotations on CHAP. IX.
1 Here the Papacy is described.

(1.) Because that which appeared, is said to be a Star; which is the Symbol of
the Gospel Ministry, Chap. 1.20.

(2.) It is said to be the Star that was fallen from Heaven; which cannot refer
to Mahomet, who never had any Place in Heaven; i. e. any Place or Dignity in
the Church; or any Dignity at all, from which he might be said to have fallen.

(3) This Star is said to have fallen from Heaven to Earth, and then to have a
New Dignity bestowed upon him; whereby it is evident, that the fallen Star,
mentioned Chap 8.10. cannot be here understood; because that Star fell upon the
Waters, this upon the Earth; and that was a Comet, this a Star, which fell from
one Power to another; whereas the other was in a burning and consuming
Condition, bereft of all Power.

(4.) This fallen Star is said to have the Keys of the bottomless Pit given
unto him; that is, a Satanical Authority, consisting of a Synagogue, a Throne,
and Depths of Satan; which being proper to the Apostasy, especially the Papacy;
ought here also to be understood concerning it: For as (according to the
Observation of Dr. Apud Poli Synops. in locum.
Lightfoot,) the Keys of Heaven were given to Peter, when a Door of Salvation
was to be opened to the Gentiles, by his Preaching, and Erecting the first
Christian Church; so when the Christian World was about to fall, as it were,
into its former Gentilism, the Key of the bottomless Pit was given to
Antichrist.

(5.) This Star is said to be already fallen, at the time that the Pit was
opened, and the Locusts (that is, the Saracens) came out of it. Now the Rise of
the Saracens is placed, by all Historians, in A.D. 622. when the Era of the
Hegira, or Flight of Mahomet began; and the Rise of Antichristianism in the
Latin Church, as to the Point of Supremacy, is generally placed by Protestants,
Sixteen Years before it; when Boniface the Third, A. D. 606. took the Title of
Universal Bishop, and Head of all Churches; which Gregor. Epist. lib: 4.38.
Gregory the Great had condemned before in the Bishop of Constantinople;
asserting, that he who usurped it, was the Forerunner of Antichrist, the Prince
of Pride; and that he imitated Lucifer, in exalting his Throne above the Stars
of God; that is, his Brethren, the Bishops, who are the Stars of Heaven; and in
ascending above the height of the Clouds. Which words are, as it were, a
Comment upon the Place; and a Prophecy (as one ingeniously speaks) of their
High Priest, who spoke not this of himself, but as being High Priest that Year;
foretelling the Fall of that Eminent Star from Heaven, to a State of Worldly
Dominion, according to the manner of the Kingdoms of the Earth. So that in a
few years after the Rise of the Papal Antichrist in the West; there arose in
the East a new sort of an Antichristian Dominion, to be a Scourge to it, and in
opposition unto it is Idolatrous Practices; the Chief of which called themselves
Chalifs, or Vicars of Mahomet, (for so the word signifies) as the Popes have
called themselves the Chalifs, or Vicars of Christ.

2 And he opened the bottomless Pit [i. e. Exercised this Authority, and entered
upon the Administration of his Kingdom;] and there arose a smoke 2 out of the
Pit, as the smoke of a great Furnace [i. e. many gross and Antichristian
Errors;] and the Sun, and the Air were darkened by reason of the Smoke of the
Pit, [i. e. The Gospel, the Light of the World, was obscured by these errors.]

2 As a great Smoke hinders the Sight, so do Errors the Understanding. He keeps
to the Allegory; for Smoke takes from us the sight of the Stars; says Grotius
on the Place. And the Bochart. Hieroz. lib. 4.4. Ludolph. Commentar. in
Aethiopic. Histor. page 173.
Locusts are wont to come in so great Numbers, that the Air has been darkened,
and the Sun, as it were, Eclypsed by them, Joel. 2.10.

3 And there came 3 out of the Smoke [contrary to the expectation of him that
opened it;] Locusts 4 upon the Earth [i. e. the grievous Plague of 5
Mahometism, with the Numerous and Destroying Armies of the 5 Saracens Exodus
10.3-15. Joel Chapters 1.2.] and unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of
the Bochart. Hieroz. lib. 4.4. Ludolph. Commentar. in Aethiopic. Histor. page
173.
Earth have power [as to the manner of the Mischief they were to do, Verse
5.10.]

3 Locusts do increase most in very dry Seasons, and come in bliting burning
Easterly Winds; which are usually accompanied with a smoaky Vapor: whence
probably is that Expression, Hosea 13.3. according to the LXX,- and like a
Smoke, or Vapor from Locusts. Although Bochartus is of Opinion, that here is
an Allusion to the Custom amongst the Ancient Arabs or Saracens, of hunting
Locusts by Bochart. Hieroz. Part. 2. page 472, 484, 495.
smoke.

4 Great Armies of Enemies are resembled to See Dr. Pocock on Joel.
Locusts in Scripture;

(1.) By Reason of their Number, Judge. 6, 5.7, 12. Psalm 105.34. Joel 1.6. The
Multitudes of Locusts, which infest the Eastern, and sometimes the European
parts, being almost Bochart. Hieroz. page 443, 445. Ludolph. Aethiopic. Histor.
page 173, 174.
incredible. And it is not altogether improper to remark here, that vast
Numbers of Locusts have been frequently seen to appear, before the Approach of
great Armies; which is frequently noted by Abul Pharajai, and by Du Fresne in
his Notes at the end of Page 530.
Cinnamus.

(2.) Because of the great, and unavoidable Mischief they do in the Fields, in
Houses, and to Men themselves, whom they set upon, and are thought sometimes to
have killed Bochart. Hieroz. page 462, 477, 478. Ludolph. page 174.
them. Book of Wisdom 16.9.

(3.) From the exact Military Bochart. page 477.
Discipline and Order they observe in flying; and the strength which is in
their Ranks and Divisions when they fly, or go, Joel 2.7, 8.

(4) From their climbing of Walls, and getting into Houses and Windows; like
Men of War, in time of Seige, and Sacking of Towns, Joel 2.7, 9. Exodus 10.6.
and from their not Bochart. page 478.
being subject to hurt, from Weapons, which they avoid by their Swiftness, and
by the Subtilty and Tenuity of their Bodies, Joel 2.8.

* Terrestrial Scorpions are (as Naturalists observe) of all the most Boch.
Hieroz. page 934.
hurtful.

(5) (5) The Saracens seem to be understood by Locusts, because,

(1.) They came from the East, as the Locusts did, Exodus 10.13. Whence they
were called Pocock. Not. ad Specim. Histor. Arab. sub init.
Saracens, which signifies the Inhabitants of the Eastern parts of the World.

(2.) Because of their vast Numbers, and their wandering State and Condition,
they being of the Race of the Ancient Ammian. Marcel. 14.4.
Scenitae, who lived in Tents, roaming from place to place; with which agrees
the Description of the Locusts, given by the Prophet Nahum 3.15, 16. as the
place is interpreted by Page 458.
Bochartus.

(3.) Because the Arabians, or Children of the East, are expressly likened to
Locusts or Grasshoppers, Judges 6.3-5.

(4.) By Reason of the suddenness of their Invasions, and the Prodigious
Swiftness of their Conquests, and the great havoc and Ravage made by them; all
which Circumstances are Notorious in the Plague of Locusts, who fall in
prodigious Numbers in one Night, and sometimes almost in a moment, destroying
all before them.

And (Lastly,) because these Locusts are said to come out of the thick smoke of
the bottomless Pit; i. e. out of gross Errors, and filthy Practices; which is
the plain Original of Mahometism; which began in a very corrupt and dark Age,
when the Christians were divided into many Sects and Schisms, and vented very
gross Errors; such were those of the Arrians, Jacobites, Melchites, Eutychians,
Monothelites and Nestorians; from whom proceeded many of the Opinions of
Mahomet; who was Sylburg. Saracenica, page 3, 5, 59.
assisted in the Contrivance of his Religion by Sergius, a banished Nestorian,
by an Arrian Monk, and other Heretics; with whom the Church was then infested,
as it was also by Contests about the Supremacy; and with gross Antichristian
Errors; which are the Chief Things intended in this Prophecy: Of all which
Histor. Oriental. lib. 2.2.
Hottinger has treated fully. But that we may the better understand the true
Meaning of this Vision; I^^ ^ll endeavor to give a brief Account of the Rise
of Mahometism, and of the progress of the Saracenick Empire, from Authentic
Historians, chiefly from Elmacinus, and Abul Pharajai, Two Arabic Writers;
which will be of great use in the following Annotations.

The Saracens are properly those Arabs which lived about Meccha and Medina, and
the places adjoining; who, under their Prophet Mahomet, began to be Famous,
about A.D. 622. when he fled from Meccha, he place of his Nativity, for fear of
the Tribe of the Coraisites, or Koreisheites, the Inhabitants of Meccha; who
threatened him for endeavoring to usurp over them, and for introducing a New
Doctrine amongst them: for although many of them had been converted to the
Christian Religion, in and before the Reign of Socrat. 4.36. Sozom. 6.38.
Valens; yet the Arabs were by this time mostly Abul-Pharajai, page 101.
Idolaters, worshipping the Stars, whose Motions and Influences they
understood, which was all Abul-Pharajai, page 101.
the Skill and Knowledge they had in their State of Ignorance; as the Mussulmen
call the Times before their Conversion to Mahometism. They are mentioned by
Hist. Not. 6.28.
Pliny (and by none before him, as far as I can find) under the Name of
Saracens; and are placed by him, and Ptolemy, in Arabia Felix; and that
rightly; for Meccha Gabriel Sionita, de Morib. and urbib. Orient. Thevenot's
Travels. Dr. Hyde's Itinera Mundi. page 87.
is not a City of Arabia Deserta, as is commonly thought; but is situated over
against the middle of the Red Sea, about a Days Journey from it, betwixt Jaman
and Higjaz, in Arabia Felix; about seven and Thirty Days Journey from Grand
Caire, and about Ten Days Journey or Two hundred and seventy Miles from Medina;
the place of this false Prophet's Retreat; where he lived about Eight Years,
and made the greatest part of his Alcoran. During this th^^^ he had many
Battles with his Neighbors, especially the K^rcishites, the Chief Tribe of
those Parts; and propagated his Doctrine, and Dominion, in many parts of
Arabia; but not much farther. After his Death (which was A. D. 631. as Abul
Pharajai affirms, or according to Elmacinus, A. D. 632.) his Successors made
swift and prodigious Conquests; overrunning Persia, Syria, Egypt, and
Palestine in a very few Years; insomuch that about the Roderici Ximenes,
Archiepisc. Toletan. Histor. Arab. cap. 12. Mr. Mede on the place. Abul-Phar.
Page 129. Camerarit Narrat. Turcic. ex Sausovin. page 77.
Year 729. in Fourscore, or an Hundred Years at furthest, they had subdued most
of the Kingdoms and Provinces of the Known World; extending their Arms into
India, beyond the Bounds of the Roman Empire. About 643. Abul-Pharajai, page
115, 116.
they invaded Africa; and from thence fell into Elmacinus, lib. 1.13. page 85.
Roderic. Tolet. cap. 9. Petav. ad An. 712.
Spain, about A. D, 711. which in Two Years space they wholly conquered. About
A. D. Theophan. Paulus Diacon. Sigon. de Rogno Italiae, page 60.
716. (as Abulpharajai and Elmacinus both agree) they besieged Constantinople
with a vast Army; and Ravaged and overrun Languedoc, Provence, and several
parts of France, from A. D. Mezeray's History of France. Petav. Ration. Temp.
Sigon. de Regno Ital. page 66.
721. to A. D. 738. when they were totally vanquished and beaten out of those
parts by Charles Martel. About A. D. Petav. Rati^nar.
828. they took Sicily, and from thence infested Italy; pillaging Rome Anasias.
vit. Gregor. 4th.
the Year following; and A.D. 846. they came from Africa (as the Locusts Plin.
Not. Hist. 11.29.
are wont to do) into Italy, and again fell upon Anasias. in Leon. 4to. Sigon.
de Regno Ital. page 120.
Rome, burning the Famous Churches of Peter and Paul, and carrying away many of
their Ornaments with them into Campania; where they pillaged several
Monasteries: but whilst they were returning with their Spoils into Africa, they
were dispersed by a mighty Tempest, and the greatest part of them were cast
away. They afterward harrassed Italy for several Years, until they were
subdued, and beaten out of it, first, by Otho, about 980. who was called, the
Death of the Saracens; and then by the Emperor Henry the Second, and the
Normans, betwixt the Years Petav. Rationar. pars 1. lib. 8.
1014, and 1022. not long after which time, viz. A. D. Elmacinus, page 336.
337. Abul-Phar. 226, 227.
1055. their was an End put to their Empire, by Tangrolipix, or Tugrol-Beg: who
fixed his Seat at Bagdad, the Imperial City of the Saracens, whereby that
Empire devolved upon the Turks; he being installed Sultan there, A. D. 1057. by
the Saracenick Chalif; Two Hundred Ninety Three years after its being built for
their Imperial Seat, by Al-Mansur, A. D. 762. as both Abul. page ^43. Elmac.
page 122.
Abul-Pharajai and Elmacinus agree.

4 And it was [said or] commanded * them [by God, who raised them up, and
sealed the True Christians, whilst Antichristianity only was exposed to hurt;]
that they should not hurt [by perverting them from their Religion;] the Grass
[or Herb] of the Earth, neither any green thing, neither any Tree [i. e. no
Christians who had any Spiritual Life in them, and showed it by its Fruits and
Effects, Psalm 1, 5.52, 8. Matthew. 3.8, 10. Rev. 7, 1.8, 7.] but only those men,
which have 6 not the Seal of God in their Foreheads [i. e. the Apostasy; for a
pure, Apostolical Church was to be preserved in secret, Chap. 7.]

* And to this End were they raised by Providence; which miraculously preserved
them from being destroyed by the Romans, as Dr. History, part 3. page 283.
Howel has judiciously observed.

6 God was pleased to preserve a pure Church in secret, during the great
Inundation of these Barbarous People; as appears from the Catalogues of
Witnesses to the Truth, in this Age; although the whole Apostate Church, both
of the Eastern and Western parts, severely felt the Scourge of this Plague;
which fell mostly upon them (that their Fault might be known by the very
providential timing of their punishment) during some Remarkable Instances, and
Workings of the Apostasy. When the Saracens first appeared A. D. 622. the World
was much given to Image Worship; Heraclius Tyrius de Bello sacro, lib. 23.30.
the Emperor, having newly then recovered the Cross from the Persians, and
restored it to the Temple of the Sepulcher, from which it had been taken; and
upon that instituted, or at least celebrated the Feast of the Exaltation of the
Cross. When they invaded Sardinia, about 720. Luitprandus, King of the
Lombards, bought the Relics of St. Austin at a great price, of them; and went
out to meet them in a solemn Procession, and being struck with the Wonder of
the Greatness of the Miracles which had been done by them, worshipped them
(says Sigon. de Regno Ital. page 61.
Sigonius) with Divine Honor. And it is very remarkable, that the great
Quarrels betwixt Leo the Emperor, and the Popes, Gregory the Second, and the
Third, about Images; were, upon the Saracens objecting Image Worship, as
Idolatry to the Emperor; and that the greatest and fiercest assaults of the
Saracens upon the Empire, were during the Time that Contest was hottest; to
wit, from the year Spanhem. Histor. Imagine.
713. when the Controversy with the Monothelites ceased, and the only one
which then exercised the World, was that about Images: about which time they
conquered Spain, and besieged Constantinople; and fell into Italy not long
after the Worship of Images was established by a Law, in the Second Council of
Nice, A. D. 787.

5 And to them it was given, that they should not 7 kill them [or utterly
destroy even the Apostate Antichristian Roman Empire;] but that they should be
8 Tormented five Months [of yeats;] and their Torment was as the Torment of a
Scorpion when he strikes a man [i. e. very 9 vexatious, and painful, Prove.
23.32. Ezekiel. 2.6.]

7 To kill a Body Politic, is, (as De Jur. Bell. and Pac. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Grotius has observed) to make it cease to be, either by utterly destroying the
people of it, or by subjecting it to a New Authority, whereby it ceases to be
what it was before: Neither of which were the Saracens able to do in the
Eastern or Western Roman Empire; for although they often besieged
Constantinople, yet they could never take it; and they tormented Rome and
Italy, by frequent and sudden Incursions, but had never possession of the
former, nor any long quiet settlement in any part of the latter; But (as
Histor. Insabr. page 115.
Putean remarks) Their Incursions into Italy, were like a sudden Tempestuous
Wind, which vanishes after it has done its Mischief. So that, as to the Chief
and Capital parts of the Roman Empire, they never had power to kill them, or
reduce them under their Authority, and could not fix the Seat of their Empire,
in any of its Imperial Cities; as the Turks afterward did theirs at
Constantinople; which is expressly called, slaying or killing the Third part of
Men, Verse. 15. but seated themselves first at Damascus in Syria, afterward at
Bagdad.

8 Here is a manifest Allusion to the time that Locusts are wont to live; which
Bocharti Hieroz. page 495.
Naturalists observe to be Five Months; which we are to understand according to
the Prophetical way of reckoning (of which there has been mention already made
on Chap. 2.10.) of Months of Years.

Now if we consider the whole length of the Duration of the Saracenick Empire,
we shall find it to be precisely 435. Years; reckoning from A. D. 622. the Era
of Mahometism, unto A. D. 1057. when the Turkish Empire succeeded; as Lib. 3.7.
page 336, 337.
Elmacinus, and Dr. Pocock, in the Margin of Abul-Pharajai, has particularly
noted. Which Line of Time consists of a Ternary of Five Months of Years; each
of them amounting to an Hundred and Forty Five Years, reckoning See the Notes
on Chap. 11.2.
Twenty Nine Years of Days to each Month; of which, Two Five Months being
allotted to their tormenting, and hurting of Men, the first in this Verse, and
the second in the tenth; the remaining five months must be understood to belong
to their declining and decaying condition; when they could not torment others.
And with this, there is a wonderful Agreement in History; which dates the Decay
and Division of this Empire, from about 290, or 300 years after its Rise. For
Elmacinus divides his History into Three Books, as we do the Duration of their
Empire into a Ternary of five months; treating in the first Book of the
Original, and Increase of their Empire; which he extends from A.D. 622. to
about A.D. 746: in the second Book, of the Declension of it; and in the third
of its Distraction and Dissipation; placing the fatal Elmacin. page 255.
Abul-Phar. page 175.
Division of it about A. D. 936. not much above twice five months after its
first appearance; when he confesses, that the Power of the Chalif was
diminished, and the Kingdom weakened; his Revenues taken away, and nothing but a
Name left him; the Turks prevailing daily at Bagdad, from A. D. 863. and
deposing the Califs very frequently.

And with (...) Account, agrees the Observation of Histor. page 409. edit.
Parisiens. Leunclav: Histor. Musulman. page 67.
Cedrenus; who relating the Prediction of a Famous Alexandrian Astronomer, who
foretold, that the prosperous Power, and flourishing Dominion of the Saracens,
should be but for Three Hundred and Nine Years; judges him to have erred
indeed, but not very much, in his Calculation. And therefore I cannot but upon
this occasion recommend the Study of Scriptural, especially Prophetical
Chronology, to all Learned Men; no ways doubting, but that they will find, that
the greatest Difficulties may be cleared up by it.

9 Bochartus Hieroz. page 639, 640, 642.
notes, That the Torment of Scorpions is very grievous, and of all other the
most vexatious; whence troublesome Persons are likned unto them, Ezekiel. 2.6.
Ecclus. 25, 15.26, 7. and observes, that they also, as well as the Locusts,
hurt only for five months. Now that the Torment of the Saracens, was not only
of the like duration, but of the like Nature, History sufficiently testifies,
especially as to what concerns the Two Imperial Seats, Rome, and
Constantinople; which, as the next Verse clearly sets forth, (with which
History accords) were frequently tormented with fresh Alarms of their
Incursions and Invasions.

6 And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall
desire to die, and death shall flee from them [i. e. they shall be tormented
with continual Invasions, so that they shall desire Conquest and Death, rather
than such a mischievous and unsettled condition, Joel 2.6. Jerem. 8.3]

7 And the Shapes of the Locusts were like unto 10 Horses prepared to b^^iel
[i. e. they were stout and swift, Joel 2.4. Job 33.23-25.] and on their Heads,
were, as it were, 11 Crowns of Gold [signifying their Victories and Success,
and the many Kingdoms should submit unto them;] and their Faces were as the 12
Faces of men [i. e. they had seemingly rational and plausible pretenses, Rev.
4.7 D^n. 7.4.]

8 And they had Hair as the 12 Hair of Women [i.e their Pretenses were
insinuating, enticing and deceitful, Canticl 4, 1.6, 5.] and their Teeth was as
the Teeth of Lions [i. e. cruel and devouring, not white and clean, Canticl. 4,
2.6, 6. Joel 1.6.]

10 Hieroz. page 474.
Bochartus observes, that Locusts represent Horses, not only in their
Swiftness, (which is here chiefly pointed at, the Conquests of the Saracens
being carried on with prodigious and almost incredible speed,) but also in the
shape of their Heads; the Figure of which may be seen in Page 177.
Ludolphus's Notes on his Aethiopick History.

11 As their rapid success is described before, so have we here represented the
great Number of Kingdoms which they overrun; for (as Mr. Mede has truly noted)
no Nation ever had so large an Extent of Dominion, or ever subdued so many
Kingdoms in so short a space.

12 12 Hieroz. page 456.
Bochartus notes, That there are some hairy and rough Locusts; and Mr. Mede
observes, that the ancient Arabians, or Saracens, were Famous for Plin. 6.28.
Ammian. Marcel. page 654. Hieronym. in vit. Malchi.
wearing long Hair, and having their heads attired like women. But these Words
(as appears from the Texts I have quoted) evidently refer to the Perfidiousness
and Subtlity of the Saracens, for which they are notoriously infamous in all
Ammian. Marcel. page 13. Excerpta e Legate. page 149. ed. Paris. Theoph.
Simocat. Hist. 3. 17.
History; and to the specious pretenses by which they advanced their Religion,
and the sagacity and strength of Reason, for which they are Sylburgii
Saracenic. page 69. -- (...).
peculiarly noted to have valued themselves; they becoming also such great
Proficients in the Peripatetick Philosophy, and the Art of disputing; that
Charlemain brought in Aristotle's Philosophy into the West, and set up the
Schools, that the Christians might be the better furnished to oppose the Jews
and Mahometans. For the Religion of Mahomet was with great cunning adapted to
the Looseness and Debauchery of that Age; and being made up of a Medley of
Judaism, and of the Opinions of the Heretics of those Times, it was peculiarly
fitted to prevail upon both of them. Furthermore, Mahomet is noted to have come
of a Noble Hottingeri Hist. Orient. page 205, 206.
Tribe, and to have got great Riches, although his Parents were very poor; and
by Conversation with people of all Persuasions, to have gained an insight into
the several Religions which were then professed; which being joined Elmacinus,
page 11, 13. Hottinger: page 356-361. Sylburg. Saracenic. page 36.
with a good Natural Wit, a sweet Voice, and a courteous Disposition to Men of
all Conditions, especially to the Christians, whom he pretended mightily to
favor, and forbad to be forced from their Religion (as appears from other
Testimonies, as well as from his Last Will and Testament, which some Learned
men do now judge to be Genuine,) were very plausible ways of gaining upon men.
But above all, the great Zeal which he showed against Elmacinus, page 3.
Images, and Idolatry, together with the Sea his Life, at the End of the
Alcoran in English. And Dr. Moor's Mystery of Godliness, B. 5. 9, 10.
seeming holiness of his Life, his solitary Retiredness into a Cave, for a
considerable time, and the strange Feats he did by the power of Sorcery, were
the most plausible, and most prevailing Insinuations he made use of; and which
were permitted to prevail, by the just Judgment of God, as a punishment upon
the Christians for their great Superstition and Idolatry; and that the Belief
of the Unity of the Godhead, and of his Abhorrence of Images; might be kept up
in the parts of the Christian World, where the Apostasy had so mightily
increased.

9 And they had Breast-plates, as it were Breast-plates of Iron [i. e. they
were well armed, Joel 2.8.] and the sound of their 13 Wings, was as the sound
of Chariots of many Horses running to Battle [denoting their Swiftness, Noise,
and Terror, Joel 2.5. Job. 39.20.]

13 Hieroz. page 475. 478.
Bochartus also notes, that the Locusts make a terrible Noise with their Wings;
and that (as was before observed) they are not easily wounded.

10 And they had Tails like unto Scorpions, and there were 14 Stings in their
Tails [i. e. they pretended to Prophecy, and infected, and deceived Men by it,
Isa. 9.15.] and their power was to hurt men five months [of years, i. e. 145.
years.]

14 The Sting and Poison of Scorpions is in their Tails; as Hieroz. page 636,
637.
Bochartus has observed; and hereby is signified, the poison of their false
Religion, grounded upon pretense to prophecy, and converse with the Angel
Gabriel; the Prophet that teaches Lies being expressly likened to the Tail,
Isa. 9.15.

11 And they had a King 15 over them [Eph. 2.2.] which is the Angel of the
bottomless 16 Pit [i. e. a Satanical Instrument acted by an Evil Spirit, who
came out of it with the Smoke, and Locusts, Verse 2, 3.] whose Name in the
Hebrew 17 Tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek Tongue has his Name Apollyon [i.
e. the Destroyer ^ viz. Mahomet, whose Religion and Empire is seated in the
Chief City of the Jews, Jerusalem; and of the Greeks, Constantinople: the
Destroyer of the Lives and Religion of both.]

15 Hereby is intimated, that these were Mystical Locusts, not Natural o^^^,
which have no King over them, Prove. 3^.27.

16 Mahomet's Hellish Doctrine is hereby described; who also was suspected of
Sorcery, and therefore strives to clear himself of it in his Alcoran; and seems
to have been possessed by an Evil Spirit; of which his extraordinary Epileptick
Fits are thought to be no mean Argument. See Mr. B. 1. Disc. 6.
Mede, and Dr. Hammond on Matthew. 17.15.

17 This is in allusion to the Inscription upon our Savior's Cross, Matthew.
27.37. This is Jesus the King of the Jews: which was written ( Luke 23.38.) in
Letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew: to show, that Christ, our Savior's
Kingdom, was to be dispersed and established through the whole World: in
correspondence whereunto, Mahomet's Superscription is, The Destroyer, as
Christ's was, Jesus, The Savior; and his Name is written in the Hebrew, and
Greek; but not the Latin Tongue: to show, that he should prevail over
Jerusalem, the Chief City of the Jews, and over Constantinople, the Chief City
of the Greek Empire; but not over Rome, the Chief City of the Latin, or Western
Roman Empire.

12 One Woe [or the first of the Three Woes. viz. the Saracenick denounced Chap
8.13.] is past [in Vision,] and behold there c^^e Two Woes more hereafter.

13 And the sixth Angel sounded [an Alarm to a new Woe,] and I heard a 18 Voice
from the Four Horns of the Golden Altar [of Incense,] which is before God,
[Chap 8.3, 4.]

18 The Voice which commands the letting loose of the four Angels, which were
to execute the second Woe, comes from t^^ Man of Incense; which had Four Horns
(as we read, H^^^d. 27, 2.30, 2. Ezekiel. 43.15.) denoting See the Commentators on
the place; and Spencer de Hebraeor. legib. page 562-569.
the Sufficiency and Excellency of Christ's Intercession, and his power and
Authority, (of which Horns are an Emblem) over his Church, in the Four Quarters
of the World. So that hereby is signified the Voice, or Prayers of the Saints
of God, or the pure Church, gathered from the Four Corners of the Earth, who
now prayed in secret, in a sealed, or retired Condition, (as we have shown on
the Eighth Chapter, Verse 3, 4.) that God would punish the Idolatry (Verse 20,
21.) which now Reigned upon the whole Earth, and was newly established at the
Council of Nice. And the Voice proceeded from the Four Horns of the Golden
Altar, to show, that they were pure from Idolatry, and that Holiness to the
Lord was graven upon the Horns of their Altar; as the sin of Idolatry was upon
the Horns of the Jewish Altars, Jerem. 17.1.

14 Saying to the sixth Angel, which had the Trumpet, loose [from their
Restraint,] the 19 Four [Evil] Angels [i. e. the Turkish Potentacy;] which are
bound 20 in the great River 21 Euphrates; [i. e. hindered by Divine Restraint,
and the Providential course of things, from making any considerable Progress in
the parts of the Roman Empire beyond that River.]

19 The Bad, as well as Good Spirits, which God makes use of, are called in
Scripture, Angels; which in this Book are put to denote the Men, and
Instruments used by and under them in their executing the Commands of God. And
because there is great Reason to believe, (as I shall show hereafter) that the
Turkish Potentacy is meant in this place, which immediately followed the
Saracenical; I shall therefore endeavor to give you a brief Account of its
Original and Progress:

The Turks (called (...) by Lib. 4. page 232. Mela 1. ult. Plin. 6, 7.
Herodotus, and Turcae by Mela, and Pliny) are by all Accounts a Northern
People; called therefore, The King of the North, Dan. 11.40. as the Saracens
are, The King of the South; because they lie Southward of Palestine. They were
Orignally Natives of Tartary, which is called Turchestan, by the Eastern
Writers; and is a Country of a vast Extent, reaching from the River Volga to
the extreme East; consisting of Two sorts of Tartars, the Eastern, or Mogul
Tartars, lying above China, beyond the Mountain Imaus, or Emodus; and the
Western Tartars on this side Imaus; whose Language is different from the
former: and from these latter came the Turks, as appears from their Language,
the Ground of which is Tartar; and those Tartars also, which inhabit the lesser
Tartary; upon the Black or Euxin Sea, called, the Crim Tartary, or Tartaria
Precopensis; from a great Dike, near which its Chief City stands; Crim
signifying a great Bank with a Ditch, in the Tartar Language; as Precop does in
the Polish: who were originally of the same Race with the Turks, although they
are now a mixed people; because their Prince is by Compact, to succeed the Grand
Signior, upon defect of Heir Male; which the Turks would not have consented to,
if they had not been of the same Line.

Now the Turks made their Excursions from all parts at first; some of them from
beyond (a) Tanais, (where those Turks seem to have lived, who sent an Embassy
to Justin Junior, and were employed by Heraclius against the Persians, when he
sailed through the Euxin Sea) into Georgia, and by degrees into Armenia: but
the greatest and most Famous Body of them, came from Mawaralnahra, or the
Regions beyond the River Oxus; and from that part of it above the Caspian Sea,
which is particularly denominated from them, Turchestan; the Chief Seat whereof
is Samarchand; from whence they were called into Persia, and not from Armenia,
as Abul-Pharajai, and Elmacinus both testify; who make frequent mention of
them, and their Kings, long hefore their settling in Persia. They at first fell
into Chorasan, (a Country lying betwixt Persia and India) and ravaged some
parts of Petav. Rationar. Tempor. 9, 7.
Persia, about A. D. 625. and afterward Abul-Phar. page 115, 116.
assisted the Persians against the Saracens, about A. D. 643. About Sabellic.
Ennead. 9. lib. 2.
A. D. 800. they made great Incursions through the Portae Caspiae; which is a
narrow Passage near Derbent, (which signifies in the Persian Language a
straight betwixt Mountains) called by the Turks, Demir Capi, or the Iron Gate,
near the Caspian Sea, betwixt Armenia and Persia; and is part of that vast
Ridge of Hills (at least 1500 Miles long) which runs from West to East, from
Armenia to India; where the Branches of it run several ways, one great one of
them separating the hithermost Tartary, from that above China, or the Mogul
Tartary; and is called Imaus: these Hills receiving different Names, in the
different Counteies through which they run; sometimes being called Mount
Nicephor. Bryenn. page 21. Du Cange in Not. ad Calcem Cinnami, page 299.
Excerpt. e Legate. page 106. ed. Paris. Leunclav. Histor. Mussulm. page 22, 23.
Elmacin. page 332. Abul-Phar. page 222. Abul-Pheda per Gravium. Knoll's History
of the Turks.
Taurus, sometimes Mount Caucasus, and near Tartary, Imaus. Through this
Natural Barrier of Nations, there is a Narrow Passage; which the Turks passed,
and possessed themselves of the Northern part of Armenia, called, perhaps, from
them, Turcomania: From whence, and about the same time, some of them went, and
settled in Caramania, in Asia Minor, anciently called Cilicia: whilst others of
them, who were Stipendiaries to the Saracenick Chaliphs, prevailed mightily at
Bagdad, betwixt the Year 863. and 900. insomuch, that although they had been
often slain in great Numbers, and were driven out of Chorasana; they yet
Rallied their Forces, under Tugrol, or Togrul-Beg, Du Cange ad calcem Cinnami,
page 300.
(called Tangrolipix, and by several other Names by the Greeks,) who came from
the Countries beyond the River Gihon, or Jihun, (which is the same with Oxus)
as Page 222. Du Cange. ibid.
Abul-Pharajai distinctly affims; and passed that River, and not Araxes, which
divides Armenia from Media; except those Two Rivers are confounded by the
Greeks, as Du Cange thinks. This great Captain, together with the rest of his
Brethren, of the Family of the Elmacin. lib. 3.7. page 331. Abul-Phar. 226,
227. Leunclav. Histor. Musul. page 69 -- Niceph. Bryen. page 21. and Du Cange
ubi supra.
Seljukidae, who began to be Famous about A. D. 1038. being called into the
Assistance of the Persians; at last conquered them; taking Ispahan about A. D.
1050. and having embraced Mahometism, the Religion of that Country; they
proceeded so far, as to conquer Bagdad, A. D. 1055. and to put an end to the
Empire of the Saracens in those parts.

Betwixt the years Du Cange ad Calcem Cianam. page 316. Histor. Byzant.
illustrat. page 354-358.
1070, and 1080. they made great progress in Asia Minor; some of the Family of
the Seljukidae, who came thither from Persia, fixing their Imperial Seat at
Iconium; who are from thence called the Sultans of Iconium, and are
distinguished from the other Turkish Sultans, who Reigned in Asia the Great;
whose chief Seats were in Persia, (where Tangrolipix Elmac. page 342.
died, A. D. 1063.) and at Bagdad. But the Tyrius de Bello sacro, lib. 5. and
6. Abul-phar. page 242.
Christians in the Holy War, about A. D. 1097. having broken their power in
those parts; and what through the Divisions which arose amongst the Sons of
Cutlumuses Abul-phar. page 245, 290, 312.
(the Cousin German of Tangrolipix, and the first who made considerable Inroads
into Asia Minor) about A.D. 1108; We hear little considerable of the Actions of
these Sultans, until their Credit and Power came to be advanced by Sultan
Aladdin Caicobad, who was made Sultan A. D. 1219. and died about A. D. 1236. In
the mean time, the Eastern Turkish Empire mightily increased, especially under
the Arms of Saladin Abul-phar. page 264-276. Fuller 's Holy War, lib. 2. Chap.
35- and 4.19.
(Salaho Ddin) who took Egypt from the Saracenick Chalifs, about A. D. 1169.
where the Turkish, and Circassian Mamlucs (i. e. Slaves, or Servants)
afterward bore sway for about 275 years, as Dr. Pocock informs us in his
Supplement to Abul-Pharajai. But on a sudden, A. D. Abul-phar. p. 280-368.
1202. there arose a New Empire in the World; the Mogul-Tartars (or Tatars,
called so from a Bizar. de reb. Perfic.
River in that Country, of that Name) falling in upon the Eastern Empire of
the Turks, and making Incursions as far as Asia Minor (which the Arabians call
Rumaea;) and at last taking Bagdad, A. D. 1258. whereby the Dynasty of the
Arabian Mussulmen, was transferred unto the Kings of the Mogul-Tartars,
according to Abul-pharajai; which Empire nevertheless lasted not long in those
parts; for it was broken by mutual Discords, about A. D. 1335. where Dr.
Supplem. ad Abul-phar. page 1-6.
Pocock places the end of that Dynasty; nothing considerable being performed by
them, until the Time of Tamerlan (Timur Lenc) who died A. D. 1404. Since which
time they have contained themselves within their own Eastern bounds; and have
not carried their Arms into the Western parts. This great and terrible Invasion
gave occasion to the Rise of the Annal. Turcici. Pandect. Turcic. and Histor.
Musulman. per Leunclav. Pocock Supplem. ad Abul-phar. page 41-53.
Ottoman Turks; who being beaten out of Asia, by the Mogul-Tartars; and hearing
of the Fame of the Sultans of Iconium; began their March from the Province of
Mahan, in the Dominions of the Persians, toward Asia Minor, A. D. 1214. under
the Conduct of Solyman-Shahum; to one of whose Sons, (he himself being drowned
at the passing of Euphrates) Aladin, Sultan of Iconium assigned a Portion of
Land, near the Mountains of Armenia: From which small beginnings they raised
themselves by their Valor, and the Favor of Aladin, to such a height, that
A. D. 1299. Dr. Pocock Supplem. page 42.
Othman (commonly called Ottoman) Solyman's Grandchild, took the Name of
Sultan, and so enlarged their Dominions, that his Son (he himself dying A. D.
1325.) took Brusia (formerly Prusa, a City of Bithynia,) either that Year, or
very soon after, and made it the First Seat (as Hadrianople was afterward, and
Constantinople is now) of the mighty Ottoman Empire; which Leunclav. Histor.
page 78, 85, 93.
succeeded the Aladinian Sultany, after it had been established in Asia Minor,
about Ninety Years. Since which time their History is so well known, that I
shall not further insist upon it; having brought it down to the Times here
mentioned; viz. their most Famous passing the River Euphrates; and that at a
time (as Narrat: Turcic. page 41.
Camerarius has very well noted) when Ecclesiastical Authority had advanced it
self above the Civil, and Divisions and Superstition had much increased amongst
Christians. Now the Cause why this great Empire should be Characterized by Four
Angels, bound in the River Euphrates, and afterward loosed; is a thing worthy
our disquisition; and it may, perhaps, be for these Reasons:

(1.) Because that the Kingdom of the Turks was divided into Four Proefectures,
or Principalities, whilst they were bound in the River Euphrates; that is, had
made no Incursions into those Western parts; which are bounded by that Famous
River. For so we are expressly told in the Relation Excerpt. e Legate. inter
Histor. Byzant. page 106-108.
of an Embassy, from the Scythian Turks to Justin Junior, about A.D. 570. where
the Turkish Ambassadors being asked hy the Emperor concerning the State of
their Kingdom; tell him, that the Chief Power was indeed solely in their King
Disabulus; but that their Kingdom was divided into Four ((...)) or
Principalities.

(2.) At their most memorable passing the River Euphrates, they were under the
Command of Four Pocock. Supplem. page 41, 42.
Captains, viz. Solomon Leunclav. Hist. page 86.
Shahum, and his Three Sons; and upon the death of Solomon, who was drowned in
the passing of that River (a circumstance not altogether to be disregarded,)
they were again under Four Commanders; viz. Otrogules, and his Three Sons; of
whom Ottoman was one; who, upon their being loosed, (by having power from God
to pass the River Euphrates,) laid the Foundations of that mighty Empire. All
which are no obscure Circumstances, but most notable, and most famous passages
of their History; the Number of Four Illustrious Families being so remarkable
amongst them, that Pandect. Turcic. page 411. Paris. edit. ad calcem Chalcondyl
Leunclavius has a particular Chapter about.

(3.) They are not only remarkable for Leunclav. Hist. 86, 87. page
Four Chief successive Families; viz. the Seljukian, Aladinian, Oguzian, and
Ottoman: but if Mr. Mede's Observation prove true, they were actually divided
into Four Tetrarchies, or Sultanies, whilst they were bound in Euphrates.

And (lastly;) Because the Spirit of God, in delivering Prophecies, which are
on purpose dark and aenigmatical, may allude to many passages and circumstances
in one, and the same Type, and Figurative Expression; some less known and
obvious than others, to excite men's Industry: why may not the Turkish
Potentacy be signified by Four, because of the Universality of its Conquests,
described Dan. 11.40-45. ( Four, as Dr. Moor observes, standing for a Note of
Universality in the Cabbalistick Mysteries) especially in the Grecian
Monarchy, which it was more immediately designed to kill, or destroy? For as
the Horns of the Altar, from which the Voice comes (Verse. 13.) are Four, to
signify the Universal Extent of Christ's Church; so are there here Four Angels
loosed; to show, that this Woe was to fall Universally upon the Grecian Church
and Monarchy, described in Daniel (Chap. 8.8.) by Four Notable Horns, toward
the Four Winds of Heaven. For the Turkish Empire (as that Judicious Historian,
Mr. Turkish History, in the Preface, and page 981.
Knolls, has observed) has brought fatal mutations, not upon Christendom only,
but the whole World; having under its Command the chief and most Fruitful parts
of Europe, Africa and Asia; and having fixed it self almost altogether, even in
the self same Kingdoms, Countries, and Regions, as belonged to the Greek
Empire. For although the Third of the Earth, and of Men, be the Symbol of the
Grecian Empire; yet in respect of its Universality, it may also be represented
by the Number Four.

20 To bind, is to hinder and restrain; as appears from Rev. 20.2. and that by
secret Impulses and Instincts, as the Word is taken, Acts 20.22.

And from hence we may learn, That the Bounds of Empires, and their progress,
are from God; as are also the Providential Seasons, in which he lets loose
Barbarous Nations to chastise Christians.

21 A great River, upon which the Old Babylon, the Type of the Antichristian
City, stood; it was the fatal Boundary of the Roman Empire; and was so
oftentimes to the Turks; they making but small Advances beyond it, except in
Asia Minor, (out of which they were also beaten, first by the Christians, and
then by the Tartars) until that famous loosing them by God, to punish the
Antichristian Babylon, about A. D. 1300. after which time their Success was
swift and prodigious.

15 And the Four Angels were loosed [i. e. permitted to pass that River,] which
were prepared [by God, from the first Erection of their Empire] for an 12 Hour,
and a 23 Day [i. e. a Year,] and a Month [of Days, which are Years;] and a Year
[of Prophetical Days, for Years;] for to slay the 24 third part of Men [i. e.
to destroy utterly the Constantinopolitan, or Greek Roman Empire.]

22 The Word (...), translated Hour; signifies, Dan. 4, 33.5, 5. Time, or
Season; in which sense it is often used by John in his Gospel, and in this
Book; particularly John 2, 4.4, 52.5, 25.7, 30. and Rev. 11, 13.17, 12. And
thus also it is to be understood in this place; because it is familiarly used
in this Sense, by the Writer of this Book; and no where by him in the other,
for an Hour; which is but of little use to ascertaining a Line of Time; which
is not wont to descend to such minute portions of it. And therefore it is here
to be understood (that it may bear a propor^ion to its Use in other places)
concerning A certain portion of Time, not here particularly limited and
determined, beyond those particularly specified; q. d. that they were prepared
for a certain Time or Season, and also for a Day, a Month, and a Year, over and
above that Time. And the Remark concerning the Acceptance of the Word Hour for
Time; receives great Light from the Observation of De Emendat. Temp. lib. 2.
page 131.
Scaliger; who notes; that Hours were a Devise of the Greeks; and so
consequently were not in use amongst the Jews, during the Times of the Old
Testament; from whence the Words and Phrases of this Book are taken.

23 This Prophetical Time (for which see Chap. 11. number. 12.) makes up 396
years; which is the exact space of Time from the beginning of the Turkish
Empire, A. D. 1057. (as we have before shown,) to the taking of Constantinople
by the Turks, A. D. 1453. the very year assigned by the latest De Emendat.
Temp. lib. 2. page 131.
and most accurate Chronologers, for the taking of that City, after much doubt
concerning it: Which is an Observation that ought to be taken notice of, to
Excite Learned Men to the Study of Scripture-Chronology.

24 We have before shown, on Chap. 8.7. that this is the Mystical Symbol of the
Greek, or Constantinopolitan Roman Empire; which was killed or destroyed, at
the taking of Constantinople, the Chief Seat of it; when (as Chronologers note)
the Eastern Empire of the Christians ceased, and came into the hands of the
Turks; which was only tormented by the Saracens, who could never kill it, by
taking its Imperial City; when an Empire, in the account of Prophecy, is at an
End. See before on Verse 5.

Ricciol. Chronol. Reform. Tom. 1. page 59, 60, 146, 211. Pocock Supplem. ad
Abul-phar. page 47. Crucii Turco-Graec. page 75. 107. Leunclav. Histor. Musulm.
page 579. 583.
16 And the number of the Army 25 of the Horsemen, were two hundred thousand
thousand [i. e. a vast number, Psalm 68.17. Dan. 7.10.] and I heard 26 the
number of them [as if they had been repeated out of a Muster-Roll.]

25 Thus the Army of Gog and Magog is described by Ezekiel. 38* 4, 15. And here is
another Character of the Turks, whose chief Strength and Numbers consisted at
first in their Cavalry; as that also of the Tartars, from whom they originally
came, and of the Persians did; with whom they are confounded, and are called by
their Name in History, after they had conquered them. And from some such
reason, perhaps, as this, is the Horses Tail, still carried before their Chief
Officers, as an Ensign of Honor and Authority, in Memory, that their Strength
consisted chiefly in Horse; of which they were wont to bring vast Numbers into
the Field; as they also did at the taking of Laonic. Chalcondyl. page 202. ed.
Paris.
Constantinople.

26 When a thing is most certain, and very remarkable; some such vehement
Expression is wont to be used in this Prophecy.

17 And thus [or after this following manner, in which I shall describe them,]
I saw the Horses in the Vision, and them that sat on them, having 27
breast-plates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone; and the Heads of their
Horses, were as the Heads of Lions [i. e. fierce and terrible, and making a
roaring noise;] and out of their mouths issued 28 fire, and smoke, and
brimstone.

27 That is, Breastplates of Armor, excellently polished, like flaming fire;
which will cast the Colors of Jacinth and Brimstone, when the Sun shines on
them: For the Turks, and their Horses, were, perhaps, at first, in polished
Armor of Iron, which is of a Violet Color; according to the Custom of the
Histor. August. in Alex. Sever. page 1019. ed. Lugd. Bat. Heliod. Aethiop. lib.
8.
Persians; from whose Country they came, when they passed Euphrates, and
amongst whom they had lived for a long time.

28 This is a plain Description of the discharging of Guns by Men on Horseback;
when the Smoke, and Fire of the Gunpowder seems to issue out of their Horses
Mouths; and the Smell of Brimstone (of which mixed with Nitre and Charcoal, it
is made) is so very prevalent.

18 By these three 29 was the third part of men killed [i. e. the
Constantinopolian Empire was destroyed,] by the fire, and by the smoke, and by
the Brimstone, which issued out at their mouths [when the Riders discharged
their Guns.]

29 Here is also another evident Character; for the Holy Ghost represents the
Turkish Army, by those Warlike Instruments, which were invented about the time
of their being let loose upon the Empire; Guns being found out A. D. Ricciol.
Chronol. reform. Chronic. page 179.
1354. or 1380. at furthest; and brought to perfection, about 1415; by the use
of which, the Leunclav. Hist. page 296. 485.
Turks enlarged their Conquests; and (as all Historians Laonic. Chalcondyl.
page 123, 124, 202, 204, 206. Crus^ Turco-Graec. page 9 --
relate) took Constantinople; the prodigious Great Cannon and Guns which they
used at that Siege, being very Remarkable, and very Fatal.

19 For their power is in their mouth [Verse 18. i. e. in their Arms,] and in
their Tails [i. e. in false pretenses to Prophecy, Verse 10.] for their Tails
were like unto Serpents [i.e. they were crafty and Venomous,] and had heads
[with mouths speaking great things; promoting and spreading their false
Doctrines;] and with them [i. e. their 30 headed Tails] they do hurt [to the
Souls of Men.]

30 They had Two Heads like the Serpent Amphis^^na: by which the spreading
Venom of their poisonous Religion is described; together with their manner of
propagating it; viz. by Fire issuing out of their mouths; that is, by Force of
Arms; and by their Tails, or crafty pretenses; for they are noted to have at
first entered Europe Lord Nepeir on the Revel.
humanely, although they proceeded after to oppression: And (lastly*) for their
high and Vainglorious Words and Titles; and the fair pretenses they made use
of against Idolatry, which was then too visible and predominant in the Church.

20 And the rest of 31 the men [i. e. [the remaining part of the Empire; viz.
the Western;] which were not killed [i.e. utterly destroyed] by these
[foregoing] Plagues [inflicted by the Saracens and Turks;] yet repented not
[notwithstanding these Judgments, which were designed by God for that End;] of
the Work of their Hands [i. e. their Idolatry, 2 Kings 22.17. Jerem. 25.6, 7.]
that they should not worship 32 Devils [i. e. Demons, Lev. 17.7.] and Idols of
Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and of Wood, which neither can see, nor
hear, nor walk [i. e. Images, Psalm 115, 4.135, 15.]

31 The Third of men (i. e. the Eastern Empire) being killed; the rest of men,
must signify, the remaining part; that is, the Western Empire, which was
usurped by the Papal Antichrist; whilst the Mohammedan Antichrist Tyrannized in
the Eastern.

32 By Demons are meant Spirits of a middle Nature betwixt God, and Men; that
is, Angels, and Souls departed. See Mr. Mede on the place; and his Apostasy of
the Latter Times.

21 Neither repented they of their Murders [i. e. Persecutions,] nor of their
33 Sorceries [i. e. Wicked Arts, and False Devices to deceive Souls, Nahum 3.4.
Isa 47.9, 12.] nor of their Fornication [or Unclean and Idolatrous Doctrines
and Practices*] nor of their Thefts [i. e. cheating of Men by sanctified
pretenses.]

33 Such as Exorcisms Relics, Anointings, and her lying Signs and Wonders;
together with all her bewitching and intoxicating Doctrines and Practices.

CHAP. X.
1 AND I saw 1 another mighty [or, powerful, Psalm 103.20.] Angel [i. e. 2
Christ,] come 3 down from Heaven [i. e. appear upon some extraordinary matter;]
clothed with a 4 cloud [of Power and Glory, Chap. 1.7.] and a 5 Rainbow was
upon his He d [to show his mindfulness of his Covenant, notwithstanding the
Deluge of Antichristianism and Mahometism;] and his face was as it were the Sun
[i e. the manifestations of himself were glorious, Chap. 1.16.] and his Feet
[i. e. his actions, and comings to Judgment;] as Pillars of Fire [i. e.
terrible, Chap. 1.15. Dan. 10.6.]

Annotations on CHAP. X.
1 And therefore a distinct one from the Seven Angels with Trumpets.

2 Christ, the Angel of the Covenant here appears; for to him might, or (...)
is Attributed Chap. 5.10. and this very Angel, although in a distinct appearance,
Chap. 11.3. declares that He will give Power unto His two Witnesses; which
Words can agree to none but Christ; as well as the following description, taken
from Dan. Chap. 10 and 12. which are to be understood of Him.

3 A Phrase frequent in Scripture, Signifying God's more than Ordinary notice
of the Actions of Men; and that he was about to say, or do some Extraordinary
Thing. Genesis 11, 5.18, 20, 21. Exodus 3.7, 8. Psalm. 144.5. Isa. 64.1. Maimonid
Ductor Dubit. 1.10.

4 A White Bright Cloud, answerable to the White Linen, Dan. 10, 5.12, 6.

5 From hence it is Evident that this Angel was Christ, the Angel of the
Covenant Malac. 3.1. Who appears thus Clothed to the Comfort of His Servants,
and to show them that he was mindful of His Promise, and that His Kingdom (of
which the Rainbow, a sign of mercy, is the Symbol,) should Come;
notwithstanding he had Permitted a Deluge of Antichristianism to overflow the
Church; and Mahometism to prevail after so Extraordinary a Manner. See Notes on
Chap. 4 3.

2 And he had in his Hand a little 6 Book opened [shewing that the Effects and
E^ents contained in it, were now ready to be Revealed and fulfilled;] and he
set his right Foot 7 upon the Sea, and his left Foot upon the Earth [as Lord of
both, and to take Possession of them Psalm, 2, 8.72, 8. Dan. 12.7.]

6 It was called a Book before, Chap. 5. but is now called a Little Book; to
show that many of its Visions were already fulfilled; whereupon it is bulk was
contracted into a lesser space. And it was before Sealed; but now is Opened; to
show that what was contained in it was at the present, to have some Notable
Appearance and Effect.

7 To Place ones Foot upon a Thing, signifies Dominion Deuteronomy. 11.24. Psalm 60.8.
; or to have in Subjection as it were under ones Feet; whereupon God bids
Abraham Genesis 13.17. to walk through the Land, and thereby take Possession of
it. Now Christ's Kingdom being according to Prophecy, to be Universal; he here
fixes his Feet upon the Whole Terraqueous Globe, showing by Actions as well as
by Speech, in the third Verse (according to the Custom of the Eastern People,
who in matters of Moment join both) that his Kingdom was not only from Sea to
Sea, as the Type of it, David's was, Psalm. 72.8; but that all the World, the
Sea and all that is in it (upon which account he stands upon, or over the
Waters Dan. 12.6, 7.) were his Possession, as well as the uttermost Parts of
the Earth Psalm. 5.8. So that by this Action is signified that Christ was Lord
of all, of Sea and Land, and of all the Creatures in them, which he here again
(as it were) takes Possession of; His Kingdom having been interrupted chiefly
by Antichristianism, and by the spreading of Mahometism, which yet was a
judgment upon the other. But methinks it is worth considering, (every Action
and Word being Weighty in Prophecy) why Christ is more peculiarly represented
as upon the Waters of the River Tigris, Dan. 12.6, 7; Whilst only two Angels
stood on each side of its banks; and that he here sets his right Foot (the
stronger and the more honorable of the two) upon the Sea, but his left upon the
Land; which Grotius himself thinks to have some signification; who supposes the
right Foot to signify the Greater Part of the People, who are often
Represented by Waters, Seas, Rivers, in this Book. We are therefore to
understand that by the Sea in Scripture, is meant the Western Parts of the
World; because the Mediterranean Sea, was the Western Numb. 34.6.
Border of the Land of Canaan: Whereupon our Versions Translate, what is to the
Sea, or Sea-ward in the Original; to the West, and Westward, Genesis 12, 8.28, 14.
Exodus 10.19. Ezekiel. 48.1, 2. and in many other Places. And the Scripture not
only calls all the Places to which the Jews were to pass by Sea, Islands, (as I
have already noted) and particularly our European Parts, at least those in the
Archipelago, the Islands of the Gentiles, Genesis 10.5. but also divides the whole
World into East and West, or according to the Phrase of their Language into
Land and Sea, meaning by Land all the Continent which lay Eastward of them; and
by Sea whatsoever lay to the West, Continent, as well as Sea: Which way of
Speech is to this day Observed by the Chinese; who upon that account, call all
the World, except Tartary, Si Yam, or the VVestern Sea; from whence Siam a
Country in the Indies, takes it is Name, as being Situated toward the Sea,
Westerly of China. And therefore by this action of our Savior (seeing that in
all other Places of Scripture the Earth is mentioned before the Sea) may be
Intimated that the Gospel which was now almost extinguished in the Eastern
parts, by Mahometism; Should appear. First in its Purity and Strength in the
Sea, or the VVestern Parts of the World; signified by the mention of the Sea in
the First Place and by Christ's putting his right Foot upon it, the Strongest
and the Honourablest of the two: Which came to pass at the Reformation,
foretold in this Vision, as shall beshewn hereafter.

And that there sbould be in the latter Days (which Doctor Pocock On Hosea 3.5.
Page 618.
extends from Christ's First, to his Second Coming) some Wonderful and Amazing
motion of the People of God from the West, is evident from Hosea 11.10. Where
the Prophet foretells that the Lord shall roar like a Lion, (an Expreson which
very Remarkably Answers to the Roaring and Thundering in this Vision) and that
thereupon, or then, the Children shall tremble from the West, or from the Dr.
P^cock on the Place.
Sea, as the Word in the Hebrew Signfies, that is, from the VVestern Parts, and
from Remote and Distant Countries, and even the uttermost parts of the Earth,
which is encompassed with the Sea. Which strange motion, or conversion, is to
come to pass near Christ's Second Coming (which Dr. Pocock asserts to be a
Received Opinion, as to the Jews) in his Kingdom; which was to have appeared
when Christ set his Right Foot upon the Sea; if the Thunders, the Effect of the
Lord's Roaring, had not been sealed; that is, if a stop had not been put to the
Efficacy of them: for Christ's Kingdom, when it comes in its full force, will
prevail, to the placing of the Jews in their Houses, Verse 11. and to the
bringing in the fullness, and perfection of the Gentiles.

3 And cried with a loud Voice [i. e. proclaimed his Right,] as when a Lion 8
roareth [i. e. terribly, and with Majesty, Isa. 31.4. Amos 3.8. Joel 3.16.
Prove. 20.2.] and when he had cried, seven Thunders 9 uttered their Voices
[declaring the appearance of his Kingdom.]

8 Christ, called, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5. is here
understood; whose Roaring denotes (as Dr. Pocock has shown upon Hos. 11.10.)
the Efficacious power of the preaching of the Gospel; resembled to the Voice of
a Lion, because of its calling Christians together to partake of it, and its
Promises; as the Lion does those of its own kind, to partake of the prey; and
because it is accompanied with a Terror and an Awe, and extends it self to the
uttermost parts of the Earth, with great power; as the Voice of a Lion is
terrible, and loud. And hereby also (as appears from the Texts I have quoted)
is signified, the Anger of God, when he appears for the Vindication of his
Kingdom, against the Enemies of it.

9 Thunders (as I have before shown on Chap. 6, 1.8, 5.) signify the Power,
and Efficacy, and signal Appearances of Christ's Kingdom, which, Seven, the
Number of Perfection, peculiarly denotes; and which Hannah prophesied would be
exalted by the Lord's Thundering out of Heaven, 1 Samuel 2.10.

4 And when the seven Thunders had uttered their Voices. I was about to write
[that which they had uttered;] and I heard a Voice from Heaven saying unto me,
10 Seal up those things which the Seven Thunders uttered, and write them not
[i. e. conceal them, as things which are to come to pass hereafter, and hinder
them from coming immediately into Effect, Dan. 8, 26.12, 4, 9.]

10 Here Sealing and Writing are plainly opposed; Writing signifying the
bringing of the Vision into Effect; and Sealing, the delaying of the
Acccmplishment of it; as I have shown on Chap. 5.1. So that here is a plain
stop put to the Kingdom of Christ; insomuch, that his Roaring did not prevail
to make the Children come trembling from the West.

5 And the Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the Earth, lifted up
his hand to Heaven [the Throne of God, in the posture and manner of Swearing,
Genesis 14.22. Dan. 12.7.]

6 And swore by him that lives for ever and ever, who created Heaven, and the
things that therein are; and the Sea, and the things which are therein [i. e.
by the Eternal, Omnipotent God, who created all things; and therefore can alter
them, and their Times and Seasons;] that there should be [such] time 11 no
longer [as that which the Prophet Daniel foretold, Chap. 7, 25.12, 7.]

11 Time in general, here called (...); is divided by Daniel into several
distinct (...); that is, appointed Times, or Seasons; which he calls Time,
Times, and the Dividing of Time; or a part, that is, an half of Time; which
Distribution is also used in this Book, Chap. 12.14. By Time is meant in
Daniel, the most signal, and perfect part of the appointed Times and seasons,
viz. a Year; as appears from Dan. 4.16. and 11.13. where Times plainly signify
Years.

By Times absolutely put, must be meant Two Times, or Two Years, because it is
the Dual Number; i. e. the next Plural Number to Time, or One Year; and then by
consequence, by The Division, or cutting off, or Half of Time, must be meant
Half a Year; as, I think, all Interpreters agree. Now The Prophetical Day,
being put for a Year, in Scripture, the Prophetical Year, must by consequence
be put for a Year of Prophetical Days; that is a year of years; consisting of
as many years as a Year does of Days; viz. of Three hundred and Sixty Years, in
round and equal Numbers, according to the degrees of a Circle: and then 360, a
Time. 720, Times. 180, half a Time. 1260.


Times must be Two Years of Years; i.e. Seven hundred and Twenty Years; and the
half Time must be half a year of years; that is One hundred and Eighty Years;
all which amounts to Twelve hundred and Sixty Years. Rev. 11, 3.12, 6.

Now Christ's Oath here having a clear reference to Daniel 12.7. by no more
Time, must be meant, no more such Time, or of the same Nature with the Times
there given to Antichrist; which were to cease, and no more time to be; except
when Christ's Kingdom appeared (which is the import of the following Verse)
when there should be Time indeed, but of a quite different Nature; dated, and
reckoned from the glorious Reign of Christ; and not from the Abominations and
Servitude of Antichrist; and ending in that, which is not so properly Time, as
the completion and perfection of it, Eternity: For Antichrist having changed
Times, (Dan. 7.25.) his Time may very well be said to be no more, when it is
changed into those of another Nature. See the Annotations on Chap. 11, 2.20, 4.

7 * But in the days of the Voice [or sounding] of the seventh Angel, wben he
shall 12 begin to sound [Chap. 11.15. and 13 when] the Mystery, [or wonderful
Prophetical Secret, Dan. 12.6.] of God [concerning the coming of the Kingdom of
Christ, Dan. 12.5-13. Romans 11.25, 26.] should be [or is] finished, [there shall
be Time indeed; but of a quite different Nature from the former:] as he has
declared [or Evangelized, the good Tidings of his Son's Kingdom, in the
beginning, progress, and perfection of it;] to his Servants the Prophets [Acts
3.21-26.]

* Dr. Oper. Theol. page 18
Moor reads (...), and renders it, except, or saving; making it to be the same
with (...); which is a Criticism, neither necessary, nor grounded upon the
Credit of Manuscripts.

12 The Word is rightly thus translated; and so it signifies, Luke 7.2. John
4.47. Acts 23.27. And Beza has well noted on John 4.47, That Aristotle
prudently distinguishes betwixt (...), and (...); the latter Word signifying
what is in preparation, or readiness to begin; and not always what is past.

13 The Particle And, is in the Greek Copies; which ought to be restored to the
Translation; and (...), or when, to be reduplicated, or repeated (...), with
(...); and the Words are to be translated, when it is finished; and not shall,
or should be finished; for then it should have been (...), and not (...).

From these Words thus settled, and interpreted in conjunction with Daniel, may
be drawn these following Observations:

(1.) That the Antichristian, or Gentile Times, are to have an End. For Christ
here swears, That such time shall be no longer; and in Daniel he swears, that
it shall be but for a Time, Times, and an half; that is, 1260. years; as has
been before shown.

(2.) That these Times are to end before the Days of the seventh Angel's
sounding. For it is expressly affirmed by Christ, Ver. 6. That there should be
Time no longer, but until those Days; in which there was to be Time indeed, but
of another Nature.

(3.) The precise Time of their Ending is affirmed in Daniel, Chap. 12.6, 7. to
be when the dispersing or scattering of the power of the holy people shall be
accomplished. For one of the Angels having asked Christ, Verse 6. how long, or
what space of Time it would be to the End of Wonders; or of These Wonders; i.
e. Those he had before spoken of, from Verse 1. to the 5th; as the LXX.
according to their Custom, enlarge upon the Words: It is answered, Verse 7.
that it would be Twelve hundred and sixty years to the End of these Wonders;
and (circumstantiating thereby the time of their End more particularly) that
when the dispersion should be accomplished; all of those things, or wonders
should be finished: thereby plainly intimating, that the scattering was to last
during the Twelve hundred and sixty years; and that they were not to end until
that was over. By which accomplishment of the scattering, or dispersion of the
power of the holy people, can be meant no other than the Woman's coming out of
the Wilderness; where the holy people were dispersed and scattered; because
that dispersion is of the same Duration with this; as appears from Rev. 12.6.
and is immediately to precede the Voice of the seventh Angel; as will be shown
hereafter on Rev. 11.11, 14.

(4.) At the End of Time; that is, of the Antichristian, and Gentile Times,
there shall be Time again, but of another Nature. For Christ having sworn,
there should be Time no longer; adds, But in the Days of the voice of the
seventh Angel: intimating thereby, that Time was then to be again; which must
be understood, to make the Sense complete. And therefore Antichristian Time
consisting of several (...), being ended; the succeeding Time must be of a
different Nature.

(5) The Beginning of this New Time, and its Period, are are here precisely
limited.

For, (1.) In general, it is to be in the days, or times of the voice, or
sounding of the seventh Angel.

(2.) It is to begin precisely, when he begins, or prepares to sound

(3.) It is to last until the Mystery of God, or the wonders, and wonderful
things ( Dan. 12.6, 7.) shall be finished; that is, until Christ shall say, It
is finished, It is finished, at the entrance of the Thousand Years of the New
Jerusalem State, when another sort of Time begins.

(6.) The whole Duration of this New Time is given in precise Numbers, by the
Prophet Daniel. For after he had assigned a Time, Times, and a half, to the
scattering of the holy people; he afterward, verse 11. adds thirty years unto
them; thereby making up the twelve hundred and sixty years, which are included
in them, to be twelve hundred and Ninety, for the full Time of the continuance
of the Antichristian Abomination: And then, verse 12. adds Forty Five more to
the twelve hundred and Ninety, making the whole time from the beginning of the
scattering of the holy people, to be Thirteen hundred and thirty Five years;
when he promises a blessed State; verse 12. So that hereby we have gained a
Line of Time, consisting of Seventy five years; reaching from the beginning of
the sounding of the seventh Angel, where John fixes it, through the Voices and
Vials issuing out of the Seventh Trumpet; until the finishing the Mystery of
God, in the appearance of Christ's glorious Kingdom; which will be but in a
State of Preparation, or in a Course, or Succession of Finishing, until that
Time.

But I cannot but after all observe, that Apud. Poli Sym.
Piscator upon the place, supposes (...) (in (...)) to be Emphatical, and to
signify as much as (...); that is, even then shall be finished the Mystery;
the Aorist (...), according to the Genius of the Greek Language, being
sometimes put for the Future. According to which Acceptance of the Word, the
Seventh Verse, which is a part of the Oath here, and in Daniel, will relate to
the finishing of the Mystery it self; and not only declare, that there shall be
Time for the finishing of it; which latter sense seems to be not so fit to be
the Subject of this Solemn Oath, as the former; although, according to the
ordinary Grammatical Construction of the Words, it appears to be the most
natural.

(Lastly,) From the due consideration of this Chapter, we may conclude, that
the Reformation, begun A. D. 1517. is foretold in it.

(1.) Because it is the Only Remarkable Event in History, relating to the
Kingdom of Christ, following the taking of Constantinople by the Turks;
represented in the foregoing Chapter. For the Spirit here affording us a
Prophetical View of a Series of Events in their orderly Succession; it cannot
be thought, that so great a one as the Reformation, should not at all be
mentioned; or if it were, that it should not be mentioned in its proper and due
place and season. Now allowing but Threescore and Four Years, as a space of
Repentance allotted by God, Chap. 9.20, 21. (which comes nigh the term of the
years of his Indignation against Jerusalem, Zech. 1.12.) for the correcting,
although not killing of the Western Apostasy, by the great Success of the
Turks; and the next thing Remarkable, is the Reformation, begun by Luther, A.
D. 1517. when at his first preaching against Indulgences, he, out of a small
Spark, kindled such a Fire, as set all Europe in a Combustion; as Ration. Temp.
lib. 9. 11.
Petavius speaks: who also remarks, that in the same year (which is pitched
upon generally by Chronologers, for the Era of the Reformation, Sleidan
beginnning his Commentaries at it,) at the Conclusion of the Lateran Council,
an Expedition against the Turks was resolved upon; for the carrying on of
which, Indulgences Fox's Book of Mart. Vol. 2. page 47. Mezeray, page 562.
were pretended to have been granted: Upon which it is that Mezeray observes,
that the First Evil (meaning the Turks) gave occasion for the Birth of the
Second Evil; as he calls the Reformation.

Now upon the great success of the Turks, at a Time when Selymus had made
extraordinary preparations against the Christians, and just before the
appearance of that great and successful Warrior, Selyman the Magnificent, who
overrun Hungary, and b^s^^ged Vienna it self; it pleased God to give Birth to
the Reformation: which was not only to be a Scourge, (although of another, yet
not of a less Formidable Nature, than the Turkish*) to the Western Apostasy,
for its impenitency; but also a most Notable Apperance of the Kingdom of
Christ; whereby there might be a Recompense made for the Loss Christianity in
general had suffered by the destruction of the Eastern Church.

For although that was sufficiently made up, in the true Value, and intrinsic
Worth of the Reformation; yet God, for the sake of his Son's Name, is so far
tender of Christianity, as not to let the Turk destroy the Western Empire, by
taking Rome, or even Vienna it self; because it is the Seat of the Christian
Emperor: as appears from the Vain Attempts of Solomon, A.D. 1529. and A.D.
1532. when he fled out of Bizarus de reb. Persicis, page 360, 361.
Hungary, the Vengeance of God following him in a dreadful Plague; and from
their late Defeat, fresh in our Memory.

And by the Reformation also, Christ was pleased to intimate, That Cbristians
were not to despond at the great progress of Mahometism; as if it had been such
an extraordinary Encroachment upon his Kingdom; seeing that was of a quite
different Nature from that Religion generally professed in the parts of the
Eastern and Western Empire, which were overrun by it; and was rather of such a
pure and spiritual Nature, as that of which the Reformation had given a
Specimen.

(2.) The Reformation is here meant; because then it might be truly sworn, that
Time should be no longer; that being so great a Breach upon the Power given to
Antichrist, that it could not happen during his Times. But if it be said, that
his Time could not be then sworn to be past, because his Power still remains:
It may be answered, that by Time here in the 6th Verse cannot be meant, all
Time whatsoever in general; but such Divisions as are made of it, Dan. 12.7,
into Time, Times, and a half; and that therefore when the Time, Times, and any
the smallest part of the half Time was past, it might be then truly affirmed,
that Time, that is, such Time should be no longer; Half Time broken, and
diminished, being no longer, in propriety of Speech, Half Time; and the Time
and Times being already wholly past. And that the full Expiration, and Actual
End of all manner of Antichristian Time, cannot be here understood, is plain
from the next Verse; where it is affirmed, that this is not to come to pass
until the Voice of the Seventh Angel.

And from hence it is, that a Worthy Person asserts, That this Oath took place
as soon as ever Half Time was entered, and the first minutes of it were past;
because that was the first opportunity in which it could be in Truth declared,
that such Times sbould be no more; which Christ laid hold on, to give a timely
notice of his approaching Kingdom; and to lay a Claim to it, as he had done
before, at other Apperances; and that space enough might be afforded for the
Transactions to be performed in the Remaining Parts of Half Time.

Now if the half Time, began at 1517 180 1697


1517. then (seeing that consists of One hundred and Eighty Years) it must end,
together with the whole twelve hundred and sixty years, at 1697. when the
Seventh Trumpet shall sound, and all things shall tend to the finishing of the
Mystery of Christ's Kingdom, according to Verse 7; which must also, according
to the same Reason, have begun A. D. 437. for there the Era of the twelve
hundred and sixty years must be fixed, if we reckon backward, from 1517 437
1080 1080 437 1517


1517. deducting from it One thousand and Eighty Years, the full Sum of the
Time, and Times, then elapsed.

(3.) The Action of Christ's setting his Right Foot upon the Sea, agrees very
well to the Circumstances of the times, when the Reformation began; and to the
Events which have followed upon it. For it began in the Western parts, viz.
Europe, fignified by the Sea, as I have already shown; and when the New Western
World of America was just found out; which was first attempted by Columbus, A.
D. 1492. and discovered by Americus Vesputius, AD. 1498. the Streights and Sea
of Magellan, being found A. D. 1518. the very year after the beginning of the
Reformation: upon which there followed continually large discoveries, and a New
World; whither the Gospel has been carried, and where the Reformation has
found a Refuge, and made a considerable progress. All which seems to be the
Effect of Christ's setting his Foot upon those places; whereby he took
possession of the whole Globe, and made a passage for his Kingdom, through the
Sea, extending it to the utmost parts of the Earth.

(4.) The Reformation was a remarkable, and powerful appearance of Christ's
Kingdom; and therefore may be very well here specified by the magnificent
appearance of Christ; by his coming down from Heaven; by his having a Book
open; by his loud Voice; by his Roaring; and the Seven Thunders: By all which
are signified in Scripture (as I have already hinted) some remarkable,
manifest, and efficacious appearances of Christ's Kingdom.

For the Reformation was, as In Prefat. and Apolog^
Sleidan truly observes, one of the most Illustrious Events which has come to
pass, and not to be paralleled since the Apostles times; which none can think
of without astonishment, and the utmost degrees of admiration and wonder; there
being in it great Discoveries made of God's Almighty Power, and admirable
Counsels; which being designed (as the Creation, and all his providential Works
are) chiefly with reference to his Son's Kingdom; he has been pleased to give
us Visible Marks and Characters of it, in the Reformation; such as are,

(1.) The Agreement and Consent which there was in the Substantials of
Doctrine, at first betwixt the Reformers: Unity, John 17.11-23. Ephesians. 4.3, 4.
in truth, being a Mark of Christ's Kingdom, and one of the most powerful
external means to convert the World. For this great Work was begun about the
same time in two distant places; by Luther in Germany, and by Zuinglius at
Zurich; and although they held no Communication with one another, ( Zuinglius
on purpose abstaining from reading of Luther's Books, when they began to be
common amongst them) yet they differed in no Doctrine of any very considerable
moment (as the French Historian Page 946.
Mezeray confesses, concerning the Protestants in general,) but in that of the
Sacrament; where also their difference was not so great, but that they both
Sleidan, page 97, 121, 159. edit. Anglic.
agreed in the Substance of the Article, that Christ's Body was taken
spiritually with the Heart, and not corporally with the Mouth; and resolved, at
a Conference they had about it, to refrain from all Contention concerning the
manner, how Christ was present in the Sacrament. Whereby it came to pass, that
the people, amongst whom Luther 's Writings were at last common, by hearing and
reading of them, did see the same Spirit in both of them, according to the
Scriptures; and did submit the more willingly to the Truth, although it seemed
something New to them; which was Zuinglius's Design in abstaining from reading
of Luther's Books; as Melchior Adam. Vita Zuingl. page 28.
Melchior Adamus particularly testifies in his Life.

(2.) The Reformation began on a sudden, with a surprise, and at unawares; when
men were most secure, and were the least prepared for it; which are the Signs
of the coming of Christ's Kingdom in Scripture, Matthew. 24.36-51. 1 These. 5.3.
For Leo Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent, page 4* 5.9. Fascicul.
rerum expetend, passim. Bishop of Meauxe's History of Variat. page 1, ^.
the tenth, was then Pope, a most Voluptuous Libertine, as loose in his
Religion as his Manners; whose Example also was followed by almost the whole
Clergy; who were then, as the Popish Writers of those Times unanimously
confess, very ignorant, and very vicious. And the Church also was then at ease
and quiet, the Schism (as Father Paul speaks) being absolutely extinguished,
and no considerable Adversary appearing. When all on a sudden, whilst the Pope
was at rest in his House, and flourishing in his Palace, dissolved in Ease and
Luxury; the Reformation broke out, to his great astonishment and disquiet, at
an unexpected time, and by an Accident very observable; his Factors being then
busy in selling Indulgences, to supply his excessive Prodigality, and to raise
a Portion for his Sister.

All which came to pass according to what the Scripture has assured us, That
when Men say Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them, and
that the coming of the Son of Man shall be, when Men are eating and drinking*
marrying and giving in marriage; and so was it at this his remarkable coming.

(3.) The Reformation proceeded from small beginnings, and yet made a wonderful
progress in a short time, notwithstanding the most powerful Endeavors to the
contrary; being sometimes carried on by Men who designed nothing less, and by
Means, and to Ends unthought of, even by those who begun it. Which are plain
Characters of the Kingdom of Heaven in Matthew. 13. Mark 4.26, 27.
Scripture; which is likened to a Grain of Mustard Seed, the least of all
Seeds; which yet when it is grown up, is the greatest of all Herbs; and to Seed
sown in the ground, which springs and grows up, and yet the Sower himself
knows not how. For Father Paul's Hist. of Counc. of Trent, page 6-12. 15, 17.
71. Sleidan, in Prefat. and page 31.
Luther was a Person of no great Fame, or Interest; who designed at first only
to preach against the Scandalous Abuses of Indulgences; and was carried on
contrary to his Expectation, from one Controversy to another, and against his
first Inclinations and Resolutions, chiefly by the forward Oppositions of his
Adversaries; he having often professed, that he was ready to let the Cause
fall, if his Enemies would but permit him. And if some few Father Paul's Hist.
page 20-23. Bishop Burnet's Histor. Reform. part 1. page 255.
things had been at first granted, (which Pope Hadrian was inclinable to, but
was diverted from his purpose by others) it is generally thought, that a stop
had been put to the Reformation. But God ordered things otherwise, making the
sins of Men subservient to his Will: as is apparent from the Actions of Henry
the Eighth; who intended Fox's Rook of Martyrs, Vol. 2. page 273. Vol. 3. page
92.
nothing less at first, than the throwing of the Pope's Power, and seems in all
his Actions, to be lead on by Providential Circumstances, to do that which he
least designed. But as its Beginnings were mean and contemptible, so was its
Progress Sleidan 133. 160. Basnage Histoir. de la Religion, page 421.
wonderful; for by the year 1532. Seven Princes, and Twenty Four Cities had
received Luther's Doctrine; and as Erasmus tells us, it had spread all over
Germany, and had stretched it self from the Ocean, as far as Switzerland.

Neither did it contain it self only within Germany, but the sound of it
reached Sweden and Denmark; the former receiving the Reformation, A.D. 1525.
the latter A. D. 1537. and its progress was so sudden, and so swift, rouzing
the whole World (as Erasmus speaks of it) out of its Lethargy; that I could
never think of it, without reflecting upon the Question made by our Honest
Martyrologist, John Vol. 2. page 80.
Fox; viz. how it should come to pass, that although the Romish Bishop has had
great Enemies and Gainsayers continually from time to time, both speaking and
working, preaching and writing against him, yet notwithstanding never any could
prevail before the coming of Luther?

To which weighty Question, although he gives there several good Conjectural
Resolutions, as he calls them; yet the Chief Reason is to be assigned to the
Thunders and Voices which were then uttered; and to the wonderful Efficacy
which prophetical Times and Seasons, have upon the Affairs of Christ's Church;
it being Necessary (as Father History, page 4.
Paul judiciously observes upon this very occasion) for the effecting of any
thing, that the time come in which it may please God to correct the Errors of
Men: Which (says he) met, together with fit Occasions, and Instruments which
knew how to make use of them, in the time of Leo. For although Men's Minds were
then disposed for a Reformation, by Reason of the Scandalous Lives, Ignorance,
and Tyranny of the Clergy; yet this Effect could not have been produced singly
from these Occasions; if the Times ordained by God's Infinite Wisdom, had not
conspired with them. And what less than Divine Assistance could give Life and
Success to a single, unassisted Person; so as to enable Basnage ubi supra.
him to convert a whole Town by one single Sermon; and to break through all
manner of difficulties with an invincible Courage, notwithstanding the utmost
Oppositions made against him, by that Great Emperor Charles the Fifth; and the
United Forces and Counsels of the Pope, and his Party: So great Reason had
Calvin. 2 Disc. c. Westfal. Opuscul. fol. 785. 787. and ibid. 137, 141.
Calvin to style Luther the Trumpet, or rather the Thunder, which raised the
World out of its Lethargy; and to say, That it was not Luther that spoke, but
God that thundered by his Mouth.

Neither were the forementioned Circumstances only observable in the Lutheran
Reformation, but in that begun in Switzerland, and Geneva: For Sleidan. passim.
page 48, 70, 76. vita ejus per Melchior. Adam.
Zuinglius was the only Person which appeared at first amongst the Helvetians;
And although he met with great Opposition from the Popish Cantons, and from his
own people, for endeavoring to dissuade them from being Mercenary in the Wars
of Foreign Princes; yet he broke through all Obstacles, and propagated his
Doctrine in a few years, in very many parts of that, and the Neighboring
Countries.

The like to which appears in the Reformation of See Mr. Spoon's History of
Geneva.
Geneva, begun A. D. 1532. only by Two Ministers of Piedmont; who, taking
Occasion from some Divisions amongst the People, upon some Protestant Theses
being set up by a few young Men in several Corners of the Street; propagated
the Truth in a short time very successfully; the Common people hearing them
gladly. For it was not until afterward, A.D. 1536. that Mr. Calvin (that great
Instrument for the promoting the Truth, Power, and Simplicity of Religion) came
to that City; whose settling there was no less Providential and unexpected, then
his Success: For he intended only to take it in his way to Basil, or Strasburg,
in one of which places he designed to continue for some time; and when he was
persuaded by Monsieur Farel, to tarry there, he met with so great Opposition,
that he was banished the City; and yet upon his Return prevailed so far, as to
settle his Doctrine and Discipline there, although it were utterly contrary to
the Looseness of their Manners; where it has ever since been exercised with
great Vigor; that small State and City flourishing (according to the wise
Observation of Mr. Spon, with which he shuts up his History of that City)
whilst other Cities have perished, and mighty States have been overturned:
which God often permits by his admirable Providence, to let great and small
States know, that their Subsistence or Ruin depends not on their own Strength
or Weakness; but that they are all in his hand, and their Happiness and misery
come only from him. But his Doctrine and Discipline did not contain it self
within the Narrow Bounds of that City; but that small Leaven leavened many
Kingdoms and Countries; viz. France, Poland, Germany, Scotland, the
Netherlands, and Hungary: and has maintained it self chiefly by the Severity
of the Manners of its Followers, and the Strictness of their Discipline, as the
Judicious French Mezeray's History, page 951. See the Synodicon of the Reformed
Churches of France, lately Printed in English.
Historian has observed: which is so great, that Henry Perefixes Life of Henry
4th, ad an. 1587.
the Fourth himself, although he was then King of Navarr, and Chief of their
Party, was forced by the Consistory of Rochel, to make Reparation for a Scandal
he had given, by his Looseness.

(4.) The Reformation (which Vita ejus per Melchior. Adam: page, 122.
Luther foretold should never be extinguished) has been also miraculously
preserved, as the Kingdom of Christ has always been, amidst the Convulsions of
States and Empires; and has been many times rescued from imminent Destructions
by extraordinary Means, and unforeseen Accidents: Whereby it appears, that it
is a Plant planted by our Heavenly Father; else it had been before now rooted
up.

The Troubles were so great, which the First Reformers encountered with, that
good Sleidan, page 140.
Melancthon was very much dejected at them; and even Luther himself, although
of an undaunted Spirit, was sometimes oppressed with disconsolate Thoughts,
about the State of Things; and had gone back, if he had not been
extraordinarily assisted. When his Cause was in great danger, (as Fox Vol. 2.
page 49, 50.
remarks) the mavelous Providence of God, who had this matter in guiding,
poovided a Remedy where the Power of Man did fail: and stirred up the whole
University of Wittenberg, to petition Duke Frederick in his behalf, when he was
upon the Point of Banishment: Whereupon the Duke began to consider his
Doctrine, and to favor him. Several times did God preserve this tender plant,
notwithstanding the many Wars, Leagues and Consultations to root it out; as
upon the Death of Sleidan 250.
George of Saxony; the many Successes of the Emperor; but especially that
Sleidan 375 -- Mezeray. page 620, 624, 632, 633, 954. Melch. Adam. Vita Calvin.
page 80. Summum Religionis discrimen, etc.
remarkable one, when the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave of Hesse were
Prisoners; when the Reformation in Germany had been entirely destroyed, if God
had not ordered Matters otherwise, by a strange turn of Affairs; whereby the
Emperor was at last forced to grant the Edict of Tbuan. Hist. Tome 1. page
503. Mezeray, 954.
Passau, which is still the Security of the Reformation in those parts; and the
True Foundation of the Liberty of the Protestants; as Monsieur Mezeray
observes: which was done for fear of a War which threatened him on both sides,
from the French and the Turks; by which means, Protestantism was generally
preserved in Germany, during the Reign of Charles the Fifth.

And yet to see the admirable Care of Divine Providence over the Vine which he
had planted; for when Sleidan, page 463.
the Reformation was at its lowest Ebb in Germany, by the forementioned
occasion; it went on very vigorously in England; the Mass being abolished there
at that very Critical Conjuncture; whereby the Protestants were kept in heart,
and its future increase was provided for.

In England, as Fox, Vol. 2. page 273, 370. Vol. 3. page 386, 792, 800. Bishop
Burnet's History of the Reformation, part 1. page 135, 136.
Historians have observed, the Reformation was remarkably preserved by many
strange Accidents, amidst the unaccountable Humors of a Cruel and
Vainglorious Prince; As, by the Intrigues of Woolsey, for the Papacy, and his
missing of it; which if he had obtained, no doubt (says Fox) the Authority of
that See had never been exterminated out of England: By the Solicitations of
the Emperor with the Pope, the Easiness of the Pope to grant the Bull, and
again his Stiffness in denying it; but especially by his rash and precipitate
Sentence against the King; and that contrary to the ordinary Forms of
proceeding in his own Courts; which if they had observed the Breach betwixt
them had been made up; the King's Submission arriving at Rome but Two Days
after the Sentence given. But (as our late Ecclesiastical Historian judiciously
observes) God in his wise and unsearchable Providence had designed to draw
other great Ends out of this Rupture; and therefore suffered them that were
most concerned to hinder it, to be the chief Instruments of driving it on. The
unprosperous proceedings of Q. Mary, and the strange Preservations of Q.
Elizabeth, together with other remarkable Instances of God's Providence in the
Times of Persecution, are largely insisted upon by our Laborious Martyrologist,
at the End of his Third Volume; which I shall not therefore mention: as neither
the secret Cardin. Bentivol. History of the Wars of Flanders, page 6.
Correspondencies betwixt Philip the 2d of Spain, and the King of France, for
the Extirpation of Protestantism, discovered by William Prince of Orange; the
Measures Mezeray, page 651, 653.
taken for exterminating it by the Spaniards and French, at a Treaty, wholly
defeated by the sudden Death of Henry the Second; the Effect which the French
Mezeray, page 651, 653, 957.
Massacre met with, contrary to the Design of those who contrived it; whereby
it was turned rather to the strengthening and security of the Protestants, than
their utter Ruin, as it might have done; to omit the Defeat in Eighty Eight,
the Gunpowder Treason, and the later Deliverance, fresh in our Memories; for
which I refer the Reader to a Sermon preached by Bishop Burnet, before the
Queen, on July the 16th, 1690.

(5.) The Reformation was an appearance of the Kingdom of Christ; as it cleared
up the True Notion and Nature of his Spiritual Kingdom, in the Souls of Men; by
instructing them in the Nature of Faith, and of Justification by Christ's
Merits; to which (as Mr. Fox Vol. 2. page 80.
has judiciously observed) the Success of the Reformation was very much owing;
those Doctrines having been mightily obscured by a wrong Notion of good Works,
and the Doctrine of Merits, one of the most Fundamental Errors of Popery. And
it very much also contributed to this End; by stripping Religion of much of its
vain Pomp, and unedifying Ceremonies; which do not promote true inward Piety,
but distract the Mind; which being of a limited Capacity, cannot well attend at
once to two Objects of so different a Nature, as sensible and intellectual ones
are. For the External Pomp of Religion, and its gaudy Ornaments, are very
contrary to the Simplicity of the Gospel; in which only Two External Rites, and
those very plain and simple ones, were instituted; viz. Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper; Christian Religion consisting chiefly in the heart, and Affections; and
in Externals, as they conduce to inward Holiness; according to what our Savior
has told us concerning his Kingdom, Luke 17.20. that it comes not with
observation; that is, is not See Grotius on the place; and Hammond.
attended with Pomp, Splendour, and Riches; but is a Spiritual Romans 2, 19. and
14.17.
Kingdom, in the Heart and Spirit, consisting not in Meats and Drinks, but in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Whereupon the Sleidan, page 53. Mezeray, page 948, 957.
Reformation retrenched much of the superfluous Riches of the Church; which are
apt to corrupt the best men's minds; and lessened much of the Secular Grandeur,
Pre-eminence, and Superiority, Titles and Honors of the Clergy; whereby the
Church becomes too like a worldly Kingdom: Whereas Christ plainly declares,
that his Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.36. and Matthew. 20.20-28. Luke
22.24-30.
forbids his Apostles all secular Jurisdiction, and the Affectation, at least,
of Titles of Honor and Authority.

(Lastly,) It was an appearance of the Kingdom of Christ, as it shook, and made
a breach in that of Antichrist; which it is at last utterly to break in pieces,
consume aed destroy, Dan. 2, 44.7, 26. And this it did after a most signal
manner, by drawing of many Kingdoms and Princes, from the Antichristian
Corruptions of Popery.

But as the Reformation was an Appearance of Christ's Kingdom, so it must be
confessed, that it was but an Imperfect one; by reason of the sealing up, or
putting a stop to those things which the Seven Thunders uttered: which would
otherwise have produced Christ's Kingdom in Glory, and have broken in pieces
the Kingdom of Antichrist. And that such a stop was put to its Efficacy, will
appear from these Considerations:

(1.) Because the Reformation was not attended with Miracles; which our Matthew.
12.28. Luke 10, 9.11, 20.
Savior makes to be a certain Sign of the coming of his Kingdom. And if it
were the Sign of its first coming, have we not reason to expect, that it shall
be so of its Second? But this Gift cannot be expected, whilst Antichristianism
prevails so mightily in the World; whose increase was the Cause of the
Cessation of Miracles in the Church; which lasted for a considerable time (as
has been shown by the Learned Mr. Dodwell in his Dissertations on Irenaeus and
Cyprian) beyond the Infancy of the Gospel, and the first propagation of it; for
which Age therefore they could not only be designed; and gradually decreased,
as the Errors and Corruptions of the Church increased.

(2.) According to the Parables of our Savior, Matthew. 13. concerning his
Kingdom; the Enemy soon sowed Tares in it whilst men slept; which choked, and
perverted the Word of the Kingdom at first preached, in many things; and the
Men which it gathered of every kind, bad as well as good, brought in a mixture
of their own sins and infirmities into it. For, not only Mezeray, page 948.
Camden. Elizab. page 26. Fox 's Martyr. Vol. 3. page 105, 442, 537.
Politicians, and wicked Worldlings, carried on their private Designs, (which
the Reformers here in England complained much of, as to the point of
Sacrilege) but the Good Men, who most effectually promoted it, had their
Weaknesses and Infirmities. Sleidan, 21, 43. and passim.
Luther and Adam. Vit. Calv. page 109* See Calvin's Answer to Officium viri pii.
Calvin, although extraordinary Persons, and of great Piety were both Men of
very warm Tempers, and were sometimes too violently transported; and the latter
is thought to have had a too Hooker's Preface to Eccles. Polit.
overweening Opinion for his own Discipline; endeavoring every where to
introduce it as Necessary, and of Divine Original; which yet was at first very
imperfect; the first Synodic. Gall. Reform. Tome 1. page 16.
Plat form of it, as it is received in the Church of France, having been
altered and augmented in Three and Twenty Synods, before it could be brought to
that Model in which it now is; which it must be confessed is very excellent;
and fit to be diligently perused by all, whose Thoughts are employed in
restoring Church Discipline. But yet, to deal impartially, I cannot think, but
that the Natural Severity of the Temper of this Great and Good Man (to whose
indefatigable pains and great Parts, we are endebted for the true Sense of the
Scriptures), gave sometimes a Tincture to his Opinions, or at least to his
Expressions in the Praedestinarian Controversies; which his Followers urged
with too great warmth and harshness toward Dissenters, in France, and the
Netherlands.

Neither have the Histoire abregee de l' Europe, Tome 1. page 528, 663, 667.
Lutherans been less rigorous in imposing their Opinions; who having retained
several Errors, as in the point of Consubstantiation, Images, Vbiquity, and the
like; would not admit the Reformed to their Communion, without their
subscribing to some of those controverted Articles; and denied them Churches in
their Cities, even when they were forced to retire unto them for succor in the
heat of the last French Persecution. In which seems to be some Relics of that
Spirit which at first much retarded the progress of the Reformation in Germany;
the Lutherans being then so wedded to their Opinion about the Sacrament, that
the Sleidan, 122, 151.
Confederates would not admit the Switzers, and those that followed Zuinglius,
into their Leagues; thinking their Assistances to be unlawful; and that they
would be as dismal in the Events, as Confederacies with Idolaters in Scripture:
and the Ten Years Imprisonment of Histor. Carcerum per Pezelium.
Casparus Peucerus, about the same Controversy, shows, that they did not
afterward much abate of their Rigor.

Furthermore, I cannot but be persuaded, that the many Wars and Confusions
which the Reformation has been engaged in (which were Mezeray, 951, 952. The
Account of the Persecution of the Vaudois, Printed at Oxford.
often the Occasions of their Persecutions), argue it to have fallen short, in
producing that Exemplary Patience, and Resignation to the Cross, which
Christianity designed, and which it at first wrought in the Primitive
Christians. And the many Errors and Divisions, which sprung up with the
Reformation, plainly prove, that there were many Tares mixed with it; which yet
God has been pleased to make use of to many good Ends; there being scarce any
Erroneous Persuasion in Religion, which has not some Truth mixed with it; and
which was not occasioned by some Neglect in the Church: which God by those
Extremes punishes them for, and calls upon them to reform. Even the
Extravagancies of Sleidan, page 52, 79, 83, 90, 96, 190.
Munster, and the Boors (to whose Demands Luther gave too sharp and bloody an
Answer, as his own Historian confesses) have a mixture of some important
Truths; and the Sleidan, page 244.
Antinomians, who first appeared about A. D. 1538. seem to have been permitted,
to admonish the Reformers of more Exalted Thoughts of the Riches of God's free
Grace in Christ; which they seemed not at first sufficiently to admire: as God,
by permitting the Extremes of Arminiauism on the other side, calls upon Men to
make use of their own hearty Endeavors; when Morality decays, and Men do not
as much as they are able, upon the pretense of Impotency; which was the Plea of
Vossii Histor. Pelag. page 21, 22.
Pelagius, who, except in the point of Grace, and those Controversies which
depend upon it, was for the most part Orthodox, and of a very good Life: and
especially thereby admonishes warm Zealots, to take care, lest in the Heat of
their Disputes about difficult and inexplicable matters, they make God, at
least indirectly, the Author of Sin; and lessen the Extent of his Grace. The
Fifth-Monarchy-men upbraid the Reformation with its Ignorance in the Nature of
Christ's Kingdom; and their inordinate Zeal, and furious Opposition of Civil
Authority, upon pretense of its contrariety to the Gospel, ought to be an
Admonisbment to Christian Magistrates, to endeavor after a more Holy way of
Government, than the World has yet arrived to. Enthusiasm is permitted, when
Formality and Deadness in Devotion too much increase. And even the Behavior of
the Quakers, may put Christians in remembrance of the Duties of Patience, and
bearing of Injuries; and may be designed by Providence, (which makes use of the
Sins and Follies of Men to Good Ends) to witness against common Swearing, and
Perjury; Deceit, and Equivocation in point of Trade; Pride, and Superfluity in
Clothes; Vain Complements, Flattering and Swelling Titles; and an Unnecessary
Use of Words and Names, taken from Idolatrous Opinions and Customs; and those
Plays and Sports, which nourish Lightness and Debauchery. The like Observation
may be made upon the other Subdivisions amongst Protestants; All of which carry
something in them to upbraid the Reformation of its Imperfection; and may be
made use of to Excellent Ends; it being as useful to the Church, to consider
what is good in them, as to confute them; and of greater benefit to the State,
to amend the Faults which occasioned them, than to prosecute them with Rigor;
which has been seldom See Thuanus's Preface to his History.
successful.

(3.) The Reformation is Imperfect, in what relates to Christian Practice; as
not having been able to bring in Everlasting Righteousness; and abundance of
Righteousness, with Peace, Truth, and Glory; according to what is prophesied of
Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 9.24. Psalm 72. and 85.

(4.) Neither has it arrived to the perfection of a Church State, as it is
laid down in Scripture; especially in the Model of the Church of Jerusalem,
given in the Acts of the Apostles; which was the first Christian Church, built
(according to our Savior's Promise) upon Peter; and called, The Church, by way
of Emphasis and Eminence; as if it were the Pattern by which others were to be
tried and modelled: For the First Apostolical Churches are the Standard of all
Reformation; and not the following Churches, even of the First Ages, which
degenerated very soon from their Primitive Purity and Simplicity. But because
the Particulars of the Defects of the Reformation, as to this Head, are too
many to be considered as they ought to be in this place; I shall leave them to
a particular Treatise on that Subject: only desiring the Judicious and
Conscientious Readers to lay aside the great Fondness which the best of Men are
wont to have for the Constitutions of the particular Churches, of which they
are Members; and to consider impartially the several places of Consider the
Mystical signification of what is delivered in the Law of Moses, with relation
to the Sanctuary, God's Worship, and his Priests; particularly, Exodus 28, 29,
30 Chapters. Leviticus 10.8-11. and Chapters 21, and 22. Ezekiel 42, 13, 14.44,
8-31. much of Ezekiel, from Chapter 40, to the end. Matthew. 18, 15-20.19, 17.20,
24-29.23, 6-12. and Grotius on those places. John 15, 27.17, ^0-23. Acts 1,
13-26.2, 37-47.3, 1.4, 31-37.5, 1-14, 41, 42.6, 1-8.8, 2.9, 39.12, 5.13, 2, 3,
15.14.22, 23, 27. Chapter 15.16, 2, 4, 5, 25.20, 7, 11, 27-36. Romans, from
Chapter 12, to the End of the Epistle. First Epistle to the Corinthians, from
the First Chapter to the 15th. and Chapter 16. most part of the Second Epistle
to the Corinthians. Galatians 2, and 6. Ephesians 2, 19-22. Chapters 4th, 5th,
and 6th; the Epistle to the Philipppians; the greatest part of the Epistles to
the Colossians, Tbessalonians, Timothy, and Titus; Hebrews 5, 12-14. and
Chapters 6.1, 2.12, 14-29. and Chapter 13; the generality of the Epistle of
James. 1 Peter, 2d Chapter, to the End of the Epistle; 2 Peter 1, 3-21. and
Chapter 2d, and 3d; most of the Epistles of John, and Christ's Letters to the
Seven Churches; Which places, diligently compared with what is prophesied of
Christ's Kingdom, in the Prophets and the Three last Chapters of the
Revelations; will furnish a Man with an exact Idea of the Church; as it was
designed by Christ, with respect to Faith, Discipline and Manners.
Scripture, which treat of Matters relating to Church Affairs; and then to
compare the State of the Churches now in being, with what God requires in a
pure Church; and I am confident they will abate much of a too fond Dotage upon
any particular Constitution, or Church State, that is now in the World: Of
which Opinion also are the Honest, and the Judicious of all Parties, when some
happy Conjunctures force them upon cool thoughts, and peaceable Considerations;
which yet do not meet with their desired Success, but in God's own Times and
Seasons. Which is remarkably evident in the Reformation of the Church of
England; which although begun by very good and great Men, and carried on often
very vigorously and successfully, yet has not been able to arrive to those
Degrees of Perfection, which even the first Reformers, who planted it, and
watered it with their Blood, Reformatio Legum Ecclesiastic.
designed and Preface to the Comminat. Fox's Book of Martyrs, edit. ult. Vol,
3. page 67, 105, 107; 120, 121, 137, 362, 374, 385, 400, 403, 411, 412, 427,
442, 537. Bishop Burnet's History of the Reformation, edit. secunda: Tome 1.
Praefat. page 147, 148, 189, 262, 300, 303, 315, 364. in the Collect. page 160,
178, 182. Praefat. ad Vol. secund. and page 44, 59, 67, 71, 72, 73, 75, 79, 80,
95, 96, 101, 104. ad 110, 112, 141, 145, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 182, 189,
190, 191, 196. ad 202, 218, 219, 304, 339, 376, 377, 387, 390, 394, 395, 396,
397, 398, 399, 406, 407, 420. Camdeni Elizab. ed. Amstelod. page 26 in Praefat.
391, 392. Sir Simon D' Ewes's Journal, page 156-158. 161, 166, 167, 177, 184,
257, 302, 303, 329, 357-360, 557, 639. Bishop Stillingfleet's Preface to his
Unreasonableness of Separation; the Discourses written lately about the
Ecclesiastical Commission, and the Convocation: a Paper entitled, Grievances
of the Church of England; supposed to be written by Archbishop Sancroft.
Letters of the English Reformers, in the Library of Switzerland. and Bishop
Burnet's excellent Discourse of the Pastoral Care.
wished for: But, what through the inconstant Humor of a Vain and a Cruel
Prince, under whom it begun; the Avarice and Dissentions of the Chief Ministers
of the Court of King Edward the Sixth; the short Reign of that Prince; the
contrary turn of Affairs in Q. Mary's Days; and the invincible prejudices of
that great Princess Q. Elizabeth, under whom it was settled, who was against
Alterations in the Church: the glorious Work did not receive the last and
finishing Hand of its Master Builders; but has ever since been hindered and
retarded by several strange Occurrences; but chiefly by the contrary struglings
of two Parties, ever since the Differences at Frankford; whereby, through
mutual Animosities, and immoderate Opposition (the chief Obstacle to all Noble
and Peaceable Designs,) things have sometimes rather gone back, than forwards:
So that there is little hope of going on unto Perfection; until the Times of
Restitution begin to appear, and God shall be pleased to dispose the Minds of
Men by his overruling Providence, to so necessary, and so glorious an
Undertaking.

8 And the Voice which I heard from Heaven [verse 4.] spoke unto me again, and
said, go, and take the little Book, which is open in the hand of the Angel,
which stands [or stood] upon the Sea, and upon the Earth.

9 And I went unto the Angel, and said unto him, Give me the little Book. And
he said unto me, Take it, and eat 14 it up [i. e. commit it to Memory, and keep
it secret as yet, Dan. 7, 28.12, 4, 9. Ezekiel. 2, 8.3, 1-10.] and it shall make
thy Belly bitter [because what is contained in it must be delayed for a longer
time, Dan. 8.26, 27.10, 14-16.] but it shall be in thy mouth [when thou
prophesiest again, Verse 11.] sweet as honey [as containing the sweet and glad
tidings of Christ's Kingdom, Psalm 19, 10.119, 103. Jerem. 15.16. Ezekiel. 3.3.]

14 To eat, signifies to meditate, and digest Divine Truths; as appears from
our Savior's Discourse, John 6. and withal to keep them close and secret; as
Mary did, Luke 2.19, 51: the Belly denoting in Scripture, the most secret
Thoughts and Cogitations of a Man. By which is signified, that Christ's
Kingdom, which had appeared but for a short time (only so long as to be just
seen open, and whilst the Book could be taken into his hand and mouth) should
soon have a stop put to it; and thereby create much Sorrow to all the true
Servants of God; but that it should again appear (signified by being again in
his mouth, after it had been in his Belly) in its Glory, to the Joy and Comfort
of them.

10 And I took the little Book out of the Angels hand, and eat it up, and it
was in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was
bitter [i. e. I was really affected, after the manner the Angel had foretold.]

11 And he [i. e. the Angel] said unto me, Thou must 15 prophecy again [i. e.
foretell the coming of Christ's Kingdom, Chap. 11.3.] before [of, or against]
many 16 People, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings [i. e. before the People,
and Rulers of the Kingdom of Antichrist.]

15 To prophecy (as is shown on Chap. 11.3.) is to foretell the coming of
Christ's Kingdom; which it is said here John should do; because he was to
deliver more Prophecies concerning it; and because it was to be actually
performed by the Witnesses represented by John; as the people of Israel of Old
were by the Prophets, who were sometimes Types of them. And from these Words we
may observe;

(1.) That the Witnesses, represented in, and by John, had already prophesied,
and were still to prophecy. And,

(2.) That the Spirit has here given, by the mentioning of his prophesying
again; an apt Transition to what was to be delivered concerning the Witnesses
in the following Chapter, who are to Prophecy in Sackcloth. And,

(3.) That the Reformation (represented in this Chapter) was an Apperance, or
prophetical Representation of the Kingdom of Christ, although very imperfect;
because it is said, that John was to prophecy again: whereby is intimated,
that he had prophesied just before; and that the Kingdom was under a delay, and
so consequently in Prophecy, and not fullfilled.

16 By this Phrase, the Subjects of the Babylonian Kingdom are described in
Chap. 2, 37.4, 1.
Daniel; which was an Emblem of the Antichristian.

CHAP. XI.
The Text.
1 AND there was given unto me [by the Angel,] a reed like unto a [measuring]
rod, [i. e. a perch or Pole made of a reed Ezekiel. 40.3.] and the Angel [i. e.
Christ, chapt. 10.1, 5.] 1 stood [near, or before me, and presented himself
unto me;] saying, rise 2 [ i. e. use all possible exactness, and diligence, for
it is a thing worthy of it, Ezekiel. 40.4.] and 3 measure [i. e. enclose, and
secure for the peculiar lot, and inheritance of God;] the Temple 4 of God [i.
e. the pure Church of God,] and the Altar 5 [ i. e. the pure Worship of God,]
and them that Worship therein 6 [in secret, and under the Divine Security and
Protection.]

Annotations on CHAP. XI.
1 He is not represented, as standing upon the Sea, as before, Chap. 10. and
therefore, perhaps, he might stand (as he does in the place of Ezekiel, here
alluded to, Chap. 40.3.) in the Gate of the Temple; or rather, at the Altar of
Incense as an Angel is represented standing in a Vision, which Synchronizes
wit^ this, Chap. 8.3. And it is the Opinion of a Worthy Person* that the Angel,
in both Visions, is Christ; who is here said to have stood [(...), had stood,]
viz. in that former Vision Contemporary with this, with the Incense of his Name
and Intercession; and had then commanded, whilst he was at the Altar, that the
Temple should be measured, and the Worshippers secured; which answer to the
Hundred Forty and Four Thousand, who were sealed about the same time, Chap 7.

2 So the Word signifies, Genesis 31.17. Josh. 1.2. Luke 1.39. and in several
other places of Scripture; with which Sense of the Word, the vehement Charge
given by this Angel to Ezekiel, on the like Account, is very agreeable, Ezekiel.
40.4.

3 Israel is called in Scripture, (Deuteronomy. 32.9. Psalm 16.5, 6.74, 2. Jerem.
10.16.) the Reed, the Line, and Cord of God's Inheritance; from the Manner of
Dividing Lands amongst them. And to measure, signifies, to make an Allottment
of a particular possession, and to enclose and secure it, while others lie
neglected, and in common. Thus the Temple is measured, Ezekiel. 40. and the Land
of Israel, Ezekiel. 47.18. and Jerusalem, Zach. 2. and to leave out, (i.e. of the
Enclosement) and to measure not, are of the same import in the following Verse.

4 The Sea Middoth ex edit, L' Emper. Page 190. Maimonid. de Aedific. Templi
per Viel.
Temple, properly so called (as distinguished from its Outward Courts, and
Apartments) consisted of the Sanctuary, or Holy Place, (called also more
peculiarly, The Temple,) and of the Holy of Holies; by which the pure, and holy
Church of God is signified; of which the Temple was a Type.

5 By the Altar is here to be understood, the Altar of Incense (called
sometimes simply (...), as Dr. Hammond confesses on Rev. 6.9) because that only
stood within the Temple, or Holy Place; the other Altar, for Burnt Offerings,
being placed before the Porch, in the Inner Court of the Lord's House. And
hereby Prayer (of which Incense is an Emblem^) and the pure Worship of God is
denoted; the Altar of Incen^^ (as Dr. Hammond has noted on Matthew. 23.35. from
Philo) being to be seen by no other, but only by the Priests that are Clean.

6 That is, in the place where the Altar stood, just before the (...), or
Temple, strictly so called; which is most properly the space betwixt the Table,
and the Candlestick: although (...) may very well here be referred to (...),
the Temple. Now the Temple being covered (whereas the Courts were open,) and
secured with Gates, Veils, and High-Walls, from the sight and approach of the
people: hereby is very appositely signified, the secret, and retired Members of
Christ's Church, secured by God, during the time of the Apostasy; who are the
same with the sealed ones before mentioned, Chap. 7. Whereupon, the Temple,
when God's pure Worship is restored, is represented as open; whereby it also
appears, that to measure, and to open, are opposite, and that it signifies
Retiredness, and Concealment. For the Description of the Temple, and the
further meaning of these, and the following passages; see (besides Josephus,
and the Books before quoted) Dr. Lightfoot of the Temple, Dr. Hammond on Matthew.
23.35. Luke 23.45. Ephesians. 2.4. Rev. 6.9. and Dr. Pocock on Joel; where he has
given us a Scheme of the Temple, from a MSS. of Maimonides, thought by him to
be as ancient as the Authors own times.

2 But the 7 Court, which is without the Temple [i. e. the Visible Church;] 8
leave [or cast] out, [as profane, with Disgrace, and Ignominy;] and measure it
not [i. e. secure it not;] for it is given [or has 9 been given, and delivered
by the Justice of God, for swerving from the true measure of his Laws, Ezekiel.
43.10-12.] unto [or into the hands, and power, Dan. 7.25. of] the 10 Gentiles
[or, Paganizi^^ Christians;] and the Holy 11 City [i. e. the whole Visible
Churc^^] shall they tread under Foot [i. e. possess it, Isa. 1.12. and use it
profanely and contemptuously, Dan. 10, 11.13. Isa. 28 3. Luke 21.4. 1 Maccab.
1.] Forty 12 and Two Months [of Days, which are Years.]

7 All the open space without the Temple, is called, as Grotius notes, (and as
I find the Word to be used in the Jewish Middoth, cap. 1. Sect. 4. L' Emper. in
locum.
Mishna) The Court; consisting of Three open Areas, or Courts; whereof the two
outermost are called, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. the Great Court, and the Outward Court, by
Ezekiel, where the Men and Women met in separate Partitions; and the Third
Court is called, the Court of the Priests, and the Inner-Court; reaching from
the Court of the Men, to the Vestibulum, or Porch of the Temple; in which the
Altar of Burnt Offerings stood. All which Space, or Area, is here meant by the
Court which is without the Temple; for so it was: and the Court of the Gentiles
(or the Fourth and Outermost Court, added by Herod) cannot be here understood,
because it was always lawful for the Gentiles to pray there; and therefore it
could not properly be said to be given unto them now, or to be polluted by
them, as having been always accounted unclean; whereas they were never admitted
into the other Courts. And by the Court without the Temple, is very appositely
understood, the Visible Christian Worship; because the Visible Worship of God
was performed in that place under the Law; whereas all the Temple-Worship was
hid from the People. See the Books before quoted, and Mr. Page 19, 20, 478,,
479, 480. and Ainsworth on Exodus 40.33.
Mede's Works.

8 Grotius on the places* notes, That this is called Extracludere, by the
Ancient Writers concerning the Limits and measuring of Grounds: But the Word
also denoting in John 9.34. Acts 7, 58: 13, 50. Grotius in loca.
Scripture, an Ignominious casting out, or an Excommunication; it may also here
signify, the leaving, or casting it out of the Sacred Enclosure, or Limits, as
unsacred and polluted; as Mr. Page 587.
Mede speaks.

9 So (...), which is of the past Sense, and not of the present, may be
translated: whereby is signified, that it had been given up, or delivered by
God, before the time in which it was measured; although it must be confessed,
that the past Tense, is often used for the present, in Scripture.

10 By Hammond on Matthew. 23.15. Grot. on John 12.20. Acts 21.28.
Gentiles, or Nations, the Jews understand all but themselves, and Proselytes
of Justice; who were circumcised, and accounted as Jews: which were the
Proselytes of the Gates (as they call them,) who had renounced Idolatry, but
had not embraced the whole Jewish Religion, and were permitted to come no
further, than into the Outer Court, called the Court of the Gentiles; and were
thought to profane, and pollute the Temple, if they did; as appears from Acts
21, 28, 29.24, 6. But by Gentiles are most commonly meant in Scripture, the
Heathen Nations round about them; who, whilst they continued in open Idolatry,
were not to live amongst them; especially those who persecuted them, and laid
their Country, City, and Temple waste; such as Nebuchadnezzar, and Antiochus,
whose Desolations are bewailed and described in Psalm 74. and 79. Dan. 8.1
Maccab. from Chap. 1. to Ver. 16 of the 6th.
Scripture: and such were also the Four Successive Monarchies, of the
Assyrians, Persians, Grecians and Romans; whose Times ((...), or appointed
Seasons, the word made use of by Daniel, and Jeremiah, Chap. 27.7.) are called
by our Savior See Grotius on the place, and Mr. Mede's Works, page 709, 753.
Luke 21.24. the Times of the Gentiles; at the ending of which fort of Times,
in the Expiration of the Roman Monarchy continued in the Antichristian, the
Jews are to be restored, as our Savior there plainly asserts; and the Holy
City is no more to be trodden under foot by the Gentiles.

Now the like Expressions, and some of the Words here made use of, being
plainly taken from the Psalm 79.1. Dan. 8.10. 1 Maccab. 1.37, 38, 39.3, 45,
51.4, 60. Luke 21.24.
Scriptures quoted in the Margin, it is manifest, that they have an Allusion to
them; especially to the Story of Antiochus, a lively Type of Antichrist (who is
therefore prophesied of in him, as a Type by Daniel,) and of the Gentile Times
and Actions here foretold: and therefore the like Actions committed by some
Christians, must be here referred to; called Gentiles, for bringing the Mr.
Mede's Apostasy of the latter Times.
Gentile Worship into the Church, together with Tyranny, and crafty Baits to
entice to Idolatry; according to the Example of Antiochus (the Type of
Antichrist,) and the Paganizing Jews, who did after the Ordinances of the
Heathens, and built a Place of Exercise at Jerusalem, according to their
Customs; and thereby gave a great occasion to the Tyrant to take Jerusalem,
and to enter proudly into the Sanctuary, and pollute it, and lay it waste, like
a Wilderness; and to make the City an habitation of Strangers, or Gentiles; and
to become strange to those that were born in it; as you may read in the places
of the Book of Maccabes before quoted. All which agrees plainly to the
Apostasy, which has introduced a Pagan Christianity into the Church.

11 Jerusalem is called so; which is the Type of the whole Christian Church;
whereby is signified a Universal Apostasy in the Visible Church; the latent, or
invisible one having been before measured and secured by God.

12 A Day is put for a Year in this Book, as has been before shown on Chap.
2.10. and then by consequence, a Month must be put for a Month of prophetical
Days, consisting of as many common years as a common month does of days. But
for the better understanding of the Nature of these prophetical Times and
Seasons; it will be very convenient to deduce this matter from the very
Beginning and Original of it. And accordingly it is to be observed, that out of
the whole space of Time assigned by God to the Transactions of this World,
which is thought to be about Seven Thousand Years; there is a certain part
allotted by him, for the Times of the Apostasy, and the Reign of the Beast;
called by Daniel, Time, Times, and half a Time, (Chap. 7, 25.12, 7. of which it
has been discoursed already on Chap. 10.6.) which are reduced into 1260. Days,
and Forty Two Months, in the Revelations: Into Days, with respect to the
Witnesses, and the Seed of the Woman in the Wilderness, who are the Children of
the Mede, page 481, 492. Mori Oper. Theol. page 614, 616. Genesis 1. Luke 16.8.
Acts 26.18. 2 Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 5.8. 1 These. 5.5, 8. 2 Pet. 1.19. Rev. 22, 16.
See the Notes on Rev. 12.1.
Day; and into Nights, with respect to the Gentiles, and the Beast, whose
Antichristian Deeds are Works of Darkness, and they the Children of the Night,
of which the Moon has the Government. And as the Natural Day is divided in
Scripture, into Evening and Morning; so is this Line of Time, in proportion to
that Distinction, divided into Days, which answer to the Morning of the Natural
Day; and into Months, which answer to the Evening, or Night of it; the Days and
Months making up one and the same Line of Time; as the Evening and Morning make
up One Natural Day: whence the Time allotted in Daniel, (Chap. 8.13, 14.) for
the Course of Affairs, from Cyrus to the cleansing of the Sanctuary, is called
Evening-Morning; out of which (for it principally respects the Apostasy, which
defiled the Sanctuary) this Line is taken; the Months out of its Evenings, and
the Days out of its Mornings: which way of Speech is taken from Genesis 1.5, 16.
where the Light is called Day, and the Darkness, Night; and the Moon is said to
rule the one, and the Sun the other; and the Natural Day is called
Evening-Morning; the Evening being put before the Morning, because the
Darkness, o^ Night of the Chaos, preceded the first appearance of Light, which
made the Day; as the Darkness of the Apostasy (according to the Course and
Order of Nature, which proceeds from Privation to Form) preceeds the
Morning Star, and bright Day of Christ's Kingdom: whereupon the Months of the
Gentiles are mentioned before the Days of the Witnesses; because the Gentile
Apostasy must be in Nature, and Time, before the Witnesses could prophecy
against it; although they both commence from the same Day or Year.

Now a Day is taken in this Prophecy, for a Celestial, Solar Year, consisting
of Three hundred and sixty days, in round Numbers, according to the Custom of
Scripture, and according to the degrees of a Circle, and of the Sun's passage
through the Ecliptic, by which the Year is made; as appears from Three 360 360
360 180 1260


Times, or Years, and a half; being made equal to Twelve hundred and sixty
days: and therefore in proportion, by a montb must be meant, not a month in
Civil Accounts; which are Arbitrary, according to the diverse Customs, and
Reckonings of Cities, and Nations; but a Caelestial, Natural Month, depending
upon the Moon, by whose Motion from one Conjunction with the Sun to another,
the Month is made: According to which Motion, a Month consists of something
above Twenty Nine days, and a Lunar Year of 354 days, (not reckoning the Odd
Hours, and Fractions, neither in this, nor the Solar Accounts;) which is six
Days above Twenty Nine Days to each Month of the Year; by which reckoning, 354
354 354 177 1239


Forty Two months of years, at 354 each year, amount to 1239 years; and at 29
42 58 116 1218


Twenty-Nine Days each Month, to 1218 years.

But because in the 1260 Days, there are five Days taken from each Solar Year,
which indeed consists of 365 Days; therefore also in the Lunar Years of the
Forty Two Months, there must be Five days taken from each, that they may bear
proportion to the Solar Years: which are indeed only properly and naturally
Years; the Lunar Year being no otherwise a Year, than as it is determined by
the Annual Course of the Sun; and being altogether uncertain, and arbitrary;
but as it is adjusted unto, and brought into accord with its Motion: According
to which Substraction, each Lunar Year will amount to 349 Days; and the whole
Forty Two Months of Years, to 349 349 349 174 1221


about 1222 Years; 1218 3 1221


exceeding the Total of the Months, at Twenty Nine Days each, by about Four
Days; which, because Fractions are neglected in these Accounts, we are to
reckon full 1222 Years; 1222 38 1260


Thirty Eight Years less than the Twelve hundred and sixty Days of Years of the
Witnesses; according to the proportion betwixt the Motion of the Sun and Moon;
the latter of which exceeding the former by about 11 Days. 3 Years of Years. 38


Eleven Days in a year (or a Thirty Third part;) the Increase in Twelve hundred
and sixty years, or Three years and a half of years, amounts to Thirty Eight
years, or twice Nineteen years; that is, two Cycles Bevereg. Instit. Chronol.
lib. 2.4, 6, 7*
of the Moon, or Golden Number; which, being grounded upon the Period of Meton
(a Famous Athenian Astronomer, who flourished Four hundred and thirty years
before Christ,) was first brought into the Calendar by the First General
Council of Nice, A. D. 325. to settle the Paschal, or Easter Feast, about which
so great Contentions had been in the Church; which Rule and Decree is
Religiously observed (as Dr. Beveridge speaks) in the Church of England.

And thus having settled the True Notion of a Month, and the Extent of it, we
are next to find out, where the Beginning of these Forty Two Months, and of the
Twelve hundred and sixty Days, which are parallel to them, is to be fixed; the
Holy Spirit having not been pleased to give the precise Epoch, or Beginning of
them; but having left it to be searched out, by the Industry of those who
consider Times and Seasons.

We are to take Notice then, that See Mr. Mede's Apostasy.
Gentilism, consisting in the Practice of Pagan and Idolatrous Customs, was
come to a great height about A. D. 400. and that there is great Reason to fix
upon A. D. 437. for the precise Year, from whence the Lord of Times and Seasons
thought good to date the Beginning of its Times, or Reign, may be made more
than probable from these following Considerations:

(1.) Because it is the precise Year, in which the Churches Purity ended; it
being the Year which compleats the last Half Time of the Churches Purity,
weighed in the Two Scales of the Balance, which appeared under the Third Seal,
as has been shown on Chap. 6.5.

(2.) Because it is the very Year from which the Time, Times, and Half Time are
to be reckoned; as has been already proved, on Chap. 10. verse. 7. numb. 13.
Which being made equal to 1260 days, Chap. 12.6, 14. the beginning of the Date
of the one, must be the beginning of the Date of the other; and consequently of
the Forty Two Months of the Gentiles, which run parallel to the 1260 days of
the Witnesses, and of the Woman in the Wilderness. Of which, the Reformation
beginning A. D. 1517. just at the Entrance of Half Time, is an illustrious
Proof; as has been observed on Chap. 10.

(3.) Because it is the middle Point betwixt the two remarkable Half Hours,
made up into One Hour, at the Ten Kings receiving power with the Beast:
Concerning which, see what has been largely discoursed on Chap. 8.

(4.) If the beginning of the Gentiles Months, and of the 1260 Days of the
Witnesses, be fixed at 437. there will be found to be a wonderful Congruity,
according to the strictest Mathematical Proportion, betwixt the Days of the
Witnesses, the Gentiles Months; and the Months of the Beast; who, as is evident
from Rev. 17.10, 11, 12. received not his power until he came to be the Eighth
King, which was not until the End of A. D. 475. or the beginning of A.D. 476.
upon the Fall of the Western Emperor. Now, if the Gentiles Months begin 437
1222 1659 38 1697


A. D. 437. then they must end (they amounting in the whole, as has been
shown, to 1222. Years) at A. D. 1659, sooner by Thirty Eight Years, then the
1260 Days End; which is the Exact Astronomical Proportion betwixt Solar and
Lunar Time, as has been before observed; and if the Beasts Months begin at 476
1222 1697


476. then they will end at 1697. together with the Days of the Witnesses; and
will carry on the Times of the Apostasy, from 1659 38 1697


the End of the Gentiles Months, to the End of all Antichristian Time, by the
same Astronomical Proportion; consisting of Two Cycles of the Moon, or Golden
Numbers. For it is to be observed; that the Church was Paganized before the
Apostatizing Hierarchy attained its Bestian Power; and that therefore the
Months of the Gentiles (who are the Members of the Apostatizing Church, before
it had an Antichristian King) began before the Months of the Beast; upon whose
Rise they fall into his Months; and are continued down with them, although only
the Mouths of the Antichristian King came then into Public Account; as after
the Erecting of a Monarchy, or after an Interregnum, those only of the Supreme
Prince do. And because these Times were given to the Beast, and Times are
always reckoned from the Supreme Princes Reign; therefore the Gentiles Months
are to be reckoned only as suppletory to the Beast's Months, by a kind of
Intercalation of Thirty Eight Years; which by the All-wise disposal of
Providence, is the Exact Mathematical proportion betwixt the Time of the Sun
and Moon: to teach us by the very Astronomical difference here observed; that
these were Pagan, or Gentile Times; the Heathens Cary's Chronological Account
of Time, Part 1. B. 1. Chap. 4. Spencer ubi infra.
generally observing the Lunar Year, and making it give place to the Solar;
although this were more Ancient, Easy, Equal, and certain than the other;
Because that their Night-Revellings were wont to be celebrated upon the Rising
of the Moon; and their Idolatrous Festivities depended upon the Aspects, and
superstitious Observations of that Planet. Whereupon God indulged the Spencer
de Hebraeor. Legib. page 715-744.
Jews the Observation of New Moons, and instituted Festivities of his own,
which depended upon their Phases and Appearances; to take them off from
following the Pagan ones; which yet they by degrees imitated. And therefore, I
cannot but look upon the high Contest in the Church, about the Day of the
Paschal Solemnity; (in the behalf of which an imposing, and a domineering
Temper first appeared) and the regulating, and settling of it, according to the
Motion of the Moon, to contain some Indications in it of an Apostasy then
working in the Church; to which the superstitious Observation of Holy Days much
contributed: whereas there was no Day at first observed as Necessary, but the
Lord's Day; Vallesius Valles. in Eusebius. page 279. Pearson. Lect. in Acta
Apostol. page 39, 40.
himself confessing, that although the Primitive Christians met on other Days,
that yet it was Voluntarily; and that it was not the Custom to do so every
where; and that all were not wont to frequent those Assemblies, where it was.

And I cannot also but observe further, That this Paschal Cycle of the Moon,
after many Corrections, was settled upon a New Hypothesis, in the very Year
Petav. Doctr. Temp. 2.57.
437, by Cyril of Alexandria; that proud and assuming Prelate, who (as that
prudent Historian Histor. 7.7, 11, 13.
Socrates notes) was the first Bishop that exercised Civil Power, and Coercive
Authority, and advanced Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction at Alexandria, beyond its
due bounds: For such Providential Congruities (if I may so call them) fatally,
as it were, conspiring to signalize this Year, will, with other Concurrent
Arguments tend much to facilitate our belief, that it is the very Epoch of the
Antichristian Times; the Cycle of the Moon being then regulated, to show that
her Months were just beginning; and Usurpation upon Civil Rights, Tyranny and
Persecution beginning then at Socrat. 7.11.
Rome, as well as at Alexandria; whereby the Mystery of Iniquity was gradually
advanced into a Beastian Kingdom, by Leo the Great, and his Successors; and by
Cyril, at Alexandria; whose Bishops were the Conservators of the Moon's Paschal
Cycle; about which so many Beverig. in Canon. page 19. 188. Vsser. Anti^.
Britannic, page 487.
Councils had been held, and so many rash Decrees had been made, for the
anathematizing of all who dissented from them, as Heretics; and that in a
trifling Controversy* grounded upon two contrary Traditions, one of which was
submitted unto at last for the sake of Peace, rather than of Truth; neither
Party being able to tell exactly which was in the Right: So dangerous a thing
is it to give too great Credit to Traditions not recorded in Scripture; and to
be wise beyond what is commanded in it.

(5.) The 2300 Evenings and Mornings, given Daniel 8 14. will also tend very
much to the ascertaining of this Epoch: For if these 2300 Days, are so many
Years, reaching from the first Year of Cyrus, A. M. 3459. to A. M. 5759. which
will be the Vulgar Year of our Lord, 1772; Then, if we take Daniel's Seventy
Five Years, (which are immediately added by him, as has been shown on Chap. 10.
numb. 13. Paragr. 6. to the 1260 Days, as the End of all Time) from the Year of
our Lord 1772; we shall come, going backwards in a Regressive Order, to the
Year 1697. for the End of the Forty Two Months, and 1260 Days; which being also
deducted from that Year, we shall arrive to the Year 437. for the beginning of
the before mentioned Days and Months.

Bus because this is a matter of great moment, I shall endeavor to state, and
settle it, by these following Observations:

Obs. (1.) It has pleased God to afford us a Scripture-Account of Time, to be
our sure Guide amidst the difficulties, and intricate Mazes of Chronology; and
that, sometimes in common Numbers, and sometimes in Prophetical and Mystical
ones: amongst which there is a very remarkable one in Dan. 8.13, 14. Where a
Line of Time is given, consisting of 2300 Days, called Evening-morning, in the
Original Hebrew, in the Singular Number; perhaps to show, that it was a
continued Line of Time, consisting of many several (...), or Days of Years,
answerable to the many particular Events to be transacted in them; which yet,
for Memories sake, were contracted into One Era, which might be called (as it
is at the 26th Verse) The Evening-Morning Vision; and that with relation to the
long Night of Idolatry and Antichristianism, called collectively, Evening;
which was to precede the glorious Morning of Christ's Kingdom, at the Entrance
of the seventh Thousand Year; the Type of which, the seventh day, is not
distributed into Evening and Morning, as the other six days are; to show, that
it is to be all Light, without any Antichristian Works of Darkness: So that
this Phrase, Evening-Morning, shows, That this was a Line of Time, reaching
through the Evening of Three Idolatrous Monarchies, to the Morning of Christ's
Kingdom.

Obs. (2.) In this Place of Daniel, a Question is put by an Angel to Christ,
the Wonderful Numberer, who is the Word, or (...) (for so the Poli Synops. in
locum.
Words are to be understood), unto how long, or unto when the Vision, should
last, or endure; as the LXX. have rightly supplied the Words; understanding
them concerning the things represented in the whole foregoing Vision; and not
only of those specified in this Verse; which are but a part of them; and are
particularly mentioned, because they were things of the greatest moment, for
which the Angel was most concerned; and being to be accomplished in the last
place, were more immediately to be referred to, in the Answer which was to be
returned. The Question proposed then is, How long it was to be to the End of
all those things which he had seen; of which the Particulars mentioned were to
be fulfilled in the last place? And the Words are to be rendered thus, according
to the Hebrew Text; How long the Vision, the Daily, etc. and not concerning the
Daily; the Question being, How long the Vision, as well as, how long the Daily,
and the Transgression of Desolation?

Obs. (3.) This Question must, in all propriety of Speech, be meant, concerning
a Period of Time, to be deduced from the beginning of the Events foretold, to
the End of them; the Answer to the Question being, That the Vision should be
unto 2300 Days; viz. from the Time, when the Effect of the Vision should first
take place: according to which sense, a Jachiad. in Daniel. per L' Empereur.
Jew has thus acutely paraphrased this Verse; Then the Angel answered, That the
Streights in which they were, were to last from the very time of the Vision, to
the Evening, or Night, of the Morning, or Day of the two thousand three hundred
years.

Obs. (4.) It is expressly contrary to the very Words of the Text, to date these
days from the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice; the Question being not, How long
shall it be from the polluting of the Sanctuary, to the cleansing of it? but,
How long shall the Vision be? That is, the whole Vision he had before seen,
concerning the Medo-Persian, and Grecian Empire, as well as the taking away of
the daily Sacrifice.

Obs. (5.) The Subject Matter of the Vision is,

(1.) Concerning the Medo Persian Empire, Ver. 20.

(2.) Concerning the Greek Empire, their first King Alexander, and the Division
of that Empire into Four Kingdoms upon his Death, Ver. 21, 22.

(3.) Concerning a Little Horn, or King, who was to rise out of One of those
Four Kingdoms, in the latter time, or at the latter End of their Kingdom, Ver.
9, 23. which I take to be (at least principally, and in its chief mystical
sense) the Little Horn, or Antichristian King, mentioned Dan. 7.8. which came
up from amongst the Ten horns of the Fourth Beast, which is the Roman Empire:
and is said here at the 9th Verse, to come up out of the Four Notable Horns,
toward the Four Winds of heaven; that is, out of the Western part of the
World, or of the Universal Monarchy of the Grecians; where the Roman Power was
seated; and where it first appeared in Macedon, to encroach upon the Grecian;
and the Mr. Mede, page 654, 749.
Fourth Kingdom brought the Third into its Subjection, by conquering Greece,
the Western, and Head Province of that Empire. Out of this Western Horn, or
Kingdom, the Roman Power, with its Little Horn, amongst its ten horns, came
forth; which alone is here mentioned; because that by it, the Exploits
specified in the following Verses, were chiefly to be performed; many of which
can also agree to no other, and none of them to any so properly as to the
Antichristian King; who is certainly called a Little Horn, in the 7th Chapter,
and has Characters given him there, parallel to those in this Chapter; as in
speaking great things, Ver. 8. in having a look more stout, and fierce than his
Fellows, Ver. 20. in prevailing against the Saints, and the holy people, and in
being broken without hands, by the Ancient of Days, Ver. 21, 22.

Obs. (6.) Although some passages of the Vision, from Verse 9, to Verse 12. may
be understood of Antiochus, the Type of Antichrist; yet all of it, and
especially the Exposition of it, from Verse 23, to 25. cannot be possibly meant
concerning him; who understood not dark Sentences, nor was a King of any great
Policy or Craft, as this little horn is described, Verses 23, 24, 25. but is
expressly noted by Live. lib. 41. Foy-Vaillant de Seleucid. Imper. page 161-163.
Historians, to have behaved himself so strangely, and so unequally, that it
was much doubted amongst the wisest, whether he were a Fool or a mad man.

And the Characters given in those Verses of the little horn, are so utterly
inconsistent with the Story of Antiochus; and are so agreeable to the
Antichristian King, that even Dr. Moor is at last forced to confess, That this
Passage was put in by the Spirit of Prophecy, with a more peculiar respect to
Antichrist himself, in whom they are more eminently fulfilled, than to
Antiochus his Type.

Obs. (7.) A Day being taken in other parts of Prophecy, for a Prophetical Day,
or a Day of Years; there is no Reason why it should be understood otherwise in
this place; it being called here Evening-Morning, upon another account, as we
have observed at the beginning of this Annotation; and not to show (as Dr. Moor
thinks) that Prophetical Days are not here meant, but Natural Days; which will
amount but to six Years, three Months, and twenty Days; a very small space of
Time, and which can be brought to comport only with the six Years Prophanations
of Antiochus; which is but a part of the Vision, and cannot be here referred
to; as appears from Observation 4th, and the following ones.

Obs. (8.) The Vision begins with the Medo-Persian Empire, as plainly appears
from the Explication of it, Verse 20. And if the Vision begins there, then the
Line of Time must begin there too; because it is the measure of it, according
to Obs. 2, and 3.

Obs. (9.) The Vision ends at the cleansing of the Sanctuary, as appears from
Verse 14. Then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed, viz. at the End of 2300 days,
which were to last to that time. Which cannot be meant concerning the
particular cleansing of it by Maccabeus from the Prophanations of Antiochus;
because this could not be called the Last End of the Indignation of God; the
Temple having been afterward polluted, and blasphemed by the Successors 1
Maccab. 6, 62.7, 33-50. and Chap. 9.
of Antiochus, and trodden under foot, and entirely destroyed by the Romans.

Obs. (10.) This Line of Time is not yet at an end; because the daily Sacrifice
of the Jews is not yet restored, nor their Desolations determined; but they are
still in a despicable condition, their Sanstuary and City being trodden under
foot by the Turks, who at present have it in their possession.

Obs. (11.) The beginning of the Medo-Persian Empire, is to be dated by the
Joint Consent of History, and of the latest and best Chronologers; from the
taking of Babylon by Cyrus: from whence the Scripture reckons the first year of
Cyrus; meaning thereby the first year of his Reign over the Babylonion Empire,
which was the last of the Seventy Years Captivity of the Jews; and the first of
their Return into their Country, upon the Edict of Cyrus.

Now from a due consideration of what has been said, we may make some advance
to the settling of the beginning of the Gentiles Months: For if these 2300
years, are a Line of Time, reaching from the first year of Cyrus to the
cleansing of the Sanctuary: Then if we gain the true Epoch of Cyrus's First
Year; we may by consequence find out the Period of these Years, and the
beginning and end of the 1260 years of the Witnesses, and of the Forty Two
Months of the Gentiles.

And here, because the Reasonings of Chronologers are very dubious; and their
Epochs very different, and of an uncertain Foundation (as Epitom. Baron. page
11.
Spondanus with just reason complains) I shall only desire this one equitable
Postulatum, to be granted me; viz. that the Scripture Accounts of Time, as they
are given us in the Hebrew Hanc supputationem recentiores Chronologi qui post
Scaligerum Floruere, uno ferme consensu complexi sunt. Anton. Pagi Appar.
Chronol. Page 1, 2.
Text, may be received as Authentic; when they are supported by reason,
evidence from profane History, and the consent of the latest Chronogers;
amongst whom I shall pitch upon Spanhemius Chronol. Introduct. ad Eccles.
Histor.
; as one of the latest, and the most accurate in his accounts; consulting
others, as there shall be occasion. Now if we guide our selves by this
Postulatum, we shall, perhaps, find this following Scripture Calendar, to be
most exact.

Years. A. M. From the Creation to the Flood. 1656. 2083. From thence to
Abraham's coming out of Chaldea. Spanhem. a page 135, ad 140. 427. 2513. To the
Israelites coming out of Egypt. Spanhem. page 142. 430. 2993. To the beginning
of the building of the Temple in the fourth of Solomon, 1 King. 6.1. Spanhem. a
page 143-145. 480. 3029. To Solomon's death, and the revolt of the Ten Tribes
immediately upon it in the first year of Rehoboam, 1 King. 6, 1.11, 42. Spanhem
149. 36. 3459. ante Chr. 528. From the First Year of Rehoboam, to the First of
Cyrus's Reign over Babylon, which was the End of the 70 Years Captivity. 430.

This Number is gathered, by adding the 390 Years of Ezekiel's bearing the sin
of Israel, to the Forty Years of his bearing Judah's sin, Ezekiel. 4.4, 5, 6. In
which Chapter the Prophet shows,

(1.) That Jerusalem would be besieged, and the Temple and City burnt,
according to what Jeremiah had prophesied; the Truth of which the People
beginning to call in question, there having passed now Five Years since their
Captivity, without any appearance, or likelihood of it; the Prophet is
commanded, Verse 3. to lay siege to Jerusalem in a Type, to be a sign to them
of the real siege approaching.

(2.) The Prophet is also commanded, Verse 9. to lie 390 Days (appointed by God
himself to signify Years, Verse 6.) upon his left side, to bear, as in a Type,
the Years of the Punishment of the House of Israel, or the Ten Tribes; And then
is expressly commanded, to lie again (Verse 6.) on his right side, to bear the
Years of the Punishment of the House of Judah, Forty Days, after he had
accomplished the Three Hundred and Ninety; thereby plainly showing the Forty to
be different from the Three Hundred and Ninety, and not included in them, as
Interpreters generally make them, with plain Violence to the express Words of
the Text.

(3.) It is evident from the 13th Verse, that the penitential and course Diet,
prescribed to the Prophet, during the streightness of the Siege, (a freer Diet
perhaps being permitted him the remaining Forty Days after it) is not only a
Type of the Famine and Misery they were to suffer; but also of the defiled and
polluted Bread they were to eat among the Gentiles, during their Captivity;
which is there evidently referred to, and not only the Siege of Jerusalem.

(4.) By the mention of the House of Israel, and Judah, separately and
distinctly from each other; and by God's assigning a distinct Term of Years to
each, is plainly intimated, that they are represented in this Vision, as in a
divided state.

(5.) The Years therefore of their Iniquity, Verse 5. which the Prophet was to
bear, must be the Years of their Iniquity, whilst they continued in a divided
state; which can be no other then the Years from their first Division, and
Idolatry under Jeroboam, until the End of the Captivity some of them were then
under; particularly referred to Verse 13. So that the Prophet does here in a
Vision show them in Prophetical Days for Years, how long their Captivity should
last; and that it should not be ended until Four Hundred and Thirty Years were
completed, from the time of their Division and Idolatry, which was the
Iniquity for which they were carried Captive, and for which he was to bear
their punishment in a Vision; showing the time from their Defection, to the End
of the Captivity.

Concerning which Prophetical and Symbolical Line of Time, it is also further
to be noted:

(1.) That the greater Number of Years of Punishment, are allotted to the Ten
Tribes, because they were First in the sin, and deepest in the Guilt: Whereas
the Two Tribes, because they walked 2 Chronicl. 11, 17.12, 1.
Three Years, after the Division, in the ways of David and Solomon, and were
less, guilty then the other; have their punishment assigned them after the
other, and that of a less continuance: And the Prophet, when he bears their
Guilt, is commanded to lie on his right side, to show the greater Esteem God
had of them; whereas he was bid to lie on his left, when he bore the Iniquity
of Israel; which being the less worthy side of the Body; thereby is denoted the
less value God had for them.

(2.) It may be observed, that this Number, Four Hundred and Thirty, is made up
of Two Numbers;

(1.) Of Forty, which is the time that the Children of Israel were to bear the
punishment of the Apostasy of their Fathers, Forty Days, each Day for a Year,
Numb. 14.33, 34. And,

(2.) 390 7 2730


Of 390, a Number, which if multiplied by Seven makes up 2730 Days for Years;
the exact Sum 390 40 2300 2730


of the 390, and 40 Days in Ezekiel, and of the 2300 Evenings-Mornings in
Daniel: whereby is signified by the multiplying the first Term of their
punishment by the Number Seven; that the Jews should lie under a State of
punishment for their Iniquities, for 2730 Years; a multiplication of punishment
by seven times, being the proportion of punishment settled by God, with respect
to his people, Levit. 26.18, 21, 24, 28. and that after the fulfilling of that
Term of Years allotted to their bearing of their Iniquity, God would restore
them to their Land, and remember his Covenant; according to what God has
promised Levit. 26.40-46. Whereby, the Extent of the 2300 days of Daniel, to
the End, and to the last End of the indignation, Verse 19. and to the cleansing
of the Sanctuary, is wonderfully exemplified.

And now from hence we have gained a Line of Time of 430 Years, from Solomon's
Death, to the end of the LXX Years Captivity, which is the first of Cyrus;
which is made out also by Dr. Beverley, from a distinct Enumeration of the
Reigns of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and the fourteen Years assigned to the
Visions of Ezekiel's Temple; and does not much differ from the Calculations of
the latest Chronologers; who make this time to amount to 437, or 439 years at
furthest; although they confess after all their Pains, that this Line of Time
is very uncertain and obscure, for Reasons collected by Introduct. Chronol. ad
Hist. Eccles. page 150-159.
Spanhemius. And therefore amidst so much doubt, and difficulty, where can we
find a surer rest then in Scripture; whose accounts of time will after all be
found the most exact; and that, when Profane History and Chronology is most in
the Dark, if we take in Prophetical Time, as well as Historical. And now having
settled the beginning of Cyrus's Reign, or the Epoch of the Medo-Persian
Monarchy, we have obtained the beginning of the 2300 years, and withal a Line
of Time from it, to the Cleansing or Justifying of the Sanctuary, i. e. of the
Christian Church Typified thereby, from all Idolatry and Antichristianism, when
the Holy Place, which is now shut, will appear open in Heaven, Rev. 11.19:

Which Account stands thus: A. M. 5759 A.D. vulg. 1772. From the beginning of
the Medo Persian Empire by Cyrus, to the cleansing of the Sanctuary, Dan. 8.13,
14. 2300

Which will end in the 5759th year from the Creation, and the 1772 year after
Christ, according to the common Account. From which if you take Daniel's 75
years, you come to the end of the 42 Months, and the 1260 days; and so, by a
regressive order, to the Epoch, or beginning of them at A.D. 437, as has been
already shown on Paragr. 5. page 210. All which is deduced by particular
Accounts, and after a most accurate manner by Dr. Beverley, in his several
Treatises, called Scripture Lines of Time; and stand as they are proved by him
in this Order: Years. 1. From Cyrus to Daniel's 70 weeks 75 2. Daniel's Weeks
490 3. The time between the Weeks and the 42 Months 400 4. The 1260 days, or 42
Months. 1260 5. The 30, and 45 Years of Daniel 75 Which amounts to years. 2300

3 And I will give Power [i. e. Commission and Ability of Testimony and
Prophecy] unto my two 13 Witnesses [raised, and sent on purpose to testify to
the Truth, and to denounce Judgments against the Apostasy;] and they shall
Prophecy [i. e. declare and Preach 14 against it, and foretell Judgments;] a
thousand, 15 two hundred and threescore days [of years;] clothed in Sackcloath
16 [i. e. in a Despicable, Afflicted, and Mournful condition.]

13 To Witness, signifies to give Testimony to the Truth, against Errors and
Corruptions; as the word is used, Is. 55.4. John 18.37. Acts 26.16. and also to
pronounce God's Judgments against sinners, as the word signifies, Malach. 3.5.
And the Witnesses are Two; because Two Witnesses at least, were required under
the Law, for confirmation, Deuteronomy. 17.6.19, 15. and to show that a small number,
but a sufficient one, should be made use of to confirm the Truth: But chiefly
in Correspondence to the Types in the Old Testament; where, these Witnesses are
generally Two: and accordingly God here raises up Two Witnesses, to Witness and
denounce Judgments against the Idolatry of the Christian Church; as Moses and
Aaron, did against the Idolatry of Pharaoh, Egypt, Balaam, and Moab; as Elijah,
and Elisha did against Baal, Ahab, Jezebel, and Ahaziah; and as Zerobabel, and
Joshua were Witnesses in Babylon during the Captivity.

14 So the Word Prophecy signifies frequently in the New Testament: Although
the Proper import of it here seems to be the Foretelling of the Increase and
Ruin of Antichrist, and of the Coming of Christ's Kingdom, to destroy him;
which being the Future Events of this Vision, the Prophesying, or Foretelling
here mentioned, must relate unto them; particularly to the Kingdom of Christ,
the Chief Subject of all the Prophecies of the Old Testament; which being not
to begin to come into Event until the Expiration of the 1260 Days; it is until
then under Prophecy, as a Future State: And the Witnesses prophecy of it, not
only in their Discourses and Writings, but by the mournful State they are in;
which is also of it self a signification that Christ's Kingdom is under a
Delay, a Sealing, or a Prophecy; which are words of like import.

15 These Days begin with the Forty Two Months of the Gentiles, and reach to
the End of Antichristian Times, running parallel along with them; God taking
care, that as soon as Gentilism came into the Church, there should be Witnesses
raised up to testify against it, and to instruct the people in the contrary
Truth, by their Preaching, and their Sufferings. See number. 12.

16 This was the Habit of Prophets, when they denounced Judgments;
particularly, of Elias, one of the Witnesses under the Old Testament, 2 Kings
1.8. Zech. 13.3, 4. Matthew. 3.4. And thus Mattathias, and his Sons, put on
Sackcloth, when the Gentiles profaned the Sanctuary, under Antiochus, 1
Maccab. 2.14.

4 These [two Witnesses] are [or are signified by what, in the Antitype is
represented by] the two Olive 17 Trees [Zach. 4;] and the two Candlesticks 18
[o^ (...) Rev. 1.20;] 19 standing before [or Ministering unto] the (...) the
Earth [Zach. 4.14]

17 The Types in this Verse are plainly taken from Zech. 4. And the Witnesses
are called Olive Trees, upon these Accounts:

(1.) Because they are to be anointed ones (Zech. 4.14.) or Kings and Priests
in Christ's Kingdom.

(2.) Because, as the Olive Branches (Zech. 4.12.) they empty the Golden Oil
out of themselves into the Candlesticks, or Churches; That is, impart to them
the Fruit of those Gifts and Graces which they had received from the Spirit of
God, and were as fully replenished with, as an Olive Tree is with Oil;
Whereupon Christians are said to be anointed by God; and the Holy Spirit, and
the Effects of it, are called, The Unction, in Scripture, 2 Cor. 1.21. 1 John
2.20, 27.

(3.) Because the Witnesses were to perform the same Offices in the Christian,
and against the Antichristian Church; as Joshua and Zerubbabel did for the
Jewish, and against Babylon, the Type of Antichrist; who is called a Mountain,
Zech. 10.4. And according to the Type in Zechariah, the Witnesses are two
anointed, or chosen Servants of God, replenished with his Spirit ( Verse 6.)
who are to level the Mountain of Antichristianism (Verse 7.) and to finish,
establish, and build up the pure Church (Verse 9.) and that out of small
things, (Verse 10.) that is, small beginnings, and a Sackcloth or contemptible,
and afflicted condition.

18 From hence it plainly appears, that the Two Witnesses are Two Churches,
which are signified by Candlesticks in this Prophecy, Chap. 1.20. as Grotius
has most appositely remarked on the place: And amongst the Candlesticks, or
Church Successions, the Office of Witnessing must needs belong to the Churches
of Pergamus and Thyatira, Chap. 2. because they are the only Successions
wherein Antipas, or Christ's faithful Antipapal Witness is mentioned; and are
the Churches which were to witness against the Antichristian Balaam, and
Jezebel; as Moses and Aaron, Elijah and Elisha, the Types of Christ's
Witnesses, did witness against the Literal Balaam, and Jezebel, under the Old
Testament.

19 To stand before, signifies to be ones Servant, in Scripture Phrase: And
hereby is signified, that these Churches served God purely (nothing but what is
pure being able to stand in his sight, Chap. 14.5.) and continually; as the
Angels do, who stand before him, to receive and obey his Commands, Chap. 8.2.

5 And if any man will [knowingly and wilfully,] hurt, [i. e. oppress, injure
or hinder] them [in the course of their Prophecy;] Fire 20 proceeds out of
their Mouths [i. e. the Efficacy of God's Word, and his Judgments and fiery
Indignation, shall attend their Prayers, and their Preaching, Is: 4.4. Jerem:
23.29. Malac. 3.11.] and Devoureth their Enemies [i. e. convinces, or confounds
opposers, Is: 44.26. Jerem: 1, 10.5, 14.] and if any man 21 will hurt them, he
must [for it will certainly come to pass;] in this manner 22 be killed [by
Spiritual, and not by Carnal Weapons Zech. 4.6.]

20 In this Verse there is a plain allusion to what Elijah did, 2 Kings 1.
Whereby is signified, that God will certainly avenge them, and that according
to the Threats and Judgments they denounce by his Spirit, and according to his
Word.

21 This Repetition assures the Certainty of the Event, according to what the
Scripture observes concerning the doubling of Pharaoh's Dream, Genesis 41.32.

22 To wit, Spiritually (at the 8th Verse intimates, this Prophecy is to be
understood) after the manner that Prophets are used to destroy; that is, by
denouncing God's Judgments, as Jeremiah, (Chap. 1.10.) is set over Kingdoms to
root out, and to destroy; that is, to foretell, and prophecy their Destruction.
Compare Jerem. ^8.7, 9. and Ezekiel. 32, 18.43, 3. Hosea 6.5. and Dr. Pocock on
that place.

6 These [Witnesses] have power to shut 23 Heaven [i. e. to denounce this
Judgment, Jerem. 1.10.] that it rain not [i. e. that there be a Spiritual
Droughth and Famine of the pure Word of God, Isa. 5.6. Amos 8.11.] in the Days
of their Prophecy [Vers. 3.] and have power over Waters [i. e. People and
Nations,] to turn them to Blood, [i. e. to embroil 24 them in Wars and
Confusions;] and to smite the Earth [i. e. the Worldly and Antichristian part
of it;] with all Plagues [viz. by preaching and denouncing them, Jerem 1.10.]
as often as they will [denounce them, according to the Will and Word of God.]

23 A plain Allusion to what Elijah did, 1 Kings, Chap. 17, 1.18, 1 41. as in
the next Words there is to Moses's turning the Waters into Blood, Exodus 7.17.

24 Which will be the Event of God's Word preached purely and efficaciously;
not of it self, but consequentially, upon supposition of the sins and passions
of wicked men, and the corrupt interests of the Antichristian Apostasy; as our
Savior, who was the Prince of Peace, yet says, that he came to send a Sword
upon Earth, Matthew. 10.34.

7 And when they shall 25 have finished their 26 testimony, the 27 Beast that
ascends out of the bottomless Pit [i. e. the Antichristian Apostasy, now in its
Ascent, or Rise to the height of a Satanical Power and Kingdom, Chap 2, 14. 9,
1, 2. Chap 13. and 17, 8.] shall make War against them [i. e. oppose and
persecute them after a more open and cruel manner than he had done before, Dan.
7, 21.8.9-12.] and shall [at 28 last] overcome them, [i. e. prevail and
prosper;] and [shall 28 afterwards] kill them [by Anathema's, and Persecutions
and by 29 suppressing and extirpating the Professors of the pure Religion.]

25 This seems to be the most Natural Interpretation of these Words; (...)
being often rendered by postquam in Matthew. 9.15. Luke 14.8. John 8.28.
Scripture; and the Poli Synops. in loeum.
Aorist of the Subjunctive Mood, being often put for the past Tense; and
accordingly the Words are thus rendered, in the Vulgar Latin, the French, and
other Versions.

26 They prophecy the whole 1260 Days, but their Testimony is finished, before
the Beast makes War with them; during which War they also prophesied; from
whence it is evident, that their Testimony is some way distinct from their
Prophecy, and is to end before it. Now the proper Notion of prophesying in this
Vision, relating to the foretelling of Judgments upon Antichrist (Verse 5, 6.)
and of what belongs to the Kingdom of Christ, by which he is to be destroyed;
the Witnesses may prophecy, in that sense, when they are dead; that is,
anathematized, and deprived of Church Priviledges: and the greater their
Persecutions are, the more remarkable is the prophetical State they are in; and
even when they are literally killed, they may prophecy, in the sense, that the
Blood of our Savior, and Abel, being dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11, 4.12, 24.
But Testimony, supposing an Ability to appear openly, and to be heard,
believed, and credited: the Testimony of these Prophets may be said to be
finished, when they were excommunicated, and could not appear, and be heard any
more, in the capacity of Witnesses, giving Testimony; but only in that of
Prophets.

27 A Methaphor taken from Daniel, where Idolatrous Monarchies and Kingdoms are
represented by Vid. Mori Oper. Theol. page 598. Grot. in Dan. 2, 31. 7, 3.
Matthew. 20.26.
Beasts: And that the Idolatrous Roman Apostasy, or Pagano Christian Monarchy
is understood in this Prophecy by the Beast, will be more conveniently shown On
Chap. 13. and 17.
hereafter: In the mean while, the Reader may consult Dr. Cressener's Learned
and Judicious Treatise concerning the Beast in the Revelation, where he will
find this great Truth evidently demonstrated.

From the (...).
Reduplication of the Article in the Greek, it may be inferred, That the Beast
was become Notorious and Famous; and from his being represented, as actually
ascending, in the Present Tense, it may be concluded, that the Accomplishment
of the Testimony was when the Beast was (...); i. e. the Rising, or Ascending
Beast, out of Satanical Depths, and the bottomless Pit, into a Throne of
Supremacy, which was about 606. as has been shown on Chap. 9.1.

28 For all this was not done at once, but by degrees, and not until after a
long War, and doubtful Combats; according to the Description of the Rise of
Antichrist, in Daniel, who was at first a Little Horn, and then waxed Great,
but did not prevail, but by degrees, so far as to magnify it self against the
Prince of the Host, and as to cast down the Truth to the Ground.

29 This is most properly the Death of a true Church; which happens, when it
ceases to be what it was before, as to Outward Church Privileges and
Profession; which is the visible Life of a Church.

8 And their dead Bodies [i. e. these Churches anathematized and suppressed;]
shall lie [unburied;] in the 30 Street of the great City [i e. their Censures
against them, and suppressing of them, shall be Public, Open, and Notorious,
through the whole Extent, and in the most conspicuous places of the
Antichristian Jurisdiction;] which 31 spiritually [i. e. in a mystical sense, 1
Cor. 10.4.] is 32 called [by the Spirit of God in this Prophecy;] 33 Sodom [for
its Spiritual Uncleanness by Idolatry;] and Egypt [for its Tyranny, and its
innumerable Superstitions and Idolatries;] 34 where also, [or in which great
City] our Lord [Christ,] was crucified.

30 By Street in Scripture, is meant, the Broad, Open, and public places of
Concourse, as the Word is used, Matthew. 5.6. and Esther 6.9. Whereby is
intimated, that some Churches in the most Conspicuous, and Eminent Places of
the Roman Territories, (which is the City concerned in these Visions, and is
called the Chap 14, 8.17, 18, 18,. 10.
great City) should be persecuted, and anathematized by the Apostasy; and that
the Devastations made upon the Witnesses, should be public, and in open view;
and that they should be capable of being raised and restored, contrary to what
the wicked are threatened with, ( Job 18.17.) that their remembrance shall
perish from the Earth, and they shall have no name in the Street.

31 From hence it clearly appears, that what is here delivered, is to be
understood in a Metaphorical sense, by way of Mystical Allegory; which was
common then amongst the Jews, and which the Sacred Writers, especially the
Apostle to the Hebrews, makes frequent use of.

23 Or is, in a Spiritual, and Mystical Sense; for to call, and to be, are
frequently used promiscuously in Scripture. Although I presume, the meaning of
this place, given in the Paraphrase, to be the truest; for as Gog was
prophesied of by the Prophets, under the Names of Edom, Moab, Leviathan, and
the other Chief Enemies of God, and of the Jewish Church, as the Prophet
Ezekiel expressly declares Chap. 38.17. So are the Idolatrous Enemies of the
Christian Church, prophesied of, under the Names of Egypt, Babylon, and the
like, in this Book, and in the Old Testament.

33 Thus Jerusalem is called Sodom and Gomorrah, Isa. 1.10.

34 Christ was crucified at Jerusalem; which is here mentioned:

(1.) To show, that this Slaughter of the Witnesses was to be under the
Jurisdiction of the Romans; Jerusalem being then under their Dominion, and our
Savior being Crucified by their Authority: Upon which account his Suffering
under Pontius Pilate, and his Crucifixion, which was a Roman Punishment, are
mentioned in the Creed.

(2.) Rome is called Jerusalem, because it succeeded the Mori Oper. Theol. 721,
728,
Synagogue in its Carnal, Hypocritical, and Persecuting Temper; and is a City
that kills the Prophets and Witnesses of Christ; as Jerusalem of old was wont
to do.

(3.) Our Savior is said to be Crucified at Rome, because he is crucified
there in his Matthew. 25.40, 45. Acts 9.4.
Members; to whom whatsoever is done, he imputes as done to himself: Whereupon
he asked Saul, why he persecuted Him, when he persecuted his Disciples. And
because the Apostasy Reigns there, which sin is particularly called, the
Crucifying of Christ afresh, and the putting him to an open shame, Heb. 6.4-8.

9 And they [or some] of the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations
[who shall be disposed to attend to, and take notice of this matter;] shall see
[or diligently consider,] their dead Bodies [i: e. the deplorable, and ruinous
State of these desolate Churches;] three days, and an half [see number. 37.] and
shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in 35 Graves [i. e. to be buried
in utter Oblivion, and to be in an irrecoverable condition, out of all hope of
being restored, Ezekiel. 37.11-14. Hos. 6.2.]

35 The same Metaphors that are here made use of, are also used in the same
sense by Ezekiel, Chap. 37.1-14. and by Hos. 13.14. where by dry bones in an
open Valley, and by dead bodies in Graves, is meant a hopeless condition,
without the least expectation of Recovery.

10 And they that dwell upon the Earth [i. e. the more sensual and earthly part
of the Kingdom of the Beast;] shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and
shall send gifts one to another [as in time of public Joy, Hest. 9.19, 22.
Nehem. 8.10-12.] because these two Prophets 36 tormented [by their Reproofs,
denouncing of Judgments, contrary Life and Conversation, and the progress of
their Doctrine amongst the people, Hos. 6.5 Judge. 16.6. Jon. 4.9] them that
dwell on the Earth [i. e. the Antichristian People.]

36 As the Prophets, and particularly Elijah, one of the Witnesses of the
Jewish Church, are said to trouble wicked Kings and People, 1 Kings 18.17,
18.21, 20.

11 And after three 37 days and a half, the Spirit 38 of Life from God entered
into them [i. e. they were wonderfully revived, Ezekiel. 37.5, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14.
Hos. 6.2.] and they stood 38 upon their feet [i. e. were in a posture of
Service and Defense, and appeared with Courage and Readiness to perform their
Duty, Ezekiel. 2.1-3.37, 10.] and great fear 39 fell upon all them which saw them
[revived so wonderfully, to the Joy of their Friends, and the Consternation of
their Enemies.]

37 It is observed by the Lord Napeir, that besides the Common Prophetical Day,
which is taken for a Year in Prophecy; There is also a great and extraordinary
Day in Scripture, which signifies not a Year, but any Time, to be determined by
Circumstances; as the Word Day is used in the Day of the Lord, and in Man's
Day. Now if Day signify Time in Scripture, it may very well Lord Napeir on the
Revel. Prop. 1.15. Mori Oper. Theol. page 179. and his Appendix to Dan. page
284-293.
signify so in this place; where it seems to be necessary, that Three Days and
an half should be brought to comport with Three Times and a half, 1260 Days,
and Forty Two Months: All which being of the same signification, there seems to
be no reason, but that the Three Days and a half should be of the same Nature
too; especially if we consider, that the Woman in the Wilderness which is the
Church, or Witnesses, collectively taken, from whom it differs only in Notion,
as the Body does from its Members; has Three Times and a half allotted her, as
well as 1260 Days; to which there must be something porportionable in the Times
of the Witnesses, which are her Seed, and are coaeval with her: and the Three
Days and a half are of the same Extent with 1260 Days, and Three Times and an
half; if you account the Days for Years, and then again resolve those Years
into Days; denoting so many Years. But for the clearer stating of this Matter,
it is to be observed; that here is a plain Allusion to the time of our
Savior's Continuance in the Grave, which is said by the Evangelist Matthew,
Chap. 12.40. to be Three Days, although he lay in the Grave only one whole and
entire Day of them. For he was not enterred until after Three a Clock in the
Afternoon of the Day in which he was crucified, Matthew. 27.57. and rose again in
the Evening of the Lord's Day, according to the Reckoning of the Jews, who
begin their Natural Day at Evening; or (to make use of those Heathenish Names
of Days which we unnecessarily retain, that I may be the better understood) on
Saturday-Night, just before the Morning of the Lord's Day; he being already
Risen (as the Evangelists testify, Matthew. 28.1. John 20.1) before Day, whilst
it was dark, when the Women came to the Sepulcher, on the first day of the
Week. So that according to our Reckoning, only a part of Friday, and that a
small one, to wit, from Three in the Afternoon until Evening, when the
Sabbath Day began, in the Account of the Jews; Friday Night, and all Saturday,
until toward Sunday-Morning, are called Dr. Hammond on Matthew. 12.40. and the
Expositors on the 5th Article of the Creed.
Three Days and Three Nights; i. e. Three Natural Days, in Scripture; although
they consist only of the middle one entire; and but of a part of the First and
Last Day. And from hence it is, that a very Sagacious Dr. Beverley's Vision of
the Witnesses slain: See Alcazer in Apocalypse. page 439.
Person, thinks that the Three Days and a half in this place, are to be
reckoned after the same manner; making them to be only proportionable parts of
the 1260 Days, and of the Times, and a half of the Beast; as the Three days of
our Savior's being in the Grave, are only parts of the Three Natural days of
his continuance under death; which proportionable parts he calls (...), or
Season; intimate and pregnant Time, and Time within Time.

For as Christ's Death was toward the End of the First day, so is the First
Day of the death of the VVitnesses to be begun from about the End of the First
Time (or 360 Years, reckoned from A. D. 437. where he begins the First Time, as
has been shown on Chap. 10. number. 13.) which he places at A.D. 787. when the
VVitnesses were killed, and were dead, as to all open power and liberty of
witnessing upon their being Excommunicated by the Second Council of Nice, after
a long War about Images, called in correspondence to Prophecy, Iconomachia.

And then (this being the First of the Three days and a half) in proportion to
our Savior's being in the Grave the whole Sabbath day; he makes the two whole
Times, consisting of 720 Years to answer the two whole Days of the VVitnesses
unburied State; which will reach to A. D. 1507. within Ten Years of the
Reformation, begun A. D. 1517. when the half time, to which the half day is
parallel, begun; as has been before shown. Upon which (in proportion to our
Savior's Rising at the beginning of the third day) some of the Witnesses began
to rise, and were called Protestants, A. D. 1524. which Name he thinks
(although grounded only upon a particular Protestation, made by some of the
Princes of Germany, against the Edict) might be designed, and brought about by
an overruling Providence, to signify, that they were VVitnesses against the
Beast, or Protesters, just then risen, and appearing to give Testimony, by way
of Protestation, against the declining Antichristianism; there being a
mysterious and fatal signification in some Names and Appellations, unforeseen
by those that gave them (who might perhaps ground them upon idle and
insignificant Reasons) which point out some Remarkable Events then unthought of.

And from hence he dates the Rising of the VVitnesses, in the beginning of the
Half time, or Half day; said yet to be after three days and a half; as our
Savior is said, Mark 8.31. in the very same words ((...)) to rise again after
three days, although it were but at the beginning of the third day, and that
very early, as soon as so much of the Night was past, as that it might be
called the third day: although he thinks it to be a partial and an imperfect
one, suitable to the dark Evening (for so it was, John 20.1.) of the third day,
when our Savior arose; and to the imperfections of Half time: During which,
there are to be continual Advances of the Reformation, and Endeavors after a
higher pitch of perfection; which yet shall not be complete; nor shall there be
an entire Resurrection of all the Witnesses, until the End of the last half
time; which he determines at 1697. upon Reasons given before; even as our
Savior, who was seen before only by some few, appeared not unto all his
Disciples, until Evening, Joh. 20.19.

Now this Hypothesis is so agreeable to the other parts of this Vision; and so
gracefully proportionable to the Type of our Lord's Death and Resurrection; and
so strongly supported by several Remarkable Passages of History; as the War
about Images, the Decree of the second Council of Nice, establishing them; and
the Reformation appealing just at the Half Time, or Half Day; that I cannot but
give my Assent to it; and that after much deliberation, and trial of the truth
of it. Only I cannot but also do so much Justice to the contrary Opinions of
some Famous Men, as to give the Reader a View of them, and to place them in the
best light I can.

(1.) It is the Opinion of Mede's Works, page 483, 760, 766, 850, 924.
Mr. Mede, (and of Bishop Usher) That the whole Body of Protestants should be
oppressed, and totally subverted for a short space; and that toward the End of
the 1260 days, when they shall be finishing, and completing their Testimony.
Which Opinion is refuted by Dr. Moor, in his Appendix to Daniel; and seems to
me to be highly improbable, because it supposes, that the Witnesses had never
been slaughtered before nor lain dead in the Streets of the Apostate City;
which is utterly contrary to all History.

(2.) Monsieur Jurieu, and other Famous and Judicious Persons, have thought
that the Churches of Piedmont, and of France, are the Two Witnesses; and have
accordingly remarked several things relating to their Rising after three years
and a half. Concerning which Opinion these following things may be observed:

(1.) That these Two Churches are of a very Ancient Original, probably planted
by Apostolical Men in the First Ages of Christianity; the former being the
Remains of that part of the Churches of the Diocese of Italy, which were under
the Bishop of Turin; who are commonly called the Waldenses: and the latter (not
called Albigenses, until after the Council at Alby in Languedock, A. D. 1178.)
being the Successors of the Ancient Churches of Gaul. For which see Learned Mr.
Allix's Accounts of those Two Churches.

(2.) These two Churches have maintained from the beginning their Independency
Allix. Du Pin de antiq. Eccles. Discipline. page, 23. 27. 82-96.
from that of Rome; and have witnessed in all Ages against the Apostasy Allix
Remark. on Albig. Chap. 19. on the Church of Piedm. page 188. 207-210. 286.

Mede's Works, 517, 721. 722.

Usher de Succession. Eccles. page 78.


from the beginning of it; always asserting the Pope to be The Antichrist; and
attributing to him the Characters of him given in this Prophecy, of which they
were diligent Readers: Upon which Account alone, their Adversaries having
nothing else to object against them, they were severely persecuted; becoming
thereby after a most remarkable manner, Antipas, Christ's faithful Martyr, and
Witness against the Papal Corruptions.

(3.) These faithful Churches were placed by Providence, like Candlesticks on a
Hill; being situated, as Mr. Allix remarks, amongst the Alps, and Pyraenean
Mountains, that they might be exposed to the view of Four or Five Kingdoms all
at once; one of them being planted in Italy, the very Seat of the Beast; and
shining there (according to their own Motto and Device) as a Light in the midst
of the Egyptian darkness of the Apostasy surrounding them; and the other
possessing the Southern parts of France, that it might the better convey the
Purity of the Gospel into Spain, over the Mountains, and into England, and
other places from the Seacoasts; which was actually performed Allix's Remaaks
on the Albig. page 222-237.
by them with great success; some Remains of their Doctrine continuing in Spain
until the times of the Reformation; and the Lollards, and the Followers of
Wickliff, in England, having been instructed by them.

(4.) As no Churches can show a fairer Account from the most early times of
faithful VVitnesses against the Apostasy; so can none parallel the Persecutions
they have undergone from the Papacy; or pretend to a better Title, to
prophesying in Sackcloath, for 1260 Years, being warred with by the Beast,
killed by him, and lying dead in his great City, than they can, Insomuch, that
although the Title of Witnesses may be justly given to all the other Bodies of
Christians, who have testified through all Ages of the Church, against
Antichristian Corruptions; yet they must be confessed to have the Pre-eminence
upon many Accounts: but especially by reason of their Visibility, and
uninterrupted Succession from the Times of the Apostles; their Constancy, Zeal,
Courage, and Success (most Nations having received the purity of the Gospel
from them) their Sackcloath, and mournful condition; and their dreadful and
unparalleled sufferings from the Papacy; under which they are still in a state
of Death.

(5.) But although these Churches are the most Eminent, and most Conspicuous
Body of Christians, concerning which it can most properly be said, that they
have prophesied, as Candlesticks, or Churches, regularly, and orderly
constituted, in a continued Succession of Pastors and People; and that by
emptying the Oil out of themselves into other Churches; most of which owe the
Reformation to them: Yet they are not the only Body of Christians which are to
be accounted VVitnesses; and of whom it may be said, that they shall prophecy
1260 Days. For the Albigenses, or Churches of Gaul, are accounted one of the
Witness-Churches; which yet cannot show an orderly, continued Succession from
the beginning of the Apostasy; which is clear, and uninterrupted only in the
Succession of the Churches of Piedmont: And all the faithful Christians in the
Communion of the Apostasy, but not of it, who have, through the Succession of
all Ages, witnessed against it; are to be accounted Witness-Churches; that is,
States or Successions of Faithful Witnesses, as Church is used in the Vision of
the Church-Prophecy.

For by the Two VVitnesses are meant (as appears from the Notes on Chap.
2.12-29. and on Chap. 11.4. number. 18.) in general, Two Successions of Faithful
Christians, witnessing from the Beginning of the Apostasy: the one in the
Communion of it, typified by Pergamus; the other in a distinct Communion from
it, typified by Thyatira, the Emblem of those pure Reformed Churches which are
under the power of Antichristian Princes; and are not Established by Laws, and
maintained by Reformed Magistrates, as the Sardian, and Philadelphian Churches
are; which rose out of the other Two Successions at the beginning of half Time;
and are still Witnesses; but VVitnesses risen to an imperfect State; although
under Reformed Princes: Whereas the other are Witnesses still lying dead in the
Streets of the City, as the French Churches do: or else risen only to some
Favor and Protection; but within and under the Dominion of Princes of the
Apostasy; as the Churches of Piedmont. For during the space of Half Time, until
the Three Years and a Half are fully ended; many of the Witness-Churches may
lie dead; and none will be raised to a perfect State by the Spirit of Life from
God. But as for those Churches of the Reformation, who are under Reformed
States; they being already raised to Life, cannot again return to Popery, or be
utterly extinguished by it; because they having been raised by Christ, cannot
die again: Only as to whatsoever remains of Antichristianism, may be in any of
them.

(6.) God Alcazer in locum, page 420, 421, 439.
has ordained, that the Persecutions of wicked and Antichristian Tyrants
should sometimes end after three Years and a half; in congruity to the three
times, and three years and a half of the continuance of Antichrist; and to the
Resurrection of our Savior after three days; this being the time in which the
Church may have hope of deliverance, according to the Type of Christ's
deliverance from the Grave; a longer continuance of Persecutions being apt to
make the Church despond; which expects (according to Hosea 6.2.) a Revival and
Resurrection on the third day; and is out of ordinary hopes, if it last a day
longer; as Martha despaired of the Revival of Lazarus, because he had been dead
four days. And thus it is observed, that Grot. in Dan. 7.25.
Antiochus, a Type of Antichrist, oppressed the Jews for three years and a
half; and that the Persecution under Alcazer, page 420, 421.
Nero, and that in Poli Synops. in Apoc. 11.19.
England under Queen Mary, and in the Netherlands under Duke D'Alva, lasted for
the same space of time: That it was much Jurieu's Pastor. Let. Tom. 3. Let. 21.
about that time from the Coronation of the late King James, to the Arrival of
King William into England; and from the Revocation of the Edict of Nants,
October 12/22, 1686. unto Their Majesty's Coronation, April 11/21, 1689. when a
Spirit of Zeal and Courage entered into the Protestants of France; That it was
about that time, from Tyrconnel's entering upon the Government of Ireland, Feb.
6, or 12. 1686/7. unto his Majesty's signal Success in Ireland, in July, and
August 1690. And (lastly) that the Protestants of the Valleys See Monsieur
Jurieu's Pastoral Letters. An account of the Vaudois, Printed at Oxford, A. D.
1688. Peter Boyer's History of the Vaudois, Printed at London, 1692. The
History of the Negotiation between the Duke of Savoy, and the Country of
Switzerland, Printed at London, 1690. Lettres sur les Matieres du Temps. Tom.
3. Page 198.
of Piedmont returned to their Country at the precise Term of Three Years and
an half, after their total dissipation. For by an Edict dated Jan. 31. 1686.
their Religion was forbidden upon pain of Death, their Churches were ordered to
be demolished, and their Ministers to be banished; which Edict was published in
the Valleys, April 11. and was put in Execution by the help of French Troops,
who attacked them on the 22d of the same Month, and totally subdued them in the
following Month of May; when many of those poor people were killed, and
barbarously slaughtered; and the miserable Remainders of them, were permitted
to depart; who after a tedious March in the depth of Winter, arrived at Geneva
the December following of the same Year 1686. But about three years and a half,
after their dissipation (they having in the mean while, been kindly received by
their Neigbours of Switzerland, Geneva, Holland, and others; and not suffered
to be put in Graves by the Popish Nations round about them, who appeared in
their Favor) All on a sudden, they took an Unanimous Resolution of returning
into their Country; and that at first against the Advice of their Friends, who
altogether despaired of their Success. And accordingly, about the beginning of
September, 1689. they passed the Lake of Geneva secretly, and without the
knowledge of that Government; entered into Savoy with their Swords in their
hands, recovered their Ancient Possession, and established themselves in it by
the Month of April 1690. notwithstanding the Opposition of the Troops of France
and Savoy; Of whom they killed great Numbers, with an inconsiderable Loss to
themselves, who were but a few, in comparison of their Enemies. Upon which the
Duke of Savoy finding them to be encouraged and assisted by Foreign Princes,
recalled the rest of them, and re-established them by an Edict dated June 4.
1690. with Liberty for the French Refugees to return with them; three years and
a half after their total dissipation, in the End of October 1686. For although
they were not Established by the Civil Power, until the beginning of June, a
Month after the Expiration of the three years and a half; yet they had regained
their own Possessions, and expelled the Strangers out of them by April; and had
received great Assistance in May, just at the End of the forementioned term of
Years.

Now although I must confess that there are many things very much to be taken
notice of in this Account; yet it cannot be the Resurrection here pointed at:
because the Sister Witness Church of France, still lies desolate, and dead in
the Street of the great City; and what has already been performed in Favor of
the Waldenses, comes so much short of what may be justly thought to be meant by
the Resurrection here foretold, that I cannot look upon it, but as a
Providential Congruity (if I may so call it) and a Pledge and Earnest of a much
greater Life, and that of a more spiritual Nature than what has yet happened
unto them: which I pray, hope and humbly believe, upon Prophetical Grounds, in
which I trust God has graciously assisted me, not to be far off.

38 This is plainly taken from Ezekiel's Description ( Chap. 37.) of the
Restoration of the Jews from Babylon, and of what will come to pass at their
final Restoration, of which the former was but a Type. Whereby is signified,
that God shall extraordinarily revive the Witnesses which are in a dead
condition, and mightily assist the Churches which are already raised, to
imperfect degrees of Life, Gifts and Graces; and so are consequently still in a
Sackcloath and mournful Condition, for the continuance of Judaism, Paganism,
and Antichristianism in the World, and the Imperfections of its own State: so
that they shall be seen, and taken notice of by all; as standing upon their
Feet: That is, as being in a steady Posture of Self Subsistence and Defense;
and that after an Eminent, and most Conspicuous manner, Zech. 14.4.

39 For they shall stand upon their Feet, an exceeding great Army; according to
what is prophesied of the Jews, Ezekiel. 37.10.

12 And they [i. e. the Witnesses standing upon their Feet in a Posture of
readiness, and Preparedness;] heard a voice from Heaven 40 [i. e.] had an
extraordinary call, and a Divine impulse;] saying unto them, come up hither
[unto a state of Security, Purity and Glory;] and they ascended up to Heaven 41
[i. e. enjoyed a pure, and Holy Church State;] in a [bright, Matt. 17 5. Acts 1
9.] cloud [i. e. in Glory;] and their Enemies 42 beheld them [i. e. their great
change and advancement was visible and notorious to all, even to the
Antichristian Apostasy.]

40 From hence, and from what goes before, it is manifest, that this will be
performed after an extraordinary manner, by the more immediate power and
assistance of God; from whom the Spirit of Life came, and all the Preparations
and Abilities for the performance of this great Action.

41 Their Church State is called Heaven, in opposition to the Antichristian
one, which is called Earth, and the World; and because of the security from
Persecution, which should attend it; and the Purity of its Doctrine, and the
Holiness of it, and its Professors; and the Glory, Honor and Esteem it was to
be in amongst Men; especially Supreme Powers, who are denoted by Heaven in this
Prophecy, Rev. 12.4.

And a pure Church State is called Heaven, because it is a Resemblance of the
Kingdom of Heaven, as it shall be upon Earth; and is an Exemplar of what is
actually decreed, performed and represented in Heaven in behalf of it, before
the Throne of God; as appears from Chapters Fourth and Fifth.

42 Here, as well as in what goes before, is a manifest Allusion to the
Circumstances of the Ascension of our Savior; but with this difference, that
only the Apostles, or chosen Witnesses beheld Christ's Ascent; but here, even
the Enemies of the Witnesses are to testify it, it shall be so Notorious and
Convincing to all.

13 And the same hour [i. e. about the same time, but after their ascent, Chap.
8.1. Number. 11. Chap. 9.15.] was there a great * Earthquake [i. e. a commotion,
and sudden change of thing, in the World, and especially in the Apostasy 43;]
and the 44 tenth part of the [great] City [i. e. of the Roman Antichristian
Kingdom, ver. 8. chap. 17.78] fell [by the commotion, change, or Earthquake;]
and in the Earthquake were slain 45 of Men seven thousand: and the remnant [or
the remaining successions of Men to the Kingdom of Christ. See chap. 2, 24. 3,
2.] were affrighted [at these Judgments;] and gave 46 Glory to the God of
Heaven [alone; and not to Saints and Images as had been before done.]

* As there was at our Savior's Death, and after his Resurrection, Matthew. 27,
51.28, 2.

43 Which is called Earth in this Prophecy.

44 By (...), may be meant,

(1.) The Tenth part of the City; (...) being understood: and then it may
denote Rome, as under the Papacy; which Mr. Mede supposes to be the Tenth part
of Old Rome: or rather because it is doubted, whether Mr. Mede's Dimensions of
Old and Modern Rome, be exact; some One most Notable Kingdom of the Ten, into
which the Western Roman Empire was divided; as is observed on Chap. 17. Whereby
the Kingdom of France may most peculiarly be denoted; which was the Tenth part
of the City; that is, the last of those Ten Kingdoms which arose out of the
Ruins of the Roman Empire, and gave their Power to the Beast; as may be seen
in the Catalogue of them, given by the Judicious and Learned Author of the Book
de Page 17.
Excidio Antichristi.

Or, (2.) By the Tenth of the City, may rather be meant the whole Papal
Jurisdiction; called, the Tenth, because it is symbolized in Prophecy by Ten
Toes, Ten Horns, Ten Kings, united under the Papacy; as will be shown on Chap.
17. For (...), may signify, not the tenth part of the City, but the (...), or
Decem-Principality, the State of the Antichristian Jurisdiction, or City, after
it came to have Ten Kings; as (...), Chap. 6.8. signifies not the fourth part
of the Earth, but the fourth Earthly Kingdom, or Monarchy; which is a Sense of
the Phrase more comprehensive than the former, and more suitable to the
symbolical Genius of this Prophecy. And it is said to fall; that is, to be
ruined and destroyed in the Commotion; as Babylon is said, by the Prophets, to
be fallen, or destroyed.

45 In the Greek it is, were slain Names of Men seven thousand. By Names of Men
(as Dr. Moor observes) may be meant Titles, Dignities, Offices, and Orders of
Men, by which they are named, and distinguished; or the Men themselves, who
were Men of Name or Repute, upon those, and such like Accounts; as Vile or Base
Men, on the contrary, are called, Men of No Name, Job 30.8. And by seven
Thousand of them being slain, is meant, that there shall be a Perfect, Total
and Solid Overthrow of the Popish Hierarchy and Jurisdiction; which shall
entirely be slain, or cease to be what it was before; which is signified by
Seven, a Perfect Number, multiplied into a Thousand, a Cubical, Solid Number:
as 1 Kings 19.17, 18. from whence this Expression is taken, God says, that he
had seven thousand left in Israel; That is a perfect Number of pure
Worshippers, reserved entire in secret. See Notes on Chap. 1, 4. 7, 4, 5. 9, 5.
20, 4.

46 To give Glory to God, is to confess their Faults, and acknowledge the
Righteousness and Justice of God in his Punishments, as Achan did, Josh. 7. 19,
20. and Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.34-37. and thereupon to Honor and Worship him
after his own manner; and to forsake their former Idolatry, Romans 1.21, 25.

14 The second Woe 47 [of the sixth Trumpet, viz. Turkish Mahometism, chap. 8,
13, 9, 12] is past [already;] and behold the third 47 Woe [viz that of the
seven^h Trumpet upon Antichrianism, chapters 14.15.16.] comes quickly 47 [into
event, and execution, after the second is past; upon the sounding of the
seventh Angel, chap. 10, 7. 11, 15.]

47 The First Woe is that of the Locusts, or Saracens; the Second of the
Horsemen of Euphrates, or the Turkish Mahometans; the Third is the Woe of the
seventh Trumpet, or Angel upon Antichristianism; which is largely related in
some of the following Chapters. And in this Verse is plainly asserted,

(1.) That during, or rather after the Earthquake, and the Effects of it, upon
the Ascent of the VVitnesses into Heaven; the second Woe, or Turkish Mahometism
should pass off; and that more particularly from the Grecian Churches, and
their Empire, or Imperial Seat: For it is here said, after the Vision of those
Events, that the second Woe is past; that is, it was then past in Vision; and
consequently was to pass off in the Event and Completion at the time
immediately following the fulfilling of the foregoing Vision.

(2.) That the Third Woe of the seventh Angel upon Antichristianism, was to
follow quickly, upon the passing off of the second VVo; that is, upon its
ceasing to be a Woe, or a Scourge to Antichristianism; for which End it was
designed by God: who will then inflict Woes of another Nature upon them.

And (3.) That the Effects of the seventh Trumpet shall not take up any long
time in their accomplishing; but shall be performed with speed, and of a
sudden; which may perhaps be the meaning of (...): for, as a Judicious Person
has acutely observed, the sixth Trumpet comes immediately after the Fifth, as
well as the seventh after the sixth; and therefore it cannot be distinguished
from the others by its immediate Succession, which is common to them all; but
by the speed of its Motions, and the quickness of its Events.

15 And the seventh 48 Angel sounded, and there were great [or loud,] voices]
of acknowledgment, of the Kingdom of Christ, and of Thanksgiving for it;] in
Heaven [or in the Heavenly pure state of the Christian Church, number. 41.]
saying, The Kingdoms of this World, are becomes Kingdoms of our Lord [God the
Father;] and of his [Son] Christ, and he shall reign for ever 49 and ever [Dan.
2, 44. 7, 14, 18, 26, 27.]

48 Seven is a Number of Perfection, and has a reference in this Vision to the
Kingdom of Christ; which is here foretold should come upon the sounding of the
seventh Angel; and is to consist, not in destroying, but in reducing the
Kingdoms of this World; that is, the several Civil Governments of it, to a
Constitution suitable to Christ's Gospel, whereby they become his Kingdoms; and
in Christ's Reign over these Kingdoms thus modelled; which shall be for ever
and ever; That is, to the End of all succeeding time here upon Earth; no other
Empire or Kingdom being to succeed it, 1 Cor. 15.24-29. But of this we shall
have Opportunity to discourse more fully hereafter, or the three last Chapters.

49 (...) Dr. Hammond on Matthew. 24.3. and Luke 1.70.
signifies in Scripture an Age of the World, or some eminent Period of it;
more particularly that of the Jewish Church and State; and therefore by (...),
seems here to be denoted the End of all the Periods, or Divisions of Time,
consummated in that of the Messiah; which is called the (...), World, or Age
to come, by the Jews.

16 And the four and twenty 50 Elders [or representatives of the Jewish Church,
chap. 4. 4, 9, 10] which sat before God on their seats [in a posture of
Authority, as being to reign with Christ; yet fell upon their Faces with great
humility and reverence,] and worshipped God [upon this happy, and glorious
change of things.]

50 Here is an Acknowledgment of Praise and Thanksgiving to God; according to
the usual manner in this Prophecy; as has been before frequently observed; and
that made by the Twenty Four Elders, the Representatives of the Jewish Church;
and by Voices in the former Verse, which perhaps proceeded from the Four Living
Creatures who are the Voices, or Speakers in the sixth Chapter.

17 Saying, We give thee thanks, O God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art
to come [i. e. the Eternal Jehovah;] because thou have taken 51 unto thee thy
great [or extraordinary] power [which has been hitherto usurped by Satan,
Mahometism, Antichistianism, and the wicked Powers of this World;] and h^th
reigned [visibly, and powerfully in Truth and Judgment without any rival.]

51 Here is declared the Succession of Christ's Kingdom; as it is the manner to
proclaim the Succession of Princes.

18 And [or although 52] the Nations [or Gentiles, that is the Paganizing
Christians, verse 2.] were angry [for being cast out of the visible Church,
which they had defiled and usurped, verse 2. Psalm. 2. and 99.1.] and [or but
52] thy wrath 53 is come [or is ready to be poured forth and executed upon the
living;] and the time of the Dead [is come;] that they should be Judged [both
good and bad according to their Deeds;] and that thou should [in that time of
Judgment;] give reward unto thy Servants the Prophets [or Witnesses of the
Jewish Church; or Ministers, Dan. 12.3.] and to the Saints [or eminently holy
Persons of the Christian Church;] and [to all] them that fear thy Name [in
every Nation according to the light and talents God has given them, Acts 10.2,
34, 35.] small and great [in Office or Graces; who shall be rewarded according
to what they have received, and the use they have made of it, Mat. 25.] and
should destroy them [of all sorts] which destroy [or corrupt] the Earth [by
their Tyranny, Wickedness, and Antichristian Apostasy.]

52 In both these Senses the Article is used in Scripture, according to its
Acceptance in the Hebrew of the Old Testament, Genesis 15, 10.17, 5. Job 17.10.
Jerem. 11.17. and in several other places.

53 This Verse relates to the Time of Trouble, mentioned Dan. 12.1. and the
great Battle, Rev. 16. and the Resurrection and Judgment, mentioned in the last
Chapters; which shall be particularly discoursed of in their proper places.

19 And the Temple of God [i. e. his pure Worship] was opened in Heaven [i. e.
became visible in the Church;] and there was now seen in his Temple [which
before was measured, sealed, and shut up, verse 2.] the Ark 54 of his Testament
[i. e. the greatest Mysteries of Religion, which were before obscured by
Antichristianism, were most clearly made known;] and there were lightnings, and
voices and thundrings, and an Earthquake, and great hail [i. e. high, and clear
Manifestations, and signs of Christ's Kingdom, Mat. 24 Rev. 4, 5.8, 5.]

54 The Ark of the Numb, 4.5, 20. 1 Samuel 6.19. Exodus 25.
Testament was always kept secret, and covered, and was to be seen only by the
High Priest once a year; whereby the Mysteries of Religion are Typified; which
the Angels desire to look into, and were not Revealed unto them but by the
Church, 1 Peter 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10. Now these Mysteries, called here, the Ark of
His, that is, Christ's Testament, or New Covenant, which were mightily obscured
and perverted under the Reign of Antichristianism appear opened; that is,
clearly manifested unto all, Jews as well as Christians, now united into One
Body; from whom also they had been for a long time hid, by Types and Veils, and
a Judicial Blindness, 1 Cor. 3.13-16. Romans 11.25. Which Temple here opened, and
the Ark seen it; are more fully and largely prophesied of by Ezekiel, from
Chapter the 40th to the End of his Prophecy.

CHAP. XII.
The Text.
1 AND * there appeared [in vision;] a great wonder [or prodigious sign
portending great things;] in Heaven [or in the pure Primitive Church State;] a
Woman [i. e. the Church, the Spouse of Christ, Isa. 54.1. 2 Cor. 11.2. Ephesians.
5.32.] clothed [or Environed] which the Sun [beams, shining all about her; i.
e. full of Communications of Glory, Purity, and Holiness, from Christ the Sun
of Righteousness; Malac. 4.2.] and the Moon 1 [i. e. Antichristianism] under
her feet [i. e. in comtempt, and in subjection to her;] and upon her Head a
Crown 2 of twelve 3 Stars [representing the twelve Apostles, chap. 1.20.]

Annotations on CHAP. XII.
* The Beast having been but just mentioned in the former Chapter, Verse 7. the
Holy Spirit does here (according to the Custom of Scripture, which takes
occasion from the bare mention of a thing, to give a larger Account of it)
begin to set forth who he was, and from whence he had his Original, and how he
came to be so powerful, as to make War with, and kill the Witnesses; which
Subject is prosecuted in this, the following, and the seventeenth Chapter.

And here we may observe, that the Vision of the Woman is Cotemporary with the
Fifth Seal, Chap. 6.9. when the pangs of Persecution were at the height, the
Child being brought forth in the Christian Empire, in the next Seal.

Heaven (as has been cursorily observed on Chap. 11.12. number. 41.) is not to be
understood always in this Book only, and perhaps not primarily of the
Church State on Earth; but of the Archetype, or State of it now in Heaven;
there seeming to be in Heaven a Kingdom of Christ, and an Heavenly Tabernacle
and Sanctuary; which is an Archetypal, and Exemplar State of what is to be
performed on Earth in the Church. Whereupon a Door was opened to John in
Heaven, Chap. 4, 1. and the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, Chap. 11.19.
Which Interpretation will be much strengthened by a due Consideration of Hebr.
9. where the Apostle distinguishes betwixt a VVorldly See Grotius on Heb. 9.
and Mr. Dodwell of One Altar.
Sanctuary, and a Heavenly one; and calls the Jewish, a pattern of things in
the Heavens.

And there is also in this Book, a Consessus, Synedrium, or Seat of Judgment in
Heaven, described in the Fourth and Fifth Chapters; before which, Satan as God
and Prince of this World, was (as it were) tried, and after his Accusation of
God's Servants, and Defense of himself, adjudged to be cast from the power of
Godship, which he had in those parts of the World which are concerned in this
Prophecy. Whereupon there is Joy in Heaven ( verse 12.) upon the Brethrens
being acquitted, upon Satan's Fall from the Rule he had by God's Justice over
the wicked World; the Glory which accrued to God by his Wise and Holy
Administrations, and the present Advance of Christ's Kingdom: Upon the increase
of which, the Saints may receive increase of Glory in that Heavenly Tabernacle
which shall come down from Heaven in the New Jerusalem State.

1 Worldly things, because of their Mutability, may be reprseented by the Sea
Mr. Mede on this place; and Page 613. Poli Synops. in Gal. 4.3. Coloss. 2.8, 20.
Moon; the lowest of the Planets, and nearest to the Earth: Paganism also (one
and the same Symbol having diverse significations in Scripture, as Grotius
observes on Heb. 9.11.) may be very well signified by it; but Antichristianism
is here chiefly intended, the main Subject of these Visions; denoted by the
Moon, because of the Paganism it introduced into Christianity; whose Idolatrous
Rites were Works of the Night, or of Darkness, of which the Moon is the
Governess; and whose Festivities depended upon the Motions and Aspects of that
Planet, as has been already observed on Chap. 11. number. 12. And by the Moon's
being here under the Sun, as it is when it Eclipses it; seems to be pointed out
the critical time of this Vision; viz. that it was when the pure Apostolical
Church, typified by Ephesus, was about to leave its first Love; and to receive
a Compare Luke 21.24. with Romans 11.12, 25.
(...), a Deminution or Eclipse, from the increasing Apostasy; for the Luster
of the Christian Church of the Gentiles, was diminished upon the coming in of
the Apostasy; and is not to have its (...), or Full Light of Graces, Knowledge,
and Converts, until the Paganizing Times of the Gentiles, in the Antichristian
Apostasy, are fullfilled.

2 To show, that the Apostolical Doctrine is the Chief Ornament, Crown and
Glory of the Church: Thus the Word Crown is used, Isa. 28.5. Phil. 4.1. 1 These.
2.19. And in this Verse there is an Excellent Description of the pure primitive
Church, enlightened and adorned by Graces, Gifts, and Communications from
Christ; and with the pure Apostolical Doctrine; but yet capable of having its
Light eclipsed by Antichristianism, rising from under its Feet; and of having
its Crown of pure Gold fall from off its Head; except Christ hold it in his
Right Hand, Chap. 1.16.

3 Hereby is signified, that the Church was Apostolical; the Twelve Apostles
being represented by Twelve Stars, because they enlightened the Church, and were
constant, and sixth in their Doctrine; not variable and unconstant, as the Moon
is in its Appearances and Motions; whereby it is the fitter Type of
Antichristianism. See the Notes on Chap. 7. 4, 5. and 21.15-21.

And perhaps the Twelve Stars may be symbolical of the Twelve Tribes, as they
shall be in the New Jerusalem State; Predicted and Typified by this State of
the Church: as the Glorious Kingdom of Christ is by the Christian Empire.

2 And she [i. e. the Church;] being with 4 Child [i. e. very Fertile and
Fruitful with true Christians, Is. 54, 1.60, 22.66, 8. Ezekiel. 16.20] cried,
travailing in Birth, and pained to be delivered [i. e. labored with her utmost
endavours, to bring forth, set up, and propagate Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 66.7.
Gal. 4.19.]

4 The Metaphors in this Verse are chiefly taken from Isaiah's Description of
the Perfect Church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles united into One Body, as it
shall be in Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 66.5-24.

3 And [whilst the Women was in Travail;] there appeared another Wonder in 5
Heaven, and behold a 6 great 6 red 7 Dragon [i. e. the bloody, and Persecuting
Pagan Roman Empire of a great Jurisdiction and Extent;] having seven 8 Heads
[or Forms of chief Government successively one after another. See Chap. 17. 9,
10.] and ten 9 Horns [or Kings, Dan. 7.20, 24. Chap. 17.12.] and seven 10
Crowns [or Diadems,] upon his Heads [noting the seven successive Forms of
Government in the Roman State to have been Imperial and Supreme.]

5 The Dragon appears as in Heaven, because he was reputed as God by the
Heathens; and was now worshipped, and in power in the Pagan Empire.

6 6 7 Pharaoh, Egypt, and other Idolatrous and Persecuting Powers and
Empires, are represented by Psalm. 74.13, 14. Is. 27, 1.51, 9. Ezekiel. 29, 3.32, 2.
Dragons, in Scripture, and by Leviathan, and other monstrous Creatures; for so
the Word translated Dr. Pocock on Mic. 1.8. Malac. 1.3.
Dragons, signifies in general in the Old Testament: And accordingly the Roman
Pagan Empire is set forth by a Dragon, because it was a Satanical Kingdom,
showing a Diobolical Spirit in its Persecution, Idolatry, Tyranny, and Unjust
Enlargement of Dominion; Upon which also the Dragon is represented, as of a
great Size, and red, or bloody: and because Satan, (called a Dragon, or
Serpent, from his tempting our first Parents in that shape, ver. 9.2 Cor.
11.3.) really influenced, and presided over that Empire, as a (...), or a
Governing and Assisting Demon; and was indeed worshipped by them, when they
sacrificed to their Idols, 1 Cor. 10.20.

8 Rome indeed stood upon seven Hills; which yet are not here meant, because
Head signifies in Scripture, the Governing Part, Isa. 7.20. Dan. 7.6. 1 Cor.
12.21. and therefore by these seven Heads, are appositely denoted the seven
successive Governments of the Roman State; viz. Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs,
Dictators, Tribunes, Caesar's or Emperors, and the Antichristian King, the
seventh Head. See the Notes on Chap. 17. 9, 10.

9 Horns (as has been shown on Chap. 5.6.) signify Kings and Kingdoms; and
the Roman Empire is represented with Ten Horns, that it may bear proportion
with the Description of it given Dan. 2.41. where the Fourth Kingdom has the
Toes of a Man, which are Ten. See Chap. 17.12.

10 Crowns are an Emblem of Imperatorial and Supreme Power; and therefore the
Ten Horns do not appear crowned, because they were not as yet in being as
Kings, but were Subjects to the Roman Empire. See on Chap. 13, 1. 17, 12.

4 And his 11 Tail [i. e. his Power and Subtility;] drew [after him, and
reduced under his Power,] the third 12 part of the Stars of Heaven [i. e. the
Potentacies and Governments of the world;] and did 13 cast them to the Earth
[i. e. Subdued them;] and the Dragon stood [watching, and ready, fierce and
hungry, 1 Pet. 5.8.] before the Woman [or Christian Church;] which was ready to
be delivered [of the Kingdom of Christ;] for to devour 14 her Child as soon as
it was Born [i. e. to destroy the Kingdom of Christ as soon as it appeared.]

11 Some Dragons or Serpents, particularly those which are called
Rattle-Snakess, have monstrous and prodigious long Tails; which are an Moor's
Oper. Theol. page 601. Hammond on the place.
emblem of a great retinue, and a long Military Train of Soldiers and Armies;
the Tail also signifies in Scripture Subtility, and may here denote the Policy
of the Devil, and his pretenses to Miracles, Prophecy, Magic, and the like;
whereby he corrupts and deceives the minds of Men. See Chap. 9.10.

12 By the third Part is meant the Grecian Monarchy, the third Monarchy in
Daniel: whereby we have a remarkable Note of Time given us, viz. that it was
now upon the point of time, in which the Seat of the Roman Empire was to be
transferred from Rome, to Byzantium by Constantine; upon which it came to be
called the third part: whereupon the Grecian Monarchy was cast to the ground,
it is very Seat and Power becoming thereupon Roman; Constantine Cave's
Introduct. to the Lives of the Fathers, vol. 2. page 13. Rycaut's Pref. to the
Lives of the Popes.
commanding by a Law that it should be called New Rome, and having Peopled it
with the best Families he could draw from Old Rome; and the Inhabitants of it
being called Romans.

13 Here is implied that the fourth Empire Subdued all the rest, and bore Rule
over all the Earth, after it had Subdued the Grecian Monarchy which stood in
competition with it, according to what was foretold by Daniel, chap. 2. 39, 40.
7, 7, 19, 32.

14 This refers to the Persecutions which fell upon the Christian Church, by
the Instigation of the Devil, and his Instruments in the Roman Empire;
especially to their last and most cruel Effort in the ten Years Persecution
under Dioclesian; when the Woman was, as it were, teeming with a Glorious
Church State in a Christian Empire, which was brought forth under Constantine;
as a short Specimen, and imperfect Representation of the Kingdom of Christ; as
has been shown on chap. 7.9.-17.

5 And yet [notwithstanding all his opposition, Psalm. 2.] she brought forth a
15 Manchild [i. e. Christ reigned then as King, and Lord of his Church; and
there was on Earth, a lively and manly representation of him, and his Kingdom
for a short time, Psalm. 2.7, 8. Is. 9, 6.66, 7, 8. Acts 4.23.-30.] who was to
rule all Nations with a rod of Iron [i. e. was to have an universal Kingdom,
Psalm 2.8-12.] and her Child was caught 16 up unto God, and to his Throne [i.
e. Christ, and his Kingdom were advanced; and his Church was in a State typical
of his glorious Kingdom, which yet not long continued, Psalm. 110.1.]

15 Here the Kingdom of Christ is plainly set forth in Expressions chiefly
taken from the second Psalm, which contains a Description of it; as all
Interpreters agree.

And by the Man-child is meant, (1.) Christ himself; who is said to be brought
forth, or born; because he at this time obtained, as King of his Church, a
Conquest over Paganism, and a great increase to his Kingdom; whereby he was
begotten, in the Phrase of the Psalmist, Psalm 2.6, 7, 8. that is, the holy
Child Jesus, was manifested and declared to be Lord and King.

(2.) The Church, and Christian Empire under Constantine, may be called, the
Man-child; as Cyrus is called the Lord's Christ, or Messiah, Isa. 45.1. because
he was a Type of Christ; and as Christians are said to be Christ's Body, and to
have Christ formed in them, Gal. 4.19. And if the Roman Empire it self may in
some sense (as Grotius has well noted on Dan. 7.13.) be not unfitly called an
Image, or Type of Christ; much more may the Christian Empire under Constantine
(who was a greater Restorer of Christ's Kingdom than Cyrus was) be styled a
Mystical Christ, and be an Emblem of his Glorious Kingdom on Earth.

16 Christ, after his Resurrection (which is called his Birth in Scripture) was
taken up into heaven, as we also shall be caught up thither, 1 These. 4.17.
where the same word is used; insomuch that this Phrase is taken from Christ's
Ascent into heaven, and alludes to it: And its import may be,

(1.) That Christ was then actually King of the Roman Heathen Empire, which he
had newly conquered; signified by his being caught up to the Throne of God:
whereby some Ascents of his Throne in the Heavenly Places, or Advancements of
his Kingdom may be signified, in which he was installed and inaugurated at his
Ascension, when he was caught up into Heaven.

(2.) Hereby may be signified also the advancing of the Christian Religion to
the Imperial Throne; as Christ was advanced at his Ascension to the Throne of
his Father, at his Right Hand, Psalm 110.1. But as Christ was of a sudden taken
up in a Cloud, out of the sight of the Apostles, whilst they were looking on
him ( Acts 1.9.) so may also hereby be signified the short space of the
continuance of the Roman Christian Empire (Rev. 17.10.) answerable to Christ's
being seen of the Apostles only for Forty Days, Acts 1.3: and the sudden
depravation of Religion, by a growing Antichristianism upon its advancement by
Constantine; whereby in a short time the true Primitive and Apostolical
Christianity was obscured, and could not be seen pure and unmixt; which (as And
on John 1.1.
Grotius has noted on the place) may be signified by being caught up to God,
those things being said in Scripture to be with God which are invisible, and
appear not unto Men.

6 And 17 [or but, yet it was not long before] the Woman, [or Church thus
delivered from Persecution, and advanced in the Christian Empire;] * fled into
the Wilderness 18 [i. e. was in a secret and obscure state and condition, in
the midst of the increasing Apostasy;] where she has a place prepared by God
[i. e. she is secured by him;] that they 18 should feed her there [or that she
should be nourished, and preserved there after a wonderful manner;] a thousand
19 two hundred and threescore days [i. e. Years. See chap. 11. 2, 3.]

17 When Christ was caught up to God, and the Heavenly State he designed became
thereupon invisible; the Church soon retired into the Wilderness; i. e. into an
obscure and invisible State too; as being bereft of that Presence and Power of
Christ, which was necessary to advance it into that perfect and heavenly State
which his Kingdom requires.

Here the Flight which was after the War in Heaven, is mentioned before it, by
a Prolepsis, or Anticipation, frequent in Grot. in Genesis 1.27. Ecclus. 48.1.
Scripture, and in this See Pererius on the Revelations. Grot. on Rev. 21.2.
Prophecy; the Holy Spirit being wont to hasten to the chief point it is about,
and to mention what intervenes of lesser consequence, afterward; as is
manifest from the History of the Creation; where Paradise, which was planted on
the Third Day, is not described until afterward, in the second Chapter; and
the full and particular Relation of the Creation of Mankind, but briefly
touched upon in the first Chapter, is deferred unto the second: which Figure is
here observed, to show, that the Man child, Christ's Kingdom, was not to
succeed upon the Glorious Pre appearance of it, Verse 5. and that the Church
(the Woman) was to be in an obscure condition, and that immediately after her
Delivery; and that she was presently to prepare for her Flight, she being not
to appear in Visible Glory, until 1260 Years after it.

* So the Children of Israel went up in haste out of Egypt, Exodus 12.31, 33,
39.

18 This Type is taken from the Children of Israel's sojourning in the
Wilderness; after they had escaped out of the hands of Pharaoh; who is expressly
called ( Psalm 74.13, 14. Isa. 51.9.) the Dragon, or Crocodile, lying amongst
the Branches of the River Nile, ready to devour the Israelites; as the Dragon
here stood before the Woman, to devour her Child.

And here the Paucity and Obscurity of the Members of the pure Church, upon the
Growth and Increase of Antichristianism, after the Empire became Christian; is
set forth by a Wilderness state or condition; which is an obscure and retired,
but a safe See Dr. Pocock on Hos. 2.14.
one: to which Men betake themselves, when they are threatened, and pursued by
Enemies; as the Israelites in the persecution of Antiochus (1 Maccab. 2. 28,
31.) when the Gentiles had profaned the Sanctuary, fled into the Mountains,
and into the secret places of the Wilderness. And yet as when the Israelites
fled from Pharaoh, into the Wilderness, they soon murmured, and apostatized
from God; so was the Church no sooner delivered from the persecutions of the
Pagan Empire; but the Antichristian, and Paganizing Apostasy began to increase;
amidst which yet the pure Church was preserved, although small in Number, and
in an obscure condition; as the few true Israelites were amongst the Numerous
Apostatizing ones in the Wilderness; who were corrupted Exodus 12.38. Numb. 11.4.
by the mixed Multitude of Idolaters, who went up with them out of Egypt; as
the Christian Church was by the Converted Pagans.

* This by a frequent Hebraism, may signify no more than that she shall be
fed, ot nourished, as the Phrase is explained at the 14 verse. But perhaps
hereby may be meant the Two Witnesses (from whom the Woman only differs as the
Universal does from all its Particulars, or the Body from its Members, taken
collectively) by whom the Church may be said to be preserved and maintained
because of their Preaching the Word of God, and distributing the hidden Manna;
as the Israelites were fed in the Wilderness with Manna, and miraculous Food,
by the Hands of Moses and Aaron, Two Old Testament Witnesses, Numb. 33.1. Psalm
77, 20.78, 52.

19 The Witnesses (chap. 11.3.) and the Woman have the same number of Days
assigned them; as being not really different one from the other: only the
Woman, or Church in general, is to be understood as the Mother, and the
Witnesses as the Seed and Children; begotten, as it were, in the Womb of the
Church, in which they were Baptized and Regenerated.

And here it is fit to be observed, (1.) That a Day began first to be reckoned
for a Year in the Wilderness. Numb. 14.34. whereby the like reckoning of a Day
for a Year, in this place, is much enforced.

(2.) That there were but just Forty Two Encampments of the Children of Israel
in the Wilderness, reckoned up in the 33d. Chap. of Numbers; whereby may be
fitly typified the Forty Two Months of the Gentiles, and the Twelve hundred and
sixty days of the Woman (which differ only as Solar and Lunar time do one from
another, as has been shown on the former Chapter) sojourning together in the
Wilderness; as the Few true Israelites did with the Numerous Apostatizing ones,
in a latent, obscure, and almost invisible manner.

(3) From hence also may be illustrated the Epoch, or beginning of the Twelve
hundred and sixty days, from A.D. 437. For as the Exodus 12.40. Gal. 3.17.
Israelites went out from Pharaoh, into the Wilderness, at the End of Four
hundred and thirty years from the Promise, and the Covenant renewed by
Sacrifice; so in correspondence to its Type, may the Christian Church be well
thought to have fled from the Dragon, Antichristianizing the Church; about the
same time from Christ's coming to give the Promise of Salvation, and to enact
the New Covenant by the Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross.

7 And there was War 20 [i. e. enmity and opposition, Ephesians. 6.12.] in Heaven 21
[and in the Christian Church and Empire;] Michael [i. e. Christ, Dan. 10.13,
21.12, 1.] and his Angels [i. e. the Christians in the Empire;] fought 22
against [i. e. opposed and resisted;] the Dragon [i e. the Devil, and
Paganism;] and the Dragon Fought [to hinder the progress of Christianity;] and
his 23 Angels [i. e. the Pagans in the Empire.]

20 There has been always an Enmity betwixt the good and the bad in the Church,
the latter persecuting the former; as Cain did Abel, and Ishmael Isaac; from
whence the Apostle dates the Persecution of the Church, the Woman with her
Children, and the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.22-31. So that the Four hundred
Years Affliction of Israel, Genesis 15.13. may be very well dated from about that
time.

21 The Christian Church is vety appositely called by the Apostle, Gal. 4.26.
Jerusalem which is above, or the heavenly Jerusalem; by which also may be
signified the Archetypal Church, or Kingdom in Heaven, mentioned on Verse 1. in
the Administration of which, there is something like a War betwixt good and
bad Angels; who are represented as fighting in Scripture, Dan. 10.13, 20, 21.
But here seems also to be pointed out unto us, the downfall of Paganism in
the Empire; which had its deadly Blow given it by Theodosius the Great, as has
been before observed: Whence it also follows, that this War is Contemporary
with the Times of Constantine and Theodosius.

22 An Expression taken from Dan. 10.13, 20.

23 Such were Licinius, Julian, Argobastes, and Eugenius, the Roman Senate, and
all other Opposers of Christianity in the Empire.

8 And prevailed not [i. e. they were conquered and subdued;] neither was their
place found any more in Heaven [i. e. Paganism was cast out of the Church and
Empire, and lost all its power and Authority in it, as being adjudged by him
that sits on the Throne, to have no longer continuance in it. See number. 1.
and 21.]

9 And the great Dragon was cast out [of Heaven by Divine Sentence; and out of
the Christian Church and Empire; [ that old Serpen [i. e. cunning and subtle,
who had been used to deceit, ever since the time of our first Parents, Genesis 3.]
called the Devil [i. e. the slanderer and calumniator of God to Men, and of Men
to God;] and Satan [i. e. the Adversary and Accuser of Christians, Job. 1.9.
Zech. 3.1, 2.] which deceives the whole World [into Idolatry, and Wickedness,
1 John 5.19.] he was cast out [of a state of rule, and dominion and reputed
Godship in the Pagan Empire;] into the * Earth [i. e. into a mean condition in
respect of his former state; and to rule in the Hearts of Earthly minded Men,
and of the Apostatizing part of the Church;] and his Angels [i. e. his Agents
and Instruments;] were cast out with him [i. e. Paganism was destroyed in the
Empire, now become Christian.]

* The State and Condition of the Dragon, under Antichristian Idolatry, may be
very well expressed by his being cast from Heaven to Earth; because Polytheism,
or the Worship of many Gods, being extirpated at the Overthrow of Paganism, he
was no more worshipped as a God in the Empire; and the Worship of Saints and
Angels succeeded to it, an Idolatry inferior to the former; which being
perfectly, and directly Satanical, was a State of things more agreeable to the
Devil; which when he lost, he might very well be said to be cast from Heaven,
to which the Pagans had exalted him in their Worship, to Earth; that is, to an
inferior sort of Authority and Power in the World, and an Idolatry less
Diabolical.

10 And [upon this Sentence, and Judgment obtained in Heaven] I heard a loud 24
Voice [of praise and thanksgiving;] saying in Heaven [and in the Church thus
delivered and exalted;] now is come Salvation [i. e. deliverance from Satan's
Claim, Power and Kingdom as a God upon Earth, under the Divine Justice upon a
fallen World; and from Persecution;] and strength [i. e. the manifestation of
God's Power in destroying his Enemies;] and the Kingdom of our God [i. e. the
glorious advancement of his Religion;] and the [manifestation of the] Power of
his Christ [in advanceing his Church;] for the accuser of our Brethren [before
God; and in the time of Persecution under the Pagan Empire;] is cast 25 down
[or thrown down upon the Earth;] which accused 26 them before our God day and
night [i. e. was their indefatigable and inveterate enemy, and false accuser.]

24 This Verse, and the following, contain an Epinicion, or a Song of
Thanksgiving to God, upon the Conquest of Paganism; and the Chap. 7. n. 23. and
n. 1. of this Chapter.
Appearance of Christ's Kingdom in the Empire, now become Christian; which yet
lasted but for a short space before the Glory of it was Eclipsed by
Antichristianism, Chap. 17.10.

Concerning the downfall of Paganism, see Dr. Cave's Learned Introduction to
the Lives of the Fathers of the Fourth Century.

25 A Metaphor taken from wrestling, as Grotius notes. And here we may observe,
that when Idolatrous and wicked Men are cast out of Rule and Authority; it may
be very well said, that the Devil is cast out; because he acts and governs in
and by them.

26 Expressions taken from Job 1. and the 4th. and Zech. 3. where the
Scripture, speaking according to the manner of Men, represents Satan as
accusing good and pious men before God. Which he does, by aggravating their
real Faults and Imperfections; and by exciting the Wicked Men of the World to
raise False Accusations against them; as they Notoriously did against the
Primitive Christians; see Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, Part 1. Chap. 1-4.

But perhaps this Accusation may relate to Satan's appearing at this Judiciary
Trial; alleging the Faults of the Brethren, and demanding, that they might be
delivered unto him, the Executioner of God's Justice; which he might urge, was
not yet satisfied.

11 And they 27 [i. e. our Brethren] overcame him [in this judiciary Trial
before the Throne of God; and all his subtle arts, and powerful instruments,
in the times of Persecution;] by the Blood of the Lamb [i. e. by Faith in
Christ's Blood; and by his Merits and Passion alone;] and by the word of their
Testimony [i. e. by the Gospel which they Preached purely, and Efficaciously,
and the Testimonies they had given under the four first Seals;] and [because,]
they Loved not their Lives [no not] unto the Death [but despised them, and
willingly and cheerfully laid them down for Christ, and his Gospel's sake.
Chap. 4. 9, 10, 11.]

27 In this Verse is shown the Way how Paganism was overthrown; which is in a
manner contrary to that which Antichristianism makes use of; viz. by the Blood
and Merits of Christ alone, and not of Saints; by the preaching of the Gospel,
and not by Unwritten Traditions; and by the Christians cheerful and patient
Suffering, not by Resistance, Wars and Murder, Chap. 11.7.

Although perhaps the Chief and Principal Import of this Verse, may be to set
forth the Grounds and Just Proceedings of God against Paganism, and of the
Victory here mentioned; which was obtained by the Blood of Christ, the great
(...), and the Fundamental and principal Cause; who prevailed by his Blood to
open the Seals, which were so many preparatory Judgments to this End; and by
the Testimony of the Living Creatures, the Gospel Ministry and Witnesses of the
Four First Seals; and by their Deaths and Martyrdoms under the Fifth Seal,
after which ensued the Ruin of Paganism under the Sixth Seal.

12. Therefore rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them [i. e. ye Angels,
and Saints, whose joy increases, according to the advancements of Christ's
Kingdom on Earth; and ye good, and heavenly minded Christians, which are
faithful Members of the Church now in an exalted state, although but for a
short time;] woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth [i. e. the earthly minded, and
Antichristian part of the Empire;] and of the Sea [i. e. the wicked multitude
of the Empire, Jude 13.] for the Devil is come down [from Heaven, or his
exalted State;] unto you [upon the Earth;] having great wrath, because he
knows that he has but a short 28 time [i. e. in respect of his former Reign.]

28 The Pagan Religion was overthrown by Theodosius the Great, and made only
some feeble Efforts under Arcadius, and Honorius, and Theodosius the Younger,
but with little Advantage: and therefore that being at an End, the short time
here mentioned must be meant concerning the Antichristian Empire, which Satan
knew was to have an End; and that in a short time, in respect of the several
Thousand Years of his past Reign in the World, from the beginning of Idolatry.

13 And when the Dragon [i. e. the Devil;] saw that he was cast upon the Earth
[out of his former Empire and Dominion;] he Persecuted * the Woman [i. e. the
Church] which brought forth the Man-child [i. e. the Kingdom of Christ.]

* Here the History of the Woman is resumed; and the Persecution here
mentioned, must relate to the Incursions of the Goths, and other Barbarous
Nations, Chap. 8. because they are the only Persecutions which immediately
succeeded upon the Dragons being cast upon the Earth by the Overthrow of
Paganism: which Judgments, designed as a Chastisement by God, were intended by
Satan (who stirred up those Nations, by the permission of Providence) as a
Persecution upon the Church: so that the Trumpets, (which are contemporary with
this Persecution) were Divine Judgments in the Hands of the Angels, upon the
Empire, and the Antichristianizing Party; but in the Designs of Satan, a
Persecution of the pure Church.

14 And to the Woman [i. e. the true and pure part of th Church;] were given
[i. e. prepared by God's Providence, ver 6.] two 29 wings of a great Eagle [i.
e. effectual means of a speedy and safe delivery from this Danger,
notwithstanding all difficulties, and in despite of all oppositions;] that she
might fly into the Wilderness [i. e. be in an obscure invisible condition,
verse 6.] into her place [prepared of God, verse 6.] where she is nourished [or
preserved,] for a 30 Time, and Times, and half a Time, [chap. 10, 6. 11, 2, 3,
9, 11.] from the face [or sight and wrath,] of the [very] Serpent 31 [i. e. the
Devil, verse 9.]

29 VVings denote Flight in Scripture ( Psalm 55.6.) and a great Eagles VVings,
a swift and a safe Retreat, joined with tender Care, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12. Isa.
63.9. And here is an Allusion to Exodus 19.4. and Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12. where God
tells the Israelites, that he had brought them out of Egypt, as on Eagles
VVings. Kings also, and Kingdoms, are represented by Eagles, and VVings in
Ezekiel. 17.3, 7. Dan. 7.6.
Scripture: whence the two VVings of an Eagle may be here appositely put to
denote the Eastern and VVestern Divisions of the Roman Empire (of which an
Eagle is the known Ensign) which by supporting and advancing the Visible
Church, secured also thereby the pure Church; although in an obscure and
VVilderness-State in the midst of the growing Apostasy; as Wheat amongst Tares
over-topping it; according to the Parable, Matthew. 13.

And here is also a Note of the Time when this came to pass; the most
remarkable Division of the Empire being upon Theodosius's Death; when the Two
Antichristianizing Divisions of it, by introducing a State of Christianity,
which counterfeited the True one; so covered and hid the True Church under it;
that the Enemies which Satan raised up against it, combated not True
Christianity, but the counterfeit of Antichristianism for it; which grounded
its pretense to Grandeur on the very Glorious Promises made to Christ's
Kingdom; and its Idolatry, on Honor for Christ and his Saints. Which made the
Devil (who found that the Storms he had raised against the Church fell upon his
own Antichristian part, the Church becoming soon invisible) to throw out of his
Mouth ( verse 15.) a Flood; thinking thereby to overwhelm her, wheresoever she
was.

30 Upon this place it is fit to observe,

(1.) That this is the very distribution of Time allotted to Antichrist, Dan.
7, 25.12, 7. Which was distributed after this manner, to show the different
States and Progress of Antichrist, who arrived not to his Kingdom but by Steps
and Degrees: for he was about One whole Time, or Three hundred and sixty Years,
before his Kingdom was established, upon his prevailing in the Iconoclastick
War; and from thence continued about Two whole Times, or Seven hundred and
Twenty Years, in a flourishing State of Supreme Power and Dominion; until the
Entrance of the Half Time, at the Reformation, 1517. when his Kingdom declined,
and was in a broken and divided condition, signified by Half Time, which is
called the dividing of Time, Dan. 7.25. See what has been said on Chap. 10, 6.
11, 2, 3, 9, 11. and what is discoursed upon the Rise of Antichrist on the
following Chapters.

(2.) There being in the 1260 Days of the Witnesses, some Remarkable
proportionable parts, called Three Days and a half; it is highly reasonable,
that the woman in the Wilderness should have such a sort of Time allotted unto
her; because she differs not from the Witnesses, but only Notionally, as has
been before observed. And therefore 1260 Days having been allowed her at the
6th verse, it may be rationally concluded, that the Distribution of Time in
this Verse, answers to the Three Days and a half of the Witnesses; because they
are both of the same Extent; Three Times and a half being the same with Three
Years and a half: and also because they may fitly denote the Time in which the
Church in general (typified by the Woman) was narrowly preserved from
Destruction; whilst its Members, the Witnesses, were oppressed, and lay dead in
the Streets. See the Notes on Chap. 11. 9, 11.

31 Serpents are noted by Naturalists to be quick sighted; and the Old Serpent
is described as very subtle, Genesis 3. from whence we may conclude, that the
True Church was now at this time so closely secured by God, that it escaped the
sight of the Dragon himself, even when he took the Shape of a Serpent; that is,
used his utmost Craft and Subtilty, as well as Power; and walked about, seeking
to devour her. And from hence also it appears, that Antichristianism had now so
mightily prevailed, as to be praedominant; the Church being hid and overgrown
by it, as the Wheat in the Gospel by the Tares; and that this was the very time
when the Witnesses lay dead, as to Power, being anathematized and silenced; and
yet prophesied in Sackcloth; i. e. in a Wilderness State and Condition; in
which a Church was nourished and preserved by God, although latent, and almost
invisible; the sealed ones being now closely secured, and the Worshippers
retired into the inmost Recesses of the Temple; which are Symbols representing
one and the same thing; according to diverse Notions and Circumstances.

For our better understanding of this Chapter, we may distinctly consider the
Woman, or Church, under these diverse Respects:

(1.) As Apostolical, during the pure state of the Church of Ephesus, Ver. 1.

(2.) As in pain, and watched by the Dragon, that her Child might be devoured,
during the Persecutions of the Church of Smyrna, Verse 2-4.

(3.) As Delivered of a Child under Constantine, Verse 5.

(4.) As bereft of her Child, which was caught up to God, Verse 5. Whereby is
signified, That Christ was not to appear long in the Glories of his Kingdom, at
that time; but was to disappear after he had given but a short sight and
glimpse of it.

(5.) As persecuted by the Serpent stirring up the Barbarous Nations, Verse 13.

(6.) As in a preparation to fly, when the Two Wings were given her, Verse 14.

(7.) As fled into the Wilderness, Verse 6. and as bid there in an invisible
State, during the closest times of her Wilderness condition, called Three Times
and a half, Verse 14. and Three Days and a half, Chap. 11.

(8.) As persecuted by the Mohammedan Inundation, Verse 15, 16.

It may also here be fitly observed, That this Chapter contains a plain Answer
to the common See the Preface to Morney du Plessi's Mystery of Iniquity. Mr.
Mede, Disc. 29.32. and page 649. And a Discourse of Bishop Sanderson concerning
the Church.
Question of the Romanists; Where was your Church before Luther? For it was in
an obscure state, sometimes more Visible than at others, and sometimes almost
wholly invisible, amidst the Apostasy; as Wheat amongst the Tares.

15 And the Serpent [i. e. the Devil] cast out of his mouth 31 water as a flood
[i. e. multitudes of Barbarous Nations;] after the Woman [the Christian pure
Church;] that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood [i. e. to be
destroyed in the common ruin.]

32 Water, as a Flood, signifies in this Prophecy, a sudden and violent
Inundation of many People and Nations; which seem to be the Mohammedan Nations,
described Chap. 6th. because,

(1.) They are said to be cast out of the Serpent's Mouth: by which the
pernicious, and prevailing Imposture of their false Prophets Doctrine may be
signified; whereby he deceived the Nations, as the Serpent did Eve by his
Subtilty: Speech and Doctrine being compared in Scripture Prove. 18.4. Mede ou
the place.
to the deep and flowing waters of a Man's Mouth; and the Mahometans having
been peculiarly described by their Subtilty, as well as their Power and Force,
Chap. 9. 7, 8, 10, 19.

(2.) Because this their violent and sudden Invasion, like that of a Torrent,
or water as a Flood; was just before the Death of the Witnesses at the second
Council of Nice, when the Woman was flying into her closest, and most retired
state; answerable to that of the sealed, or secured from the hurt of the
Mohammedan Locusts, Chap. 9.4. for she was as yet visible to the Serpent, when
he cast the flood after her; and was then flying into her invisible state: the
Church being, as is plain from hence, sometimes totally overspread with thick
darkness; and at other times more or less Visible; as the Sun is in cloudy
days, or the Stars in overcast Evenings, when they can scarcely be discerned,
but by a piercing and steadfast Eye; or through Telescopes.

16 And the Earth [i. e. the corrupt, and apostatized part of the Church;]
helped the Woman [by opposing this inundation;] and the Earth 33 opened her
Mouth, and swallowed up the Flood which the Dragon cast out of his Mouth [i. e.
received, and suffered the mischief of their invasions.]

33 These words are taken from Numb. 16.32. and allude to what has sometimes
happened in Earthquakes, in which Rivers have been swallowed up by the Earth.
And it may be observed, that it is not said, that the Earth swallowed the
waters; (which might indeed denote the conversion of the Barbarous Nations, and
their incorporating into the Apostasy) but that it swallowed up the Flood;
whereby the Mischief of the Waters, or People, is more properly signified:
which indeed fell severely (as has been observed on Chap. 9.) on the
Idolatrous Apostasy, whilst the pure Church was sealed, or secured, and
preserved from the hurt of the Locusts.

17 And the Dragon was wrath with the Woman [i. e. the pure Church;] and he
went to make War [by means of the Beast, chap. 11 7. to whom he gave his
Authority, chap. 13.2] with the [small] remnant 34 of her seed, [i. e. the
Witnesses who became visible by separating from the Apostasy, chap. 11.] which
keep the Commandments of God [purely and entirely without additions, and
corruptions;] and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ [which is the Spirit of
Prophecy, chap. 19.10. i. e. are Witness Churches chap. 11.3.]

34 The Seed of the woman are plainly the Witnesses (Chap. 11.) which small
Remnant was warred with and killed, whilst the Church in general, or the Woman,
was preserved by God

CHAP. XIII.
The Text.
1 AND 1 [John] stood upon the 1 sand of the Sea, and saw [in Vision,] a [2
wild savage] 3 Beast [i. e. an Idolatrous, cruel and persecuting Body of Men,
under a Chief Head;] rise up out of the 4 Sea [i. e. taking its beginning out
of the Commotions and Confusions of Nations and People, Dan. 7.2 3] having
seven 5 heads [or Forms of Government, Chap. 12, 3.17, 10] and ten horns [or
Kingdoms, Chap. 5, 6.12, 3.17, 12.] and upon his horns ten 6 crowns [or
Diadems, to denote their Sovereign Power;] and upon his heads the name of
Blasphemy [signifying that they were Idolatrous Governments, Chap. 2.9.]

Annotations on CHAP. XIII.
1 The most proper place to receive a Vision of a Beast rising out of the Sea.

2 So the Word should be translated; for it is of a distinct signification from
(...); which also ought to be rendered Living Creature, and not Beast.

3 It appears plainly from Dan. 7.3, 17, 23. that this is the true See Grotius
on Dan. 7.3. Mat. 20.26. Moor's mystery of Iniquity, Part 2. in the Word Beast.
Scriptural Notion of a Beast in general.

4 This is taken from Dan. 7.3. where Four great Beasts, or Kingdoms, are
represented as coming up out of the Sea, upon which the Winds had striven,
whereby a Troublesome state of Affairs is aptly signified; out of which Empires
and Kingdoms have generally risen. See number. 6.

5 From hence it appears evidently, that this Beast is the Roman Empire, which
was under seven Forms of Government. See on Chap. 12, 3. 17, 10.

6 These Horns are the Kingdoms into which the Roman Empire was divided; as
appears from Chap. 17.10. which are here represented as Crowned, to denote that
this was the State of the Empire, under which that Division should come to
pass; whereby it is distinguished from the State of the Empire, given as Pagan,
in the foregoing Chapter, where its Ten Horns are not Crowned. For although
Prophecy, with Respect to the Vision in Daniel, (Chap. 7.8.) generally
represents the Fourth Beast, or Roman Empire, in its full and complete
Portraiture, as well with Relation to what it was to be, as to what it actually
was at the time of each Vision; yet that a distinction of the Times of its
particular States and Conditions, might he the better observed, each
Representation is generally diversified by some particular circumstances
relating to it: Whereupon the Ten Horns are represented as Crowned, to show,
that this was the Beast with which the Ten Kings were to receive Power. From
whence it appears, that this Beast is the Papacy, as is shown on Rev. 17.12.
which also rose out of the Sea, or out of the Confusions of the Roman City and
Empire; when it was cast, like a burning Mountain, into the Sea, Chap. 8.8. It
being plain from Morney du Plessi's Mystery of Iniquity. page 81, 85.
Heidegger. Histor. Papatus, pars 1. cap. 2. Bp. Overal's Convocat. Book, page
291, 292.
History, that the Papacy rose upon the Ruins of the Empire; which beginning
with the the Invasions of the Northern Nations, about 400, we may well date its
first rising out of the Sea, from about that time; when Epist. ad Gaudentium,
and in Prefat. ad libr. Didym. de Sp. S. where by the Sea thing Pot out of the
North, he understands the Northern Nations.
Jerome expected Antichrist; whom This is confessed by Bellarmine de Roman.
Pontif. 3. 5. See Mornay's mystery of Iniquity. Downham of Antichrist, B. 1. c.
3. Dr. Cressener's Append. to his Demonstrat. of the Apocal.
he, and the Ancient Fathers believed should rise upon the Fall of the Empire;
which they took to be the (...), or that which withheld the Man of Sin.

2 And the Beast which I saw was [in its Body,] like unto a 7 Leopard [which
represents the Grecian Monarchy, Dan. 7.6.] and his Feet were as the Feet of a
7 Bear [the Emblem of the Medo-Persian Monarchy, Dan. 7.5.] and his Mouth as
the Mouth of a 7 Lion [which was the Symbol of the Babylonian, or Assyrian
Monarchy, Dan. 7.4.] and the 8 Dragon [i. e. the Pagan Roman Emperors, Chap.
12. 3, 9, 13.] gave him [i. e. the Beast] his 9 power [i e. his Diabolical Arts
and Forces to entice, and constrain Men to Idolatry;] his 10 Seat [or Throne;
i. e. his Imperial Seat at Rome;] and [his] great 11 Authority [Rule, or
Government.]

7 7 7 From hence it appears, that this was the Fourth, or Roman Monarchy;
because it is represented, as made up of the Three former; whose People and
Nations it conquered, and out of whose Ruins it grew; and because it had all
the evil Qualities and Properties of Subtilty and Cruelty, which are thought to
be See the Interpreters on Daniel 7.
signified by these Beasts: which Fourth Beast having no shape (...) Daniel;
has here one given it, in which the Parts and Shapes of the Image, and the
Beasts in Daniel, are united into one Fourth Beast. Only it is to be observed,
that the Order of the Parts of this Beast is contrary to that in Daniel; the
Leopard being placed first, because it represented the Grecian Monarchy, which
immediately preceded the Roman; which this Beast was like unto in its Body, as
it was in its Mouth to the Lion; which corresponds to the Head of the Image;
and in its Fore-Feet to the Bear (whose strength lies in his Fore-Feet) which
answer to the Arms of the great Image, as the Hinder-Feet or Legs do to its
Legs and Feet; the proper situation of the Fourth, or Roman Monarchy: And the
Dragon answers exactly to the first appearance of the Fourth Beast, Dan. 7.7.
and the Beast it self, with its Ten Kings, to the Ten Horned appearance of that
Beast, and the Little Horn amongst them, Dan. 7.7, 8. These being but several
Symbols and Hierogliphicks of one and the same thing; viz. of Four successive
Universal Monarchies.

8 By the Dragon is meant (as has been before observed on Chap. 12.3.) the
Imperatorial Pagan Power, or the Heathen Emperors of Rome, the sixth Head; as
under the Influence of Satan; who is mentioned chiefly with reference to the
Roman Monarchy, in this Prophecy; which has the Character of Satanicalness,
above all the rest.

9 Here the Succession of the seventh Head, or the Antichristian King, to the
sixth Head, or the Pagan Emperors; is described by the Dragon's giving him his
Power: which came to pass at A.D. 476. when the Christian Emperors, the
seventh King (but no Head, as is shown on Chap. 17.8-13.) ceased, and the
Antichristian King succeeded. And the latter is represented as receiving Power
from the former, by immediate Succession, although there were about an hundred
and Fifty Years distance betwixt them; because it was the next immediate Head
to it, although not the next King; who being a Christian one, is of no account
in the Annals of the Beastian Kingdom; as the Jews and Eastern People were wont
to omit the History and Chronology of Usurpers: and because the Dragon's
Antichristian Successor was then in Being, although withheld from his actual
Succession by the Christian Emperors; according to 2 These. 2. as is fully
shown on Chap. 17. And the Dragon is said to give his Power to the Beast: that
is, secretly to convey, and willingly to resign it to him; because of the
insensible Change of Paganism into Antichristianism; and the Agreeableness
betwixt them.

10 This being a Roman Beast, the Seat or Throne given it, must be at Rome too:
Which was by a wonderful Interposal of Providence, kept, as it were, empty for
the Beast; Constantine removing from thence to Byzantium; and the Western
Emperors, residing mostly at Milan, and Ravenna; by which means the Power of
the Papacy increased at Rome; and the Dragon made sure of his Seat for his
Successor: which he began to do as soon as he perceived that he must depart; by
so influencing Dioclesian and Maximian (under the disposals of Providence) that
the one should live at Milan, and the other at Nicomedia, and resign the Empire
in those Cities, and not at Rome. And this is a thing so evident from History,
that it is expressly mentioned by Laonicus De reb. gest: Imperat. Turcar. edit.
Paris. page 3. Blondus instaurat. Romans lib. 3. Steuch. Eugub. de Constantin.
Donat. lib. 1.
Chalcondylas, an Athenian, (whom I mention, to show, that it was a thing so
notorious, that Strangers took notice of it) with this Notable Remark; That the
Romans, although Masters of the greatest Empire in the World, left Rome to the
High Priest, and passed into Thrace unto Constantinople, under the Conduct of
Constantine. After the Division of the Empire into Eastern and Western, Rome
was so much neglected by the Western Emperors, that there are frequent
Complaints of that City in S^gon. de Imper. Oceident. lib. 10. page 167. edit.
Hanov.
Claudian, that Milan was preferred before it; and when Augustulus abdicated,
Odoacer retired to Ravenna, leaving Rome to the Papacy (which came then into
succession) as its proper Seat; and although Sigon. ibid. lib. 16. page 271.
Theodorick acknowledged, that it was a Crime to be absent from that City; yet
(as if a Providential Fate had determined him contrary to his own Will and
Choice) he immediately, after a splendid Triumph, retired from it to Ravenna;
where his Successors, the Gothic Kings resided. And it is further to be
observed, that when the Beast succeeded into the Dynasty (or Power) and Seat of
the Dragon; that Odoacer called not himself Emperor of Rome (which was the
Seat of the Beast) but King of Italy; and that although there have been, since
the Time of Augustulus, the last Emperor of Rome, Kings of Italy, Roman
Emperors, and Kings of the Romans; yet there has been no Supreme Governor
who has had the Imperial Title of the City of Rome it self, at least for any
long time, but the Pope; who is peculiarly styled, the Pope of Rome; and has
the Supreme Government of it. See more on Chap. 17.

11 This refers to the Authority the Pope has in the Empire, in Union with the
Ten Kings, of whom he is Head. See on Chap. 17.

3 And I saw 12 one of his Heads [to wit, the Sixth, the Pagan Emperors;] as
it 13 were, wounded [or slain] to death [by the Christian Emperors;] and his
[to wit, the Beast's] deadly wound [in its sixth Head;] was healed [by its
survival in the seventh Head, which succeeded it. See Verse 14. and Chap. 17.8.
11,] and all the * World wondered after the Beast [i. e. were wonderfully taken
with him, and followed him with implicit Consent and Applause.]

12 It is evident, by comparing Rev. 17.8-13. with this Verse, that by this
wounded Head, must be understood the Pagan Emperors, the sixth Head, wounded
by the Christian Emperors, the seventh King.

13 Here we may observe, that the Sixth Head is not said to be dead, but to
have a Wound which seemed Arethas in locum.
to be deadly, or to be wounded as it were to death: whereby may be denoted,
that although the Pagan Imperialism, the sixth Head, never came again into
Succession for any long time, the Roman Monarchickness of it only remaining
under the Christian Emperors, and not its Pagan Idolatry, and Bloody Temper
against Christianity; that yet Paganism was not so entirely destroyed at the
Succession of the Christian Empire; but that it recovered for a short time
under Julian; and was kept in some Life by the Pagan part of the Senate, and
those Heathens who continued in Office until the time of Theodosius; and by the
Emperor's connivance at their Religion; all Dr. Cave's Introduct. to Vol. 2.
of the Lives of the Fathers.
of them also having accepted of the Pontifical Stole, and born the Office and
Title of Pontifex Maximus, or Chief Head of the College of the Priests of the
Heathens, until Gratian, who refused it: and especially by the Heathen Customs
and Rites which the Christians by degrees brought into the Church: by which
Paganism gradually and insensibly passed into Antichristianism; and the Beast
was kept alive, and at last perfectly healed. So that here is described the
State of the Roman Empire, as in its passage under the Christian Emperors,
from the sixth Head to the seventh, in a bleeding and desperate Condition; but
in hopes of having its Wound cured: And the State of the same Empire, as
actually healed, is represented in the next Words; when a Monarchy and Idolatry
was introduced so like that under the sixth Head, that its Rise is here
described rather by the healing of an Old Wound, than by the Succession of a
New Head.

* Here is set forth the Extent of the Beast's Kingdom; the whole World being
said to be his Followers and Admirers; which the Defenders of the Papacy make
to be a Note of their Church: who are wont (as has been well Rivet. Tom. 3.
page 583.
observed) by the just Judgment of God, to attribute those things imprudently
to the Papacy; which are the Apocalyptick Marks of Antichrist.

To wonder after him, may also imply the implicit Faith and blind Devotion paid
to the Papacy; which is usually the Effect of a groundless Wonder, and an
Admiration of Men's persons. And here we may observe, that it is foretold, that
Defection from Truth shall be Universal.

4 And they [that wondered after the Beast, which were a very great multitude;]
worshipped the 10 Dragon [or Roman Pagan Power or Monarchy;] which gave [his]
power unto the Beast [i. e. they obeyed a Roman Pagan Diabolical Power in an
Antichristian Successor;] and they 15 worshipped [and were subject unto,] the
Beast [i. e. the 16 Roman Empire under its seventh Head the Papacy, as Imperial
and Monarchick;] saying, 17 Who is like unto the Beast [in Eminency and
Excellency?] who is 18 able to make War with him [i. e. resist or withstand his
Power?]

14 It was one and the same Roman Monarchy under the Dragon and the Beast;
because they had both the same Imperial Seat at Rome; upon the continuance of
which a Monarchy is continued in the Account of Prophecy: and because they were
both influenced by the same Draconick and Devilish Temper and Spirit; whereby
they became One Body; the Dragon living in, and being worshipped in the Beast:
Whence it is that the Beast has but one and the self same Body under all its
Heads; it being represented as One Beast, with diverse distinct Heads; each of
which Head also may be called a Beast, by a Synecdoche, or a Figure, whereby
what belongs to the whole, may be attributed to an eminent part.

15 To Worship denotes also Grotius in locum. Genesis 37.7, 8.
Subjection, in Scripture; because Subjects were wont to adore, or prostrate
themselves to their Princes and Superiors in the Eastern Countries: As the
Subjects also of the Popes do; who are not approached unto without Rivet. Tom.
3. page 576, 577. Fouli's Romish Vsurpat. B. 1.4.
Adoration; and are placed on the Ceremonial. Roman. Sect. 2. cap. 2. And Sir
Paul Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes.
Altar after they are chosen, to receive the Adorations of the Cardinals, and
others present.

16 Beast, absolutely taken, signifies,

(1.) The Roman Empire with all its seven Heads.

And (2.) The State of the Roman Empire, under the seventh Head, and Eighth
King, the Papacy; which is the general Acceptance of the Beast in this
Prophecy.

17 This is an Expression frequently made use of in Exodus 15.11. 1 Samuel 2.2. 1 Chronicles. 17.20.
Scripture, to denote God's peerless, and appropriated Supereminence; and
consequently his appropriated Worship. And by it is very appositely set forth
the Rivet. and Foulis ubi supra.
extravagant, profane and blasphemous Titles and Prerogatives given to the
Pope by his Followers; who make as if he were something more than Humane;
calling him their In Gloss. extravag. Rivet. Tom. 3. page 518. confessed by
Father. Walsh, the Author of the Controversial Letters, and other honest
Romanists.
God, and Christ's Vicar, and attributing to See Mr. Dodwel's Fundamental
Principle of Popery; where it is proved that this must necessarily be the
fundamental principal of their Communion; although it be denied by some of them.
him Infallibility; all which is signified here by this Phrase; which is not
unlike the blasphemous Expressions of Rabshekah, 2 Kings 18.

18 This most See Fouli's Romish Vsurpat. Mr. Dodwell 's Considerat. of present
concernment. Math. Paris, Anno. 1245 -- Imperatorem Fredericum conculcavimus;
and quis es tu qui nobis temere credis resistere? Graseri Histor. Antichrist.
page 176. Omnes Principes fortunam irritasse qui cum Papa certaruat.
Kings and Kingdoms have found to be true in their Contests with the Papal
Omnipotency; as some of their Admirers have called it.

5 And there was given unto him [by the Devil, God permitting, and ordering
things accordingly, upon men's willful blindness;] a mouth 19 speaking great
things [i. e. a Faculty of impudent lying and boasting concerning his own Power
and Infallibility, in Decrees, Anathema's, and the like;] and blasphemies [i.
e. Idolatrous Decrees;] and power was given unto him to continue 20 Forty and
two Months [of Years.] See on Chap. 11.2.

19 This Phrase is taken from Dan. 7.8, 11, 20, 25.11, 36. where it is the
Character of the Little Horn, and the Antichristian King; from whence it also
appears, that this Beast is an Antichristian one: and that this also is a Mark
of the Papacy, clearly appears, from their See the Authors quoted on number. 16.
The Canon Law, the Bullarium Romanum, and the Authors who defend the Papacy,
and the Court of Rome.
extravagant Titles, and Decrees and Pretenses to Universal Power.

20 (...) Grot. in Jac. 4.13. Mede in Locum.
when joined with a word signifying any space of Time, denotes in Scripture the
continuance of it.

6 And he opened his Mouth [with great boldness and arrogance;] in Blasphemies
[or Idolatrous Expressions;] against God [Dan. 7 25.] to 21 blaspheme his Name
[or Essence;] and his 22 Tabernacle [i. e. Christ's Humane Nature, and his
Church;] and them 23 that dwell in Heaven [i. e. Saints and Angels.]

21 By making Images of God, which is called Blasphemy or Idolatry, in
Scripture. See Chap. 2.9. number. 19.

22 The Humane Nature of Christ, is called in John 1.14. Hebr. 8, 2.9, 11. Col.
2.9. See Dr. Hammond on John 1.14.
Scripture the True Tabarnacle, in which the Divinity, as it were, sojourned
here upon Earth. And the Church also may be represented by a Tabernacle (as it
is called, Ezekiel. 23.4. Rev. 21.3.) because of its wandering
Wilderness-condition, in expectation of its Home, and (...) in Heaven. The Sea
Dr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity.
first is blasphemed in the Papacy many ways, but especially by the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and the Idolatrous practices consequent upon it; the latter
by Calumnies, Excommunications and Persecutions.

It is the Opinion of a Learned Man, that by Tabernacle is here meant the State
of Saints and Angels in Heaven, or the Heavenly State, in which Christ is said
to minister, Heb. 8.2. and through which he is said to have passed, (Heb.
9.11.) to the Holy of Holies, the very Throne of God; which may also be the
meaning of Heb. 10.20. And this Interpretation he thinks to be most probable,

(1.) Because the Humane Nature of Christ is it self the Minister of the
Tabernacle; and not the Tabernacle in which the Ministration is performed.

(2.) Because the Heavenly things themselves are to be purified and anointed (
Dan. 9.24. Heb. 9.23) and therefore are to be supposed to have been profaned
and blasphemed; that is, Idolatrously abused: and because such an Acceptance
of the Word Tabernacle here is more agreeable to what is said in this Vision
concerning the Tabernacle of Testimony being opened, and the Tabernacle of God
being with Men; and with Ezekiel's Visional Temple, or Tabernacle; and with the
Divine Tabernacle (Chap. 4.) the Scene or Apocalyptick Stage of these Visions.
See Chap. 12, 1. 21, 3.

And (lastly) because Christ in his Humane Nature may be more significantly
comprehended under the John 1.1, 18. See Mercer, and Pocock on Joel 2.32. and
Acts 2.21.
Name of God.

23 Who are blasphemed by the Idolatrous Worship of them, taught and practiced
in the Church of Rome.

7 And it was given to him to make War with the Saints [i. e. to oppose,
excommunicate and persecute the Witnesses, Chap. 11, 7. and the Seed of the
Woman, Chap 12.17.] and to overcome them [Chap. 11.7.] and power was given him
over all Kindreds, and Tongues and Nations [i. e. to make Proselytes in all
parts of the World, and to Rule and Govern the Kings and People of the
Antichrian Kingdom, Chap. 10.11.]

8 And all that dwell upon the Earth [i. e. the Apostasy;] shall worship him
[i. e. obey, and honor him as an Infallible Head.] whose 24 Names are not
written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, slain from the Foundation of the World
[i. e. except those Living, Eminent and Excellent Members of Christ's Church,
particularly known and designed by him to be effectually saved by his Blood;
who was crucified in respect of the Divine Decree, Appointment and Agreement
betwixt the Father and the Son, from all Eternity, Phil. 4.3. Genesis 3.15. Acts
15.18. Gal. 3.17.]

24 See on Chap. 3. 4, 5. These are the Witnesses, Chap. 11. the seed of the
Woman, Chap. 12.17. and the Sealed ones.

9 If any man 25 has an ear let him hear [for what has been now delivered in
a Spiritual and Mystical manner, is very remarkable, and worthy the most
attentive, and most serious Observation. See Chap. 2.7.]

25 Hereby (as has been already shown on Chap. 2.7.) is intimated, that what
has been delivered concerning the Beast in this Chapter, after an aenigmatical
and parabolical manner (this being the Sentence made use of by our Savior in
the close of his Parables) is a Truth of the greatest importance; against which
yet many would shut their Ears. And therefore all Christians are called upon
seriously to consider, and weigh what is here delivered; and not to be driven
from the profession of the pure Faith, by Fear of Punishment; nor wrought upon
to follow the Beast, by the spendid Baits of Greatness, Power and Authority, or
the high and big pretenses of Infallibility, Success, and Universality; seeing
it was foreseen and foretold by the Holy Spirit, that the generality of Mankind
should be earthly minded, and should thereupon follow the Beast; and only a few
chosen and beloved of God should escape this Universal Corruption.

10 He that leads 26 into Captivity, shall go into Captivity: he that kills
with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword [i. e. all Antichrian Enemies
shall be dealt with at last, as they have dealt with others, Chap. 19. 20, 21.]
Here is [an occasion for the Exercise of] the Patience and Faith of the Saints
[in bearing their Sufferings, and in believing and patiently waiting for their
deliverance out of them, and the destruction of the Enemies of God, and of his
Church. See on Chap. 14.12.]

26 Here is a plain reference to the Beast's, and the False Prophets being
taken Captive; and to the slaughter of the Remnant by the Sword, Chap. 19. 20,
21. For as the Prophets of old were wont to comfort the People of God when in
Captivity, and under great distress, by Denunciations of Ruin and Destruction
to their Enemies; so does the Holy Spirit here revive the persecuted Saints, by
telling them that their Persecutions should have an End, and that the Apostasy
which now domineered, and blasphemed the Holy Name of God, should at last be
abolished, and utterly destroyed; according to the just and righteous Judgment
of Almighty God, who recompenses Tribulation to them that trouble his Saints, 2
These. 1.6, 7. Isa. 33.1, 2. Ezekiel. 39.10. Matthew. 7, 2.26, 52. But yet they are
commanded to have Patience; for although the Judgment is certain, yet it will
not be so soon as they might expect, Hab. 2.3, 4. Matthew. 21.19-24

11 And I beheld another 27 Beast [i. e. another Persecuting, and Idolatrous
Body of Men under Superiors;] coming up [silently, slowly, and by degrees, as
feet of Clay,] out of the 28 Earth [or Apostasy;] and he had two 28 Horns
[Potentacies or Powers;] like a Lamb 29 [i. e. seemingly Christian;] and he
spoke as a 30 Dragon [i. e. was in his Doctrines, Decrees, and Practices,
Antichristianly Idolatrous, and Persecuting.]

27 This Beast is different from the former, as appears from his Original,
Shape, and the other Characters here given of him; called therefore the other
Beast; as being a distinct Beast from that whose Succession the Prophecy was
describing.

28 28 The former Beast rose up out of the Sea; that is, the Commotions and
Divisions of the Empire: This rises as things grow out of the Earth, silently,
and by degrees. And as by the former Beast, the Papacy as Monarchick and
Imperial, was fitly represented; so in this Type there seems to be a
signification of the Apostate Hierarchy, or of the whole Body of the
Ecclesiastics, as Antichristian; as appears,

(1.) From the Account here given of its Original; viz. that it was out of the
Earth; by which the Apostate State of the Church is signified in this Prophecy.
For as the Papal Monarchy rose out of the Providential Commotions and Troubles
of the Empire; so was the Antichristian Power of the Clergy founded upon the
Apostatizing Spirit of Diotrephes, increasing by degrees in the Church.

(2.) It appears, that some Christian Body of Men is signified by this Beast;
because it is said to have Horns, like a Lamb, which is the Type of Christ in
Scripture: By which Expression ( Horns being the Type of Powers and Potentacies
in Scripture) an Apostate Hierarchy, or a Holy Government (for so the Word
signifies) acting under the sanctified pretenses of Christ's Authority, and his
Religion, and in ordine ad spiritualia, is very appositely set forth unto us.

And (3.) By this Beast's being represented with Two Horns, is very aptly
signified, the whole Body of the Ecclesiastics, under the Potentacy of the
Ruling Clergy, or Hierarchy of the Two Divisions of the Empire, into East and
West: and withal there is an intimation given, that this Beast rose when the
Empire was thus divided.

And (lastly) We may from hence conclude, that this Beast is not The
Antichrist, who is represented as a Monarch, by One single Horn in Daniel; but
a Body Politic (signified by a Beast in Prophecy) under Two coordinate
Powers, or Horns; by which the Hierarchy of the Eastern and Western part of the
Empire, before the Pope came to be an Horn, or to have his Antichristian
Supremacy, is very fitly typified: especially the Eastern, and Western
Patriarchates; which were a mere Usurpation in the Church; arising from the
honor of precedence, which the Metropolitans of the Chief Cities, gained upon
Constantine's new modelling of the Empire; which (as Bishop An account of the
Govern. of the Christian Church for the first six hundred years page 192.310.
and from page 188. to the end of that Book.
Parker speaks) quickly became a Stirrup to Ambition, to mount into a
Superiority of Power and Jurisdiction: And although there were many Contests
betwixt the Eastern and Western Bishops, yet (as the same Learned and Judicious
Person has observed) the Patriarchal Usurpation first began at Constantinople,
and the Supremacy of the Church of Rome was founded merely upon the Ambition of
the Church of Constantinople. Which Words are an excellent Comment, upon this,
and the following Verses, as his whole Discourse there is; wherein is proved,
that the Eastern Horn, or Hierarchy, as well as the Western, was the Chief
Cause of advancing the Beast, or the Papacy, to its Kingdom.

29 Christ is typified by a Lamb in John 1.29, 36. Acts 8.32. 1 Pet. 1.19.
Scripture; the Emblem of Innocence, Meekness and Purity: And here is
intimated, that this is an Antichristian Beast, because of its having something
of a Lamb in it; the Devil not being able to introduce Antichristianism, but
under the Mask of Christianity, and under a pretense to See Dr. Moor's mystery
of Iniquity.
Mystery, Godliness, and The Popes, whilst they give themselves the humblest
Titles, make the Proudest claims; and under the Name of Servus. Servorum, make
themselves Princes of the World. Bp. Parker, ibid. page 347. with relation to
Gregory the Great.
Humility; by which ways it was at first brought into the Church, and is still
kept up in it.

30 Here is signified, that this Beast was a Pagano-Christian Beast, and a
persecuting one; because he spoke and acted like a Dragon, the Type of Paganism
and Persecution; whilst his Pretenses were the Authority and Honor of Christ;
the Advancement of Unity and Peace, and a Zeal for God's Glory; and a reducing
of Men by Lamb-like, i. e. innocent and gentle Methods; a Phrase much used by
the French Clergy, in their Speeches to their King, upon his barbarous
proceedings against the French Protestants.

12 And he [i. e. the Hierarchy] exercised all the Power of the first Beast [or
the Roman Idolatrous Monarchy,] before 31 him [and in favor of him; for his
Honor, and by his Consent;] and causes the Earth [or the Apostasy;] and them
which dwell therein [i. e. the Apostate Members of this Earthly and Worldly
Church, the Gentiles, the Subjects of this Hierarchy, Chap. 11.2.] to worship
[Verse 4.8.] the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed [i. e. the Roman
Empire under the seventh Head, and eighth King, Verse 2, 23. Chap. 17. 8, 10,
12.]

31 From hence it appears,

(1.) That this was the Hierarchy of the Roman Empire, because it exercises
Power before the Beast, or in his presence; which Beast was the Roman Empire;
as appears from its Description before given.

(2.) That these Two Horns, answering to the Two Feet in Daniel (the same thing
being fitly represented by Feet in the Image of a Man, and by Horns in the Type
of a Beast's Head) and those Two Feet coming not into Succession until the Rise
of the Ten Kings (who are the Ten Iron Toes of it) which was not until A. D.
476. when the Imperatorial Power ceased, and the Papal Succession began with
its Ten Kings; it will follow, that this other Beast exercised not the Power of
the first Beast until then.

(3.) That the first Beast, with its seventh Head, the Papacy, even when it was
in Succession as the eighth King, A.D. 476. yet did not then exercise its Power
of its self; as is plain from History; in which it is notorious, that the
Papacy attained not its Supremacy until A. D. 606. and that all that time the
Hierarchy of the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Empire, exercised all its
Power before it, by ministering unto it, as the Phrase signifies, 1 Samuel 2.18.
or in See Grot. on Luke 4, 7.24, 19.
its stead, and for its benefit, as a kind of a Protector of it in its Infancy;
and as the Clayie part of the Feet of this Image, upholding and sustaining the
seventh Head.

(4.) Although the first Beast were before the other Beast, as the first Beast
signifies the Roman Empire; whence it is called the other Beast, with reference
to some former, or first Beast; yet as it is the seventh Head, they are
contemporary: the Papacy, and the other Beast, in that particular Notion, as
Feet of Clay, coming into Succession together at 476. which yet were before the
first Beast, as they were a domineering, and aspiring Body of Men, making way
for the Papal Kingdom, during the time of the Christian Emperor, when the
Beast lay wounded, and was partly kept alive, in an healing condition, by them;
and as they were those who protected the New King, the Papacy, from his
Succession at 476. until his Supremacy, at 606.

13 And [or for] he does great 32 wonders [i. e. seemingly great, but really
lying and counterfeit ones, 2 Thessal. 2.9.] so that he makes 33 Fire to come
down from Heaven on the Earth in the sight of men [i. e. appears to worldly
and apostatized Men* consenting to, and applauding the Cheat, to work as great
Miracles as Elias did, 1 Kings 18.33. 2 Kings 1.10.]

32 Lying Wonders are one Character of the Man of Sin, giveh by the Apostle, 2
These. 2.9. And accordingly it is notorious, that the great Apostasy was brought
in by the Lying Miracles, Fabulous Legends, Counterfeit Writings, and pretended
Inspirations of the Clergy, as Mr. Apostasy of the latter times, B. 1. Chap. 2,
3, 4, 5. Bishop Stillingfleet's Second Discourse in Vindicat. of the Protestant
Grounds of Faith, Chap. 3. his Discourse of Idolatry, Chap. 4. his Answer to
Mr. Cressy's Epistle Apolog. Chap. 2.
Mede, and others have proved. Bishop Account of the Government of the Church,
page 249. the right of the Emperors, in choosing the Pope, was gained from them
by a pretense to Divine Inspiration. Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes.
Parker observes, that the Constantinopolitan See (which was afterward one of
these Horns when the Clayie Feet came into Succession) was first advanced by
the pretended Inspiration of Diodorus, an Old Doting Bishop; and Annal. lib. 4,
and 5. Downham of antichrist, lib. 1. page 110.
Aventinus confesses, that in the time of Gregory the seventh, when Antichrist
came to his height, false Prophets were very frequent: And accordingly this
very Beast is called afteewards the false Prophet.

33 This is one of those Miracles which the Poli Synops. in loc.
Jews require for proof, that a Prophet is sent from God: By which is
intimated, that this Beast was permitted by God to do great Signs; and that
withal he was of a wrathful and a revengeful Spirit, contrary to that of the
Gospel; where Christ rebukes his Disciples for calling for Fire from Heaven.

14 And deceives them that dwell on the earth [i. e. the Pagano-Christian
Worshippers, Chap. 11.2.] by the means of those Miracles which he had power to
do in the sight of the Beast, saying to [i. e. teaching, persuading, and
commanding] them that dwell on the Earth [i. e. the Genti e Worshippers, Chap.
11.2.] that they should make an Image 34 [of Universal, Roman, Persecuting, and
Idolatrous Empire;] to the [Honour of] the Beast, which had the wound by a
Sword [of the Christian Emperors, the seventh King, in its sixth Head, the
Pagan Emperors;] and did [now] live 35 [in this Image.]

34 Here is an Allusion to the Image which Dan. 3.
Nebuchadnezzar set up; which he made of Gold, to represent himself (who was
the Head of Gold in the great Image he had seen in a Vision, Chap. 2. 38.) as
the sole Head, and Universal Monarch of the World, as he was acknoledged to be
in the Titles given him, Verse 4; or at least to be a Figure of his Universal
Monarchy; of which a great Image is the Type in Chap. 2.31-45.
Daniel: which Image was also set up for Divine Worship, and is called God, at
the 29th Verse; all who refused to serve, and worship it, being severely
punished: To all which Particulars there are clear References in this Chapter;
and in the Usurpations of the Popes, the Worship of Images introduced
especially by their means, and the great severity used against all the
Witnesses (of whom Shadrack, Meshack and Abednego were Types) who refused to
worship Images, and submit to the Papal Supremacy, which were the Image, and
the Gods the Antichristianizing Hierarchy had set up.

35 Did live, signifies did revive, or recover, as Grotius and Vatablus render
the Word, and that in or by the Image; upon the making of which, the Beast was
perfectly cured; his Idolatry and Supremacy becoming then predominant; whereas
it was before but in its Infancy, and under the Tutorage of the other Beast;
who was, as it were, a Cardinal Patron, to the Beast in its Minority, acting
all things for him, and in his Favor; as those Cardinals now do for the Popes,
in their decrepit Age.

The sixth Head, as it distinctly and particularly denotes the Pagan Emperors,
was neither healed nor revived; the Monarchy passing from it to the seventh
Head; although the Beast be represented in his entire Portraiture, to show the
Succession of his Heads: but as it denotes, and is a part of the Roman,
Idolatrous, persecuting Monarchickness, in which Beastianism consists; so it
was revived, and healed, when the seventh Head attained Idolatrous, and
persecuting, as well as Roman Power: whereas during the Christian Empire,
although the Emperors had Roman, Monarchick Power; yet they were not
Idolatrous, and persecuting Powers, as the Pagan were; whatsoever there was of
degeneracy, or persecution, upon other Accounts.

15 And he had power to give 36 Life [i. e. activity, and a power of working
upon the Minds of Men,] to the * Image of the Beast [i. e. unto the likeness,
and similit^de of the Pagan Roman Empire;] that the Image of the Beast should
both speak [in Decrees and Canons;] and [also] cause [by ^ts own power, and
that of the secular Magistrate;] that as many as would not worship [obey, and
be subject to,] the Image of the Beast should be killed [by Excommunication,
and the Temporal Sword, Dan. 3.5, 6]

36 For this was not a lifeless, dumb Idol, like that of Nebuchadnezzar, or
those described, Psalm 115. but was possessed with an active, and a restless
Spirit, as some of the Sea Dr. Hammond on the place.
Idols, and Oracles of old were. Or, to give Life to the Image of the Beast,
may signify, the Revival of Paganism; as Life signifies, Chap. 11 11. and
Verse 14.

* The Devil being wounded in his Power, by the Wound of the sixth, or Pagan
Head; and knowing from the Prophecy of Daniel, that there was to be no other
Pagan Monarchy, and Draconick Head, gave his Power to the Beast: But perceiving
that this Beast was not able to deceive the World by a pure Imperatorial Power,
and a barefaced Heathen Idolatry; he wrought upon the Gentile Worshippers (or
Antichristian Laity newly converted from Heathenism, and retaining a great Love
for the Magnificence and Customs of their former Religion) by means of the
other Dan (...) or the Antichristianizing Hierarchy, to make an Image which
should be not only to the Honor of the first Beast, but should be a
Resemblance of it. Now an Image being not the thing it self, but a similitude
of it, this Image must consist in some Likeness, or Resemblance of a Universal,
Persecuting, and Idolatrous Empire; in which the Nature of Beastianism is
placed by Prophecy. Which was exactly fulfilled,

(1.) When the Papacy attained an Universal Supremacy; which yet being but an
Ecclesiastic, or Spiritual one, or a Temporal one under an Hierarchick Form,
erected after the Model and Platform of the Civil Empire; was indeed but a
Clayie Image, or Resemblance of the Real and Substantial Power, which the
Emperors enjoyed; and wanted the strength of Dan. 2.40-43.
Iron, which is necessary to all Dominion; which the Papacy has not of it self,
but from the Iron and strength of its Ten Toes, or of the Kings united under
him, as a Spiritual Head. Such an Image did Abbas Ursperg. ad an. 1298.
Crakenthorp of the Pope's temporal monarchy.
Boniface the Eighth appear to be, when he rode in Imperial Robes, with a Naked
Sword carried before him; one proclaiming with a loud Voice, Ecce hic duo
Gladii; Behold here are Two Swords, the Spiritual and the Temporal; and when to
Overal's Convocat. Book, page 314.
make his infinite Sovereignty more conspicuous and memorable to all Posterity,
he came forth one day amongst the people, to be admired of them, with a Sword
by his side, and a Crown upon his Head; strutting like an Image in vain
Pageantry.

(2.) When a Mr. Mede's Apostasy of the latter times. Dr. Moor's Mystery of
Iniquity. part 2 lib. 1.17. Bishop Stillingfleet's Discourses of Idolatry.
Pagano Christian Idolatry was established; which is an Image, or
Representation of Heathen Idolatry.

(3.) This Image of the Roman Imperialism (which is chiefly represented by it)
consisting of Antichristianism, as well as Supremacy, may be also looked upon as
an Image of Christianity; as being the Counterfeit of it; assuming Supremacy
under the pretense of Christ's Sovereignty, whose Vicar he pretends to be; and
introducing a Religion which substitutes an imaginary counterfeit Christianity
in the place of the true one, when it is indeed opposite to it; in which the
Nature of Antichristianism consists.

16 And he causes all both small 37 and great, rich and poor, free and bond
[i. e. all, of all Ranks and Conditions, Dan. 3.4, 5, 6.] to receive a 38 mark
in their 39 right hand [i. e. to be obliged to engage, and act for him;] or in
their 40 foreheads [i. e. or openly to avow, and own him, and his profession.]

37 A distinction of Grot. in Locum.
persons, in use in the Roman Empire, comprizing all Ages and Conditions.

38 As the Followers of the Lamb have their Seal or Mark; so have the Followers
of Antichrist: whereby is denoted his Propriety in them, their Service of him,
and their open profession of his Name or Doctrine, by which they are to be
known and distinguished from others. An Expression taken, as Grot. Ham. Poli
Synops.
Critics think, from the Marks, which the Romans were wont to put upon their
Possessions, Slaves and Soldiers; but may be rather an Allusion to Cain's Mark;
or (which seems to be most probable) to the 3 of Maccab. See Grotius on that
place, and Hammond on this Verse.
(...), or Mark of an Ivy-leaf, which Ptolemy Philopator caused to be burnt
with Fire upon the Bodies of those Jews who were to enjoy the privileges of
the Common people of Egypt; in token of their being the Servants and
Worshippers of Bacchus: For the same Word ((...)) is used in both places; and
several passages of the Books of Maccabees have been before alluded to in this
Prophecy, as has been already Page 203, 204.
observed, concerning the Story of Antiochus; those Apochryphal Books being
preserved (as Dr. Scripture Line of Time, part 2. page 43, 44.
Beverley has ingeniously and judiciously observed) not without a Design of
Providence, and put into the Canon of the Church of Rome; That a Prophet of
their own, or a Scripture of their own Canonizing, might be a Witness against
them.

39 The Right hand being most in use, and the strongest, denotes Action:
whereupon God commanded the Jews that the Law should be a sign unto them upon
their hands; that is, should be obeyed and kept by them.

40 That is, that they should not be ashamed of professing his Doctrine, but
should make their Relation unto him be as open, and as remarkable, as if it had
been written upon their Foreheads; as the Jews were commanded to have the Law
upon their Foreheads, and betwixt their Eyes, Exodus 13.9. Deuteronomy. 6.8 --

17 And [he causes also] that no man might 41 buy or sell [i. e. partake, or
dispose of any Advantages or Preferments;] save he that had the mark [i. e. was
engaged in his Cause and profession, and was active in it;] or the Name [i. e.
42 Nature] of the Beast, or the Number of his Name [i. e. the Number which
shall show his Nature.]

41 This Phrase has a relation to the Commodities, or Merchandises of the
Beast's Kingdom, and the Privileges of his City; reckoned up, Chap. 18. of
which the Papacy debars all Men, by Vid. Poli Synops. in locum, and Medum,
Brightman.
Excommunications, Interdictions, and Civil Penalties, who will not own and
profess its Doctrine. And here is a further Allusion to the Story of Ptolemy
Philopator, in the Book of Maccabees before quoted; (who seems to be a Type of
Antichrist, as Antiochus is confessedly owned to have been) who took away from
all those Jews the Privileges belonging to Alexandrians, which they before
enjoyed, who would not embrace his Idolatrous Religion; and admitted only those
into his Court, and the higher Rank of Citizens of Alexandria, who would be
initiated into it; thrusting even the Jews, who complied so far as to take the
Mark of Bacchus, into the Inferior Rank of the Vulgar Egyptians; which is an
Instance exactly agreeing to the Proceedings of the Antichristian King, as all
See Foulis of Popish Usurpations.
History testifies.

42 So Hammond on Matthew. 2.23. Mr. Mede Disc. 2.
Name signifies in Scripture; as Divines usually show on the first Petition of
the Lord's Prayer.

18 Here is [what requires, and will exercise] 43 Wisdom; let him that has
understanding [in such matters;] count 44 [or calculate] the number of the 45
Beast [i. e. the Number which shall show when he became an Idolatrous Beast;]
for it is the Number of 46 a man [i. e. such an one as Men of Wisdom and
Understanding may, and are wont to calculate;] and his number is six 47 hundred
threescore and six.

43 By Wisdom is meant here, such Wisdom or Skill as the Egyptians, and the
Skillful Jews, and other Wise Men of the Eastern Nations had; and for which
Moses is so renowned in Scripture, Acts 7.22. of which, Knowledge in See Bongus
de Numeris, Meursius de denario Pythagorico, Wendelinus, and other Authors, who
have witten of Pythagora's Tetractys. Grot. in Act. 7.22. Hammond. on 2 Timothy
3.8. Dr. Moor's Cabbala. Mr. Potter of the Number of the Beast.
Numbers was none of the least. And that such like mystical and obscure
Knowledge was anciently called Wisdom, is plain from the Author of the Book of
Ecclesiasticus, who tells us ( Chap. 6.22.) that Wisdom is according to her
Name, ((...)) not manifest unto many; alluding (as Philo also often does) to
the Dr. Moor's mystery of Iniq. part 2. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Etymology of the Greek Word; as if it were derived from the Hebrew (...).
which signifies to cover, or hide.

44 (...); which word signifies to calculate, as Arithmeticians were wont to do
of old, with Stones or Counters.

45 The Numbers of his Name seems to denote the Number which shall show his
Nature, Essence and Being; Name and Thing, to be, and to be called, being very
frequently used promiscuously in Scripture: and the Number of the Beast seems
to be different from that of his Name; and may signify the Number which shall
show the Time of his becoming The Beast; as will appear more clearly in the
following Annotations.

46 Hereby is not signified, that Antichrist is a Man; but that it is the
Number of Man ((...), not (...),) or of the same kind that other Numbers are,
which Men make use of; as Isaiah (Chap. 8.1.) is commanded to write with a
Man's Pen; that is, with such a one, and in such Characters as are in use
amongst Men; and as the Word is used, Chap. 21.17.

47 The Man of Understanding is not bid to calculate the Numeral Letters of the
Beast's Name; but to calculate 666. the Number of the Beast; which
Arithmeticians know can be done no other way but by extracting the Root of it:
which seems wholly to overthrow the conceit which Lib. 5. Cap. 30.
Irenaeus has delivered from Ancient Tradition; that (...) (the Numeral Value
of the Letters of which word make up 666.) is the Name of the Beast; and that
the counting of the Number of the Beast, consists in nothing else but in the
counting of the Value of the Letters of his Name; which is no great piece of
Wisdom and Understanding. And although the Authority of Irenaeus is not to be
altogether contemned; yet it being notorious, that he was mistaken, or imposed
upon, in some things, for which he vouches the Traditions of Apostolical Men
(as particularly concerning our Savior's Age, when he died) he is not to be
followed, when there are so considerable Reasons to be brought against the
Opinion he relates, and those from the very Text it self. For besides, that the
Numeral Letters of several other Names, amount to 666. the Apostasy is no where
set forth unto us in Prophecy, under Types, which have any reference to the
Name of Latins, but only to that of Romans; which has also swallowed up for a
long time the other Name; which is now out of use.

And therefore I cannot but acquiesce in what Mr. Potter has said in his
Admirable Discourse upon this Number; where he has shown, that the counting of
it consists in the extracting the Root of it, which is 25; the Number 25 25 125
50 625 41 666.


25. being the only Number, which by being multiplied into it self, makes up
the Square Number 666. when the Fraction (which is 41 in this Operation) is
added to it; which is what is meant by the Square Root of a Number. And this
Opinion I acquiesce in,

(1.) Because it is the only way of counting, or calculating this Number; and
is withal a piece of Ancient Wisdom and Understanding; perhaps in use amongst
the Eastern Sages, from whom the Greeks derived their Skill.

(2.) Because the Root of it 25, gives us the Number of the Year, when the
Beast first had a Name, or a Being. Concerning which we are to observe, that
the Epoch of all the Numbers in this Prophecy, are to be taken from the time
of our Savior's Resurrection, A. D. 33. to which if you add this Number, the
Conception of the Beast will fall upon A. D. 58. about the time in which the
second Epistle to the Thessalonians 2 Ep. 2.7. thought by Mr. Dodwell, and Dr.
Cave, to have been written 49. by Bp. Pearson, A.D. 53. and by several others,
A. D. 57.
was written, when the Apostle affirms, that the Mystery of Iniquity was
working. For as 12, the Root of the Number of the pure Church, may denote, that
the Church continued pure until Twelve Years after the Resurrection, viz. until
A.D. 45. so may also the Root 25. lead us after the same manner to the
Beginning of the Apostasy, at A. D. 58.

(3.) Because the Square Number arising out of this Root, gives us the time
when the Apostasy came to be the Image of the Beast. For if we add 666. to A.
D. 58. the time of its Conception, we shall arrive to A. D. 724. when the Beast
which rose about A. D. 600. (as has been before observed) came to his Manly
Age, as an Idolatrous Power; being then warmly engaged in the War about Images.
Which Observation is much illustrated by the Beasts being represented as an
Image in this Chapter; in which 25 may be considered as the Root or Basis; and
666 as the Height of it. And as Nebuchadnezzar's Image (Dan. 3.1. the Type of
the Image in this Chapter) was an irregular Figure, contrary to the Rules of
Proportion (as Interpreters have shown on that place) and consisted of Sixes,
as this does; so is 25, the Basis of this Image, a Surd Number; out of which a
regular, and perfect Square cannot arise, but one mixed with Fractions: to show,
that the Apostasy is in Truth an Irregular Religion; consisting of many unequal
Additions; as 25 is an uneven Number, and 666. is not a square and perfect
Number, arising out of 25 only; but is made up of Fractional Additions,
Whereas, on the contrary, the Number 12. the Root of the pure Church, is an
even number, making One hundred and Forty Four Thousand, its Square, perfectly
and entirely; to show the Perfection, Entireness, and Agreeableness of its
Doctrines.

(4.) Except this be the meaning of the Number of the Beast, there will want an
anti-numerus, or opposite number to the number of Christ's Kingdom; which is
agreed on by all Interpreters to be 12. the square Root of One hundred and
Forty Four Thousand; and thereby that graceful Antithesis, (...), or
Correspondent Opposition, which is observed in this Prophecy, betwixt the
things which relate to Christ's and Antichrist's Kingdom, will be violated and
broken; and the Anti-Apostolicalness of this Church will not be so appositely
signified. See Mr. Potter 's Discourse.

(5.) The Number 25. may very well be put to express the beginning of
Antichrist's Kingdom; because it has been always accounted, by Sacred and
Profane Writers, who have thought nothing of Antichrist, to be mysteriously
evil; and to be an Hieroglyphical Character of some unhappy, desperate,
deplorable, and Apostatical Estate of Christ's Church; because it is an oddly
uneven number, which is unevenly measured by an odd Number; as Mr. Potter Chap.
12.
has proved out of Jerome, and others, in his Excellent Discourse on this
Subject; an Exquisite Piece of Mysterious Knowledge. For which Reason also, 666
may be a Number expressing things belonging to Antichrist's Kingdom; because it
consists of Sixes; a Number relating to the Pagan Kingdom, the Sixth Head; of
which Antichrist is the Image: And also (as On this Verse.
Grotius observes) denotes the Things of this World; as Seven does the Things
of the Better World, the Kingdom of the Messiah.

(6.) The Number 25 is most admirably applicable to the Antichristian Roman
State; it being the only Conspicuous and Remarkable number in that Hierarchy;
describing the Papacy in its most Essential Parts; that Church having been
Fatally led to lay its very Foundations upon it; it having at first Five and
Twenty Cardinals, and its Creed consisting of Five and Twenty Articles, as the
Apostles does of Twelve; as Mr. Potter has accurately shown in these, and many
other Particulars.

(7.) It may be observed, That as the Number 666. can by no means be made out
of 12, whatsoever Number you multiply it by; so neither can the Antichristian
State any way arise out of the Apostles Doctrine.

(Lastly,) The Number 666. consisting of the same number in all its places,
from Units to Hundreds; is upon that account (as Grotius observes on the place)
very Remarkable, according to the Opinion of the Wise Pagans, who made their
Vows in the same proportion: And because it consists of an entire Poli Synops.
in locum.
Senary of numbers, arising by degrees from Units to Tens, and from thence to
Hundreds; and that in a proportion very agreeable, by the multiplication of 6
by 10; so as that 6 are found 10 times in 60, and 60, 10 times in 600: it may
from thence be thought to signify the seeming Comeliness and Proportion of the
Antichristian State; which is so great, that it is apt to deceive those who do
not exercise Wisdom, to discern things; it being at first sight a Number more
proportionable than 144, the Number of Christ's Kingdom. So necessary is it to
count numbers, and to extract the Roots of them, by stripping things of their
Outward seeming Appearances, although never so Comely; and searching into the
very intimate nature, and Essence of them.

CHAP. XIV.
The Text.
1 AND I looked [or was in Vision];] and lo, a Lamb [i. e. Christ,] stood [to
import his settlement in his Government, and his Rule and Defense of his
people, Psalm 2.6. Mic. 5.4.] on the Mount 1 Zion [i. e. appeared in an
exalted, and an established State, in his Kingdom; Psalm 48. Mic. 4.1. Heb.
12.22.] and with him an 2 Hundred Forty and Four Thousand [i. e. a Body of
Apostolical Pure Christians, Chap. 7.4.] having his [i. e. Christ's] Fathers
Name 3 written in their Foreheads [i. e. openly adjudged by God, and professing
themselves to be the true Followers of Christ. See on Chap. 7.3.]

Annotations on CHAP. XIV.
1 Zion Josh. 15.63. 2 Samuel 5.1-10. 1 Chronicles. 11.1-9. 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Psalm 48.2.
was the Mountain, or upper part of Jerusalem, on one side of which stood the
House, or Palace of David; as the Temple did on the North side of it, called
Mount Moriah; which was reckoned as a part of Mount Zion. This Mountain was
taken by David from the Jebusites, whom the Children of Judah were not able to
drive out, because of their Unbelief; and was the first Exploit undertaken by
him, after his being anointed King over all Israel, upon the Submission paid
unto him by all the Tribes of Israel, and their acknowledgment of their being
his Bone, and his Flesh; wherein they were Types of the Obedience that all
Nations are to pay to Christ; and of their becoming Members of his Body, of his
Flesh, and of his Bones, Ephesians. 5.30. David took it when he began to 2 Samuel
5.4. Luke 3.22, 23.
Reign, being Thirty Years old; according to the Age when our Savior began to
preach, gather Members for his Kingdom, and cast out Devils; as David also
dispossessed the 2 Samuel 5.6-8. Gregory's Observat. Chap. 7.
Jebusites, and cast out their Tutelary Idols, the Hatred of his Soul; called
by him and his Followers, by way of Sarcasm and Contempt, the Blind; and the
Lame; as having Eyes, but seeing not, and Feet, but walking not; according to
the like Expression used by him, Psalm 115. When he had taken it, he fortified
the Strong Hold of it; and afterward built there, and made a Beautiful City,
calling it, the City of David. In all which he was a Type of Christ, as that
Mountain, Strong Hold, and City, were of the Strength, Stability, and Beauty of
Christ's Kingdom; especially as it shall appear at last in a most glorious
manner; triumphing over all Heathen and Antichristian Idols; when the Lord
shall set his King upon his Holy Hill of Zion; and Christ shall stand, and feed
his People, and be great unto the Ends of the Earth, Psalm 2.6. Micah 5.4.

Only here it may be observed, (1.) That as the taking of this Mountain was the
first Achievement of David, after he came to the Kingdom, before he was fully
established in it, and had built his City; so may this Appearance of Christ, be
some Preparatory State of his Kingdom, called the Kingdom of David in
Scripture; rising Micah 4.1, 2.
to the Tops of the Mountains, and exalting it self above the Hills, that so
the Everlasting Gospel might be heard, and People might flow unto it; but
somewhat different from the State of its full Establishment, when his Kingdom
shall appear in its utmost Glory: as in the Description of it given Heb. 12.22.
they first come unto Mount Sion, before they come unto the City of the Living
God, and the Heavenly Jerusalem; as is more fully shown on the Three last
Chapters; where this whole matter is largely considered.

(2.) That here is represented some Exalted State of the Heavenly Tabernacle it
self, typified by Mount Sion; which was not yet of so high, and so exalted a
Nature, as that which it shall afterward arrive to, when it shall appear as in
the highest Heavens, or in its Heavenly State: it being probable, that there
are Exaltations of Christ's Kingdom in the Archetype of it, in the Heavenly
Places; of which the several Advances it receives here on Earth, are the
Counterpart, Patterns and Example; according to what has been already
discoursed on Chap. 12.1. and will be shown more largely hereafter: it being
very difficult to give Account of many things in this Prophecy without this
Supposition.

2 As this Vision relates to the State of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, there is
hereby signified, a Body of Apostolical pure Christians, appearing in a State
of open, and public profession of Christ's pure Religion: but as it refers to
the State of things in the Heavenly Places, hereby is denoted an appearance of
the very 144000. mentioned in the seventh Chapter, who are the Saints and
Witnesses departed in the Lord.

3 They were before sealed, and in a hidden, and invisible State; but now they
have a Name written, that is, appearing legible upon their Foreheads; and that
the Name of God: whereby may be understood some Approbation of them, and
Declaration on God's part, before whose Throne they are ( Verse 5.) as to be
judged and approved by him, that they were Holiness unto the Lord; in allusion
to the Inscription on the High-Priest's Frontlet, Exodus 20.36. and that they
were worthy of the Exalted State they now were advanced unto: and withal an
open profession of the Witnesses on Earth, that they were God's true Soldiers
and Servants, (who used to See Mr. Mede on the place, and Grotius.
be marked in the Forehead) and not marked Slaves of the Beast. And by the
mention of Christ's Sealed Number in this place, is intimated the great
difference there will be in the Issue and Event of Things, betwixt Christ's
Servants appearing thus in Glory, and the marked Servants of the Beast, just
beforementioned in the former Chapter; and withal (according to that known
Rule, That Opposites, when placed near one another, illustrate each other)
hereby is much established the Interpretation of the Number of 666. there
given; 12 the Root of 144000. being an Anti-Number to 25, the Mark of the
Beast; signifying an Apostolical Body of Witnesses, as that does an
Anti-Apostolical one. See the Notes on Chap. 7. number. 9. and on Chap. 13.18.

2 And I heard a Voice 4 from Heaven, as the Voice of many Waters [i. e. a loud
and powerful one, Chap. 1. 15.] and as the Voice of a great 4 Thunder [i. e.
Terrible, Chap. 4, 5. 6, 1. 10, 3.] and I heard the Voice of 4 Harpers harping
with their Harps [i. e. there was a great and powerful Appearance of Christ's
Kingdom, Chap. 11.15.]

4 4 4 Voices, Thunder (called so frequently, Psalm 29. and in other places,
the Voice of God) Music and Singing, are the constant Forerunners and
Attendants of Christ's Kingdom, as has been frequently observed. And it seems
to me, that this Vision relates to the Appearance of Christ's Kingdom, upon the
sounding of the seventh Angel, when there were great See Grot. on Rev. 5.8.
Voices heard in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of the World are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; and that it is Synchronous and
contemporary with it; it being very rational, that the seven loud Voices, so
audibly heard in order, in this Chapter; should be no other than the Voices of
the Seven Thunders (mentioned, Chap. 10.3-8.) now unsealed, or opened; which
were then sealed, and not to be written, or come into Event, until the days of
the Voice of the seventh Angel.

And here it may be observed; that by the Voices and Music, is not only
represented an Appearance of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth; but that also they
signify the Joy which is in Heaven, and in the Heavenly Tabernacle, upon the
Exaltation of Christ's Kingdom; For if there be Joy in Heaven upon the
Conversion of a Sinner, it may well be supposed to be there also, upon the
great Advancements of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth.

And amongst all the Music of the Temple, perhaps See Grot. on Rev. 5.8.
Harps are here more particularly mentioned; Because it is the Musical
Instrument of Praise and Thanksgiving, which was wont to be made use of in
setting forth Great and Extraordinary Actions; and was the particular
Instrument which David was eminently skilled in, and which was the occasion of
his being brought to Court, and fitted for the Kingdom; which was the Type of
Christ's Kingdom here represented.

And Thunder also may be here mentioned to show, that the seven Voices of this
Vision, were the several Openings, or Vnsealings of the seven Thunders, which
were sealed, Chap. 10.4.

3 And they sung, as it were, a New Song [i. e. the Song of Redemption by
Christ's Blood alone, which seemed to be New, because it had not been taught,
nor heard openly during the Apostasy. See Chap. 5.9.] before the Throne of God
[Chap. 4.] and before the Four Beasts [or Living Creatures Chap. 4.6.] and the
Elders [Chap. 4.4. i. e. the Doctrine of Redemption, and those who sung, and
had taught it in the Church, whilst they were upon Earth, were approved of by
God, and the Divine Consistory, which all along in this Prophecy appears as
passing Judgment upon the Actions represented in it. See Chap. 4.1. page 70.]
and no man could learn that Song but the Hundred Forty and Four Thousand [i. e.
none could fully understand, and experience, the Doctrine taught in that Song,
but those true Christ ans] which were redeemed [i. e. rescued and delivered by
the Blood of Christ alone, from the Earth [i. e. from the Corruptions of
Antichristianism.]

4 These are they which are not defiled with [Whorish] Women [i. e. were not
Members of Idolatrous Churches, Ezekiel. 23. See Rev. 17.1.] for they are Virgins
[and not Prostitutes, as Jezebel, and the Whore, Chap. 17. and had kept
themselves pure from all Idolatry and Antichristian Pollutions, Psalm 45.14.
Canticl. 1.3. 2 Cor. 11.2.] these are they which 5 follow the Lamb wheresoever
he goes [i. e. were the Faithful Disciples of Christ; and are now his more
Immediate Attendants in the Heavenly State of his Kingdom here represented;]
these were 6 redeemed from 7 among men, being the first 7 fruits unto God, and
to the Lamb [i. e. the choicest Members of his Church; and the first partakers
of the Glory of his Kingdom.]

5 A Metaphor taken from those Officers who are the constant Attendants of
Princes; or from the Disciples of Prophets, concerning whom this Phrase is used
in Matthew. 8.19. Luke 9.57.
Scripture; or rather from the Virgins, the Companions of the Bride and
Bridegroom, Psalm 45.14. Matthew. 25. Christ's Kingdom being likened to a
Marriage-Supper, Chap. 19.9. and his Attendants as a Bridegroom, to Virgins,
Matthew. 25. who are also the Chorus to the Marriage-Song of his Kingdom, in the
Book of Canticles. And they are mentioned in opposition to the Followers and
Worshippers of the Beast.

6 As the Firstborn were wont to be under the Law, Exodus 13, 13.22, 29.

7 First Fruits Exodus 22.29. Numb. 18.16. Jerem. 2.3. Zech. 2.12. James 1.18.
See Mede on the place, and the Commentators on these Texts.
were the First and the Choicest Offerings; and whatsoever was separated from
Profane Uses to Holy ones.

Whereby is signified, (1.) The First Church of Choice, Holy, and Pure
Christians, which shall appear at the expiring of the Times of the Beast, upon
the first Succession of Christ into his Kingdom; when (as has been before
shown on Chap. 10. number. 13.) the Thirty Years in Daniel, which make the 1260
Years to amount to 1290. are to begin in the full and entire Resurrection of
the Witnesses: Who are said here to be redeemed by the Lamb, or Christ alone,
in opposition to their own and others Merits, and Antichristian Pardons and
Indulgences; and that from among Men; i. e. from out of the World, or the
common State of Mankind; or rather from the Antichristian Men of the Earth,
those Merchants, (Chap. 18.11-13.) who bought and sold Men and Souls.

(2.) Because in this Vision there is described not only the State of Christ's
Church and Kingdom upon Earth, but also the State of the Archetypal Kingdom in
Heaven; Hereby is also represented the first Glorious Appearance of the Members
of it, the Witnesses departed in the Lord, who have the privilege to be the
constant Attendants of the Lamb, in his Heavenly Tabernacle; and the first
partakers of that exalted State of his Kingdom, here Visionally represented by
Mount Zion.

5 And in their mouth was found no 8 guile [i. e. they were not found guilty of
the great Lie of Antichristianism and Idolatry;] for they are without Fault
before the 9 Throne of God [i. e. they are acquitted and justified by God;
although they had been condemned and anathematized by Antichrist.]

8 Idols are called Lies in Jerem. 16.19. Am. 2.4. Grotius and Mede on the
place.
Scripture; and Lying (as Grotius observes on the place) is a constant
Concomitant of Idolatry; and hereby this Apostolical Number of Christ's
Followers, are distinguished from those which belonged to Antichrist, whose
Religion is but an Image, or Counterfeit of Christ's, and is thereupon also
justly called a Lie.

9 Hence it appears, that this is the Vision of some exalted State of Christ's
Heavenly Kingdom, seen as before the Throne of God, or the Divine Sanhedrim,
and Court of Judicature, coming down (as it were) on Mount Zion; where the
Witnesses (who are the 144000.) who had been killed by the Beast, appear, and
are, as it were, adjudged by God, as worthy the exalted State they enjoy with
Christ; and which they had obtained under his Conduct, and for his Sake: which
Appearance shall have also (as has been all along observed) a parallel one on
Earth, in the Philadelphian State of the Church.

6 And I saw 10 anoth r Angel [or Gospel Ministry, Chap. 1. 1, 20] fly in the
midst of Heaven [to denote the Swift; Public, and Universal Public tion of the
Gospel of the Kingdom, Chap. 8.13.] having [committed unto him 2 Cor. 5.19.]
the 11 Everlasting Gospel [of the Kingdom spoken by the Mouth of all his
Prophets since the World began, which was to bring in Everlasting Righ eousne
s, Dan. 9.24 Acts 3.21-26. Rev. 16.7.] to preach unto [all] them tha dwell on
the Earth, and to 22 every Nation [of Pagan Mohammedan, and Antichristian
Gentiles;] and Kindred [or Tribes of Israeli es;] and Tongue [or the various
People of several Languages amongst them;] and People [i. e. to the whole
multitude of each.]

10 There being no Angel mentioned before, but only a Voice (Verse 2.) By
another Angel here must also be understood, another Voice; which Word imports
Utterance of Doctrine; as John the Baptist is called, The Voice of one crying
in the Wilderness: And this Voice is here called an Angel, because it was
pronounced by an Angelical Voice, or Speaker; who was seen; whereas the former
was only heard; so that this is another, or a distinct Voice or Angel from the
former: Whereby a certain Order of Voices is plainly represented; which being
also Seven in Number, and distinctly reckoned up, may very well be accounted
the seven Thunders, opened into loud and distinct Voices.

11 The Gospel of Christ's Glorious Kingdom being the main Subject and Scope of
these Visions, it must therefore be here referred to; which is called
Everlasting;

(1.) Because it was the Doctrine, or Mystery designed by God from everlasting,
praefigured in all the Types of the Old Law, and preached, or spoken by the
Mouth of all the Prophets since the World began; by which Phrase Eternity is
signified in Scripture. See Acts 3.21-26. Romans 16.25, 26. 1 Cor. 2.7. Rev. 10.7.

(2.) Because it was to bring in the Everlasting Righteousness (mentioned Dan.
9.24.) or the way of becoming Righteous in the Account of God by Christ alone;
which will then be fully manifested to be no New Doctrine (as the Apostasy, at
the Beginning of the Reformation asserted it to be) but the way which was from
Everlasting, and shall be until the End of all Things.

I think it may not be unfit to observe in this place, That the Apostasy (that
it might be a perfect Antichristian Counterfeit of Christ's Kingdom) did
pretend to a New Gospel, called the Bishop Stillingfleet of Idol. Chap. 4. p.
238-246.
Eternal Gospel; containing many Extravagant and Blasphemous Opinions; and
asserting, that the Scriptures contained not the Gospel of the Kingdom, but
were to give way to a New Gospel, which should take place in A. D. 1260. Six
Years after the preaching of it; which Gospel was so much favored by the
Popes, and the Court of Rome, that a Book written against it, was burnt by
their Order; And although they were at last forced to burn the Eternal Gospel
also; yet it was done secretly, and with much unwillingness.

12 This is a Pleonasm, or a Figure, wherein by a Redundant Accumulation of
many Particulars, is expressed the preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, for the
bringing in of all Nations (whereby Ethnicks, or Gentiles of all sorts, are
meant in Scripture) and of all the Tribes of Israel to the Kingdom of Christ;
according to Hosea 6.1-3. Matthew. 24.14. Romans 11.25, 26. which is to be near the
End, when the Deliverer shall come out of Sion, and after Two days, in the
Third Day; which Dr. Pocock on Hosea, extends even to the End of the World; but
others, with more Reason, to the End of See on Chap. 11. 9, 11.
Antichristian, or Gentile Times, when Christ's Kingdom shall appear, and they
who have known (something of Christ's Kingdom) shall follow on to know the
Lord, more fully and perfectly by the preaching of this Everlasting Gospel,
Hos. 6.3.

7 Saying with a loud Voice [i. e. after a zealous, and most powerful manner;]
fear God [and not Idols, Isaiah 8.12, 13.] and give Glory to him [alone, and
not to Creatures, Angels, and Saints;] for the Hour [or precise time, and
appointed Season;] of his Judgment [Government, or 13 Kingdom, and of his
Judgments on all manner of Idolatry, Pagan, and Antichristian, which he will no
longer wink at;] is come: and worship him [therefore the Creator of all
things,] that made Heaven 14 and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of
Waters [of the Great Deep, Genesis 7.11.]

13 So Judgment often signifies in the Old Testament; as Psalm 72.1, 2. and in
other places of Scripture.

14 The Heathens worshipped all the parts of Nature, even the Seas, Rivers and
Fountains, as is clearly proved by De Idolatr.
Vossius; which the Antichristian Dr. Moor's Mystery of Iniquity, part 2. lib.
1.17. Bishop Stillingfleet's Fourth Conference concerning Idolatry.
Apostasy also having imitated, in appointing Tutelar Saints, and Angels to
most of the parts of the Creation, and in introducing a Worship which is but an
Image, or a New Model of Paganism; Do their Idolatries may be here meant.

8 And there followed another 15 Angel [or Gospel Ministry;] saying [i. e.
preaching, and denouncing this great Truth;] 16 Babylon [i. e. Antichristian,
or Papal Rome,] is 17 fallen, is fallen [i. e. will as certainly fall in a
short time, as if it were a ready fallen;] that great City [of a large Juri
diction, and Head of the Roman Empire;] because she made all Nations drink of
the Wine of the 18 wrath of her Fornication [i. e. partake of her Idolatry.]

15 Some Copies read a Second Angel; for so it was, although it was the Third
Voice; for so saying imports.

16 Babylon is a known Type of Rome Antichristian; as is shown more fully
hereafter.

17 This is a common Scheme of Speech amongst the Prophets, to signify, that
the thing will as certainly come to pass, as if it were already accomplished,
Isaiah 21.9. Jer. 51.8. The Temporal Punishment of Babylon, or Rome, was
executed, Chap. 11.13. before the sounding, and Voices of the seventh Trumpet;
So that this Fall, which is after that sounding, must relate to some other
Punishment: which may probably be its Eternal Punishment; which is executed,
Chap. 18.2. and is here only Preached, or Denounced, as nearly approaching, by
this Angelical Voice, or Preacher; and that after a more powerful manner (these
Voices issuing out of Thunder unsealed) than had been done before.

18 They were drunk, and mad after Idols, and possessed (as it were) with a high
Rage of Lust after them; like to that of a Wild Ass, to which Idolatrous Israel
is compared by the Prophet, Jer. 2.24.

9 And the third Angel [but fourth Voice] followed [after] them, saying, with a
loud Voice [to show the Import, and Severity of the Denunciation;] if [after
the Denunciation against the Antichrian City,] any man [shall still presume to]
worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in
his hand [i. e. any way comply with Antichristianism, Chap. 13.11-18.]

10 The same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God [i. e. he shall be
punished in 19 Wrath for the 19 Wrath of his Fornication, Verse 8.] which is
poured out [or 20 tempered and prepared to be] witho t any [the least] mixture
[or 20 Temperament of Mercy, Luke 16.24. James 2.13.] into the 21 Cup of his
Indignation [and Fury;] amd he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone [i e.
with the most exquisite Torments,] in the presence [and with the Approbation]
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb [Christ; who shall command
the Execution of the Sentence, and approve the Equity and Justice of the
Judgments of God, 2 These. 1.5-11.]

19 19 A Figure frequent in Scripture; as Romans 1.25, 26. and in several other
places.

20 20 This seems to be the true meaning of (...); which Phrase in this way of
rendering has some Elegance in it.

21 A Phrase whereby the Wrath of God is frequently expressed in Job 21.20.
Psalm 75.8. Isaiah 51.17, 22. Jerem. 25.15. Ezekiel 23.32, 33.
Scripture.

11 And the Smoke [from the fire] of their Torment ascends up [i. e. shall as
certainly ascend as if it were now mounting up, and that] 22 for ever and ever:
And they have no rest 22 day nor night [i. e. their punishment shall be without
interm ssion,] who worship the Beast, and his Image, and [he also shall be thus
punished [whosoever receives the mark of his 23 Name [i. e. is any way Subj ct
to Antichrist, and is of his Profession.]

22 22 In the former Verse there was a Denunciation (for the Judgments are only
here preached and foretold, but not executed,) of the severest of God's
Judgments; expressed, to set forth the Extraordinariness of them, by many full,
and even redundant Expressions: And in this Verse it is declared that their
Punishment shall be for ever, and without intermission: Whence it appears, that
their Everlasting Punishment, and not their Temporal one, is here denounced.

23 Hence it is manifest, That the Mark of the Beast is the Impression of his
Name: Image, Mark, Name, and Number of Name being all of the same import;
Number including Mark, and Name too.

12 Here 24 [or just at the time now represented in the course of this
Prophecy;] is [the end of] the Patience [or waiting] of the Saints [for
Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 12.12. Rev. 13.10,] Here are [all] they [and none of
them are lost,] that keep the Commandments of God and the Faith of Jesus, [i.
e. the Faithful and Obedient Witnesses are here ready to receive the
blessedness promised them, Dan. 12.12. in the Kingdom of Christ, and the first
resurrect on, now at hand, Rev. 12, 17.13, 10.20, 5.]

24 This Voice (in exact correspondence with Chap. 13.10. which ought to be
interpreted in agreement with this Verse) just after the Judgment on the Beast,
sets Bounds to the Saints patient Expectation of Christ's Kingdom; intimating
that it was near at hand; and that all the Faithful Witnesses, and Seed of the
Woman (Chap. 12.17.) should rise; none of them having been lost, but
Antichrist, of whom Judas, the Son of Perdition, was a Type, John 17.12.

13 And I heard a [Fifth] Voice from Heaven [as Thunder, Ver. 2.] saying unto
me, 25 Write [i. e. unseal, and plainly deliver this important, memorable, and
necessary Truth, which will very shortly be accomplished;] 26 Blessed [Dan.
12.12] are the dead which dye in the Lord [i. e. who dye for his Sake, and
Cause, and in his Faith and Favor, resigning their Life and Spirit into his
hands, by virtue of Grace and Strength derived from him, 1 Cor. 15.18. 1 These.
4.14, 16.] from henceforth [i. e. they will be 27 immediately blessed; for the
time is near, yea, even at the doors:] yea, [it is certainly so, Chap. 1.7.]
says the [Holy] Spirit [it self, whose Witness is Truth, 1 John 5.6. and which
raises the dead, Romans 8.10, 11.] that they may rest [Dan. 12.1, 2. 2 These.
1.7.] from their Labors [in the Kingdom of Christ, for a Thousand Years, Hebr.
4.9, 10. See on Rev. 20.5, 6.] and their [good] works [without the Trouble,
Sufferings and Labor which before accompanied them;] do follow them [into the
Rest prepared for them in that Kingdom, to their Praise and Honor, and that
they might be rewarded for them, Heb. 4.]

25 Writing and Sealing are opposed in this Prophecy; as has been before Page
80.
observed; from whence we may conclude, that this Voice was one of the Thunders
now unsealed, or Written.

26 In this Verse there is a plain Declaration of the First Resurrection;
Concerning which see what is fully discoursed on, Rev. 20. And it is taken (as
Grotius excellently observes on the place) from Dan. 12.12. where Blessedness
is pronounced as belonging to those who shall wait, and come to the End of the
1335 Years: from whence also it appears, that this is to be accomplished at the
completion of those Years; when a Blessed Resureection is to be, according to
Dan. 12.1, 2, 3.

27 This seeems to be the import of the Particle (...), as Dr. On this Verse,
and on Matthew 23.39.
Hammond has observed: and although there be some difference amongst Critics
about the signification of this Word, and whether it should be referred to what
goes before, or what follows after; yet the sense seems, according to all, to
be much the same.

24 And I looked 28 [or was in Vision,] and behold a white [or bright] 29 cloud
[of Glory, to denote, the Majesty, Justice, and Purity of Gods Judgments,] and
upon the Cloud one 30 sat like unto the Son of Man [i. e. Christ, Chap. 1.13.
Dan. 7.13. John 1.14] having on his head a Golden 31 Crown [denoting his
Kingdom, and Conquests, Chap. 6.2.] and in his hand a sharp 31 Sickle [to reap
the World swiftly and speedily, Joel 3.4, 13. Matthew. 13.30, 36-43.]

28 The two former Verses contained evidently a Declaration of a Blessed State
of the Dead in the Lord, immediately to ensue; which State being the next thing
in order to be performed, seems to be here set forth by Metaphors made use of
to the same purpose, by the Prophet Joel, and our Savior, in the places quoted
in the Paraphrase on the Text; as shall be endeavored to be shown from what
the Words of the Text shall suggest.

29 Here Christ is represented as coming in his Kingdom to Judgment; according
to the Descriptions frequently given of it in the Gospels, Luke 21.27. Matthew.
24, 30.26, 64. Dan. 7.14.

30 This posture also denotes Judicature and Government Joel 3.12. Matthew.
19.22. to which answers his coming sitting on a White Horse, as he does here on
a White Cloud, in the parallel place to this, Rev. 19.11.

31 In Rev. 19. he has also many Crowns upon his Head; which are a known
Emblem of Regal Power, and Conquest: And as he had a Crown at his first going
out to propagate the Gospel, Chap. 6.2. so is he here also represented with a
Golden one, to show the Glory of the Kingdom in which he is now established.

32 This is the Instrument of Reapers, with which they not only cut down the
Corn, but also gather it together; according to our Savior's Parable, Matthew.
13. and it is sharp, to denote the speed which will be then used, Joel 3.4.

15 And another [a sixth] * Angel [and Voice] came out of the Temple, crying
with a loud Voice [i. e. earnestly, Luke 18.7. Rev. 6.10.] to him that sat on
the Cloud [i. e. to Christ;] Thrust in [we humbly pray thee] thy Sickle, and
reap: for the time is come for thee [the Lord of the Harvest, the Judge of the
World, which raises the Dead, and quickneth them, Matthew. 9.38. John 5.21, 22.]
to reap; for the 33 Harvest of the Earth [or Field of the World,] is * ripe [i.
e. all things are ready, and the time appointed for gathering the Children of
the Kingdom is now just at hand, Matthew 13.30, 38. John 4.35. Mark 4.29. The Day
of the Lord is near.
Joel 3.14]

* This Angel, or Angelical Company (for Angel is taken collectively in this
Prophecy) is not a Gospel Ministry, because it does not denounce any thing as
the others had done; but seems to denote the Attendants of Christ, the Angels,
who are the Reapers, Matthew. 13.29. and the Shout, the Voice of the Archangel,
which shall accompany him at the last Day; and they cry out unto him from his
Heavenly Temple, to expedite that Blessedness which had been so long delayed,
and which the Saints so eagerly long after, and the whole Creation groans for,
Romans 8.22, 23. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.4, 5.

33 Harvest is plainly taken in a good sense in the places quoted in the
Paraphrase; and where it is common to the good and bad, as Matthew. 13. they are
distinguished from one another as Tares and Wheat; and even in Joel 3.13. (from
whence this Expression is taken) Vintage is peculiarly appropriated to the
Wicked, and may be very well distinguished from the Harvest, which may relate
to God's bringing, or gathering together his People, Verse 1.7. and his mighty
ones, Verse 11. who seem to be the same with the Armies of Heaven, the Angels
and the Saints, which shall accompany Christ at this great Day of his Kingdom,
Rev. 19.14. And therefore the reaping of both these at the last Day, being so
plainly distinguished in Scripture, it is fit also that it should be so here
also.

* Ripe, that is, fully ripe, White to the Harvest; and therefore looks as if
it were dried or withered (as the Word also imports) because of the long delay,
and expectation of Christ's Kingdom.

16 And he that sat on the Cloud [i. e. Christ;] thrust in his Sickle on the
Earth, and the Earth was [immediately] reaped [of its 34 Wheat; i. e. the Just
were gathered together at the first Resurrection, Matthew. 13.30, 38, 48. Rev.
20.5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.13-18.]

34 The Saints and Godly are understood (says Mr. Brightman on the place) by
the Corn, or Wheat of this Harvest; who are compared to it by our Savior,
Matthew. 13.30, 38. and are here represented, says he, as falling of their own
accord before the Sickle, through the great ripeness of them. Now seeing that
almost Poli Synops. in Apocal. page 1098 in fin.
all Interpreters agree, that these Words have a reference to the last
Judgment, described by the same Metaphors in Dan. 7. and Math. 13. it is highly
probable, that hereby is meant the gathering together of the Saints departed in
Christ, by the first Resurrection; fitly called the reaping of the Earth of its
Wheat; as it consists in the gathering together of the Bodies, and Dust of
Saints, which are all that is precious, and of any Value in it; and the
gathering of them, and those who remain alive, out of this Wicked,
Antichristian Earth, into a New Heaven, and a New Earth; which is the proper
meaning of Metere est ex hac Vita colligere. Menoch. Tirinus in locum. Falx
homines a Terra demet it ut Ecclesiae inserantur. Grot. in locum
Reaping in Scripture: and because this is to be done in a moment, (1 Cor.
15.51, 52.) therefore is the Sickle represented as sharp, to denote the
extraordinary quickness of this Action: But of this see what is largely
discoursed on the Three Last Chapters.

17 And another Angel [i. e. the Seventh and last,] came out of the Temple
which is in Heaven [i. e. another Angelical Company of Reapers, who were to
bind 35 together the Wicked, in order to destruction, Matthew. 13.41.] he also
having a sharp Sickle [to cut 36 down, and gather together the wicked ones for
a swift Destruction, Verse 14]

35 For such this Angel may very well be supposed to be, by the Description
here given of him; and consequently the Angel, Verse 15. must mean the Reapers,
who were to gather the Wheat, or the Children of the Kingdom together.

36 For this is the Use of a Sickle, as well as to gather.

18 And 37 another Angel came out from the Altar [of Burnt Offerings, on which
there was Fire continually, Levit. 6.9. Rev. 6.9.] which had power over fire
[i. e. God's Judgments, in order to execute them, Rev. 8, 5.11, 5] and cried
with a loud cry [that the Blood of the Souls under the Altar might be speedily
and fully avenged upon the Wicked, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.] to him that had the sharp
Sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp Sickle, and gather [by raising them;] the
clusters of the 38 Vine of the Earth [i. e. the Children of the Wicked one,
Matthew. 13.30, 38, 41, 49, 50. Joel 3.13. Deuteronomy. 32.32.] for her Grapes are fully
ripe [for Destruction.]

37 It is the Opinion of Dr. Lightfoot, That here is an Allusion to a Custom
amongst the Jews, who were not wont to put in the Sickle, until the Priests,
who sat in the Temple, gave Order, and Command for it: But I presume, the
Reason given in the Paraphrase, to be more apposite.

38 The Wicked, and the Antichristian Church, are represented by an Earthly
Vine, whose Clusters and Grapes are bitter, like the Vine of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33: as the True Church, and the Righteous Members of it,
are by the Vine of the Lord, and of Christ, Isaiah 5. Psalm 80. John 15. Now if
the Reaping of the Harvest, signifies the Gathering of the Saints at the First
Resurrection; then the Gathering of the Vintage must signify the Resurrection
of the Wicked, to whom it is expressly referred by the Prophet Joel, Chap. 3.13.
Concerning which see what is discoursed on the Three last Chapters.

19 And the Angel thrust in his Sickle into the Earth, and gathered the Vine of
the Earth, and cast it into the great Winepress of the Wrath of God [i. e. into
exquisite Torments.]

20 And the Winepress was trodden [i. e. these Judgments were executed;]
without 39 the City [of the New Jerusalem, Chap. 21.2. Isa. 66.24. in the
Valley of Decision, Joel 3 2, 12, 14. Rev. 16.16.] and blood came out of the
Winepress, even to the Horses Bridles [i. e. the Destruction was very bloody,
and apparent to them with Christ, on White Horses, Rev. 19.14] by the space of
a thousand, and six 40 hundred furlongs [i. e. it was Universal, Joel 3.2. Rev.
16.14.]

30 The New Jerusalem, the beloved City, the Camp of the Saints, which they
came to compass ( Rev. 20.9.) but could not enter, being discomfited, in a
place without it, called Jehoshaphat, by Joel; whereby is signified, that Gods
Judgments shall be executed upon them (which is the meaning of the Word
Jehoshaphat) in the places to which the Wicked shall be confined by God, during
the Thousand years of the New Jerusalem.

40 Four, the Square Four times four hundred amount to sixteen hundred.
Root of 1600, is a Symbol of Universality; taken from the Four Corners, or
Winds of Heaven; which denote the whole Heaven, and the whole Earth, in
Scripture: and perhaps also upon other Pythagorical and Cabbalistical Reasons,
which may be seen in Dr. Moor's Commentary on this place.

And here is to be noted what a Learned Friend suggested unto me; That Four
being a Square Number, and Furlongs being the Measure of the Four Square City,
the New Jerusalem, Chap. 21.16: Hereby may be fitly signified, that this
Vengeance (described here as a Four square one, if I may so speak, coming out
of the Four square City) was not only Universal, in the Four Quarters, or
utmost Corners of the Earth, the Seat of the Wicked Nations, Revel. 20.8; but
also Perfect and Regular, (as a Apiece City is) agreeable to God's Holy
and Righteous Admensurations of Justice, toward All Men, the Wicked, as well
as the Saints.

CHAP. XV.
The Text.
1 AND I saw [in Vision,] another sign [or Matthew. 16.1.
prodigious appearance, more 1 wonderful than the former seen Chap. 12.1.] in 2
Heaven, great and mavelous [for the Events signified by it;] 3 seven Angels
[the immediate Ministers of this Judgment,] having [in their Vials, Verse 7.]
the seven 4 last plagues [or Judgments;] for in them is filled up [or finished]
the wrath of God; [and therefore they are the last.]

Annotations on CHAP. XV.
1 For in the former, Paganism fell, and the Kingdom was only adjudged to
Christ; but in this, Antichristianism falls, and the glorious Kingdom of Christ
it self appears; whereas there was before only an Emblem of it upon Earth:
which being a State of things more perfect than the former, is here called not
only a great, but a mavelous Portent.

2 Three things in this Prophecy are more particularly seen as in Heaven.

(1.) The Divine Court of Judicature, or Grand Synedrium, Chap. 4.

(2.) The Downfall of Paganism, and the Appearance of the Christian Empire,
Chap. 12.1.

(3.) The present Judgment upon Antichristianism: All of them referring to the
Kingdom of Christ, in the New Jerusalem, but this to an high State of it now
approaching.

3 The Sabbatick Number of Seven is all along used in this Prophecy, to show,
that the End and Issue of all things in it, is with respect to Christ's Kingdom
at the Seventh Thousand Year of the World; as has been before observed.

4 Hence we may note, (1.) That these Plagues relate to the Seventh Trumpet,
out of which they must issue, because they are the last Plagues, and that the
last We; at the first sounding of which the Wrath of God came (Chap. 11.18.)
which is by these Plagues filled up, or accomplished.

(2.) That the last Plagues must refer to the last Division of Time in Daniel
(Chap. 12.12.) to wit, the last Forty Five Years, which being added to the
Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years, make them up the One Thousand Three Hundred and
Thirty Five Days of Years there mentioned.

(3.) That the last Portion of Apocalyptick Time necessarily supposes that
there is a constant Order, or Connection of Time in this Book, from First to
Last; viz. from the First Seal to the Seventh and Last Trumpet; out of which,
first the Voices, and then the Vials issue, which are the Last Plagues; after
which, according to Daniel, the Blessed State of Christ's Kingdom in Glory
begins; until when, none could enter the Temple, Verse 8.

2 And I saw, as it were, a Sea of Glass [representing the pure State of the
Church and Kingdom; See on Chap. 4.6.] mingled with 5 Fire [to denote the Fiery
Indignation of God, to be poured out of the Vials;] and them that had gotten
the Victory over the Beat, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the
Number of his Name [i. e. who had overcome and escaped out of the Temptations
of the Antichristian Profession; See Chap. 13.15-18. 14 11.] stand 6 on the Sea
of Glass [in a Posture and State of Victory, and happy Security from the
Vengeance of the Vials;] having the 7 Harps of God [i. e. most Excellent, Holy,
and Heavenly Music, with Joyful and Thankful Hearts.]

5 This has a reference to the Red Sea, through which the Israelites passed;
being made up, as it were, of the Christalline Sea, Chap. 4.6. and the Red Sea,
Exodus 14. this Verse, and some others in this Chapter, containing an Allusion
to that Memorable Story.

6 As the Israelites (Exodus 14.29, 30.) stood on the shote of the Red Sea, in
safety, viewing the Overthrow of the Egyptians, the Type of the Antichristian
Party; for to stand on the Sea signifies to stand on the shore of it, 1 Kings
4.20. Exodus 15.22. Whereby is signified the Preservation and Security of the
Saints, during the pouring forth of the Vials upon the Wicked: Whereupon Fire
is not here mentioned; where the Sea is spoken of with relation to them: And
the Scripture seems to affirm that the Days of the last Great Tribulation
(which may perhaps refer to the Vials) shall be shortened, or cut off, for the
sake of the Elect, Isa. 10.22. Matthew. 24.22. Romans 9.28.

7 By a usual Hebraism, the most Excellent things are attributed to God in
Scripture; whence these Phrases, Cedars of God, Mountains of God, and the like.
And by these Harps is signified, such Heavenly Music, or Praise and
Thanksgiving, in this Representation of Christ's Kingdom, as David the King (a
Type of Christ) used in his Royal Palace, and in the Service of the Temple;
called, the Music of God in 1 Chronicles. 16.42. 2 Chronicles. 7.6.
Scripture: Skill to play on the Harp being one of those Gifts which God
bestowed on David to fit him for the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 17.13, 18. and in which
the Prophets exercised themselves, 1 Samuel 10.5. And so also at the passage over
the Red Sea (which is here alluded to) the Women went out after Miriam, with
Timbrels, Dances and Songs, Exodus 15.20-22.

3 And 8 they sung [now in an happy and secure State;] the Song of Moses [i. e.
one of the same Spirit and Style with that which was sung by him, Exodus 15.]
the [ Deuteronomy. 34.10. Heb. 3.5.
Eminent] Servant of God [and Deuteronomy. 34.10. Heb. 3.5.
Faithful in all his House; and therefore a fit Type of these Faithful
Witnesses; and worthy to be imitated by them in a Song in Memory of Gods
Judgments on Antichrist, of whom the Egyptians, the Subject of Moses's Song,
were a Type;] and [they sung] the Song of the Lamb [Christ, sung Chap 5.8-14.]
saying, Great [as to the Power by which they are wrought, Exodus 15.6, 7. Rev.
5.12] and mavelous [as to the Wisdom of them, Exodus 15.11. Rev. 5.12.] are
[all] thy Works [especially those wrought in our Deliverance;] Lord God
Almighty [glorious in Holiness, doing Wonders, Exodus 15.11. Rev. 4.8.] just [in
punishing,] and true [in performing thy promises,] are thy ways [i. e.
Proceedings and Actions, Exodus 15.13. Deuteronomy. 42.4.] thou King of Saints [whom
thou do defend, deliver, and exalt, Exodus 15.17, 18. Rev. 5.9.]

8 As Moses and the Israelites also did on the Banks of the Red Sea, Exodus 15.
betwixt which Song, and that of the Lamb, Chap. 4, and 5. there is a very
remarkable Congruity; as is observed in the Paraphrase.

4 Who [of all the Creatures, Rev. 5.13.] shall not fear thee O Lord [for thy
Judgments, Exodus 15.14-16. Jerem. 10.7.] and glorify thy Name [i. e. Thee, thy
Excellencies and Perfections, Exodus 15.3, 11.] for thou only art holy [Exod.
15.11. Rev. 4 8.] for all Nations shall come and worship before thee [alone,
Exodus 15.14-16. Rev. 4.8-11. and 5.13.] for thy Judgments are made manifest [in
the Glories of thy Triumphs over thy Enemies, Exodus 15.6, 7. Rev. 5.13.]

5 And after that [Song, and Vision,] I looked [again, or was in Vision;] and
behold the 9 Temple [or Psalm, 28, 2. 138, 2. Grot. and Hammond on this place,
and on Acts 7.44.
Oracle, the most Holy Place,] of the Tabernacle of the Testimony [i. e. of the
Divine Habitation, or Dewlling Place, where God used to manifest and exhibit
himself, and give Testimony of his Presence, and in which were the Two Tables,
the Witnesses of the Covenant betwixt God and his People, which were to
testify what God required, and testify against them if they broke it, Exodus
25.10, 22.31, 18* 38, 21. Numb. 1.50. Deuteronomy. 31.6. Acts 7.44.] in Heaven [in the
Heavenly* Tabernacle, and in the Pure Church; See on Chap. 14 2.] was opened
[i. e. there was a very high Appearance of an Exalted State of Christ's Kingdom
in the Heavenly Tabernacle; and a very great Manifestation of his Kingdom on
Earth, and Extraordinary Communications of God's Will aod Evidences of his
Presence, especially in 10 Judgments]

9 The Temple of the Tabernacle, denotes the Holy of Holies, the most sacred
part of it; which is now opened, to signify some extraordinary manifestation
of Christ's Kingdom; there seeming to be many Gradual Openings and Visions of
the several parts of the Temple; according to the several Advances of Christ's
Church, and Kingdom unto its perfection: For in the Vision of the Temple Opened
(Chap. 11.19. only the Ark of the Testament was seen; which relates only to
some particular great Mysteries concerning Christ's Redemption: Whereas here
the whole Inward Tabernacle of Testimony was discovered, which had several Heb.
9.1-5.
other things in it besides the Ark; whereby other Manifestations may be
signified.

But although the Temple of Jerusalem be the primary Type alluded to; yet
Ezekiel's Visional Temple is the more immediate Type; and the ultimate Prospect
of all, is upon God's dwelling in holy Souls, especially in the New Jerusalem
State, by his Shecinah, or special Presence; and to God and the Lamb, being the
Temple into which all is at last resolved, Rev. 21.3, 22.

10 This I take (as appears from the next Verse) to be the principal intent of
the Opening of the Temple of the Tabernacle at this time; viz. That God's Will
concerning the approaching Judgments, ready to be executed, was now plainly
made known; expressed here by the Opening of that place, from whence the Divine
Responses, and Oracles were wont to be made under the Law; and therefore the
Angels come forth in the Habit in which the High Priest was wont to come out of
the Holy of Holies, with an Answer from God.

6 And the seven Angels [or Ministers of God's Judgments.] came out of the
[Heavenly] Temple, having the seven Plagues [Strokes, or Punishments;] clothed
in pure and white Linen [Chap. 3.4, 5.] and having their Breasts girded with
golden girdles [i. e. they came out in the Habit of Priests, and Kings, to show
the Royal Priesthood of Christ's Kingdom, and Heavenly Temple, or Tabernacle
out of which these Judgments proceed; See Chap. 1, 13]

7 And one of the Four Beasts [or the first of the Representatives of the
Apostolical Church, Chap. 4, 6. 6, 1.] gave 11 unto the seven Angels seven
golden Vials [or Bowls, 2 Chronicles. 4.22. Rev. 5.8] full [not of Incense, but] of
the 12 Wrath of God [trodden cut of the Winepress of his Wrath, out of which
the Vial are filled, Chap. 14 19, 20. 15, 1. 19, 15.] who lives for ever and
ever [and therefore can, and will punish the Wicked with an utter, and an
everlasting destruction, Deuteronomy. 32.22-43. Heb. 10.31.]

11 The seven Angels had indeed the seven Plagues; that is, the Judgments and
Punishments which were to be executed; but besides the Materials (if I may so
speak) of these Judiciary Plagues, there is also something in God's severe
Judgments, which comes more immediately from the hand of God himself; in which
the very Essence and Formality of Romans 12.19. Heb. 10.28-31. See Dr. Tho.
Goodwin's Discourse of the Punishment of Sin in Hell.
Hell Torments is thought to consist. Now this Wrath of God (the Sting of his
Punishments, and the very Gall of them) is here given to the Angels by One of
the Four Living Creatures, that is, by the First of them (as One generally
signifies in this Prophecy,) whose Voice was as Thunder, and who had the very
Purity and Power of the Gospel; and that in Golden Vials, to signify the
Purity and Holiness of God's Judgments; and that they were executed upon the
Prayers of Saints, of which Golden Vials and Incense are an Emblem, Chap. 5. 8.

12 The Wicked, with their sins, are cast as Grapes of Sodom (Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33.)
into the Winepress of God's Wrath, trod by Christ (Chap. 19, 15.) as Redeemer;
and out of that Wine are these Vials filled: Whereby is signified, that the
Just Vengeance, and Recompense of God is executed upon them by Christ, as the
Demerit and Consequence of their sins, for the Blood of his Servants they had
shed: and as the Vials of the Prayers of the Saints (Chap. 5.8.) are full of
Odors, by Virtue of Christ's Intercession; so are these full of the Wrath of
God, upon the Intercession of Christ for his oppressed Saints.

8 And the Temple was 13 filled with 14 Smoke from the Glory of God, and from
his Power [i. e. there were settled Manifestati^ns of God's powerful, and
Glorious Presence, in a blessed State; Ezekiel. 43.4-6] and 15 [or but] no man [or
no Creature] was able to enter into the Temple [i. e. God's Glorious Presence
could not be enjoyed in its highest Manifestations, Ezekiel. 48 35. Rev 21.3, 23,
24.] till the Seven Plagues of the Seven Angels were fulfilled [i. e. until the
perfect Destruction of the Wicked, whose Sins 16 hinder God's Presence, Ezekiel.
43.9.]

13 The Constant Exodus 43.34, 35. Lev. 16.2. Numb. 9.15-23. 1 Kings 8.10-13. 2 Chronicles. 7.1-4. Ezekiel. 43.1-9.
Manifestations of God's Presence, are signified in Scripture, by a Cloud
covering and filling the Tabernacle and Temple; whereby God took, as it were,
possession of them; who is represented in Ezekiel, as filling the House, or
Temple, with his Glory; when he came to dwell in the midst of his people for
ever, Ezekiel. 43.5, 7, 9. Whereby is signified, that the New Jerusalem State was
near its Settlement in the Blessed Milennium, when God will dwell with Men, and
he and the Lamb shall be the Temple of the City, Rev. 21.2, 3, 22, 23.

14 Light See on Chap. 3. number. 36.
and Bright Fire are the proper Emblems of God, who is Love; but when Smoke
appears with it, there is intimated some Darkness in the Dispensation referred
to; and Mixtures of Wrath and Displeasure: as in this place; because God's
Wrath was not as yet executed; the Glory of God (represented by Light and
Bright Clouds in the Old Testament) filled the Temple with Smoke, and not
Light; there being as yet a Contest betwixt the Wrath, Jealousy, and Justice
of God, and his Enemies to be destroyed; whose Defilements (represented by
Smoke, Chap. 9. 2.) and Sins were the Cause that God's Anger smoaked against
them; for otherwise Fury is not in the Lord, Isa. 27.4.

15 An Allusion to what is related concerning Moses, Exodus 40.35. whereby is
expressed the great Terror of this Time of Vengeance; which no Created Beings,
not even the Angels themselves are able to bear; this being the Isa. Chapters
24, 25, 26, 27. Dan. 12.1. Matthew. 24.21, 29, 30. Mark 13.19. Luke 21.23, 24.
Rev. 3, 10.7, 14.16, 18.
Time of such Trouble as never was; called, The Great Temptation, The Great
Tribulation, and the Great Earthquake, in Scripture; which was to be shortened
for the Elect's Sake; and will be so very Terrible, that they are pronounced
Blessed by Daniel (Chap. 12.12.) who shall wait, and come to the End of those
Days; when the Blessed Millennium shall begin: Which perhaps may be prefigured
by Exodus 24.12-18.
Mose's not being able to go up into the Mount, until after six Days, and his
being called up into it by God on the seventh Day, the Sea the Notes on Chapt.
20.4.
Type of the seventh Thousand Year, or the Sabbatical Millennium.

And from hence it may be observed, that although there shall be several
Manifestations of God's Presence, and Openings of the Temple, after the End of
the Beasts Months; upon the Entrance of which, the Temple was shut up, and at
the Expiring of which, it must consequently be opened: that yet nevertheless
the highest State of it, in which God and the Lamb are the Temple; consisting
in perfect Tranquillity, and Serenity, without any smoke of Anger from God's
Glory, shall not be enjoyed, until the Vials are poured out: which will not be,
if the Beast's Months end at 1697, until A. D. 1772. when the 75 Years, which
are added to the Times of Antichrist, by Daniel (Chap. 12.) will be expired; as
has been frequently observed.

16 This was signified by the several gradual Ezekiel. 8.4, 6.9, 3.10, 4,
15-19.11, 23.
Removals of the Glory of God, and its departure from the Temple, in Ezekiel;
and his not returning into it, so as to fill it, and inhabit in it for ever,
until he had consumed the wicked Idolaters, and their Abominations, in his
Anger, Ezekiel, 39.11-29.43, 1-9.

CHAP. XVI.
The Text.
AND I heard a great Voice [or a powerful Command, full of Authority, and about
a most important matter;] out of the [Heavenly] Temple [of Christ's Kingdom,
the Original and Arche-type of his Kingdom upon Earth, Chap. 15.1, 8.] saying
to the seven Angels [or Ministerial Instruments of God's Will, who undertake
nothing without a special Command;] Go your ways [with all speed, and
swiftness, and by Virtue of my Commission;] and pour out [the very Dregs of]
the Vials of thr Wrath of God upon the 1 Earth.

Annotations on CHAP. XIV.
1 This Chapter relating wholly to things Future, is thereupon very obscure; it
being doubtful, whether it is to be interpreted in a Mystical Sense, as most
Interpreters have done; or in a Litteral one; with reference to the Great
Conflagration of the World; plainly asserted by the Apostle 2 Ep. 3.
Peter, and generally acknowledged as a great Truth. In the former way of
Interpreting; Earth, Sea, Rivers, and the other parts of the World, on which
the Vials are poured, are to be understood only concerning the several Members
of the Antichristian Kingdom, signified by them; but in the latter, they are to
be taken Literally; and the Vials are to be supposed as so many Gradual
Preparations to the General Dissolution of the World by Fire. To the clearing
of which Question, it may be observed,

(1.) That these Vials are filled out of the Blood which came out of the
Winepress of God's Wrath; as appears from Chap. 14.19, 20. compared with the
first Verse of this Chapter.

Whence it will follow, if that Observation be true, That these Vials must be
poured out, after the gathering the Clusters of the Vine of the Earth; that is,
after the Resurrection of the Wicked, described, Chap. 14.18, 19. who are
raised to the Judgment of the great Day, as well as the Saints, who come with
Christ; and that with Minds so affected with Wickedness and Malice, as they
were whilst before upon Earth; and with Bodies suited to their Wicked Minds,
and capable of influencing each other; upon whom the Wrath of these Vials is to
fall, as well as upon the Wicked, who shall then be alive; as appears from
Chap. 11.18. compared with the first Verse of this Chapter; where the Wrath of
God, and the Time of the Dead, who are to be Judged, seem to refer to these
Vials out of which the Wrath of God is to be poured. See the Annotations on
Chap. 20.

(2.) It is plain from Dan. 7.9. 1 Thessalonians. 1.7. Matthew. 24. Dr. Burnet's Theory,
3.11, 12.
Scripture, that Christ's coming shall be in Flaming Fire; and that there shall
be several Preparatory Dispositions of Things toward it, and the
Conflagration. Now it not being probable, that so great a Change of Things
should not be prefigured in this Prophecy, which so clearly refers to the End
of the Old World, and the Beginning of a New One; where can it have place in it
but in this Chapter? Which Observation is the more Remarkable, in that there is
a very surprising Agreement betwixt the Vials thus interpreted, and the most
ingenious Hypothesis of Dr. Burnet, concerning the gradual Dispositions to, and
progress of the great Conflagration.

(3.) The Philosophy of Scripture being generally Popular, according to the
Common, and Received Opinions of those to whom it was primarily written; these
Vials must also be understood after the same manner. And the Preparations to
the general Fire must be consequently conceived to be effected by fit and
proper Natural Causes (but under Dr. Burnet's Theor. 3.8. Mr. Ray of the
Dissol. of the World.
the Ministry of the Angels of each Vial) hinted at only, and intimated by the
Types in the Old Testament, to which each Vial alludes; and that after a
popular manner, according to the common Sentiments of Mankind, but especially
of the Jews, to whom the Scriptures were primarily written.

2 And the first [Angel] went, and poured out his Vial [i. e. executed the
Judgment he had received in Command,] upon the Earth [by producing an
extraordinary 3 Heat, and Drought in it;] and there fell [or 4 was, as the
Consequent of this Heat,] a noisome and grievous [or a loathsome, tormenting,
malignant, and incurable, Deuteronomy. 28.27, 35. Job 2.7.] sore [or 5 fiery Ulcer,
breaking forth in scalding Blanes, or boiling Blisters, which were extremely
grievous, to those on whom they fell, and loathsome to others; and were
accompanied with the sharpest Pains of Body, and 5 Mind, Exodus 9.9, 11. Job
2.7, 8.6, 4.19 13, 19.] upon the Men which had the Mark of the Beast, and upon
them which worshipped his Image [i. e. the Antichristian Professors, Chap.
13.15, 16.]

2 Earth is here taken for the Earth strictly so called, as distinct from the
Seas and Rivers; upon which the Vials are poured afterward.

3 This is signified by the hot Ashes of the Furnace, Exodus 9.8-11. (from
whence the Expressions concerning this Plague are taken) which became small
Dust (whereby Drought also is signified, Deuteronomy. 28.24.) in all the Land of
Egypt, and was, or became a Boil on Man and Beast. And accordingly in this
Plague, it may by the like Congruity be supposed, that many Hot, and Fiery
Particles and Exhalations (which in the Plague of Rivet. in locum. Dr. Burnet
's Theor. 3.7, 8.
Egypt were mixed with the Hot Ashes, when they fell upon the Land) will be
poured forth from these Vials upon the Earth; which shall produce an
extraordinary Heat and Drought, and be the Cause of the Sores here mentioned,
which are wont to break out upon Men's Bodies in hot and dry seasons.

4 Exodus 9.10. It was, or there was, as the Greek translateth, there were
Boyls. Ainsw. on Exodus 9.10.

5 For such a Sore was that (...), or Ulcer (the same word which is here used)
which fell on Job and the Egyptians; which was also accompanied with a great
Vexation of Mind, as appears from the History of Job.

3 And the second Angel poured out his Vial upon the Sea, and it became as the
Blood of a 6 Dead Man [i. e. it stagnated,] and every living Soul died in the
Sea [i. e. all the Fish of it died, Chap. 8.9.]

6 The Blood of a Man who has received a deadly wound, or of a Carcass, is
clotty, thick, and glutinous; whereby the Stagnation of the Waters of the Sea
is aptly represented; as also Fiery Eruptions in several parts of the Channel
of the Sea: Whereby, in conjunction with other Causes, the mighty Ocean
(according to Dr. Theor. 3.9.
Burnet's Hypothesis) may be reduced to a standing Pool of putrid waters;
which, according to Amos 7.4. may be also devoured by Fire.

4 And the Third Angel poured out his Vial upon the 7 Rivers, and Fountains of
Waters, and they [also] became Blood [i. e. stagnated, and were corrupted, so
that Men could not 8 drink of them, and were deprived of their necessary
Sustenance, Exodus 7.18, 24. Jerem. 51.36.]

7 According to the Philosophy of Genesis 2.5, 6. Psalm. 104.6-14. Eccles. 1.7.
Isa. 44, 27.50, 2.
Scripture (defended by many Dr. Plot de Origin Fontium.
Ancient and Dr. Plot de Origin Fontium.
Modern Philosophers) Rivers depend upon the Sea; and therefore the Sea is here
represented as prepared for Stagnation, before the Rivers; to whose Diminution
Dr. Burnet 's Theor. 3.9.
also, or Suspension, the preceding Drought, and following Heat, in the Eighth
Verse, are to be supposed to contribute.

8 This is a grievous Plague, bringing the Judgment home to them, by inflicting
it upon Necessaries; their Fish dying, and their water, which should have
quenched their Thirst in the great Heat and Drought, being corrupted, and unfit
for use; according to what God inflicted on Egypt, Exodus 7.14-25. when the
River Nile, and all their Water stank, so that they could not drink of them;
and their Fish died; whereby they were deprived of their necessary Genesis 46.34.
Exodus 8.26. Numb. 11.5. Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11. Jerem. 2.18.
Food, their River-Water being their common Drink, and Fish their ordinary
Food, it being not lawful for them to eat Sheep, or Oxen.

5 And I heard the Angel of the Waters [or the Ministering Instruments of God's
Judgments uppn the Waters;] say [upon the consideration of the Greatness, and
yet Righteousness of this Judgment;] thou art Righteous [and Just] O Lord,
which art, and wast, and shall be [i. e. the Eternal and Immutable God, who
performs infallibly his Promise and Threats, Exodus 3. Rev. 1.4.] because thou
have judged [and punished,] thus [i. e. after this just way of Retribution, and
Retaliation, Psalm 58.10, 11. Matthew. 7.2.]

6 For they [of the Antichristian Profession, Verse 2.] have shed the * Blood
of Saints [i. e. Holy Men;] and Prophets [i. e. Witnesses, Chap. 6, 9, 10, 11.
11. 3, 18.] and thou have [therefore,] given them Blood [or Bloody Waters,] to
drink, for they are worthy [i. e. this is a just Judgment upon them, Judge. 1.7.
1 Samuel 15.33. Isa. 49.26. Obad. 16.]

* Hencc it seems to appear, that this Vial is a Judgment on the Wicked, raised
to receive the Recompense of their shedding the Blood of the Saints; because
the principal Persecutors were already dead; and therefore must be raised, that
they may partake of this Just Retaliation; for otherwise the Number of them who
will be then alive, will be but small, in comparison of those who are dead; and
the greatest Objects of God's Vengeance, will escape the Punishment of this
Last Day, which is denounced in Scripture against all Ages and Generations of
the World, and not only that which shall be then in Being.

7 And I heard another [Angel] out of the 9 Altar, say, [in the Name of the
Saints and Martyrs, who lay under it, Chap. 6.9.] Even so [it ought to be,]
Lord God Almighty [who art wonderful in thy Judgments,] true [to thy Promises
of avenging thy Saints, Chap. 6.10, 11.] and righteous are thy Judgments [in
giving them Blood to drink for the Blood they had shed.]

9 The Angels are answered, as it were, by a Chorus of Saints, of the First
Resurrection; who during the pouring out of the Vials, are protected by God,
and are placed, as it were at the Altar: That is, in a place of Safety, and
Refuge, as the Altar was under the Old Law; of which Zoar and Goshen were a
Type. 2 Pet. 2.9.

8 And the Fourth Angel [having power over Fire, Chap. 14.18.] poured out his
Vial upon the 10 Sun [and augmented his Heat;] and Power was [thereby] given
unto him [i. e. the Sun,] to 11 scorch [the wicked] men [of the Earth] with
Fire [i. e. grievously to annoy and afflict them, Jonah 4.8, 9. Matthew. 13.6,
21.]

1^ As the Light of the Sun may be multiplied by Parelia, and other Natural
Causes (to which the Prophet alludes, Isa. 30.26.) So is it not difficult to
conceive, that its Heat may be Naturally augmented by the Dissolution, or
Dissipation of its Maculae; upon the Increase and breaking forth of those
Fluctuating Vortexes of Fire, which are in the Body of that Planet, and are
stronger and clearer at its Center, than near its Circumference; and by other
Natural Causes, not unknown to the Learned in such Studies. And if the Heat of
the Sun may be increased by Natural Causes, how much more by Supernatural ones,
ordering and conducting them, and adding New ones?

9 And [the Antichristian, and Wicked] Men, were scorched, [or set on fire,]
with great 11 Heat [i. e. they were extremely afflicted, and tormented in Body
and 12 Mind;] and 13 blasphemed the Name of God, which has power over these
[foregoing, and following] Plagues, [to inflict, or remove them;] and they 13
repented not to give him Glory [i. e. they were finally 14 impenitent, Heb. 6,
6.10, 26-31.12, 17. Rev. 22.12.]

11 11 Here seems to be an Allusion to the violent, scorching, and fuffocating
Heats of the Sun, and the Grot. in Jon. 4.8, 9. Dr. Hyde 's Itiner. Mundi. page
146.
(...), or burning heat of the Wind (which usually accompany one another in the
Eastern Climates) which afflicted Jonah.

1^ As Jonah also was much troubled, and grieved in Mind as well as Body, Chap.
4.6, 3.

13 13 Thus Jonah also was displeased, and very angry, and wished for Death,
and repented not, but excused his former Disobedience, although he had been
sharply punished for it, Chap. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9.

14 There was no place of Repentance for them; as being under the dreadful Doom
pronounced by the Angel of the Vials, who showed John these things; and said,
Let him that is filthy be filthy still, Chap. 22.11.

10 And the Fifth Angel poured out his Vial on the Seat [or 15 Throne] of the
Beast [i. e. on Rome, the Seat of the Papacy, Chap. 13, 2.17, 3.] and his
Kingdom [i. e. his whole Jurisdiction,] was full of 16 darkness [i. e. was in a
most afflicted and disconsolate condition, Exodus 10.21-23. Isaiah 8.19-22.] and
they 17 gnawed their Tongues for pain [i. e. were extremely impatient, and
furious under their Torment, Isaiah 8.21.]

15 Hereby is signified, that this Beast usurped Temporal State and Authority;
as having a Chief, and Imperial City for his Throne, or Place of Residence. And
it is observable, that this, and such like Phrases, of a too Ominous
signification, crept into the Church by degrees; notwithstanding the Opposition
made to such Innovations, and to the Affectation of Temporal Titles and
Authority: it being one Reason alleged by a Synod at Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. 7.30.
Antioch, for their deposing Paulus Samosatenus, that he affected State,
Secular Titles, and Power; and that he erected a Tribunal in the Church, and a
Stately Seat in it, like that of the Temporal Magistrates; which Pomp very much
increased afterward; as Vallesius on Eusebius observes.

16 It is expressly affirmed in Dan. 7.9-11. Rev. 18, 8.19, 3.
Scripture, that Rome shall perish by Fire; for which Fate (as Dr. Theory of
the Earth, 3.10.
Burnet has most ingeniously observed) Italy, the Kingdom, and Seat of the
Beast, is most peculiarly disposed by Nature, by reason of the Sulphureousness
of its Soil, and its Fiery Mountains and Caverns. And therefore if this
particular Judgment upon the Seat of Antichrist be here intended; by the
Darkness may be aptly signified, the Smoke of its Fire, now in preparation to
break forth, which had been kindled and increased in the Bowels of the Earth,
by the extreme heat of the Former Vials; according to the manner, in which Dr.
Burnet supposes the Conflagration will be brought to pass.

And here we may observe, that by a peculiar Direction of Divine Judgment, this
Fire begins first at the Seat of Antichrist; it being very reasonable and
decorous (as Dr. Theory 3.10.
Burnet speaks) that the Grand Traitor, and Head of the Apostasy, should be
made the First Example of Divine Vengeance: From whence it may be supposed to
spread it self through Italy, the more immediate part of the Beast's Kingdom;
and so through his whole Jurisdiction; and at last, in the Universal
Conflagration (to which these Vials are as so many Dispositions) through the
whole Earth.

It is also observable, that God's Judgments point out, and are proportioned,
in their Kinds, to Men's Sins. Whence it may be conjectured, that the
Antichristian Kingdom was punished with Darkness (even Natural Effects carrying
along with them Intimations of Moral Reasons and Ends) because of the gross and
palpable Ignorance it had introduced: as Egypt was punished by hot Ashes of
burnt Brick, for their oppressing the Israelites at their Brick-Kills; and had
their Waters justly turned into Blood, for making that Element the Instrument
of their Bloody Design against the Israelitish Infants, Ex. 1.22.

11 And blasphemed 17 the God of Heaven [by whose Command these Plagues were
inflicted,] because of their Pains, and their Sores [or fiery Ulcers, and
Torment of 17 Mind and Body, Verse 2.] and repented not of their deeds [as
being given over to a Reprobate Mind, Verse 9.]

17 17 The extreme Torment they were under, affected their Minds and
Consciences, and made them blaspheme God, and gnaw their Tongues, as Men in the
greatest Rage imaginable. For in this Vial there is an Allusion to the thick
and palpable Darkness with which God plagued Egypt, Exodus 10.21-23. wherein
Men sat still for several Days together, in a most disconsolate condition;
vexed Psalm 78.49. Wisd. 17.
and tormented with great Terrors from their own affrighted Consciences, and
the Evil Angels.

12 And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River 18 Euphrates,
and the Waters thereof were dried up [i. e. all manner of Impediments were
removed, Isa. 11, 15. Jerem. 50, 38.51, 32, 36. Zech. 10.11.] that the way of
the Kings 19 of the East [i. e. of those Living Saints who are to Reign with
Christ in his Kingdom, Isa. 41.26. Rev. 21.24.] might be prepared [i. e. that
all things might be 20 prepared for the Jerusalem State, in the New-Earth. See
the Three last Chapters.]

18 In this Verse there is an Allusion to the Exploit of Cyrus, who dreined the
River Euphrates when he took Babylon, as had been foretold by the Prophet Chap.
50, 38.51, 32, 36. Vid. Grot. in loc. Isaiah 41.26.
Jeremiah; and to those passages of the Is. 15.15. Zech. 10.11. where, by the
Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, is meant, the Bay of the Mediterranean Sea, which
lies next to Egypt; and by the River, not Euphrates; which has not Seven
Streams, but Nilus, which by so many Mouths empties it self into the
Mediterranean.
Prophets, where the Return of the Jews into their own Land is described in the
like Expressions.

19 Here also is an Allusion to Isaiah 41.2, 25.46, 11. where it is foretold,
that one should be raised up from the North, and come from the Rising of the
Sun to call upon, or Ezra 1, 1, 2.
proclaim God's Name; meaning thereby Cyrus, who by his Mother's side was of
Media, which lies North from Judea; and by his Father was a Persian, whose
Country lies exactly Eastward of the Holy Land. And although Arabia be
sometimes called the East in Judge. 6.3. Job. 1, 3.
Scripture, and the Arabs, the Children of the East (for Job was a King in
Arabia, as Dr. Itiner. Mundi, page 72, 73.
Hyde has fully proved); yet it was in respect of Mede 's Works, page 476.
Egypt, where the Jews had learnt that Form of Speech, Arabia lying Southward
of Palestine.

Now Cyrus was a Type of Christ, and therefore by the Kings of the East may in
proportion be here meant those Saints, who as so many Messiahsses, or Anointed
Kings and Priests, (by which Name Cyrus is called in Scripture) shall Reign
with Christ, who is expressly said to come from the East, Chap. 7.2.

20 An Expression used Isaiah 40.3. Malach 3.1. Matthew. 3.3. And here it is to
be noted, that Genesis 2.10-14.
Euphrates was one of the Branches into which the River which watered Paradise
was divided, after it had passed through it: It was also the Genesis 15.18. Exodus
23.31. Deuteronomy. 1, 4.11, 24. Josh. 1.4. 2 Samuel 8.3. 1 Kings 4.21. 2 Chronicles. 9.26.
Eastern Bound of the Land of Promise, to which David and Solomon extended
their Dominion; the Kingdoms thereabouts being Tributary unto them; although
the Jews never enjoyed a quiet Possession of them, as proper Owners, for any
considerable time; God Fuller's Pisgah Sight, 1.2.
contracting their Borders for their Sins; and at last, scattering, and
carrying them Captive beyond this very River, into the Dominions of the
Assyrian and Babylonish Tyrants. So that this River, which at first was a
Stream flowing out of Paradise, became the Fatal Boundary of the Kingdom of the
People of God, over which they were carried Captive; and a Sign of Enmity and
Hostility to God's Church; Babylon, the Type of the Seat of Antichrist, being
seated on one Branch of it.

From which Observations we may conclude, that by drying up the Waters of
Euphrates, that the Way of the Kings of the East might be prepared, is
signified,

(1.) Preparations for removing of all Impediments and Obstacles whatsoever,
especially from Antichrist, which may hinder the Kingdom of Christ, whose
Dominion is to be extended beyond that River, unto the Ends of the Earth, as
the Psalmist has plainly foretold, Psalm 72.8.

(2.) Here may also be intimated the near Approach of the New Earth, described
in the Three Last Chapters; signified by the drying up that River, whereon the
Type of the Antichristian City was seated; which was an hindrance to the Saints
entering into, and enjoying the Paradisiacal State of the New Earth of Christ's
Kingdom. In order to which also (according to Dr. Theory of the Earth, 3.9.
Burnet's Hypothesis,) the Rivers are to be dried up, that so no stop may be
put to the Conflagration, which is to burn up the Old Earth.

13 And I saw three unclean 21 Spirits [of Devils, Verse 14] like Frogs 22 come
out of the 23 mouth of the Dragon [i. e. the Pagan Roe man Powers, Chapters 12,
and 13.] and out of the mouth of the Beast [i. e. the Antichristian King, Chap.
13.] and of the False 24 Prophet [i. e. the Antichristian Hierarchy, the other
Beast, Chap. 13.11 -- ]

21 An Epithet frequently given in Scripture to the Evil Spirits, to
distinguish them from the Pure and Holy Spirit of God; and they are called
unclean, because they tempt to, and take delight in Sin, which is Impurity and
Uncleanness.

22 Like the Frogs of Egypt, Exodus 8.1-14. who went up into the Houses of the
Egyptians, and even into the Bedchamber of King Pharaoh, and his Nobles,
Psalm 105.30. Whereby is elegantly set forth the Vile Original of the Devil's
Angels and Emissaries; born, as it were, out of the unclean Mud and Slime; and
sent to Negotiate and Solicit (of which the Croaking of Frogs is a Symbol) the
Kings of the Earth, into whose Bed Chambers, and most private Retirements they
insinuate themselves.

23 They came out of their Mouths, as Ambassadors, to speak in their Name, and
interpret their Mind and Designs. And these Spirits of Devils came out of the
Mouths of the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet, to show, that Satan had made
use of them all along as his principal Agents; out of each of whom they came;
to show, that all their several and distinct Interests were now to be joined
together at this great Battle, and decisive Attempt.

24 He is called, the Other Beast, Chap. 13. whilst the Beast was in his
Infancy; but when he arrived to his Kingship and Supremacy, then this other
Beast became his False Prophet, serving and Advancing him by Lying Miracles and
Wonders.

14 For they [three Frogs,] are [indeed] the Spirits 25 of Devils [like Frogs;]
work^ng 26 [lying,] Miracles, [2 These. 2.9-11.] Rev. 13.13, 14.] which go f rth
unto the Kings of the Earth [i. e. the Antichristian Potentates, and Enemies of
Christ's Kingdom, Psalm 2.1, 2. Judge. 5.3.19. Rev. 20.7-10.] and of the whole
World [Chap. 20.8] to gather them [by exciting and engaging them] to the 27
Battle of that 28 great day of God Almighty [Chap. 19.19.]

25 These Wicked Agents for Paganism and Aneichristianism are called Spirits of
Devils, because they are acted and influenced by the Devil and his Angels; who
ever since their Fall, have been permitted to make bold Attempts, full of
Malice and Rage against God, and Christ's Kingdom.

26 They are permitted, according to the Example of the Egyptian Magicians, to
work Lying Wonders; as the Devil had frequently done in the Times of Paganism
and Antichristianism.

27 This is the first Battle of Gog and Magog before the coming of Christ's
Kingdom, now ready to appear; wherein they are overcome; and the Wisdom and
extraordinary Power of God (styled here upon that account (...), the Lord of
Hosts, in respect of his Rule and Dominion over all things, and his Power by
which he is able to perform them) is manifested in the Defeat of the Devil, who
had summoned all his Force and Power together, under the Wise, Holy, and
Incomprehensible Justice and Vengeance of God, to show his utmost Malice and
Rage against Christ's Kingdom. See on Chap. 19.19. and on the Three Last
Chapters.

28 Wherein he would manifest his uncontrollable Power, and absolute Dominion,
after the most extraordinary manner, beyond any thing which had as yet appeared

15 Behold 29 [says Christ,] I come [or am just ready to come in my Thousand
Years Kingdom,] as 30 a Thief [i. e. on a sudden, and after a surprising
manner, chap. 3.3, 10, 11.] Blessed [in that happy state, Dan. 12.12.] is he
that 31 watches [in this time of trouble and temptation, and they who shall be
found so doing when I come, Luke 12.35-40.] and 32 [blessed also is he that [
keeps his Garments [i. e. his purity, righteousness and innocence, chap.
19.8.] lest [loosing his righteousness,] he walk naked, and they see his shame
[i. e. his shameful nakedness, be discovered to his utter confusion, and he be
driven out of Paradise as his naked first Parents were, Genesis 3. 2 Cor. 5.3.]

29 These Words are a Parenthesis, spoken by Christ to those who professed his
Religion (as appears from the Gentleness, and tender care of them) commanding
them to watch over themselves with great diligence, and signifying what their
state should be in his Kingdom just approaching; intimated by the Word Blessed,
taken from Dan. 12.12. which is a place of the like import with this.

30 Christ is every where represented Matthew. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
in Scripture, as coming of a sudden to his Kingdom, notwithstanding the many
Prognostics given of it, and preparations to it; because his actual appearing
will be on a sudden, and by surprise.

31 32 Hereby is signified, that all they shall be blessed, who have watched
for Christ, with Oil in their Vessels, as well as their Lamps; and shall be
found really united to him, and having on his Righteousness, when he comes in
his Kingdom. See Chap. 3.

16 And he 33 [i. e. the Spirits of Devils, under the justice and Vengeance of
Almighty God, in order to his Glory, and the punishment of his Enemies, Judge.
4.7. Joel 3.11, 12.] gathers them [i. e. the Kings of the Earth, and of the
whole World,] together [by their instigations, and power ever them;] into a
place called in the Hebrew tongue 34 Armageddon [i. e. there was a most
Powerful and Diabolical Confederacy against Christ's Kingdom, Psalm. 2.]

33 It is evident from Verse 14. that this gathering together is performed by
the three Evil Spirits; where yet, as well as in this Verse, a Verb of the
Singular Number is made use of, according to the Custom of the Greek Language,
when a Noun of the Neuter Gender is referred to.

And this gathering together is some desperate Attempt managed by the Wicked of
the Old Earth, at the instigation, and by the help of the Evil Spirits, against
Christ's Kingdom, just ready to appear; in which they are discomfited after
some extraordinary and miraculous manner; as Sisera was at Megiddo, Judge. 4,
15.5, 20. and are confined by God in a miserable and most contemptible
condition, during the Thousand Years of Christ's Kingdom; upon the expiring of
which, Satan, and his Wicked Kings and Nations are again loosed. See Chap. 20.

34 The Word signifies the Hill of Megiddo, called Megiddon by the Zech. 12.11,
(...), LXX.
Prophet; a Royal City in the Tribe of Issachar, but belonging to Manasseh,
which Josh. 17.11, 12. Judge. 1.27.
the Canaanites inhabited in despite of the Children of Manasseh; and was
Judge. Chapters 3, and 4.
famous for the miraculous Defeat of Sisera, and the Kings of Canaan (a Type of
the Kings of the Earth in this Prophecy) by Barak and the Israelites, who came
down from Mount Tabor (which was not far from that place) and discomfited them
at the Waters of Megiddo, in the Hilly (as In loc.
Grotius thinks) and Mountainous parts of that place; and also for the Death of
2 Kings 9 27.
Ahaziah, but especially of 2 Kings 23.29, 30. 2 Chronicles. 35.20-27.
Josiah, who received his deadly Wound, with a great slaughter, in the Valley
of Megiddo; where he was bewailed with so great a Lamentation, that the
Mournings in that Valley are used by way of a proverbial speech, by the Prophet
Zechariah; and Megiddo is interpreted by the LXX. the Valley of the slain, or
cut off; as if it signified a place of great grief and slaughter. And the Name
of this place is made choice of here, perhaps to signify,

(1.) That Satan shall be discomfited; and that, although he make choice of the
most advantageous places, to defend himself; signified by the Mountains
encompassing the Valley of Megiddo. For the Canaanites having had a Terrible
Defeat in the Valley; Satan, the Leader of these Wicked Kings of the Earth, may
be supposed now to make choice of New Stratagems; signified by the Hill of
Megiddo, according to the 1 Kings 20.23.
Notions received amongst Idolaters, that the Gods of the Hills were stronger
than the Gods of the Plain.

(2.) With reference to what is prophesied of by Chap. 39.4.
Ezekiel, concerning Gog (the Type of these Kings of the Earth) that he shall
fall upon the Mountains of Israel.

(3.) Megiddo is chosen as the Type and Symbol of the place of this Battle of
Decision; to show, that Satan intended the Destruction of Christ's Kingdom, now
ready to succeed, according to what had before come to pass in the destruction
of Josiah, who was a Type of Christ (as the godly Kings of Judah and Israel
were) and was slain near that place, just when he had prepared the Temple of
God, the Emblem of Christ's Kingdom. 2 Chronicles. 35.20.

(4.) To show, that God (who overrules evil Designs for good, and who
declares, Judge. 4.7. the place here alluded to, that he drew Sisera, and his
multitude together) had ordained, that these Kings should be totally
overthrown, as the Kings of Canaan were at Megiddo; and that Christ's Church
should triumph over them, and bless God for the great Victory (in the Song
prepared for it, in the preceding Chapter) as 2 Chronicles. 20.26.
Jehoshaphat, and the Israelites did in the Valley of Beracah, or Blessing, for
the Defeat of that great multitude of Wicked People, which confederated against
Israel: Whereupon this place of Decision is called, the Valley of Jehoshaphat,
in Chap. 3.2, 12, 14.
Joel: The Battle being described sometimes as if it were to be in a Joel 3.
Ezekiel. 39, 5.
Valley or Plain; and sometimes as on a Ezekiel. 39.4.
Mountain; and confined to no particular place ( Jehoshaphats Fullers Pisgah
Sight. page 280, 294.
Valley being far distant from the Valley of Megiddo); but expressed so as to
typifie other things unto us, and to show that they shall be totally defeated,
as men driven from their several Fastnesses, and Retreats, Mountains as well as
Plains and Valleys.

(5.) To show, that both Jews Zech. 12.3, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
and Gentiles should mourn at the sight of Christ now ready to appear in his
glorious Kingdom; as there was a great Mourning for Josiah by the Jews, and the
Assyrians, whom he then assisted; which may probably be the meaning of
Hadadrimmon, Zech. 12.11. which according to On Zech. 12.11.
Grotius, signifies the Glory of Rimmon, an Assyrian Idol.

17 And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into the 35 Air, and there came a
great voice out of the Temple 36 of Heaven from the Throne [i. e. there was an
extraordinary manifestation of the intimate, and more immediate presence of
God,] saying, it 37 is done [i. e. this is the last vial, and Judgment, upon
the wicked Nations, Ezekiel. 39.8. See on chap. 20. and 21.6.]

35 By Air is meant in See Dr. Hammond on Psalm 148.4.
Scripture, the Aerial Expansum, or Firmament, consisting of Air, and Clouds,
balanced by the Weight of it, Job 37.16. which being the Place of Meteors, the
Angel pours his Vial upon it; and thereupon follow Thunder and Lightning, and a
Great Earthquake, which commonly accompany each other; the Islands and
Mountains fly away, and so great Hail falls, (which is a usual Attendant of
Thunder-storms) as if the Clouds, with all their Job 38.22, 23.
Treasures of Meteors were thrown down from Heaven. Whereby the more immediate
preparations to the Dissolution of the Old Earth, seem to be described;
according to the Prediction of the Apostle Peter, and the Description given of
it in Dr. Burnet's Theory: who yet very 3.3, 7.
prudently admonishes us not to be too positive, or presumtuous in our
Conjectures about these Things; because if there be an invisible Hand, Divine,
or Angelical, that touches the Springs and Wheels of Nature, it will not be
easy for us to determine with Certainty, the Order of their Motions.

36 Called so in remembrance of the Throne and Temple in Ezekiel.

37 A Phrase evidently taken from Ezekiel. 39.8. where it is used concerning Gog
and Magog; whence also it appears that their Destruction is here referred to;
concerning whom read Chap. 20. and Ezekiel. 38. and 39.

18 And there were voices, and thunders, 38 and lightning, aad there was a
great Earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an
Earthquake and so great [i. e. there were very high manifestations of Christ's
glorious Kingdom, and a time of trouble, such as never was before; the powers
of the Earth and Heavens being shaken, to make way for a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, Dan. 12.1, 2. Matthew. 24.29. Heb. 12.26-22. See on chap. 4.5. and on the
three last chapters.]

38 See Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, Book 3.

19 And the great City [i. e. the whole Antichristian Jurisdiction, and
Kingdom, chap. 14, 8.18, 10, 21.] was divided [by the Earthquake,] into 39
three parts [i. e. the whole strength of the Antichristian State, was
dissipated, and overthrown;] and the Cities of the [wicked] Nations [of the
whole World, verse 14. chap. 20.8.] fell, and great Babylon 40 [i. e. Rome,
chap. 14.8.] came in [special] remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup
of the Wine of the feirceness of his Wrath [i. e. to destroy her with a most
severe and an utter destruction. See on chap. 14.8-11.]

39 The general Type of Three Parts, seems to be taken from Ezekiel. 5.2, 12.
where Jerusalem, when it was designed for Destruction, is marked out into Three
Parts: which Three parts here, are the Three United Forces of the Antichristian
Kingdom, viz.

(1.) The Dragon, or Devil, with his Three Unclean Spirits.

(2.) The Beast, and his False Prophet, who as being united in Force and
Interest, have one punishment.

(3.) The Kings of the Earth. See on Chap. 19.19-21.

40 Hence it appears, that the Conflagration is here pointed at; because it is
plain from this Prophecy, that Rome shall be destroyed by Fire, as has been
before observed.

20 And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found [i. e. the 41
old Earth was dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. See on chap. 21.1.]

41 See Dr. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, B. 3.9. whose ingenious Hypothesis
gives great light to this place; according to which (as is here foretold) the
Mountains are to be destroyed in the last place; and there are to be no
Islands, because no Sea, in the New Earth; which is to be plain and level.

21 And there fell upon [the wicked, Kings, and] men [of the Earth, who were
gathered together against Christ's Kingdom, verses 14.16.] a great Hail out of
Heaven 42 [i. e. an extraordinary Tempest of Divine Wrath inflicted by the more
immediate command of God;] every stone about the weight of a Talent [i. e. each
stroke of God's Wrath was extraordinary great, heavy and insupportable, Ezekiel.
38.22. Matthew. 23.44. and [yet these] men Blasphemed God because of the Hail [i.
e. were still obdurate, and impenitent;] for the Plague thereof was exceeding
great, [upon which they should therefore have humbled themselves under the
mighty hand of God.]

42 Hail was one of the Plagues of Egypt; and the wicked Kings of Canaan were
destroyed by great Hailstones from Heaven, Joshua 10.11. as the Antichristian
Egyptians, and Kings of the Earth here are. But this place more immediately
referrs to Ezekiel. 38.22. where God foretells, that Gog and Magog shall be
destroyed by a Thunder storm of Rain, and Great Hailstones. And from hence it
appears, (as also from the solemn words, Verse 17. It is done, which are
plainly taken from the same passage in Ezekiel) that the Judgments upon those
wicked Nations are here referred to: and this may probably be that signal
Vengeance which shall fall upon them, upon the passing away of the Old Earth;
by which, as by a mighty Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, and prodigious
Hailstones, (reserved by God against this time of Trouble, and this day of
Battle and War; as Job speaks, Chap 38.22, 23. in the same Words used in this
Chapter, and by Daniel, Chap. 12.1.) they shall be scattered into the Four
Corners of the Earth, where they are to remain, under the Effects of God's
Wrath, often set forth in Scripture by such Tempests, until the expiring of the
Thousand Years.

CHAP. XVII.
The Text.
1 AND there came [with Authority and Commission from God,] one [i. e. the
first, Chap. 16.2.] of the seven Angels which 1 had the seven Vials, and talked
with me [after a more familiar manner;] saying unto me, Come hither [i. e.
nearer unto me, to receive more clear and intimate communications of
Knowledge;] and I will show [or point out, and demonstrate] unto thee, the
Judgment [i. e. the foul 3 guilt, Sentence and Destruction,] of the great 4
Whore [i. e. the gteat Idolatrous City and Church;] that 5 sits upon many
Waters [that is, rules over much people, Verse. 15, 18.]

Annotations on CHAP. XVII.
1 To show, that this Woman was one of the Enemies of Christ's Kingdom, upon
whom the Vials are to be poured, and withal the chief of them, with whom all
the others were to fall.

2 As being now about to give him a more clear description of the Beast, than
he had as yet received.

3 So the Word signifies sometimes in Scripture, as Ezekiel 7.23. Romans 5.16. 1 Timothy 5.12.

4 The People, Cities and Churches, which Apostatize from the True God to
Idolatry, are called Whores in Isa. 1.21. Nahum 3.4. Ezekiel. 23. Rev. 2.20.
Scripture, for breaking their Covenant with God, to whom they were thereby
espoused; from whence it is evident, that a Christian City must be meant in
this Chapter, and not a Pagan; which cannot be said to be a Whore, or an
Apostate City, because Pagan Cities having never acknowledged the True God, or
been espoused unto him, cannot be said to Apostatize from him. And we may
observe that there is here a Double Article in the Greek ((...)) to show that
this City was Eminent for Idolatry, and that she had been before noted for it
in this Prophecy; that she had continued in it for a long time; that her sin
was great in it self; and had been propagated through the large Extent of her
Dominions; whence she is called, The Great Whore, and The Whore; as being the
Chief and Metropolitan of the Idolatrous Cities and Churches; the impudent
Whorish Woman (according to Ezekiel. 16.30. and Chap. 23.) and the Jezebel, Rev.
2.20.

5 In Allusion to the situation of her Type, Babylon; which is called, The
Great City, Dan. 4.3. and is described Jerem. 51.13. as dwelling upon many
Waters; that is, situaated upon Euphrates, which encompassed it, and ran
through it, and the adjacent Country, in Cuts and Rivulets.

2 With whom [i. e. by 6 whose solicitations, and example;] the [ten] Kings of
the Earth, [verse 12.] have committed [spiritual] fornication [which is
Idolatry, Isa. 23.17.] and [all] the inhabitants [or meaner people] of the
Earth [i. e. of the Apostate Roman Empire,] have been drunk [i. e. madly
zealous, and sottish y doteing, Jerem. 51.7.] with the wine of her Fornication
[i.e. her pleasing, and intoxicating allurements to Idolatry.]

6 Or, hereby may be signified, that they Idolized her, by worshipping her, and
calling her the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, and attributing
Infallibility to her; as the Phrase is taken Jerem. 3.9. Ezekiel. 16, 17.23, 37.

3 So he [i. e. the Angel,] carried me away in the Spirit [chap. 1. 10.] into
the Wilderness, 7 [where the Woman, the true Church was, chap. 12. 6.] and I
saw a 8 Woman [i. e. a City, verse 18. and Church] * sit [on high; and in an
exalted state, verse 9.] upon a scarlet 9 colored Beast [i. e. the Roman
Empire,] full of names [or kinds] of Blasphemies [i.e. of all 10 manner of
Idols, and Idolatries, and Idolatrous Titles, and Offices;] having seven heads
[or successive forms of Government, verse 9, 10.] and ten horns [i. e. Kings,
verse 12.]

7 The Wilderness was a proper place for him to see this Vision in:

(1.) Because places of Retirement and Solitude, are fittest for the Reception
of Divine Illuminations, and for Meditation; and to signify, that a clear and
distinct View of the Apostasy could not be taken but by one who had retired at
some distance from it, and from its bewitching pleasures; and the Hurry and
Noise which attended its City, Church and Court.

(2.) Because the Woman, the pure Church, being in the Wilderness, he could
best compare them, and distinguish the one from the other.

8 Churches and Cities are represented by Women in Prophecy Isa. 54.6. Jerrm.
6.2. Ezekiel, 16, 30. and 23d Chap.
; as they are also in ancient Coyns and Pictures. And although a City be here
chiefly signified, as is plain from Verse 18. yet because the Church is in the
City, and the foul and loathsome Crime of the City, here reprehended, is with
relation to Church-Corruptions; therefore that is to be understood, and
included in it.

* She sits on high, on the Beast, by which she is born up, or exalted, as
Imperial Cities are, by the Empires, of which they are the Chief Seat.

9 Scarlet Color denotes Royal Authority, as appears from Dan. 5. Matthew.
27.28. and the Military Robe of the Roman Emperors was also of that Color;
whereby is appositely signified the Tyrannical Cruelty of the Beast; and that
this Woman, or City, was seated in the Roman Empire, and was the Imperial City
of it.

10 All which may be included in See Chap. 2, 9. 11, 13. numb. 45.
Names of Blasphemies; and is plainly fulfilled in the Numerous kinds of
Idolatry, and Idolatrous Offices, in use under the Roman Antichristian
Jurisdiction; no other Beast being proper to carry a Whore, or an Apostate
Church; but an Apostate one.

4 And the Woman [i. e. the Romish City and Church] was arrayed in Purple 11
and Scarlet Color [i. e. arrogated to her self Imperial Power, and Majesty,]
and decked 12 with Gold and precious stones and Pearls [i. e. was a pompous,
and worldly Church, full of Pride and Riches;] having a golden Cup 13 in her
hand [i. e. tempting Baits, and powerful motives ready at hand, to entice
worldly minds;] full of abomination, 14 and filthiness of her fornication [i.
e. of abominable and loathsome Idolatry.]

11 Scarlet was the Habit of the Romans in War, and Purple the Habit of the
Emperors and Senate in Times of Peace, as Grotius observes on the place;
whereby is signified, that this was an Imperial Roman City. It is also
observable,

(1.) That this Woman takes to her self the Color of the Ornaments of the
Tabernacle of God (as Grotius also notes) which were of Exodus, 25.4.
Purple and Scarlet, whereby her Idolatrous Usurpations of what belongs to God
may be set forth.

And (2.) That these Colors are much affected in the Papacy; Heidegger. in
Apocalypse. page 429, 430. Platin. in Vit. Paul. secundi. Vide Bezae argutum
Epigramma in hanc rem.
that Christ's Priests (says Baronius) might be in their Pomp, equal to the
High Priests amongst the Heathens.

12 Such was also wont to be the Attire of Harlots, Prove. 17.10. And it is
observable, that the Papacy has not only excessive Riches and Revenues, but
that the Rycaut 's Preface to the Lives of the Popes,
Popes have been so prodigal in procuring Ornaments and Jewels for their own
Pontifical Attire, and especially their Triple Crown, (a fatal Counterfeit of
Christ's many Crowns, Rev. 19.12.) that they have often run the Papacy into
debt by it; which by their Prodigious Pride is laden with Gold and Jewels, and
became thereby so heavy, that Pope Paul the Second died of an Apoplexy,
occasioned by the weight of it.

13 Babylon, her Type, is said ( Jerem. 51.7.) to be the Golden Cup, that has
made the Earth drunken with her Wine.

14 Abominations signify Images or Idols, and the abominable Practices
accompanying them. 1 King. 11.5, 7. 2 King. 23.24. Jerem. 7, 30. ^2, 34.

5 And upon her 15 forehead [after the impudent manner of a whoreish woman,
Ezekiel 23, and 16.30.] was a Name 16 written [so plainly, that it might be read
and understood by those who exercise Spiritual Wisdom, verse 9.] Mystery 17 [of
iniquity, 2 These. 2.7.] 18 Babylon the great [i.e. the Metropolis of the
Fourth, or Roman Empire,] the 19 Mother [City, and Church,] of Harlots [i. e.
of Idolatrous Cities, and Churches;] and abominations [i. e. the chief Author
and Promoter of Image Worship; and other filthy 20 and unclean Doctrines and
Practices] of the Earth [i. e. of the Apostasy.]

15 Critics have observed, that Harlots were wont to have their Names written
on the Portals of the House where they prostituted themselves, and sometimes
upon their Foreheads; and that hereby is accordingly signified, the notorious
Impudence of her Idolatry; although I presume, that this may be rather an
allusion to the Title Exodus 28.36.
upon the Forefront of the Mitre of the Jewish High Priest, which had Holiness
to the Lord, written upon it; and that hereby is intimated, that this Apostate
Church was of a contrary Temper and Spirit to what God required in his Church
and Servants.

16 She was not one of those whom God had sealed in the Forehead; but had her
Crime written upon it, her sin being public and notorious, and easily to be
discerned by the Mind that has Wisdom.

17 Hereby is evidently signified, that this Woman had completed and brought
forth that Mystery of Iniquity; which began to work when the Apostle wrote to
the Thessalonians; called a Mystery of Iniquity, because it undermined
Christianity, the Mystery of Godliness, by the specious pretenses of promoting
and advancing it; as Dr. Moor has shown in his Mystery of Inibuity; where he
has also plainly proved, that this has been actually done by the Romish
Church; whose Religion and Worship (especially in what belongs to the Mystery
of the Mass) is so mystical, that many Books have been written to give the
significations of it; and of the Habits of their Priests, and the Ceremoniet
and Vestments they make use of.

And that Papal Rome is hereby meant, will appear more evidently from what
Scaliger has noted on this place; viz. that the Word Heidegger in Apocalypse.
cap. 17. page 160. Downham of Antichrist. and Bishop Barlow's Brutum Fulmen.
(...), was engraven on the Frontlet of the Pope's Mitre; and was changed by
Julius the Third, when the Protestants began to adapt this Prophecy to the
Papacy; which is also confessed to be true by Brocardus, a Papist, in his Notes
upon this place, who lived in the times of Pope Julius; and is but faintly
denied by Lessius, in his Answer to King James.

18 Babylon was the Seat of the Assyrian Monarchy; and is confessed Dr.
Cressener, lib. 1.3.
by almost all Interpreters, Ancient and Modern, Popish as well as Protestant,
to be a Type of Rome; which in here described by the Phrase Nebuchadnezzar made
use of, when he proudly gloried in Babylon as the seat of his Kingdom; from
whence it appears that Rome is here meant, under the relation of being the seat
of the fourth Empire, as Babylon was of the first. And Rome as the seat of the
Fourth Empire under its Antichristian King, must be here meant; because it is
called the Mother of Harlots; which is a Phrase peculiar to an Apostate City,
and Church in Scripture; as has been before observed on numb. 4.

19 The chief of the Idolatrous Churches; from whence Idolatry is derived and
propagated to all others; and on which they depend, as members of it; in
Opposition to the True Jerusalem the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26.

20 Such as the Denial of Marriage to the Clergy, whereby Uncleanness is
promoted; the toleration and defense of Fornication; and other abominable
Doctrines and Practices which are Taught, or Connived at under the Papacy.

6 And I saw the Woman [as it were] drunken with the Blood of the Saints [or
holy and pure Christians, which she had spilt with an excessive, and insatiable
greediness and delight;] and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus [i. e. his
Special and Faithful Witness;] and when I saw her, I wondered 21 with great
Admiration [what this Vision should mean]

21 This shows that Rome Antiehristian must be here understood; for it would
have been no such strange sight to have seen Pagan Rome, defiled with Idolatry,
and drunk with the blood of Christians.

7 And the Angel said unto me, wherefore did thou marvel? [for the thing when
thou understandest it more fully, will not seem so strange, and therefore] I
will 22 tell [or explain unto] thee, the mystery, [or secret meaning, and
import,] of the Woman [i. e. the City and Church;] and of the Beast [i. e. the
Roman Empire,] that carries or supporteth her, verse 3.] which has the seven
heads and ten horns [verse 3]

22 Here the Angel, contrary to his wonted custom, Explains the Vision to him;
which shows that it is a very remarkable one, and upon which the understanding
of all the others depend very much.

8 The beast [or Roman Empire, as under its seventh Head, the Papacy, verse 10,
11.] which thou saw carrying the Woman, [verse 3.] was 23 [in the sixth head
the Pagan Emperors; verse 10;] and is 23 not [as yet risen, and arrived to an
Antichristian Supremacy. See chap. 13. 11 12.] and [or but,] shall ascend 23
out of the bottomless Pit [and arrive to that Supremacy; See on chap. 9. 1, 2.
and chap. 13.] and [at last] shall go into 24 Perdition [i. e. be utterly
destroyed, Rev. 19.20. Numb. 24.24. 2 These. 2.8.] and they that dwell on the
[Antichristian] Earth [throughout all its Territories;] shall wonder after the
Beast [i. e. be wonderfully taken with him, follow him with an implicit Faith,
and Worship, and be subject unto him. See on Chap. 13. 3, 4. And by his
Admiters, I mean those] whose names are not written in the book if Life [of the
Lamb, chap. 13. 8.] slain from the beginning of the World [i. e. those who are
not living members of Christ's true Church, chosen from all Eternity, and
purchased by the Blood of Christ, the Eternal Sacrifice; but of a New, Apostate
Church, which yet pretends to be the Catholic, and has introduced New
Mediators, and New Sacrifices; all these shall with Wonder and Adoration,
admire] when they behold [with great Applause, and with a superstitious Fear
and Subjection,] the Beast that was [a Draconick Idolatrous Power in its sixth
Head, the Emperors;] and is not [as yet manifestly and apparently the same
Imperial Draconick Power;] and yet is [the same, but in an Image, or a
Christian Disguise, having introduced a Pagano-Christian Idolatry, and a Mock
Imperial Power, under the pretense of a Christian Supremacy. See on Chap. 13.
14, 15.]

23 23 23 This is, as it were, the Name Dr. Moor on the place, and his Synops.
Proph.
and Character of the Beast, taken from his different states and conditions;
whereby is signified, that the Beast which he then saw carrying or supporting
the Woman, or City of Rome, was the Roman Empire; which had been under an
Imperatorial Power; but was now under one, which had been for some time
advancing toward it, and was just ready to ascend ((...)) to it; being just
come forth out of the bottomless Pit, which he went down to open ( Chap. 9.
12.) and having exalted the Imperial City to the height of Ecclesiastical
Dignity. By which is plainly signified, the Time when the Papacy attained its
Supremacy from Phocas; and exalted the Church of Rome above all Churches, after
it had been for some time in a weak and Infant state, according to what has
been already discoursed on Chap. 9. 1, 2. and Chap. 13.

24 Antichrist is called the Son of perdition, 2 These. 2.3. as Judas, the Type
of him, also is, John 17.12. because he brings perdition or destruction upon
others, and is himself (as highly deserving it) devoted by God to perdition,
and that a most exemplary and severe one, Numb. 24.24.

9 And here is [matter to exercise] the mind which has [Mystical, and
Spiritual] Wisdom [Chap. 13. 18.] The seven Heads are [the Symbols, and
Representations of] seven 25 Mountains, on which the Woman [i. e. the City and
Church of Rome] sits [or is situated.]

25 This is a most evident description of Rome, no other Imperial City being
seated at the time when John saw this Vision (for it is described as then
actually reigning, at the 18th Verse) upon seven Mountains. For Du Fresne
Constantinop, Christian. 1.8, 9.
Constantinople (which indeed stands upon as many Hills) was not then built;
and the Ancient Byzantium was not so situated, but was afterward enlarged to
that compass by Constantine, in imitation of Old Rome.

And the seven Heads have a double signification, as other Grot. in Heb. 9.11,
Types have not unfrequently in Scripture. For they have not only a reference
to the seven Kings, the moveable, and successive Heads of the Beast; but also
to the seven Immovable Heads, or Mountains, on which the City of Rome was
situated; which are called Heads, because they support the City which stands
upon them; as the seven Heads, which are Kings, did the Civil State of it;
which was kept up by the Majesty, Government and Residence of them.

10 And [also] there [or they *, to wit, the Heads,] are [or signify,] seven
26 Kings [or Forms of Supreme Idolatrous Government:] five are fallen [already
from the Sovereignty which they had exercised in their proper Successions,] and
one 27 [ viz. the Government by Pagan Emperors,] is 28 [now in being;] and the
other 29 [King, but not Head, or Idolatrous Government, viz. the Christian
Emperors;] is not yet come [into Succession;] and when he comes, he must [or
ought to] continue a 30 short space [in comparison of the five first, the
Government now in being, and that which is to succeed it.]

* So the Words in the Original ought to be translated.

26 Heads, by a very apt Similitude, signify Supreme Powers, as being the
Governing part of the Body, signified by the Beast: and accordingly, seven
Heads signify here seven Kings; i. e. Supreme Governors, or Governments; as
the Word is taken in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 33.5. Dan. 7.17, 23. And hereby the Roman
Empire is undoubtedly signified, which had seven successive kinds of supreme
Government; viz. Kings, Consuls, Decemvirs, Dictators, Tribunes, Emperors,
Popes; as Cressener Demonstrat. of the Apocal. lib. 3.
Protestants generally reckon them up, with great Reason, from History. For the
Triumvirate was rather a Confusion than a Government, and lasted not long; and
is rejected by Lab. 21.
Fenestella, as no Magistracy.

27 27 The Five first of these Governments were already past, and abrogated at
the Time of this Vision; and are here only just mentioned; and that altogether,
without any distinct Account of them, their Time, Names, Difference, or the
Order of their Succession amongst themselves; because they were of no further
use to this Propheey, then to show, that the One Head then in being, was the
sixth of the seven, after five already past. But although the distinct Order of
the Succession of the Five Governments which were past, be not here
particularly specified (whereby many doubts which might have been raised
concerning them, are obviated) yet it is evident, that the whole seven
Governments were successive, and not all together in being at one and the same
time; because the sixth King is represented as following Five already past, and
as One then in being, to which another not yet come, was to succeed; which are
plain Characters of an Orderly Succession.

28 For John saw this Vision, under Domitian, a Pagan Emperor. And from hence
it is evident, that the Ancient Pagan Rome is not the Beast, because the Beast
is the Eighth King, Verse 11. but the Pagan Emperors are the Sixth; to wit,
the King then in being (the one that now is.)

29 The One King, or Government in actual being, when this Vision was seen, was
certainly that of the Pagan Emperors; and therefore the other here mentioned,
must be the Christian Emperors; because they are the only King, or Government
of Rome, which immediately succeeded the Pagan Emperors. And they are most
appositely called (...); not only to signify, that they were the Government
next in Succession to the former, or distinct in Number from it; but that they
were (as (...) signifies) of an other kind or sort from it, as not being
Beastian or Idolatrous, but an utter Enemy to the Beast; during whose Reign it
lay wounded to Death, (Chap. 13. 3.) Whereupon (...) seems to be made use of by
the Holy Spirit; that so it might be answered by (...), a Word which includes
both the former Senses. For seeing that there are Eight Kings, and but Seven
Heads, it is plain, that One of the Kings must be no Head; and therefore of a
Nature different from all the other: which can only belong to this Seventh
King; because the Five First Governments are known to be Idolatrous
Governments, (which is the signification of an Head in this Prophecy;) and the
Eighth is expressly said to be one of the seven; that is, Idolatrous Heads. So
that this Other is indeed a King, and that the seventh, of the Imperial City of
Rome; but is not of the Seven; that is, is not a King who is also an Idolatrous
Head of the Beast; as all the six Governments before the Christian Emperors
were, and as the seventh Head was to be; who is the Eighth King, or Government;
but the seventh Idolatrous King, or the seventh King, who is an Head, as well
as a King; as appears from Verse 11.

30 This is also an evident Character of the Christian Empire; which (in
comparison of the Reign of the Five preceding Kings, and the 1260 Years of the
Beast) lasted but for a short space; uiz. but about an hundred and Fifty Years,
reckoning from Constantine, until the Fall of the Western Empire, under
Augustulus. A. D. 476. Whence also it is evident, that the Beast, the next, or
Eighth King, must enter into Succession at that Time, together with his Ten
Kings, who receive power as Kings, at the same Hour with him, Verse 12. These
being evidently Governments immediately successive, as a Sixth to a Fifth, a
Seventh to that, and an Eighth following it, without any Interregnum, or
intermediate Government. And it is here said, that it must, or ought not to
continue long; to show, that Providence had ordained, that the Christian Empire
should be short, on purpose that there might be space enough (out of the time
destined for these purposes) for the Reign of the Beast, whose Kingdom was to
be built upon the Ruins of the Christian Empire.

11 And the Beast that was [viz. in the sixth Head, Verse 8.] and is not [as
yet risen to his Supremacy, Verse 8.] even he [and let it be observed;] is the
31 Eighth [King, Verse 10.] and is [one, to wit, the last,] of the seven
[Heads, or Idolatrous Governments, the Seventh King being no Head, Verse 10.]
and goes into perdition [i. e. shall be destroyed; and then all the Four
Monarchies end in him, and the Kingdom of Christ succeeds, Dan. 2. and 7. See
on Verse 8. and on Verses 16, 17.]

31 From this Verse it is evident,

(1.) That The Beast is the Papacy; because that although there were Kings of
Italy, after the Extinction of the Christian Emperors, the Seventh King; yet
Rome, the Woman, or great City of these Eight Kings, who upheld and sustained
it by their Authority; and where the Heads and Kings were resident, which
reigned over the inferior Kings or Princes of the Earth: was never afterward
under the Supreme Government of any but the Pope; at least for any considerable
time: who must therefore be the Eighth King here mentioned; they being called
Kings, with respect to the City of Rome; as appears from Verse 3, 9, 10, 11,
18. and from what has been observed on Chap. 13. 2. where the very same Beast
with this is described; as is evident from the Characters given of them in both
Chapters; which may be seen in Dr. Moor's Synops. Prophet. lib. 1. Chap. 10,
etc. and in Dr. Cressener's Demonstrat. of the Apocalypse,

(2.) That the Papacy is an Idolatrous Government, because the Eighth King,
which is the Papacy, is of the Seven Heads of the Beast, or Idolatrous Roman
Empire in general; and is also The Beast in particular, or that which is called
so by way of Eminence; viz. the Seventh Head, but Eighth King, which was, is
not, and yet is; which is called, the Beast, although it be only a Head of it;
as an eminent part has often the denomination of the whole; and to show, that
it is the same with the Little Horn in Daniel, which is called ( Dan. 7.11.)
The Beast, although it were only One of its Horns.

Whence (3.) it will follow, that the present Papacy is the Beast; because that
has been in possession of the Government of Rome ever since the Christian
Empire; and so consequently no other Antichristian King is to be expected
toward the End of the World; nor any other City to be understood here but the
present Papal Rome: the Head of which, the Pope, is actually Crowned Sir Paul
Rycaut 's Preface to the Lives of the Popes.
with a Triple Crown after his Election; and that with so many Solemnities,
that the Ceremony takes up a whole Day; and he has also all the Ensigns of
Temporal Sovereignty; as a Court of Cardinals (who in the Ceremoniale Romanum,
are called Princes in the Church) Ambassadors, Guards, and the like; and is
approached with more Reverence than the Emperors themselves; which is so much
taken notice of by the Graseri Histor. Antichrist. p. 142. Buxtorf. Lexic.
Talmud.
Jews and Graseri Histor. Antichrist. p. 142. Buxtorf. Lexic. Talmud.
Infidels, that the Pope is frequently called the King of the Franks (i. e. the
Christians) by the Turks; and the King of Edom by the Jews, by which they mean
Rome.

12 And the ten 32 horns which thou saw, are [or signify,] ten Kings [or
independent Soveraignities;] which have received no Kingdom [or independency,
of and in the Empire;] as yet [i. e. at the time of this Vision:] but receive
Power as Kings [i. e. an independent, and Sovereign Power;] one hour 23 with
the Beast [i. e. at the same time, that the Beast receives Power, and in
conjunction with him.]

32 These Kings receive Power with the Beast when he comes to be the Eighth
King; which coming not to pass until the Extinction of the Christian Emperors
of Rome, or the Western Caesar's; by these Kings can be meant no other then
those amongst whom the Empire was divided upon the Conquests of the Northern
Nations; who are thought by Mr. Page 463. 661. Author. libri de Excid.
Antichrist.
Mede, and other Learned Men, to have been Ten at first; although that Number
seems rather to be retained, upon the account of the Ten Toes of the Image in
(c) Daniel; to which the Ten Horns of the Beast do correspond; to show, that
this Beast is the last State of the Roman Empire; in which the Image was to be
broken in pieces by the Stone (the Emblem of Christ's Kingdom) which is to
smite it on its Feet, and Ten Toes. For the Endeavors of Learned Men to reduce
the several Divisions of the Roman Empire into Ten, are not so successful as
could be wished; Mr. Mede being forced to make the Greeks one of then; and the
Author of the Book de Excidio Antichristi, confining them within the Rhine, and
the Danube: So that I cannot but think, upon further consideration, that the
True Account of this Division, is with relation to the Image in Daniel; the
Book of the Revelations being nothing but a more full illustration by various
Emblems, of what is but briefly delivered in that Prophecy. See the Annot. on
Chap. 11, 13. 12, 3.

33 To wit, at One Hour, or Season, made up of Two Half Hours, beginning at A.
D. 476. as has been already fully discoursed on Chap. 8. 7.

13 These have 34 mind [as to matters of Religion] and shall give their power
[or Force,] and strength [or Authority,] to the Beast [to wit, in Religious
Matters; and their Assistance and Arms on other occasions.]

34 Here is plainly foretold the strict Union there is betwixt the Papacy, and
the Popish Kings, or Kingdoms and Governments; and the Support, Assistance, and
Authority they afford it; which the Northern Nations were very Famous for, at
their first Settlement and Conversion.

14 These shall make War with [i. e. oppose, and persecute,] the 35 Lamb [i. e.
Christ, in his true Members and Faithful Witnesses, Psalm 2 Acts 4.27, 28. 9,
4] and the Lamb shall overcome them [by the high and powerful preaching of his
Gospel, Chap. 14] for he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings [and therefore
able to vanquish them, and erect his Kingdom, Dan. Chap. 2. and 7. Psalm. 2.]
and they that are with him [i. e his Followers, when he comes to his Kingdom,
Chap. 14. 1.] are called and chosen [by his Grace to this Service,] and [were
his] faithful [Witnesses, Servants and Soldiers unto Death]

35 Hence it appears, that these are Antichristian Kings or Powers; there
having been no Persecution in the Roman Empire by Pagan Powers, since the
Division of it by the Northern Nations.

15 And he [i. e. the Angel,] says unto me [i. e. instructed me in the further
knowledge of the Mystery I had seen;] The Waters which thou saw [Verse 1.]
where the Whore sits; are [i. e. signifie] 36 Peoples, and Multitudes, and
Nations, and Tongues [i. e. the People of the Roman Empire, Dan. 4.1.]

36 Here is shown the Amplitude, and vast Extent of the Jurisdiction of the
Papacy, a thing she so much boasts of.

16 And the Ten Horns [or Kings] which thou saw upon the [Seventh Head of
the] Beast; [even] these [Kings] shall [at last] hate the 37 Whore [whom they
had before loved and admired;] and shall make her desolate [by forsaking her
Communion;] and naked [by stripping her of her Ornaments, Verse 4. and
Authority; and by exposing her to shame, Chap. 16. 15.] and shall 38 eat her
Flesh [i. e. consume and devour her very Substance, and Revenues, Dan. 7.5.
Psalm 27.2.] and burn 39 her with fire [i. e. destroy what is left of her.]

37 A Metaphor taken from the Usage which Harlots often meet with, from those
who have been misled, and abused by them; who are wont at first to entertain a
dislike of them, then to hate them, afterward to take from them the Gifts they
had bestowed on them, and at last revenge themselves upon them by their utter
Ruin.

From this Verse it may be observed,

(1.) That no one of the Kingdoms, or Principalities in Union with the Papacy,
shall be able to arrive to an Universal Monarchy; but as all such Attempts have
been hitherto vain, so shall they still be so: Because, as they were at first
Many Independent Soveraignties, (said to be Ten, in allusion to the Ten Toes of
the Image, and Ten Horns of the Beast) when they at first gave they Power to
the Beast, Verse 13. So are they to remain so until they forsake her; it being
expressly here affirmed, that the Ten Horns shall hate the Whore.

(2.) That the Whore, or Idolatrous Church of Rome, shall fall by those very
States and Kingdoms, which had all along upheld her. Which is to come to pass
(as is plainly asserted in the next Verse) when the Words of God shall be
fulfilled; that is, the Promises of God concerning the expiring of the Beast's
Times, shall be completed, according to what has been already observed on
Chap. 10. 6, 7. When the Ten Kings, which support the City and Church of Rome,
which sits on them, withdrawing themselves from her; the Tenth of that great
City, or the City, and Jurisdiction, consisting (in the Account of Prophecy) of
Ten Principalities, must needs fall too. From whence also it plainly appears,
that the Fall of the Tenth part of the City, mentioned Chap. 21. 23. refers to
the Ten Kings deserting and forsaking her.

38 A Phrase taken from Dan. 7.5. Psalm 27.2. signifying their taking away her
very Substance, Revenues and Dominions, and converting what they had bestowed
upon her, to their own Use; as Grotius interprets the place.

39 A Phrase taken from Levit. 21.9. where it is commanded. That the Daughter
of a Priest guilty of Wheredom, should be burnt with Fire.

17 For God has put in their [willfully wicked] hearts [Rom. 1.26. 2 These.
2.10] to fulfill his Will, and to agree [Verse 13] and give their Kingdom [and
its power and strength,] unto the Beast [by submitting unto him, and being
governed by him;] until the words of God [by his Prophets, and by his Apostle
in this Vision, Chap. 13. 5.] shall be fullfilled [i. e. until the Promises
made by God, concerning the Expiring of the Times of the Beast; and the
following Approach of Christ's Kingdom, shall be fullfilled, Dan. Chapters 2.
and 7. and 12.7. See on Chap. 10.5, 6.11, 13. and Verse 16. of this Chapter,
number. 37.]

18 And the Woman which thou saw, is [or signifies] that [remarkable] great
City, which [now] 40 reigns over the Kings of the Earth.

40 (...), The Regnant, Imperial City, now actually having, and exercising at
this present time, Sovereignty over the Kings of the Earth. Which is a plain
and evident Character that Rome is here meant; no other City being in Exercise
of such Power at the Time when the Apostle saw this Vision.

It may not be unuseful to add here, in the Close of this Chapter, this short
Digression concerning Antichrist; that the Reader might have in one View the
chief of what concerns him in Scripture; especially the more plain and
Doctrinal parts of it: In order to which it may be observed,

(1.) That about Two Years after Ezekiel's Ezekiel. 40, etc. Dan. 2. Lightf.
Works, Tom. 1. page 132, 133.
Vision of the Temple and Throne, the Babylonian Monarchy began, upon the
Conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, which was the only Kingdom that opposed
him. Which Vision contained a Type of Christ's Glorious Church and Kingdom,
which was then to have come into Succession (in place of the Jewish Temple and
City, then in Ashes) as a City and Temple fit for God's Presence; if the
Idolatry, and other sins of his People, had not hindered him Ezekiel. 43.1-12.
from dwelling for ever in the midst of them. Hereupon, by the infinite Justice
and Wisdom of God, the first Dan. Chap. 2. and 7.
Monarchy began; and a Course of Four successive Monarchies was to expire,
before the Glorious Kingdom of Christ should succeed. Which Monarchies
(although as to their Greatness and Universality, they bore some Resemblance of
the Kingdom of Christ) were yet indeed Antichristian; as being contray to
Christ's Kingdom, in their Idolatry, bloody and persecuting Temper, and in
respect of their usurping its place and stead; in which Antichristianism
consists; which is an See on Chapters 13, 14, 15. Abbot de Antichr. page 26.
Downham of Antichrist, 1, 4. 2, 1. Moor's Mystery of Iniq. part 2.
Opposition to, and a Delay, and Undermine of Christ's Kingdom, which it
usurps, and counterfeits. For seeing that Christ has a Glorious Kingdom
belonging to him, as come in the Flesh, the supplanting of this Kingdom is the
peculiar Character of Antichrist; according to 1 John 4.3.

(2.) It is plain from Dan. 4.33, 35, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.7, 8, 11, 12, 20, 21,
24, 25.8, 9-12.11, 36-45.12, 7, 11. Matthew. 24.15, 24. Mark 13. Luke
12.41-59.21, 24.36. 2 These. 2. 1 Timothy 4.1-5. 2 Peter 2.1 John 2.18, 19, 22.4,
3.2 John 7.
Scripture, that in the Times of the Fourth of these Monarchies (called the
Times of the Gentiles, by our Savior, Luke 21.24.) there should arise (besides
the other many Antichrists) One Grand Notorious one, called,

(1) (...), or The Antichrist, by way of Eminence.

(2.) The Man of Sin, or the sinful wicked One, the chief Author and Servant of
Sin, and not of God; whose Profession is nothing else but a Mystery of Iniquity.

(3.) The Son of Perdition, or the graceless, hopeless Apostate, like Judas,
called so John 17.12. the chief Author of Mischief, and Destruction to Christ's
Church; and therefore fitted for, and devoted by God to Destruction, or
Perdition.

(4.) (...), or the Grot. in 2 These. 2.4. and 1 Pet. 5.8.
Satanical, and Apostate Adversary, and Opposite to Christ's Kingdom.

(5.) (...), or The Blasphemous, and Insolent Usurper, upon the Authority of
Christ, and the Supreme Powers, who are called Gods in Scripture.

(6.) (...), or The Lawless One; one who pretends to be above all Laws; and
violates all the Laws of God and Man. By which Man of Sin, is not meant a
single person, but a Succession Poli Synops. in loc. See Downham of Antichr.
2.2.
of Men; as Interpreters upon the place have observed from parallel places of
Scripture: who is also the Mede 's Works, page 763.
same with Daniel's Wicked Horn, or Beast; as the Church (says Mr. Mede) from
her Infancy has interpreted it.

(3.) It is plainly asserted in 2 These. 2. 1 Timothy 4.2 Pet. 2.1. See Mr. Mede's
Works, B. 1. Disc. 29, 43. his apostasy of the latter times; and Dr. Moor's
Mystery of Iniquity; which is also confessed by Ribera, and those other Learned
Romanists, who assert, that there shall be an apostasy of the Romish Church,
toward the end of the World. See Alcazer in Apocalypse. page 20. 466. ed. Ant^.
Scripture, that the Sin of this Man of Sin, should, in general, consist in an
Apostasy, and that a great and solemn one, which should overspread the Visible
Face of the Catholic Church of Christ: which is called by the Apostle Paul,
(...), The Apostasy, or the Grand Apostasy, and that from the Faith, or the
Great Mystery of the Christian Religion, described in the last Verse of the
Third Chapter to Timothy; which, as Mr. Mede has well observed, should,
according to the Division of the Ancients, be the first Verse of the Fourth
Chapter.

(4.) In particular, this Grand Apostasy is limited in Scripture, chiefly to
these Three Heads,

(1.) To Idolatry and Superstition, Dan. 11.37-39. 1 Timothy 4.1-4.

(2.) To an Insolent and Blasphemous Usurpation of a God-like Supremacy, in
Opposition to the Supremacy of Christ, and of the Civil Magistrate, Dan. 7.8,
11, 20, 25.8, 9-14, 23, 24, 25.11, 36, 37.2 These. 2.4.

(3.) To a bloody and persecuting Temper, Dan. 7.21, 25.8, 10, 24, 25.

(5) It is also 1 Timothy 4.1. (...). 1 John 2.18.
expressly, plainly, and not aenigmatically, and mysteriously declared by the
Holy Spirit, that this Apostasy was to be in the latter Times. By which are
meant, as Mr. Apostas. of the latter Times, Chap. 21, etc.
Mede has proved, the latter Times of the Fourth, or Roman Kingdom; whose
Times he thinks are called the last Times, because it is the Last Kingdom in
Daniel.

(6.) Furthermore, the particular Time, or Season, of the Coming, Revelation,
or Appearance and Manifestation of this Man of Sin; is expressly dated by the
Apostle Paul, from the Fall of the These. 2.6, 7. (...), and (...), (a word
which signifies to retain, or hold fast, and also to obstruct, hold back, or
hinder) is elegantly put to denote the Pagan, and Christian, Roman Empire, and
Emperors, the Sixth and Seventh Kings; from their holding their own proper
Successions firm, during their own Times; and thereby holding back, or
hindering the Succession of Antichrist: but the Christian Empire, and
Emperors, the Seventh King, is most especially thereby intimated, who held
back, or hindered, more immediately, the Succession of the Antichrist, the
Eighth King, that he might be revealed in his own Season, upon the Fall of
Augustulus, the last of the Roman Emperors. See Chap. 8. 11, and this Chapter.
Grot. in 2 These. 2.6. and Ham. ibid. and in Romans 1.18. Abbot. demonstr.
Antichr. page 91. Patres ad unum fere omnes hoc agnoscunt.
Roman Empire; which the Sea Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. 3.5. Chamier. de Antichr.
Mede's Works, page 656.
Ancients generally understand, by the taking out of the way that which
lets, or withholdeth, 2 These. 2.6, 7. Upon which the Apostle says, that the
Man of Sin should be revealed, (...); i. e. in his own Season, as Dr. Hammond
rightly translates the Word; which is the same with that made use of in Dan.
12.7. Rev. 12.14.
Daniel, and the Dan. 12.7. Rev. 12.14.
Revelations, concerning the Months, Times or Seasons of the Beast.

(7.) The Apostle Paul in the same Chapter (2 These. 2, 6, 7, 8.) expressly
assigns a Line of Time to this Man of Sin, dated from his Birth, Coming,
Revelation, or First Appearance, at the taking away of the Roman Empire, A. D.
475, or 476, and reaching unto the Coming of Christ: Which may be called, the
(...), or Times of Antichrist; to distinguish them from the (...), or Times of
Christ, mentioned 1 Timothy 6.15. it being remarkable, that Antichrist, Christ's
Counterfeit and Opposite, has also a Coming, Times and a Kingdom assigned him
in Scripture, in Opposition to the Coming, Times and Kingdom of Christ.

(8.) The manner of the Destruction of this Man of Sin, is described by the
Apostle (2 These. 2.8.) in Terms so agreeable to those made use of in Dan. 7.
and the Chap. 17, 8, 11. 19. 21.
Revelations, with reference to the Little Horn, the Beast, and the False
Prophet; that it cannot well be denied but that they are the same.

(9.) The Apostle also further expressly declares, that this Man of Sin, which
was not to be revealed, or appear openly, until the taking away of the Roman
Empire; was yet in his Conception in the Womb, at the Supposed most commonly to
be written about A. D. 57, or 58. See above, page 302.
Time of his writing the second Epistle to the Thessalonians; aptly expressed
by 2 These. 2.7. (...); it has received its beginninng, or is in preparation to
enter, and disclose it self to the World. Hammond on the place, and on Gal. 5.6.
the then actual workings of the Mystery of Iniquity; called so, because of its
Contrariety and Opposition to the Mystery of Godliness, which it undermined by
secret and mysterious Operations and Workings of Satan, in Lying Wonders, and
strong Delusions; by Hypocritical Pretenses of promoting Christianity; by
departing from the Simplicity of the Gospel, and Apostolical Traditions; and
taking pleasure in Unrighteousness, for Interest's sake, as the Apostle plainly
asserts, 2 These. 2.7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15. 1 Timothy 4.2, 3. 2 Pet. 2.3, 3.

(10) It is evident from Scripture, that Satan had great success in the early
Times of Christianity, in perverting and seduceing Men from the Purity, Truth,
and Simplicity of the Gospel; as appears from the Complaints of the Apostles,
and from the many Heresies and Antichrists then in being; from whence the
Apostle John concludes (1 Ep. 2.18.) that it was then the last Time, and that
the Grand and Notorious Antichrist, the Head of the Apostasy, should take his
Original from those many Heretical Autichrists which were then in being; and
that (as has been before observed) in the latter Times of those last Times;
which seems plainly to be the sense of those words of the Apostle. To which
progress of the Mystery of Iniquity many things then contributed; (as has been
before observed on Chap. 2. 4.) brought about by the Justice and Providence of
God, for the punishment of those who would wilfully perish, and would not
receive the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved, 2 These. 2, 10.16. To
which Particulars may be added, the early Ambition of some who stretched
themselves beyond their own Measure, Line or Rule; that is, beyond the
particular Districts to which the Apostles had confined the Exercise of their
Power, which was otherwise unlimited; of whom the Apostle Paul complains, 2.
Cor. 10.12.18. who also seems to intimate 1 Cor. 15, 9-11. 2 Cor. 11.5. Gal.
2.1-12.
, as if the People thought that James, Peter and John had an Authority over
him, because of their Gifts, Age and Conversation with Christ: to which Opinion
also the Apostles themselves might occasionally, and by accident contribute;
who strove for Superiority whilst their Lord was with them; and were not
afterward infallible, save in what they did by the immediate assistance of the
Holy Ghost; as appears from what the Apostle Paul blames in the Conversation of
Peter, Gal. 2. So early, so secret, so plausible, and so powerful might the
Temptations and Occasions be, to the introducing of the great Apostasy; God Nec
periclitor dicere ipsas quoque Scripturas, sic esse ex Dei voluntate
dispositas, ut Haereticis materias subministrarent; cum legam, Oportere
Haereses esse, quae sine Scripturis esse non poslunt. Tertull. de Prescript.
cap. 39.
in his Just Judgments sending strong Delusions, and permitting all
deceiveableness of Unrighteousness to work upon them, who wilfully delude
themselves, and take pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.

(11.) It is evident from History, that the Workings of this Mystery of
Iniquity, were more visible in the following Ages; to which many things
contributed:

As (1.) The Eusebius. Hist. 4.22. Chamier de Antichr. 16.8. where he largely
shows how Antichristianism was promoted by Heresies.
Heresies which soon prevailed and corrupted the Church, upon the Death of the
Apostles.

(2.) The Greek Col. 2. It is confessed by Learned Romanists, that several
Pagan Customs were introduced, especially in Constantine's Time, to win the
Gentiles, Baron. ad. an. 312. art. 94. ad an. 324. art. 79. Gregor. M. lib. 9.
ep. 71. Polyd. Virgil. Proaem. ed 5. ultimos libros de rerum inventor:
Philosophy, and Customs, brought into the Church by the converted Heathens;
and many Jewish Customs and Notions taken from the Confessed frequently by
Grotius, in his Notes on the New Testament, and by Mr. Dodwell; particularly
Append. ad Praelect. page 660-671.
Essens; whereby the Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 2. sub fin. Testes Verit. Spanhem.
summa Histor. Eccles. sparsim. Gregor. M. lib. 7. Epistolorum fatetur se (in
rebus Liturgicis) ab Apostolorum consuetudine discessiste.
Simplicity of the Gospel was by degrees corrupted, which was at first simple
and plain in its Doctrine and Worship; as Protestant Authors generally show;
and as appears from several Popish Authors, particularly Platina in the Lives
of the Popes, who shows in each Life, what Customs each Pope introduced.

(3.) An early This is notorious, and confessed frequently by Dr. Ham. in his
Defense of Episcopacy.
modelling of the Church according to the Form of the Civil Government in the
Empire; which was one chief occasion of the many Quarrels amongst the Bishops
about their Sees; and of their aspiring to a Worldly Dignity suitable to the
places of their Residence: from whence came Patriarchs into the Church, (which
are confessed to be an Usurpation, by Bishop Parker of the Govern. of the Chapter
page 289. Du Pin. de Antiq. Eccles. Disc.
Parker, and the Learned Sorbonist du Pin) and other Ecclesiastical
Subordinations confessed by Learned Dr. Of the Pope's Supremacy, page 191 -- in
4^.
Barrow to be only Humane and Prudential Constitutions.

(4.) The Strifes, Cypr. de Lapsis, page, 123, 124. Origin. T. 1. page 71. 113.
142. 246. 441-444. ex edit. Huet. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. 8. 1, 2, 13. Socrat.
7.11. and sparsim. Sozom. 7.7, 28, 29. Sulpit. Sever. sub fin. Grot. in Matthew.
20.28.
Ambition, and the too general Degeneracy of the Manners of the Clergy, much
complained of by Ancient Authors: although God was pleased all along to raise
up Great and Good Men, who were Ornaments to the Church, and witnessed against,
and opposed the overflowing Corruptions in Doctrine and Manners.

(5.) The Increase of See Pufendorf 's history of the Popedom. Rycaut 's
Preface to the Lives of the Popes. Dr. Barrow of the Popes Supremacy, page 240,
etc. The third general Council of Ephesus was afraid, lest under pretense of
Sacerdotal Power the (...), or Pride of Secular Dominion, should be brought
into the Church. Parker, ibid. p. 234. See Overal 's Convoc. Book, l. 3. 1-6.
Ecclesiastical Authority; which from the Power of binding and loosing,
inflicting of Censures, distributing the Charity of the People, and determining
of Controversies in Civil Matters, voluntarily referred to them, according to
the 1 Cor. 6.
Apostles Advice; arrived at last from such small beginnings to the
Antichristian Pre-eminence now visible in the Papacy.

(6.) Excessive Overal's Convocat. Book. B. 3. 1-6. Hieron. in Vit. Malchi.
Postquam ad Christianos Principes Venit (Ecclesia) potentia quidem, and
divitiis major, sed virtutibus minor, facta est. I do not say, that an
Ecclesiastical Society, may not lawfully for its support, use Power, Policy and
Wealth, in some measure to uphold, or defend it self; but that a Constitution
needing such things is not Divine; or that so far as it does use them, it is no
more than humane. Dr. Barrow of the Unity of the Church, page 33. 4^.
Honors and Riches, whereby the Minds of the Clergy were corrupted and drawn
off from the care of Souls, as Epist. 1. 5, 7.
Gregory the Great confesses ingenuously; and the Church became too like a
Worldly Kingdom; especially when Kings and Emperors became over-lavish in
their Liberality to purchase Pardons for their sins; whereupon, as the Learned
Archbishop of Paris, de Heidegger. Histor. Papat. chap. 3.
Marca observes; the Discipline of the Church was very much relaxed, in
recompense, as it were, for the large Endowments received from them.

(6.) Early Forgeries of Books, and Traditions, confessed by Learned Romanists;
a too great Reverence for Antiquity; and a Despair of knowing more than our
Ancestors; which our Learned Antichrist. Demonstrat. page 15.
Abbot makes to be one main cause of the Rise of Antichristianism.

(12.) It is evident that The Papacy is The Antichrist; because the several
Properties and Characters given of him in Scripture, do agree to the Papacy,
and to it alone. For the full proof of which Proposition, I refer the Reader to
the Abbot's Demonstrat. Antichrist. a book much valued by Joseph Scaliger, who
was not wont to be lavish of his commendations. Downham of Antichrist. Dr.
Moor's Mystery of Iniquity. Dr. Cressener's Demonst. of the first Principles of
the Protestant applicat. of the Apocal. Jurieu's accomplishm. of Prophecies,
Tom. 1. Chap. 24. Tom. 3. His Pastoral Letters. But chiefly Dr. Beverley's
command of God to his People, to come out of Babylon, where this great truth is
most evidently demonstrated.
Books quoted in the Margent; and shall only here give him a brief View of what
may be most observable on this Head:

(1.) The Doctrines and Practices laid to the Charge of Antichrist in Scripture
(the general Heads of which are reckoned up, paragr. 4.) are plainly taught and
practiced in the Romish Church; such as Idolatry, Superstition, Supremacy,
Persecution; and the carrying on all this by Lying Wonders, forbidding
Marriage, and abstaining from Meats; and that after so subtle a manner, under a
disguise of Piety; as that Good and Learned Men have been deceived by it:
Whence it plainly appears to be a Mystery of Iniquity, and The Apostasy
foretold and described in Scripture; as Mr. Apostasy of the latter Times.]
Mede, and Dr. Mystery of Iniq.
Moor have fully proved.

(2.) The Seven-hill'd City, the place of the Residence of Antichrist, can
agree to none but Rome, the Seat of the Papacy; for whose Residence in it, the
Emperors made way, by removing from it by degrees, as has been observed on
Chap. 13. 2. and the Name, Number, Image and Mark of the Beast, the excessive
Riches, and gaudy Pomp of the Woman, are sufficiently Visible, and Notorious in
the Romish Church; as has been also before observed on the 13th and 17th
Chapters.

(3.) The Insolent See on Chapter 13.
Boastings, unmeasurable Ambition, mad Zeal, and Devilish Cunning, the
Tyrannical Vsurpati, ons of the Papacy over Emperors, and Civil Powers; and
the universal spreading of that Mystery of Iniquity, do sufficiently show, that
it was plainly described by the Little Horn, and the King that should do after
his Will, in Chap. 7. and 11. See Mr. Mede's Works, p. 667, etc. -- Graser.
Histor. Antichr. p. 149, etc.
Daniel, and by the Beast, and the Whore in the Revelations, whom the World
followed, and wondered after.

(4.) The Worldly Rycaut's Preface to the Lives of the Popes. Dr. Barrow of the
Unity of the Church. p. 33. 34. etc. in 410.
Pomp, Temporal Dominion, Court, Guards, Titles, Style, and Coronation of the
Pope, plainly show, that he is a Horn, and a King, according to Prophecy; and
the Rise of the Papacy, upon the Fall of the Roman See on Chap. 13. and 17.
Emperors, is a sufficient Proof, that the Popes are that Man of Sin who was
to be witheld until that Time; and that they are the seventh Head, and Eighth
King.

(5.) It is plain from History, that the Converts from Heathenism, and the
Barbaroas Nations, Paganized the Western Parts of Christendom, and became the
Chief Support of the Papacy. And how agreeable is that to Prophecy, which
places the Entrance of the Sea on Chap. 11. Chap. 13.
Gentiles into the Court of the Temple, before the Succession, and Rise of the
Beast; thereby intimating, that they were prepared before hand, as Subjects for
this King of Pride.

(6.) How aptly are the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Empire, called the
Two Horns of the Beast? And is it not accordingly notorious from History, that
the Grandeur Rex Superbiae prope est, and quod dici nefas est, Sacerdotum ei
praeparatur exercitus. Greg. M. lib. 4. ep. 38.
of the Papacy, and the Idolatry of it, was made way for by the Ambition and
Corruptions of the Clergy of both those Divisions; by the Constantinopolitan,
as well as Roman Bishops; who were the Gregor. M. Epistolae. Abbot demon.
Antichrist. Constantinopolitanus Episcopus Antichristi Praecursor.
Forerunners of Antichrist; and in whose Dominions also Image Worship was
decreed by the Second Council of Nice; whereupon they fell under the severe
Effects of the Saracenick and Turkish Woes, described Chap. 9. And has not
that Clergy ever Medes Apostasy of the latter times. part 2.
since been the Chief Instruments of promoting and keeping up that
deceivableness of Unrighteousness, as the Apostle calls it, 2 These. 2. And may
they not therefore be well meant by the False Prophet in this Prophecy?

(7.) How observable is it from Mede's Works. p. 463. 661.
History, that the Empire was divided, when the Papacy rose; and that, upon
those Divisions? and that Three Horns, or Powers, viz. the Exarchate, the
Lombards, and the Franks, were removed by him, to make way for his Dominion in
Italy? Which is plainly foretold, Dan. 7.8, 24. by the coming up of a Little
Horn amongst the Ten Horns, by whom three of them were humbled, subdued, and
plucked up by the Roots.

(8.) May not the Pope (according to Daniel 7.24.) be fitly called a King,
diverse from all the rest of the Kings, which are united with him? Is not his
Supremacy an Image (as it is called Rev. 13.14.) of Imperatorial power, not a
true and real one; and does not he subsist merely by the Will of the Princes
and Kingdoms of whom he is the Spiritual Head? so that they may (according to
Dan. 8.24.
Prophecy) be fitly said to give their power to him, and his power to be
mighty, but not by his own power.

(9.) Antichrist is called the Son of Perdition in Scripture And is it not
notorious in all See the Lives of the Popes, and the Histories of the Papacy
before quoted. Foulis of Romish Vsurpat. Overals Convocat. Book lib. 3. Bp.
Stillingfl. of Idolatry p. 314-337.
History, that Perdition, Mischief, Wars and Bloodshed has attended the Rise
and Progress of the Papacy? For it was founded upon the Perdition and Ruins of
the Empire; it was raised to a Supremacy, by approving the Murder of the Good
Emperor Mauritius; and advanced it self above the Civil powers, and all that
is called God, by trampling upon Kings and Emperors, raising Wars and
Seditions against them, and by anathematizing, persecuting, and killing all
that opposed it.

(10.) The Times of the Beast are most admirably divided in Scripture, into a
Time, Times, and an half Time; to de note the several Steps and Advances of it;
and its Declination in the half Time; which being a Division, or breaking of
Time, is an intimation of its broken and divided State; as has been shown on
Chap. 12. Now it is plain from the History of the Papacy, that its Power was
most considerably broken at the Reformation, A. D. 1517; So that we may very
well date its half Time from that Year, after which so many Nations fell off
from it: if from that Year we ascend to the beginning of its Two United Times
(which are 720 Years) we arrive at A. D. 797. when his first time ended,
consisting of 360 Years, the half of which is 180 Years; and there, according
to Expectation, we find this Man of Sin, in the great strength and vigor of
Manly Age; having conquered all the Obstacles which opposed his Establishment.
For in that very Zonar. Cedren. Sigebert. Petav. Rationar. Tempor.
Year (remarkable for a horrible Darkness for Seventeen Days together) the
whole Race of Leo Conon, called Iconomachus, was utterly extinguished by the
cruel Empress Irene; who had all along opposed the Pope in the Controversy
about Images: whereby he was freed from his Enemies on all hands; his Power in
the West being then also settled by the Mezeray, page 99. It may be observed,
that the Kings of France were the first Kings that embraced Christian Religion,
as it was professed at Rome; and that they contributed the most of any Kings
upon the Earth, to the raising and supporting of the Papacy; as appears from an
Inscription on a Marble-Stone, still extant at Ravenna, where it is
acknowledged, that Pepin was the first King who gave example to Posterity, how
the power of Holy Church was to be amplified and increased: and as they have
all along afforded Refuge to Persecuted Popes (as Monsieur Mezeray speaks) so
is it a thing remarkable, that France, although it has no great Obligation or
dependency upon Rome, except with relation to the privileges of the Gallican
Church; yet interests her self more warmly in her Affairs, and sends more
Stately Embassies thither, than any other Princes: whence it may be observed,
that it is upon all accounts the chief part of the Decem-principality; and that
her Kings are the most remarkable of the Ten. Mezeray, page 15. 223. Rycaut's
Preface to the Lives of the Popes.
Kings of the Franks, to whom (as we may observe by the way) the Popes chiefly
owe their Temporal Grandeur. And if we ascend again from thence to the
beginning of its first Time (which must accordingly be A. D. 437.) we arrive to
a very remarkable Year; in which we find the World very busy in settling the
Lunar Year; as on purpose to point out unto us, that the Beast's Months were
then just entering; in whose Times, compared with the Days of the Witnesses,
there is observed the exact Mathematical proportion betwixt the Motion of the
Sun and Moon; a thing very See before on Chap. 11. 2.
admirable, and worthy observation. And further, not only the beginning and end
of the first Time, (where the Two Times also begin) are remarkable for some
notable things relating to the Papacy; but also the Year 1157, the very Joint
of Time in which the Two United Times meet; is very Famous for Baron.
Heidegger. histor. Papat. cap. 4. Foulis of Romish Vsurpat. 4.4.
Pope Hadrian's setting up in the Vatican a Picture of the Emperor's
Vassalage; who was fain to hold the Pope's Stirrup before he could be crowned;
and for his insolent Letters to him; wherein he asserts, that he was set up by
God to destroy Kingdoms and Countries; and that the Roman Empire was held as a
Feif of the Papacy; whereby he sufficiently showed his Antichristian Spirit,
and his Mouth speaking great things. So remarkable is each Joint of the Beast's
Times; divided by the Wisdom of the Holy Spirit, into a Time, Times, (or Two
Times united into One,) and half a Time, to denote the different States of
Antichrist and his Kingdom; who was the whole first Time in his Growth, and
Ascent to an Idolatrous Power; which he was fully established in at A. D. 797;
ten Years after his finishing the Iconoclastick War in the Second Council of
Nice: and because after that Time, until 1517. his Kingdom continually
increased, and received no decay, and he went on, and prospered, in one and the
same Kingly State; therefore are the Two next Times given in One united Line of
Time, called Times, because it was One and the same Kingly State; the first
Time, measuring out a different State from this, having a distinct Time to it
self, and being then ended. And his last State beginning at the Reformation, A
D. 1517. is very appositely measured by half a Time, because it was a divided,
and a broken one.

Seeing therefore that the Doctrine, Name, Number, Image, Place, Times, and all
the other Characters, and Notes of Antichrist given in Scripture, do all agree
to the Papacy, and to that alone; it will follow, that the Papacy is The
Antichrist. Q E D.

But that the Rise, Progress, and Times of Antichrist, may be the better
understood, I shall give this brief Scheme of them; referring to the several
places in the Annotations, where they are particularly discoursed of.

(1.) Antichrist See page 22. 302.
was in Conception in the Womb, when the Apostle Paul wrote the Second Epistle
to the Thessalonians, probably 25 Years after the Resurrection, 58 A. D. (2.)
He was forming See from page 22-38, 93, 94, 112, 124, 125. from 204, to 215.
from that time, by the workings of the mystery of Iniquity, in the lower parts
of the Earth (as the Womb is called, Psalm 139.15. Ephesians. 4.9.) during the
Ephesine and Smyrnaean Succession, in which the Synagogue of Satan arose, until
he was brought forth, and the Gentiles Months began, about the middle space,
betwixt the Death of Theodosius, and the Fall of the VVestern Empire, just when
Cyril was settling the Lunar Year. 437 A. D. (3.) From that time the Sea on
Chap. 8, 10, 11. 9, 1, 2, 3. 11, 1, 2, 3. and Chapters 13. and 17. and 2 These.
2.
Gentiles, i. e. the people newly converted to Christianity, Paganized it, by
introducing Heathen Notions and Customs; and thereby prepared the way for this
Man of Sin's becoming the Beast, or the Seventh Head, and Eighth King, upon the
Fall of the Western Empire; when he was revealed in his own Time, and the Beast
arose with his Ten Kings; according See the Author de Excid. Antichr. page 184.
to all History; and his Months began, 475 or 476 A. D. (4.) This Man of Sin
was indeed the King of Rome (according to the Course of Succession laid down in
Prophecy,) at 476. when the Christian Emperors ceased; but he did not arrive
to his Universal See on Chap. 9. 1, 2. and Chap. 13. and Chap. 17. 8. and
Heidegger. Histor. Papat. Chap. 2. Morney's Mystery of Iniq.
Supremacy over all Churches, until A. D. 606. according to the general Consent
of Protestants, in agreement with Prophecy ( Chap. 9. 1, 2. 17, 8.) which was
prepared for him by the Eastern and Western Divisions of the Empire; called the
other Beast, with Two Horns, like a Lamb, Chap. 13. 606 A. D. (5.) At 606 he
fell as a Star from Heaven to Earth, and became an Earthly or Antichristian
Monarch over all Churches; and from thence by degrees proceeded to kill and
overcome, until he came to be an See on Chap. 13, 14-18. and Chap. 11. 7.
Image, or to have a Supreme Idolatrous Power established fully at the End of
his First Time, 797 A. D. (6.) From Heidig. Histor. Papat. Chap. 4, 5, 6.
that Time the Popes advanced themselves by degrees, especially by the means of
Hildebrand (as is clear from all History,) until they came into a full
possession of Dominion, and Power in Temporals, which they had long strove and
struggled for, 1157 A. D. (7.) After that Heideg. Histor. Papat. Chap. 4, 5, 6.
time (although with some Variety of Fo^tune, according to the Temper of the
Popes, and the Princes they were to contest with) they exercised the Power they
had gained over Princes and Emperors, sitting in the Temple of God as God, and
opposing and exalting themselves above all that is called God; by Deposing and
Excommunicating Princes, absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance,
dispensing with God's Laws, arrogating Infallibility to themselves, and filling
the World with Slaughter and Confusion, and with scandalous and abominable
Doctrines and Practices, until the Reformation; when their Power in Spirituals
and Temporals was broken. 1517 A. D.
CHAP. XVIII.
The Text.
AND after these things [i. e. immediately after the distinct Representation of
the Woman, and her whole State, in the foregoing Chapter,] I saw another Angel
[or Minister of God's Judgment, distinct from him who appeared Chapter 17. 1.] come
down from Heaven [in the Name of God, and with a Commission from him,] having
great power [as being to effect great matters;] and the Earth was lightened with
his Glory [i. e. the Judgment and Ministration was very Terrible and Glorious,
and accompanied with abundance of Light and Knowledge, Ezekiel. 43.2.]

2 And he cried mightily with a strong 1 Voice [to show the greatness of the
Judgment,] saying, Babylon the great [i. e Papal Rome, Chap. 14, 8. 16, 19. 17,
5.] is fallen, is fallen [i. e. will now be totally, and finally overthrown,
and that as certainly as if it were already fallen, Isa. 21.9. Jerem. 51.8.]
and is become [the Judgment being now actually in execution;] the Habitation of
2 Devils, and the 3 hold of every foul Bird, and a Cage of every unclean and
hateful Bird [i. e. it is desolate for ever, Jerem. 51.62. See Note 19]

Annotations on CHAP. XVIII.
1 This Angel gives a particular Representation of the Divine Judgment upon
Babylon, or Papal Rome; according to the general importance of the seventh
Vial, Chap. 16. 19. And this Voice, or Angel, may probably be the same with the
Angel of the seventh Voice, (Chap. 14. 18.) which had pow-over Fire; for his
Appearance is illustrious and Bright, like that of Fire; and the glorious
Execution of the Judgment is as the loudest Voice.

2 Its Destruction is here described by Expressions taken from the Prophets,
particulary from Isa. 13.19-22.34, 14. Jerem. 51.37.) which are Allusions to
the popular Notions and Opinions then common amongst Men; for which see the
Commentators on those places, and Grotius on this Verse, and on Matthew. 10.1.
and Matthew. 12.

3 A Military word (says Grotius,) signifying the Stations, or Watches of
Soldiers.

3 For 4 all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication;
and the Kings of the Earth [Verse 9.] have committed Fornication with her; and
the Merchants of the Earth [Verse 11.] are waxed rich through the abundance of
her 5 Delicacies [i. e. the several Members of the Papal Communion, have
through her Means, been guilty of the foulest Idolatry, Cruelty and Sensuality.
See Chap. 14. 8-11. and Chapters 13. and 17.]

4 Here is declared the Cause of her Ruin.

5 See Doctor Hammond on 1 Timothy 5.11.

4 And I heard another Voice [or Angel distinct from the former, Verses 1, 2.]
from Heaven, saying, 6 Come out of her [i. e. out of Mystical Babylon, the
Papal City and Communion;] my 7 people [who have not defiled your selves with
her Idolatry;] that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues [or punishments, which are now actually in Execution, Genesis
19.12-26. Numb. 16.26.]

6 These Words are taken from Isaiah 48.20. Jerem. 50, 8.51, 6, 45. and they
are a Divine Admonition to all Ages; (especially since the Reformation, and the
clearer discovery of Babylon, and its Corruptions by it) to forsake that
Communion; as they tender their own Safety, and Deliverance from Sin and
Judgments, the Consequents of it. They do also express the Grace and Mercy of
God, by which he gathers his People from amongst the Wicked, and calls them out
of Danger, into places of Retreat and Safety; as he now does those whom he had
hitherto witheld from Antichristian Errors, and was about to secure after a
most glorious manner.

7 Hence it appears, that God may have people in an Idolatrous Communion, who
are not of it; who yet are obliged actually to leave and forsake such a
Communion, at some times, and in some Cases; as Protestants have shown in their
Discourses upon that Controversy; of which Cases, a Fear of being guilty of
its Idolatry is the Chief; by which the Title and Privilege of being God's
People is forfeited, 2 Cor. 6.14-28.

5 For her sins have 8 reached unto Heaven [i. e. have been extraordinarily
Clamorous, and have cried aloud for Vengeance;] and God has 9 remembered her
Iniquities [i. e. does now punish her acc rding to her deserts, Chap. 16. 19.]

8 This is an Allusion to the crying sins of Sodom, Nineveh, and other wicked
Cities; which, when they are extraordinarily notorious, are said to reach
Heaven in Scripture, Genesis 4, 10.11, 4.18, 20, 21.19, 13. Jonah 1.2. James 5.4.

9 As God's Forgiveness of sin, is called, his forgetting of it, in Scripture;
so his Punishment of it, is called, Remembering of it.

6 Remember 10 her [ye, my people,] even as she rewarded you, and double unto
her double [i. e. abunda^tly and utterly destroy her, Jerem. 17, 18.50, 14,
15.] according to her [abominable, evil] works: in the cup [of Affliction,]
which she has filled [to others,] fill to her double [for she has
impenitently, and irreclaimably sinned against me, as well as injured you, and
therefore a double pun^shment is justly due.]

10 This Verse refers to the Triumphs and Acclamations of the Saints, upon
God's Just Judgments on his malicious, and irreconcilable Enemies; and to their
Concurrence in inflicting of them, as far as can be thought proper for them.
See Psalm 58, 10. and 137. 2 These. 1.6. 2 Timothy 4, 14.

7 How much she has gloried her self [in her Authority:] and lived deliciously
[in Pride and Luxury,] so much torment, and sorrow give her [as a just
Recompense of her sins, 2 These. 1.6.] for she says 11 [or has said,] in [the
Pride, Carelessness, and wantonness of] her heart, I 12 sit [as] a Queen [i. e.
have supreme and uncontrollable Authority,] and am no Widow [i. e. I have many
Kings and People to defend me, and am the Mother, and Chief of Cities, and
Churches, Isa. 47.7, 8. Zeph. 2.15.] and shall see no sorrow [in the loss of
Children, or People, but shall continue the Seat of Ecclesiastical Power, and
of Empire.]

11 This refers to her Pride and Boastings, in the Days of her Prosperity and
Security.

12 Words full of Insolence and Blasphemy, and which (especially as they lie in
the places of the Isa. 47.10-15. Zeph. 2.15.
Prophets from whence they are taken) can be properly spoken only by God alone;
and plainly refer to the insolent pretenses of the Papacy to Supremacy,
Infallibility, and Indefectibility.

8 Therefore [because of her Pride, Security, and arrogant pretense to what
properly belongs to God alone,] shall her Plagues come in one day [i e.
unexpectedly and suddenly, Isa. 47.9-11.] Death, and Mournin g, and Famine [i.
e. Variety of punishments, which shall bear a conformity to her sins,] and she
[i. e. Rome, the mystical Bnbylon,] shall be utterly burnt with 13 fire [i. e.
shall be utterly destroyed and consumed:] for strong [and powerful,] is the
Lord who judges her [and therefore able to inflict the severest punishment on
her, as incredible as the thing may seem to her, or others]

13 See Dr. Burnet's Theory, B. 3.10.

9 And the Kings 14 of the Earth, who have committed Fornication [or Idolatry,]
and lived deliciously with her [or in her Communion, Verses 3, 7.] shall bewail
her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning [i. e. the signs of her
Torment, Genesis 19.28. Ezekiel. 26.15-21]

14 The Ten Kings shall hate the Whore, and burn her, as is expressly asserted,
Chap. 17.16. and therefore by these Kings must be meant, either some who shall
adhere to her, even after the punishment inflicted by the Ten Kings; or else
rather, the Kings who died Impenitently in her Communion, who are raised to
Judgment, and first behold her punishment with Terror, and then partake with
her in it: of which see more on the following Chapters.

10 Standing afar off, for the Fear of her Torment [which they know they have
deserved, and must shortly feel;] saying [in the anguish, and horror of their
Minds;] Alas, alas, that great City Babylon [or Rome,] that [once] mighty [or
powerful] City; for in one hour [or suddenly,] is thy Judgment come [and
therefore ours cannot be far off.]

11 And the 15 Merchants of the Earth [i.e. the worldly Factors for the Roman
Church; and those who had compassed Sea and Land to gain advantages by it, and
Proselytes to it;] shall weep and mourn over her, for [or because] no man
buyeth her 15 Merchandise any more [i. e. they could have no more advantage by
her, Matthew. 10, 8.23, 15. 2. Pet. 2.3. 2 Cor. 2.17. Matthew. 21.13.]

12 The Merchandise of Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, and of Pearls,
and fine Linen, and Purple, and Silk, and Scarlet [i. e. whatsoever was
precious, and for Ornament, the highest Preferments, and most gaudy Pomps and
Ornaments of that Worldly Church;] and all Thine Wood [or Sweet Wood, for
Images, Incense and Temples,] and all manner Vessels of Ivory, and all manner
Vessels of most precious Wood, and of Brass, and Iron, and Marble [i. e.
Utensils, and Materials of all sorts, for their Temples]

15 15 This, and the following Expressions, are taken from Isa. 47.15. and Ezekiel
27. where the Destruction of Babylon, and of Tire (Types of the Antichristian
City) is represented after the same manner. And by Merchants of the Earth are
meant all the busy and deceitful Negotiators and Factors (as the Word is
taken, Hosea 12.7.) for the Papacy; who any ways contributed to her Grandeur,
Idolatry and Superstition; whatsoever might serve to those ends being to be
understood by the Merchandise here mentioned.

13 And Cynamon; and Odours, and Ointments, and Frankincense [i. e. all things
gratifying the Senses; and to be used in Censings and Unctions;] and Wine [for
the Idolatrous Chalice,] and Oil [for Chrism;] and fine Flower [for the
Idolatrous Wafer] and Wheat, and Beasts, and Sheep [i. e. necessary Provision,
and Tithes and Oblations for her Clergy;] and Horses and Chariots [i. e. what
belonged to her outward Pomp and Equipage;] and Slaves [i. e. hired See Dr.
Ham. on the Place.
Servants and Attendants, and whosoever gives them bodily Service,] and 16
Souls of Men [i. e. those who served them with their Wit and Understanding,
their Craft and Cunning; and were Slaves to them in Soul as well as Body.]

13 This is taken from Ezekiel. 27.13. where Slaves, or Bondmen are called Souls
of Men; and hereby may be meant those who served them with their very Souls,
who pawned their Consciences for them, and enslaved their very Souls to them,
serving them with the utmost of their Craft, and intellectual Capacities; in
contradistinction to them who served them with their Bodily Service only,
called Bodies, or Slaves; all sorts of See the Commentators on this Verse.
Servants being comprehended under those Two Words.

Dr. Moor also thinks, that Souls in Purgatory may be here meant; the redeeming
of which is a great part of the Traffic of the Romish Church.

14 And the 17 Fruits that thy Soul lusted after [i. e. the delicious
advantages, and great Harvest of Gain thou have so passionately pursued and
longed for;] are departed from thee; and all things which were dainty [to
taste,] and goodly [to sight; i. e. which might entice and allure, Genesis 3.6.]
are departed from thee, and thou shall find thom no more at all [i. e. all
manner of hopes of thy former advantages, and delights, shall be utterly cast
off for ever.]

17 Or, the Harvest of the Desire of thy Soul.

15 The Merchants [I say] of these things [Goods or Merchandise,] which were
made rich by her [by buying, and selling,] shall stand afar off, for the Fear
of her Torment [which they also expect to feel,] weeping, and wailing.

16 And saying, alas, alas, that great City, that was clothed in fine Linen,
and Purple, and Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls,
[i. e. that Rich, Proud, and Luxurious Church and City, Chap. 17.4. Luke
16.19.] For in one hour, so great Riches is come to naught [i. e. that Rich and
Pompous City and Church, is on a sudden utterly destroyed.]

17 And every 18 Shipmaster, and all the Company in Ships, and Sailers, and as
many as trade by Sea [i. e. the several Superior and Inferior Orders of Men,
who made Proselytes for, and got their Living by the Romish A Church is
frequently likened to a Ship, by the Ecclesiastical Writers, who give a
Rationale of the Names of its several parts.
Church, especially those who brought Riches into her Treasury, from her
Foreign Dominions;] stood afar off.

18 This is taken from Ezekiel. 27.25-36. And by Shipmasters may be meant those
who Imported her Foreign Revenue, and whatsoever contributed to her Greatness,
Idolatry, and Superstition; as by Merchants in the former Verses may be
particularly, and precisely understood, those who Exported such like Traffic;
or traded within the Territories of Rome, the Churches Patrimony.

18 And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, what City is like
unto this great [destroyed] City [i. e. there never was any City and Church
like it, nor any desolation like hers, Ezekiel. 27.32.]

19 And they cast dust on their heads [in token of Sorrow, Ezekiel 27.30.] and
cried, weeping, and wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great City, wherein were
made Rich all that had Ships in the Sea [i. e. all that traded and trafficked
with her, importing what might serve and advantage her, and gaining Proselytes
to her;] by reason of her costliness [i. e. out of her Rich Treasure, and large
Revenues,] for in one hour she is made desolate.

20 [But although they weep and wail, yet] Rejoice over her, [saith the Voice
from Heaven, Verse 4] thou Heaven [i. e. thou Heavenly Sanctuary, and Kingdom
of Christ] and ye Holy Apopostles and Prophets [or Witnesses, who are the
Members of it, Chap. 11.3.] for God has avenged you of her [and therefore it
becomes you to rejoice, to show your approbation of God's Justice* on your
behalf.]

21 And a mighty Angel [or a very powerful Minister of God's Vengeance,] took
up a Stone, like a great 19 Millstone to show the greatness and it
recoverableness of her Downfall, Exodus 15.10. Nehem. 9.11. Jerem. 51.63, 64.]
and cast it into the Sea [in which her Merchants and Ship-masters had traded,]
saying, thus [or after this manner, in token of its Downfall,] with Vioence
[that it may never rise again,] shall that great City Babylon [or Antichristian
Rome,] be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all [i. e. she shall be
utterly destroyed with everlasting Desolations, Jerem. 51.26.]

19 There are several Falls of Babylon in this Prophecy; as,

(1.) When the Ten Kings give their Power no longer to the Beast, but hate the
Whore; whereupon the Whore, that is, the Idolatrous City and Church, must needs
fall, when the Beast, who carries and supports her, has his Power withdrawn
from him; upon which the (...), or the Decem-Principality, falls as in an
Earthquake, Chap. 11. 13.

(2.) It seems to be plain, that the Antichristian City shall be destroyed, and
that by Fire, by the Ten Kings, Chap. 17. 16.

But (3.) Besides these Punishments to be inflicted on the very City of Rome
(which I take to be most particularly meant by Babylon here, and not the whole
Jurisdiction) there seems to be in this place (as. Dr. Theory 3.10.
Burnet has observed) ome intimations of a more dreadful Fate that will attend
it; namely, to be abs^^^t, (...) swallowed up in a Lake Fire and Brimstone,
after the ^^nner of Sodom and Gomorrah, so as totally to disappear; which he
takes to he a punishment distinct from its exterior burning, to come to pass at
the Conflagration, and to be here meant. See more on Chap. 19.

It is remarkable, that Babylon, the Type, was (according to Prophecy, Isa.
13.19-22. Jerem. 50.13, 26.) utterly destroyed, so as never to be inhabited,
and built again. For after it had been taken by Alexander, it by degrees
decayed; first, by reason of the Neighborhood of Seleucia, built by Seleucus
Nicator, on the River Tygris, about 293 years before Christ; then, by
Ctesiphon's becoming the Seat of the Parthian Empire, built by them on the
other side of the River Tigris, to exhaust Seleucia; and by the building of
Bagdad on the same River, by the Saracens, A. D. 766, when it was finished. And
although these Cities, especially Bagdad, are called Babylon, in Authors, yet
it was certainly a distinct City from them; the Ancient Babylon of the Chaldees
being situate on the River Euphrates, about Three Days Journey from Bagdad; and
being now only an heap of Ruins; her Kings having first deserted her (as the
Kings of the Antichristian Babylon will), and then the People; who transplanted
themselves, at different times, to other places; and built a City in Egypt of
the same Name, by the permission of the Ptolemees: from which place Bp. See
Pearson. Oper. Posthum. de Succession. Romans Episc. Dissert. 1.8,
Pearson supposes that the Apostle Peter dated his second Epistle.

22 And the 20 Voice of Harpers, and Musicians, and of Pipers, and Trumpeters,
shall he heard no more at all in thee [i. e. nothing which tends to Pleasure
shall be any more heard in thee;] and no Craftsman, of whatsoever Craft he be,
shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of Millstone [to grind Corn,]
shall be ^eard no more at all in thee [i. e. it shall never be again City, and
Society, which cannot subsist without Necessaries, signified by Trade and
Bread.]

20 Here, and in the following Verses, by several Exaggerations, (according to
the custom of the Prophets, from whom they are taken) is set forth the utter
desolation of the Antichristian City.

23 And the light of a Candle shall shine no more at all in thee [i. e. thou
shall be perpetual Darkness and Desolation, without the least comfort, Jer.
25.10.] and the Voice of the Bridegroom, and of the Bride, shall be heard no
more at all in thee [i. e, thy Polity and Society shall be no more propagated,
but shall utterly cease, together with all the Joy of thy former Solemnities,
and Festivities, Jerem. 7, 34.16, 9. and all this shall come upon thee] for [or
because] thy Merchants [who proselyrted Souls to their destruction, and made
Gain of Godliness,] were the great 21 men of the Earth [i. e. were Lordly,
Worldly, Ambitious, and Sensual; and also because, or] for by thy Sorceries [i.
e. Idolatry, and Superstition,] were all Nations deceived.

21 See on Chap. 6.15. It is an Expression taken from Isa. 23.8. where it
relates to the Merchants of Tire, a Crowning, or Imperial City; and a Type of
the Antichristian City; whose Worldly and Ambitious Clergy are here signified.

24 And in her was [also] found the [guilt of the] blood of Prophets [or
Witnesses.] and of Saints [or Holy Persons,] and of all 22 that were slain upon
the Earth [i. e. she was found guilty of Persecution and Bloodshed, as well as
Idolatry; and all which had been shed during the Times of Christianity, was
laid to her charge; because she was the Offspring of Persecuting Parents, had
approved her Forefathers wicked Deeds, and had filled up the measure of their
iniquities, Jerem. 2.34. Matthew; 23.29- 39.]

22 This is to be understood, in the sense our Savior uses the like Expression
concerning Jerusalem, upon whom he charges all the Blood that had been spilt
from Abel, Matthew. 23.29-39.

See also Zech. 5.5-11. where the Land of Shinar, or Babylon, is represented as
having the House, and Basis, or Foundation of all Wickedness in it: as if she
had been guilty of all manner of sins; and all sinners were to be punished in
the Lake of her Burnings. See Note 19.

CHAP. XIX.
The Text.
1 AND after 1 these things [i.e. the things seen in the precedent Chapter,] I
heard a great Voice of much people in Heaven [i. e. of the innumerable Company
which stands before the Throne, and before the Lamb, Chap. 7.9.] saying, 2
Alleluja, [i. e. Praise ye the Lord,] Salvation [from all evils, especially
those suffered under Antichristianity,] and Glory, and Honor, and Power [be
ascribed] unto the Lord our God [and to him alone; for he is the sole Author of
all good.]

Annotations on CHAP. XIX.
1 From the First to the Tenth Verse, there is a Vision of a Triumphant and
Joyful Appearance in Heaven, for the Judgment upon the great Whore, described
in the Two preceding Chapters; and for the Marriage of the Lamb, and the near
Approach of his Glorious Kingdom.

2 This Word is first used, Psalm 104.35. to express the Psalmist's Joy upon
the prospect of the Accomplishment of his Prediction, or Desire, that sinners
might be consumed out of the Earth. And it is here also made use of
accordingly, upon the Judgment executed upon Antichrist, God's Chief Enemy; and
upon a prospect of the Old Earth's being utterly consumed, together with the
wicked people of it; and a New Earth's succeeding in its place.

2 For true, and righteous are his Judgments [and therefore is he to be
praised;] for he has judged [and punished,] the great whore [or the Idolatrous
City, and Church,] which did corrupt [and destroy, Jerem. 51.25.] the Earth
with her Fornication [or Idolatry,] and has avenged the Blood of her servants
at her hand [i. e. has rewarded her abundantly according to her demerits, for
shedding the blood of his Faithful Witnesses and Servants, chap 18. 20.]

3 And again [or the second time,] they said Alleluja [to testify their Joy,
upon the sight of the smoke, the sign and token of her everlasting burnings.]
And her smoke rose up [or was then in its ascent, and that] for ever, and ever
[i.e. she was punnished with an everlasting Destruction.]

4 And the four and twenty Elders, 3 and the Beasts [i e. the representatives
of the Jewish and Christian Church, chap. 4.] fell down and worshipped God that
sat on the Throne, saying, Amen, Allelujah [i. e. there was a very great
appearance, and manifestation of Christ's glorious Kingdom; and the justice of
God's Judgments was acknowledged with Praise and Thanksgiving.]

3 The Elders of the Church of Israel, are placed first in this Appearance of
the Divine Confessus, or Sanhedrim: from whence it may be concluded, that this
was a Vision of the New Jerusalem-State, in which the Israelites, as the First
Born, are to have the Pre-eminence; who (according to all Prophecy, and Romans
11.) are to be converted, and restored to their own Land; as has been before
observed.

And perhaps for this Reason also is the Hebrew word, Allelujah, here retained.

5 And a voice 4 came out of the [midst of the] Throne [from Christ. See chap.
5, 6. 7, 17.] saying [by way of holy Excitement, and Encouragement,] praise our
God [my God, as well as yours, John 20.17. Rev. 3.12] all ye his Servants, and
ye that fear [and worship] him, both small, and great [i. e. of whatsoever
Nation, Quality and Condition ye are, for God is no respecter of Persons, Psalm
115.11, 13. Acts 2, 5.10, 34, 35. Gal. 3.28.]

4 This Voice seems to be an Heavenly Excitement to all the Saints upon Earth,
Gentiles, and Jews, small and great of all Nations now converted, to join with
the Heavenly Assembly, in rendering Praises to God.

6 And [immediately upon this efficacious Exhortation from out of the Throne,]
I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of mighty Thundrings [i. e. there was a mighty
appearance of Christ's Kingdom, and powerful Communications from the Heavenly
Throne, to all his Servants upon Earth that feared him; and Heaven, and Earth
joined in praises] saying, Alleluja; for the Lord 5 God Omnipotent [now]
reigns [and that Gloriously, Isa. 4.23.]

5 These Words are taken from Isaiah 24.21-23. where it is prophesied, That the
Lord God of Hosts, (or the Lord God Omnipotent) should Reign in Mount Zion, and
in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients (or Elders of the Christian Church), and
that Gloriously; after he had punished, and shut up in Prison the Kings of the
Earth. Which is a clear Proof, that the Reign of God, here mentioned, has a
Respect to the Reign, and Kingdom of Christ, after the punishment of the wicked
Kings, and Nations of the Earth, Chap. 20.

7 Let us be glad, and rejoice [exceedingly,] and give honor [or praise, Luke
17.18.] to him [alone:] For the Marriage 6 of the Lamb [Christ with his Church;
2. Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 5.32.] is [now actually] come, [in, and by the coming of his
Kingdom, Psalm 45. Matt. 22, 11.25, 1-13. Luke 12.36.] and his Wife has made
her self ready [i. e. the new Jerusalem state, is now coming down from God out
of Heaven, Rev. 21.2.]

6 Christ is represented frequently Isa. Chap. 54. and 62. Hos. 2. Psalm 45.
the Book of Canticles, and Bp. Patrick's Preface to it.
in Scripture as a Bridgegroom, and the Church as his Spouse, and Wife; to whom
he is actually married when his Kingdom appears in its Glory; as is plainly
asserted, Chap. 21.2. The Time from his Death and Resurrection, until then,
being rather the Time of betrothing, or Espousals, than of Marriage. Consider
Canticles 3.11. and the Mystical Sense of the Captive Spouse, Deuteronomy. 21.10-14
which may perhaps have some reference to this matter.

8 And to her was granted 7 [by Christ, in virtue of his Death, Ephesians. 5.25, 26.]
that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and white [or bright, and Royal
8 Garments, see on chap. 3.4.] For the fine Linen, is [i. e. signifies,] the 9
Righteousness of [the] Saints, [who now come down from Heaven with Christ in
his Kingdom, chap. 21.2.]

7 Her Nuptial Garments, and Ornaments are here said to be Granted, or Given
unto her; to show, that all the Righteousness we have, is of Free Gift and
Grace; even the preparing, or making our selves ready, by putting on Christ's
Righteousness by Faith; which as subjected in our Faculties, may be called Our
Righteousness; whereby we become perfect through the Comeliness which God puts
upon us, Jerem. 23.6. Ezekiel. 16.14. Zech. 3.4. Romans 3. and 10.3, 4. Phil. 2.12,
13.

8 See Grotius on the place. Christ was now about to present his Church without
spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. and therefore is she clothed in fine white Linen;
of which sort also Royal Robes were wont to be; whereby is signified, that the
Saints were now to Reign with Christ.

9 By (...) is meant in Scripture the Grot. in Matthew. 22.11. Luke 1.6. and
Hammond. on Romans 8.4. Romans 2.26.
Precepts of the Law, and Holy Actions conformable to those Precepts; in which
sense it is here taken: which are said to be given unto the Saints, to show,
that the Justification, and also the inherent Holiness of Saints, is wholly
from Christ our Righteousness, and is given and communicated unto them out of
his Fullness, 1 Cor. 1, 30.15, 10. Gal. 2.20. John 1.16.

Doctor Hammond's Interpretation of these Words, (The Ordinances of the
Sanctuary,) cannot possibly be true; because the Holy Spirit expressly says,
that the fine Linen (which the Priest used when he went into the Sanctuary,
which is here alluded to) is; that is, signifies (which is the constant meaning
of that word in this Prophecy) Righteousness; and therefore the fine Linen it
self cannot be here meant; but the Righteousnesses of Saints, signified by
those Ordinances of the Sanctuary.

9 And he [i. e. an Angel, chap. 22. 8.] says unto me, write [this Truth, and
seal it not, for it will immediately be brought into effect, see on chap. 5,
1.10, 4.] blessed are they which are 10 called unto the Marriage Supper of the
Lamb [which is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 22.2.] and he [i.e. the Angel,]
says unto me, Or, these true words are of, or from God.
these 11 are the true sayings of God [i. e. certain infallible, and most
important Truths; as incredible, and as inconsiderable as they may seem to men]

10 The Righteous Saints, (who are called the Wife of the Lamb, that is the
Church of Saints, collectively taken, in the Two foregoing Verses) come down
with Christ out of Heaven, as is evident from comparing those Verses with
Chapt. 21.2. and therefore by the called in this Verse seems to be meant the
Saints who shall then be alive upon Earth, who are said to have but a part in
the first Resurrection, Chap. 20.6. and are represented here only as Guests
bidden, but not as the Companions, and Followers of the Bridegroom. See on
Chap. 20.6.

11 These being not ordinary Scripture-Truths, but of an high and Prophetic
Nature; therefore a particular Asseveration of the Truth of them is here used;
that they might gain belief the more easily, and to ascertain the Revelation of
them; as the Angel particularly asserts the Truth of Daniel's Visions, Dan. 8,
26.10, 21.11, 2. And this Phrase is afterward twice used upon the same account
in this very Prophecy, Chap. 21, 5.22, 6.

10 And I [being transported 12 with the Vision I had seen of the glorious
state of Christ's Kingdom;] fell [through incogitancy, and surprise,] at his
[i. e. the Angel] Feet to Worship 13 him; And he [i. e. the Angel,] said
[immediately, with 14 great Zeal, and in great haste, to prevent me as soon as
he could;] I am thy fellow 15 Servant [and therefore am not to be Worshipped;
Worship being to be given to Superiors, and not Equals; not to Angels, who are
but Fellow Servan s, and Fellow Creatures with Men; and Ministering Spirits to
the great God;] and [I am the Fellow Servant] of thy Brethren [the Prophets and
Witnesses, chap. 12, 17. 22, 9] that have [received] the Testimony of Jesus [in
his Gospel, chap. 1. 2.] Worship [therefore]* God [and him alone; and not his
Servants, and Instruments, whatsoever their Excellencies, and Perfections may
be; for they are but your Fellow Creatures: And even as to their Ministrations,
and Offices, they are not Superior to you,] for the 16 Testimony of Jesus
[which your Brethren the Witnesses have from the Scriptures concerning things
future, chap. 1. 1, 2, 3.] is [of the same esteem, and value, with immediate
Prophecy it self; because that] the [very] 16 Spirit, [and Life] of Prophesy
[consists in the Communication of it from Christ; and it matters not as to the
value of the Prophecy, or of the Persons who recive it, whether it come from
the Testimony of Christ in Scripture, or from immediate Revelation: And
therefore seeing that thou and thy Brethren here received the Testimony of
Christ; you are equal unto us; although you have it not immediately from
Christ, but by our Ministration; or from his Apostles and Disciples, chap. 1.
1-4. 22, 6.]

12 This Action seems to be chiefly Of this Nature are many Actions of the
Patriarchs thought to be by Justin Martyr, who calls them (...). Dial. cum
Tryphon. page 364, 371.
Symbolical; and is transferred, as in a Figure, to the Apostle; to teach, and
represent unto us, under the Person of the Apostle himself, that the best men
are very apt to he surprised, and drawn by the Example of others, and by false
pretenses, into Creature-Worship; and that such Worship is unlawful, let the
pretenses be never so plausible; and that the only way to avoid all manner of
Idolatry, is to keep to the Precept here given, of Worshipping God alone. See
on Chap. 22.8, 9.

13 As being an Angel employed in a great Ministry, and upon the most pleasing,
and most grateful Message; of showing him the New Jerusalem-State, consisting
of Gentiles and Jews, his Countrymen, Brethren and Kinsmen (for whom the
Apostle Paul could have wished himself accursed from Christ, Romans 9.3.) united
together, and reigning with Christ in his Kingdom.

14 All this seems to be included in the broken, and abrupt form of speech here
made use of by the Angel.

15 Here is declared, that Angels and Men are Fellow Creatures, and shall be
Fellow Servants in the New Jerusalem-State, the World to come; which shall not
be subject to Angels; and in which there shall be an Equality betwixt them, and
Saints, the Members of it; and that they shall join together in the Worship of
Christ. Luke 20.36. Heb. 1, 6.2, 5.

* That is, Jesus the Word of God, who is God, and One with the Father; and is
accordingly worshipped in this Prophecy, Chap. 5. and. 22.3. and in other
places.

16 16 Here the Angel delivers a most excellent Axiom, wherein we are taught,

(1.) That the principal thing to be attended to in Prophecy is, Whether it be
the Testimony of Christ, or no; That is, whether it be delivered in Scripture:
which principal Character, is here called, The Spirit of Prophecy; that is, the
Life and Soul of it; which animates it, and gives it its true Value and Esteem;
in the Sense that Spirit is often opposed to Letter, and Flesh in Scripture, 2
Cor. 3.6.

(2) That the Sense of Prophetical Scriptures, given from a compare of
Scripture with Scripture, is (when it evidently appears to be so) of equal
Credibility with the Prophecy it self; because it is the Spirit, of the Letter
of it.

(3.) That Interpreters of prophetical Scriptures, when their Interpretations
are confirmed, are worthy of a Prophet's Reward; because they have the Spirit
of prophecy, Matthew. 10.41.

11 And I saw Heaven 18 opened [for a glorious appearance of Christ,] and
behold a white Horse [the Emblem of Christ's Royalty and Glory, from his
Resurrection, to his second coming in his Kingdom, chap. 6. 2.] and he that
sat upon him [i. e. Christ,] was called faithful 18 and true [to his Promises,
and his Friends,] and in Righteousness [i. e. Truth, and Peace] he does Judge 19
[his People, Psalm. 96.10, 13. Is. 11.1-9.32, 16.] and make 19 War [with his
Enemies, Is. 11.4.]

17 To show that the Heavens shall open, when the King of Glory appears, Psalm
24.7-10. Matthew. 24.30.

And this Appearance (which is the second Vision in this Chapter) is that of
Christ's coming in his Kingdom to Judgment; and is the same with that, Chap.
14.14. as will plainly appear to any who considers the Circumstances, and
Description of both.

18 He is said to be Faithful and True; because of his appearing in his
Kingdom, according to his promise; which Atheists, Antiscripturists, and those
of the Antichristian Party, had called in question; still asking, with those
Scoffers (2 Pet. 3.) where is the promise of his coming?

19 19 Hence it appears that the great Battle of Armageddon, is by way of
Judgment; wherein the Enemies of Christ, and of his Kingdom, are represented as
Ezekiel. 32.27. and Chap. 38. Rev. 20.
Warriors in Arms; who when conquered, were wont, as Captives of War, to be
judged by, and receive Sentence from the Conqueror, as appears from Jerem.
52.9.

12 His Eyes were as a flame of 20 Fire [penetrating and judging of all things,
after a quick and terrible manner, chap. 1.14. 2, 18.] and on his head were
many 21 Crowns [to denote the amplitude of his Dominions, his many Conquests,
and the several Exercises of his Regal Office, especially now in his glorious
Monarchy, and Kingdom, Psalm. 72 8-20. Rev. 14.14.] and he had a Name 22 written
that no man knew but he himself [i. e. his Essence, and Nature as God
Incarnate; and his Will, Counsels, Judgments, and Rewards, c uld not be fully
known, nor comprehended by any Creature; and not at all after a saving manner,
but by them to whom he should reveal them, Judge. 13.18. Job 11.7, 8. Psalm
36.6. Matthew. 11.27. Romans 11.33, 34. 1 Cor. 2.6.-16. 1 John 3.2.]

20 Christ is to be revealed in flaming These. 1, 8.2, 8.
fire, when he comes to Judgment in his Kingdom; and therefore his Eyes are
represented as a flame of fire, to signify his Discerning Judgment, and
All-seeing Wisdom; which he will then most peculiarly manifest.

21 Christ had a Kingdom from his very Resurrection; and has had all along many
Conquests over his Enemies in the Administration of it; and is therefore very
fitly represented with many Crowns; as David, a Type of Christ, put on his Head
the Crowns of the several Kings conquered by him, 2 Samuel 12.30. 1 Chronicles. 20.2.
See also 1 Maccab. 11.13. He has also many Crowns, because of his Kingdom, as
the Eternal Word, and as Mediator; which he has administered under the Father
ever since his Resurrection, represented by the first Seal; and as he now
enters upon the Administration of his Glorious Kingdom; as he is also King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, he has all the Crowns of the Kingdoms of the Earth
belonging unto him; and now, as it were, put upon his Head.

22 His Name, Emmanuel, God made Flesh, or God in our Nature, seems to be here
more particularly understood; as being peculiar to him, as distinct from the
Father, and the Spirit, Judge. 13.18. Isa. 9.6. Prove. 30.4.

13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in [the] Blood [of his Enemies,
Psalm. 68.23. Is. 63.1-6.] and his Name is called [or, he is,] the Word 23 of
God, [John 1.1]

23 That is, the Eternal Word of God; by whom God spoke, when he made the
World; and spoke also to our Forefathers under the Old Testament, and unto us
in the Gospel. And he may also be called, The Word, because in him the whole
Word of God, Prophecies and Promises, are Yea and Amen; that is, constant, and
not changeable, punctually fullfilled, unalterably confirmed, and ratified, 2
Cor. 1.19, 20. See Grot. on Joh. 1.1. Bishop Pearson on the second Article of
the Creed; and Dr. Bull's Defensio Fidei Nicaenae.

14 And the Armies which were in Heaven [i. e. Christ's mighty Angels, and the
Saints which shall accompany them, when he comes to Judgment in his Kingdom,
Dan. 4 35. Zech. 14.5. Matthew. 22.7. 1 These. 4.14. 1 Cor. 15. Phil. 3.29. 2
These. 1.7. Jude 14.15. See the Notes on Rev. 14:14, 15. and chap. 20. and on
verse 11. of this Chapter] followed him upon white 24 Horses [as Companions,
and Partakers with Christ in his Glory, and his Kingdom;] clothed in fine 25
Linen, white and clean [i. e. they were Justified and Sanctified by the
Righteousness; and Holiness of Christ imputed unto them. See on verse 8.]

24 This Battle is a Judgment, as appears from Verse 15. So that these Armies
of Heaven must be the Angels and the Saints who shall come with Christ in
Judgment to his Kingdom, with glorified Bodies; as the Scriptures quoted in the
Paraphrase, do plainly declare: and they are represented as on White Horses, to
show the Glory they shall appear in, and their joint Rule and Reign with
Christ; it being the custom for Kings Favorites, Nobles and Rulers, to be clad
in White Garments, and ride on White Beasts; as has been already observed on
Rev. 3, 4, 18.6, 2.

25 These Heavenly Armies appear in the same Habit, with the Spouse, at the
Eighth Verse; whence it follows, that they are Saints, who differ not from the
Spouse, which is the Church, but as the Members do from the Body, the whole
from the parts united.

But Christ only, and not the Saints, appears in a Vesture dipped in Blood; to
show, that this Victory over Antichrist, and the wicked world, was wholly owing
to his Blood; according to Isaiah 63.1-7. and that the Saints Robes were
washed, and made white in his Blood alone.

15 And out of his Mouth goes a sharp Sword [of Sentence, and Condemnation,
proceeding out of it, verse 21] that with it he should smite [all] the [Wicked]
Nations of the Earth, and [after he has smitten them,] he shall rule them with
a rod of Iron [during the continuance of his Glorious Kingdom, Psalm 2. Rev.
2.27. See Rev. 20.] and he treads [and that alone, Isa. 63.1-6.] the
Winepress 26 of the feirceness, and wrath of Almighty God [i. e. the wicked of
the Earth were punished by him with exquisite Torments]

26 From hence it appears, that this Judgment and Victory, is contemporary with
Chapter 14. 19, 20. See also on Chapter 20.

16 And he has on his [Kingly, and Glorious 27] Vesture, [ Is. 63.1.] and on
his Thigh [upon which the Sword of his Fury was also girt, Psalm 45.3. Is. 27,
1.66, 16. Ezekiel. 38.18, 21] a Name Written [legibly, and now seen, and acknowled
by all;] King of Kings, and Lord of Lords [i. e. the only Supreme, Universal
Monarch, Dan. 2.44, 45, 47. 1 Timothy 6.15. Rev. 17.14.]

27 Here Christ is represented as taking possession of his glorious Kingdom,
clad in Imperial, Glorious Apparel; and girt with a Kingly Sword, according to
the Description of his going forth to his Kingdom in his Might, Glory, and
Majesty, Psalm 45.

It is an ingenious conjecture of those who think, that as his former Name (
Verse 12, 13.) denotes his Divinity; so does this denote his Kingdom, as the
Son of Man: Whereupon he wears a Title on his Vesture, as Kings are wont to do
their Regal Cognizances; by which they are distinguished, and made known: and
also on his Thigh; to signify, that he came from the Loins, or Thighs of
Abraham, and David (whose Son he was, according to the Flesh, Matthew. 1.1. Romans
1.3.) to whose Seed, which is Christ, an universal Kingdom was promised.
Whereupon also they were wont to put their Hands under the Thighs of them to
whom they swore Fidelity and Subjection; to show, that Christ, the Blessed
Seed, and Universal Monarch, was to come from the Thigh, or Loins of Abraham,
Genesis 24, 2.46, 26.47, 29. 1 Chronicles. 29.24. Ezekiel. 17.18.

17 And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun [to show the Glory of Christ the
King of Kings and the Sun of Righteousness now c^mforting his Servants, and
treading down his Enemies, Malach. 4.2, 3 Rev. 1.16.8, 12 10, 1.12, 1.] and he
cried with a oud voice, saying, to all the Fowls 28 that fly in the midst of
Heaven, come and gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great God
[i e. come, and partake of, and c lebrate this his great Victory, Is 34.6.
Jerem. 12.9. Ezekiel. 39.17, 19. Zeph. 1.7.]

28 In this Verse begins the Third Vision of this Chapter; wherein is described
the Event and Success of the Battle of Armageddon, by a Feast for Fowls upon
the Carcasses of the slain; to which they are, as it were, invited, by a
Poetical Allocution, made use of 1 Samuel 17.46. Jerem. 12.9. and Ezekiel. 39.17-20.
the place here alluded to; from whence it is evident, that the Battle and
Success mentioned in this place, has a reference to Gog, the Subject of those
Visions of the Prophet Ezekiel. Now, although by Fowl are meant in the Prophet,
the Damned Spirits, who seize on lost Mankind, as Ravenous Birds on their Prey;
yet because they are discomfited in this Battle, and are represented as bound
in it, they cannot be understood in this place; which has a reference rather to
the Saints (those Armies of Heaven on white Horses) who come with Christ in the
Air at this Day of Judgment, typified by a Battle of Decision; and are, as it
were, invited to a Feast upon a sacrifice of the slain (as it is called Ezekiel
39.17-21.) according to the Notions and Customs of the Jews, who were wont to
Dr. Cudworth's true Notion of the Lord's Supper.
Feast upon Sacrifices; and that after a Victory, and sometimes upon the Spoils
taken in War; as Abraham was f^asted by Melchizedeck; and his Soldiers upon the
Spoils taken from the wicked Kings, a Type of the Kings here vanquished, Genesis
14. And accordingly the Saints are here invited to an Eucharistical Feast, for
the slaughter of Christ's Enemies; who are frequently in Scripture said to See
Rev. 18.20. Psalm 58.10. Psalm 106. and 149.
rejoice; not in the misery, but in the righteous Judgments of Christ upon the
wicked; in regard of which Righteousness they are comforted (as the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks, Chap. 14.22, 23.) concerning the Evil which God brings upon the
wicked, for their wicked ways and doings.

18 That ye may Eat the Flesh of [the] Kings [of the Earth,] and the Flesh of
Captains, and the Flesh of Mighty Men [or Soldiers, Jerem. 46 5.] and the Flesh
of Horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all Men, booth free
and bond, both small and great, [i. e. that ye might rejoice for the Judgments
of God upon all his Enemies whatsoever, Psalm 110. and 149. Rev. 18.20. Ezekiel.
39.18-21.]

19 And I saw the Beast [i. e. the Papacy and its Hierarchy;] and the Kings of
the Earth, and their Armies [i. e. all the wicked Potentates of the Earth, and
their followers, and adherents;] gathered together to make War [i. e. united in
a Diabolical Conspiracy, chap. 16.13, 14, 16.] against him that sat on the
[white] Horse [i. e. Christ, verse 11.] against his Army [the Saints, verse 14]

20 And the Beast was taken [captive, Rev. 13.10] and with him the false
Prophet [i. e. the other Beast,] that wrought Miracles before him, with which
he deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that
Worshipped his Image [i. e. the adherents of Antichrist, chap. 13.] these 29
both were cast 30 alive into a lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone [i. e. were
punished after a most exemplary manner, and with the utmost severity.]

29 The Beast, and the False Prophet, (as being the Chief in the Conspiracy
against Christ's Kingdom) are first taken, and are condemned to the Lake, even
before the Devil, and the wicked Nations; who found them there, when they were
cast into it, Rev. 20.10-15.

30 This Phrase shows, (1.) That their Punishment will be very severe, and very
exemplary, proceeding from the utmost Wrath, and Indignation of God, expressed
by Fire and Brimstone.

(2.) That it was their Final and Eternal Condemnation; as being the very same
punishment, to which all the wicked are at last consigned at the final
consummation of all things, Chap. 20. 10-15. So that hereby is signified, the
Eminency and Transcendency of their punishment, and the utter and total
Abolition of that Antichristian State; which, as being the base, and
Hypocritical Counterfeit of Christianity; is most peculiarly abhorred by God;
and is accordingly consumed and abolished, so as never to appear again,
immediately at the very First Approach, or Dawning of Christ's Kingdom; as the
shadows fly away when the Day breaks; and the Chaff is suddenly driven away
with the wind, Psalm 1.4. Hos. 6, 4.13, 3. Canticl. 2.17.2 These. 2.8.

21 And the 31 Remnant [i. e. the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies, verse
18, 19] were slain 32 with the Sword of him that sat upon the [white] Horse
[verse 11.] which Sword proceeded out of his Mouth [i. e. they were Condemned
by the Light, Evidence and Convictions of Christ's Gospel, according to which
God will then judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.16.] and all the
Fowls were filled with their Flesh [i. e. all the Saints were fully satisfied
with the Justice of their Condemnation, and the high Praises of God were in
their Mouths for it, Psalm 149 5.6]

31 The Beast, and False Prophet, the Chief Enemies of Christ's Kingdom, are
first sentenced, and are cast into the Lake, at the first Appearance of Christ,
to which punishment also all their Adherents are expressly adjudged, Rev.
14.9-11. although not at the same time (as seems to appear from their
bewailing the Ruin of Babylon afterward, Chap. 18.) or not to the same
degrees of it: Whereupon it follows; that if under the Beast, and the False
Prophet, their Armies and Adherents are to be comprehended, who must needs be
vanquished with their Cheiftains; then by the Kings, and their Armies, must be
meant all the other wicked of the Earth, besides the Antichristian Counterfeit;
who are vanquished and condemned by Christ, and his Armies. And although the
Devil and his Angels, and Armies, are not here mentioned, yet it is evident
from Chap. 20.2. that the Dragon was laid hold on, or taken Captive; which
Phrase respects the Issue of a Battle, and must consequently relate to this at
Armageddon. But because those Enemies are Invisible Instruments, and acted in,
and by the others; therefore are they not particularly named here, but only
their Instruments and Agents, who openly appeared, and resisted Christ's
Kingdom.

32 These are not cast alive into the Lake, because they are to appear again
after the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; but are said only to be slain by
the Brightness, Efficacy and Power of Christ's Kingdom: whereby is meant a
Spiritual Slaughter, accompanied with Bodily Torments, proceeding from Anguish
of Mind; in the sense of the Psalmist, Psalm. 59.11, 13.104, 35. concerning
which see more on the following Chapter.

Here it may be noted, That there are Three Enemies of Christ to be vanquished
by his coming; which may also be the Three Parts of the great City:

(1.) The Dragon, or Satan and his Angels; by whose Diabolical Spirit all the
Enemies of Christ's Kingdom were influenced; who are bound and sealed up during
the Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; and are afterward cast into the Lake,
Chap. 20.2, 3, 10.

(2.) The Kings of the Earth, and their Armies; i. e. those who had a bare
Enmity and Hostility against Christ's Kingdom, and not under the pretense of
advancing it; who are slain at this Battle, and then make Second Assault upon
Christ's Kingdom; in which they are overcome, and at last utterly abolished, and
cast into the Lake, Chap. 20.9, 10.

(3.) Antichristianism; consisting of Beastianism, and False Prophetism: which
State is utterly abolished by the first Appearance of Christ; and all its
Votaries, and impenitent Adherents, lie under the severe Judgments of God,
during the whole time of Christ's Glorious Kingdom; being never able to make
any the least opposition against it.

CHAP. XX.
The Text.
1 AND I saw an Angel come down from heaven [i. e. a very particular and
peculiar Ministry of Angels, deputed by God for this purpose,] having the Key
of the bottomless pit [i. e. a Power to open and shut the Pit of Hell, Luke
8.31. Rev. 1, 18.9, 1.] and a great chain in his hand [i. e. Powerful means to
restrain the Evil Spirits, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6]

2 And he laid 1 hold on [i. e. seized upon, and secured, Matthew. 14.3.] the
Dragon, that Old Serpent, which is the 2 Devil, and Satan [Gen. 3. Rev. 12.9.]
and bound him [i. e. restrained him from 3 deceiving the Nations] a thousand
years [i. e. during the Reign of Christ. See on Verse 4.]

Annotations on CHAP. XX.
1 An Account having been given in the former Chapter, how Two parts of the
great City, or Two of the Three Enemies of Christ had been disposed of; the
Holy Spirit does in this Chapter, from Verse 1 to 4. particularly describe the
Event of that Battle, with reference to Satan, or the Devil and his Angels, the
Third Enemy, or Third part of the Great City, or Idolatrous and Wicked Polity
of the Kingdom of Darkness.

2 (...), Grot. in Marc. 3.26.
Vniversitas Satanica, the Devil and all his Evil Angels; called The Dragon, as
he presided over, and influenced the Pagan Empire and Emperors, and lived in
the Imperial Supremacy of the Antichristian King, Chap. 13.4: and That Old
Serpent, in respect of his Deceiving our First Parents in Paradise, in that
Shape; and his working in and by Antichrist, with all lying Wonders, and
deceivableness of Unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.9, 10. Rev. 12.3, 14: and the
Devil, and Satan, as he is the Accuser and Adversary of Mankind, Rev. 12.9.
Under whom are comprehended the several Sorts and Orders of Wicked Spirits,
(mentioned Ephesians. 2, 2.6, 12.) acting as one Power, under one Prince and Chief of
them; who are here restrained from all manner of Power whatsoever, either from
themselves, or as influencing others, during the glorious Kingdom of Christ.

3 As he had done our first Parents in the first Paradise; so that there is no
fear of being driven out of this New Paradise, or of being deceived by
Diabolical Temptations in it: it being very Burnet's Theor. 4.2.
probable that the New Earth will be Paradisiacal.

3 And he 4 cast him into the bottomless pit [which is also a place of Torment,
Matthew. 8.28, 29. Luke 8.31.] and 4 shut him up, and set a 4 Seal upon him [i.
e. closely confined him, after the most secure manner,] that he should deceive
the Nations [Verse 8.] no more [as he had hitherto done, by the Lie of
Idolatry, and other deceitful Wickednesses and Temptations;] till the thousand
Years [of Christ's Reign,] should be fullfilled, [or ended:] and after that, he
must [according to the secret Counsel, and Will of God,] be loosed [from this
Restraint,] for a 5 little season.

4 4 4 By these several Expressions is intimated, that the Devil should be
confined after the closest manner, and restrained from all sorts of Mischief:
but because he was to be let loose after the thousand years; therefore he is
said to be only shut up in the bottomless pit; and is not cast into the Lake
until afterward, when he is made utterly incapable of any manner of power, or
Action against God and his Kingdom, for the least season, and that to all
Eternity.

And here end the first Triumphs, and Conquests of Christ in his Kingdom; which
begins with the reducing of his Enemies, viz. Antichrist, the Wicked Nations,
and the Devil, so as to make them his Footstool; whom his Father had been
subduing for him, from his Ascension; as is evident from Psalm 110.1. 1 Cor.
15.25.

5 The duration of this Season is no where determined in Scripture, and
therefore cannot be positively assigned: only if the Tradition of the seven
Thousand Years duration of the World, prove true; it must comprehend that space
of Time which will be found wanting to complete the 7000 Years, after the
Expiration of the 1000 Years of Christ's Kingdom.

4 And I saw 6 Thrones [i. e. solemn and glorious pre^arations for Rule and
Judgment, Dan. 7.9] and 7 they [i. e. the Saints of the most High, who come
with Christ, Chap. 19.14. Dan. 7.13, 18, 21, 22, 26, 27. Zech. 14.5. 1 These.
4.14.] sat 8 upon them [i. e. were invested in a Regal and a Judicial Office,]
and 9 Judgment [i. e. Power of Governing, Sentencing, and Punishing,] was given
unto them [who sat on the Throne, by God, and Christ, Dan. 7.22, 27.] and I saw
the [separate] 10 souls of them [or of the Persons,] that we e beheaded for the
Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God [i. e. the Souls of the Martyrs under
the Pagan Emperor of Rome, Rev 6.9, 10 11.] and 11 [I saw also the 12 Souls of
them] which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had
received his Mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands [i. e. the Faithful
Witnesses killed by Antichrist, Chap. 6, 11. 11, 7. 13, 15, 16.] and they [i.
e. all these Saints and Martyrs,] 13 lived [again, in Spiritual and Heavenly
Bodies, 1 Cor. 15 42-50.] and 14 reigned with 15 Christ a 16 thousand Years.]

6 This Representation is taken from Dan. 7.9. in allusion to the Mede's Works,
p. 762. Grot. in Matthew. 19.28.
Thrones, or Seats of the Jewish Consistory; or rather (in the Opinion of
Mede's Works, p. 762. Grot. in Matthew. 19.28.
Grotius) to the ancient Custom of the Jews, amongst whom the Princes of the
Tribes were wont to sit with the King, ih public Assemblies. And accordingly,
This Court of Christ's Kingdom, and Grand Assizes of the Day of Judgment, is
represented as having many Thrones; as,

(1.) The Throne of God the Father, Dan. 7.9.

(2.) The Throne of Christ, in which he was enstated, ( Dan. 7.13, 14) upon the
Judgment passed upon Ant^ehrist; to show, that Christ's Glorious Kingdom begins
not until after that Judgment and Destruction; as in this Prophecy the Thousand
Years do not enter until after the Battle of Decision; which is also called a
Judgment. Chap. 19.

(3.) Many Thrones of Saints, Dan. 7.10, 18, 22, 26. where the Saints are
called The Judgment; and are said to he set in Judgment; and many Thrones to be
set down, pitched, or erected, as the Word ought to be translated at the 9th
Verse; which Thrones do not belong to the Angels; who are not represented as
sitting, but standing, as Ministering and Assisting Spirits, 1 Kings 22.19. Is.
6.1. Dan. 7.10.

7 By a diligent compare of Dan. 7.13, 18, etc. with Rev. 19.14, 17. and this
Verse; it will plainly appear, that the Saints, those Armies of Heaven, who
come with Christ in the Clouds to Judgment, are the They here referred to; the
very They (Dan. 7.13. where the like Phrase is used) who come with the Son of
Man upon the Clouds of Heaven; to whom Thrones, a Kingdom, and a Judicatory are
ascribed in Matthew. 19.28. Luke 22.30. 1 Cor. 6.1-4.
Scripture, over the Wicked Angels, and the World; and who have here Thrones
given them, as a Reward for their Attendance upon Christ in the foregoing
Battle; to whom alone yet the Victory is ascribed, Chap. 19.21.

8 To sit upon a Throne, denotes in Scripture, a continuance in an undisturbed
possession of Sovereignty and Dominion, with a Right of Judicature; as
Expositors of the Creed have shown, on the Article concerning Christ's sitting
on the Right Hand of the Father.

9 This Word signifies Rule and Government, in Scripture; as well as a Judicial
Power, Genesis 15, 14.19, 9.1 Sam. 4.18. Psalm 72.1, 2.

10 From this place it may be observed,

(1.) That these were the Souls of the very Martyrs whom he had seen before
under the Altar, Chap. 6.9-11. the same Expressions being used in both places.

(2.) That they were particularly the Martyrs under the pagan Roman Emperors;
because they are said to have been beheaded; which was a Grot. in locum.
Roman Punishment.

(3.) That the Soul is Immortal, and sleeps not in its separate State; because
they cry with a loud Voice, have Robes given unto them, and are admonished to
rest for a little season, 6.9-11.

11 These are distinguished from the former, by the interposition of (...), or
And: and are evidently (as appears from comparing this place with Rev. 6.11.)
the Witnesses martyred under the Reign of the Beast, or Antichrist; who were to
fill up, or complete the Number of Martyrs; and then to Live and Reign together
with the Martyrs under the Pagan Emperors.

12 Pareus supposes an Ellipsis in this place; which may be thus supplied,
(...), etc. although separate Souls are often spoken of in Scripture in the
Masculine Gender, Luke 16.19-31.

13 They lived; that is, in their Persons, in Bodies, suited to the State of
the Blessed Milennium; for this cannot refer to the Souls here-mentioned, which
lived before; as has been already observed. See also the Notes on the
following Verse.

14 This (as well as almost all the other Expressions in the New Testament,
concerning the Great Day of Judgment) is taken chiefly from Daniel; who in the
second and seventh Chapters of his Prophecy, foretells, that during the Times
of the Fourth Kingdom (evidently proved by several Mede 's Works, page 711. Dr.
Moor'^ S^^ps. Proph 2.13. Dr, Gressener s Demonstr. B. 2. 6-8. and the Append.
Authors to be the Roman) the God of Heaven should set up a Kingdom, which from
small beginnings, or an Infant-State (likned by Daniel to a Mr. Mede 713, 743,
etc.
Stone) should by a Divine and Supernatural Power, increase so far, that at
last, in the Days of the Ten Kings (who are the Ten Toes of the Feet of the
Great Image, Dan. 2.43, 44.) it should become a Mountain, filling the whole
Earth; that is, a Universal, and an Everlasting Kingdom, after it had put an
end to all other Kingdoms, particularly that of Antichrist; upon whose
destruction this Glorious Kingdom, or Glorious State of Christ's Kingdom, is to
begin. And that there shall be a glorious state of Christ's Church, such as has
not hitherto been, is a Truth so apparent in Scripture, that those Pocock on
Micah, page 24, 29, 32, 42.
who are most wary of interpreting the Scriptures to this Sense, lest thereby
any advantage might be given to the Jews, cannot but confess, that many
Passages of the Prophets which relate to this State, are not as yet clearly,
nor fully completed; but that they are still in fulfilling, and more may be
expected in the latter times; which Dr. Pocock extends to the second Coming of
Christ. And although we ought to be cautious, how we administer occasion of
hardening the Jews in their Infidelity, by forcing Texts of Scripture to this
Sense, which may be meant concerning the first Coming of Christ; yet the want
of due distinguishing betwixt his first Coming in a way of Humiliation, and
Sufferings; and his second Coming in Glory, and that to erect a Kingdom upon
Earth, and under the Heaven (as is expressly affirmed Dan. 7.27. Rev. 5.10.) in
a State of perfect Righteousness, Peace and Prosperity; has been no mean cause
of Offense to the Jews; and is the occasion of many Errors amongst Christians.
But that there shall be such a Kingdom of Christ, (which may be called his
Mediatory Kingdom) distinct from the Kingdom of Eternity, of which the Man
Christ Jesus is the Eternal King, as he is united to the Eternal Word; and from
his Spiritual and Evangelical Kingdom; will appear evident from these following
Considerations:

(1.) Because the many Psalm 2.8. Isa. 2.2-4. Micah 4.1. Mr. Mede Disc. 25. 29.
36.
Prophecies, foretelling a Glorious, Constant, and uninterrupted Visibility,
and Universality of Christ's Church, not yet accomplished, do require such a
Future State. For the Church has been seldom gloriously visible, never
constantly, and uninterruptedly so: neither has it been at any time in
possession of much above the sixth part of the known World; so far has it
fallen short of the Universality prophesied of in Scripture.

(2.) Many Isa, 11.6-9.65.17-25. Ezekiel. 48.35. Micah 4.3. Justin. Mart. Dial,
cum Tryphon. Dr. Burnet's Theor, 4.5, 7. Jurieu's accomplishm. of prophec. Tom.
2. Chap. 18, 24. Grot. de Verit. Relig. Christ. 5.18. Quaedam vero etiam
definite and sine condition promissa, si impleta nondum sunt, adhuc possunt
expectari. Constat enim, etiam apud Judaeos Tempus, sive Regnum Messiae* durare
ad finem seculorum.
Prophecies relating to the Temporal and Spiritual Happiness of Christ's Church,
are not yet at all fulfilled, or only in part; and therefore there must be some
Future State, in which they are to be accomplished. Such as those which foretell
its perfect peace, prosperity, holiness, and the divine presence resting and
remaining in it; which can by no Art be so interpreted, as to make out that
they are already fulfilled.

(3.) Many of the Jurieu T. 3. Chapter 19.
Types of the Old Testament, prefigure and signify such a State of Christ's
Church and Kingdom: such as Paradise, the New World after the Flood, the coming
of the Israelites into Canaan, out of Egypt, the Type of the Antichristian
Apostasy; their Return from their Captivity in Babylon, into a peaceable
possession of their Land; the Kingdom of 2 Samuel 7.8-29. and 23.3-8. See the
Notes on Chap. 14.1.
David, in which he was established upon his Conquest over the Heathens, and
not until after many Troubles and Distresses; wherein it was an Eminent Type of
Christ's Kingdom, as it proceeded from weak, small and troublesome beginnings,
to strength, and a lasting Peace, after great Victories over the Sons of
Belial, and the Heathen Nations: This Kingdom is also Typified by Psalm 72.
Solomon's Kingdom, and his Marriage, in the Book of Canticles; and most
eminently by the Sea on Chap. 1.4. and what follows in the next Note.
Sabbatism, or Rest of God, in the seventh day, after six, for finishing his
Works; wherein the seventh Thousand Year designed for Christ's Kingdom, is
evidently prefigured: for Christ's Kingdom being the main design of God, to be
accomplished, in order to his Eternal Kingdom, and the chief means conducing to
it; was the primary thing in his intention from the beginning, and was not only
foretold by all the Prophets, but was prefigured by the Ezekiel. Chap. 40, etc.
Heb. 8, 5.9, 9, 10.10. 1.
Types, which shall be perfectly, and fully completed in that State.

(4.) Dan. Chapters 2, and 7. 2 These. 2.8. Burnet 's Theory B. 4. 8.
Antichrist is not yet destroyed; neither are the Isa. 11. and 14.1, 2.25,
8.56, 8. Chap. 60.65, 17-25. Ezekiel. 28.24-26.36, 25-38.37, 15-28, Hos. 3.4, 5.
and Dr. Pocock on the place, page 162. Zech. 9, 9-17.10, 5-12. and Chapters 12,
13, 14. Amos 9.11-15. Mic. 2.12, 13. Romans 11.2 Cor. 3.16. Grot. in Luc. 21.24.
Mr. Mede Ep. 17. and page 891, Mons. Jurieu's accomplishm. of prophec. Tom. 2,
Chap. 17.
Jews called, nor is the Isa. 11. and 14.1, 2.25, 8.56, 8. Chap. 60.65, 17-25.
Ezekiel. 28.24-26.36, 25-38.37, 15-28, Hos. 3.4, 5. and Dr. Pocock on the place,
page 162. Zech. 9, 9-17.10, 5-12. and Chapters 12, 13, 14. Amos 9.11-15. Mic.
2.12, 13. Romans 11.2 Cor. 3.16. Grot. in Luc. 21.24. Mr. Mede Ep. 17. and page
891, Mons. Jurieu's accomplishm. of prophec. Tom. 2, Chap. 17.
fullness of the Gentiles as yet come in; nor are Psalm 110.1 Cor. 15.24-29.
Heb. 2.5-9.
all things as yet subdued unto Christ; all which yet, according to plain
Scripture, are to come to pass, some of them, before Christ's Kingdom, others
before it be delivered up to the Father; whence it is evident, that this
Kingdom is not yet come, much less already past, as some imagine.

(5.) Christ is not yet come in his Glory, and therefore his Kingdom is not yet
come: For the Compare Isa. 53. and 63. with many other places of Scripture: For
there are twenty Texts which speak of his Second Coming to Glory, for one which
speaks of his First Coming. See Mons. Jurieu. and Dr. Burnet's Theory.
Scriptures evidently distinguish betwixt Two Comings of Christ; the one in a
State of Humiliation already past, the other in a State of Glory; and most
commonly Matthew. 16, 28.25.31. Luke 19, 13, 15.23, 42. 2 Timothy 4.1.
join his Second Coming and his Kingdom together.

(6.) The Scriptures join the Resurrection, and the Coming and Kingdom of
Christ together. Whence it is evident, that this Kingdom is not come; because
the general Resurrection is not past. For thus, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. Christ's
coming plainly refers to his coming to the Kingdom, at the General
Resurrection; he having all the while from his Ascension, sat at the Right Hand
of the Father, in the patient Expectation of this his Glorious Kingdom, Psalm
110.1. Heb. 10.12. Rev. 1.9.

(7.) There must be such a State, in which all things, even the inanimate parts
of the Creation, are to be restored to their pure, primitive State; that
Christ's Redemption might be perfect and complete: For Christ died, and made an
Atonement and Reconciliation by his Blood, that he might carry on the great
work of Redemption, through the several Ages of the World, to its full
perfection. Now, that Romans 8.19-24. 1 Cor. 23, 21, 22.
Redemption consisting in restoring whatsoever the First Adam lost, there must
be a Restitution of the whole Creation to its first State; or else Christ's
Redemption will not be perfect. But of this more hereafter.

(8.) If the General Resurrection, and the Kingdom of Christ are the same; then
the Arguments from the Justice, and Wisdom of God, and all the other general
Topics which are commonly brought for the proof of the former, will conclude
as strongly for the latter: to which may be added, that it is agreeable to the
Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God, that he should reserve some Age of the
World for his own entire Reign in Righteousness, who had permitted the Devil,
and Antichrist, to domineer in so many Ages of it; and that his Son should be
visibly glorified in the sight of that very Earth, where he had been humbled,
even to the Death of the Cross; and the last Act, or Period of the Economy of
his Exaltation, should be accompanied with the greatest Glory and Majesty; as
the last Act of his Humiliation, was attended with the greatest Misery and
Reproach: and that his Saints, who had undergone a long state of Misery and
Persecution, should inherit Romans 8.19-24. 1 Cor. 23, 21, 22.
the Earth in prosperity, according to the promises of God; and the Wicked
should suffer in a Visible State of Shame and Ignominy; and that for some long
space of time, and not only for a single Day of Judgment; that Men might be
deterred from sinning here, by the length of the punishment, and Burnet's
Theor. 4.5.
by the dishonor of it, which shall be notorious to the whole Creation;
whereas the Eternal State of the Damned, is an hidden State; besides which,
according to the general current of Scripture, there must be a Visible
Appearance of the Wicked, and the Good, at the general Retribution; when God
will display to the whole World the Reasons and Grounds of his procedures, and
the whole Scene and Contexture of his Providence; that his Wisdom, Justice and
Goodness toward his Creatures might be seen, acknowledged, and admired by all
of them; to which the continuance of Mankind, under a Visible State for some
considerable time, according to their Demerits, in the Reverse of what they
enjoyed here: will very much contribute. Psalm 73. Isa. 65.13, 25. Dan. 12.1,
2. Phil. 2.9-11.

(9.) It is agreeable See Dr. Home 's Resurrection revealed, lib, 3. 5.
to the wonted procedures of Almighty God, that there should be a state of
prosperity to his Church upon Earth. For he has generally in all Ages punished
on Earth, feirce Tyrants, and Persecutors of his Church; and given to it a
general Rest, after long, and tedious Troubles, Afflictions and Persecutions;
and that most commonly in the Churches Extremity, whiCh is God's Opportunity:
and accordingly, we may justly expect such a State, upon the Destruction of
Antichrist; and that his Fall is not far off, because the two special
Witness-Churches of France and Savoy, have been reduced to the utmost Extremity.

(10.) The Economy, Dispensation, or Fatherly Administration af this Kingdom,
which is God's Household, is placed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.10. in the Fullness
of Times; that is, of All Time; which not being as yet expired, we may thence
conclude, that this Kingdom is not yet come. For from the Consideration of Mark
1.15. Gal. 4.4, Ephesians. 1.10. and Isaiah 2.2. it seems there were as if a Line
of Time in Scripture, commencing from Christ's First Coming, called the
Fullness of Time; and ending in his second Coming, called, the Fullness of
Times, or of all such Times.

(11.) The Monarchick See Dr. Beverley's Kingdom of Jesus Christ entering its
Succession; and Dan. 2, and 7.
Image in Daniel, is not yet broken to pieces, but continues in its Feet, and
Ten Toes, under the Papacy, and its Ten Kings; and therefore the Kingdom of
Christ is not yet come, which is to destroy it. Which Kingdom also, as it is
there described, cannot be Christ's Evangelical Kingdom, because that destroyed
not Kingdoms, but converted them; nor his Kingdom of Eternity; because,
according to Prophecy, this Kingdom is to be under the Heaven, and to fill the
whole Earth, Dan. 2.

(12.) Very many Texts of Scripture cannot possibly be explained, at least in
their Fullest, and most complete Sense and Latitude, without supposing some
such State. For even the first, and great Prophecy, Genesis 3.15. concerning the
bruising of the Serpents Head. is not yet fully completed, nor will be, until
Christ's Second Coming, when Sin and Death shall be utterly abolished, 1 Cor.
15. Japhet's Tents (according to Noah's Prophecy, Genesis 9.27.) have not been yet
enlarged through the whole Extent of the Northern parts of the World; neither
has God yet persuaded Japheth and Shem, Gentile and Jew, to live together in
the same Tents, or Church. The Promises to Dr. Homes Resurrect. revealed, B. 3.
2.
Abraham as they are explained by the Apostles) of such a Numerous Race as
shall possess almost the whole World, are not fulfilled in their utmost
Latitude; as neither Dr. Homes Resurrect. revealed, B. 3.2.
some of Jacob's Prophecies, to befall his Posterity in the last Days, Genesis 49.
particularly that Remarkable one, Verse 10. for the universal and complete
gathering of the people, both Jews and Gentiles, into one Body, is not as yet
come to pass. And who can say, that the N^mb. 24.17. Deuteronomy. 30, 3, 4, 5.32, 36,
43. Psalm 2, 8.22, 27-31.45.47, 7, 8, 9.49, 14.67.68, 22-35.72.86, 9.110.149.
Very many places in the Prophets already quoted. The places in the New
Testament which speak concerning Christ's Kingdom. and the World to come of the
Messiah: and Luke 19.11, 12.23, 42. (...), in thy Kingdom. Acts 3.19-26. 1 Cor.
15.24, etc. Ephesians. 1.21. Heb 3.5-9. 2 Peter 3.13. Revel. 11.15. See a Treatise
written by Alstecius, entitled, The Beloved City, or the Saints Reign. Mr.
Archer of the Personal Reign of Christ. Dr. Homes 's Resurrection Revealed. Dr.
Burnet 's Theory, B. 4. Dr. Beverley against Mr. Baxter. Monsieur Jurieu, and
Mr. Claude Oevres Posth^m. Tom. 3. Le Ci^quieme Empire.
Prophecies contained in the places quoted in the Margent, are as yet
completely fullfilled; or that the First See Dr. Beverley on the Lords Prayer.
Mede Ep. 52.
Petitions of the Lords Prayer, can be well understood, without the supposal of
such a Kingdom?

(13.) When the Apostles had received power (in which all necessary Gifts,
Knowledge, as well as others, is included, Luke 24.49.) by the Holy Ghost's
coming upon them; the knowledge of Times and Seasons was bestowed upon them by
God; which indeed it was not for them to know before, of themselves, and
without the Spirit; which alone knows the Secrets of God; for which they were
rebuked by our Savior ( Acts 1.6-8.) and not for supposing such a Kingdom and
Restoration. For in the first Sermon which the Apostle Peter made after the
descent of the Holy Ghost ( Acts 3.19-26.) he plainly makes mention of the
Times, and appointed Seasons of (d) Restitution, or Restoration, and
Refreshment to Israel; determining also the precise Time, when this should come
to pass; viz. at the second Coming of Christ from Heaven, foretold by all the
Prophets; when the sins of the converted Israelites were to be blotted out, and
they should have great comfort and refreshment from the presence of God by
Christ's return; referring to the Prophecy of Moses (Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18, 19.)
where it is foretold, that at the raising up, or coming of Christ, the
Israelites shall hear, or obey him, in all things whatsoever he shall say unto
them; which perfect Obedience has not been as yet paid unto Christ's Doctrine
by them; and therefore the Words must refer to some Second Coming; when,
according to the Tenor of that, and other places of Scripture, the faithful
Jews shall be restored, comforted and rewarded; and the Disobedient shall be
destroyed from among the people.

(Lastly,) The Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.24.-29. plainly asserts, that Christ shall
have such a Distinct and Peculiar Kingdom to himself, as that he may be said in
the Exercise of it, not to be subject to God the Father; and God the Father,
during that Kingdom, not to be all in all. Which cannot be understood
concerning him whilst he was upon Earth; because he was then in a State of
Humiliation, and Sufferings, being made lower then the Angels, and having taken
upon himself the Form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7, 8. Heb. 2.9: nor concerning him
as he is now in Heaven; because he is represented in Scripture in his present
State, as sitting on the Right Hand of God; whereby is denoted his enjoying and
possessing, as the Son (...), Acts 3.2. the same word used Acts 1.6. by the
Apostles, when they proposed this question to our Savior.
of Man, a Glory and Authority next to that of God the Father; and the Exercise
of his Regal Office, as a Branch of his Mediatorship, as in subjection, and
subordination unto him; and as in expectation of having his Enemies subdued by
the Father, Psalm 110.1. Heb. 10.12, 13. Nor can this be understood concerning
the Kingdom of Eternity; because then God will be All in All; And although
Christ must Reign in his Humane Nature to all Eternity, yet that is not as
Mediator, but as God-Man John 13, 32.17, 5, 24.
glorified with the Glory which he had with the Father before the World was; in
which State his Humane Nature is not to have a proper and peculiar Glory of it
self; but one in and with God, from him, and him alone: And therefore this must
be understood concerning some State of his Kingdom (called 1 Cor. 15.24. The
Kingdom) in which Christ, as Son of Man, and Mediators, shall appear to Reign
so gloriously, with such Evidences, and Manifestations of Glory, in and from
himself, as that he may be said, not to be subject to the Father, but to have a
distinct Kingdom of his own, although communicated from God the Father; in
which he Reigns freely and absolutely as King, and net as a Viceroy limited by
a Commission; and which was not to be One with his Fathers Kingdom, until all
things become One in him; when Christ's Mediatory Kingdom is to cease; A
Mediator, not being a Mediator of One. Now if there be such a Kingdom, and that
Kingdom be not his Mediatory, nor Eternal Kingdom; what Kingdom can it be, but
that Glorious Kingdom we have been treating of; which is to begin (as the
Apostle there intimates, and shall be shown hereafter) at the Resurrection, and
is to end when all things are subdued unto the Son; when he shall deliver up
his Kingdom in which the Saints had been sanctified by him, and prepared for
Union with God; according to the Tenor of that admirable Prayer of our Savior
( John 17.) the Pattern of his Intercession. Q. E. D,

15 It is no where expressly said in Scripture, that Christ shall come down upon
the Earth at the Day of Judgment; but only that he shall appear in the Clouds
So (...) may be rendered; compare Rev. 5.10. and Matthew. 25.21. See Mr. Mather
de Signo Filii Hominis; and Dr. Homes Resurrect. revealed, 2.2.
over the Earth, in the lowest part of the Heavens, into which be descends from
the highest Heavens, Judging the World, and Reigning there with his Saints. 1
These. 4.16, 17.

16 (...), The Thousand Years; which are to be understoood of a definite space
of time; as appears from the Epoch, and Period assigned to this Line of Time;
which is dated from the binding of the Devil, and ends in the loosing of him.

And the Thousand Years are to be understood Literally, and not Prophetically,
reckoning each Day for a Year; because all Prophetical Time will be at an end
before the Blessed Millennium begins; according to Christ's Oath (Rev. 10.6.)
that Time should be no longer, after the expiring of the 1260 Years, the Times
foretold by the Prophets. Now if Prophetical Time be at an end before the
Thousand Years enter; then they must be Literally, and not Prophetically
understood; in which sense if they were to be taken, the Glory of the Divine
State, in which God is all in all, would be deferred to so vast a length of
Time, as could not rationally be supposed. But that this State is to last such
a precise Number of Years, seems to be plainly asserted by the Apostle Peter
(2. Ep. 3.8.) who discoursing concerning the Day of Judgment, delivers this
remarkable Axiom, (of which he charges those he wrote to, to take special
notice, as of a thing very observable) viz. That one Day is with the Lord as a
Thousand Years, and a Thousand Years as one Day. In which place the Apostle
answers an Objection which he foresaw would be made by some Scoffers in the
last Days, against the coming of Christ to dissolve this present World, and
make a New One; and tells the that this should certainly come to pass at the
Day of Judgment.

But least his meaning should be mistaken, he says, that by the Day of
Judgment, he does not mean a single ordinary Day, but a Day in the mysterious
Account, and Reckoning of Almighty God, who made all things in Number, as well
as in Weight and Measure; and had ordained accordingly, that a Day in his
Account should be reckoned as a Thousand Years, and a Thousand Years as One
Day; and therefore that the Day of Judgment being One of the Lord's Days
(called frequently the Day of the Lord in Scripture) must consist of a Thousand
Literal Years; and a Thousand Years (when spoken of with relation to some
mystical Day, or Time of the Lord) must be accounted as One mystical Day;
comprehending a Thousand Years of common Account. And also he further
intimates, that the Days of the Lord (in which he perfected the Work of the
Creation, and rested from it) being Seven, there must consequently pass before
the Day of Judgment, six Thousand Years, or six mystical Days; and that the Day
of Judgment must accordingly last a Thousand Years, which should be a Day of
Sabbatism, or a Thousand Years of Rest or Peace, and of Sanctification or
Righteousness; in correspondence to Gods resting on the Seventh Day, and
blessing, and sanctifying it.

And this Interpretation of the place is not only agreeable to the Traditions
Mede 's Works, page 609. Grot. in loc. Ainsw. on Genesis 1.31. Burnet's Theory. B.
3, 5.4, 3, 6.
of the Jews, to whom the Apostle wrote; and to the Sentiments of the Primitive
Christians; but also may be stongly enforced from the Circumstances of the Text
it self. For if this were not the sense of the Words, and it contained only
this plain Natural Truth, that Time is nothing to Eternity, why should so
solemn an Admonition be prefixed to it? Which is also a sense nothing proper
to the scope of the Apostle; who was to answer the Objection of the Scoffers;
and to comfort the Christians under the delay and long suffering of God; and to
excite them to look for it, and hasten unto it; to which end it was no ways
proper to tell them, that each Natural day of the Year, was with the Lord as a
Thousand Years; which would but have increased their impatient expectation; and
would withal not have answered the Objection of the Scoffers; because there
might be, for all the Apostle had asserted, many Thousand Years before the
Promise of his coming should be fulfilled. Whereas the other Interpretation,
affords Hope to the Christians, that things should not always continue as they
were, but that this wicked World should be at last destroyed, and a New One
succeed it; wherein they should be found of Christ at his coming, in peace,
that is, in a state of rest and peace, to their good and prosperity; according
to what the Apostle Paul had written unto them in his Epistle to the Especially
in the 3d and 4th Chapters.
Hebrews; where, besides the Rest from the Works of the Creation; and that
promised to the Israelites in the Land of Canaan; he makes mention of another
Rest, which he calls a certain limited Day, wherein another kind of Rest is to
be expected; plainly intimating the Day of Rest in the Times of the Messiah, or
a Sabbatism (as the word ought to be translated, verse 9.) that is, a seventh
Thousand Years of Peace and Righteousness, after six Thousand of Labor, Misery
and Sin; for, (according to the Key of Mystical Knowledge given by the Apostles
Peter and John) after a Bp. Fell 's Sermon on 2 Pet. 3.3.
Millenary Week, the Everlasting Sabbath shall commence.

And further, this Number is to be taken literally, because by it is signified
a State of Perfection; a Year being the perfect Revolution of the Sun; and a
Thousand, being a perfect Number; and the perfection both of Time and Numbers
concurring in a Thousand Years. For a Thousand Years is a Cube For it arises
out of the multiplication of Three Tens; Two Tens multiplied, making 100 Years;
and 100 Years multiplied by the Third Ten, amounting to 1000 Years; which is a
Cube of Time. See Meursii Denar. Pythagor. and Dr. Moor's Cabbala; Oper.
Philosoph. Tom. 2. page 500, 501, 530, 532, 557, 558, 559, 561.
of Time, whose Root is Ten; whereby is signified a steady, uninterrupted, and
permanent State, of which a Cube is the Symbol; and withal a perfect one, to
which no other State is to succeed, but is to be swallowed up in the perfection
of Eternity; as the Number Ten is a perfect Number, beyond which there is no
simple Number, and comprehends all simple Numbers in it.

Whence it is, that Man, being a sinful and imperfect Creature, could never
arrive to the Term of a Thousand Years (as Jachiades, a Jew, has observed on
Dan. 7.25.) the period of a perfect State upon Earth; which the First Adam
could not reach (for if he had, he had been probably translated into an
Immortal State) nor any of the Sons of Adam during the Old World; but is proper
only to the Sons of the Resurrection in the New World of the Second Adam, or
the Messiah.

5 But the 17 rest [or remnant] of the dead [i. e. those who we^e slain by the
Sword of Christ's Mouth, Chap. 19.21.] lived 18 not again, 19 until the
Thousand Years were finished. This [living again of the Saints and Martyrs] 20
is the first Resurrection, [of Life, John 5.29. 1 These. 4.15, 16.]

17 It is plain from what has been observed in the foregoing Annotation, that
the Day of See Mr. Mede, page 531-537. 571-573. 577-580, 602-619. Ep. 15.2. and
Book 5. And Dr. Beverley of the Universal Christian Doctrine of the Day of
Judgment. Matthew. 25.31, 34. Luke 19.12-27.
Judgment mentioned in the Doctrinal parts of Scripture, is the same with the
Thousand Years Kingdom of Christ; Day John 16.26. Heb. 3.8, 9. See Mr. Mede in
the places quoted, and page 86. and Mr. Mather de Signo Filii Hominis.
often signifying in Scripture a long space af Time, and not only a single Day.
And therefore, seeing that the Wicked are to be judged as well as the Good,
they must be here meant by the rest of the Dead; who are evidently the same
with the Wicked People slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth, Chap. 19.21. the
same Expressions being used in both places.

18 The Wicked indeed live again, when they are raised to Judgment; but because
they rise only to Shame, and Everlasting Contempt, (as the Prophet Daniel
speaks, Chap. 12.2.) and lie as dead, or slain under the condemning power of
Christ's Gospel, the Sword proceeding out of his Mouth; and shall never live a
Life of Happiness; therefore are they represented here as dead See Matthew. 8.22.
Luke 15.32. 1 Timothy 5.6. 2 Peter 3.7. Jude 12.
Men, which lived not again; and accordingly, they are seldom mentioned in the
general Discourses in the Neither in the 15th of the Corinthians, nor 1
Thessal. 4.
New Testament about the Resurrection.

19 They are represented during the Thousand Years, as in a dead, spiritless,
and unactive State, lying under the Judiciary Sentence of Condemnation; and the
perdition which the day of Judgment shall bring upon ungodly men, 2 Pet. 3.7.
upon the expiring of which, they become active, gather to Battle, and compass
the Camp of the Saints, Verse 8, 9.

20 This refers to the Resurrection, and living again of the Saints and
Martyrs, mentioned in the Fourth Verse; who are the Children of the
Resurrection, Luke 20.36. aand the dead in Christ that shall rise first; whose
Resurrection hereupon is called The First Resurrection; i. e. the Resurrection
of those who shall rise first at the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, and who are
to have a Second Resurrection (as it may be called in the sense that Grot. in
Apocal. 20.5.
word may be taken, Lament. 3.63. Heb. 11.35.) when they, together with the
living Saints, shall be caught up, to be ever with the Lord in his Eternal
Kingdom; to which their first Resurrection to Glory is a preparative: there
being Four several Resurrections (as they may be called) in Scripture.

(1.) To a Life of Grace, and of the Divine Spirit here.

(2.) Of separate Spirits with Christ.

(3.) The Resurrection to a state of Glory in Christ's Thousand Years Kingdom.

(4.) The State they are caught up, to when they are united to God in an
endless Life to all Eternity.

For as the Change the Living Saints are to undergo, may be called a Tertall:
de Resurrect. cap. 41. qui ab adventu Domini deprehendentur in carne,
merebuntur compendio mortis per dem^tationem expunctae concurrere cum
resurgentibus.
Death, so may their being caught up be called a Resurrection.

But because the Wicked Dan. 12.2. Matt. 25.31. John 5.29. Acts 24.15. 2 Cor.
5.10.
shall rise at the same time with the Just, and they both shall appear together
at Christ's Tribunal; therefore is their State here accounted for together with
that of the Just; and the Resurrection not mentioned until that be declared;
although it is not properly a Resurrection (which word when it is used simply,
and absolutely, as it is here, signifies usually the Luke 14, 14.20, 35, 36. 1
Cor. 15.
Resurrection of Life) but a Death.

6 Blessed [in a most especial manner, because he waits, and comes to the
end of Times; and the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 12.12.] and holy [for
they also are of the Number of the Saints, who are not perfect without them,
and shall at last be caught up with them, 1 These. 4.15, 17. Heb. 11.40. 1 Cor.
15.51, 52. Isa. 4.2, 3.] is 21 he [i. e. they which are alive, and remain unto
the Coming of the Lord, 1 These 4.15, 17. Isa. 4.2, 3.] that has [although but
a] part [or share,] in the first Resurrection [and not an entire possession of
the whole Happiness, and Glories, of that blessed State of Life and Reign with
Christ, until they are caught up unto him, 1 These. 4.17.] on such the 22 second
Death [in the Lake of ^ire and Brimstone, Verse 14, 15. Chap. 21.8.] has no
power [at all, for they being the Living, shall always live, and having part in
the first Resurrection to Life; shall be found in the Book of Life, Dan. 12.1.
Ezekiel. 47.9. and the 15th Verse of this Chapter;] but they shall be Priests of
God [i. e. Holy, and dedicated to his Service alone,] and of Christ [enjoying
the full benefit of his Redemption, in White, Priestly Robes of Righteousness,
washed in his Blood, Chap. 1, 16.5, 10.19, 8, 9] and shall reign 23 with him a
Thousand 24 Ye^rs [i. e. shall enjoy a pure, peaceable, and glorious
Church State, and be a Political Body upon Earth, governing the whole World for
a Thousand Years, according to the Laws of Christ's Gospel, by virtue of his
Power, and in relation unto, and dependence on him, Dan. 2. and 7th. See Notes
on Verse 4.]

21 If the Sons, and Children of the First Resurrection be the Saints, and
Martyrs, who rise first, and come with Christ in his Kingdom; then the He, or
Body of Men, (as the Article so often signifies) here mentioned, must be the 1
These. 4.15, 17, 1 Cor. 15.51
((...)) The We living, or the Generation af Saints and Believers (such as the
Apostle was) who shall be alive upon Earth at Christ's Coming, and shall never
have Died, or fallen asleep in the Lord; but shall have been kept Isa. 4.3. 1
Pet. 3.7.
alive, and preserved, as a Remnant (therefore called (...)) in the Judgment,
and Burning, the Battle, and Fire of the last Day; because there are no other
Saints mentioned in Scripture, who can be said to be partakers of the
Resurrection.

And they are properly said to have but a part in the first Resurrection;
because they shall only be changed at the first Resurrection, when the Dead in
Christ rise first; but shall not have such spiritual and incorruptible Bodies,
and put on such Immortality, as the Dead Saints raised to Life, have at the
very first moment of their Resurrection, until they are caught up in the
Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, so as to be ever with him, 1 These. 4.17. 1
Cor. 15.52. Who are also here very remarkably placed in their due order,
according to Doctrinal Scripture; viz. after the Resurrection of the dead
Saints to life, and the Resurrection of the dead Wicked, to condemnation; who
rise together; Whereas the living Saints are not caught up (which may be called
a Resurrection) until afterward, 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17.

Which will appear more plain from a close, and due consideration of what
Doctrinal Scripture has delivered concerning the Resurrection; in which it is
asserted,

(1.) That Christ is the 1 Cor. 15.20, 23.
First Fruits of them that sleep; from whence it follows, that the Saints
raised, may be very well meant by the Harvest (Rev. 14.15.) before which the
First Fruits were wont to be offered under the Law.

(2.) The Apostle asserts, 1 Cor. 15.22, 23. 1 These. ^^, 16. that there shall
be an Order observed in the Vivification, or Resurrection of the Just to
Immortality, and Incorruptibility; in which Sense the Apostle must be
understood, 1 These. 4.16. where he says, that the Dead in Christ shall rise
first, that is, to Incorruptibility; for otherwise, if Resurrection be to be
taken simply, and absolutely, the Just do not rise before the Unjust; nor are
the living Saints changed after them; but all of them rise together in the same
moment, 1 Cor: 15.52.

(3.) The Bodies 1 Cor. 15.52. 2 Cor. 5.4. 1 These. 3, 13.4, 14-17. 2 These. 1.7.
Jude 14.
of the Dead Saints are first raised, and that incorruptible, at the Descent of
Christ from Heaven with a shout; and being caught up into the Air, are united
to their Spirits; and then they come, or are brought along with Christ, at his
Revelation, and Appearing in his Kingdom.

(4.) The Living Saints are 1 Cor, 15.52.
changed indeed, at the same moment that the Dead Saints are raised; but they
are not caught up to an Incorruptible and Immortal State until afterward; as
the Apostle expressly asserts, 1 These. 4.16, 17. where he says, that the dead in
Christ shall rise first; and that then, or afterward (for so the word ought to
be translated here, as it is 1 Cor. 15.23. that the Apostle might not seem to
contradict what he had said just before concerning the Dead rising first) the
surviving Saints should be caught up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the
Air, to be with him to all Eternity in Heaven. Which is also asserted by the
Apostle at the 15th Verse; where he says, that the Saints, who shall be alive
at the Day of Judgment, shall not prevent them which are asleep; that is, shall
not rise before them, or shall not (...), nequaquam assequemur, sive
attingemus, Ludov. de Dieu.
attain the same State of Incorruptibility, and Immortality, they shall enjoy
at the very moment of the sounding of the last Trump, until afterward; which
distance of Time is not determined by the Apostle; and may be many Years for
ought that is asserted in this place by him; because the same word is used 1
Cor. 15.23. concerning the distance betwixt Christ's Resurrection, and that of
the Dead Saints; which is now, almost the space of seventeen hundred Years. And
although the Apostle, 1 These. 4.17. seems to assert, that the Living Saints
shall be caught, up together with the Dead Saints; yet those words must not be
so understood; as if the Living Saints were caught up, at the same moment that
the Dead Saints rise; for then the Apostle would contradict himself; but must
be understood according to the acceptance of the word ((...)), Romans 3.12. viz.
that they shall be caught up in their own Order and Time, as well as the other,
and be in the like State with them; or else do rather refer to the last joint
Ascent of both together, into the higher Regions of the Air (the appearance of
Christ hitherto having been perhaps in some lower parts of it) in order to
their being for ever with the Lord.

This, and such like Parallels betwixt the Doctrinal and Prophetical parts of
Scripture, as to this Point of the Resurrection; did incline me to understand
it in a litteral Sense; which I was for a long while averse to, (as I since
find Mr. Page 770. Epist. 20.
Mede was) until by a more close consideration of what Dr. Beverley has
discoursed on this Point; I was fully convinced.

22 By Second Death is meant Final, Eternal Punishment; to distinguish it from
the First Death of the slain with the Sword of Christ's Mouth; for at the very
beginning of Christ's Kingdom, the Wicked are slain by the Conviction, Sentence
and Condemnation of Christ's Gospel, and Appearance; which is called, the
making of his Foes his Footstool, Psalm 110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25. Romans 16.20. Heb.
2.5-9. whereby the first Act of Christ's Regal Power, at his first sending of
the Rod of his strength out of Zion, to bring his Enemies under the Footstool
of his Throne, seems to be signified; under which they lie in a state of Death,
that is, Condemnation, and Inability to act any thing against Christ's Kingdom,
until the Thousand Years are accomplished; when they are permitted to break
forth into open Enmity and Hostility; and are at last utterly subdued, and cast
into the Lake, to suffer Eternal Punishments; and the Son shall put down
((...)) or abolish, and bring to naught, all his Enemies; even Death it self,
the last Enemy to be subdued, 1 Cor. 15.24, 26. But those who are partakers in
the first Resurrection, being found alive at Christ's first appearing in his
Kingdom, are continued in that State; and suffer no Death at all; neither the
first, proceeding from the Convictions of Christ's Gospel and Judgments; nor
the second, of final Condemnation.

23 They may be said to Reign with Christ, in the sense that we are said to be
crucified with Christ, and to live with him: for the Personal See Dr. Homes;
and Mr. Mather de Signo Filii Hominis.
Reign of Christ upon Earth, cannot be proved from Scripture; whatsoever
Glorious Appearances may be of his Humanity, from his Throne in the Clouds, and
the possession of the Kingdom is given to the Saints in Daniel: of which more
hereafter, as occasion offers.

24 Here it may be observed,

(1.) That the same individual Thousand Years, are meant throughout the whole
Chapter; as appears from the Greek Article ((...)); whereby, reference is made
to each foregoing Thousand Years, and it is shown that they are the same. For
Satan is bound a Thousand Years, Verse 2. and is restrained, Verse 3. from
deceiving the Nations ((...)) during the same thousand Years: The Dead Saints
and Martyrs live and Reign with Christ ((...)) for the same space of Years,
Verse 4. during which also, the Wicked are in a state of Death, Verse 5. The
Living Saints are partakers in the first Resurrection, during a Thousand Years,
Verse 6. at the End of which very Thousand Years, Satan is loosed, Verse 7.
Whence it will follow, that the Thousand Years during which Satan was bound,
are the same with those, during which the Living Saints Reigned with Christ;
and that they are the same with the Thousand Years assigned to the Dead Saints
raised, and the Dead State of the Wicked; because they which agree in one
Third, must agree amongst themselves.

(2.) That there are but three sorts of Mankind to whom the Thousand Years are
assigned; viz. The Dead-raised, Saints and Martyrs: The Dead Wicked, raised to
a Spiritual and Political Death: and the Living Saints changed: for there are
only so many parts, or sorts of Mankind, in the state of the Thousand Years;
and it is not assigned to any Living-Wicked, who shall live wickedly, and then
die; because whatsoever lives at all, shall live, Ezekiel. 47.9.

7 And when the [foregoing] Thousand Years [during which he had been bound, and
restrained from deceiving the Nations, Verse 2, 3] were expired, Satan shall be
25 loosed out of his Prison [ i. e. his close Restraints from all power and
liberty of Temptation shall be taken off.]

25 Satan, who was always a Prisoner, and in everlasting Chains under Darkness,
unto the Judgment of the Great Day; was more peculiarly restrained, during the
Thousand Years, from all power of Temptation; which he had exercised,
notwithstanding his Chains of Darkness, from the time of his Fall from his
first Estate, until then; when he was closely confined by the Glorious
Appearance of Christ, and his Kingdom, in the New Heaven and Earth: but when
that Appearance was withdrawn from the New Earth, then Satan was, as it were,
loosed, and at liberty to tempt; which he could not do, whilst the Holiness,
Righteousness, Truth and Justice of Christ's Kingdom, appeared in their full
Power and Glory.

8 And shall go out [of his Prison, and Restraints to and fro in the Earth,
seeking whom he may devour,] to deceive the 26 Nations, which are in the four *
quarters [or Corners] of the Earth, Gog 27 and Magog [ i. e. the Enemies of God
and his Christ, Ezekiel. 38.2, 3.39, 8. Rev. 19.18, 19, 21.] to gather them
together [from all parts,] to 28 Battle [ i. e. to oppose, persecute and
destroy Christ's Kingdom upon Earth:] the 29 number of whom is as the Sand of
the Sea [ i. e. exceeding great, Ezekiel 38.8, 9, 15, 16.]

26 (...), Grot. in Matthew. 5, 7. Ephesians. 2.11, 12.
that is, Gentiles, or Aliens, from the New Jerusalem State; banished, as it
were, from that happy Society, into the Four Quarters, or Corners of the Earth;
and living there as without God, in the New World of the Messiah; beleiving
indeed, but as the Devils do, with trembling, which is a Spiritual Death; who
were typified by the Hamonah, and Multitude of Nations, Ezekiel. 38, 8, 9, 15,
16.39, 11, 16. who are to come up against the New Jerusalem, in the latter
Days, after the Resurrection, Conversion, and Return of the Jews, and their
Union with the Gentiles into One Church; as appears from Ezekiel. Chapters 36, 37,
38, 39.

Now whatsoever is meant by these Nations in Ezekiel; it is plain, that in this
place they can be no other than some of those to whom the Thousand Years are
here assigned, who are the whole of Mankind: and seeing that it cannot be
supposed that the Saints of any kind can be possibly engaged in such a design,
against Christ's Kingdom, (as being the saved, and healed, the Living, the
Sons, and Partakers of the first Resurrection, and secured by Christ, the
Second Adam, in a State of Righteousness, who will lose none that are his, as
the first Adam did) it will follow, that by these Nations must be understood,
the remnant slain, the rest of the Dead, who lived not again, or the
Dead-Wicked, raised to a state of Condemnation, and continuing under the Awe
and Terror of it, during the Glories of Christ's Kingdom; who are now stirred
up by Satan, their Head and Ringleader, to attack the Camp of the Saints upon
Earth; whom he thought he might easily overcome, now the more immediate
Presence and Assistance of Christ was withdrawn from them. And to this sense
agree many Expressions in Ezekiel, who calls them the Multitude, or Nations of
the Dead (Chap. 39.8-17.) and also the general scope of this Chapter, which has
a relation, as is granted by all Interpreters, to what will come to pass at the
last Judgment, and the Resurrection.

* In the Four Corners, or Angles of the New Earth, which is represented as a
square City, or Camp; without which, as it were, at the Four Angles, and
Corners of it, the Wicked are placed, here and Chap. 22.15. in allusion to the
Custom amongst the Jews of executing Offenders without the Camp, and City; and
of excluding and excommunicating all unclean persons out of it, Numb. 5.1-4.
Heb. 13.11, 12, 13.

27 This is a plain proof, that these Nations are typified by the multitude of
the Dead, in Ezekiel; who calls them Gog, and the Land of Magog; by which the
Ezekiel. 32, 26.38, 15.39, 2. The Mogul-Tartars above the Wall of China, are
called so by the Arabian Writers. Dr. Hyde. Epist. de mensuris Sinens. See Mr.
Mede, page 574. and Ep. 41.
Northern, and Scythian Nations are understood, in Scripture; a Type of the
Enemies of God's Church and Kingdom, prophesied of in Old Time by the servants
of God, the Prophets of Israel, under the Names of such Nations as were the
Chief Enemies of the Jews, in the particular Times of each Prophet, Ezekiel.
38.17. So that Gog and Magog seems to denote the whole multitude of God's
Enemies in each Age; which admirably agrees with what has been discoursed
already; to wit, that these Nations are the Wicked dead of every Age of the
World, raised to Condemnation.

29 This Battle is distinct from that at Armageddon; which was before the
Thousand Years. Neither will it appear incredible, that the Fallen Angels, and
the Damned, should again attempt such a Design; and that after they had
experienced the power of Christ's Wrath for a Thousand Years: If we consider,
that the Devils retain the same Enmity against God, notwithstanding their many
Ages of Punishment, and their Expectation of an Eternal Doom; and that this
Attempt was under the wise Permission, and Order of Almighty God, at a time
when his more immediate Glorious Presence was withdrawn from the New Earth of
his Saints, and the Laodicean state of Coldness and Indifferency, to the
Glories of Christ's Kingdom, began. For the Wicked Nations, as they went down
to Hell (according to the Expressions of Ezekiel, Chap. 32.26, 27.) with their
Weapons of War; that is, with the same Enmity to Christ in which they lived;
and laid their Swords under their Heads, in a readiness to act the same
Wickedness over again; so are they raised with the same Passions, only the more
enraged for their Punishments; and may very well be supposed out of Envy and
Revenge, for their long confinement under a State of Punishment and Infamy, to
engage in this Attempt.

29 Although the Number of the Wicked, who shall be raised to Condemnation,
will be very great; yet there will not be any inconvenience to our Assertion
from thence, as if the Earth would be encumbered with so vast a Number of wicked
persons; because no very great space will be required for their confinement; if
that be true, which is asserted by Sir William See his Essay in Political
Arithmetic concerning the Growth of the City of London.
Petty; That half the Island of Ireland, would afford not only Footing to stand
upon, but Graves to lie down in, for the whole Number of Men now living, and
also for those that have died since the beginning of the World. To which may be
added, that their Bodies shall be spiritual; they being to partake of the
spirituality of the Resurrection, although not of the Purity and Blessedness of
it.

9 And they went up [in Battle array, 1 Kings 10.1. from the Quarters and
Corners to which they were confined,] on the breadth of the Earth [i. e. to
assault the Kingdom of Christ, which had spread it self over the whole Earth,
Isa. 8, 8.49, 6. Psalm 72.8.] and compassed [or besieged] the Camp 30 of the
Saints [who reign with Christ, Verse 6.] and the 31 beloved City [i. e. they
endeavored to destroy Christ's Kingdom, and the New Jerusalem State on Earth.
See on Chap. 21.2, 3.] and 32 [or, but] Fire came down from God out of Heaven,
and devoured them [i. e. they were suddenly, and miraculously discomfited by
God, and most severe Judgments were inflicted upon them, by God's fiery Wrath
and Indignation, Ezekiel. 38.22, 23.39, 6, 9, 10.]

30 A Metaphor from the Camp of the Israelites in the Wilderness; a Type of the
Church and Kingdom of Christ. See Ainsworth on Numb. 2.27.

31 Jerusalem is called God's Beloved, Psalm 60, 5.108, 6. which was a Type of
the New Jerusalem State, the Holy City, the Bride, and Beloved of her Husband,
Chap. 21.

32 The Israelites are represented by Ezekiel (Chap. 38.11.) as living in
unwalled Villages, without Bars and Gates, safely, and at rest; when they shall
be invaded by Gog, that is, the Heathen Nations, out of whose Captivity they
are to be brought. And in such a Posture may the Saints upon Earth be well
presumed to be, after the Thousand Years; when the Laodicean State (as has
been before observed on Chap. 3.14-21.) begins; in which, through a long
continuance of Glory, and Prosperity, the Saints upon Earth began to be less
Zealous, and did not so ardently desire to be caught up to Christ, and be for
ever with him, as they had before done.

10 And the Devil that deceived them [or the Deceiver of them, and that from
the beginning, John 4.44. 1 John 3.8.] was [without any Trial, as being taken
in the very Fact, and having been a notorious Murderer, and Liar from the
beginning, and the Father of all Sin, and Enmity to Christ's Kingdom;] cast
[immediately,] into the 33 Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the 34 Beast, and
the False Prophet are [who were before cast into it; Chap. 19.20.] and shall be
tormented day aad night for ever and ever [i. e. he was adjudged upon
undeniable Evidence of Fact, to a State of utter inability of acting against
God and Christ, and to extreme Torments to all Eternity, without intermission.]

33 He, and his chief Agents, are condemned to the same punishment; having no
remains of any Power left, no more than there is of a thing which is consumed
by Fire; for the Devil shall not be only held in Chains, as formerly, but all
his Power, and Authority, shall be utterly abolished. Grotius in locum, and in
Cap. 19,20.

34 From hence it appears, that Gog and Magog is not Antichrist, as some have
thought; because Antichrist was in the Lake before their Discomfiture and
Condemnation.

11 And I saw a 35 great white 36 Throne [i. e. a Representation of the last,
and great Act of Judicature, in which all Enmity was destroyed, and the living,
remaining Saints, were caught up to the Lord, to sit with him on his Throne;
and all which belonged to Christ's Kingdom, were fully sanctified, and
glorified, and prepared for Union with God to all Eternity, 1 Cor. 15. 1 These.
4. Rev. 3.21.] and him that sat on it [i. e. Christ, Matthew. 25.31. Acts 17.21.]
from whose 37 Face [or Presence; upon the Declaration of his Will,] the [38
New] Earth, and the [38 New] Heaven, sled 39 away [or disappeared, at his
Rebuke and Command,] and there was found no 40 place for them [i. e. they were
utterly abolished, and annihilated; Psalm 37.10. Dan. 2.35. Rev. 12.8.]

35 It was a great Throne, because all who had overcome, were to sit with
Christ in it; and the whole World was to be finally Judged at it: and it was
White, to show the Glory, Sanctity, and Purity of Christ's Justice, and of the
State in which the Saints were now to be invested; who at this great and last
Session, are caught up together into the Air, to be with Christ for ever, after
they had Judged the World with him.

36 From the Appearance of this Throne, and the following Judgment, it may be
concluded, that this was the Laodicean State of the Church, according to the
importance of the Word, which signifies the Judging of the People. See on Chap.
3.

37 Face, signifies a steadfast Will and Purpose, shown by Gestures, or other
Signs and Circumstances; as the word is taken, Luke 9.51-53.

38 38 These must be the New Heaven, and New Earth, whose Description is given
in the following Chapter; because they fly away after the Expiration of the
Thousand Years, which is the space of Time allotted to the Duration of the
Reign and Kingdom of Christ, and of the Holy City, prepared as a Bride, the New
Jerusalem; which are to be, not in the Old, but the New Heaven and Earth; as
will plainly appear to any one who compares this Chapter with the following,
wherein (as is all along observed) are such Descriptions given of the Thousand
Years Kingdom of Christ, as can agree to no other but a New Heaven, and New
Earth, in which dwells Righteousness.

39 This New Earth flies away, but the Old One is to be dissolved by Fire; of
which, flying away, is not a proper Expression.

40 The Psalmist expresses the Death of a Man, by his place knowing him no
more, Psalm 103.16. But when it is said, That no place is found for a thing,
thereby seems to be denoted its utter annihilation, and withal the
impossibility of any other thing succeeding in its place, because there is no
place remaining, into which it should succeed. Whence it follows, that this is
the last Heaven and Earth; and that no New Ones are to succeed it; and that
nothing else shall remain after it but the Eternal Kingdom of God, All in All,
in the highest Heavens, and the Lake of the Damned.

12 And I saw the 41 Dead [in Trespasses and Sins, who had lain in an unactive
State of Infamy, during the Thousand Years, and were afterward discomfited by
the Fire of God, which came down from Heaven, Verse 5, 9.] small 42 and great
[i. e. all sorts, and the whole Race of them, Chap. 19.18.] stand before God
[to be judged by him,] and the 43 Books [of God's Omniscience, Men's
Consciences, and the Law,] were opened [i. e. Men's Actions, and God's Knowledge
of them, were made manifest.] and 44 another Book was opened, which is the Book
44 of Life, [viz. the Lamb's Book of Life, from the foundation of the World,
Chap. 3, 5.13, 8.17, 8, 21, 27.] and the [Wicked] Dead [raised to Condemnation,
and discomfited by God's severe Judgment and Indignation, and now brought all
together to receive their final Sentence,] were judged out of those things
which were written in the books, according to their [own wicked] Works [which
were not also found written in the Book of Life, Verse 15.]

41 Hence it appears, that this is the Judgment of the Nations, the Gog-Magog,
who were discomfited, Verse 9. because they are called, the Dead, in Ezekiel,
and the Slain, and Dead in this Prophecy.

42 Hence it also appears, that these are the Kings, and their Armies,
mentioned Chap. 19.18, 19. who are the slain, and the all men, small and great;
viz. the whole Race of wicked Men.

43 A Metaphor Dan. 7.10. Esth. 6.1. Isa. 65.6. Malach. 3.16.
taken from the Rolls and Records of Courts of Judicature; and from the
Registers kept by the Eastern Kings, of the Actions of their Reigns; whereby
God's exact Justice, and the perfect Knowledge which he has of all Men's
Actions, is set forth; and the evident Conviction which will attend the
procedures of that Great Day, Matthew. 12.36. 1 Cor. 4.5.

44 44 This is is the Book of Election, and Predestination, belonging to the
Living in the New Jerusalem State; which is represented as One single Book;
because it depends upon One single Decree of God, and One single Cause of that
Decree, viz. the free Grace, and Good Pleasure of God in Christ, Acts 13.48.
Romans 8.28, etc. Ephesians. 1. Whereas the Books of Reprobation are many; because
that depends upon the many Evil Actions of Men; which, Justice particularly
weighs and considers; and upon the Multitude and Diversity of Sinners, which
are to be convicted and condemned, according to the Sins each of them had
particularly committed; So that there is to be, a^ it were, a particular Book
of Conscience for each of them. And it is Another ((...)) Book, or a Book of
another sort or kind; to show, that the Elect shall be justified, and saved by
Free Grace, and not for their Works; nor even according to their own Works,
but those which Christ had wrought in them.

13 And [or for] the Sea 45 gave up [or had before given up, to Death, 46 and
Hell,] the Dead which were in it [viz. at the beginning of the Day of Judgment,
when the Dead Wicked were raised to Condemnation] and Death and Hell [i. e. the
common Receptacle of the Wicked, where they were under Confinement and
Punishment during the Thousand Years,] delivered up, [now at this last Act of
Judicature,] the Dead which were in them [i. e. all the Wicked which had been
under their Confinement;] and they [i. e. the Dead Wicked,] were judged every
man according to their Works 47 [which were not found written in the Book of
Life; and which they had lately done against the Camp and City of God; as well
as for all their other wicked Deeds which they had done whilst they were in the
Flesh in this present World.]

45 Grotius and Piscator render the Word, had given up, which must refer to
the rising of the Dead Wicked, at the beginning of the Thousand Years; when,
because there was to be No Sea in the New Earth, the Sea gave up its Dead.

46 For the Dead Wicked were condemned at first to the Four Corners of the
Earth; which were as a kind of Hades, or Common Receptacle of the Dead,
answerable to the Hamonah, or City of Dead Carcases, in Ezekiel, Chap. 38, and
39. See on Verse 8. and Mr. Mede, page 57 1. and Bishop Vshers Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge, concerning Limbus Patrum.

47 Their Works, in the former Verse, are represented as written in Books;
because being committed long before, they were thereby to be put in remembrance
of them; and therefore the Books are opened unto them. But here being no
mention of Books opened, it may well be concluded, that these Works were those
which they had newly committed against the beloved City, Verse 9. which being
fresh in their Memories, there needed not any writing of them in Books, in
order to their conviction.

14 And Death, 48 and Hell [or the Grave, the last Enemies to be destroyed, 1
Cor. 15.26, 55.] were cast into the Lake of fire [i. e. Mortality, and all
Places of Punishment, except that designed for the Eternal Torment of the
Wicked, were annihilated; there being now no further use of them; and they
having delivered up the Dead which were in them:] This [casting into the Lake,]
is the 49 second Death [i. e. Death Eternal, Matthew. 10.28. See on Verse 6.]

48 These are the Enemies of Christ, which, according to Doctrinal Scripture,
in full concurrence with Prophetical, are to be destroyed by him at last; just
before the delivery of his Kingdom up to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.25, 26, 54, 55,
56.

49 As that Expression, ( Verse 5.) this is the first Resurrection, seems to
denote, that it was to be at the beginning of Christ's Kingdom; so does this
parallel Expression intimate, that this Second Death was to be at the End, and
last Appearance of it; These Two being, as it were, solemn Inscriptions on Two
Pillars; showing the Two Bounds of Christ's Kingdom; beginning in a First
Resurrection of Saints, and a First Death of the Wicked; and ending in a Second
Resurrection to Glory of the former, and a Second Death of the latter; as
Absolute, Final, and Immutable as the Life of the former.

15 And 50 whosoever was not found written in the [Lamb's] Book of Life [i. e.
whosoever was not a Living Member of Christ's Kingdom, during the Thousand
Years of Life and Blessedness;] was cast into the Lake of Fire [i. e. was
punished with Eternal Torments.]

50 The Reprobate are not only judged according to the Rules of Justice, by
their own works; but the Book of absolute, sovereign, and free Grace, is looked
into, when they are condemned; to show the Agreement there is betwixt God's
Decrees, and the proceedings of his Rectoral Justice, in condemning Sinners,
according to their own demerits; there being none left out of the Book of Life
and Grace; who shall not be shown to have justly deserved to be condemned for
their own sins.

And hitherto has been a Description of the Wicked, their City in the four
Corners of the Earth, their Actions, and Final Condemnation: There follows now
in the next Chapters a Description of the City of the Saints, and of their
Final Reward in the Eternal Kingdom of God, All in All.

CHAP. XXI.
The Text.
1 1 AND I saw a New 2 Heaven, and a New Earth [i. e. the Seat of the Kingdom
of Christ, wherein the Saints Reign with him a Thousand Years, Chap. 20.4, 6. 2
Pet. 3. Isa. 65, 17.66, 22. Matthew. 19.28. Acts 3.19.] for the first Heaven, and
2 the first Earth [i, e. the Heavens and the Earth which are now, 2 Pet. 3.7.]
were 3 passed away [with a great Noise, burnt up, and dissolved by Fire, 2 Pet.
3.10, 11, 12.] and there was no more 4 Sea.

Annotations on CHAP. XXI.
1 Here, according to the custom of the Sacred Writers, a particular Account is
given of the Generations (as the Scripture speaks, Genesis 2.4.) of the New
Heaven, and New Earth, which he had before, ( Chap. 20 11.) seen fly away, at
the Consummation, and End of all things, when Christ shall deliver up his
Kingdom to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. it being usual (as appears from Genesis
2.) for the holy Penmen to give a particular Description afterward, of what
they had before either briefly hinted, or only described in general; who are
wont also to pursue the matter they have in hand, quite throughout, before they
resume its more particular consideration; as appears from the former Chapter;
where the duration; of the Kingdom of Christ is continued from its beginning in
the Resurrection of the Saints, to its End, in the Destruction of Death, his
last Enemy; and to the flying away of the very New Heavens and Earth; when
Christ's Mediatory Kingdom being at an end, the Eternal Kingdom of God, All in
All, is to succeed.

2 The preceding Vision plainly relating to the Resurrection, and the last Day
of Judgment; the New Heavens, and Earth here described, must accordingly be
understood, concerning those mentioned by the Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. 3.13. which
are to succeed the general Conflagration of the present Heavens and Earth, to
be dissolved at the very first Appearance of Christ at his second Coming; who
is to be manifested, or revealed in Flames of Fire: It being very Luke
17.26-31. But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, etc. Even thus shall it
be in the Day when the Son of Man is revealed, i. e. (to make good the
parallel) in the very self same Day in which he is revealed. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. 2
Pet. 3.10, 12.

See Dr. Burnet 's Theory, B. 3. and 4. Mather de Signo Filii Homin. 2. 5.


plain from Doctrinal Scripture, that the present World shall be burnt before
the end of all things; and probably at Christ's very first coming to his
Kingdom; to which Conflagration there will be many preceding Dispositions and
Preparations; which are called the Signs of Christ's Coming, in Scripture; and
are probably the Vials in this Prophecy before insisted on, Chap. 16.

This New Dr. Burnet 's Theory, B. 4. 3, 8.
Heaven and Earth, which are to arise out of the Remains of the Old ones, as
out of a Second Chaos; are no other than the Seat of the Kingdom of the Blessed
Millennium, in which the Saints are to Reign with Christ, Chap. 20. because
(according to the plain words of the Apostle Peter) it is that New Heaven and
Earth in which Righteousness is to dwell; i. e. Righteous Saints are to Reign
in Holiness and Righteousness during the Day of Judgment, which is a Day of the
Lords, consisting of a Thousand Years; which is as plain a Description of the
Blessed Millenium, as can well be given: of which Truth also the following
Verses will administer many Proofs.

3 The very word made use of by the Apostle Peter (2 Ep. 3.10.) concerning the
passing away of the Heavens of this World, at the general Conflagration. For it
is to be observed, that the Scriptures make mention of Three Worlds:

(1.) The World before the Flood; reaching from the beginning of the Creation,
to its perishing by Water. Which the Apostle 2 Ep. 2, 5.3, 5, 6. (...).
Peter calls the Heavens and Earth of Old, the World that then was, and the
Old, or Original World; concerning which see the Burnet's Theory, B. 1. and 2.
and the Append, to the 4th Book.
ingenious Theory of the Earth.

(2.) The present World, reserved for fire, called in 2 Pet. 3.7. Romans 8.19-24.
Gal. 1.4. John 12, 31.14, 30. 1 Cor. 2.6, 8. 2 Cor. 4.4. Mather de Signo Fill.
Homin. 1. 2.
Scripture the Heavens and Earth which are now; this present evil World; and
this World, by way of Contempt, and to distinguish it from the world to come.

(3.) The New 2 Pet. 3.13. Heb. 2.5. Ephesians. 1.21. Luke 20.34-38. and Chap. 17.
Heavens, and New Earth; called in Scripture, the World to come, that World,
the World of the Resurrection from the Dead, and the Kingdom of God, and of
the Son of Man at his coming: which is to succeed, when 1 Cor. 7.31. Psalm
102.26. 2 Pet. 3. Psalm 104.30. Matthew. 19.28. Acts 3.21. Romans 8.19-24. Mather
de Signo, etc. 2.5. Burnet 's Theory.
the Form, Fashion, and Disposition of the parts of this World shall pass
away, and be changed, upon its dissolution by fire; and there shall be a
Restitution, Regeneration, Delivery, Redemption, and Restoration of all things
in the Natural, as well as Moral World, into the Primitive State, from which
they had fallen by Sin.

4 This is a very surprising confirmation of Doctor Burnet's Hypothesis, viz.
That the World shall be restored to its Primitive Paradisiacal State, in which
there was no Sea; and that the Sea shall be devoured by the Conflagration:
which latter is also alluded to by the Prophet Amos (Chap. 7.4.) where he
supposes, that Fire shall devour the great Deep; of which it had already eaten
up, or devoured a part in Vision.

And the Wicked being separated by God from the Righteous, now strictly united
into one Body, and living together in perfect Peace and Unity; it seems to be
very congruous there should be No Sea in that State; which as it is the Type of
unquiet multitudes; so also is it an hinderance to the mutual communication of
Men one with another.

And here it may be convenient to give a brief Account of the Series, and Order
of things, according to Scripture; from the Time of the Approach of Christ's
Kingdom, until the End, and Delivery up of it to God.

(1.) Antichrist will fall, as soon as ever the Months of the Beast are
expired; and Mahometanism, which was designed as a Scourge to it, shall
consequently afterward cease to be a VVo to the Christian World. See Chapter
9, 12.11, 2, 3, 14.

(2.) The Jews also will be restored to their own Country, after the
fullfilling of the Times of the Gentiles; i. e. at the End of Antichristian
Times, Matthew. 21.24.

(3.) There will be Days of Great Tribulation; and immediately after them,
there will be many signs of Christ's coming, and of the End of the World; and
very great Preparations for the general Conflagration, Matthew. 24.3, 29. Mather
de Signo Filii Hominis. Dr. Burnet's Theory, B. 3. Chap. 10, 11, 12.

(4.) Then will appear some Extraordinary Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven;
upon which, all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn, and the Son of Man shall
be seen coming in the Clouds of Heaven, Matthew. 24.30.

(5.) As soon as ever Christ shall appear, the Dead will be raised, and the
Earth and Heavens of this present World, will at the same time be dissolved by
Fire; in which, the Wicked, Living, and Raised, are punished; 2 These. 1.8, 9. 2
Pet. 3.7.
Vengeance being to be taken on them, and they suffering Perdition in, and by
this Conflagration of the Heavens and Earth, which were kept in store, and
preserved by God for the perdition of ungodly men; and that not only of the
wicked men of that Generation which shall be then alive; but of all who have
died in their sins: it being plain, that our Savior bids all, of every
Generation watch, least that Day surprise them; and that he supposes that Sodom
and Gomorrah, which were set forth for an Example of Eternal Fire, should
suffer again in the Day of Judgment; and that all which repent not, must
perish, Luke 13.3, 5. Matthew. 11.24. Jude 7.
((...)) after the like manner with the Galileans, and those on whom the Tower
of Siloam fell; that is, by sudden, Bodily Judgments; which can happen to all
impenitents only at this General Judgment by Fire.

(6.) The whole Antichristian State, will be utterly annihilated, at the first
appearance of Christ: Satan will be bound for a Thousand Years: and the Wicked
will not be consumed in the Conflagration, but having Bodies capable of
undergoing it, will be brought thereby into a state of Confinement; and that,
as it were, in the Sea the Opinions of the Ancients about Limbus Patrum, in Bp.
Usher's answer to the Jesuit.
Ends, and Corners of the New Earth, during the whole space of the Blessed
Millennium, Rev. 20.

(7.) The Bodies of the Dead Saints being raised, are caught up into the Air;
and the Saints which come with Christ, appear in them, together with him in the
Heavens; and probably continue with him there in Glory, during the Thousand
Years: the Heavens being purged, and purified, as it were, by Fire; and the
Luke 10.18. Ephesians. 6.12.
Evil Spirits falling down like Lightning from the Air, which had been so long
possessed by them; whereby these High and Heavenly Places are, as it were,
prepared for the Reception of Christ and his Saints. For Righteousness must
dwell in the New 2 Pet. 3.13. (...). Romans 8.22, 23.
Heavens, as well as the New Earth; and the whole Creation groans, and waits
for this Redemption.

But this shall be further made out, as occasion offers, upon the following
parts of this Vision.

(8.) The Living Saints will be Malach. 3.1-3. 1 Cor. 3.10-16.
purged and purified as Gold and Silver, and many of them shall be saved at
this Day, with great Difficulty; but all shall be preserved by God (who knows
how to deliver the Godly, as he did Lot, and the Three Children in the Fiery
Furnace, which are Types of this Last and Great Deliverance, 2 Pet. 2.9.) in
the general Conflagration; and their Bodies being changed, they shall Reign
with Christ on the New Earth, the Romans 8.19-24. Burnet 's Theory, 4.7-9.
former being unfit, through the Vanity and Corruption it is subject to, for
such a purpose.

And this is that State of the Earth, which it earnestly expects, and groaneth
after; and for which it was designed by God; who seems to declare by the
Prophet Isaiah, (Chap. 45.17, 18.) that he created it not in vain; or to be
such a Chaos, and subject to so much Vanity, (Romans 8.20.) as it now is; but to
be inhabited by the Mystical Israel of all the Earth, (Isa. 45.17, 21, 22.) who
shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting Salvation.

(9.) All this will come to pass at the very beginning of Christ's Coming
(whose Proceedings will be very sudden and swift, Malach. 3.5. 1 Cor. 15.52.)
in which Malach. 4.1-4. Psalm 110.1.
the Wicked shall be burnt up, and trod down, and be as Ashes under the Soles
of the Feet of the Saints, lying at the Footstool of Christ's Throne; whilst
the Living Saints Reign with him on the New Earth, and the Raised Saints in the
New Heavens.

(10.) At the End of the Thousand Years, upon Christ's withdrawing some of his
more immediate Presence and Glory; Satan will stir up the Wicked Nations (who
had been all that while in a State of Contempt and Punishment, Malach. 4.1-4.)
to endeavor to destroy Christ's Kingdom on Earth; upon which he will catch up
his Saints into the Air, and give them incorruptible Bodies; and the whole Body
of Saints, with Christ their Head, shall finally Judge the wicked world; and
the New Heavens and Earth shall disappear, and fly away; the Son shall deliver
up his Kingdom to the Father; and the Saints shall remain with him to all
Eternity; whilst Satan, and all the Wicked, remain in the Lake for ever; which
is a place of Punishment; represented as a Lake, made out of the Liquefaction,
and Dissolution of the present Earth, burnt with Fire.

And this is a brief Scriptural Account of this great Transaction; against See
Dr. Beverley's Universal Christian Doctrine of the Day of Judgment.
which, although many Objections may be raised; yet there are few which may not
be as plausibly alleged against the Day of Judgment, as it is usually
understood by Divines.

2 And 5 I John [the Apoc^lyptick Apostle, unto whom Christ had sent, and
signified, and shown things to come, thereby testifying, that I was a Servant
of his, and greatly beloved by him, Rev. 1 1. Dan. 9, 23.10* 7, 11, 19.] saw
[and let it be observed diligently, for these words are true and faithful,
Verse 5.] the 6 Holy City [or Polity of Saints,] New Jerusalem [above, the
Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. Heb. 11, 10, 16.12, 22, 23.] coming down [with
Christ into the Regions of the Air, 1 These. 4.14-18. See on Chap. 19.7, 8, 9,
14.19.20, 4.] from God [the Father,] out of Heaven [before whose Throne it had
hitherto been, in various degrees of Exaltation. See on Chap. 12, 1.14, 1.]
prepared, [and arrayed in Christ's Righteousness,] as a Bride adorned for her
Husband [which is the Lamb Christ; that he might present to himself a Glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle; and at last perfectly unite it to God in
his Eternal Kingdom, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Rev. 19.7, 8, 9]

5 He does not say simply, as in the former Verse, I saw, but I John saw; by
that Emphatical Expression showing the great Importance of the Vision, and
likewise more earnestly affirming the Truth of that, which was to be of so
great use and consolation to the Saints: hereby imitating the Beloved Prophet
Daniel, who frequently makes use of the same Phrase, upon the like Occasions.

6 From a due compare of this place, with the places quoted in the Paraphrase,
it appears,

(1.) That the Holy City is no other than the Bride, or Saints, those Armies
which come with Christ in the Air to Judgment in his Kingdom; the very They,
who sit in Thrones, and Reign with him a Thousand Years, Chap. 20.4. as has
been before proved, and often observed.

(2.) That this New Jerusalem is in the New Heavens, or Heavenly Places of the
Air, as they are called in Scripture; into which the Saints come, or descend
from Heaven with Christ, as has been before observed, and consequently, that
the New Dr. Burnet 's Theory, 4.3, 8.
Heavens, and New Earth, are the Seat of the Thousand Years Reign of Christ;
and the Saints the Inhabitants of it; because they are here represented as
coming into it, as into a place newly prepared for them by God, Verse 1.

(3.) That this New Jerusalem State coming down from God, is the Kingdom of
Christ, in its Highest, and most Exalted State; which had been hitherto
represented in this Vision, as before the Throne of God, in diverse States and
Degrees of Exaltation; according as Christ's Kingdom increased, and his Enemies
were subdued by God the Father; at whose Right Hand he was to sit in a patient
Expectation of this Kingdom, until all his Enemies were made his Footstool:
which being now performed, he comes down from God out of Heaven, with his
Bride, or Church purified, and perfectly sanctified, into his glorious Kingdom,
in the New Heavens, and New Earth, the Seat of the Blessed Millennium. For thus
( Heb. 12.22. compared with Rev. 14.1.) the Saints first come unto Mount Sion,
and then, unto the City of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; or the
Archetypal State of Christ's Kingdom in Heaven (to which there is one always
correspondent on Earth) the Metropolis of the Christian Worship (which had its
Original from thence, Heb. 12.25. and of which it is a Pattern, Heb. 9.1.) the
True Temple built without hands, where our hopes is, and of which we are
Citizens; and which is the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and the Mother of all True
Christians, Gal. 4.26.

3 And I heard a great Voice out of Heaven [proclaiming a great Truth, and
showing me a New and Extraordinary Thing, which had never been before;] saying,
Behold [with thine eyes and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all
that I shall show thee, Ezekiel. 40, 4.44, 5.] the Tabernacle of G d [i. e. the
Kingdom of Heaven, of which the Tabernacle was a Type. See the Notes on Chap.
13.6 15, 5.] is [now] with 7 men [in the New Heaven, and New Earth, into which
it is come down from God out of Heaven, Verse 2.] and he [i. e. God,] will 8
dwell [or Tabernacle, a second time, John 1.14] with them [in a State of Glory,
Ezekiel. 37.26-28.] 9 and they shall be his [sanctified, Ezekiel. 37.28. 1 These,
5.23. Rev, 19.8.] People, and God himself shall be with them [in Christ; by
peculiar, extraordinary, perpetual, and Glorious Manifestations of Presence,
and Conduct;] and be their God [to sanctify them wholly, and then to unite
them unto himself in his Kingdom of Eternity, John 17.19, 21. 1 Cor. 1.8* 1
These. 5, 23.]

7 It comes down from God, and is with Men; and therefore a State in the
highest Heavens cannot be here meant; for it is not said, that it Ascends, or
that the Tabernacle of Men is with God; but that the Tabernacle of God is with
Men.

8 God in Christ had dwelt with Men before, in a State of Humiliation; and his
Glory appeared but to some few chosen ones (for the World knew him not, and his
own did not receive him, John 1.10, 11.) and that only at some transient
Manifestations of it, such as the Transfiguration on the Mount; but now very
great and glorious Burnet 's Theory, 4.7.
appearances of Divine Majesty and Presence, are promised; to be continued for
evermore in Heaven, after a Thousand Years duration in the New Heaven, and New
Earth, which are to fly away into Eternity, Ezekiel. 37.26.

9 Expressions taken from the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7, 8. and the
New Covenant mentioned Jerem 31, 31-34. 32, 40- 44. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.37, 26, 27,
28 Heb. 8. whereby is shown, that the Promises of that Covenant are not fully
accomplished but in the Glorious Kingdom of Christ; the Minister of the
Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not Man;
which comes down from Heaven in this Vision. Compare Heb. 8. with the first
Verses of this Chapter.

4 And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes [i. e. shall remove all
Causes and Occasions of Sorrow, Is. 25.8.60, 20.] and there shall be no more
death [or it shall be destroyed by Christ* Is 25.8 1 Cor. 15.26, 54.] neither
Sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain [i. e. it shall be a
state of Dr. Burnet 's Theory, 4.7
Indolency, free from pain and want:] for the former things [of the first
Heaven, and first Earth, the World of the first Adam, i. e. Sin, Diseas^s,
Want, Satan, and his wicked Agents, Hell, and Death;] are passed away [out of
the Limits of the first Heaven, and first Earth.]

5 And he that * sat on the [white] Throne [i. e. Christ, whom I had seen
sitting on his own distinct Throne, at the delivery up of the Kingdom, Chap.
20.11.] said, behold [for it is a thing much to be observed,] I [am now about
to] make all things new [i. e. to make a New Heaven, and a New Earth, and to
renew, and fully sanctify Humane Nature, John 17.19.] And he said unto me 10
Write; for these Words are true and faithful [i. e. the New Things declared by
me, in these Words, are now ready to be made by me; whereby all my Words,
Promises, and Declarations, will receive a full comple^ion; and will appear to
be True and Infallible.]

* There are Three Thrones ascribed to Christ in this Prophecy,

(1.) The Throne of the Father; in which Christ sits with him, from the
Resurrection, until the Appearance of his own Throne in his Kingdom, Chap. 3.21.

(2.) Christ's own Throne, or the Throne peculiar to his Humane Nature in his
Glorious Kingdom; called, his Throne, Chap. 3.21. and the Throne of the Lamb,
Chap. 22.3.

(3.) The White Throne, Chap. 20.11. in which Christ appears at the last
Judicial Act of his Kingdom j^ ^hen he is about to deliver it up to his Father.
Which app^^^^^ce having been seen but just before (although it be after this in
Time, and in the Order of Completion) is here referred to; to show, that the
same person, whom he had by way of Prolepsis, or Anticipation (a Figure
frequent in this Prophecy) seen dissolving all things; was now to appear as
making all things New; the same Christ being the Omega, and End, who shall
dissolve all things; and the Beginning, or Alpha, who is the Efficient Cause of
the New Creation, the New Heaven and New Earth; and of Psalm 22.27-31.102, 18.
the Generation of Saints, the people which shall be created to inhabit it.

10 To write, is to bring into Effect, as has been often See on Chap. 19.9.
observed before; whereby is signified, that all the New things he had promised
and declared in his Word, were just ready to be made hy him.

6 And he said unto me, 11 It is done [i. e. what I was about to do is now
performed; I have now sanctified and renewed my Servants, and delivered the
Creation from its Vanity, Corruption, and Bondage:] I [the Eternal Word in
Humane Nature,] am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End [of Prophecy; who
made all things in the beginning, and have now created them anew; and am
therefore able to say, it is done, Chap. 1, 8.3, 14.] I [who am able,] will
[also] give unto him [i. e. unto the Saints of all Ages,] that is a thirst [i.
e. that earnestly desire the full glory of m^ Kingdom;] of the Fountain of the
Water of Life [i e. full and lasting Communications of Grace and Glory, to all
the Living in this New Jerusalem, Isa. 4 3. John 4, 10, 14.7, 37.] freely [i.
e. out of my mere Grace and Favor, Isa. 55.1, 2.]

11 Christ here, at the completion of what he was to do for his Servants, uses
the same Expression he had before used ( Chap. 16.17.) after the Destruction of
his Enemies by the Vials: which may thereupon he looked upon as See on Chap.
3.12.
Monumental Inscriptions upon Two Pillars, placed, as it were, at Two
remarkable Boundaries of Prophecy; of which, the one respects Christ's making
his Enemies his Footstool; the other the Blessed State, and Lot of the Saints,
at the End of Days mentioned Dan. 12.13.

7 He that overcomes [i e all of each Church State who overcome the
Temptations of it. See Chapters 2, and 3.) shall inherit [as Sons,] all 12 [the
New] things [i. e. Graces and Blessings of my New King^om; under which is
comprised all that is really desirable; and all the Promises made to the
Churches, Chapters 2, and 3.] and I [Christ, God-Man,] 12 will be his God [and
Father, as having begotten him to this New Life, Ephesians. 2.10.] and he shall be my
Son [i. e. the Promises of the New Covenant, and the Privileges of Adoption
shall be bestowed upon him, in the highest, and fullest Sense of them. S^e on
Verse 3.]

12 12 Here is declared, that the Romans 8.
Restoration of all things, and the Adoption to the Inheritance, and
Redemption of Bodies, will be fully completed only in the Kingdom of Christ,
who is the Father of the New World, the World to come.

8 But [all] the 13 fearful [of the Antichristian State especially, who dare
not hold fast the Profession of their Faith without wavering, but for fear
forsake the assembling of themselves, drawing back unto Perdition, Heb. 12.23,
25, 38, 39.] and unbeleiving [in the Promises of Christ's Coming, because of
his long delay; and who upon that draw back from the true Faith, and scoff at
it, Heb. 12.35-39. 2 Pet. 2 and 3 Chapters] the abominable [and defiled in
their Mind, Conscience, and Practices, and to every good work reprobate, Tit.
1.15, 16.] and murderers [especially of the Witnesses and Saints, Chap. 18.24.]
and Whoremongers [who practice and advance Doctrines which promote uncleanness,
Chap, 2.6, 15] and Sorcerers, [who bewitch Souls, Chap. 18.23.] and Idolaters
[as the Antichristian Party are by way of Eminence,] and all Liars [who
bel^eve, and make a Lie, especially the great one of Antichristianism, Rev.
3.9. 2 These. 2.9. 1 Timothy 4.2.] shall have their part [not in the first
Resurrection to Blessedness and Holiness, but] in the Lake which burns with
fire and brimstone: which is the second Death [and that Eternal. See on Chap.
20.6, 10, 14, 15.]

13 All sorts of Sinners are here understood, but most especially the
Antichristian, to whom the Characters agree; Antichrist being the Man of Sin,
and Shinar, or Babylon, which is Antichristian Rome, being the very House, and
Base of all Wickedness, Ezekiel. 5.8, 11. Rev. 18.24.

9 And there came unto me 14 one [or the first and principal,] of the seven
Angels, which had the seven Vials full af the seven last plagues [the very same
who showed me the J^dgment of the Great Whore, Chap. 17.1] and talked with me,
saying, Come hither, I will show thee the Chap. 19.7-9.
Bride, the Lamb's Wife [i. e. the New Jerusalem State; and thou shall plainly,
and more distinctly see the Nature of it, and the vast difference there is
betwixt it, and the Antichristian State which I before showed th^e, Chap. 17.]

14 The same Angel that showed him the Judgment on the great Whore, shows him
also the New Jerusalem State; to manifest that the Destruction of Antichrist,
and the pouring forth of the Vials, are highly, and immediately preparatory to
Christ's Kingdom.

10 And he carried me away in the Spirit [i. e. I was in a Spiritual Ecstasy,
and was carried in Vision, Chap. 1, 10.17 3.] to a great and high mountain [to
denote the State of Christ's Church and Kingdom, now become a Mountain, Dan.
2.35. established in the Tops of the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills;
and to show that this was the City seen by Ezekiel, when he was set upon a very
high Mountain. Isa. 2.2. Ezekiel 40.2.] and showed me [not the Antichristian City
of the Whore, Chap. 17.3. but] that [truly] great City [the Burnet's Theory,
4.9.
general Assembly, consisting of all true Believers, and of the Spirits of all
just men made perfect; Heb. 12.22, 23.] the Holy [and Heavenly] Jerusalem [the
City of the Living God, and not the impure Idolatrous City of the Whore,]
descending out of Heaven [i. e. the highest Heavens, into the lower Regions of
it, Verse 2.] from God [by whom it was built, and the Kingdom was set up, Dan.
2.44. Heb. 11.10, 16.]

11 Having the Glory of God [i. e. the 15 glorious Presence of Christ, and of
his Saints, Matthew. 17:2. John 1.14. Heb 1.3] and her Light (...).
[or that which enlightened her.] was like unto a Stone most precious, even like
a Jasper Stone, clear as Crystal [i. e. the Presence of Christ was Of which
the Jasper is an Emblem. See Grot. on Chap. 4.3. and on this Verse.
firm and last^ng, dwelling and abiding in it; and it was full of Glory,
Purity, and Holiness. See on Chap. 4 3.]

15 For this is the most proper Representation of the Divine Glory; of which
the Glorious Appearances of Fire, Light, and Bright Clouds, the Schekinah under
the Old Testament, were but faint Images and Types.

12 And had a Wall great, and high [i. e it was under the immediate protection
of Divine Omnipotency, and those which were without, were excluded from it,
Isaiah 26.1-5. 60, 18. Zech. 2.5. Rev. 22.15.] and had twelve Gates [for free
access to all true Israelites, or Saints,] and at the Gates Twelve Angels [as
Cherubims to guard this New Paradise, that nothing which had not right to Life,
might enter therein, Genesis 3.24. Ezekiel. 48.31.] and Names written thereon, which
are the Names of the Twelve 16 Tribes of the children of Israel [to show that
none but God's People, the true Israelitism, had a right to this New Jerusalem
State. See on Chap. 7, 4-10.]

16 These are the very 14400, who were sealed, Chap. 7.

13 On the East three Gates, on the North three Gates, on the South three
Gates, and on the West three Gates [i. e. there were Twelve Gates, answerable
to the Twelve Tribes; Three on each side of the Four square City, toward each
Corner of the Heavens; to show, that the whole Israel of God, or all true
Believers, from every quarter of the World, have a right to the Kingdom of
Heaven, Luke 13.29. See Ezekiel. 48.31-35.]

14 And the Wall of the City [which was the Security and Protection of it, and
excluded every thing which was unclean,] had Twelve Foundations, and in them
the Names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb [slain from the Foundation of the
World; to show that the Kingdom and Church of Christ was secured and protected
by the Apostolical Doctrine, upon which it was built; Jesus Christ, the Lamb of
God, whose Blood is the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, by which all things
are secured unto us, ratified, and confirmed, being the chief Cornerstone,
Ephesians. 2.19-22]

15 And he that talked with me [i. e. the 17 Angel, Verse 9.] had a golden [not
a common] Reed [to show that this was the glorious, pure, precious, and refined
State of the Church, of which that measured by Ezekiel, with a common Reed, was
but a Type, Ezekiel. 40.3.] to measure the [Dimensions, and Contents of the Holy]
18 City [or whole Visible Church, which was now rescued out of the hands of the
Heathens, and Antichristian Enemies; and might therefore be measured, as being
agreeable to the pure and exact measure of God's Law; whereas it was before
left out as irregular, and was not measured, Chap. 11.2.] and [to measure,] the
Gates thereof [i. e. to declare who had right of access into it*] and the Wall
thereof [i. e. to show, and declare, in what the defense and security of God's
Church and Kingdom consists.]

17 The Temple (Chap. 11.1.) was measured by a Man, but this City by an Angel;
that by a common Reed, like a Rod; this by a simple Reed, but a Golden one; to
show that this State (which was the real accomplishment of Ezekiel's Visionary
City, and the full opening of the enclosed Temple) was an Angelical State, in
which the Saints were Equal to Angels, Math. 22.30. and that it was purged and
purified, as Gold in the Trial of the Fire of the Last Day; and that Christ had
broken to pieces the Heathen Nations, by the Rod of his Power (Psalm 2, 9.110,
2.) and would now measure and rule by a Golden Reed, as by a Golden Scepter,
(the Emblem of Favor and Reconciliation amongst the Eastern Nations, Esth. 4,
11.5, 2.8, 4.) and would no more chastise and correct his Servants.

18 The Temple only was measured before ( Chap. 11.1, 2.) and not the City; but
here there was no Temple, (Verse 22.) and the whole City is measured, in all
the Dimensions of it; to show, that the whole Visible Church was now Regular
and Symmetral, and was become a Living, and Holy Temple unto God.

16 And the City lies foursquare [to show that the Church in Christ's Kingdom,
shall be 19 Universal; a Body 20 well compact, firm, and immovable; constant,
21 perfect, and always like it self; in 22 perfect Peace and Repose; and cannot
receive the least 23 addition, or diminution, from what was once delivered unto
it:] and the length is as large as the breadth [i, e. it was 24 exactly
perfect;] and he measured the City with the Reed, Twelve Thousand Furlongs [to
show that it was perfectly 25 Apostolical; and exactly agreeable to the
measures of the Sanctuary of the Holy City 26 Jerusalem, and wholly different
from the Antichristian State of 26 Rome;] the 27 length, and the breath, and
the height of it are equal [i. e. it was 28 exactly agreeable with it self,
and entirely Apostolical, in the whole, and each part of it.]

19 Of which the Number Four is a Symbol, taken from the Four Quarters of the
World, whereby the whole World is denoted in Scripture.

20 Of which Nature are Buildings of Four square Stones, and Armies drawn up in
that Figure; whence Quadratum agmen, Corpus Quadratum, and Turres Quadratae,
are used in Authors for strong Bodies, and well compacted and firm Buildings,
and Armies; and such ought the Church to be, and shall be in Christ's Kingdom,
Isaiah 33 20. Psalm 78.69. Matthew. 16.18. Heb. 12.27, 28. Ephesians. 4.14, 16.

21 Whence the Phrase Homo (...), concerning a Perfect, Just, and Constant Man;
as a Square Figure, or Cube, is every way like it self, turn it on which side
you please; and so ought the Church to be always constant to it self in all its
Doctrines; not mutable and inconstant.

22 As a solid Square, Cube, or Die, is a Figure the most stable of any other;
which, throw it which way you will, always settles it self at last upon its own
Basis, and remains firm; because its Basis is broad and equal.

23 As a Square is altered from its own Figure into another, by the least
addition to it, or diminution from it: and thus the Church, when it takes from,
or adds to the Faith once delivered to the Saints, looses that perfection in
which it was built at first by God, and becomes irregular. Upon which, and
other Reasons, a Four square Figure is much in use in Scripture; it being the
Figure of the Sea on Chap 4.6.
Encampments round about the Tabernacle, and of the Divine Consessus in this
Prophecy; of the Exodus 27.^.
Altar, Exodus 28.16.
Breast Plate, and the most 1 Kings 6.20. 2 Chronicles. 3.8.
Holy Place under the Law; as also of many things belonging to Ezekiel. 41, 21.42,
20, etc. Vid. Grot. in locum.
Ezekiel's Visional Temple.

24 As that is a perfect Square, whose length and breadth are equal; whereas if
they were unequal, it would be a Parallelogram, or a Long Square; which is less
perfect than a Square. See Mr. Potter, Chap. 28.

25 For Twelve signifies Apostolicalness, from the Twelve Apostles; and a
Thousand is a Number of perfection, See on Chap. 7, 4.20, 4.

Here being also a Concurrence of Number and Measure; viz. of the Number
Twelve, with the Twelve Thousand Furlongs, the Measure of the solid Content of
this City; hereby may be signified, that in this State, there will be an exact
Concurrence of whatsoever God has required by his Rules and Laws to the
perfection of Church-States; as things are known to be exactly just and equal,
when they are not only the same they were at first in Number; but are agreeable
to the Standard Weight and Measure.

26 26 To show that this City is more peculiarly described in opposition to the
Roman Hierarchy; the Perimeter of the Cube 1200 Furlongs, is the Circuit of
Jerusalem, the Holy City, as the Perimeter of the Cube Twenty Five Thousand
Furlongs (which 25 is the Root of the Number of the Beast) is the Circuit of
Rome: and to the Twelve Gates, Angels, Tribes, Foundations in the New
Jerusalem, do answer Twenty Five Gates, Pastors, Parishes, Cardinals, etc. in
the City of Rome. Dr. Moor on this place, and his Mystery of Godliness, 5.16.
and Mr. Potter's Interpret. of the Number of the Beast.

27 Hence it appears,

(1.) That this is an Potter, Chap. 28.
Equilateral Square, the most perfect, and the most capacious of all such
Figures; whereby the Perfection, and the Universal Extent of Christ's Kingdom,
may be signified.

(2.) That the City it self Potter, Chap. 2, 3, 4, etc.
is measured 1200 Furlongs; from whence it follows, that it is of a solid,
Cubical Figure, like a Die, having Three Dimensions; and that its Measures are
solid Measures (whereby they are made to agree with Ezekiel's Measures, by Mr.
Potter) because nothing can measure a solid Figure but a solid measure. Whereby
the Firmness, and Solidity of this Church State is set forth; and also that it
Dr. Moor's Paraphrase on the place.
cannot be a City literally understood, and signifies not Walls, and Houses,
but Men; because there can be no City of such a Figure.

28 Whereas the Antichristian State, and all Human Models of Churches, are
disagreeable in themselves, from one another, and the exact Scripture-Measure
and Rule.

17 And he measured the 29 Wall thereof, an hundred forty and four A Cubit is
the Oldest, the most common, and most famous Measure amongst the people of God;
whence it is put by way of Eminence, for a Measure in general, Jerem. 51.13.
and i^ was the Measure of the Prophetic Temple, and City in Ezekiel.
Cubits [the Root of which is Twelve, the Apostolical Number; to show, that the
Safety and Security of the Church consists in its conformity to the Doctrine
and Discipline delivered by the Apostles, Acts 2 42. See the Notes on Chap. 7,
4.13, 18.] according to the measure of a Man [i. e. this Church State was
highly 30 rational, and exactly agreeable to the Intellectual Capacities of
Mankind, and such as Men of Understanding may find out, when ^hey make use of
that part of Wisdom by which the Roots of Numbers are extracted. See on Chap.
13.18.] that is the Angel [to show, that this was a State of Men above this
present mortal State, in which the children of the Resurrection are made equal
unto the Grot. in loc.
Angels, Luee 20 35, 36.] and that it was not Beastian, or Antichristian, but
Angelical.]

29 The Wall is measured; to show that Apostolicism (signified by Twelve, the
Root of its measure) contains all things in it necessary to a Church; as the
Wall does enclose the whole City; and is the fixed and unmovable Dimensions of
it.

30 Whereas the Antichristian State is irrational; disagreeable in its self,
and from the Divine Rule; in correspondence to its Root 25, which is a surd and
irrational Number, uneven and irregular, in the Product arising from it, as
well as in its self. See Mr. Potter, and the Notes on Chap. 13.18.

18 And the building of the Wall of it was 31 Jasper [ i. e. it was firm, and
impregnable, and withal glorious; Verse 11.] and the City was pure Gold, like
unto clear Glass [i. e. this was a precious and pure State, and The gaudy Whore
had only External Ornaments; but this State is transparent, pure, and clean,
within, as well as without. Forestus in locum. See Chap. 4, 6.15, 2.
thoroughly enlightened by God, Verse 23.]

31 This Stove is not to be subdued by the knocks of the Hammer, but is so
strong, that it breaks all that strikes against it: Dr. Moor. See Grot. on Chap
4.3. and Verse. 11.

19 And the Foundations of the Wall of the City, were garnished with all manner
of 32 precious Stones [to show the Excellency of Christ, the (b) cornerstone
of this Spiritual Building, and of the Doctrine of the Gospel, upon which it
was bui^t by his Apostles; and the great variety and compleatness of the
precious Gifts and Graces of this State:] The first Foundation was Jasper, the
second Sapphire, the third a Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerald.

32 The Precious Stones hereafter particularly mentioned, are the same with
those in the Breast Plate of the High Priest, See Verse 14. and Braunius de
Vestit. Hebr. 2.26.
( Exodus 28.17, 21.) but placed in a different Order from them; but for what
Reasons I am not able to determine; as I neither can precisely and positively
the particular signification of each of them. Only in general they may signify,

(1.) Perfection of Glory, Prosperity, and Happiness; in the highest manner the
Creation is capable of, in its renewed State, much beyond the choicest, and
most precious things of this World; or even of Paradise it self, whose Rivers
flowed from the Land of Gold and Pearl.

(2.) Perfection of Gifts and Graces, Divine Presence and Illumination,
Doctrine and Truth; and whatsoever else may be justly thought to be the true
meaning of the Stones, and the Vrim and Thummim in the Oracular Breast Plate of
the High Priest. For which see the Commentators on Exodus 28. and 39. Lev. 8.
Deuteronomy. 33.8. and Braunius de Vestit. Sacerdot. Hebraeor. See also 1 Chronicles. 29.2.
2 Chronicles. 3.6. Isaiah 54.11-14. Ezekiel* 28.13. Tobit, Chapters 13, and 14. and Dr.
Moor's Paraphrase, and other Commentators on this place.

20 The fifth Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius, the seventh Chrysolite, the eighth
Beryl; the ninth a Topaz, the Tenth a Chrysoprasus, the eleventh a Jacinth; the
twelfth an Amethyst [i. e. this was a glorious State, in which all true
Israelites of the Twelve Tribes, whose Names were engraven on the Twelve See
Ainsw. on Exodus 28.
Stones of the Breast Plate, were joined, and united into one Body with the
True Christians, who kept and professed the Doctrine they had received from the
Twelve Apostles of the Lamb Christ.]

21 And the Twelve Gates were Twelve Pearls, every several Gate was of one
Pearl [to show the inestimable value of the Gospel, that one Pearl, of great
price; and the pure 33 conversation, and unity 34 of all who are to enter into
Christ's Kingdom, by him the only Door, and Way to Eternal Life, Matthew. 13.45,
46. John 10.1-14.] and the Street of the City was pure Gold, as it were
transparent Glass [i. e. the Conversation 35 of the Saints of this State was
pure and incorrupt, as refined Gold; and sincere, as if their Thoughts and
Hear^s were transparent to each other; and the very places of concourse were
free from all manner of defilement; contrary to what was in the Antichristian
great City, which was defil^d with Uncleanness, and the Blood of the Witnesses,
which lay dead in the Streets of it, Chap. 11.8.]

33 For they are of a White color. Grot. in loc.

34 Pearls are called Unions, because they are always found united together,
and never separate from each other. Plin. Histor. 9. 35.

35 For the Street is the Forum Urbis, as Grotius notes; the public place
where Men meet, and transact Business. Moor 's Paraphr.

22 And I saw no Templi appellatione destinato abstinebant Christiani. Grot. in
Act. 7.48.
Temple therein [i e. no one particular place in which alone God would be
worshipped, and manifest his Presence, as in the Temple of Jerusalem, 1 Kings
8.] for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple thereof [i. e. do
afford their Presence immediately, and after a glorious manner in this State;
whereby each pious Soul becomes a Temple for God and Christ, to dwell, and
manifest themselves in, Exek. 48.35. John 4*23.20, 23. Acts 7.46-50. Rev. 3.20.]

23 And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it
[who were as it were, ashamed, an^ confounded at the greater Glory of the
Divine Kingdom, and Presence, Isa. 24, 23.60, 19.] for the 36 glory of God [the
Father, the Fountain, and Original of all Being whatsoever, and of all Light,
Knowledge, Life, Love, Grace, and Comfort,] did lighten it [by a Light
communicated from him,] and the Lamb [Christ, who is the Glory of God, Light of
Light, and very God of very God,] is the light thereof [by the Glory of the
Godhead, appearing illustriously in his Humane Nature. See Verse 11.]

36 God is not subject to the Son in this his glorious Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15.27.
and therefore he is said to be the Light of it; and Christ the Son is said to
be the (...), or the Lamp; as shining by a Light communicated from the Godhead,
and residing in him, who is the brightness of his Father's Glory, and the
express Image of his Person. See Bishop Pearson on the Creed, and Dr. Bull's
Defensio Fidei Nicaenae.

24 And the 37 Nations of them which are Isa. 45.20. (...). Sunt ilii ex
Gentilium reliquiis quos Diluvium Ignis, non inundaverit. Innelliguntur, ni
fallor, qui cladem illam in Christi (...) saturam evaserint, quando venturus
est ad hosts Ecclesiae suae perdendos. Mede's Works, page 915.
saved [i. e. those Living Remaining Saints, who shall have escaped the Sword
of Christ's Mouth; and the Fire for the Perdition of the Ungodly, Isa. 4
2-5.45, 20.60, 3, 11. See the Notes on Chap. 20.6.] shall walk in the Light of
it [i. e. shall partake of the Glories of the New Jerusalem, in the New Heaven,
where Christ and the Dead raised incorruptible, Reign together, Isa. 2, 5.60,
2, 3. See the Not s on Chapter 20.4] and the Kings [and Priests,] of the [New]
Earth [i e. the Saints living upon the New Earth, and reigning with Christ a
Thousand Years, Chap. 20, 6.21, 1.] do bring their Glory, and Honor into it
[i. e. acknowledge all their Glory and Happiness to be derived from that State
above, and shall at last be caught up into it. See on Chap. 20. Psalm 68,
29.62, 10. 1 These. 4.17.]

37 Called Nations of the saved, to distinguish them from the Wicked Nations,
Chap. 20.8. the Slain, and Dead, killed by the Sword of Christ's Mouth, and
devoured by Fire from Heaven, Chap. 19, 21.20, 8, 9. See the Notes on the
former Chapter.

It is acutely observed by Mr. Ep. 20.
Mede, That the State of the New Jerusalem, and the State of the Nations, which
shall walk in the Light thereof, are different; as is plain, because the
Nations, and Kings of the latter, walk in the Light of the former, and bring
their own Glory to it, as to a State different, and distinct from it: by the
former of which seems plainly to be meant the Jerusalem above, which comes down
from God out of Heaven, with Christ, and his Saints, into the New Heaven; and
by the latter, the Camp of the Saints upon Earth; those Living, Remaining
Saints, who shall dwell in the New Earth for a Thousand Years, partaking of the
Glories, and Happiness of the Sain^s above with Christ, who Reign in the New
Heavens, as in a Palace of Glory; from whence the Divine Light transfuses it
self upon the Saints below; who walk and rejoice in it, being directed and
influenced by it; until by Degrees (those Assistances, and powerful
Communications being abated and withdrawn) they began to be too much in love
with their State upon Earth, and did not so earnestly long to be caught up to
be with Christ for ever: Whereupon Satan was loosed, and the wicked Nations
drew together against them: Which is the Laodicean State of the Church,
described in the Third Chapter; and will appear to be the true meaning of this
place, to any one who will diligently compare it with what has been discoursed
on the former Chapter.

25 And the 38 Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day [but shall be open
continually, Isa. 60.11.] for [although Men shut their Gates at Night; yet]
there shall be no night there [and therefore the Gates need never be shut;
because God and the Lamb are the Light of it, Verse 23.]

38 This seems to refer to the Free Communications there shall be in this
State, betwixt the Saints upon Earth, and the Saints above in the Heavenly
Jerusalem, with Christ; who may Et si in nonnullis solenniis se praesens sistat
Christi numen, circumstantibus Angelorum turmis, etc. Burnet. Theor. Tellur.
lib. 4. 7.
perhaps, descend sometimes upon Earth, and ascend again to Heaven, according
to what is typified by Jacob's Mystical Ladder, Genesis 28.12.

26 And they [i. e. the 39 Kings of the Earth,] shall bring the glory and
honor of the Nations into it [i. e. the whole Body of the remaining and Living
Saints, who are the saved of the Nations, shall acknowledge all their Glory to
be from this Heavenly New Jerusalem, and shall at last be caught up into it,
Verse 24.]

39 The Body of Saints upon Earth, are a Kingdom of Saints; which, to show the
Universality of them, and the Polity, which will be in that State, are
represented as Naetions, under Kings, as Heads and Governors.

17 And there shall in no wise enter into it any [the least] thing
[whatsoever,] that defiles [i. e. it shall be a State of perfect Holiness,
Isaiah 35.8.] neither [any thing] whatsoever [that] works abomination [or
Idolatry,] or makes a Lie [i. e. the great Lie of Antichristianism,] but they
which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life [i. e. none shall enter into this
State, but those who are amongst the Living, and are either raised to Life, or
are alive, and remain unto the Coming of the Lord. See the Notes on Chap. 20.

CHAP. XXII.
The Text.
1 1 AND he [i. e. the Angel, Chap. 21.9] showed me a pure 2 River of Water of
Life, clear as Crystal [i. e. abundance, and even full ess of Purely Spiri^ual,
Divine, and Heavenly Life, Gifts, Graces, and Refreshments, Psalm 36.8. Ez.
47.1. Joel 3 18. Zech. 14.8. John 7.37, 38.] proceeding out of the 3 Throne of
God, and of the 4 Lamb [as out of its Head, or Fountain, Genesis 2.10. Psalm 36.4.
Cha^. 21.6.]

Annotations on CHAP. XXII.
1 This Chapter, to Verse the 6th, ought not to have been separated from the
former, as being one continued Description of the City, in the midst of which
this River was, Verse 2.

^ This is in allusion to the River of Paradise, which went out of Eden, as out
of its Head and Fountain, to water the Garden, Genesis 2.10. Whereby, as also by
the Tree in the midst of this City, is intimated, that this State will be
Paradisaical.

3 In Ezekiel's Vision the River comes out of the Temple and Altar; But there
being no Temple in this New Jerusalem, the Throne of God is put in the place of
it; to show that this State shall be wholly Divine.

4 The Lamb's Throne is the distinct, and peculiar Throne of Christ, as the Son
of Man, in his Glorious Kingdom; in which State the Divinity will so dispense
it self to the Humane Nature, as that it shall have a distinct Glory of its
own, although derived from the Divine; and the Son may be said not to be
subject, (1 Cor. 15.28.) because he is a King; even as in Christ's State of
Humiliation, the Divinity did not generally manifest it self so gloriously, and
illustriously in the Humanity, but that Christ might be said to have emptied
himself of his Divine Glory, Phil. 2.6, 7. See page 441, 442. and Chap. 21.5.

2 In the midst of the street [or broad places; whereby is signified the
Assembly of the whole Body of the Saints, Chap. 20.9.] of it [i. e. of the
City,] and of either side of the River was there the 5 Tree of Life [i. e. this
was a Paradisiacal State, in which the Saints raised, and changed, could dye no
more, but were made equal to the Angels, Luke 20.36. 1 Cor. 15.] which bare
Twelve manner of Fruits [i. e. afforded perfect 6 Pleasures, and Consolations
to this 6 Apostolical Israelitism,] and yielded her Fruit every Month [i. e.
Variety and Fullness of Joy for 7 evermore, Psalm 1. and 16, 11.92* 12, 14.
Ezekiel. 47.7, 12.] and the 8 Leaves of the Tree, were for the healing of the
Nations [of the saved, who were to walk in the Light of the New Jerusalem
State; that is, the Living Saints were to be preserved during the Thousand
Years, in Bodies changed, which should afterward be made incorruptible. See on
Chap. 20. and 21.24]

5 Or A Tree of Life, viz. one on each side, at just, and convenient distances;
for they were very many (as appears from Ezekiel. 47.7, 12. and from the
Expression here used) at the Bank of the River, on the one side, and on the
other: and yet they are here represented as One Tree, because they were all of
One Kind, viz. of the same kind with the Tree of Life, in the midst of
Paradise; by which, Life was Sacramentally conveyed to our first Parents; and a
Symbol was given of the Immortality of the renewed Paradisiacal State of
Christ's Kingdom.

6 For the Number Twelve is a Symbol of Perfection, of Apostolicalness, and of
the True Israel of God, now united into one Body in this State.

7 The Year being the measure of all Time, bearing Fruit as often as there be
Months in the Year, must needs signify the continual, constant fruitfulness of
it. Dr. Hammond on the place.

8 The Ezekiel. 47.12. to which place this Verse alludes.
Fruit of this Tree is for Meat; i. e. for solid Nourishment, and ordinary
Food; but the Leaves of it, are only for medicine, or healing; from whence it
follows, that the Nations here mentioned, had some Remains of Corruptibility
left, which required Care, and needed Preservation by Medicines; by which is
admirably set forth the different State of the raised Saints, caught up
immediately to Christ, into a State of Incorruptibility; and that of the living
Saints on Earth, (the very Nations mentioned Chap. 21, 24, 26.) whose Bodies
are only changed, but not made incorruptible at first; as has been 451, 452.
already frequently observed; and therefore are represented as living indeed,
Chap. 20.6. but with some Principle of Corruptibility in them, which stood in
need of Healing; whereas the Dead Saints being raised to a Life of
Incorruptibility, are very aptly represented as fed and nourished with the very
Fruit of she Tree of Life; that is, by immediate Communications of
Incorruptibility from God, and Christ, who is Life, John 1, 4.5, 26. and Chap.
6.

3 And there shall be no more curse [or no Effects of Sin in this New Paradise,
as there were in the first, Genesis 3.14, etc.] but the Throne of God, and of the
Lamb shall be in 9 it [by glorious Manifestations, and Communications;] and his
16 Servants [which were sealed. See Chap. 7.4.] shall serve him [perfectly in
this State, and never fall from it, as our first Parents did, but shall be
Kings and Priests to God for ever.]

9 This whole City, or State, as well that on Earth as in the Heavens, shall be
replenished with Communications from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb; which
shall be in the City on the New Earth, by its Light shining on it from the New
Heaven, Chap. 21.24.

10 This Relative Particle respects both God and the Lamb; and yet is of the
Singular Number; to show the Unity of the Godhead, and the Equality of the
Father, and the Son, the Lamb as one with the Eternal Word.

4 And they shall see his Face [i. e. partake of the Nature and Glory of God,
and of Christ, Matthew. 5.8. 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2.] and his Name shall be in
their Foreheads [i. e. they shall be manifestly known to be his Servants; who
were wont to be marked on the Forehead; and they shall be Holiness to the Lord,
according to the Inscription on the Highpriests ^r^ntlet. See the Notes on
Chap. 7, 3, 4.14, 1.]

5 And there shall be 10 no night there [i. e. no impuri^^, and (...)
interruption of Happiness and Comfort, ^s^l^ ^6.^ (...) Joh^ ^.5, 6, 7.] and
they need no Candle [(...),] ^ither ^igh^ ^f the Sun [i. e. no Natural Light,
of which the Sun is the Fountain,] for the Lord God gives them Light [i. e.
affo^deth them hi^ glorious Presence, and Consolations;] and th^^ (...) for
ever and ever [i. e. after the Thousand Years M^di^^o^y Kingdom, they shall
reign with Christ for ever in the highest Heavens; for Christ's Kingdom is an
Eternal Kingdom, and of it there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. See Chap. 3, 21.5,
10.20, 4, 6.]

10 This, and the foregoing Verses, contain a Repetition of what had been said
before; either by way of Genesis 41.32. ^hil. 3.1.
Assurance, and Confirmation, as is usual in Prophecy; or with reference to the
Saints upon Earth, upon the mention of them, Verse 2. or with respect to the
Persons, to whom that is now accommodated, which had been before spoken
concerning their City, or State. Compare Chap. 21.23, 25. with the fifth Verse
of this Chapter.

6 And he [i. e. the first of the Seven Angels which had the Seven Vials, Chap.
21.9.] said unto me, 11 these sayings [of the Prophecy of this Book, Verse 7.]
are faithful and true [i. e. important, certain, and infallible Truths. See on
Chap. 19.9.] And the Lord 12 God of the Holy Prophets [i. e. Christ, who spoke
by them, and whose Spirit inspired them, Acts 3.21. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12.3, 19.
2 Pet. 1.21.] sent [or did send at first, Chap 2.1. and all along in this
Prophecy,] his Angel [or Min^string Spirits,] to show unto his Servants, the
things [of this Prophecy,] which must shortly [after the Day of the Sea the
Notes on Chap. ^.1^.
Resurrection, the time when this Vision was seen, and from whence it
commences; begin] to come to pass [in order, one after another. See on Chap.
1.1.]

11 Here begins the Conclusion, or Epilogue of this Sacred Drama; wherein the
Angel (says Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase on the place) began to conclude, and
fold up his Discourse, and to sum up what I had seen in this Vision, telling
me, that all this, as strange, and as glorious as it was, should certainly come
to pass. And the Vision ends, as it began, with a Declaration of the Chap. 1.5:
Truth and Importance of the Prophecy; and of its Chap 1.1.
speedy issuing into Event; and of the most remarkable things contained in it.

12 Here is a plain Assertion of the Divinity of Christ, concerning whom these
words are to be understood; as is manifest by comparing them with Chap. 1.1.
and Verse 16. of this Chapter.

7 Behold 13 I [Christ] come 14 quickly [in Judgment to my Kingdom; for the 15
Vials are now ready to be poured forth:] Blessed [therefore, and this
admonition is at this time, of all others, the most seasonable, when the
severest Judgments of God are ready to be executed;] is he that keeps the
Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. [See Chap. 1, 3.3, 11.]

13 Here Christ himself speaks; this being a Sacred Drama; in which, according
to the Nature of such Representations, several Persons are introduced, and
there are many interlocutory passages; as is observable in the Song of Solomon,
which is a Dramatick Poem, in the Form of a Pastoral Eclogue.

14 This Epilogue, or Conclusion, seems to refer to some of the most important,
and remarkable passages of the whole Vision; which it behoved all to take the
chiefest notice of; according to the Method observed in the first Chapter;
which is, as it were, a Prologue, or Introduction to it. And accordingly, the
sudden Coming of Christ to take Vengeance of his Enemies, in the pouring forth
of the Vials, being one of the most remarkable Events foretold in this Vision;
is here again mentioned, as it had been before, Chap. 1.7.

15 For it seems probable, from Chap. 21.9. that this part of the Vision was
seen and heard by John, just before he had the Representation of the pouring
forth of the Vials; when the Admonition to keep and observe the Words of this
Prophecy was most highly seasonable: For by a close consideration of Chap. 17,
1.19, 7-11.21, 9. it seems, as if the first, or principal Angel of the Vials,
which showed John the Judgment of the Whore, and the New Jerusalem; gave him
also this Conclusion at the same time; aptly fitted to the time just before the
pouring forth of the Vials; when it was necessary, that the Saints should not
only have a comfortable View of the blessed State, but also be assured of the
sudden coming of it; that they might be sustained under the dismal Tribulation
then approaching; whereupon they are again assured of his quick coming, Verse
12.

8 And I John [the Apocalyptick Apostle, and Servant of Christ, See on Chap.
21.2.] saw these [foregoing] things [relating to the New Jerusalem,] and heard
[the Voice of Jesus, and of his Angel, Verse 6, 7. and 16 both saw, and heard
all the Sayings, and Vision of this Book: and therefore am worthy of belief, as
having been an Eye and Ear-witness of] them. And when I had heard and s^^^ [the
glorious State of the New Jerusalem,] I fell 17 down to worship before the Feet
of the Angel which showed me these things [and who had also brought me the glad
tidings of a Judgment on God's Enemy the Whore, Chap. 17.1. and of the
Marriage-Supper, Chap. 19 9.]

1^ Although these Words have an immediate reference to ^h^^ had been seen just
before, yet they may also refer to all the (...) going Visions of this Book.

17 It is something difficult to determine whether this passage be the same
with the former, related Chap. 19.7-21. and only twice repeated, to show the
Importance of the Matter, and the great danger of falling into the sin of
Idolatry; although the Relation be something different from the former
(according to the manner of the Evangelists, the latter of whom deliver some
things more fully and completely than the former) and the Two Representations,
although of the same thing, are very different; the one being upon the View of
the New Jerusalem State, in its full Glory, and complete Description; the
other, Chap. 19. only upon the sight of the preparation of the Bride, and her
coming down out of Heaven.

9 Then says he unto me [immediately, in great haste, and with great Zeal, and
Vehemence. See Chap. 19 10] See thou do it not; for I am thy Fellow Servants
[and therefore am not to be worsh pped,] and [the Fellow-Servant] of thy
Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep 18 the sayings of this Book [i.
e. I, although an Angel of so great Rank, and Ministry, am yet but a
Fellow Creature with thee, and the Holy Saints, and Witnesses; and their
Fellow Servants also in the New Jerusalem State, in which you and they shall be
equal unto Angels; and therefore I am not to be worshipped; Worship being due
to Superiors, not Equals, Creatures and Servants. See on Chap. 19.10.] Worship
[therefore,] God, [and him alone, Matthew. 4.10]

18 Here the Angel seems to intimate, as if the sayings of this Book were a
Caution against the Apostatical State, and the Worship of Angels; and also the
Rule and Model of Divine Worship, from the first Apostolical State of the
Church, typified by Ephesus, to the highest State of it in the New Jerusalem;
according to which, as he could not receive such Worship, so ought not John
also to have given it unto him. And this passage also affords a clear proof of
the Divinity of Christ in Humane Nature; because Divine Worship is paid unto
him all along in this Book.

10 And he [i. c. Christ. Ver. 12, 13, 16, 20.] says unto me, Seal 19 not the
Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book; for the time [of the completion of all
the Sealings mentioned in this Book,] is [now] at hand.

19 These words must refer to the times of the seventh Trumpet, when all the
Thunders were unsealed, Chap. 14. just before the pouring forth of the Vials;
until when, it could not properly be used; it being expressly commanded, that
every one of the Thunders should be sealed.

11 He that 20 is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy [i e.
guilty of any other sin, all of which defile a Man, Mat. 15.18. Jam. 1, 21.3,
6*] let him be filthy still, and he that is righteous [or justified,] let him
be righteous still: and he that is holy [or sanctified,] let him be holy still
[i. e. the time and place of Repentance is no more to be found, but he that is
unjust, and filthy, will not repent; and he that is just, and holy, shall
continue so still.]

20 These words seem to have a respect to the Times just before the pouring
forth of the Vials; when those Men who had been proof against the preaching of
the Everlasting Gospel, were judicially delivered over to punishment; because
of the willful Obstinacy, and Hardness af their Hearts: whereupon they
blasphemed, and repented not. See Chap. 16.9.

12 And behold I come 21 quickly [to Judgment, in my Kingdom] and my reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall be [good or bad, Matthew.
16.27. Rev. 10.18.20, 12-15.]

21 This must be supposed to be spoken before the pouring forth of the Vials;
in which the Wicked receive their Reward in Punishments.

13 I am Alpha, and Omega the Beginning, and the End, the First and the Last
[i. e. I am the Eternal God, who as I gave Being to all things, so do I put an
end to them too; and I am more especially showing this my Divine Power, in
bringing all things to perfection in my Kingdom, and thereby putting an end to
Prophecy, whose main scope and design was with reference unto it. See on Chap.
1, 8.21, 6]

14 Blessed 22 [in Christ's Kingdom, Dan. 12.12. See on Chap. 14.13] are they
that The King's M S. reads (...), that is, wash their garments.
do his Commandments [i. e. are now found, and appear to have kept them,] that
they may have right [by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, and upon their
appearing in the fine The King's M S. reads (...), that is, wash their garments.
white Linen of Christ's Righteousness: See on Chap. 19.7, 8.] to the Tree of
Life [i. e. to the incorruptibility of the new Jerusalem State, verse 2.] and
many enter in through the Gates of the City [i. e. be admitted into that State.
See on chap. 21.6, 12, 21.]

15 For without [this blessed State, in the four corners of the new Earth, see
on chap. 20.8.] are Dogs [i. e. the Members of the Antichristian A Dog is
thought by the best interpreters to signify a Sodomite, Deuteronomy. 23.18. Canes, qui
Supra, cap. 21.8. (...), ut Hebrei exponunt, id quod est, Deuteronomy. 23.18 Grot. in
Locum.
Sodom, chap. 11.8. and those who are without the Covenant, Matt. 15.26.
Profane, Brutish, and Persecuting Apostates, Matt. 7.6. 2 Pet. 2.22] and
Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
lives, and makes a Lie [i. e. all wicked Persons, but especially the
Antichristian Party, to which these Characters eminently agree, see on Chap.
21.8, 27.]

16 I Jesus have sent my Angel [from the beginning Chap. 1.1.
of this Prophecy, all along to this present conclusion of it;] to testify unto
you [John, and all my other Servants, chap. 1.1.] these things in the Churches
[i. e. in, or concerning the seven Successions of my Church, see the Notes on
chap. 1.4. and on chap. second and third,] I am the root, and the offspring of
David [i. e. the Messiah, proceeding from David as from a root, to whom the
Kingdom (...).
was Promised, see on chap. 5.5.] and the bright and morning Star [which only
dawned in the Church Succession of Thyatira, but now shows in full brightness
at the succession of my Kingdom, see the Notes on chap. 2.28.]

17 And the Shirit [speaking to, and in the several Successions of the Church,
chap. 2. and 3. and making intercession for the Saints, Romans 8.26, 27.] and
the Bride [i. e. the Saints, chap 19.7, 8.21, 2] say, come [Lord Jesus, come
quickly in thy Kingdom.] And let him that hears [and obeys the words of
this Prophecy,] say [joyning as in consort,] come [Lord Jesus.] And These are
Christ's Words, and are a kind of Antiphon^, in ths Divine Anthem, or Sacred
Dialogue; wherein Christ in Answer to the Saints, says, as it were; if you so
desire my coming, I will not be backward in inviting you, let him, say I, that
is a thirst come.
let him that is a thirst [for the comforts, and refreshments of the new
Jerusalem State, see on chap. 21.6.] come: And whosoever will [or has a sincere
desire for these times of full refreshments,] let him take the Water of Life
freely [for the incorruptibility of this State is of my free grace and favor,
chap. 21, 6.22, 1.]

18 For I [Christ, verse 20.] testify [and declare All this is frequently the
import of the word Testify in Scripture.
openly, with the greatest earnestness, zeal, and holy Asseveration, as with an
Oath, John, 13.21. Romans 1.9. Acts 18.5.] unto every man, [of what Nullo
excepto, pontifice, vel concilio. Paraeus in loc.
quality, or dignity soever] that hears the words of the Prophecy of this
Book, [that it is a Book of so great perfection and life that] if any man shall
Elegans est allusio in (...) and (...). Grot. in Loc.
add unto these things [contained in this Book of Revelations, and by
consequence to any other part of Scripture by 22 Traditions, and rash, Rashly
to be the Authority of a false Interpretation of Scripture, is to take God's
Name in vain in a high degree. Mr. Mede. This is the last authoritative
Prophecy that is likely to come from Heaven, to be a rule of Faith to the
Church; and whosoever shall go about to infuse any other expectations into men,
than usually are agreeable to these Visions, God shall bring on him the
Judgments here denounced against his greatest Enemies; and so in like manner
whosoever shall derogate from the authority of this Prophecy, or occasion men's
not receiving the admonition of Christ here contained, in every part thereof,
God shall cast him off. etc. Dr. Hammond's Paraphr.
or wilfully false Interpretations,] God shall add unto him [besides the
retributions of his ordinary Justice, and Wrath,] the [dreadful,] plagues that
are written in this Book.

22 Here is a change of Persons, and John speaks; whose words plainly refer to
the admittance and entrance of the Saints into the new Jerusalem State; and
therefore must have respect to the times after the Pouring forth of the Vials,
when the Wicked were shut out of the City.

19 And if any man shall take 23 away [as the Antichristian Party has even the
Scriptures themselves,] from the words [or authority,] of this of Prophecy, God
shall take away his part and the Book of Life, [i. e. he shall not be found
written in the Book of Life, among the Living in the New Jerusalem,] and out of
the Holy City [from which he shall be debarred, and excommunicated,] and from
the Things [promises, and blessings,] which are written in this Baok.

23 As the Antichristian Party has done.

20 He which testifies these things [i e. Christ, who is Truth it self,] says,
surely [believe it, for it is a certain, and infallible Truth,] I come quickly
[i. e. all my comings are unexpected, and by Surprise; I begin very suddenly
after the date of this Vision, to bring it into effect. I hasten all things to
an end in the just and due time; and am now just upon coming to put an end to
this, and all other Prophecies, being not slack in performing them, as some men
count slackness, 2 Pet. 3.9.] Amen [saith John the beloved Apostle, and Servant
of Christ, in the Name, and Person, of Angels and Saints his fellow Servants;]
even so [be it; [ come Lord Jesus [in thy Kingdom, come quickly.]

21 The 24 [Justifying, Sanctifying, and efficaciously operative] Grace
[Proceeding from the undeserved Love, Favor, and Assistances,] of our Lord
[God] Jesus Christ [our Savior, and anointed Prophet, Priest, and King,] be
with you all [Churches and Saints, to whom this great Prophetical Epistle is
Written] Amen. [So be it, and so it will certainly be.]

24 This whole Book of Prophecies being as it were one entire Epistle Monitory,
to the Church of God throughout all Ages of the World; it is concluded, as it
was begun, according to the custom of the Apostles, with the usual Form of
Valediction in their Epistles.

AMEN, AMEN, COME LORD JESUS, COME QUICKLY
FINIS.

