LOYALTIES TEARS FLOWING AFTER THE BLOOD OF THE ROYAL SUFFERER CHARLES I. etc.

ENGLANDS Glory and Shame.

BY J. B.

-- Dabit Indignatio versum. Anno Dom. 1649.

LOYALTIES TEARS Flowing after the Blood of the ROYAL SUFFERER, CHARLES the I.
etc.
-- Dabit Indignatio versum.

BLood! and a Kings! and such a Kings! and that
Not shed by Tigres or by Dragons Laws,
But Christian humble Subjects Zeal! O blot
Out those faint words which on the Teeth and Paws
Of Barbarism were engraved: and in this Nation
For Salvagenesse's Names, write Reformation.
Come, come, Amazement, and attend this Day
Which lets the Powers of night and darkness loose:
Which Capital enacts it, not to say
I justify my Justice-trampling Foes:
Which writes a Law, and that in Royal Blood,
That it is in England, Treason to be Good.
A Day which damns it as a deadly Crime
To be a King: A Day in which the stain
Of murderous cruelty those pour on him
Who strove their butchering fury to restrain;
Making that Prince a Tyrant, who denies
His Subjects but his leave to Tyrannize.
A Day in which the sacred Head offends
Because he stoops not to the kicking feet:
In which Laws Basis all Laws structure rends
By not subverting his own Judgment Seat:
In which it must be grand Impiety
Resolved Defender of the Faith to be.
O heav'nly-guilty Charles! how blessed were
Those Crimes of His; but how unblessed We
Who now so bloudily released are
From the dear Yoke of such sweet tyranny:
A tyranny which nobly does oppress
The Liberties of none but wickedness.
When wealth grown common, spoiled the Commonwealth
By her too full fed Daughter wanton Pride:
And fretfull Schism, having by wise stealth
Inveigled Numbers Power to her side,
Secured the Pulpit-garrisons, and well
By Use and Doctrine armed the word Rebel:
When slander first had robbed him of his Reason,
And from his Counsel Armies sought to bring him:
When by bold cannons mouths more brazen treason
Learned to Petition: and when to Un-king him,
Was judged the only way to make him be
A glorious Monarch: Then, then straightened He
Entered his widest lists of Virtue: where
His looks on kindest fortune did display
His holy bravery, by which he never
Without a sigh beheld his bloody Bay;
But sadly pondered, how he was constrained
To loose his Subjects, when the field he gained.
So when a tender Father, forced to shield
Against rebellious Sons his sacred Right,
By dear success obtains a bloody field;
His slaughtered Childrens lamentable sight
The War upon his Bowels does renew,
And makes him die for every one he slew.
Heroic Conflicts these! But nobler they
In which as often He with Dis^sters fought
As with the Rebels: though his Troops gave way,
His gallant Patience never was put to rout.
Thus in whatever unsuccessfull field
He lost his Armies, still his Strength he held.
Strength, strength it is, with an undaunted heart
To see Right beaten, Innocence pursued,
Integrity betrayed by fawning Art,
The Spring of Power by wild streams subdued:
To scorn proud chance, and hug just truth, although
Poor she naught but her naked self can show.
Her did he hug in his hearts Cabinet
Beyond the reach of fatal Nasebies plunder:
Though all his other Holds their copies set,
They never could move this Castle to surrender.
Yet since the English persecute her so,
He means to try what Scots for Truth will do.
Unhappy Scots! who now blush not to be
False unto Truth: who teach the World what price
They set on Kings: who put their Loyalty
Into their purse: who to their Avarice,
And fellow*Rebels, their great Master sell,
That Judas might not want a Parallel.
From Jail to Jail the Royal Sufferer
Is thus by freedoms monstrous Patrons tossed.
Nor may his dearest Queen or Children bear
His Desolation company: the most
Favor his Subjects grant him, is, that yet
Him from Himself the Ax forbears to cut.
All else they tear away, not leaving those
Whose sacred Office might his Prayers assist.
O worst of hellish Barbarism! by whose
Black art, unless Charles can be King and Priest,
He must be both from his three Kingdom^ driven
Here upon Earth, and from the fourth in Heaven.
But his brave Soul was fortified too well
To yield her holy fort of Piety.
All else he grants; yet denies still
To sacrifice the envied Altar: He
Holding, what yet he might not use, maintains
His Realm of Goodness, and in Carisbrook reigns.
He reigns: and though his Foes He could not, yet
His nobler Self He conquers; and ih high
Triumph looks down from Constancies brave seat
On the vast Ruins of that Majesty
Which lately flourished in full glory on
His British and his Irish potent Throne.
He curses not, but slights false fortune, and
Remembers that three Crowns less Princely are
Then Christian resolution, which dares stand
The fury even of Reformations War.
O glorious Virtue, which could glory spare,
And highest gains from deepest losses tear!
What though's betrayed Sword appeared too weak
To vindicate his Honor? yet his Pen
Does all the Rebels proudest Conquests break;
And oh how much more then his Britain win!
For all the world now bows down to the look
Of his illustrious most triumphant Book.
That Book, on which astonishment must dwell
For evermore: whilst every Reader there
Beholds what miracles of worth did swell
The Authors Soul. Nor shall his Murderers dare
(Though bloody malice at his life repines)
Not to admire and love Him in his lines.
But now his Foes worst envy he forestalls,
And lives in Heaven before they force him thither:
For up He climbs when on his knees He falls,
And by his Meditations, together
With Saints and Angels does adore that God
Whose noble path of sufferings here he trod.
Him he adores, and to his mercy sues
In their behalf, who none to Him would show.
He sweetly minds Him of those barbarous Jews
Upon whose spite down with his blood did flow
His pitying prayers: And why should mine, says He
More then thy wrongs, dear Lord, revenged be?
Surely were Rebels not their own worst Foes;
They would permit this royal Saint to live,
And pray for their demerits pardon, whose
Unhappy hearts were too too dead to strive
For life eternal. But alas, it grieves
The wretched Members that their Head but lives
His holy life their scandal is, and He
Is so unsufferably good, that they
No such example can endure to be
A check to their own guilt. Besides no way
They had with free and safe convenience in
The Lions lifetime to divide his skin.
Thus through the People-cheating Pageantry
Of specious formal Court, and Judge, and Bar,
(That He might mocked, as well's oppressed die)
He convoyed is to his last Theater:
Where how he acts his Passions part, may they
Who to this Martyrdom did bring him, say;
Say, Wretches, was Deaths bloody face to him
So dreadful as the thought of it to you?
Of's Scepter did he ever so tender seem
As of the Ax? taught he not Princes how
To reign in death, when he gave strait command
Not that his Throne, but Block should firmly stand
And wished he not that Block had higher been,
That all bloodthirsty ees that thither came,
Might their dear draught have had, and fully seen
How little he ashamed was of shame?
Yet though thus low, it served him for his step
From earth to heavens high kingdom to get up.
Such power at last has holy patience, that
Her deadliest Foes she can compel to be
Her greatest Servants, and make every Plot
Of spite advance her own felicity.
For know, mistaken Murderers, that you did
Put on his Crown, when you took off his Head.
And now his Houses may his Lands divide,
And reap the fruit of those Divisions they
Spread through his Realms: Now atheistick Pride
The groundwork of Confusion may lay
On prosperous Villainy, and call God in
Because he scourges not, to own their sin.
The Covenant, and its Independent spawn
May now blaspheme with credit, having brought
Their seven years holy Work to end, and drawn
The Rubric of their pure Religion out
Of their own Sovereigns veins: They now together
On horseback got, may ride -- O say not whether.
Their Triumphs they may read, and see how they
Have by one single universal Blow
Cut down Religions most resolved Stay;
Broke the established Pillar of the Law;
Dashed out wise Piety, white Continence,
Mild Majesty, and generous Temperance.
Surely all Conquests conquered are by this,
But Pilat's, and the Jew's: Yet they are not
In fault, since Christ himself secured is
Above the reach of Ax, or Vote, or Scot:
And what could they do more or braver now,
Then murder Him in's Deputy below,
His Deputy, as Lion, and as Lamb;
As King, and as betrayed, bought and sold?
No; Men could do more; and therefore Fame
Must do them right: for if their Power could
Answer their Courage, they durst have a fling
At God himself, because He is a King.
But hark, what fatal Noise is that which flies
On terrors wings, and thunders at the Sky:
Poor Bradshaw now his leave in vain denies,
For though Charles might not speak, his Blood will cry
It Cries, and fears nor Guns, nor Trumpets throats,
Nor the more barbarous Roar of Rebels Votes.
A stronger Realms Militia it awakes
Then He was robbed of here; through all the spears
With valiant Importunity it breaks,
And sounds a March to Vengeance: In His ears
Who only the true Independent is
It pleads against the false Ones Salvagenesse.
O desperate Fools! why, why would you compel
Such gentle Blood so cruelly to speak?
Why could you not have stayed for your Hell,
Till Death had sent you down: but needs must make
Judgment prepare you torments here, and fry
Your guilty Souls in Horrors Misery?
Fry them it will, if this your Sovereigns Blood
Makes you not blush: If on your flaming sin
You pour not out a penitential flood;
If your most traiterous Ax you feel not in
Your humbled Breasts, that there the cursed Woun^
May upon your own smitten hearts rebound.
But when it shall be lawful, not to lie,
And safely give sublime Desert its due;
When loyal tongues shall not prove Traitors by
The Allegiance of Praises; when the few
Shall be more worth then are the Many; when
Truth may have leave to be her self again:
Then shall true-hearted Muses freely broach
Their richest and their most heroic Vein
To wait on this Bloods streams, and flow in such
A generous and time-defying Strein,
That Charles again shall live in state, and prove
Immortal somewhere else besides Above.
All Nations then amazed shall stand, to see
What England had, and needs away would throw:
Then to his Worths illustrious History
All pious Kings shall strive to School to go:
In Wonders Odours then shall noblest Fame
Embalme the Glories of His sacred Name.
THE END.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and
are to be sold at his shop at the Princes Arms in St PAUL'S Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in Humane Learning, etc.
1. THe History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated by I. H. Esquire; Fol.
2. The History of Polexander, Englished by William Brown Gent. Printed for T.
W. and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, in Folio. 3. Mr James Howels History
of Lewis the thirteenth, King of France, with the life of his Cardinal de
Richelieu, in Folio. 4. Mr Howels Epistolae Ho-Elianae, Familiar Letters,
Domestic and Foreign, in six Sections, Partly Historical, Political,
Philosophical, first Volume with Additions, in 8o 1650. 5. Mr Howels New
Volume of Familiar Letters; Partly Historical, Political, Philosophical, the
second Volume with many Additions. 1650. 6. Mr Howels third Volume of
Additionall Letters of a fresher date, never before published, in 8o 1650. 7.
Mr Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, in 12o with Additions. 1650.
8. Mr Howels Englands Tears for the present Wars, in 12o 1650. 9. Mr Howell
of the Pre-eminence and Pedigree of Parliament, in 12o 1650. 10. Mr Howels
Instructions for Foreign Travels, in 12o with diverse Additions. 1650. 11. Mr
Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to His Majesty, in 4o 12. Mr Howels
Angliae Suspiria and Lachrimae, in 12o 13. Policy Vnveiled, or Maxims of
State, done into English by the Translator of Gusman the Spanish Rogue, in 4o
14. The History of the Inquisition, composed by the R. F. Paul Servita the
compiler of the History of the Council of Trent, in 4o 15. Biathanatos, a
Paradox of Self-Homicide, by D. Io: Done Deane of St Paul's London, in 4o 16.
Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi's, Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Earl of
Monmouth, in 12o 17. Marquis Virgillio Malvezzis, David persecuted, Englished
by Rob. Ashley Gent. in 12o 18. Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi, Of the success and
chief events of the Monarchy of Spain, in the year 1639. of the Revolt of the
Catalonians, Englished by Rob. Gentilis, in 12o 19. Marquis Virgillio
Malvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alcibiades and Coriolanus, Englished
by Robert Gentilis, in 12o 1650. 20. Gracious Privileges granted by the King
of Spain unto our English Merchants, in 4o 21. The History of Life and Death,
or the Promulgation of Life, written by Francis Lord Verulam Viscount St Alban.
in 12o 22. The Antipathy between the French and the Spaniard, Translated out of
Spanish, in 12o 23. Mr Birds Grounds of Grammar, in 8o 24. Mr Bulwers
Philocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb man's friend, in 12o 25. Mr Bulwers
Pathomyotomia, or a Dissection of the significative Muscles of the Affections
of the Mind, in 12o 26. An Itinerary containing a Voyage made through Italy in
the years 1646, 1647. Illustrated with diverse Figures of Antiquities, never
before published, by John Reymond. Genesis in 12o 27. The use of passions, written
by I. F. Senault, and put into English by Henry Earl of Monmouth, in 8o 28.
Choice Music for three Voices, with a Thorough Base, composed by Mr Henry and
Mr William Laws, Brothers and Servants to His Majesty, with diverse Elegies set
in Music by several friends upon the Death of Mr William Laws, in 4o 29.
Judicious and select Essays and Observations written by the Renowned and
learned Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana,
in 8o 1650.
Choice Poems, with excellent Translations, and Incomparable Comedies and
Tragedies, written by several Ingenious Authors.
30 COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher Gent.
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Original Copies,
containing 34 Plays, and a Masque, in Folio. 31. Epigrammata Thomae Mori
Angli, in 16o 32. Fragmenta Aurea, A collection of the Incomparable Pieces
written by Sir John Suckling Knight, in 8o 33. All Iuvenals 16. Satyrs,
Translated by Sir Robert Stapylton Knight, wherein is contained a Survey of the
manners and Actions of Mankind, with Annotations, in 8o 34. Museus on the loves
of Hero and Leander, with Leanders Letters to Hero, and her answer, taken out
of Ovid, with Annotations, by Sir Robert Stapylton Knight, in 12o 35. Poems
etc. written by M. Edward Waller of Beckonsfield Esquire; in 8o 36. Pastor fido,
the faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly Translated out of the Original by
Richard Fanshaw Esquire; in 4o 37. Poems, with a Discovery of the Civil Wars of
Rome, by Richard Fanshaw Esquire in 4o 38. Aurora Ismenia and the Prince, with
Oronta the Cyprian Virgin, translated by Tho: Stanley Esquire; the second Edition
corrected and amended, in 8o 1650. 39. Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigills,
with Annotations, by Thomas Stanley Esquire; in 8o 1650. 40. Medea, a Tragedy
written in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Englished by Mr Edward Sherburne
Esquire; with Annotations, in 8o 41. Senecas Answer to Lucilius his Quaere why Good
men suffer misfortunes seeing there is a Divine Providence, translated into
English Verse by Mr Edward Sherburne Esquire; in 8o 42. Poems of Mr John Milton,
with a Masque presented at Ludlow Castle before the Earl of Bridgewater then
President of Wales, in 8o 43. Poems etc. with a Masque called the Triumph of
Beauty, by James Shirley, in 8o 44 Steps to the Temple, Sacred Poems, with the
Delight of the Muses, upon several occasions, by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge,
in 12o 45. The Mistress, or several Copies of Love verses written by Mr Abraham
Cowley, in 8o 46. Divine Poems, written by Francis Quarles Senior, in 8o 47.
The Odes of Casimire, translated by George Hills, in 12o 48. Arnalte and
Lucenda, or the Melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L. Lawrence in 4o 49.
The Sophister, a Comedy, in 4o by Dr S. 50. The woman Hater, or the Hungry
Courtier, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher Genesis in 4o*
51. The Tragedy of Thierry King of France, and his Brother Theodoret, written
by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, Genesis in 4o 52. The Unfortunate Lovers, a
Tragedy, written by William Davenant Knight, in 4o 53. Love and Honor, a
Comedy, written by William Davenant Knight, in 4o 54. Madagascar, with other
Poems, written by William Davenant Knight, in 12o 55. The Country Captain and
the Variety, Two Comedies written by a person of Honor, in 12o 56. The Cid, a
Trage-comedy. in 12o 1650. 57. The Sophy, a Tragedy, written by John Denham
Esquire; 58. Coopers Hill, a Poem by John Denham Esquire; the 2 Edition in 4o with
Additions. 1650. 59. Clarastella with other occasional Poems, Elegies,
Epigrams, and Satyrs, written by Robert Heath, Esquire; 1650. 60. The Accademy of
Complements, wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, and Strangers, may
accommodate their Courtly Practice with Gentile Ceremonies, Complemental,
Amorous, high expressions and Forms of speaking, or writing of Letters, most
in fashion, with Additions of many witty Poems, and pleasant new Songs, Newly
Printed. 1650.
Several Sermons with other Excellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some most
eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
61 A Manual of Private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week, by
the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o 62 A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet
Meditations and Devotions, by the Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot
Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 24o 63 Ten Sermons upon Several
Occasions, preached at St Paul's Cross, and elsewhere, by the Right Reverend
Father in God, Arthur Lake late Bishop of Bath and Walls, in 4o 64 Six Sermons
upon Several Occasions preached at the Co^^t before the Kings Majesty, and
elsewhere, by that late Learned and reverend Divine, John Done Dr in Divinity,
and Deane of St Paul's London, in 4o. 65 Precious Promises and Privileges of
the faithful, written by Richard Sibbes Doctor in Divinity, late Master of
Katherin Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher of Grayes Inn London, in 12o 66 Sarah
and Hagar, or the sixteenth Chapter of Genesis, opened in nineteen Sermons,
being the first legitimate Essay of the Pious labors of that Learned,
Orthodox, and Indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr Josias Shute B. D. and
above 33 years Rector of St Mary Woolnoth, in Lombardstreet, in Folio. 67
Christ's tears, with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in
sundry Sermons upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maiden B D. Preacher of the
Word of God, and late Fellow of Magdalen College in Cambridge, 4o 68 Ten
Sermons preached upon several Sundays, and Saints days, by Peter Hausted Mr.
in Arts, and Curate at Vppingham in Rutland, in 4o 69 18 Sermons preached upon
the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
wherein the greatest mysteries of Godliness are unfolded, to the capacity of
the weakest Christian, by John Dawson, in 4o 70 Christian Divinity, written by
Edmund Reeve, Bachelour in Divinity, in 4o 71 A description of the Newborn
Christian, or a lively Pattern of the Saint militant, child of God, written by
Nicholas Hunt, in 4o 72 The Tyranny of Satan, in a Recantation Sermon at St
Paul's Cross, by T. Gage, in 4o 73 The True and absolu^e Bishop, wherein is
showed how Christ is our only Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, by Nicholas
Darton, in 4o 74 Divine Meditations upon the 91 Psalm, and on the Hist. of Agag
K. of Amaleck, with an Essay of friendship, written by an Honble person, in 12o
75 Lazarus his rest, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious, learned,
and Orthodox Divine, Mr. Ephraim Vdall, by Thomas Reeve Bachelor in Divinity,
in 4o 76. An Historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory, in
8o

