The CRY of BLOOD.

AND Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jews reconciled, and in conspiracy with
the Dragon, to devour the Manchild.

BEING A Declaration of the Lord arising in those people, of the City of
BRISTOL, who are scornfully called Quakers, and of the manifold Sufferings, and
Persecutions sustained by them from the Priests, Rulers, Professors and rude
multitude, contrary to Law, Liberty, Justice, Government, the righteous ends of
the Wars, and the Scriptures of Truth.

TOGETHER With a true Account of the material Passages in substance between the
Rulers and them at their several Examinations, and Commitments, and at two
general Sessions of the Public Peace: And of the Tumults, and insurrections,
with other necessary Observations, and Occurrences.

Gathered up, written in a Roll, and delivered to John Gunning late Mayor of
that City (being the fruits of his Year) for the private Admonition, and
Conviction of himself, and Brethren concerned, and named therein: with a Letter
declaring the end, and reason of what is so done, (of which a Copy follows in
the ensuing pages) Subscribed by

Geo: Bishop, Thomas Goldney, Henry Roe, Edw: Pyott, Dennis Hollister.
And now after five months space of time Published, for the Reasons hereafter
expressed.

And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy, and true,
do thou not judge, and avenge our blood, on them that dwell on the earth?
Rev. 6. 10. And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night
unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you, that he will avenge them
speedily; nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, shall be find faith on the
earth? Luke 18. 7, 8. And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends
together, for before they were at Emnity among themselves. Luke 23. 12. For of
a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, (whom thou have anointed) both Herod and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were gathered
together, Acts 4. 27. And the Dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to
be delivered to devour her child as soon as it was born: and she brought forth
a man child, who was to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, and her child was
caught up to God, and to his Throne; and the Dragon was wroth with the Woman,
and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments
of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev. 12. 4, 17. And the Devil
shall cast some of you into Prison, Rev. 2. 10. London, Printed for Giles
Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1656.

To you John Gunning late Mayor, Joseph Jackson, Richard Vickris, Miles
Jackson, John Lock, George Hellier, Henry Gibbs, William Cann, George Knight,
and Gabriell Sherman, Aldermen of the City of Bristoll.
WE, with the rest of the people of God in this City, who are in scorn and
derision called Quakers, have, for many months together, patiently, and in
silence, born and suffered manifold persecutions from your selves, and the
people of this Town, thorough your encouragement; without seeking reparation,
though with a very high hand, and with exceeding hard measure, they have been
executed upon us; waiting when the witness of God in every one of your
Consciences (with which we are One, and which one day will witness us, and our
sufferings, and the Truth, for which we suffer, eternally upon you, except you
repent) would have been hearkened unto; which would have opened the eye in every
one of you, which the God of this world has blinded; and have shown you Jesus,
whom (without a cause) in us you persecute, and have filled your faces with
shame for the evil of your doings; and have caused you to mourn over him whom
you have pierced, with a bitter lamentation, even as a man that mourns for
his only son; and have raised up in you the righteous principle of God, from
whence true Judgment would have proceeded; that so the Cruel mockings, bitter
revilings, illegal bonds and imprisonments, and other gross abuses, with which
we have been by you, and thorough your means exercised, might have ceased, and
you led to repentance; and the Salvation of your souls, which are precious, in
this great and notable day of the Lord Jesus; After which we long, and our
Bowels earn, the Lord is our witness, even that you might come to the
knowledge of the truth, thorough Faith in his blood, for which things sake, all
that we have received from yor hands, would have become to us, sweet and
pleasant.

But seeing, neither the forbearance and long suffering of God; nor our patient
and long abiding under all your wills and lusts; nor the fear of man, to the
penalty of whose Laws you lie very obnoxious; nor natural affection, nor
Common humanity, which would lead you to tenderness and mercy, and Justice;
and to do to others, as you would be done unto your selves; nor the
Consideration of what has been our carriage, especially of some of us, to you,
(notwithstanding that we have received always the worst of usages at your
hands) above what you could think of, expect, or hope for, have not prevailed
with you, but instead thereof, you are become more hard, rewarding Evil for
Good, and Cruelty for Kindness, declaring your sin as Sodom, the show of your
Countenance witnessing it against you; and having breathed forth new, and fresh
persecutions against the witnesses of Jesus, (in which Temperance Hignell.
One of them has lately suffered, to the loss of her life): When as
wickedness rages in the streets; And who is there found amongst you, that
does it punish? We have gathered up much of what the Truth, and we, and our
friends, for witnessing thereof, have suffered by you into one body; and have
demonstrated how contrary your actions therein, have been, to Law and
Scripture, (the Rules by which you pretend to order all your affairs) and to
Liberty and to Justice: And although you can expect no such thing at our hands,
yet that it may appear that another spirit rules in us, than the spirit of
this world, and how desirous we are that you should know, and be convinced of
the evil of your way, and turn unto the Lord; We do herewit, hin the Close of
the year, before we publish it, present it to you, even to that of God, which
is pure and just in every one of your Consciences, to which we speak, that as
in a glass with the light of Jesus Christ, by whom the world was made,
wherewith he lightens every one that comes into the world, which convinces
you of sin, you abiding still and cool therein, may come to see what you have
done, and the spirit and principle from which it has proceeded, to wit, of
Darkness, and of the Prince of this world, who, throughout all Ages, as now by
you, has raised persecution against the Principle of Light, the Seed of God,
as the Scriptures testify; and that by him you may be delivered out of the
snares of the Devil, by whom you are led Captive to do his will; And this is
that which we wish and long for, even your salvation. For you must die, and if
the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the
tree falls, there it shall be, and sad will be your portion, if it falls in
opposition to Jesus the Judge of all, whom (we bear witness) you now
persecute; Nor Rocks, nor mountains will (in that day) cover you from the wrath
of the Lamb: And therefore have we laid things plainly, and clearly before you:
But if ye shall still harden your hearts, and go on in the perverseness, and
stubbornness of your spirits, in opposition to the truth, We call Heaven and
Earth, yea, the Righteous God and Judge of all, this day to record against you,
that we are Clear of your blood, and your destruction will be upon your own
heads: Remember that ye are thus warned in your lifetime.

Witnessed by those who are true Lovers of your Soul's eternal good, though
reproachfully called by you and the world, Quakers, and persecuted as such:
Geo: Bishop, Thomas Goldney, Henry Roe, Edw: Pyott, Dennis Hollister.

Bristoll, the 12th. day of the 9th. month, 1655.
For John Goning late Mayor, Joseph Jackson, Richard Vickris, Miles Jackson,
John Lock, Geo: Hillier, Henry Gibbs, William Cann, Geo: Knight, and Gabriel
Sherman, Aldermen of the City of Bristoll.
The foregoing Letter, with the following Epistle and Declaration, was
delivered to John Goning aforesaid, the 18th day of the tenth month, 1655:
since which, a patient and silent waiting there has been, to see, whether upon
this gathering up of the wickedness, which from them has gone forth into the
earth, and returning it convicted, and judged by the light of Jesus Christ, and
the Laws of this Nation, to that of God in every one of their Consciences,
shame would cover their faces, and they turn unto the Lord: But, seeing they
still resist the witness of God, and of late have again, and do still continue
to run on greedily in the way of Cain, persecuting, and imprisoning the just,
who witness the Sacrifice, that is respected of the Lord, which testifies
against that, unto which he has no respect, for their so testifying in
obedience to the movings of the Lord; neither regarding Justice, or Mercy, the
Law of God, or the Nation, (contrary unto which are their actions, as may
appear, when what they have done therein shall be brought forth, and made
public) nor having respect to the widow, or the fatherless, whom they
afflict, and oppress, though the Lord has said, Thou shall not afflict any
Widow, or fatherless child: if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at
all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I
will kill you with the sword, and your wifes shall be widows, and your
children fatherless, Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24. Nor their own souls, but despising
the riches of the goodness of God, and his forbearance, and long suffering,
not knowing the goodness of God leading them to repentance, are, after the
hardness, and impenitency of their hearts, still treasuring up unto themselves
wrath unto the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God,
which shall destroy the adversaries, who will render to every man according to
his deeds; That we may stand clear of their blood, and leave nothing
unattempted, to which we are directed of the Lord, that may be for the stopping
of them in their way, and recovering them from the evil thereof, that so
repenting, and being converted, their sins may be blotted out, and their souls
saved in this day of refreshing, which is come from the presence of the Lord,
which is the longing of our souls, even, that not one of them should dye, but
rather, that he should turn from his iniquity and live: Therefore, as we have,
for above a years time, patiently endured what their wills have exercised,
without resisting, without seeking any reparation, (Though after such a manner
have been the sufferings, as in the following declaration of them is
rehearsed), waiting, when the witness of God in every one of them, would have
been by them minded, and they wearied in their manifold persecutions of the
innocent: And, as, when we saw, after so long forbearance, that they neither
considered what they had done, nor laid it to heart, nor said, it is Enough, We
drew up together, and set in order before them, much of what they had done, and
showed how contrary it was to the Law of God, and Man, and to Justice, and
Humanity, to the end, that seeing their nakedness therewith, as in a glass,
by the light of Jesus Christ, shame might cover them: And, as, we have since
waited for the space of five months, to see, whether their iniquities being so
laid before them, and so testified to their faces, they would blush, or be
ashamed, that so their transgressions might be hid, and their sins covered, and
what they have done against the truth be no more remembered by the Lord, or be
rehearsed before man, which was, and is the desire of our Souls (the Lord is
our record) and the end both of our forbearance, and spreading of what they
have done, before them; So now, through a deceived heart, which has led them
aside, and a rebellious mind, which still carries them on against the truth,
those ends being hitherto frustrated, and instead of them, a Violent
persecution having been, and being still prosecuted, wherein they have
imprisoned diverse for the testimony of Jesus: whereby that which we drew up
together, and privately delivered to them, and intended for the raising up of
shame as a garment to cover their nakedness, being by them thrown aside, and
that which should be their shame, coming to be gloried in, which is all we have
hitherto heard from them in relation thereunto: We have brought forth to
public View at once what has been done by them at several times, not in
secret, but before the Sun. And thus openly do we reprove those who have thus
sinned openly, and rejected private admonition, if so be shame may yet overtake
them, and they smite upon their thigh, and say, What have we done? And of their
blood are we clear in the presence of the great, and terrible God of Heaven,
and Earth, whose witness, what we have done, shall stand for him against them,
in the day, when he shall come to judgment; which on them hastens apace. And to
that of God in every man's Conscience shall we be made manifest, that we have
not dealt with Them, as they have dealt with Us, or as men use to deal with an
enemy; but with another spirit, rewarding Them good, whereas they have rewarded
Us evil.

To the Reader.
Reader,
Thou will (perhaps) marvail, That in these days wherein Religion seems to
have ascended the Throne; and Justice and Righteousness to have sat down on
her right hand, and on her left, as the glorious issue of many bloody wars;
Wherein Liberty of Conscience in things of a spiritual nature, except to Popery
and Prelacy, And to such as under the profession of Christ, hold forth and
practice licentiousness, seems to be guarded from all persecution, by the
Fundamental constitution of a new Government; Wherein those are Chief in
Authority and Rule, and possessed of all power, whose sword was made successful
and victorious, to the cutting down of Tyrannous and imposing powers, under
which, themselves (amongst others) suffered; wherein the Gospel is said to
shine so glorious, as to form the whole Nation into a profession, and to the
rendering so many thousands of professors clear-sighted in the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, and earnestly to expect the reign of Christ over all for ever, now
supposed by them, and believed to be on the very threshold; Such persecutions
and unjust proceedings, as are rehearsed in the following Treatise, should be
presumed to be done in England; And that those who are called the Children of
the Kingdom, and account themselves ready to sit down therein with Christ, when
he shall appear, Now that he is begun to be manifested in life and mighty power
(unto which thousands of his Saints do bear witness, and have set their seals)
should (all opinions, Judgments and forms, hitherto in the height of enmity and
contention, against each other) be now reconciled together, and join in with
the powers of the world (from whom in their several days, as they have
witnessed any thing of truth, they have received opposition) And also with the
rude multitude in persecuting and afflicting the witnesses of this Kingdom, and
seeking to murder the Lord of Glory, thus beginning in these last times to be
revealed.

But thou will cease to admire, if in the cool of the day, thou do sit down
and consider, That, as it was of old, ( Esaias 8. 18.
) Christ Jesus, and the Children whom the Lord had given him, were for signs
and wonders, in Israel, ( Romans 9. 4, 5.
) to whom pertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the
giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the promises, whose were the
Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the flesh, himself came, who is God over
all, blessed for ever, Even from the Lord of Hosts who dwells in Mount Sion;
And that as the seed of the Serpent and of the Bondwoman (which is the same in
Ishmael as in Cain, who hated and slew his brother) ( Gal. 4. 29.
) persecuted the Seed of the Freewoman, so it is now.

( Mal. 3. 1. John 1. 41. 4. 25.
) Very great were the expectations of the Jews, for the coming of the Messiah.
Of him ( Luke 1. 70. 24. 27. Acts 3. 18, 21.
) all the Prophets prophesied from the beginning of the world, Him all the (
Heb. 8. 1. 5. 10. 1. 5. 7. 10.
) Levitical services, sacrifices, the Temple, Circumcision, and the Jewish
Kingdom, shadowed and typified. Him the ( Luke 5. 17. Acts 13. 27.
) Doctors of the Law and the Pharisees read out of the Prophets, every Sabbath
day, and on him were their hopes fixed for a perfect restoration, and
redemption from under all their Captivities and servitudes: In the ( Gal. 4. 4.
) fullness of time, in the days of ( Matthew. 2. 1.
) Herod the King, (who was not of the race of the Jews, but appointed over
them, by the Romans, under whose power they then were) when the Scepter was
departed from Judah, which old Jacob ( Genesis 49, 10.
) prophesied should not he, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh
come; He came, was ( Luke 2, 4, 7.
) born of a Virgin at Bethlehem in the Tribe of Benjamin, of the Seed of David;
The ( Luke 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
) Angels signify his birth to the Shepherds, and for joy of it, sing together;
( Luke 1. 17, 76. 3. 4, 5, 6.
) John prepares the way before him, in the spirit and power of Elias; ( Acts 2.
22.
) Approved he is of God, by miracles, wonders and signs; by a ( Mat. 3. 16, 17.
) voice from Heaven, by the descension of a Dove, and by ( 1 Cor. 15. 4. Acts
17. 31.
) raising him the third day, according to the Scriptures; All ( Luke 24. 44.
Acts 3. 18.
) Prophecies are fulfilled in him, and himself ( John 7. 28. 37. 38. John 8.
12, to the end. Luke 4. 21.
) convinces the Doctors and the people publicly, that it was so; being
indeed, ( 1 Timothy 3. 16.
) God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached to the Gentiles, believed of in the world, and received into glory;
And yet, because He came not with outward observation; nor in the Glory of
Solomon; nor in the dominion, or restoration of an earthly Kingdom; nor in the
way they prescribed him; Nor by the discovery of the High Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees; But was ( Luke 2. 24. Levit. 12. 8.
) born of a poor woman; ( Mat. 13 55.
) supposed a Carpenters son; ( Luke 2. 7.
) laid in a manger, (for there was no room for him in the Inn) more marred in
his ( Esaias 52. 14.
) visage, than any man; of no ( Esaias 53. 2, 3.
) form, or comeliness, or beauty, whereby he should be desired: Of no ( Mat.
8. 20.
) abiding place; ( Mat. 4. 18, 21. John 21. 3.
) Attended by poor Fishermen as his disciples; followed by ( Matthew. 9. 9. 10.
11. 21. 31. 32. 11. 19. Luke 3. 12. 5. 29, 30. 15. 1. 7. 29. 19. 2.
) Publicans and sinners; because he opposed their ( Matthew. 25, 3, 6. Mark 7. 8,
9, 15.
) traditions; Reproved their ( John 4, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
) outward commanded worship, (being all ended in him) changed the ( Mat. 5. 6.
cap. Mat. 12. 1. 2. 6. 7. 8. 10. 12. 13. 14. Mat. 15. 1, 15 Joh. 5. 10, 11 Acts
6. 14.
) Laws, and Customs; ( John 8. 44. 15. 22. 16. 8, 9.
) Convinced them of sin; was as a ( Mal. 3. 1, 2.
) Refiners fire, and as Fullers soap; ( Mat. 2. 3.
) All Jerusalem, as well as H^rod, was moved at his birth; The ( Mat. 2. 4. 5.
6. 16.
) chief Priest, and Scribes advise with Herod whom they hated, and tell him who
sought to murder Jesus, where he was to be born, who should be the Governor,
that should rule the people of Israel; His ( Joh. 1. 11.
) own receive him not, though he came to them; the most ( Mat. 12. 14. John 7.
12. Luke 22, 2. John 12. 42. Mat. 26. 3. 57. 59. 27. 20, 22.
) strict in the outward observation of the Law which led to him, most persecute
him; His friends (when he took to him 12 disciples) tell him he was ( Mark 3.
21.
) besides himself; The Scribes and Pharisees say, he is ( Mat. 11. 19.
) gluttonous, a wine-bibber, a ( Mark 3. 23. Matthew. 9. 34.
) Devil, and the Chief of them, yea and a ( Mat. 26. 65, 66.
) Blasphemer, And he must dye for it; ( John 8. 59. 10. 39. Iuke 23. 29. 30.
) Tumults were raised upon him, to take away his life, though he passed
thorough them, his hour being not come; the ( John 9. 12. Luke 24. 20, 22.
) Chief Priests cried out to Pilate, when he would have released him, (for he
was ( Acts 3. 13.
) determined so to do, ( Mat. 27. 18.
) knowing that they had delivered him for envy) because he found no ( John 19.
6. 18. 38. Luke 23. 5.
) cause of death in him, saying, ( Mat. 27. 23. Mark 15. 14.
) What evil has he done? Whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against
Caesar; and thou art no friend to Caesar if thou let him go: No ( John 19. 15.
) King will we have but Caesar, (though they before said, If we let this man
alone, the ( John 11. 48.
) Romans will take our place and Nation) A ( Luke 23. 18, 19. 24. 25. Mark 15.
7. Matthew. 27, 21.
) mover of sedition, a maker of insurrection; a murderer do they desire before
him; Nothing will serve them, but to ( Mat. 27. 22, 23. John 19. 6.
) crucify him; And the rude multitude do they ( Matthew. 27. 20. Mark 15, 11.
) stir up to cry, Release Barrabbas, Crucify Jesus, and the ( Luke 23. 24, 25.
) voices of them and the Chief Priests prevailed; And Pilate gave sentence that
it should be as they required; And he released unto them him that for Sedition
and murder was cast into prison, whom they had desired, but he delivered Jesus
to their will: A stone is ( Mat. 27. 63, 64, 65, 66.
) rolled before his Sepulcher, and guards of Soldiers placed to hinder him
from rising; And when he arose from the dead, ( Mat. 28. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
) large money given them to slander his resurrection, and to say, his disciples
came by night and stole him away. Thus they (of whom he was according to the (
Romans 9. 4, 5.
) flesh), to whom he was the ( Genesis 3. 16. 17. 19. 18. 18. ^8. 14.
) promise of many hundred years standing, and that in him, all the families of
the earth should be blessed; in whom all the promises, concerning him were
fulfilled before their eyes, for whose sake their Kingdom stood above two
thousand years, being the Admiration and dread of the world; they who looked so
earnestly for him, mist him; and they who laid up all their hopes, and life, in
his coming, put him to death, and said, his ( Mat. 27. 25.
) blood be upon us and our Children: And although the Romans, in that very
generation, took away their place and Nation, and caused them to sustain such
miseries, ^s ( Mat. 24. 21.
) never were before, or shall be on a people, as he foretold; And though they
have these many hundreds of years, ceased from being a Kingdom, and are
scattered upon the face of the earth as the prey of Nations, Yet are the Jews
still expecting the Messiah, the Messenger of the Covenant's coming, whom their
( Acts 5. 30. 10. 39.
) Fathers, with wicked hands slew, and hung upon a tree.

As it was then, so is it now in this City and Nation. Great has been, and
are, in these days, the expectations, many the breathings, the groans, the
prayers, the speakings of professors for the coming of Jesus Christ, in Spirit
and power, the ( Heb. 9. last.
) according to the Scriptures, to judge Babylon the great Whore, the mother of
harlots, and of Fornications, who has made all Nations drunk with the Cup of
her abominations; to raise up the Tabernacle of David which is fallen down; to
bring the New Jerusalem from God, out of heaven; prepared as a Bride adorned
for her Husband; wherein the Tabernacle of God shall be with men, and he shall
dwell with them, and they shall be his people. And God himself shall be with
them, and be their God; Yea what writings are there to prove, according to the
computation of years, that we are come to the periods of Daniel's times, and
John's in his Revelations, wherein the Prophesies shall be fulfilled, and that
the Kingdom shall not be delivered to another people: And how earnest are the
expectations of people, going from mountain to hill, looking here, and looking
there, saying, Lo here, and lo there, as if the Bridegroom were coming,
promising themselves, and being persuaded that they are upon the entrance of
those glorious times, that never shall have an end: And yet now that the Cry at
midnight has been made, Behold the Bridegroom comes, Go ye forth to meet him;
And many who had oil in their lamps, have met him, and are gone in with him:
Now that the day does dawn, and the shadows fly away; after the long night of
Obscurity and Apostasy; Now that the man of sin (by the brightness of his
coming) is discovered, and destroyed in many, who are his witnesses, and of his
power and glory; Because he comes not in the Common way of the National
profession; Nor by the mixed Companies of the Presbytery; nor by the Forms of
gathered Churches, so called; nor by Baptism of water; nor by Observation; nor
in high Notions and Imaginations; nor in the liberty of the flesh; nor in
outward pomp, and glory, nor in the wilderness; nor in the secret Chambers;
nor in the Thrones of this world; nor in returning and raising up the outward
breaches in the fundamental constitutions of the Civil Government, (which now
seems to be shaken, as was the Jewish upon his coming in the flesh) nor by
outward powers; nor by the Rulers; nor the Priests; nor the Doctors; nor the
Universities; nor the Synods; nor by the great men; nor by the noble; nor by
the ways, men have concluded on; But in the power and life of God, growing up
as a tender plant before him; as a root out of the dry ground, out of the
barren mountains, out of the least of the Tribes, Out of the mean, and the
weak, and the foolish, without outward form, comeliness or beauty, Reproving,
and denying all the vanities and fashions, and Customs of the world, and
whatsoever is esteemed by man; Judging, and cutting down the body of sin, and
the whole world of professions, opinions, and Judgments; which stand in the
imagination, and not in the light; Turning the lofty from their Seats, and
exalting the humble and meek, Bringing those who have placed themselves at the
upper end of the Table, to the lowest, to the first principle, the light, which
is the door; at which whosoever enters not, is a thief and a robber: Passing
Judgment on every idle word; witnessing the straight way, the daily Cross, the
denial of a man's self, his will, and righteousness, the Redemption, the
cleansing, the birth, the Teacher, the setting up of Judgment and
righteousness on the earth within, yea Christ within, the hope of Glory, yea,
the father and the son; and the spirit dwelling, and ma^ing their abode
within.

Therefore who has believed this report? And to whom is the Arm of the Lord
revealed? Where is there faith to be found on the earth, for this coming of the
Son of Man, Though his Coming forth to Us be as the rain, as the later and
former rain on the earth? Who can abide this day of his coming, and who can
stand, now that he thus appears, as a sanctuary to those who sanctify him in
their hearts, and make him their fear, and their dread; But for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offense to both the Houses of Israel, for a gin,
and for a snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; And many among them shall
stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken; and the
testimony, and the law be bound up, and sealed amongst his disciples? How are
the Priests, and the Rulers, and the Churches (so called) and professors of all
sorts, and this City of Bristol, moved thereat? What seekings out where he is
born? What contrivances to murder him? What reproaches of Deceivers, Witches,
Sorcerers, Jesuits, Franciscan Friars, Blasphemers, Devils, are cast upon them
in whom he is appeared? What false reports of denyers of Ordinances and of
Christ dying at Jerusalem, and of the Scriptures, of disturbers of the peace,
are raised upon them? Yea, what abuses, incivilities, rage, madness,
insurrections, Tumults, riots, illegal bonds and imprisonments, Oppressions and
persecutions, bloodthirstinesse and murtherous resolutions? How are all forms,
factions, and interests in the City reconciled, and made friends, and united
(though at enmity with each other from the beginning) in this day, to Crucify
Jesus, in these his Saints? Presbytery with Independency, Independency with
Anabaptisme, Anabaptisme with Notionists, and professors at large, and Ranters,
and they with the Episcopals, and the multitude of profane and loose livers,
and all with the Rulers, and the Rulers with them: and the Priests their
leaders, in things contrary to Law and Justice, against those people who are
made offenders, in nothing but their obedience to the Lord? How have all Forms
and opinions lost the Cross, which they received from these Rulers, and this
people, and from other different forms, as they in their several times have
witnessed any thing of reformation in letter or spirit, in things Civil or
Spiritual, upon the coming forth hereof, which even then was exercising on some
of them, by the Rulers? And how are they all joined together in one? Yea, the
Priests and other professors out of the Country come hither, and say also, A
confederacy, to lay the Cross on these servants of the most High, and such a
Cross every way, as never knew any before; Nay all the professions in this
City together; and which (did not the Lord chain up for his Seeds sake, and the
Law of the Land restrain) would with more fury pour out the blood, and more
greedily tear the flesh of the people of God, than ever was witnessed in the
former ages, in the most tyrannical and bloody persecutions; whereby they bear
( Luke 21. 13.
) testimony to those servants of the Lord; that they are the Disciples of
Jesus, and to themselves, that they are not his disciples; But are of that (
John 1. 3. 11. 12.
) wicked one who slew his brother, because his works were evil, and his
brothers good; And having lost the Cross, they have lost the power, and life
of truth, and the being the Disciples of Christ, as says ( Luke 14. 26. to
the 34. Mat. 10. 37, 38, 39, 40. 16. 24, 25. Mark 8. 34. 15. 38. 10: 21. Luke
9. 23, to the 27.
) Christ himself; He that takes not up his Cross daily and follows me,
cannot be my disciple; For the Cross is always what the Truth received of the
world, and what themselves received of the world, when they witnessed the
truth: Yea its ( Mat. 10. 22. 24. 9. Mark 13. 12, 13. John 7. 7. 15. 18, 19.
17. 14. 1 John 3. 13.
) portion is to be hated of the world, because it is not of it, and the ( John
15. 19.
) world loves its own? The Rulers stand in their old spirit of darkness,
enmity and persecution, and those who received the Cross, and who were hated
of them all along as they were witnesses for the truth, are come to them, and
fallen in with them, being indeed now of the same root and principle: If the (
Luke 14. 34, 35.
) salt has lost its savor, wherewithal shall it be salted? it is good for
nothing but to be cast on the dunghill, says Christ; Let them sit down, and
sadly consider it: Any kind of form or profession, any kind of Priests,
Raylers, Covetous, proud, Liars, Drunkards, or others, outwardly more strict;
it is no matter what, or who, so this new kind of Religion (as they call it,
though it is what was from the beginning, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day,
and the same for ever) may be rooted out of the City; Nay, though it be to the
losing of their Civil interest, the price of their blood and sufferings; Save
Barabbas, Crucify Jesus; And, he is no friend to Caesar nor the Government of
the City that will not have it so. And occasions are sought for, and haltings
looked after, and Emissaries sent about, to find matter to slander the Lord of
life risen in his Saints, Though, blessed be the Lord who has ( 1 Samuel 2. 9.
) guided the feet of his Saints so, that they have not wherewithal, justly to
slander their holy Calling; But the wicked shall become silent in darkness.

And thus has the Lord, who has been so much defired and expected, come in
this Ministry of Spirit and life first to the Independent and baptized
Churches, so called in this City, who were offended thereat, and stumbled; Then
to the City: But the Priests, Rulers, and the generality of the people through
their means reject, and persecute it, though many of the Churches so called,
and diverse hundreds in and about the City have received him, and do believe in
his Name, and do bear testimony with many thousands more, that the Lord is
come, and their testimony is true.

But as it was of old, That very Word of the Lord spoken by the Prophets, for
which they were persecuted, and put to death by the Rulers, and people of
Israel, being recorded, and transmitted to posterity, the Scribes and
Pharisees, who lived in the days of Christ, ( Mat. 23. 29. to the end.
) received in the letter, and owned as the Scriptures; and seemed to be so
offended at their Fathers for slaying the servants the Prophets, that they
built their Tombs, and garnished their Sepulchers, and said, If they had lived
in their Fathers days, they would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the Prophets. And yet Christ Jesus the Son of God, the Messiah, that
holy and just one, of whom the Prophets spoke, they crucified, and witnessed
themselves (as he testified to their faces) to be the children of those who
killed the Prophets: And therefore he said unto them, Woe be unto you, ye
Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell:
Wherefore behold, I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and Scribes, and some
of them ye shall kill and crucify; And some of them shall ye scourge in your
Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City, that upon you may come all
the righteous blood, shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel,
unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
Temple and the Altar: Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon
this generation, Matthew. 23. from 29. to 37.

Even so, That ( John 1, 1, 2, 3
) eternal word of life, which the Apostles heard and saw with their eyes, and
looked upon, and handled with their hands, and bare witness unto with the
Saints in their time, as that which was with the Father from the beginning, and
manifested unto them, ( John 16. 13. Acts 15. 28.
) leading them into all truth, for declaring of which, and walking therein, as
the spirit, (not the form, for there was no letter for much of what they did)
moved, and ( Acts 2. 4.
) gave them utterance, they were persecuted, and put to death, as the vilest of
men, and the off-scowring of all things, by those who were called the devout
and honorable, and the Rulers and the people of the Jews, who stood in the
letter, and in the form of those things, which were once commanded of God, but
then abolished by the coming of Christ, whom none of the ( 1 Cor. 2. 6, 8.
) Princes of the world knew; for if they had, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory, being (at least much of it) committed to writing, and handed
with the rest of the Scriptures of truth, to these later times, the people of
this generation embrace the declaration thereof, Crying out against the Jews
for persecuting and killing the Prophets, and Apostles, and crucifying of
Christ, after whose name they call themselves, in whose doctrine and worship,
and in the fellowship, and order of the Apostles, and the Churches of the the
Saints in their times they pretend to abide; and for it and the Scriptures,
wherein they are recorded, are they zealous, even to blood, though not
according to knowledge, as these later days have sadly witnessed. And yet
those, who in this day of the Lords appearing, do witness the Prophets and
Apostles, and their doctrine, and Christ Jesus and the Scriptures, and what is
said therein of the Saints, and their conditions in life and power, in spirit
and letter, do receive from those who pretend to them all, and to the
Scriptures, and yet are not so much as in the letter or form of doctrine
declared therein, the very same measure of reproach and persecution, as did the
Prophets and Christ Jesus, and the Apostles, and the Saints, of which the
Scriptures testify; (read the one, and compare the other therewith and judge)
though as to blood, they have not as yet reached, further than of those in
other parts of this Nation, who are dead in prison, and of the blows they have
received; And of others who by beatings, have had their blood drawn, even in
the Steeple Houses, as well as other places, and mingled with their sacrifices,
of which this City gives instances, because the Lord (who says unto the
raging Sea, Hitherto shall thy proud waves go, and no further) has bounded
them by his power, but they who contrary to Law and Justice, and to that
liberty, which has been allowed themselves, and to the Scriptures, which they
would be understood to own, and to be ruled by, have proceeded so far, and with
so high a rage, as this following Treatise (to say nothing of what has been
acted in other parts of this Nation) does make to appear. What cruelties would
they not exceed in all former times, had they Law for it, or power in their
hands? And how does this Generation manifest themselves hereby, to be in the
same spirit with those, and in their steps, which persecuted and killed the
Prophets, and Christ Jesus, Luke 11. 49.
and the Apostles, and the witnesses of truth, to this day, filling up the
measure of their fathers iniquity? Wherefore the wisdom of God has and will
raise up his cloud of witnesses, whom they do devise wicked devices against,
and dig as low as hell, and imprison and persecute from City to City, and from
County to County, and execute cruelties upon, That all the blood of the
Righteous, shed since the foundation of the world, may come upon them; And
venily it shall be required of this generation.

The Cry of Blood, etc.
MAny of the people of God in and about the City of Bristoll (as in diverse
other parts of this Nation) having a long time wandered from mountain to hill,
from one from to another, seeking rest, but finding none, and diverse receiving
no satisfaction from the Forms in which they walked, and wherein they did
abide, in expectation of the glorious appearing of the Lord Jesus in spirit and
power according to the Scriptures; It has pleased the Lord, (whom they sought)
at length to hasten to his Temple, and out of his tender mercies to visit
them, with the dayspring from on high, and not only them, but many others who
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, thorough the everlasting Gospel
of his dear Son; Which though hid from ages and generations for many hundreds
of years, yet, he has now begun to make manifest with mighty power, in the
hearts and by the ministration of many whom he has raised up to declare, and
publish the same, and to bear witness to his great and terrible day
approaching upon the Inhabitants of the earth; And to the redeeming of his Sion
with Judgment, and her Converts with righteousness; Unto which thousands of
precious Saints in this Nation, and many hundreds in and about this place (who
are turned by the power thereof, from darkness to light, and from the Kingdom
of Satan unto God) having born their testimony, and set to their seals, the
Devil is come down with great wrath, knowing his time is short, and stirs up
the beast, and the false Prophet, the Rulers of the earth, and the Merchants of
Babylon, to make war against it, with a rage reaching up to Heaven. But the
Lamb, even him, who rides upon the white horse, the Word of God, who is called
Faithful and true, and in righteousness does judge, and make war, out of whose
mouth goes a sharp sword, with which he sha^^ smite the Nations, and rule them
with a rod of iron, on whose vesture dipped in blood, and thigh is written, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, having all the Armies of Heaven following him on
white horses shall overcome, and have the victory, for his Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion is for ever and ever. And the beast shall
be taken, and with him the false Prophet that works miracles before him, and
which he deceived, and they both shall be cast alive into the lake of fire
burning with brimstone; And the fowls that fly in the midst of the Heavens,
shall eat the flesh of Kings and of Captains, and of mighty men, and of Horses,
and of them that sit thereon, and of all men both free and bond, small and
great, that gather themselves together to make war against him, that sits on
the white horse, and against his Army, And all the fowls shall be filled with
their flesh.

Of the rising and progress of this Sun of righteousness, and the
persecutions raised against it in this City, is the intent of this Treatise;
The particulars whereof shall be set down in order.

Some of the brethren near Kendale in Westmerland, being moved, not by man nor
the will of man, but by the Lord, to come to Bristoll (to which place they were
wholly strangers, as they were to every Inhabitant thereof) to declare what he
should there Command them; in obedience thereunto, came thither on the 12th day
of the fifth month (called 12th of the 5th month, 1654, John Audland came
first to Bristol.
July) 1654, in the Evening; And having the next day delivered the word of the
Lord there given them in charge, to the Independent and Baptized Churches (so
called) And having testified the things of the Kingdom, to a few others, who
were waiting for the Redemption of Israel: The day following being the 14th of
the same month, they passed away toward Plymouth in Devonshire, the witness
being raised (though in so short space of time) by the power of the Lord, and
several both of the Churches (so called) and others, putting their seals to
the truth of their testimony.

Being come to and departed from Plymouth to London, one of the Brethren
aforesaid, to wit, John Audland, was mightily pressed in spirit to visit
Bristoll again, and therefore returned thither about the beginning of the 7th
month following, called September, Beginning of the 7th month, 1654, John
Audland came the second time, and John Camm with him.
with whom John Camm, being moved of the Lord came also, and spoke publicly
as the Spirit gave them utterance. And, truly, such a wide door, and an
effectual was opened, which none could shut, as has not been known in any age
in this Nation: for the people being as Corn ripe for the Harvest, pressed in
by multitudes in this day of the Lords power, and the witness which at first,
was risen but in a few, to whom the Word of the Kingdom was communicated, like
to Elijah's cloud, seemed to fill the whole Heaven. The places of meeting were
too straight, the Assemblies (thereupon) in the fields, though in the winter
season, were multiplied to two, three, nay sometimes to near four thousand
people: And many of all sorts, professions, Ranks, ages and sexes, some of whom
as eminent as any in that City, in that which is called Godliness, became
obedient to the truth, whose minds being turned to the Lord, witnessed the
power and life of Jesus (in measure) and Redemption within, from the fashions
and customs of the world, and their former vain Conversations and professions;
and this Ministry, through which they were begotten again to a lively hope,
through the resurrection of the dead, to be of the Lord.

Persecution begun.
At this manifestation of Jesus, the Priests and Rulers, with many professors
of all opinions, and the worser sort of the City were exceedingly moved: And as
the joyful Sound went forth into the Country round about, whereby many were
brought i^to the obedience of the truth; So the members of the many-headed
beast there, and the false Prophet, join in confederacy with them, in making
war against it: And even some, who as they have in their time and generation
born their testimony to any thing of simplicity and power in Religion, or have
owned the public interest, have constantly been maligned and opposed by the
Magistrates and people, fall in and become one with both, strengthening their
hands, and stirring up their hatred against the Truth. And although they
thereby justify the oppositions themselves have received, and allow the
persecuting Principle (which when it was their own case, they condemned) and
give Judgment upon, and prepare trouble for themselves, and weaken the public
interest in which they are concerned, and have lost the Cross which the
servants of the living God have always witnessed against the adulterous
generation; yet so blind are their eyes, that though they see, they perceive
not, so gross are their ears, that though they hear, yet do they not
understand, yea their hearts are waxen fat lest they should see and hear, and
be converted and healed, fulfilling the words of Christ, who says, For
Judgment am I come into this world, that those who are blind may see; and those
who say they see, may John 9. 39.
be made blind, and their sin may remain. And now who Esaias 42. 19.
is blind but my servant? and who is deaf, but my messenger, seeing many
things, but he observes not; opening the ear, but he hears not: And indeed
to those who have known, and lived in that City for the space of 18. years last
past, and do impartially weigh things, to have beheld their Episcopacy
persecuting Puritanisme (so called) with reproaches, riots, imprisonments, and
accusations of plotting against the Kingdom under pretense of religious
meetings, which they would make Conventicles: Puritanisme in the throne turned
into Presbytery, opposing Episcopacy as Popish; and Independency as Heresy and
Schism; Independency got into the Chair, trampling under Presbytery as
Antichristian, and others above them as Notionists, Anti-Ordinance men, etc.
Each taking their turn and time, and applying themselves unto, and making use
of the Powers of the earth for the pulling down of the one, and setting up of
the other; And now to see Episcopals, Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists,
Notionists, Ranters, and the rude rabble of ignorant and dissolute people, the
Priests and the Rulers aforesaid reconciled, joined and folded together, as
Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jews in exercising the very same reproaches and
persecutions, wherein themselves suffered from each other, and from the Priests
and Rulers, and in a higher manner against those, who are called forth to
witness Jesus now made manifest in them, it would be very strange, but that
this is the portion which the truth has received from the men and professions
of the world throughout all generations, and which returns to it as a
testimony. Nevertheless, as death and hell could not hinder the resurrection
of Christ, but he arose the third day according to the Scriptures, so the
confederacy aforesaid, with all their policy and power, have not been able to
extinguish the light that has shined, but the more they have sought to quench
it, the brighter it has appeared, and so will it increase to the perfect day:
for the Lord is risen, and the word is gone forth out of his mouth, and will
not return again till Judgment and Righteousness be set up in the earth, and
all his enemies be subdued under him.

As the word of the Kingdom grew and multiplied, so the rage of the Beast and
of the false prophet, increased against it: For having a little recovered the
deadly wound at first given them, the Priests apply themselves to the Rulers,
(as the false Prophets, Priests and Pharisees did of old) and pressed they are,
to turn these servants of the Lord out of Town, as men not to be endured, who
on the 30th day of the eighth month following being the 2d. day of the week in
the morning, being assembled in their Council Chamber, and the Priests ready
according to their appointment sent an Officer to Francis Howgill and 30th. of
the 8th month, 1654, Francis Howgill and Edward Borough before the Rulers.
Edward Borough, to desire (not to command) them, to come before them,
whereupon they immediately went, being accompanied with three or four friends
of the City, (against whom there was no just cause of exception) whom when the
Magistrates saw, as they sat about the Council Board, as in a Judicature, they
began immediately to be enraged, and Richard Aldworth, Joseph Jackson, and
George Hellier, Aldermen, would not be at rest, till the Mayor had commanded
them forth, and caused the door to be kept fast, by an Officer, that their
friends might not come in, and be present, which was observed all the time the
strangers were before them, but dealt not so with their opposites, who were
admitted, and present all the time, though they were told it was not fair
dealing.

Those two being left alone, several of the Priests came in presently, and
others of their party, who were also admitted: And the Mayor having demanded of
them their names, and their Country, and their business, and the last place
from whence they came; And they having given plain answers thereunto, And that,
according to the Command of the Everlasting God, they came to that place, to
bear witness and testimony unto his Name against all deceit, as they had done
many days, at the City of London, from whence they came last: The Mayor asked
them whether they would discourse fairly of things? They answered, Yea; and
exhorted the Rulers to try them by the Scriptures; for, as unto them, by it
they would be judged in what they spoke: The Priests, having got this material,
instead of the sword of the Spirit, began to ask them many questions; but they
replying, That what the Magistrate, who had Command over them, asked, they were
ready to answer, not what the Priests demanded. And the Magistrates thereupon
assigning their power to the Priests, they said they were ready to answer any
thing that should be put upon them: And to what the Priests demanded, gave they
answers, according to the Scriptures, which the Priests were not able to
disprove, nor prove by the Scriptures, what they affirmed; As would appear,
were the particulars rehearsed; though Ralph Farmer one of the Priests then
present, is not ashamed in a book of his, styled, The Mystery of ungodliness,
to affirm the contrary. And with meekness gave they a reason of the hope that
was in them, and declared how the Lord had wrought upon them and in them, and
how he had called them forth to this Ministry, and of their former
Conversation. But the Priests cutting them short in their Declaration of their
immediate Call, and forbearing to ask them more Questions, the Magistrates
(having got no advantage against them by their words, and that which one of the
Priests present charged them with to have said in his hearing, at a public
meeting, was disproved by another present, to the silencing of the Priest, who
afterward confessed before them, that twice in the same discourse he expressed
himself otherwise) charged them with having tumultuous meetings, and said they
could not suffer it: They answered, If they were found at any time
transgressors of any Law, let the Law be showed them, and they would suffer by
it, for they desired nothing but equity; And to the Law of equity they were
subject for conscience sake; But bade them take heed how they made their own
wills a Law: And one there present said, he had been at their meetings, where
there were very many honest godly, sober people; And that their meetings were
not tumultuous: Then they warned them from the Lord to beware, lest they
hardened their hearts, and so persecuted the innocent without a cause, and were
found in the steps of the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Chief Priests, which
persecuted Christ and his Apostles, and so brought innocent blood upon their
own heads: But their wrath was kindled against them; And though they had
nothing to lay to their charge, as to what they had done (as their own
consciences will testify and bear witness) no breach of any Law being found
upon them: and what they spoke, they proved by the Scriptures, which bare
witness to the same; Yet in their anger, they commanded them to depart E. B.
and J. H. commanded to depart the City.
the City, and the Liberties thereof at their peril. To which they made answer,
that they came not in the will of man, nor stood in the will of man, but when
he moved them to depart, who moved them thither, they should obey; but their
wills they could not obey, for their will was not Law: And boldly said, If they
were guilty of the transgression of any Law, let them suffer by it; but rather
than they would transgress the righteous Law of God written in their hearts,
by subjecting to their wills and lusts, they choose to walk in the Law of God,
and to suffer under their wills, what they could lay upon them; for they were
freeborn Englishmen, and had served in faithfulness the Commonwealth, being
free in the presence of God, from the transgression of any Law: To their
commands, they could not be obedient; and if by violence they would put them
out of the City, and had power to do it, they could not resist; and so they
departed out of their presence, rejoicing in the will of God, that they were
counted worthy reproach, and to be called before Rulers and Counselors for the
testimony of Jesus.

Now let all people Judge, whether these proceedings of the Magistrates, be not
manifestly contrary to the Rights and Liberties of Englishmen, who may freely
come into, and live in any place, within the English Jurisdiction, giving an
account of their names, former habitations, business, places of birth, and
last abode, and freeing the Parish from charge if it be demanded: And to the
Laws of the Nation; which requires plain dealing, not treachery in
Magistrates: That places of Justice be open and free to all, not to be done
privately, and in a Chamber, or the doors kept fast; That witnesses on both
sides be present and heard; That the Accuser and Pr^secuter be neither
Examiner, Witness, nor Judge; That the Magistrates without respect of persons,
judge according to the Law, not their own wills and lusts; And to the righteous
ends of the late Wars; for Rights, Liberties, Fundamental Laws, and
administration of impartial and equal Justice: And to the ( Exodus 22. 21. 23.
9. 12. Deuteronomy. 9. 12. Deuteronomy 10. 18, 19. Lev. 19. 33, 34. Psalm 146. 9. Ezekiel. 22.
29. Heb. 13. 2.
) Law of God; which requires strangers to be entertained, and cherished, and
loved as thy self, not to be vexed or oppressed; That His ( 2 Chronicles. 36. 15,
16. Isa. 44. 26. Matt. 22. 6. Jer. 7. 25, 26, 27, 28.
) Messengers be well entreated and hearkened to; That the ( Psalm. 82. 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. Exodus 23. 2. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19, 20. 27. 19.
) Innocent be protected and defended in Judgment: That the ( Deuteronomy. 1. 17. 2
Chro. 19. 6, 7.
) Judgment given, be the Lords; Yea, to Common humanity: when men shall leave
all that is dear unto them, out of love to their souls, at the command of God,
travel many hundreds of miles, and freely speak to them the word of God, as
having known the terror of the Lord, and desiring only to approve themselves
in what they deliver to every man's ( 2 Cor. 4. 2.
) Conscience, in the sight of God, according to the Scripture, and being not
chargeable to any, And a case wherein every Englishman is concerned? And
whether these Priests be not found out of the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and his
Apostles, and in the steps of the false Prophets, Highpriests, Scribes and
Pharisees, who throughout all their Generations, caused the true Prophets, and
Ministers of Christ to be brought before Kings and Rulers, to be ( 2 Kings 22.
24. Matt. 26. 67, 68.
) smot on the face, to be imprisoned, ( Jer. 20. 3. Acts 16. 29.
) stockt, ( Acts 16. 22, 23. 37. 22. 19: 2 Cor. 11. 24, 25. Acts 5. 40. Heb.
11. 36.
) whipped, ( John 9. 22. 24. 35. John 16. 7.
) cast out of the Synagogues, ( Matt. 8. 24. Acts 16. 39. Acts 2. 18. 5. 40. 1
These. 2. 7. 8.
) commanded to depart their Coast, and to speak no more in that Name; yea, to
be ( Heb. 11. 37. Acts 7. 58, 59, 60. Matt. 23. 29 to the end. Acts 12. 19. 26.
10.
) put to death (Christ himself to be ( Matt. 27. 20. 35.
) Crucified) as ( Matt. 27. 63. 2 Cor. 6. 8.
) deceivers, ( Acts 21. 28.
) changers of the Laws and ( Acts 16. 21.
) Customs, ( Acts 17. 6.
) movers of Sedition, ( Acts 24. 5.
) turners of the world upside down, ( Acts 24. 5.
) pestilent and mad fellows, ( Luke 23 2.
) disturbers of the Peace, ( Luke 5, 24. John 10. 37. Matt. 26. 65. Acts 6. 11.
13.
) perverting the Nation, ( Luke 7. 33. John 8. 48.
) blasphemers and ( 2 Kings 9. 11. Jer. 29. 26. Jo. 10, 20. Acts 26. 24. Luke
23. 2.
) Devils. 'Twas Amaziah ( Amos 7. 10, 11, 12, 13.
) that bad Amos depart Bethel, and Prophecy no more there; for it was the
Kings Court: 'Twas the ( Luke 8. 37.
) Gadarens that desired Christ to depart out of their Coasts, because the
Devils he cast out, were got into the Swine: And 'twas the ( Luke 7. 53.
) Samaritans that would not receive him, because his face was as though he
would go to Jerusalem. If any one come in his own name, or in the name of a
Synod or some Church (so called) as bred up at the Universities, or skilled in
the Tongues, such a one is received, settled, maintained and defended, be he
what he will as to his qualifications, and never so ignorant of the power and
life of Jesus, or unfit to speak, even to men, of which this City affords
instances; but they who come not in their own name or will, nor by the will t 1
Kings 18. 20. Acts 16. 20.
of man, but in the name and power of the eternal God, whereby they are made
able Ministers of the everlasting Gospel, and witnessed to be so in the hearts
of thousands, though they covet no man's silver nor gold, though their
conversation be as becomes the Gospel; yet they must be charged to depart this
City and the Liberties thereof.

Designing against the Government suggested.
This their first Attempt, proving successess, (for their command in their own
wills contrary to Law, was not observed) and these waters of the Sanctuary
flowing higher and higher, and spreading themselves much in the hearts of the
people, the Priests and Rulers, are grieved thereat, and new consultations are
had concerning them. And because that generally those who embraced the Truth,
were such as had always been faithful to the Interest of the Commonwealth,
and of unspotted reputation, and in that regard were likely to be heard by the
chief in Authority, should they complain because of their oppressions from
these Magistrates, (the generality of whom are well known to have endeavored
the destruction both of the Commonwealth, and the friends thereof) and that
some other ends might be accomplished; It was thought requisite, and therefore
Representations were made at White Hall and Westminster, that these were
disaffected persons to the Government, who under the notion of Quakers, and
under that pretense, were suspected to be carrying on some design against the
Government; That there are thousands at their meetings, even in the Fort, that
the safety of the Garrison, was in immediate danger by those tumultuous
Assemblies; Among whom were many Cavaliers; and that the Officers of the
Garrison, were friends to those people; that so being brought under the
prejudice and jealousy of Authority, will and lust might the more freely be
acted upon them for the future and, and be owned therein: whieh suggestions
were so far from truth, that there was nothing administered, that might give a
rational ground of color for any such practices, those meetings being in
peaceableness: and though thousands made them up, yet their quiet carriage and
diligent attention was such, as demonstrated another spirit than that of this
world, and another Kingdom than an earthly, which (if the truth was spoken out)
was that which indeed gave the trouble. And to this false and adulterous
generation, an open charge is hereby given, to prove the least title of any
thing in design against the present Government, in any who are Convinced of the
Truth, and do truly own this Ministration; or any thing in all their meetings,
of a tumultuous nature, or that gave any just suspicion of conspiracies on
their part, or that is indeed criminal before man; the Principles of those
people tending to the laying down of carnal weapons, and to the taking away of
the occasion of war and disturbance, and to the bringing of people off from
that ground of evil doing, to which the Magistrates sword is made a terror: It
was Haman that suggested to King Ahashuerus that (c) it was not for the Kings
profit to suffer the Jews Hester 3. 8. 9.
scattered in his Province, whose Laws were diverse from all people, neither
kept they the Kings Laws, because Mordecai bowed not to him in the gate: It was
the ( Dan. 6. 4, 5, ^, 7. 12. 13.
) Governors of Provinces that suggested, This Daniel will not obey thy Command
O King! and, these ( Dan. 3. 12.
) Children of the captivity, regard not thee O King! nor the Decree which thou
have signed, they serve not thy God, nor worship the Image thou have set up.
And it was the ( John 9. 12,
) Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who told Pilate, if he Crucified not
Jesus the King of the Jews, he was no friend to Caesar, and that they had no
King but Caesar; And we have found this ( Luke 23. 2.
) fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar,
saying, that he himself is Christ a King, though he pretended to no other
Kingdom than a spiritual one, neither entrenched he upon Herod or Pilate. And
it was the Bishops, who in latter times reproached the meetings of the people
of God, who were scornfully called Puritans, with the brand of Conventicles
against the Kingdom; for which they would needs pretend a Law: which neither
was made for, nor intended any such thing: and possessed the Kings against them
as their only enemies.

Priests in their Pulpits, and elsewhere incensing, stirring up, and enraging
the People.
Whilst this groundwork of Dissavour was laying in the Chief in Authority,
the Priests were not idle to disaffect and enrage the City, by their Raylings
and lies in their Pulpits, their reading of Books there, and perverting the
sense of them, and falsely representing the people of God, as Deceivers, Denyers
of Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, Scriptures, Ordinances, Magistracy, Ministry,
Justification by Christ; as Blasphemers, Jesuits, Witches, yea what not; And
endeavoring to possess the people therewith, Gathering and repeating what lies
and false stories (how improbable soever) they could learn abroad for that
purpose: a Ringleader and Chief of whom was Ralph Farmer Priest; and hereunto
many of the Independents and Baptized Judgment, and others, added their
reports. And upon occasions private and public, manifested their dislike and
opposition to those people, and their Doctrine and Principles, whereby both the
Magistrates and the multitude were so hightened, and incensed that there was
nothing too bad for them to wish to, nor too cru^ for them to execute upon, the
innocent; yea, they stoo^ ready to draw their blood, and manifested such a
spirit, that had the Supreme disposer of all things, and the Laws given leave;
it was casie to conclude, they would more greedily have led them to execution,
and murdered them with torments, then the Bishops did the Martyrs in Queen
Maryes days (to burn whom they had a Law) or the Heathen, the poor Christians
under the Roman persecution, and thought therein they should do God service:
As Just, as innocent, as Disciples, as Christians, no persecutions were managed
against Christ and his Apostles upon record in Scripture; but, as Luke 23. 2.
Perverters of the Nation, Forbidders of Tribute to be given to Caesar,
Teachers that the ( Acts 6. 14. Acts 21. 21. 18. 12, 13.
) Law of Moses was not to be observed, Christ the end thereof being come, as (
John 7. 19, 20. 8. 48. 52 59. Acts 21. 28.
) Devils, as ( John 19. 7. Mark 14. 64.
) Blasphemers of God, the Holy place, and the Law, as ( Acts 6. 11. 13. Acts 6.
14. 16. 21.
) Changers of the Laws and Customs, as ( Acts 16. 20, 21.
) turbulent and ( Acts 24. 5. 18. 13.
) pestilent fellows, Movers of Sedition ( Acts 26. 6.
) Prophaners of the Temple, ( Acts 21. 2^, 29, 30, 31.
) Polluters of the Holy place, ( Acts 19. 26.
) Affirmers that those are not Gods which are made with hands, and so to the
Prison and to the Cross, to the Stocks, and to the Whip, to the Torments, and
to the Devourings of wild Beasts, to the Saws, and to Death it self. And the
same seed of the Serpent in this Generation, with a greater rage (according to
its power) persecutes the righteous seed; first, paints them out as the vilest
of men, not fit to live, and then stirs up the beastly nature of the multitude,
to devour and destroy them; as the Romans of old clothed Christians, in wild
beasts skins, and then threw them to the dogs to be torn to pieces.

With these things the City was as it were set on fire, and the minds of the
people fully prepared for mischief; and as opportunities were administered,
their tongues were exercised, and their hands stretched out against those who
bore testimony to the Truth; For (now) no friends whatsoever, could pass up
and down the streets upon their occasions, nor to a friends house, nor to or
from their meetings to wait upon the Lord, but by boys, servants, Porters,
Priests and other people, who would be esteemed of rank and quality, were they
openly abused, reproached, dirted, stoned, pincht, kicked, and otherwise grossly
injured without check, or control; Insomuch as there appeared not the face of
civility, in the Town: And a stranger would have doubted whether any such thing
as Government were in it, or Religion.

And as the Trumpet gives the alarm to the battle, so the tongues of people,
being thus freely exercised, whetted on their rage, and kindled their fury
further to lay hands on the Innocent, as what is hereafter mentioned, will
abundantly manifest; For, on the tenth day of the tenth month in the Eliz.
Marshal 10. day, 10. month, 1654. speaking the word of the Lord to Priest
Farmer.
morning, Elizabeth Marshal being moved of the Lord, to deliver a Message to
Ralph Farmer; and the people hearing of him at Nicholas Steeple-house, went
thither, and sitting over against him, and waiting in the power of the Lord,
all the while he was speaking, but spoke nothing till he had ended his Sermon,
and prayer of it, and seemed to be going out of the Pulpit, to give that they
call the Sacrament to the people (at which times the thing called the blessing,
is not usually given till that be ended) Cried out, This is the word of the
Lord to thee Farmer, Woe, woe, woe from the Lord to them who take the word of the
Lord in their mouths, and the Lord never sent them. And was proceeding to speak
further, but Tumulted, etc.
the multitude prevented her, by laying on her, violent hands, crushing her
Arms, pinching, and thuisting her (the first that laid hands on her, and
crushed her Arms, being one of the Rulers Sons) notwithstanding she got a
little respit, and turning about was moved to speak to the people; for her
bowels were turned within her for them and to them she said from the Lord, This
is the mighty day of the Lord, the Lord is coming to pull his people out of
the mouths of all dumb shepherds; But she was hindered by the tumult from
speaking any further, who drew her out of the Steeple-house into the street,
where the boys and other people followed her with dirt and stones; John Gouning
the Mayor was present at the Steeple-house aforesaid, to whom Ralph Farmer
openly called, that course might be taken with her, who the next day instead of
questioning and punishing the tumult, who assaulted the woman, and made the
disturbance before his face, as the Law required, sent for her, and several
days that week, to come before him, but she was not at home, her absence being
upon her occasions, not to avoid him in the least.

The same day in the afternoon, one Captain Samuel John Worring, 10. day 10.
month, 1654. Speaking to Samuel Grimes.
Grimes, Divining at Philips, and affirming to the people many gross untruths,
of those whom he reproachfully called Quakers, One Henry Gunning reproved him,
he having said that he committed sin in all the things that he did; Whereupon
John Worring Apprentice to Peter Hiley, said to him, If thou were a Minister of
Jesus Christ, the Law of the spirit of Tumulted.
life which is in Christ Jesus, would make thee free from the Law of sin and
death: Then the multitude abused and beat, worring and Gonning. And the
Churchwarden (so called) and the Clark laid hands on them, the Constables
present not keeping the Peace.

On the fourth day of the week following, the Magistrates sent for John Worring
before them, and demanded Examined.
of him, why he made a disturbance in the public Congregation aforesaid? And
why he disturbed the Minister before he had done his Sermon? Worring denied,
that he made any disturbance. Whereupon the Magistrates called the Clark, in
evidence against him, who positively swore, that he told Grimes that he spoke
never a true word, and that he kicked at the said Clark; All which, Worring
affirmed to be false.

Then they called another to testify against him, who swore that Worring
called Grimes Devil, which Worring affirmed to be false also; And Magistrates
themselves by their questions, seemed to suspect the truth of his testimony.
Hereupon they asked him, what he could say for himself? He answered, and denied
that he spoke such words as they charged him withal: They demanded of him, what
were the words he did say? Worring replied, They were these, That if he were a
Minister of Christ, the Law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus,
would make him free from the Law of sin and of death: They told him, he was
sent to make a disturbance; this he denied, or that he was sent by any, (for
such things are not the practice of the servants of the Lord, whom they
suspected to have sent him, and would slander with such things) And he added,
that is was not so. Whereupon Alderman Joseph Jackson replied, he was like a
Cutpurse, and that he denied all things he did. Then they asked him, why he
kicked the Clark? He answered, that he did neither kick nor strike, but was both
kicked and struck. Alderman Joseph Jackson replied, that if his brains had been
knocked out, he had had his amends in his his hands: And so they committed him
to Newgate Committed.
prison, without any Mittimus.

The 17. day of the same month, Elizabeth Marshall Eliz: Marshal 17. day 10.
month 1654 speaking to John Knowls.
was moved of the Lord, to speak to John Knowls Priest, at the Steeple-house
called the College; whom she hearing all the time without saying a word, after
that, by what is called his blessing, he dismissed the people, the power of the
Lord was upon her, and commanded her to warn him to repent, And she said, This
is the word of the Lord to thee Knowls, I warn thee to repent, and to mind the
light of Christ in thy Conscience, and was very full to have spoken more unto
him; But Alderman William Cann, a Ruler present, and some others, commanded the
people to lay hands on her, who Tumulted etc
thereupon violently assaulted her, giving her many blows in the place with
staves and cudgels, pushing and haling her; but the mighty power of the Lord,
bore her above it all, and moved her to cry out to them, The mighty day of the
Lord is at hand, wherein he will strike terror on the wicked, which she
uttered often with a loud voice; But the tumult haling her out of the
Steeple-house, she went her way into the City, Hundreds of people following
her, and as she was going was taken into Custody by a Constable, Taken into
Custody.
by order, as he said, of the aforesaid Alderman, and brought before the Mayor,
that Alderman and another being present: The Mayor demanded of Examined.
her, why she went to disturb the Minister and the Peace? She answered, she
was no disturber of the Peace. He replied, she was in that she had caused
tumults in the streets (whereas the Tumults were made on her) She only replied,
woe be to me if I obey not the word of the Lord, Then the Mayor commanded the
Constable to carry her to Newgate prison, where Committed.
she was taken into Custody without a Mittimus.

The next day about the third hour in the afternoon, 18. day 10. month 1654.
Eliz. Marshal Examined.
she was sent for from the prison to the Council house, where the Mayor and
Aldermen being sat, the Mayor charged her with disturbing of the Peace, which
she denied, and said, she offered abuse to none; but they disturbed the Peace
who tumultuously laid hands on her; Then the Magistrates called for the
Depositions against her, as to her Message to Ralph Farmer, as aforesaid. They
affirming that he had not said his blessing: But they urged nothing of what she
said to John Knowls, upon which she was, after examination, Committed. Then the
Mayor caused the Depositions to be read, and demanded of her whether she spoke
the words therein alleged? To which she stood silent, having owned what she
spoke aforesaid from the Lord before them, and only said in answer, I have
said. You need not urge her said Richard Aldworth, she owns it. Then they said,
She must to the Place from whence she came; and called Committed.
for the Keeper to take her away; She replied she hah broken no Law, and bad
them act according to the Law; They commanded again the Keeper to take her
away, whereupon she went to the Mayor, and again, and again required a
Mittimus; but he refused and said, the Keeper was a sufficient Mittimus: Then
departing with the Keeper, she was moved from the Lord to return again, which
she did, and warned them from they Lord in these words, You that are
Magistrates of this City, I warn you from the Lord that you act righteously,
and that equity run down as a stream, and righteousness as a mighty water;
Whereupon she was returned to prison, they not suffering any friend of hers to
come in with her into the Council house, to beat witness on her behalf, though
it was earnestly desired.

And thus was Elizabeth Marshal, only for speaking from the Lord to John
Knowls, after he had dismissed the people, by command of an Alderman, laid hands
on by the multitude, violently assaulted, and beaten with staves and cudgels in
the place, and after she was hurried out, taken into Custody by order of the
same Alderman; And being brought before him and the Mayor, examined, and sent
to prison without a Mittimus: and the next day brought in Custody from the
prison before the Magistrates, and by them charged with nothing as to the cause
of her Commitment, after she had been ezamined as aforesaid; but as to her
Message delivered a week before to Ralph Farmer as aforesaid: And for this she
is Committed again to Prison, as they pretend, though they denied her a
Mittimus, being by her demanded again and again, and permitted no friend to
come into the Council chamber with her; But the Mayor punished none of those
who made the tumult in the Steeple-house before his face, and who assaulted her
with violence, crushing and haling her; nor caused the Peace to be kept, nor
did Ralph Farmer desire any such thing, or that the woman might have liberty to
speak, and he to answer, but called out to the Mayor, in the midst of the
tumult, to take a course with her: Nor did the Mayor punish or call to an
account, any of those who beat her with staves, and cudgels, and otherwise
assaulted, and abused her at the College, or that made the tumults; but
imprisoned her both times, laying the tumults raised on her (wherein she was
beaten, and in so much danger, and on whom the Peace was broken) to her charge,
though as to any cause wherefore she was committed, and continued for the space
of about eight weeks, a prisoner, it appears not by any Mittimus to this day.

And thus was John Worring sent for by the Magistrates, for speaking (after
another had begun) to one who was no Priest, and who but 3 or 4 days before,
said, at a meeting in the presence of near three hundred people; that he
scorned the name and the office of a Minister, and publicly said, that he
sinned in every thing he did: And after examination, committed to Prison
without any Mittim^^, and continued there for the space of forty days, though
an Apprentice. But neither was the tumult enquired after, according to Law,
that was raised upon him, nor those who struck and beat him in the place, nor
the Constables present who kept not the Peace; But instead thereof, when he
said he was beaten and kicked, Joseph Jackson said, a Luke 2. 42. 46.
if he had had his brayns knocked out, he had his amends b Acts 9. 20. 13. 5.
14. 14. 1. and 17: 10. 17. and 18. 4. 19. 26 19. 8.
in his hands: and (when he would not own what was falsely alleged against him
to be true, though what he had spoken, he confessed) was reproached by the said
Alderman, with the ignominious name of a Cutpurse: So that whether the Priest
be spoken c Acts 17. 16, to the end.
to; when he has ended all, except his blessing; or d Acts 17. 17.
when by having said his blessing, he has dismissed e Acts 19. 9.
f Acts 28. 30, 31.
the people; Or whether it be to a Priest, or to one that scorns the name and
Office of a Minister; and g Sergius Paulus Governor of P^phos, Acts 13. 7. 47.
The Rulers of the Synagogue
says he sins in all things he does; and be the words what they will, or the
occasion, it appears, all is one to those who rule by their Lusts, not by Law:
When as ( Antioch in Pisidia, Acts 13. 5. At Ephesus Acts 18. 19. 20. Publius
Governor of Miletum Acts 28. 10, 11.
) Christ was permitted at twelve years old, to dispute with the Doctors in the
Tepmle; And the ( At Rome two years, no man forbidding, Acts 28. 31. A^ Antioch
a year, Acts 11. 26. At Ephesus 3 months, Acts 19. 8. At Corinth a year, 6.
months Acts 17. 11. At Iconium a long time, Acts 14. 3. At Caesaria many days
Acts 21. 10.
) Apostles spoke, and reasoned, and disputed in the Synagogues amongst Jews and
Gentiles, amongst the (c) Athenians in the (d) Market daily, with those that
met with him, and on Mars hill, and in Ephesus, and in the (e) School of
Tyrannus, and at (f) Rome, and were desired so to do, by some of the (g)
Rulers, and permitted by others for some (h) space of time; And in the Churches
of Christ, all might ( 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31.
) Prophecy one by one, and if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, let
the first hold his peace; And the Prophets two or three might speak, and the
rest judge; And it seemed to ( Acts 25. 27.
) Festus the Roman Governor, a thing unreasonable, to send a prisoner, and
not withal to signify the crimes laid against him, it was the ( Jeroboam,
Ahab, Jezabel, etc.
) wicked Kings, and Princes, and People, of Israel and Judah that caused the
Messengers of the Lord to be imprisoned, and his servants to be evil entreated,
and that said unto the ( Esaias 30. 10. Jer. 11. 21. Amos 2. 12. 7. 13. 15. Micah
2. 6.
) Prophets, prophecy not ( 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16. Jer. 7. 25. 25. 4. and 35. 15,
26. 5. and 29. 19. and 32. 33. 44. 4.
) though he sent them, rising up early, saying, O do not the abominable thing
that I hate, till there was no remedy, and both ( 2 Kings 17. 18. 20. 23.
) Israel ( 2 Kings 24. 3.
) and Judah were removed out of his sight; And it was the ( Jer. 5. 12. 33. 17.
) false Prophe^s that persuaded them so to do; saying, no evil shall befall
you, and that the ( Amos 7. 10.
) land was not able to bear the words of those who speak from the mouth of the
Lord; And it was the High Priests, and the Chief of the Jews, and the devout
and honourahle (so called) that crucified him that spoke from ( 1 Cor. 2. 8.
Luke 23. 10. 13. 23, 24. Acts 13. 5. 14. 19. and 17. 17. and 14. 2. 5. 17. 5,
6, 7, 8.
) heaven, and stirred up the Rulers of the Synagogues, and the multitude, to
oppose and persecute his Apostles, whom before they disturbed not.

And as to the ( See Magna Charta. Stat. Westminster. Petition of Right. The trialls
of the late King and of Strafford and Canterbury.
) ancient Law of this Nation, It is a special Fundamental, That none be taken
or imprisoned, but according to the Law of the Land, (viz. by lawful Warrant or
Mittimus of one or more who are lawfully authorized under his or their hands
and seals, which Warrant or Mittimus must contain the cause of the Commitment,
and must conclude, Until he that is Committed, be delivered by Law, for above
all things the Law does value the Liberty of a man's person; Therefore complaint
was made in the Parliament (3. Charles) against the King and Lords, for sending
several Merchants of London to Prison, with Warrants, which contained not the
cause of their Commitment; To salve which, the Petition of Right was then
granted, which confirmed Magna Charta, and the Statute of Westminster. 1. wherein
this fundamental Law is contained: And to act contrary hereunto, is to subvert
the fundamental Law; For which the late King, Strafford and Canterbury were
impeached, attainted and executed as Traitors against the fundamental Laws and
Liberties of the Nation: And against this fundamental Law, no particular usage
25 Edw. 1. Cap. 2. Coke upon Con. c. f. 527.
or Custom of any particular place is of force: All which (as it appears) these
Magistrates neither account nor regard, nor their heads nor estates, for they
commit men to prison without any Warrant or Mittimus, and have denied it to
about 20. persons, of whom particularly this Treatise makes mention, though
several of them earnestly and often demanded it.

Also, freedom of the exercise of the profession of Faith in Christ Jesus,
though differing in Judgment from the Doctrine, worship, or discipline
publicly held forth, is a fundamental in the present ( See the Government,
Art. 37.
) Constitution; And for all to prophecy, and when any thing is revealed to
another that sits by, for the first to hold his peace; And that all may
speak one by one; was exercised in the true Church of Christ, of which the
Scriptures bear Record, as aforesaid, and is a true profession and exercise of
faith in Jesus Christ.

And for that absolete Act Mary 1. on which the Priests and Magistrates pretend
to lay the legality of their proceedings in this case: It is well known to have
been made in the time of Popery, for the defense of the Romish, Popish Priests,
in the time of their Service from the testimony of those Protestants, whom then
God mightily raised up to bear testimony against their Idolatrous Doctrines and
services, who witnessed against them thorough flames of fire: All which
Doctrines and Services being wholly removed, the effect must needs cease with
the cause, and the Defense, when that which is defended, is taken away. And 1
Eliz. c. 2. repeales, and makes utterly void and of none effect all Laws,
Statutes, and Ordinances, wherein or whereby any other service than that of the
Common Prayer is limited, established or set forth: And that Act aforesaid, 1
Mar. amounts to the establishing of the Mass, which is another service. And
yet neither are the Priests ashamed to desire, nor do the Magistrates blush to
defend them upon color and pretense of that Statute; nay, to imprison, where
there is no offense by that Law, were it in force, and practicable, for it
protects the Romish, Popish Priests, from interruption, only in the time of
Service. Can those who claim the benefit and privileges of that Law, and are
protected thereby, otherwise be esteemed of, than such as that Law qualifies
and makes capable of the privileges and protection therein provided? And so,
is not the witness the same against which the provision is made, as aforesaid?
and that which seeks the same defense, of the same root and principle? If the
Priests will needs have that Law to be in force, and to be defended thereby,
then let them not refuse to be accounted of and denominated as such whom that
Law qualifies, guardeth and defends, viz. as Romish Popish Priests of
Antichrist, not as Protestants or Ministers of Jesus Christ; for, against the
witness of God in such, was that Law made and provided.

The great Tumult and R^et.
The Priests and People having understood by these illegal and oppressive
proceedings, how much these Magistrates had the truth, and those who owned it,
in abomination, were greatly encouraged to proceed in their opposition
thereunto; And resolutions were also had, by an insurrection to quit the Town
of those Servants of the most high, who were so isntrumental in this day of
the Lord, because according to the way of Justice, and the Law of the Land,
they being innocent, it could not be done. And such an expedient (if it took)
might gratify and answer all their opposites: Therefore a Conspiracy was
entered into, and a design laid amongst Continued.
the Apprentices for that purpose; and meetings had in order thereunto: And as
a Blind or pretext to this continued outrage, a Petition was drawn to have been
presented the Mayor and Aldermen, to turn them out of the Town; and upon their
refusing so to do (for they knew that the Law authorized no such Injustice)
then to rise, and not only to do their endeavors on them, but on such as
should assist them: And in this Petition Priest Farmer was consulted (to say no
more); and to execute this Plot, goings there were from house to house, and
Master and man were prepared.

Mighty were the outgoings of the Lord on the first day of the week, being the
17th. of the 10th. month, in the public meetings, and mightily was the
Dragon enraged thereat, seeing his Kingdom shortened; And therefore staid not
till his Serpent wisdom by a Petition had turn^d his design into an
insurrection, but blows up the heat of the rash and ungoverned Apprentices and
rude multitude to lay hold on the first opportunity, to put it, by downright
tumult, into issue.

And therefore having understood that the third Raised on John Audland and John
Camm. 18th. of the 10th month, 1654. The first day.
day of the week following, John Camm and John Audland (who were of the first
that came hither, and were great laborers in the work of the Lord in Bristol)
were to pass over the Bridge to a meeting appointed at Brislington, a mile or
two from th^nce, in the County of Somerset, Resolutions were had to set upon
them. And accordingly the third day of the week in the morning being the 19th
day of the 10th month, they two passing peaceably over the Bridge, and a
friend with them, offering no offense or injury to any, several Apprentices of
Priest Farmers Parish, followed after, and passing by them to the South end of
the Bridge, turned about, and giving a sign, many other Apprentices came forth
and other people, and joined with them, who together fell violently on those
innocent strangers, and assaulted, punched, pulled and haled them back over the
Bridge again toward the High Cross, their numbers being increased to some
Hundreds, and their rage heightened, that some cried out, Hang them presently;
others, Knock them down, and would have dragged them thorough Winestreet, and
so out of the City, there to have executed their cruelty upon them; but it
pleased the Lord, that others were hearkened to, who spoke to have them brought
before the Mayor; And so the Riot haled them into the Tolzey, where their rage
had been much upon them, were it not that a friend present, with much ado, got
them into his house near at hand, and so rescued them; About which the Riot
remained for some time, threatening to assault it: Those two being all that
time, as Lambs dumb before their shearers, nor did they strive, or lift up
their voice, being quiet in the power of the eternal God, nor were they afraid,
though in such danger of being destroyed; for the Masters permitted their
servants to go and to act therein before their faces; and Richard Newman the
Chief Constable of that Ward, looked upon it, (the Riot passing by his door)
but kept not the Peace, his servant being a chief; and those peaceable
Citizens, who endeavored to pacify and stop the Riot, and told the
Apprentices the offense and the danger, they would not hear, and threw out from
amongst them; And lately arrested one of them (a member of the Council) for so
doing, under the pretense of an Assault.

This Riot occasioned a great amazement in the City, it being sudden to many,
and put the Chief Officers of the Garrison, (who by Commission had Command over
the City, as well as over the Fort and Castle) upon consideration what to do,
not knowing to what public mischief, such a tumult (should it not have been
endeavored presently to be dispersed) might grow, or what design against the
Commonwealth, under the pretense aforesaid, might be brought forth. It being a
season, wherein a general one was then laid, over all parts of the Nation. Of
which they were sensible, and of the affections of those who acted herein, and
of the Generality of the people, to the old enemy, which gave them strong
ground of suspicion and jealousy: Nevertheless being desirous, that by the
Magistrates the peace of the City might be kept, and this Insurrection,
suppressed, if it might be, whereby all pretense of Clamor against them, for
interposing the Civil Authority, might be taken away: They with another
peaceable Citizen went to the Mayor and some of the Aldermen, and signified as
much, who being very earnest that the Soldiers should not intermeddle, and
undertaking to still the Town, and keep it in peace, and to publish an order
for the Tumult to depart, forbore the putting in execution any thing of the
Military power: But though the Numbers dispersed of themselves some hours,
before any order of the Magistrate was published for that purpose, yet was not
the rage of the multitude allayed, but that evening being together, and that
night in small Companies, and the next morning, much desperate language was
heard from them, concerning their resolutions to attempt them again, if they
came that way, and to pay them for all; Some of them affirming, they should
have more Countenance from the Magistrates, than those strangers, and that they
had none of the least men in the Town to countenance them; with much more
language to this purpose.

The second days Riot.
The next morning those friends passed over the Bridge to their meeting at
Brislington, disappointed the day before by the Tumult: And three of the chief
of the former days Riot, were sent for before the Mayor at the Information of
the Officers of the Garrison, who had witnesses ready, and did prove The height
of the Tumult at noon.
it upon them. Which drew them to the Tolzey where they were in a high Riot,
about three hours together, their numbers being esteemed at one time to be,
above fifteen hundred, crying, One and all. And so heightened were they in their
rage, that though the Mayor and Aldermen with the sword, and the Sheriffs,
required all present whatsoever to depart, and published a Proclamation to that
purpose, and stood there near half an hour, and a guard of Musketeers were
drawn up near them to rescue their Officers, who (they heard) were in danger of
their lives by the Riot, and (therefore) marched thither; yet neither master nor
man would stir: nay some Masters persuaded some of the Ryoters to stay, and
to stand their ground, and not to budge one foot, when they were intending to
depart upon the Majors order in the name of the Lord Protector, saying, It was
a lie, the Mayor had no such order from the Protector, and Charles Stuart was
publicly mentioned by the name of King; many of the Ryoters having been
Cavaliers; And one was named openly among them to be Captain, and the Soldiers
were dared by them to advance, and hats waved at them in defiance, not a
Constable at this time keeping the peace: And this Riot was so heightened, (and
no marvel, if it be only considered, that it was given out, that Alderman The
Riot encouraged by Ald. Geo: Hellier 's saying to to them, (as it was given
out) That he would spend his blood, and lose his life before any of the Rioters
should go to Prison.
George Hellier should say at the Tolzie to some of the Ryoters in the time of
the Riot, he would spend his blood and lose his life before any of his fellow
Apprentices (so great it seems was the condescension) should go to prison, and
(which was to them a great encouragement) caused some of them to stay, when
they were departing, upon report of the commitment of some for the former days
Riot) that to those who were amongst, and observed them impartially, it was
even a miracle that blood had not proceeded, and a great deal too, had but one
hand been lifted up, which the Lord was pleased in great mercy to restrain,
though so ready and near to have been in execution: The very beholding and
serious consideration of which, and of the persons that made up these Tumults,
wrought Conviction upon some, who now love, and are brought in measure into the
obedience of the truth.

But the prevention thereof at that time, allayed not the boiling of rancor in
their breasts: for though after some hours, the Riot dispersed of themselves,
yet resolutions were had to meet with those strangers, as they returned from
Brislington, and then to execute their wills upon them: And for that purpose,
toward the Evening, drew together In the Evening.
in multitudes on the Bridge, and on the other side of the River Avon; and to
several of their Masters, at the same time appearing at the Tolzey as owning
their servants, came some of the chief of the Ryoters, informing, that those
Quakers were coming into the City; To whom answer was made, We are waiting on
the Mayor to do Justice, as he has promised; which if he does not, we will do
Justice our selves. And the Magistrates were pressed earnestly to assign their
power, by some, who said to the Magistrate, if they would grant them it, they
would order them well enough, and go where the proudest of them dared to go:
And some of them boasted of raising thousands, if the Mayor would assign them
his power; What to do, is left to be understood; for, to order two naked men
who resisted not, and were likely to be torn in pieces by the multitude, and
none forcibly assisting them, needed no such powers: The Commonwealth being at
that very time deeply and generally designed against, through all parts of the
Nation, and within few weeks of the set time of its Execution, viz. 12. Feb.
ensuing; Yea, it was manifest, that most men were either acted in or pleased
with these tumultuous proceedings: such language also passed and threatenings,
tending to the shedding of blood, that even the Rulers themselves, at length
were in great fear thereof, Rulers afraid that blood would be shed, and
therefore send to those Friends, that they could not secure them.
and therefore sent their Sword Bearer to diver^ those friends, from passing
into the Town, for tha^ they could not undertake to secure them; who through
the Providence of the Lord were preserved with a very great deliverance, the
spirits of the multitude being that night so full of fury, and such mutterings
At night.
of the listings of hundreds of men, that the whole City was in a great
affrightment.

Had Order and Government, the discharge of their Duty and their Reputation,
been regarded by these Magistrates, or the freeing themselves from the
suspicion of having given secret Countenance and approbation to the Ryots
aforesaid, they would have made their Insurrections as exemplary in punishment,
as they exceeded in outrage and breach of the Peace, any thing of that nature,
that this Nation has afforded. But to this day neither has any one person of
the Ryoters been punished or called to an account, except the three aforesaid,
through occasion of the Officers, who were not committed or punished, but
rather encouraged, by what Joseph Jackson said in their hearing in the Council
Chamber, to the Officers of the Garrison in the height of the Tumult; nor any
Constables for not discharging their duties, as they were required according to
Law. Nay as men concerned in the Tumults, and the guilt thereof, writing there
is to have it extenuated and excused, with those in chiefest Authority, being
not ashamed falsely to charge those as the cause and the Designers, upon whom
the Tumults were raised, and whose lives were thereby endangered: And two of
the Council were appointed to ride to White Hall; And a Petition of those
Ryoters to O. P. was prepared, hastened, and subscribed: And so far were they
from protecting the Innocent aforesaid, that they met together and sent to John
Audland and John Came (who, the seventh day of that week, being moved of the
Lord, came boldly into the City going in the chief parts thereof, and from
house to house (without the least disturbance) to desire them to depart the
City, (though the Town was quiet) without signifying any Law that they had
broken, which deserved such a violation of their just Liberty, in answer to
their desires in their letter to that purpose sent the Magistrates, the 22. of
the tenth month.

Now for Tumults and Insurrections, to take upon them to make Laws, And in a
ryotous manner for more than one days continuance, to seek to put them in
execution, on innocent and peaceable freeborn Englishmen, who had fought for
the Liberties of their Country, and had broken no Law, nor were charged with
any such things to the hazard of their lives which were sought after, and the
endangering of the setting a whole City into blood, contrary to and in contempt
of Law, Liberty and Justice, and tending to the subversion of all order and
Government; And for Magistrates, not to make enquiry into, or to punish one
offender, though hundreds sometimes acted highly therein before their faces,
according to the 13 Hen. 4. c. 2.
Law which require the Justices of the Peace with the Sheriff, to suppress a
Riot in their view, and to Record the same; which record amounts to a
Conviction, on which the offenders may be punished. And if the Ryoters are
departed, requires the Justices and Sheriff, within one month to enquire by a
Jury, and to hear and determine according to Law, upon pain of 100 l. a piece
every one making default: But to endeavor to excuse it to the chief in
Authority, pleading the part of the guilty, and falsely to suggest the cause and
design of those Tumults on the Innocent, upon whom the Tumults were raised; And
to send to and resolve the turning the Innocent so injured out of the City,
instead of protecting and doing them Justice; is such a shameless President of
abominable injustice and misgovernment, as outstrips Sodom it self, who drew
together about Lot's house, to abuse two strangers, come into their City, whom
they took to be men, but indeed were Angels, sent to execute the Judgment of
God upon them in fire and brimstone for their wickedness: And that wherein
every man is concerned; for who is certain of his Liberty, and who can judge
himself safe, if the rude multitude have a mind to infringe the one, or
endamage the other and the Magistrates instead of doing Justice on such
offenders, shall make up wherein they miscarry; and if it be lawful to do thus
to one, they may do it unto all: for One would think, that Masters should never
let loose, cherish and uphold the unbridled youth of their servants, not
knowing how soon it may turn on themselves; And that Magistrates should blush
to bear the name of Governors where the multitude command, not themselves;
much more to countenance and encourage such: But are they ashamed who commit
Jer. 6. 15.
such abominations as these? Nay, they are not at all ashamed, neither they,
nor the Priests, nor the People. Is this the Justice and the Rule of Bristol?
for equity against which, and Judgment, whosoever pleads, and for Just
Liberty and righteousness, he must be accounted an Enemy to the Government and
the Town, and so be represented, understood and prosecuted? Is this the quiet
and peaceable City of which the Magistrates do so loudly boast? And are not See
Ralph Farmers mystery of Ungodliness, page 22, 94.
these the horse-heels of Priest Farmer, with which he answered his
adversaries, whom he calls Quakers, as his other business to dispatch, then to
confute this doctrine, though he published a book for that purpose?

Whilst those friends aforesaid were in the City, Friends of the City abused,
etc. when Friends of the Country were departed.
they were made the pretense of all the miscarriages hitherto particularized;
but if they were once departed, the Citizens (it was said) shall find no
disturbance. But the enmity being at the Seed, it ceased not after they were
out thereof in order to a meeting before appointed in Leicestershire. For the
25th. of the 10th. month they were up in Tumults 25th. 10th. month, 1654.
again, several hundreds attempted a friends house at the Tolzey, but were
dispersed by some Troopers, and as friends were found in the streets, they were
kicked by them, dirted, and otherwise abused; And not only in the streets, but
in the steeple houses, were these outrages committed; and the Magistrates add
thereunto their injustice and oppression. For,

On the first day of the 11th. month Henry Warren, First of the 11th. month,
1654. Henry Warren speaking to Priest Longman.
being moved of the Lord, went to Thomas's steeple-house, where one Longman (a
malignant, formerly Chaplain to General Hopton in the Wars for the late King
against the Parliament) Divined a Gift Sermon, who having ended all, and
dismissed the people, he said to him, now thou have done, I may speak, The
prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto the Lord: Whereupon the Tumult
rose, Tumulted, etc.
and came upon him, assaulted and beat him in the place, and after this manner
of violence drew him forth thorough the streets to the Mayor, who demanded what
he had done? Answer was given, Examined.
that he made disturbance in the Church, having said to the Minister, The
prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. The Mayor asked whether
the Minister had quite done? They replied, he had: Then he demanded of Warren,
wherefore he went thither, for he knew he went not to learn? Warren asked
whether the place was not as free for him as another? The Mayor demanded of
him, why he kept on his hat in the time of prayer? He replied, The Lord says,
My Son give me thy heart, for the fashions and Customs of the world are an
abomination unto the Lord. Thou art a cunning fellow, said the Mayor, but I
will have some to sift thee as shall be as Cunning as thy self; and thou shall
know before thou go hence, that thou have disturbed the Peace: Then in came
Alderman Joseph Jackson, who presently said, Away with him to Newgate; and
after he had so said, asked what he had done? After him came in Alderman Henry
Gibbs, who asked Warren wherefore he went thither, seeing he did not like the
Minister? Warren replied, that he was not there, in his own will. How came
thou thither then, said he? Warren answered, By Command. Thou art a seduced
fool, replied Henry Gibbs. By what Command wast thou there, said Joseph
Jackson? He answered, By the Spirit of God in him: There Is enough said Joseph
Jackson, to commit him to prison. To which Warren replied, Know you not that
Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? Then they were all silent for a
little space, and without any more words commanded him to be carried to prison,
without Committed.
a Mittimus, where he was continued some time without any further examination:
And thus was he imprisoned upon witnessing a Good Confession, viz. That he was
there by the Command of the Spirit of God in him, as the High Priest rent his
Clothes, and said, What need we any further witnesses? Ye have heard the
Blaspheming, what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death,
when he had asked Christ again and again after the witnesses against him did
not agree, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the blessed? And he said, I am, And
ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in
the Clouds of Heaven, Mark 14. 61, 62, 63, 64.

Meetings of Friends. disturbed, and abused, etc.
Nor were the private meetings, to wait upon 2d. of the 11th month, 1654.
the Lord, free from abuse and interruption, though none but friends of the
City were present; for both on the 2d. day of the 11th. month, at a friends
house in Corn-street, and on the sixth of the same month, at another in
Backstreet, were they affronted and disturbed by the Apprentices, at the one,
and abused by the rabble at the other: And it was become Crime enough for any
one, to be reproached with the name of a Quaker, and matter for the Tumult to
rise upon and aslault such an one: For on the 7. day of the 11. month, being
the first day 7th. day of the 11th. month 1654. Robert Claiston for preserving
a woman from being strangled. Tumulted, and beat etc. in the Steeple-house.
of the week, Robert Claiston, Apprentice to Daniel Claiston, being at Stephens
Steeple-house, only for endeavoring to pull off a hand from a widows throat,
which was violent laid upon it, and likely to have strangled her by the tumult,
John Lane the Constable, instead of keeping the Peace, and assisting of
Claiston, and rescuing the woman, cried out to the tumult, that he was a
Quaker; whereupon the tumult struck him several blows in the face, His blood
drawn, Garment rent.
which drew blood from him, tore his Cloak into three pieces: And afterward,
the said Lane and the tumult drew him out of the Steeple-house, through the
Brought before the Mayor.
streets to the Mayors, who permitted not Claiston to speak for himself, but
dismissed him; whereupon Daniel Claiston, being concerned in the injuries
aforesaid done to his servant, consulted with a Lawyer for remedy in the case,
who advised him to bring his action against Lane as Guardian to an Orphan, who
did accordingly, of which when Robert Aldworth the Town Clark understood, he
Council in the Law in his case termed Advice against the City, and displeasure
manifested against the Lawyer that gaveit.
came himself to the Lawyer, and expressed much discontent for his giving Counsel
as aforesaid, terming it Advice against the City. Claiston gave the Warrant to
one of the Officers to execute it, who told him, he was afraid to do it, lest
the Mayor should turn him out of his place, because upon his executing of a
Warrant of that nature before, the Mayor threatened him very much for so doing,
And when he complained to the Mayor, how his Apprentice had been beat and
abused at the Steeple-house, as aforesaid, and that desiring the benefit of the
Law, and that, if his servant had offended the Law, he might suffer according
to his offense; The Mayor told him, He should not have the benefit of the Law:
And Sheriff Lawford Denied the befit of the Law by the Mayor.
said, That that place (meaning the Steeple-house) was not a place free for
Claistons Apprentice, in answer to what, Claiston asked of him, whether that
place was not as free for his servant as others? And so remedy at Law is here
endeavored to be stopped, and Council for that purpose, in case of great
injuries as aforesaid, termed Advice against the City; and therefore
displeasure is manifested to those who gave it, and the Officer because of the
Officer not daring to execute the Law because of the Mayors threatening.
threatenings of the Mayor, not daring to do his duty in the execution of the
Law; yea the benefit of the Law is denied in so many words when demanded as
aforesaid, instead of Justice being done by them as the Law requires, in the
behalf of those who suffer wrong.

Multitude enraged abuse friends grossly.
And indeed, by reason of these things the multitude grew very unruly,
breathing forth fresh persecutions and blood, no passing the streets without
great reproaches, nor to meetings without many abuses: those who met on the
ninth of the eleventh month, in Corn-street, were served so, and stones 9th.
day 11th. month, 1654.
cast at them as they went in, and the doors assaulted while they were
together, and against their coming out, the street filled, whooping,
reproaching, and some casting water, and dirt on them, others pinching and
striking them, haling off their cloths and kicking them; and after this manner
followed them up the streets toward their homes: And that night, between the
ninth and tenth hours, came Robert Willet to a friends house, whose doors being
fast, A friend violently entered at night.
he with violence entered the Entry, being full of Riotous followers, though he
was denied entrance by the man of the house, because he attempted it by force
as aforesaid; but being in, he walked up and down, staring and looking, as one
over filled with some mischievous intent, (notwithstanding the man of the house
spoke nothing to him, but in a mild manner said, that he wondered, that he who
in a civil way and with his leave might come at any time into his house, should
violently and against his leave enter his house, and continue so; And he very
much abused therein,
and desired a friend by, to take notice what he said, and how the other
behaved himself; And on a sudden after, being about a quarter of an hour in the
house, without any occasion or provocation, with much passion and rage stamping
with his feet, and beating the boards, abused him with most scurrilous and
opprobious language, and with much threatening said, He should dye like a dog,
that his head And his life threatened.
should go off, that his life should go forth as a moth out of a cloth; and for
his liberty, he was certain, it was gone for ever: the Language of the Plot,
which was to have been executed thorough the Nation the twelvth of February
following, but providentially discovered and prevented. To which, the man of
the house made him no return or reply, but desired his friend to take notice of
proceedings, though, had he sought to have revenged himself, he could easily
have made him an example to all, who should for the future attempt the like.
During the time aforesaid, there was none in his house but a friend or two,
besides his own family; and this man is made Ensign to Robert Aldworths own
Company in the new Militia.

Sessions.
Hitherto proceedings were had by the Magistrates in a more private way against
the seed; though so notorious, as they became the example and encouragement to
those outrages before mentioned. Now the more public proceedings drew nigh,
being the General Sessions for the Public Peace of the City and County, held
the 16. day of the 11. month: At which Sessions, as of what has 16. of the
11th. month 1654.
has been before rehearsed, were very small things, and of too private a
cognizance; The Magistrates came now to sit in public Judgment, and what they
had done as aforesaid, pleasing the people, they stretched forth their hands,
publicly to add persecutions where before they had not reached, and to decree
unrighteous Decrees, and to write down grievances, which themselves (not the
Law) prescribed: to turn aside the Needy from Judgment, and to take away the
right from the Poor, that Widows may be their Prey, and that they may rob the
fatherless: as those did of old against whom the woe is pronounced, Isa. 10. 1.
and to whom the Lord said, What will you do in the day of visitation, and in
the desolation that will come from far; to whom will you flock for help, and
where then will you leave your glory? ver. 3.

At which Sessions, in the first place Robert Aldworth The Town-^larks Charge
to the Grand Jury.
Town Clark, in his charge to the Grand Jury, who were upon their Oaths,
amongst other things signified to this effect: That the Law did protect those
who met together, to perform some Religious duty, as to sing, pray, read, or
expound the Scriptures; but for people to meet together, though in a private
house, and to be silent; was no part of Religion; and therefore out of the
verdge of the Law, and to be enquired after by them, and where such were found,
to present them.

This is such an interpretation and conclusion, as titles viz. An Act for
relief of Religious, and peaceable people from See Act of Parliament. Sept. 27.
(50)
the rigor of former Acts of Parliament;

And the whole body of it does demonstrate, That that Law was made purposely
for the protection of different Judgments, in matters of Religion from any
thing of an imposition, punishment, or other trouble, by reason or pretense of
any Law whatsoever: And it is strange Logic to assign matter of molestation and
punishment by a Law, upon that, which to defend from any trouble, that very Law
was made; and is an interpretation against the reason of the Act: which the
learned in the Law account absurd, and invalid. Wherein does the sense of the
Law lie, according to which Judgment is to be given, whether in its own words
or in expositions thereupon?

Again, Is a silent waiting upon the Lord no part of Religion? Did not the
Scriptures hold this forth, and the holy practice of the men of God there on
Record? Or, were it a Doctrine that those who pretend to Religion, have or
would deny, a little time would be spent in demonstrating it to be so; But
being undeniable, and that which every one who truly have fellowship with the
Lord do witness, how is he not ashamed to endeavor to strike it out of the
num^er of religious exercises, and so out of the protection of the Act?

But were it so, Is there any Law that punishes people that are together,
neither saying nor doing any thing? Is quietness, and silence transgression of
the Law? It seems, nor he, nor the Magistrates for whom he judges can find a
Law, at least Conscience to put it in execution, by which to enquire after and
punish such Riot, and Insurrections as has been mentioned; But for the quiet,
the silent, the peaceable, though the Law is a praise and commendation to such;
yet rather than they shall go unmolested, a sense contrary to the very ground
of the Law, of which it is given, shall be stamped a Law, and charged upon a
Grand Jury, on their Oaths to enquire after; but the Grand Jury have shevvn
more Conscience to their Oaths hitherto, in not observing, than the Tovvn-Clark
had understanding in Law, or tenderness in Religion, or Conscience to give
it. Had he not bent his Bow, and made his Arrow ready to shoot at those who are
upright in heart, and sought whereby to persecute them, these things had been
plain before his eyes: And so would have been the 37. Article of the present
Government, which says expressly in these words, See Government Art. 37.
That such as profess faith in God by Jesus Christ, (though differing in
Judgment from the Doctrine, Worship and Discipline publicly held forth) shall
not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the profession of the faith
and exercise of their Religion, so as they abuse not this Liberty to the Civil
injury of others, and to the actual disturbance of the Peace on their parts:
Provided, that this Liberty be not extended to Popery or Prelacy, nor to such
as under the profession of Christ, hold forth and practice licentiousnes: Which
he might have read to the Jury, being without knot or mysterious scruple; he
knowing very well who said to the Parliament in the Sea O. P. his Speech to the
Parliament September. 12. 1654. page 30, 31, 32.
Painted Chamber, Sept. 12. 1654, in these words, Is not Liberty of Conscience,
in Religion a Fundamental? So long as there is Liberty for the Supreme
Magistrate, to exercise his Conscience in erecting what Form of Church
Government he is satisfied he should set up, Why should he not give it to
others? Liberty of Conscience (...) Natural right, and he that would have it,
ought to give it, having Liberty to settle what he likes for the Public;
Indeed that has been the vanity of our Contests, Every Sect says, Give me
Liberty; but give him it, And to his power he will not yield it to any body
else; Where is our ingenuity? Truly that is a thing that ought to be very
reciprocal, The Magistrate has his Supremacy and he may settle Religion
according to his Conscience; And I may say it to you, I can say it: All the
money in this Nation would not have tempted men to fight upon such an account
as they have engaged, if they had not hopes of Liberty, better than they had
from Episcopacy, Or than would have been afforded them from Scottish
Presbytery, or an English either, if it had made such steps, or been as sharp
and rigid as it threat'^ed when it was first set up: This I say, is a
Fundamental, it ought to be so: It is for us and the Generations to come. And
if there be an absoluteness in the imposer without fitting allowances and
exceptions from the Rule, We shall have our people dri^en in^o Wildernesses, as
they were when those poor and afflicted people, that forsook their estates and
inheritances here (where they lived plenteously and comfortably) for the
enjoyment of their Liberty, and were necessitated to go into a vaste howling
wilderness in New England, where they have for Liberties sake stripped
themselves of all their Comforts, and the full enjoyments they had, embracing
rather loss of friends and want, than to be ensnared and in bondage: Further
adding, Page 36, 37.
That this and other Articles concerning Religion in the Instrument of
Government was a fundamental, one of the four fundamentals; and how much blood
it cost to have it so, and content^^^, and even the hazarding of all; And how
he could sooner be willing to be rolled into his grave, and buried with infamy,
than give his consent to the wilful throwing away of that Government, so
testified unto in the Fundamentals of it, as was before mentioned, in relation
to the good of these Nations and Posterity.

But suppose there were no such Defense; that tenderness the Town Clerk
pretended to formerly, whilst he had not got what he crouched for, had it been
real, would have taken such a time to exercise it toward his former Friends,
who (his Conscience tells him) are dear to the Lord, when his Place might have
prevented their trouble, for disturbance in things of so tender a nature, and
so practicably Religious.

Yet he is mistaken in all, for those servants of the Lord meet not so
together, as resolving silence; for at their meetings, it is known, there is
both praying and speaking; but silence there is, whilst there are no movings
from the Lord to pray, and to speak from his mouth with the voice, All flesh
must he silent before the Lord, and those who love and dwell in the light, know
what it is to have fellowship with the Father and the Son, and one with
another, and to feed on the hid treasure, and to be taught, when not a word
from man is spoken, which is a mystery too, and out of which are shut all those
who live in Cain's nature: As all such do, who are vagabonds and wanderers in
their own imaginations, and strangers to the life of God: Poor heart! Is all
thy former seeming tenderness come to this, That neither the Public
profession, nor witness of the power and life of God, nor the private
exercise, shall have a being by thee, nor the Saints any rest for the soles of
their feet, if thou can help it, as has been always the course of the
Dragon toward the Seed of Christ? Can thou quench the light of Israel, or
stifle the Spirit of Christ, in his people? Look to it, the Lord will require
it of thee, as if their meetings had been hindered, and their blood drawn,
Surely the Lord reigns, Let him rejoice, and Let Jerusalem clap her hands,
And all her Enemies shall be subdued under him.

Trial of the Prisoners.
After the Charge was given, those who were bound over to appear, and in
prison, were sent for, one after the other, and called; Henry Warren was the
first: To whom the Town Clerk said, that he stood there for disturbing the
Peace, Warren mildly answered, I have broken no Law as I know of, for the man
had done before I spoke; and asked the Town Clerk whether he brake the Peace,
by taking blows and not resisting, but keeping his Seat? To which the
Town Clerk made reply, urging again, his having offended the Law. Warren
answered, If I have offended, the Law is open against me. At length, after some
other questions demanded and answered to the purpose aforesaid, the Town Clerk
asked the Bench, whether he had behaved himself civilly since he came forth of
Newgate? To which nothing in charge being returned, he told him he might go
about his business, and bade him take that for a warning. Warren replied, that
he had a war^ing within him, the which he should obey before man. And so he was
dismissed.

Elizabeth Marshall's Trial.
Elizabeth Marshall Widow, being brought from the Prison, was the next called
for, who being set at the bar (having heard none of the proceedings with
Warren aforesaid) gave a paper to the Town Clerk, directed to the Magistrates,
which he delivered unto the Mayor: Then the Town Clerk told her, That she stood
committed by the Mayor and Aldermen as a Disturber of the Peace. She answered,
She was no Disturber of the Peace, but was sent in a Message from the Lord,
standing out of her own will, in the will of God, and that in obedience unto
his will, she went and delivered her Message. The Town Clerk perceiving her to
go on to speak, for she was very full, commanded her silence, and told her, If
she would be sorry for what she had done, or bring two to be bound for her;
that she should be freed, if not, she must to prison again: She answered, That
she stood out of her own will in the will of God, therefore she should not
bring her Conscience to be bound by the will of man. To which the Town Clerk
answered, That by order of the Court she must return to prison, from whence she
came. Thereupon she was moved of the Lord, to speak to him, and she said; Mind
the light of Christ in thy Conscience, which will bring condemnation on the man
of sin, and teach thee to act righteously and holily, and see thou act
according to the Law, and not a tittle beyond the Law, as thou will answer it
before the Lord. Upon which he (jeeringly) bade her use better language; then
she was pulled down, but she cried out, Give me leave to clear my Conscience:
And, being moved from the Lord, she warned the Magistrates in these words, Mind
the light of Christ which will teach you to act righteously; and charged them
in the name of the Lord, to act according to the Law, and not a tittle beyond.
Then was she remanded to prison, where she was continued about four weeks, and
released, after they had satiated themselves with her oppressions; The Paper
she delivered to the Magistrates as aforesaid, was as follows:

Her Letter to the Magistrates.
Unto you who are the Magistrates of this City, I am commanded of the Lord to
give you warning, that the Mighty day of the Lord of Hosts is at hand, that he
is arising in his mighty power; In which day, the strong shall be as towe, and
the maker of it as a spark; And from the Lord I am to warn you, that you judge
righteous Judgment, that then so you be not found some of those which shall
imbrue your hands in the blood of the Saints, and so cast the righteous Law of
God behind your backs, and so hate to be reformed; for now the Lord is arising
in his sons and in his daughters, a faithful witness for himself, Crying even
in the Ears of the Almighty, It is time for thee to arise Lord, for men have
made void thy Law; That so you be not found bearing the Sword in vain, and so
punishing the Innocent, and let the guilty go free: Therefore from the Lord you
are warned to mind that of God in your Consciences, which will bring you to see
Judgment running down as a stream, and equity as a mighty River: And this is
the word of the Lord to you, whether you will hear or forbear. And seeing the
Just lies slain in the streets of the City, it even turns the bowels of the
righteous within them, that so for Sions sake they cannot hold their peace, and
for Jerusalem's sake, I must not be silent: And so knowing the Terrors of the
Lord for sin and for rebellion, I am moved to write in love to your souls, who
is a Prisoner in Newgate, for witnessing against Deceit, and for the Testimony
of Jesus,

Elizabeth Marshall.


And, shortly after she was returned to prison, she sent the following paper to
the Town Clerk:

Her Letter to the Town Clerk.
This is the word of the Lord to thee Robert Aldworth, who art a Counselor in
the Law; I warn thee in the Name and presence of the living God, thou knowing
the Law, that thou act according to the Law, as thou will answer it before the
Lord, at the great and terrible day of the Lord, when the book of Conscience
shall be opened: I warn thee that thou mind the Light of Christ in thy
conscience, loving it and abiding in it, it will lead thee up unto God; hating
it, it will be thy condemnation: The Law of God is just, and is according to
that in my Conscience, which I own, which is a Law against evil doers, as
man-slayers, thieves and adulterers, and drunkards, and such like: In the name
of the Lord and by his word, I do pronounce woes and plagues from the Lord
against all such as scoff at the Light of Christ, and the Language of Christ,
as thou did: This is the day of thy visitation whether thou will hear or
forbear: Thus was I moved of the Lord to write unto thee, who am a Prisoner for
witnessing, and for the Testimony of Jesus,

Elizabeth Marshal


John Worrings Trial.
John Worring was also brought from the prison and called, to whom his Charge
was read to this effect, for making a disturbance in the public Congregation,
calling the Minister Devil, and kicking at the Clark, and saying, the Minister
spoke never a true word, Worring answered, He made no disturbance. The Court
said, he had disturbed the Minister before he had done his Sermon. Worring
replied, that one Gunning began, and that he spoke after him and that he to
whom he spoke was no Minister; And had denied both the name and the Office at a
meeting. At a meeting, said Alderman Joseph Jackson, what meeting? He answered,
At a meeting before three hundred people, as himself said in the Pulpit at
Ragcliff. Alderman Cann replied, though he had denied the Name and the Office,
yet he did represent the Place of the Minister at that time: And Joseph Jackson
presently said, thou did call him Devil: Worring denied it. Joseph Jackson
replied, one had sworn it; He answered, if I had said so, which I never said,
yet I could prove him one by his own words. They asked him, how? Said Worring,
Out of his own mouth; for he said at the meeting, that in all things that he
did, he sinned: and if in all things, as well in that (meaning his preaching)
as in other things, and he that sins is of the Devil: If you will not
believe me, belie^e the Scriptures; Then some of the Court said, he kicked the
Clark. He denied it, but said, the Clark gave him a kick; So they asked him no
more concerning that, but demanded of him, what he said to the Minister? To
which he made answer, that he said, If he were a Minister of Jesus Christ, the
Law of the spirit of life which is in Jesus, would set him free from the Law of
sin and death; and unless he were freed by that Law of life which is in Christ
Jesus, he was still acting the works of the Devil, and was no better in that
condition. Then the Court told him, he had been invited by some turbulent
people, who had set him on that action; and asked him whether he would promise
for the future, he would do no more such things, and find Sureties for the
good behavior. One of the Officers told him, A little boy might be surety.
Worring replied, that he denied his words, and told the Court that he was not
sorry; And that he stood single and free. The Court replied, that he must be
sorry. He answered them again, that he stood single and free, that if they
would clear him they might, if not; they might do their pleasures? And for
being sorry, he was not. The Court told him he must to prison again: He
answered again, he stood free: and so he was to prison returned, and continued
there till the 19th. of the 11th. month, at which time a Liberate was sent the
Jailer, signed Aldworth, and witnessed John Gunning Mayor, Dated Jan: 19. 1654.
requiring him to set at Liberty the body of John Warren, in that he had found
Sureties f^r his being of the good behavior; Whereupon the Keeper would have
put him forth; But he perceiving the deceit thereby to confess himself an
offender, and so to give away the innocence of his cause, and to administer
matter of reproach to the truth and to himself, having neither sought Sureties,
nor found any, denied to go forth thereupon, then the Officer would have put
him out by force: But he desiring a little time to consider, wrote a note to
the Town Clark, and sent it to him in these words,

Robert Aldworth, A Liberate was delivered me His Letter to the Town Clark.
just now by John Roach the Jailer, for my enlargment out of prison, which when
I had read over, I found that the cause thereof is expressed in these words:
For that he has found Sureties for his being of the good behavior, which I
cannot accept of, in regard that I have not misbehaved myself; but have
delivered that Message to one that said he scorned the name of a Minister, for
which I have a Warrant within; And because of the not^rious untruth therein
mentioned, that I have found Sureties for my being of the good behavior, when
as I neither directly or indirectly have sought for, or found any Sureties for
any such thing, nor can I; and therefore cannot accept of my freedom upon any
such Warrant; But do protest against it,

John Worring.




Notwithstanding, he was the same day turned out of the Prison; against which,
upon account of of the Liberate aforesaid, he protested, when by force he was
put out: The meek and sober carriage of these prisoners at the Sessions, and
their not seeking revenge on those who abused and struck them was such, as did
tenderly take with many who were present, and heard the proceeding^.

An lastly, This Sessions ends not in enquiring Sessions ending.
after, and punishing exemplarily according to Law, those Tumults, Ryots, and
Insurrections, and other outrages, and breaches of the Public Peace,
aforementioned: which (had Judgment been put to the Line, and Righteousness
to the Plummet, and Order and Government been respected) would have been
executed (for not so much as one man has therefore been punished to this day,
But in the four Orders following, which they appoint to be read in all Churches
as they call them)

Order of Sessions.
That no person or persons, do hereafter presume to molest, trouble, or
otherwise disquiet any Minister or Congregation, either before, or after the
Public exercises be ended; And if any person or persons do so offend, that in
all such cases, the Constables or any other Officers, shall apprehend, take and
arrest the Party and Parties so offending, and bring him or them before the
Mayor, and some other Justice of the Peace, who are to take care, that such
offender or offenders, be bound with sufficient Sureties to appear at the next
General Sessions; And in the mean while to be of the good behavior, and for
not sinding some Sureties as aforesaid, to commit them to Prison.

Reply. The Statute 1 Mary, to which they pretend to Justify their
Imprisonments as aforesaid, were it in force, or fit to be made practicable,
only provides for the defense of the Popish Priest, during the time of his
Mass and Service; but for before and after the Mass and Service, makes no
provision, nor for disturbing or troubling (as they call it) the Congregation
at all: But these Magistrates having imprisoned, and returned again to prison,
persons for speaking after the Congregation was dismissed, to Justify their
proceedings, and to oppress the Servants of the Lord for the future, turn
Legislators, and make a Law where the Nation has made none; And enjoin one
another, and all Officers, to put it in execution, viz. That none presume to
molest or trouble, or otherwise disquiet the Congregation as well as the
Minister before and after, as well as in the time of public Exercise. And if
any do so offend, that in all such cases, the Officers shall apprehend take and
arrest them, and bring them before the Mayor or some other Justice of the
Peace, who are to bind them with sufficient Sureties, to appear at the next
general Sessions, and in the mean while to be of the good behavior; And for
not finding such Sureties to commit them to prison. When as all Laws made by
any Corporation for imprisonment of any man's person, are invalid, because
against the Fundamental Laws of this Nation, which also provideth, That no
Law be made, or of force or binding, but by the common consent of the People in
Parliament; which is so absolute, and an essential a right, that the
encroachments of the late King and his Ministers of State thereupon, occasioned
the levying of the late defensive Wars by the Parliament. And the late King
with others his Ministers were therefore executed, and abundance of blood shed,
and miseries sustained, not yet to be forgotten. And now that the Wars are
ended, and this Fundamental Right fully vindicated in the behalf of the Nation;
And the present Government has provided the same with the Fundamental Laws,
Art. 6. Except in some cases See the Government, Art. 6. Art. 30.
in point of Necessity, expressed, Art. 30. till the sitting of the then next
Parliament: In which the single Person and his Council have power to make
Ordinances, These Magistrates, who endeavored what lay in them to subvert and
destroy it in behalf of the late King, (for whom the generality of them were,
in principle, affection, and action) and are not afraid to presume to take upon
them this Supreme Legislative Authority over the Citizens, and Inhabitants of
Bristol, who have been active for and faithful to that Interest, as any in
that City, and have adventured their bloods and their all, in its behalf, and
who are of as godly, peaceable, and unblameable Conversation, as any within
that Jurisdiction: And not only over them do they thus usurp it, but over all
Englishmen who come in that City. Nor is it in things of a trivial nature that
they are thus bold to Legislate it; but in matters relating to Conscience and
Religion, and to the Commands of God; In which to have freedom and Liberty,
has been a principal end in those honest men, who have engaged in the late
Wars, and which has been carried thorough the many and high Contests
thereabouts in the late Parliaments; And is provided for in the present
Government: And that they may be sure to hit those honest people, against whom
their malice rages, both upon the account of Civil and Spiritual interests,
they not only make Law as aforesaid, but become Judges of the Law themselves
make: Whereas the Administrators of Justice are sworn to execute the Laws made
by the Supreme Legislative Authority, not to make any. Those who are Chief in
Authority may consider, whether this be not an endeavoring of the subversion
of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the English Nation, and a very sad
and high oppression, under which those honest people in that City do sigh and
groan; and fit to be enquired after.

Order of Sessions. That if any such disturbance, trouble or other disquietment
be hereafter made, done or committed in the Churches as aforesaid, the Minister
be also desired not to hold dispute or other public debate there, with the
Party or parties so offending, but to persuade the hearers to repair home
quietly to their several Families and habitations, and not to hearken to or
run after them.

Reply. Poor Priests! who being not able to defend before the people what you
deliver to them as Doctrine, nor to make appear to the faces of those whom you
falsely accuse, and rail on, as Antichrists, Seducers, etc. that they are such:
Nor to try what shall be said to you from the Lord, nor to answer the Queries
sent you long since, by those whom you oppose; Nor to prove your selves true
Ministers of Christ, as you profess your selves to be. Indeed it concerned you
to obtain the Magistrates Sword to guard your Pulpit, every way though contrary
to Law, that none by speaking may put you to it: And that if any shall so do,
you may refuse to reply, lest you offend the Magistrates, who have desired you
the contrary: And for you, this is an easy answer; People, Repair home quietly
to your habitations and Families, and do not run after, nor hearken to these
men: It Is the Magistrates desire we should so persuade you, and that we hold no
public dispute or debate with them. Oh ye Generation of blind Guides, Are ye
not ashamed to pretend your selves Ministers of Christ, and yet dare not to
submit your Doctrine before the people, to whom you speak, to be tried by the
Scriptures? Are ye not ashamed to accuse, charge, and belly others who are
absent, in the place where you would be accounted to speak as the Oracles of
God; and yet dare not hear them make good what they assert, and clear
themselves to your faces, before those to whom you have accused them? Do ye not
blush to be guarded by a material sword, and to have recourse thereunto, that
none be permitted to oppose and examine what you deliver; and if any shall
attempt to do it, be the occasion what it will, he must be silenced, and his
person imprisoned, and perhaps his brains knocked out by the rude multitude, who
make up what you call your Churches? And to stand under such a desire of the
Magistrates, not to debate, not to dispute: Ye disingenuous and dumb Shepherds,
Did the Prophets and Apostles of Christ so, or the holy men of God? Did they
not speak freely, and hear and answer freely, and did they not approve what
they said, to the testimony of every man's Conscience in the sight of God, yea
even to those that opposed themselves? Did they not go into the Synagogues and
into the Temple, and to Mars Hill, and to the School of Tyrannus, and to the
Places of meeting, where they came both of Jew and Gentile, testifying, and
reasoning of the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, the work of their
Ministry? Did the Athenians, whom you call Heathens, refuse to reason with
Paul, even in their Marketplace daily, and on Mars Hill, concerning their
Idol gods which were made with hands, or of Jesus whom he preached and
declared to be the only true God, blessed for ever? or did they tumult him, or
desire the Magistrates to imprison him for so doing? Might they not all speak
one by one in the Churches of Christ, who were living stones built upon the
living Foundation. And when any thing was revealed to another that sat by, was
not the first to hold his peace? and when the 1 Cor. 14. 23, 24, 25.
unbelievers and unlearned came in, did they tumult, beat or imprison them? or
were they not convinced of all, and Judged of all, and so the secrets of their
hearts being made manifest, fell down on their faces worshipping God, and
reporting that God was in them of a truth? Were that a Church which you say is
so, and were they unbelievers and unlearned that come in amongst you, according
as you say? Is the Spirit that rules in you and your actions, such as does
convince them so, and make manifest the secrets of their hearts, that falling
down on their faces, and worshipping God, they report that God is in you of a
truth? Or are not your actions such as Cain's, who hated and therefore slew his
brother? and the spirit that is in you, that of the evil one, even of the
Prince of this world that rules mightily in the Children of disobedience, as
your fruits make manifest? Did they call to the Magistrates for help in this or
any thing belonging to the Kingdom of Christ, which consists in spirit and in
power; and is to be managed and carried on by weapons only of the same
spiritual nature? Nay, did not the false Prophets, Chief Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees, and those who stood in their generation, apply themselves to the
Magistrate against them, yea to the people, Ye men of Israel help; made they
not tumults and insurrections? and stirred they not up persecution against
Christ, and his Apostles, thorough all the parts where they preached? Were it
not the Jews who went from City to City, and from Region to Region to stir
up the Gentiles against them, who before heard them quietly? and amongst the
Jews, were it not those who are called the devout and honorable that raised
the persecutions; And who believing not, and being moved with Envy, took unto
them lewd fellows of the baser Acts 17. 4, 5, 6, 7. Acts 13. 50.
sort, gathering a Company, and setting whole Cities in uproares, assaulting
houses, and seeking to bring them out to the people, Crying out to the Rulers,
these that have turned the world upside down, are come hither also, whom Jason
has received, and these all do contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, saying, that
there is another King one Jesus; As it is at this day? Is it not a shame to all
men of Natural Learning to be thus defended, none to oppose, none to object,
against what is publicly held forth, as Doctrine, upon pain of tumults and
imprisonments, if there be but an attempting to speak: Do ye not blush to be
under, or desire such a protection, whereby you may speak, lie, falsely accuse,
rail, blaspheam, yea and what you will in your Pulpits, and none must question
you publicly, under the penalties aforesaid? Well! you are out of the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and ere long, yea, the day is at hand,
wherein your Baal must plead for himself, and even those who guard him and his
Prophets shall be content to have the trial before the people; which is the
God that answers by fire, and shall deliver up the Prophets of Baal to be cut
off by the people, whom they have deceived. And the Lord will Malach. 2. 9 and
1. 2, 2.
make them contemptible and base before all the people, according as they have
not kept his ways, but have been partial in the Law. And now, O ye Priests,
this Commandment is for you, If you will not hear, and if you will not lay it
to heart, to give glory unto my Name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send
a Curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them
already, because ye do not lay them to heart. Behold, I will corrupt your seed,
and spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts, and one
shall take you away with it: And ye shall know that I have sent this
Commandment unto you.

Order of Sessions. That the Constables do once in every fortnight make
diligent search within their several Wards, for all strangers, Inmates and
suspicious persons, and to present their names, and those who entertain them,
within two days following to the Mayor and Justices, to the end such course
may be taken with them as is agreeable to Law.

Reply. Had, what the Law requires of them in this particular, been effectually
executed, the Town had not been so full of persons, who ought to be enquired
after, as it is at this day: But all lies asleep in this particular, till the
hopes to catch the Messengers of truth, and to keep the Town clear of such,
awakened their blind zeal as another expedient to effect their ends upon those
servants of the Lord: But its fallen asleep again, since it has not proved a
snare to catch the Innocent.

Order of Sessions. That all people do take special notice, and be hereby
forwarned, not to be present at any tumult, or other unlawful Assembly, or on
any pretense to assemble or gather into Companies, or multitudes into the
streets, or elsewhere, or to conduct and follow offenders, either to the
Magistrates houses, or other places of Justice, unless they be thereunto
lawfully called: And the Constables and all other public Officers are hereby
required to apprehend and arrest all such boys and Apprentices, and other
people, that shall assemble or gather together, as aforesaid, And to bring them
before the Magistrates, to be punished according to the Law.

Reply. Less then this they could not do in color of Justice, but whether
they meant any such thing, will appear, in that they never to this day, have
punished one offender, although Hundreds at a time have transgressed therein,
and that before their faces, and at their very doors, as the instances
hereafter to be mentioned will demonstrate: Nor has a Constable discharged his
duty therein required. But it seems these Magistrates, Constables, and people
know one another minds well enough, in this thing, and can agree together in
injuring the Innocent, though their orders seem to speak the contrary.

Preamble to the Orders of Sessions aforementioned. And the ground of all these
Orders is premised to be several great Tumults and unlawful Assemblies lately
happened and arisen within this City, as well on the Lords days as at other
times, and (as the Court is informed) upon pretense or occasions, that some
disturbed the Congregations and Ministers both before, and after the Public
Exercises in the Churches have been fully concluded: And likewise by the
coming of strangers to the City, who can render no good account of their being
here; whereby the Lords day has been much profaned, the Inhabitants greatly
affrighted, and the Public Peace, safety, and welfare of the City, very much
endangered to be broken and disturbed, which the Court taking into serious
consideration, and well weighing the manifold mischiefs, and sad effects, which
may grow thereupon, did Order, etc. Signed, Aldworth. And Ordered, by John
Gunning Mayor, John Lock, Richard Vickers, William Cann, Joseph Jackson, Henry
Gibbs, and George Hellier Aldermen.

Reply. It Is well we have got the Confession of the Bench under hands, that
those before mentioned, were great Tumults, and unlawful Assemblies profaning
the Lords day, greatly affrighting the Inhabitants, endangering the disturbance
of the Public Peace, safety and welfare of the City, whereupon manifold
mischiefs may grow, and sad effects. And ought not such a great Tumult and
unlawful Assemblies to have been strictly enquired after, and severely
punished? Ought they not to have been discountenanced and suppressed? Has any
Master or Servant, Officer or Inhabitant, been called to account, and punished
for them according to the Law to this day, though hundreds have often times
appeared and acted them before their eyes?

When a friend of the Commonwealth, was called before the Mayor and Aldermen,
upon information of some words which was said, he should hear one of the
Apprentices to say, and sworn before them to speak the truth, was what he
informed them upon his Oath to this effect, viz. That the said Apprentice being
asked how the Apprentices could be so bold, to rise as they had done, and be so
long from their Masters business, unless they had leave from their Masters, or
some other encouragement? He heard him say, they had leave from their Masters,
and were encouraged; for that Alderman Hellier came into them whilst they were
at the Tolzey, and said that he would dye rather then any of the Apprentices
should go to Prison, which he offered to prove further by two of his servants,
Committed to writing and prosecuted according to the concernment every way of a
thing of that nature? Or, did not the Mayor forbid the Clark to write, and took
he not under his hand, only what he could not say, viz. That he heard the said
Apprentice to speak, that they had 400 horse in the Town, ready for the King?
Has it not lay hushed to this day? But, Henry Davis a friend to the
Commonwealth, he and his brethren Committed to Newgate, and continued him a
Prisoner from the 20th. of the 10th month 1654. to the 16th. of the 11th. month
following, being the next Sessions; for that upon his hearing in his shop in
the High street, at the hight of the Riot December. 20. aforesaid, when the
Proclamation was read at the High Cross in the name of the Lord Protector,
requiring every one to depart, these words spoken by some of the Royters, who
then filled that part of the street, viz. What do you tell us of a Protector,
tell us of King Charles? He immediately gave notice thereof to the Officers of
the Garrison, and not to them, some of them telling him, he had committed
Treason in so doing: And James Hill, another friend to the Commonwealth, they
bound over at the same time to answer at the Sessions, for speaking the words
so heard as aforesaid. Do ye not stand guilty, O ye Rulers, of the tumults and
disorders aforesaid in the eye of the Law; and amongst all wise men, shall it
be said, in not enquiring after, in not suppressing, in not correcting, nay, in
encouraging, countenancing, and abetting such unlawful assemblies, and
consequently of all the mischiefs and sad effects, which already have, or may
for the future therefrom proceed? Ought you upon any consideration to bear with
a Riot, and not to suppress and punish it? If others upon pretense of whom it is
raised have offended the Law, send for them afterward, and on them let the Law
have its course. If the instances already produced, be not full enough, to make
this appear, as indeed they are, those hereafter mentioned will make it up
abundantly. And yet how are they not ashamed in actions so palpable and gross,
carried on by them illegally, and by the multitude with Tumults, to lay it on
those as the occasion, who are injured and oppressed, and do suffer by them and
the multitude contrary to Law and Justice?

Is any thing done to your Congregations or Priests, more than the Scriptures
warrant, or that consists not with the nature and freedom, which ought to be
in public assemblies about Religious exercises, and what was used by the
Servants of Christ? Cannot the Priests hear, or make answer quietly if there be
occasion, and leave it to those that sit by to judge? Cannot you, nor your
Priests bear a few words spoken in the Name of the Lord, but you must call it a
disturbance? If the Lord speaks by those poor contemptible instruments (as he
does, and many do witness it) Then take heed you be not found amongst the
proud and scornful, and fighters against. God, for Jesus Christ is yesterday,
to day, and the same for ever: And you are fallen upon such times of the Son of
man that ye are not aware of: Your Priests may say any thing, yet all is well;
but he that tells a Liar, he lies, and a blasphemer that he speaks blasphemy,
and that the Lord has pronounced woes to those who say The Lord says, when he
never sent them, nor spoke to them, though the Lord raise up (as he has at
this day) his witnesses amongst your sons and your daughters to testify
against such to their faces (and in so doing through beatings, prisons, fire,
and blood will it carry them, and woe be to them if they obey not the Lord
therein) that must not be born, tumults, imprisonments, new Laws where you
have no power to ena^t, any thing, to work them sufferings: Oh what will become
of you that thus strike against the Corner stone, that will dash you to pieces,
that thus limit the holy One of Israel: And by your Laws and actions say, that
his Spirit shall not testify (now that the true Ministry is come) against the
false Ministry (which stands in the time and will of man) and against the false
worships, and bowings in your houses of Rimmon, be they what they will, or the
deceit. But you will stop the mouths of his witnesses, imprison, and permit
them to be beaten even in your Synagogues. Do ye thus provoke the Lord? Are ye
stronger than he, O ye sons of men, that are as a thing of naught, that are
less than the dust of the earth? who would set the thorns and the briars
against him in battle, he will go thorough you, and burn you together, and
consume you as stubble that is fully dry; yea verily he will cause all his
enemies to be brought, and to be slain before him. Consider this, O ye, that
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. If
Priests knew, 'twas in vain to speak at random, others having the same Liberty
to object, as they have to speak: And if the people were assured, that they
should surely endure the Law in case of Tumults; the Pulpits would cease to be
the Places of Contention, and the giving out of trouble in all the Land,
(England has paid for these Priests and Pulpits in streams of blood already)
and they would be more wary what they said there, or reported; and the people
would quickly be still and quiet. Nay, it may be said, Bristol would be the
most orderly City in England, and most easily governed. But being heated by the
Priests, and encouraged by the Magistrates, thence proceed those outrages, of
which England does ring; And indeed, it is not so much the fault of the People,
as of the other; who should instruct, and otherwise order them.

And do ye not blush to put so gross an untruth, as the coming of strangers to
this City, who (you say) can render no good account of their being here, as the
other ground of those great tumults, and unlawful assemblies, of such evil
consequences as you mention, and tendencies to future mischiefs and sad
effects: How do ye know, they can render no good account of their being here?
John Camm and John Audland who were thus tumulted, were never before you, nor
examined by you, yet have they given a good account of their coming, amongst
many witnesses: If to be Englishmen born, and living near Kendall in
Westmerland, where their abode has been all their time, except in the Wars and
this Ministry; where their outward habitations and Families at present are, and
estates; If to have always lived soberly, and unblameably in the world; If to
have been 6. or 7. years in Arms for the Parliament, mostly on their own costs,
and to have fought and performed eminent service in the field, and faithfully
to have discharged other places of trust; If to have been always constant to
the Public Interest, and as active in their places for it, as any in those
parts; If to come to this City in obedience to the Lord from their Habitations,
Friends and Relations, out of love to your souls, to preach the everlasting
Gospel of Christ Jesus, of which he has made them able Ministers, to the
turning of many hundreds in this City (besides other places) from darkness to
light, and from the Kingdom of Satan unto God, who are the seals of their
Ministry, and witnesses to the Power and life of God in them; If to be here in
all Self-denial, Peaceablenesse, Long-suffering, not chargeable to any, not
breaking any Law, ready to prove by the Scriptures, wha^soever they hold forth,
being what they seem, and doing what they say, pressing obedience to God and
Man, Relations and G^^ernors, from the obedience of Christ, according to the
Will of God: If the account of these things be the rendering of a good reason of
their being here, as it is undeniably; Then of these things an account has
been already (and the Town Clerk knows it) and can further be given, were it
requisite, or were that indeed the thing you minded: And yet how say you, they
cannot render any good reason of their being here? and place that as a cause of
the great Tumults aforesaid, and unlawful assemblies: Who had cause more
greatly to be affrighted (though in the power of the Lord they were not at
all)? And whose safety, peace and welfare was more endangered, either those on
whom the outrages aforesaid have been acted, or those who raised it on them,
and would have taken away their lives?

But no more of these Orders of Sessions, and the grounds of them, though much
materially may be said, which is not yet mentioned:
We shall now proceed to instance what has been since acted in observance of
these Decrees.
These public proceedings in Sessions, somewhat 18th. 11th. month, 1654. The
Deputy-Mayor, and his brethren coming together by Candlelight, and sending
for the Constables throughout the Town, to search for some friends at a
meeting, occasion new stirs in the Town, when before it was quiet.
blew up afresh the spirits of the people, who disturbed with Tumults, the
private meeting in Cornstreet, the 18th. of the 11th. month following, and
abused those who went in and out as formerly. But those sparks waxing faint,
and the meeting two days after in the same place unmolested, no people at all
being gathered about the house; Alder. Vickris, then Deputy-Maior being forward
in these persecutions was very eager to do some notable thing in the Majors
absence: And therefore when the City was quiet, sends for the Aldermen, and for
the Sergeants and Constables, and by Candlelight meets in the Councell-house,
which raised an admiration in the Town, and drew many to the Tolzey, and from
thence sends Constables to the meeting to look for, and to bring before him and
his brethren, George Fox, John Audland, John Camm, Francis Howgill, Edward
Borough, and James Nayler. But the meeting was rose before, and John Audland,
who only (of those aforementioned) was in Town, was departed; whereupon he
sent for the man of the house, who went to them, and gave them such answers as
their Questions required: and to other houses he sent to seek them, whereby
occasion was given of New Tumults and disturbances.

And the next day Thomas Bawdon, Apprentice Thomas Bawdon, 22th. 11th. month,
1654. speaking to the People, Committed.
to Edward Wilcox, speaking to the people after all was ended, not to the
Priest, was the 22th. of the same month committed by them to prison for so
doing, in observing of their own Order of Sessions aforesaid, not of the Law;
for it gave them no such Power, or Authority.

The Deputy-Maior, missing in what he attempted Warrant issued out in general
for the apprehending of some friends.
the last day of the week aforementioned, is put by the Serpent on a new
expedient, (viz.) to issue out a Warrant in general to all Constables to
apprehend them, though neither John Audland, nor John Camm, nor any of those
Northern friends avoided them at any time, but stood single in their own
freedom, ready to appear, and to give an answer to what should be demanded of
them, though they had no reason to put themselves as a prey into their teeth,
who sought to devour them, and to hinder their Ministry.

And for this the Deputy-Maior thought he had 23d. 11th. month, 1654. A house
endeavored to be searched, and forced at a meeting by virtue thereof, and
tumult raised thereupon, the people being still, till the Magistrates met
together to give order therein.
got his opportunity, for hearing of the meeting at the same house again the
23. of the eleventh month, the Town being quiet, he sends for the Aldermen, to
meet him in the Councel-House, and thorough the Wards for all the Constables,
which though it alarmed the whole Town, yet few of the Constables would appear,
except such as had been old Malignants, and some of them with a Sergeant about
the third hour in the afternoon, he and his brethren send to search the house,
and to apprehend George Fox, James Nayler, John Comm, John Audland, Francis
Howgill, and Edward Borough, or any of them they should find there.

These Officers coming to the house, and finding the door fast, they knock
thereat; the Man of the house going to the door, demanded their business; They
replied, that the Deputy-Maior and the Aldermen had sent them to search his
house for the men aforementioned, and to bring them before him; He demanded the
Warrant; They answered, they had none, only by word of mouth: He replied,
without a legal Warrant he could let none into his house: and that he wondered
the Deputy Mayor should send thus to him, both on the last day of the week and
then; in regard he was well known to have behaved himself peaceably and
soberly, and to entertain none but such persons; whereupon they returned to the
Deputy-Maior: A great concourse of people being, by the Constables thus coming,
drawn together, who were rude, and endeavored to follow the Constables into
the house, though before the Magistrates met, and the Constables came, the
streets were quiet.

About half an hour after, the Officers returned again, and told the man of the
house (who held the door open in his hand) that they had now a Warrant to
search; He desired to see it; they denied it, saying, The Warrant was their
security, but they would read it to him: He replied, his house was his security
and defense; that he knew in what cases, the Law allowed searches to be made.
If their Warrant were legal they should come in; but for hearing of it read he
would not, he thereby being not able to know whether it were true or false, and
that there were many tumultuous people at the door, whom it concerned them to
take course with, and to keep the Peace; For those in his house, they were
Christians met together to wait on the Lord, and desired to know, whether the
Magistrates would disturb them? They denied again to let him see the Warrant,
and told him, that it Was not particularly directed to him, Then he desired
them to give him a Copy thereof, and if he saw it were according to Law, he
would let them search. They replied they could not give a Copy of the Majors
Warrant, and with that forcibly attempted to enter, and afterward offered
violence to break it open; whereupon some of them departed again, and the rest
staid about the door, which occasioned the tumult very much to increase, before
their faces, which they appeased not, though by him required.

Afterward they returned again, but refused to give him a Copy of their
Warrant, or to let him take a Copy, though he promised them to return it
immediately, and to let them come in, if it were legal, and desired to know his
positive answer: To which he replied, that they had offered vilence to his
house, not showing him any Warrant, nor giving him any Copy; that the street
was full of tumultuous people, which for ought he knew, attended their coming
in, and what mischief they and the tumult meant he knew not; Therefore he was
resolved to look to his own security. They told him the Magistrates would take
it ill of him: He replied, he had reason to take it ill of the Magistrates to
occasion his house to be thus assaulted, both then and at other times; and in
permitting such Tumults on his house, and his peaceable friends therein, that
his house was as free to him, as the Magistrates was to them; and therefore,
where they required things contrary to Law, they must not expect therein
obedience: All which he spoke with much mildness: So they departed, the Tumult
being made up of some hundreds, who continued filling the streets, and
whooping, and hollowing, beating the door with other abuses: the Constables
permitting them so to do.

About the fifth hour, the meeting rose, and a little before they departed, a
Chief Constable being in the house observing the Riot, and hearing the former
passages, went forth at the desire of the man of the house, to require the
Peace, and to cause every man to depart, for the Riot was very high, expecting
their coming out, but they regarded him not: and so they violently assaulted
the people of the Lord wirh blows, kicks, dirt, stones, and other vile abuses,
and reproaches, and clamours, following them up the streets.

During this time (which from the coming of the Officers, was above two hours)
did neither the Constables, nor the Magistrates keep the Peace, though the
Council house where they sat, was at the upper end of the same street where the
meeting was; and though some of the Aldermen saw the tumults and abuses, yet so
far were they from doing their duty therein, and causing their own order of
Sessions to be observed, that Alderman Joseph Jackson and John Knolles Priest
laughed openly on the Tolzey, as they stood and looked thereon:

Then the Tumult returned on the house where the meeting was, with more
violence than before; assaulting the door and giving very opprobrious language
to the man of the house with great clamor and rage, till the 7th. hour: and in
what danger he was could they have gotten in, may be well understood, and did
manifestly appear by their words and actions; But during all this time the
Magistrates did not endeavor the preservation of the Peace, or require any so
to do, though it was in the view and hearing of several of them.

Now because so much is rehearsed concerning the Warrant with which the
Officers came to search, as aforesaid; Here follows a true Copy thereof, and
whether sufficiently le al to warrant such proceedings, let the understanding
Judge.

To all the Constables with in this City, City of Bristol,
and to every of them.
The Copy of the Warrant. FOrasmuch as information has been given us, that
John Camm, and John Audland two strangers, who were Commanded to depart this
City, have in contempt of Authority come into this City, again to the
disturbance of the public Peace; These are therefore to will and require you,
forthwith to apprehend them, and bring them before us to be examined,
according to Law.

Given this 22th. January 1654. Signed, William Cann, Joseph Jackson, Gabriel
Sherman Richard Vickris Dept. Mayor. Henry Gibs. John Lock.


This Warrant gives no power to search private or any other houses, or
signifies any such Crime as Felony, or Treason, in which cases only the Law
allows private houses to be searched; Nor does it mention by nam^, George Fox,
James Nayler, Francis Howgill, or Edward Borough, whom the Officers demanded
to search for: nor was it directed to the house they came, nor to any other
house, nor to all houses in general. And for the Crimes laid down therein, as
to John Camm and John Audley, whom it mentions, they are wholly false, For,
first they were never commanded to depart the City, by the Magistrates
themselves, before whom they were never; or by any other at their command,
either for a time, or not to return again: Nor did they return to this City
again, in contempt of their Authority; for as they were not commanded to
depart, and there can be no contempt, where there is no command: So, if they
had commanded them, it would have been without the Law; and the not observing
of an unlawful Command, is no contempt of Authority; But they contemn Authority
who Command in their own wills, not according to the Law: Nor had the Command
been just according to the Law of the Nation, and they had returned
notwithstanding in obedience to the Command of the Lord, were it a return as to
them in contempt of Authority any more than in the Apostles, who were charged
to speak no more in that name, and to depart their Coasts, to return again and
to speak in the Will of God, whom to obey or man (replied they to the powers)
is i^ better, judge ye? Nor are they men of that spirit, to do any thing in
Contempt to any, much less to Authority, though to their persecutors, But to
pray they may be forgiven: And for that clause, To the disturbance of the
Public Peace, that is untrue; for they are charged to make appear the least
disturbance of the Peace on their part, which the Law calls so, and they will
present their bodies to the punishment the Law provides; But disturbed they
were, and Tumults raised on them, threatening their Lives, and the Peace broker,
as aforesaid.

The Warrant aforesaid being invalid, and not carrying with it scandal enough,
the Magistrates cause another to be formed, upon an information found out of
one George Coolishaw, in these words,

To the Constables of the Peace, of the City of Bristol.
Ward of and to every of them.
FOrasmuch as information has Warrant for apprehension, etc. as Franciscan
Friars.
been given us upon oath, That certain persons of the Franciscan Order in Rome,
have of late come over into England, and under the notion of Quakers drawn
together several Multitudes of people in London; and whereas certain strangers
going under the names of John Camm, John Audland, George Fox, James Nayler,
Francis How gill, and Edward Borough, and others unknown, have lately resorted
to this City, and in like manner under the same notion of Quakers, drawn
multitudes of people after them, and occasioned very great disturbances amongst
us: And forasmuch as by the said Information, it appears to us to be very
probable and much to be suspected, that the said persons so lately come hither,
are some of those that came from Rome, as aforesaid: These are therefore in the
name of his Highness the Lord Protector, to will and require you to make
diligent search through your Ward for the aforesaid strangers, or any of them,
and all other suspected persons, and to apprehend and bring them before us, or
some of us, to be examined and dealt with, according to Law. Hereof fail you
not.

Given the 25th. of Jan. 1654. Signed, 25th. 11th. month 1654. John Gunning,
Mayor. Gabriel Sherman, Henry Gibbs, George Hellier, Gabriel Sherman, William
Cann, Joseph Jackson, John Lock, Richard Vickris,


Hereunto were there Seals affixed, and that Alderman Sherman might be sure his
name was down, he wrote it twice; and Alderman Hellier, his Hand and Seal,
though he was not then sworn a Justice; for which, and for his acting upon the
Bench at the Sessions the 16th. of the eleventh month 1654. as a Justice, and
for other his proceedings, when he was Mayor, and also of his Brethren, he and
they are yet to reckon, to the easing somewhat of the charge of the
Commonwealth.

Information of Coolishaw is, upon which this Warrant is grounded, may be seen
in a scandalous Paper, published by William Prin, styled, The Quakers unmasked
and clearly detected, and in the answer thereunto by John Audland, one of those
mentioned, in the fore-recited Warrant, in his book, entitled, The Innocent
delivered out of the snare, and the blind guide fallen into the Pit, and
likewise in his book entitled, The Schoolmaster disciplined: In all of which
it is word for word rehearsed, to which the Reader is referred, who in the two
latter may see the Information found a Lie, and so the foundation of the
Warrant fallen to the ground.

And yet on this Information of apparent lies and confusion, have the
Magistrates grounded their Warrant aforesaid, and William Prinn his Paper
against them: It is very strange reasoning and even rational men will judge it
so: Because such and such an evil person might come amongst a Company and
Society, therefore all that Company must be suspected to be such, and so
understood, apprehended and prosecuted: Upon this foot, what society of men in
England would be free? What would become of, and how clothed with all the
ignominy and offenses imaginable, would the Priests and their Steeple houses
appear, whose Assemblies are made up of the worst of men, should this stand for
a good argument? In drawing it upon others (and that See, The Innocent
delivered out of the snare, p. 40. affirmed by 10 witnesses, that no such
persons as Franciscan Friars spoke amongst them, and that they know the names
of such as have spoken at their meetings.
falsely too, for no such Franciscan Friars, were speakers amongst those whom
they in reproach call Quakers) how do they bring the Conclusion on, themselves?
So blind does envy and malice render men, that, so it may hit whom they
malign, they mind not, though the same dart strike thorough their own Liver.

The Informant says that Coppinger told him, he had been at all the Churches
and meetings, public and private, that he could hear of in London, besides
th^se whom he calls Quakers; Why are there not Warrants issued out, upon the
suspicion aforesaid, to apprehend such strangers as have spoke, at the
Independent, Anabaptist, Presbyterian, and other Churches (so called) and
meetings in Bristol, as well as for those whom they call Quakers; for of all
these there are Assemblies in London; and Coppinger, as the Informant says,
was at all he could hear of; and strangers have, and do speak at each of these
Churches, (so called) and meetings prerending to be of each of their opinions;
And those Assemblies are made up of great numbers. Coppinger spoke in London,
what is that to Bristol, were the matter of the information, in that particular
to be credited: But it seems the blind zeal of Bristol Magistrates, as Priest
Farmer has effected it, can raise matter for persecuting the truth, as it is
in Jesus, out of that which the Magistrates of London (whom it properly
concerns, as the Informer has laid it) have seen neither cause nor Warrant
sufficient for so doing: As it has caused them so to assign a lie in their
VVarrant aforesaid, viz. George Fox: and James Nayler, amongst others, have
lately resorted to this City, and in like manner, under the same notion of
Quakers, d^awn multitudes of people after them, and occasioned very great
disturbances amongst us; when as, George Fox, and James Nayler, were never in
Bristol, nor did ever any of those others mentioned in this VVarrant, give any
occasion of disturbance on their part, that the Law calls so.

Now the partiality of the Magistrates in the Warrant aforesaid, is apparent;
for had they indeed intended the searching for and apprehension of Franciscan
Friars, and such Jesuits, as to deceive, form themselves into a Converse with
all opinions, and the discharge of the duty the Law lays upon them, they would
have secured the Informant Coolishaw aforesaid, according to Law, for
concealing Coppinger, who (he swears) told him he was of the Franciscan Order,
and such a person, as his deposition rehearses, with Confiscation of his whole
estate, and perpetual imprisonment as guilty of misprision of Treason, in
concealing a Traitor till he was departed, instead of issuing out such a
Warrant for the securing the Innocent upon such groundless suspicion: Whereby
it appears, that the indignation of the Dragon lay not at the Jesuits, but at
the Ministers of the everlasting Gospel; to trouble whom, cause is sought, when
those against whom there is real cause, are let free and unmolested: And it is
further manifest, in that when some of the Constables, being sent for to
execute the Warrant aforesaid, informed the Magistrates that Mass was said in
Backstreet, and for that desired No Mass without a Priest in Orders.
a Warrant, they all refused so to do; though one of them, viz. Alder. Joseph
Jackson confessed he believed it to be true.

It Is hard William Prinn could not see this flaw in his quick perspective,
thorough which he pretends to have clearly detected the Quakers, and so have
given notice thereof to his good friends the Magistrates, to keep close the
Information for their Credits sake, instead of publishing his erring
expositions thereupon; And thereby recording their transgression, as well as
his malice and weak understanding. But how otherwise should his and their folly
have been made manifest, and those whom he and they malign and slander be
befriended with the Copy of the Information, upon which the Warrant aforesaid
is said to be grounded: It is an honor for a man to cease from strife, but
every fool will be meddling, says the Wiseman, Prove. 20. 3. But as they
conceived iniquity, so they brought forth a Lie, and their birth proved as the
untimely fruit of a woman; for John Audland, at that time was out of Town, and
John Camm (who was only here) sick, and a friend of the City having before
enquired, and informed himself concerning them all, gave an account under his
hand to the Town Clerk, Jan. 29. of their birth, habitations and Conversations;
and that they had never been out of this Island, whereby that suspicion was
taken off, and the Net was broken, and the Innocent escaped as a bird out of
the snare of the Fowler, though it walked from Ward to Ward, and diligently
sought to have taken them.

Yet something must be done with this Warrant, Thomas Murford first of the
12th. month, 1654.
and George Salter (a Malignant Constable) will make the experiment; And
therefore having an information of a meeting in Redcliffe-street, he hastes
thither therewith; but being a little too early, there were but a few come
together, out of which he took Thomas Murford as a taken out of a Meeting as a
suspected Franciscan Friar, for having on a Hair Coat. Examined.
suspicious person, and brings him before Alderman Hellier, who examines him,
and sends him to the Mayor, before whom being brought, and some of the
Aldermen, they demanded of him, for what he came into the City, after that
manner? He answered, he was commanded of the Lord to come and mourn in
sackcloth and ashes for them, and to warn them to let the Lords people alone,
as they would answer it at the day of Judgment, and not to persecute or
imprison his Saints. Whereupon they commanded his Coat of hair to be taken off,
and Henry Gibbs cried out with great rage, Whip him out of Town; but said
others, Let him be gone out of the City now; but if he come in again, we will
whip him out at the Horse-tail; so they ordered their Officers to turn him out
of the Town, who Turned out of Town.
executed their Commands; but he by and by returned at the same gate, not
daring to do otherwise He returning. Committed.
because of the dread and terror of the Lord that was upon him; within which
he was no sooner entered, but the same Officers, who waited for that purpose
apprehended him again, and brought him before the Mayor, who committed him to
prison, where after he had been a few hours, his hair Coat was brought to him
again, which he put on the next day on his other Clothes; but the third day of
his imprisonment he was inwardly required again to strip himself stark naked,
and to put the hair Coat next his skin, and so to abide till he spoke with the
Mayor; so he girded the hair-cloth to his loins, and was barefoot till the
second day of the next week, on which being released, he immediately in that
manner, went directly to the Mayor, who commanding his hat to be taken off, the
ashes on his head, flew about, which he shaked from him, and told the Mayor,
That the Lord of Hosts would stain the Crown and glory of all his pride, and
strip him naked and bare before him; and charged him again in the name of the
Lord, to let the Lords people alone, for they were a righteous holy people,
whom he had redeemed to himself, who were not against Magistrates, but owned
them in their places as a terror to evil d^e^s, and a praise to them that do
well. And thus was he turned out of his Native place, imprisoned and oppressed
in his person and his property, contrary to Law, and to that frame of spirit
which ought to be in men professing themselves Christians, which is to hearken
to such unusual Signs and Admonitions, at least not to punish those who are
made so to appear unto them upon a Warrant as a suspected Franciscan Friar,
though he was born and bred in the Town, holds some estate of the City, is
there well known, and has sometime lately been an Officer therein, and a man
of an unblameable and professing conversation; yet Citizen or stranger, guilty
or not, all is one with this Generation, for this is such an offense to them,
yea the very meeting of those who come together to se^k the Lord, that Alderman
Hellier swore to a Relation of his, that if they met at his (the said
Relations) house, he would pull them out by the ears: As his brother Alderman
Lock, swore the same oath to a Centry in the Castle, because he discharged his
duty.

By this time had the Magistates made such a 1. of the 12th. month 1654. John
Comberbatch for going along with T. M. to s^e that the Rabble whom be heard
threaten to hurt him, did him no injury,
progress in their illegal and unjust proceedings, that inferior Officers took
the boldness to act, as if they were Magistrates, and to imprison, where the
Magistrates had discharged, as having done nothing contrary to the Law; For
John Cumberbatch, being at his standing of wares in the Fair, called Paul's
fair, and hearing some of the Rabble threaten to throw Morford into the Horse
Pool without Temple gate, when he was turned out of the Town as aforesaid, lest
they should do the man any violence, he went after them; and when Morford
returned, came back into the City with him; Whereupon William Butts a malignant
Constable, laid violent hands on Comberbatch and haled him before the Mayor,
charging him with inviting Morford in again, when he urged him to no such
thing, but out of pity as aforesaid, went after him, nor could Butts prove any
thing against him; whereupon the Mayor bad Comberbatch go about his business:
but as he was forth of the Maior's door, Butts laid violent hands on him again,
saying, he should go to prison; Comberbatch told him, he was not Committed ^y
the Mayor, and therefore he would not go. Said Butts, Dragged to Prison by W.
Butts a Malignant Constable after the Mayor had dismissed him.
thou shall go, and so haled him by force. Comberbatch called to him for a
Mit^imus, Butts answered, he would be his Mittimus, and so dragged him to
Newgate, not suffering him to speak with any friend by the way, and there
charged the Prison with him, having thrust him in at the door first; for
Comberbatch said, he would not go in, unless Butts delivered him to the
Keeper, and so he delivered him to the Keepers son; Notwithstanding the Mayor
never punished Butts for so doing, though complaint thereof was made unto him by
some honest men, who were eye witnesses.

From this new kind of persecution they return Thomas Robertson and Josiah
Cole, 4th. of the 12th. month.
to the former of Tumults, and unlawful Assemblies; for on the fourth day of
the twelvth month, Thomas Robertson of Grayrigge near Rendal in Westmerland,
and Josiah Cole of Winterborne near Bristol, being at Nicholas Steeple-house in
the time of the Divination of Priest Hazard, many people gathered about them,
and gave them many affronts though they both stood still, nor did either of
them speak a word, But when Thomas Robertson began to utter his voice, after
Priest Hazzad had Speaking to Priest Hazard.
ended all and dismissed the people; whilst the word was in his mouth, unspoken
by him, he was struck on the head by many, as was also Josiah Tumulted, etc.
Cole, though he was silent, and attempted not to speak, which blows they both
received patiently, without any resistance: Afterward Thomas began to speak
again and said, Tremble before the Lord, and the words of his holiness.
Whereupon the Tumult was so great, that they permitted him to speak no more;
but hurried him and Josiah out of the Steeple-house, and in great Companies
with much rage, drew them toward the Majors, and having taken away Thomas his
hat, they dragged him under the spouts bar-headed, (it raining hard) the water
running down the end of his Locks, yet he suffered it, and their rage, with
unmoved cheerfulness: The Tumult having thus btought him and Josiah to the
Majors house, he Examined.
demanded wherefore they were brought thither? the Constables replied, for
disturbing Mr. Hazard. Thomas desired the Mayor to do Justice without respect
of persons, and told him he was commanded of the Lord for what he did. At which
the Mayors wife, and others present scoft, Saying, This is all your story: Then
the Mayor demanded their names and their Country, which they gave, whereupon
the Mayor commanded them both to Newgate: Thomas told the Mayor at his
departure, that he had discharged his Conscience: and bad him see that he did
execute Justice and Judgment without respect of persons, for the Lord required
it. When they came to the Mayors door, the Tumult, staying there till then,
hurried them to Newgate: some crying Committed.
out, Whip them about the streets, others hang them up, Newgate is too good for
them; where they were both secured, though Josiah Cole spoke not a word in the
Steeple-house; but standing still received many blows, and other abuses without
resistance: and though Thomas Robertson spoke not a word, till all was dismissed,
and then but these words, Tremble before the Lord, and the words of his
holiness: But those who struck him in the Steeple-house, and made the Tumult
there, and in Tumultuous Companies, hurryed them to the Majors, and staying
there till the Mayor had Committed them, in tumults haled them to Newgate, and
struck, and took away the hats of some who endeavored the Peace, not a man of
whom are enquired after, or punished to this day, though Complaint was made
thereof, and though contrary to their own order made at the Sessions aforesaid
read in the Steeple Houses: Nor did the Constables arrest, or apprehend any
offender therein, then or since, though they were so long amongst them, and
though that Order requires them so to do; nor has the Mayor punished any of
those Constables for neglect of their duty. The next day some Officers came to
the prison with Orders (as they said) from the Mayor, to release them, if they
would pay their fees, and to turn them out of Town without being further
examined, or brought before the Magistrates, but they refusing to pay any fees,
were returned in again, and shortly after released: Thomas Robertson was five
or six years in Arms for the Parliament, an Officer in Colonel Brigg's
Regiment, was at Preston Fight at the Engagement at the Bridge, in Scotland and
Carlisle, living on his own estate, and bearing his own charge in the Wars,
except a small Sum which he received after the fight at Preston: Josiah Cole
was also a Soldier in the Service of the Commonwealth, and at Worcester Fight,
whose Liberties now are not valued at all, or regarded by these Magistrates.

The same day Christopher Birkhead was moved 4th. 12th. month, 1654:
Christopher Birkhead speaking to a ^ Priest.
to go to Stephen's Steeple-house, where sitting silent, Alderman Cann a Ruler
present commanded him to be brought to his house, from whence he by and by
returned, and sat, saying nothing till all was ended: Then he said to the
Priest, Thou Son of Pride; and was proceeding further to speak, but the same
Alderman thrust him down from the place whereon he stood, and a young man held
him by the Collar till the Constables came: and then he saying further, The
Plagues of God is thy portion, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, they
carried him away toward the Mayor's, but afterward brought him to his own
house by order of the said Alderman, upon his meeting of them in the street.
The next day 4th. 12^h. month, 1654.
the Mayor and Aldermen sent for him before them, from a Ship on which he was
at work; (he being a Shipwright by Calling, and a S^aman able to take charge of
a Ship) And demanded of Examined.
him, wherefor^ ^^ disturbed the Congregation, the day before in the Church? He
answered, he disturbed no man, and that the Church was in God: They asked him
why he came thither, and why he staid not at home when the Alderman sent him?
He replied, The fear of the Lord brought him thither, and made him to speak,
God was his witness. Then came in the Priest, and after he had bowed himself
to the Magistrates, Alderman Joseph Jackson asked the Priest what Christopher
had said to him? The Priest answered, he said something to my Pride (the Priest
was light and vain, laughing and deriding) Then said Christopher to him,
Professest thou thy self a Minister of the Gospel, and yet art light and vain
and laughing before the Magistrates! Oh, said the Priest, he owneth you to be
Magistrates, Yea (replied Christopher) I own Magistracy that punishes evil
doers, and praises them that do well: Then the Magistrates asked him why he
quaked so, (for the power of the Lord was much upon him, whilst he was before
them) and whether he was acold or afraid? He answered, he was neither cold nor
afraid of any man, God was his witness; he feared the Lord: They replied, the
Devil shook him. He answered, the holy men of God shaked, and instanced in
Daniel, and Habakkuck, etc. Thus did he quake yesterday at Church, said one of
the Aldermen; and, said Joseph Jackson, deriding him, I Will make thee give over
shaking, and so looks fierce on him, and then said, Shake now, shake now; And
asked him, how much money he had for going to the Church; He answered, No man
knew of it but himself, God was his witness: Then they asked him, how he dared
to call the Minister, the son of Pride? He answered, because he saw him so, in
the light of Christ which discovers him. They demanded, how he dared to Judge
him? He replied, All Judgment was given to the Son. They said, that was to
Christ. He answered, unless the Spirit of Christ was in them, they were none
of his: And the same Spirit judges the same in all. Then they asked him
whether he knew beforehand, that that Minister should preach, or Mr. Jones?
Thereupon he began to give them an account, and said, That upon the third day
of the foregoing week, about the 11th. hour of the night, the Lord bade him to
go to the S^eeple-house, there to bear witness for his Name; But he knew not
whether he should speak to him till he saw his face. But they slighted what he
declared, and said, Whip him, send him to Bride-well; And Joseph Jackson said,
that if he had the whipping of him, he would make him give over quaking. Then
the Priest came and stood near him, upon whom Christopher looking, Joseph
Jackson said, All thy spite is at the Minister, There he is, what can thou
say to him? To whom he replied, after a little silence, Dare thou to own thy
self to be a Minister of Christ? The Priest answered not, but went from him; If
thou do, said Christopher, I am sure thou live out of his doctrine,
calling of men Masters, and being called of men Master, stealing the word from
thy neighbor, speaking a divination of thine own brain, and not from the mouth
of the Lord, as the false Prophets did, with much more to that purpose: Then
Joseph Jackson asked Christopher, whether he did ever pray? He answered, yea:
How? said he. Christopher replied, In the Spirit: Can thou pray, said Joseph
Jackson, that Prayer in the 11th. of Luke? He answered, yea, according to the
measure of the Grace of God given him: Then he demanded, what was his name?
(though he knew it well enough) Christopher replied, A Servant of the Lord,
according to the measure of the grace of God given me. What Is thy name, said he
again? He answered, in the flesh, Christopher Birkhead: Then they bade him
promise the Mayor that he would go to the Church no more, and then they would
set him free: He answered, The Church is in God; But, the Steeple-house you
mean: Well, the Steeple-house, said one of them, let him have it in his own
terms: He answered, he would promise as much as he could keep with a good
Conscience toward God; As to my own will, as far as I know (said he) I shall
not go: But if I am moved of the Lord, I shall obey God and not man: They asked
him why he went now? He replied, Against his will. Then they said, Take him
away to Bridewell. Committed to Bridewell.
Whereupon he told the Ma^or, he was no vagrant, or runnagate: But the Mayor
slighted what he said, and sent him thither, where they continued him for the
space of 9. or 10. days; though Bridewell is no prison, and he ought not
therefore to have been committed thither, had he mis-behaved himself, as to the
breach of any Law; but a house of Correction for rogues, and for idle persons
who will not work: And Christopher Birkhead is one born and bred in the City,
being about the age of forty years, diligent in his calling, an able Seaman,
and always living in the City, except when at Sea, as was his father before
him, and of good reputation as to the world: But it seems Joseph Jackson had a
great mind to have him fast in Bridewell, and to have the place of whipping of
him there, to make him leave his quaking. What rule they bear, and what spirit
they are of, rational men will Judge; Who instead of taking heed what they do,
for the Judgment ought to be the Lords, and not man's, and instead of executing
Justice according to Law, without respect of persons, are upon slight
occasions, drunk with fury and passion on the Seat of Judgment, and in their
rage and lusts, imprison and oppress the Innocent contrary to the Law, and let
offenders go free.

Alderman Joseph Jackson will one day sadly know (except he repent) what it is
to do so, of which the Light in his Conscience has given him many a
Remembrance; and what it is profanely to scoff at the power of the Lord in
his Servants, who stand in dread of his presence, trembling, shaking and
quaking, of whom the Scriptures bear record, as did ( Genesis 27. 33.
) Isaac, (who trembled exceedingly, and ( Heb. 12. 22. Exodus 33. 11. Act. 2. 37.
) Moses, who spoke with God face to face, as a man to his friend, and did
exceedingly quake and fear, the whole ( Exodus 19. 6.
) Camp of Israel, ( Job 37. 1. 16. 12. 21. 6.
) Job, the ( Ezra 10. 3, 4, 9.
) Children of the Captivity under Ezra and Nehemiah; the ( Isa. 66. 5. 66. 2.
) people of the Lord in Isaiah's days, the humble and contrite ones in whom
God dwelt: ( Ezekiel. 12. 18.
) Ezekiel and the ( Ezekiel. 37. 7. 38. 19.
) Camp of dry bones to which he prophesied: ( Psalm. 119. 120. 1 Samuel 13. 14.
) David, a man after Gods own heart; ( Jerem. 23. 9. 5. 22.
) Jeremiah, whose bones shook like a drunken man: ( Dan. 10. 11.
) Daniel, ( Habac. 3. 16.
) Habakkuk, ( 1 Cor. 2. 3.
) Paul, and the ( 2 Cor. 7. 15.
) Church of Corinth, who received the Gospel in much fear and trembling, and he
was with them in fear and much trembling: And what it is to wish to have the
whipping of such, and to call it of the Devil. Let him be warned, lest he
witness ( Dan. 5, 6, 25.
) Belshazzar's condition, whose countenance was changed, and his thoughts
troubled, so that the Joints of his loins were loosened, and his knees smote
one against another, when the fingers of the man's hand came forth and wrote
over against the Candlestick: And let him and all others who scoff at and
persecute the power of the Lord now risen in his Saints, and call it of the
Devil, read and consider what Christ says, Mark 3. 28, 29, 30. Verily I say
unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies
wherewithal soever they shall blaspheme; but he that shall blaspheme against
the Holy Ghost has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation,
because they said, He has an unclean spirit: They who built the Sepulchers of
the Prophets, and said, if they had lived in their ( Luke 11. 47, 48, 49, 50,
51.
) fathers days, they would not have killed the servants the Prophets, they
told Christ he had an unclean spirit, and cast out Devils by the Prince of
Devils, and Christ said to them, They bore witness to themselves, that they
were the chil^ren of those who killed the Prophets, and that all the righteous
blood shed from Abel should fall on them; and these murdered the Lord of
glory, and persecuted to the death his Apostles and Disciples, though he ( Mat.
18. 6.
) said, It were better for a man to have a millstone tied about his neck, and
he cast into the middle of the Sea, than to offend one of these little ones,
who believed in him: This is said to him out of much love to his soul, for he
is seen and comprehended in the eternal light which never changes; and he
will find it a hard matter much longer to kick against the pricks: For the Lord
will stir up Jealousy ere long, like a man of War, because of the
persecution of his sons and of his daughters; and when he is angry, who shall
be able to deliver out of his hands?

Now the Serpent who is more subtle than all the beasts of the field, that he
might indeed bruise the heel of the seed of the woman, and reach those with his
floods, whom his tail has not touched, suggesteth yet new ways to molest and
wear out the servants of the Most High, by seeking occasion against, and
sending for before them, such of the people aforesaid, as they knew could not
bow to any image, or respect men's persons, and to execute their oppressions and
injustice on such.

Jeremy Hignell on the 15th. of the first month, Jeremy Hignell, 15th. first
month, 1654.
1654. being in his shop, attending his calling, was sent for by the Mayor and
Aldermen, to come before them, which he presently obeying, the Mayor commanded
him to draw near, and asked him whether he knew where he was? Hignell said, he
did. Then the Mayor asked him, where? He replied, In the presence of the Lord.
Are you not in the presence of the Lord's Justices, said the Mayor? He replied,
If you be the Lords Justices, I am. Whereupon one of the Aldermen said (without
any more words passing at that time aforesaid, for they asked him no other
question but what is already mentioned, or the least signification of the
reason of their sending for him) We see what he is, take him Committed.
away to Newgate; and commanded the Officer to carry him away; and so he was
immediately brought thither, where the Keeper received him without a Mittimus,
and kept him close prisoner a great part of that time, permitting none to come
to him but his Wife, for which he said, he had order from the Mayor.

On the second day of the second month, he was sent for from prison, before
them again, and stood before them in the Councell-house, as they required;
where he standing a while, they bade him go forth; saying not a word more to
him. Hereupon he went forth and stood at the door; then he was bid to go down;
and by and by the Sword Bearer brought order from the Magistrates to carry him
to prison again: Out of which that evening he was released, having been kept
there for the space of 19. days from his Calling, and a close prisoner a great
part of the time; and at no time did they then, or have they to this day
signified to him the cause of their sending for him, or of his Commitment,
though his Wife desired it of the Mayor, who refused so to do, the man being of
a very sober and honest Conversation, and always a friend to the Commonwealth.

Sara Goldsmith, being moved to put on a Coat of Sarah Goldsmith 5th. day 3d.
month, 1655. going through the Town in a Coat of hair.
Sackcloth of hair next her, to uncover her head, and to put earth thereon,
with her hair hanging down about her, and without any other clothes upon her,
except shoes on her feet; and in that manner to go to every Gate, and through
every Street within the Walls of the City, and afterward to stand at the High
Cross in the view of the Town and Market, as a sign against the Pride of
Bristol, and to abide in that habit so the space of seven days; In obedience
whereunto, though very cross to her own will, she cheerfully prepared her
Garment, being in the manner of a Coat down to the ground; And on the day
appointed her, being the last day of the week, and the fifth day of the third
month, taking with her two friends to accompany her, went forth about the
fourth hour in the morning, and having finished her going to the Gates, and
thorough the Streets, some People following of them, but doing them no harm,
she returned home, and at the ninth hour, came to the High Cross with one of
the friends aforementioned, a great multitude following, and there stood for
the space of half an hour, till the tumult which consisted of many hundreds,
grew so violent, and assaulted so much her self and friend, who stood with her,
that they were enforced thorough the help of some, whom they knew not, but were
made friendly, to repair to a shop near, out of which the multitude cried to
have them thrown, that they might assault them; but the Chamberlain with some
of the Sergeants came, and brought them thence to the Councel-house; out of
respect (as he said) to their safety from the Tumult, which filled the Streets
thereabouts.

When they had been a little while in the inner Tolzey, the Mayor came in and
Joseph Jackson, who stamped with his foot, and grew much enraged, and furious as
soon as he saw her; but the Mayor called Sara to him, and asked Examined.
her, what was her reason to appear in the City in such a habit? She answered,
It was in obedience to the light in her Conscience. What if you, said the Mayor
in your obedience had been killed by the rude multitude? She replied, I am in
the hands of him who rules all things, I have harmed none, yet I have been
harmed: Neither have I broken any Law by which I can be brought under any
censure: Then Joseph Jackson demanded of her the same question that the Mayor
did concerning her habit: She only replied, I have said, Say it over again,
said he: She answered, thou heardst me. But I have forgot it, said he: The
replied, I stand not in mine own will; Whereupon some said, she was mad: To
which the friend answered, I bear witness, she is not mad; Look, here is one
said Joseph Jackson bears, witness. Sara replied, she bears witness I am not
mad, If I had appeared in Gay clothing, then you would not have been troubled:
which were all the words then spoken by her. Then Joseph Jackson furiously
demanded of her friend, what her name was? She gave it to him: Then he asked
her how long she had been with Sara? She stood silent, He demanded of her why
she came up in the City with Sara? She replied, because Sara was her friend. Do
you own her said he? She answered, I do own her: Wherefore, said he, came she
in this habit? She replied, There she was, she was sufficient to answer for her
self, and said no more. Then the Mayor (at the instigation of Joseph Jackson)
for the Mayor was advising how he might send Sara home safely) ordered them to
be sent to Bridewell, and seeing Anne the wife of Nicholas Gannecliffe standing
by Joseph Jackson, demanded of her whether she owned Sara? To which Anne
answered, yea, I own her to be a servant of the living God, and as the
Scripture says; I and the Children, whom thou have given me, are for signs and
Wonders: and so behold she is as a sign and a wonder to you this day; Then
Joseph Jackson said, Take her away to prison too; She lives, said the Mayor,
without the Liberties of the City, Send her away notwithstanding, said he. Then
Sara told them, That Anne had not been with her; but coming to Market upon her
occasions, and seeing the Tumult about her, came to her (which was the truth)
notwithstanding all three were Anne Gannicliffe, Margaret Wood, for being with,
and owning her Committed.
sent to Bridewell, the Tumult who standing in great numbers, before the
Council house, all the while the Mayor examined them, following them thither,
where, by Order of the Mayor, as the Keeper said, were they kept close
prisoners, so strict that no friends were permitted to come to them; nay, their
Husbands were sometimes denied, and the Mother of the friend, and their
Servants who brought them provisions; and when any of them had admittance, it
was with very much ado, and after long waiting, till Nicholas Gannercloffe
brought witnesses, and demanded (before them) his wife of the Keeper, who
denied to release her, or to give him the reason of her being there detained,
and only said, it was by the Majors Order: nor would the Keeper permit them the
first night to light a Candle, or to make any fire, till about noon the next
day, nor permitted he friends to stand without, and to call to them and see
them out of the windows; but caused such to be turned from the walls of the
house, and a Court-door in the street, (which usually stands open) to be made
fast, to keep them out: and very fierce he was to them, and to any that asked
for them, and so were his people; and great dogs were set on some who came to
see them, by the rude people, who dwelt near, with other abuses unpunisht to
this day, though complaint was presently made by some who were in danger. And
thus was her friend Margaret Wood, who only was with her, in her usual habit,
and Anne Gannycliffe, (who seeing the tumult about her, came from her
occasions, out of love, to see she had no injury, sent to Bridewell together, a
place for Rogues, and were there kept close prisoners, and used as aforesaid,
till the 11th. day of the third month, and Sara till the 16th. though it is
every ones Liberty to wear what Garments they please, and to accompany and see
their friends, especially where they are no transgressors of the Law: And
though the Law gives not power to any Judges or Justices to Commit any one, The
Stat. Westminst. 2. with other Laws, provide for a safe imprisonment; but for a
close imprisonment, there is not any, but it is directly contrary to the 28.
Hen. 8. c. 2. which says, Prisons shall be in the most eminent, and populous
Towns where there is most resort of people, that they may be the more often
visited, and relieved.
close prisoner, and keep him so, be the Crime what it will; but not one of the
Tumult is to this day called to account, or punished, though it stood so long
before their faces.

Had Sara Goldsmith appeared in the fantastic dress of this vain and wanton
age, or in a spirit of lightness and haughtiness she had received enough of
friendship from this Generation; but being through the cross to her own will,
made obedient for their sakes to pass through the City in aircloth next her,
and ashes, as a testimony against their pride, which never was at that hight as
at this day, she has received that hard measure aforementioned, instead of
laying it to heart, and being humbled before the Lord; Verily the men of
Nineveh shall rise up in Judgment against this Generation Mat. 11. 41.
and shall condemn it; for they repented at the saying of Jonah the Prophet in
sackcloth and ashes: To Jer. 6. 40. 20. 7. 8. Isay 8. 18.
the Prophets of old, the word of the Lord was a reproach and a burden, they
were made a derision, and mocked daily, and were for signs and wonders, and
they were put into Prisons, and into Stocks, and some of them to death: nor was
what they said, or that wherein they were made signs unto them, minded or
regarded: as it is at this day, though it cost them hard to bear it, in behalf
of the people as ( Ezekiel. 4. 5.
) Ezekiel 390. days lying on his left side, and ( Ezekiel. 4. 6.
) 40 on his right side. And to ( Ezekiel. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. 15.
) eat his bread mingled with beasts dung, during that time, by weight, and his
water by measure. And Isaiah, to go naked and barefoot. d Isay 20. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6.
3. years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt; And how ( Ezekiel. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6.
) ridiculous was it for Ezekiel to dig through a Wall in the middle of the
day, and to carry out his stuff in the sight of the people (...) ^ut off his (
Ezekiel 5, 2, 3, 4.
) hair, off his Head, and off his Beard, and to weigh tt openly with a
balance, and to burn one third in the fire, another third to cut with a Knife
to pieces, and a third to throw in the Air, To ( Ezekiel. 4. 1, 2, 3.
) pourtray Jerusalem on a tilestone, and to lay siege against it: And to cast
up Mounts, and raise battering Rams, and to put an iron pan between him and the
City, to ( Ezekiel. 7. 23.
) make a chain: And for Jeremiah to hide a ( Jer. 13. 4, 5, 6.
) girdle in the bank of the River Euphrates, till it be quite marred; to carry
a ( Jer. 25. 15, 16, 17, to the 30.
) Cup for the Nations to drink thereat. As the Word of the Lord, and his signs,
wherein he makes his servants to appear, are at this day; And though he ( Amos
2. 11, 12.
) raised up of their sons for Prophets, and their young men for Nazarites, yet
they gave the Nazarites wine to drink, and ( Isa. 30. 10, 11. Jer. 11. 21.
) commanded tht Prophets, saying, Prophecy not, and to the false Prophets they
hearkened, who prophesied smooth things, and ( Jer. 28. 15. 29. 31.
) caused them to trust in a lie, and evil entreated his ( 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
) Messengers till there was no remedy; and those things they prophesied, and
wherein they were signs, were fulfilled upon them in their destruction. Why
have thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which makes himself a Prophet,
since the Lord has made thee Priest, in the room of Jehojadah the Priest, that
ye should be Officers for the house of the Lord, for every man that is mad, and
makes himself a Prophet, that thou should put him in the prison and the
stocks; Did Shemaiah the false Prophet write from Babylon in the Captivity to
Zephaniah and all the Priests, and to all the People in Jerusalem, concerning
Jeremiah, Jer. 29. 24, 25, 26, 27. Oh Bristol, Bristol, that thus evil
entreatest those who are sent unto thee, how has the Lord soug^ (...) does
seek to gather thee as a hen does her Chicken* Be warned in time, to know the
things that belong to thy Peace, Lest hereafter they be hid from thine eyes,
and thy habitation be left to thee desolate.

Nor were they satisfied with what they had done to those aforementioned, but
as men restless in their persecutions, on the eight day of the third month,
Daniel Wastfield 8. day 3. month. 1655.
the Major sent for Daniel Wastfield before him, who coming with his Officer,
the Major and Aldermen Vickris sat down, and the Major said to him: Wastfield,
come hither, whereupon he drew near, then the Major asked him three several
times, what art thou? Though he knew him well enough, calling him by his name
as aforesaid, He answered I am a man. What Is thy name said the Major, My name is
Daniel Committed.
Wastfield said he, Take him and carry him to Newgate said the Major to one of
his officers, further adding that he came thither to contemn Justice; To which
he replied, nay, he came thither in obedience to his order. So being committed,
he demanded a Mittimus, that so he might know for what he was committed, to
which the Major answered, his word was a Mittimus, and so he was carried away
without any more words used on either side, and without any signification to
him, to this day, wherefore he was sent for or committed, where he was
continued a prisoner 33 days, and a close Prisoner by order of the Major, and
none to come to him but his servants, as said the keeper; though he be a shop
keeper, and as a Wi^ower, and had one child sick, dead and buried whilst he
was thus unjustly imprisoned, being kept from seeing it, or going to its
burial, and had another sick, and no body but his servant to look to his shop
and trading, not knowing of, to this day, any thing, whereby they have cause
against him according to Law: Have such pieces of tyrannical injustice and
cruelty as these, been heard of in this Nation? or dared the highest Ministers
of State under Charles Stuart, so to do? was not Strafford, to these men a
Petty transgressor, and his loins as their little finger?

And the more they persecuted, the more they thirsted after persecution, for on
the eleventh day of the third month the Magistrates sent for William William
Foord 11. day 3. mon^h. 1655.
Foord to come before them, where being come, the Company of Milliners
complained, that he kept a man at work in contempt of the Majors order, for on
the thirtieth day of the second month, they had sent for him Concerning the
same business upon Complaint of the Milliners, for that he kept a stranger at
work, contrary as they pretended to their Ordinary, whereupon the Major charged
Foord to turn the stranger away, and not to teach him his trade, which he
refused to do in regard he was none of that Company, and had followed the trade
of Wooll-combing before they were a Corporation, and because the man had been
all his youth a Soldier in the Army, and in a capacity by the late Act, to
set up any where, nor was he obliged by any Law, either not to teach him his
trade, or to turn him out of his house, he being an honest sober man, desirous
to learn a calling whereby to live; And they further alleged that he should
say, he would keep him in spite of any man's teeth, whereupon their witness was
produced and sworn, who denied that he said, in spite of any man's teeth, but
that William ^^ord had said, he intended to teach him; then one of the Aldermen
affirmed, that he promised to turn him away: which William Foord denied to be
truth; whereupon he called to the Milliners to justify it, but they were made
to speak the truth, which was that he refused to turn the man out of his house,
and that he could say nothing as to the teaching of him. Then they asked the
Milliners what fine he had Committed by their Ordinary? they answered half a
Crown a day for every day he had employed him, they asked why they did not levy
the fine upon him? They replied, if he would turn away the man, they would be
satisfied, He told them he was not of their trade, and therefore their Ordinary
had no power over him, and that the man whom he was teaching, might make use of
any trade by the Act, to which Alderman Joseph Jackson replied, it was no such
matter, and said, Is that your Conscience? Then they asked him whether he would
keep the man or no? to which he replied, he should: Then the Major asked him
whether he had any sureties there present? He asked him what to do? The Major
told him, he should be bound to the good behavior: He answered, he had broken
no Law, therefore he should provide no Sureties: then they told him he should
go to Newgate: he asked them for a Mittimus: whereupon Committed.
they in scorn laughed at him, and Shiriff Lawford told him, he knew not the
Law: He replied whether he knew it or no, it was convenient that he might have
under their hands, wherefore he was committed, Then they said, the Majors word
was a Mittimus; He said again, he should not go without something under their
hand, then Shiriff Lawford said, h^ should be carried in a wheel-barrow, and
the Officers staying a while for him, and seeing that he would not go, they
commanded their Officers to carry him away; so many of them came about him, and
did drive him along before them to prison, where he was continued for the space
of 26. days, a prisoner, from his family, and calling both Daniel Wastfield
and William Foord, being men, who h^ve been always faithful and active for
the public interest, and have served it in Arms, and so has the stranger,
because of whom they pretend to have imprisoned William Foord, though that and
their being such as are reproachfully called Quakers may be understood the true
reason wherefore they are thus unjustly dealt withal, and occ^sions sought
against them, for the Law they have not transgressed.

After the imprisonment of these for the space of time aforementioned, the
friends of truth, had Christopher B^rkhead. 2. day 5. month 16^5. Standing
silent in Nicholas Steeple-house, wh^lst Priest Farmer was worsh^pping.
some respite from their bonds: till the second day of the 7. month, at which
time Christopher Birkhead being in the Steeple house called Nicholas, unto
which he was moved of the Lord, he stood there silent whilst Priest Farmer said
a few words as a prayer, and read some Psalms, which when he had done, the
Priest sto^d still, saying nothing; But looked toward the Aldermen present,
with whom his Clarke was talking, and took a Psalms book of a boy, as if he
would sing, and went to open it, but did not, but turning two or three times
and looking on the Magistrates with whom his Clarke was speaking as aforesaid:
At length about the time that Miles Jackson Alderman was coming out of his
feate toward Christopher, Priest Farmer began to speak to Christopher, and
told him he disturbed the People by standing with his hat on in the time of
Prayer, and moreover said to him, that if he had any thing to say, he should
speak; and tell his business why he came thither (for Christopher was silent)
then, and not before Christopher began to speak, Thus says the Lord: A
wonderful and horrible thing is Committed in the land, and was speaking
further; but Priest Farmer said, he would have none of that, or word^ to that
purpose, and spoke loud that the people might not hear Christopher. By this
time Miles Jackson, being come from his seat to the place where Christopher
stood, commanded him to be taken away, saying, he was a disturber. Christopher
Struck.
replied, All people take notice whether I have disturbed any man: Then the
under-Sexton laid hands on him in the place; and in the view of the Magistrate
and the Priest struck him on the head with a stick; Tumulted, etc.
and the rude multitude came about him, some striking, some pinching, and some
thrusting him, which caused him to turn his head to the Priest and say, see
the fruits of thy Ministry, then the Rude Multitude haled him toward the
Steeple-house door, and Miles Jackson followed them, and commanded Committed.
him to be carried to Bridewell: So Priest Farmers Clarke took him by one arm,
and his under Sexton by the other, and had him away, the Sexton Pinching and
haling him forwards with much earnestness, and using very bitter words to him,
saying, why do not thou come faster? whilst the Clerk held him by the other
arm keeping him back: At length the Sexton got him to himself, and so haled
him to Bridewell, the tumult following him thither, and charged Bridewell with
him, a Constable being then come to them, the Cle^k saying to the Officer, that
Alderman Miles Jackson and Alderman Vickris commanded them to bring him
thither, where he was moved to write to Priest Farmer in these words,

Ralph Farmer,
THou that pretendest thy self to be a Minister His Letter to Priest Farmer.
of Christ, but art found in the step^ of the false Prophets, and Scribes, and
Pharisees, which were Hypocrites as thou art, to whom the Woe was, and the same
Woe is thy portion, who have the chief place in the Assemblyes, and stand
praying in the Synagogue, or Idols Temple, where I found thee, when I was moved
from the Lord there to go, to bear witness against thy deceit, and abominable
worship, which the Lord abhors, for thy hands are full of blood, who go in
the way of Cain to envy, and runnest greedily after the error of Balaam for
gifts and rewards, though thou coverest thy self with the Prophets words, and
the Apostles words, which lived the life of what they spoke, which thou do
not, I have a sure witness in thy Conscience bearing me testimony, if thou will
hearken unto it, thou stolest the words of David's Psalms, 17. 18. and read
to the people, to fill the time of thy lying Divination; and there thou
read, Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry. Give ear unto my prayer,
that goes not out of feigned lips. O thou full of all subtilty, in the light
of the Lord thou art seen, and let that in thy Conscience witness against thee,
whether thy prayers are any thing else but what thou have feigned, and made up
in thy imagination, and sellest them to the people for money; the Lord has
proved thy heart, and weighed thee, and thou art found lacking, and thy
Kingdom is falling, and must down, by the mighty power of the Lord, plot thou
never so subtly against the Lord and his Anointed; think thou to cover thy
self with reading David's words, who did love the Lord, and he was his
strength, and his rock; and his fortress, etc. But thou Deceiver, was it, or is
it so with thee? who when I stood silent and peaceable before thee, thou
could not stand nor go on in thy Witchcraft; but thy looks made manifest who
was thy God, and where thy strength lay, even in the powers of the earth, by
whom I was there commanded to be taken out of thy presence; and there thy
people, with whom thou withal pretendest to serve the living God, beat me
before thy face, and in that thou call the Church too, and so haled me out,
and cast me into Prison, and called me a Disturber, who disturbed, no man; but
the man of sin in thee was disturbed, and feared to have thy deeds come to the
light. Now consider what thou have done, and art doing, and repent, for else
the Judgments of the Lord will overtake thee, and his heavy hand will be upon
thee, and there shall be none to deliver thee. This was I moved of the Lord to
write to thee, that thou might see thy deceit, and know that his Judgments
will be just upon thee, in the day when he will plead with thee, and there
shall be none to deliver thee. From him, who is a lover of righteousness, known
to the men of the world by the name of

From Bridewell in Bristoll the 4. day of the 7. month, 1655. Christopher
Birkhead.


The fury of their persecution beginning thus to Benjamin Maynard, 9 day, 7.
month, 1655. speaking to Priest Paul.
break forth afresh on Christopher ^irkhead, it ceased not there; but on the
ninth day of the seventh month, 1655. Benjamin Maynard being moved of the Lord
to go unto John Paul Priest, and coming into the Steeple-house, where he was
speaking out of his high place to the people, the Lord moved him powerfully to
say, John Paul, in the presence of the Lord be silent. And as he was speaking
further, one of the Priests hearers clapped his hand on Benjamin 's mouth, not
suffering him to speak; and many others came about him, two of whom brought him
to Bridewell, where he was continued a Prisoner till the Tumulted. Imprisoned
in Bridewell, 10. day, 7. month, 1655. Examined,
next day; at which time he was sent for before the Mayor and Aldermen, who
demanded of him wherehence he had the command to go to John Paul? He replied,
from the Lord, and that he was to obey his command rather than the will of man.
To which Henry Gibbs Alderman, returned, that he knew of no such command. Then
after some other questions, not worth the rehearsing, to which he made answer,
one of them told him he must suffer, and asked he was whether he had any
Sureties, or would find any? He replied, nay. Then they commanded the
Committed.
Keeper to take him away. He demanded a Mittimus, but the Mayor said, his word
was a Mittimus; so they sent him to Newgate Prison. The next day after which,
he sent a Letter to John Paul in these words.

TO thee, John Paul, I was moved of the Lord His Letter to John Paul Priest.
to write. I do charge thee from the presence of the living God, to cease from
thy deceit, for thou take the Saints words, and make a trade of them; the
Lord did send his Prophets to cry Woe against such as thou art, thou and such as
thou art, say, and cry peace to the wicked, where there is no peace; by the
Light of Christ you are all seen to be out of the Doctrine of Christ, therefore
turn into that of God in thy Conscience, which shows thee sin and evil; if
thou actest contrary to it, it will be thy condemnation, for you are all such
as feed upon the fat, and feed not the flock, therefore the hand of the Lord is
against you all. Woe be to you that are covered with a covering, but not with my
spirit, says Christ, for you that are covered with any other covering, your
beds are too short, and your coverings too narrow, for they will not hide you
from the presence of the Lord. From him who is a Prisoner for the Truths sake,
known to the World by the name of

From Newgate Prison the 11. day of the 7. month, 1655. Benjamin Maynard.


Nor did their persecution end here, but on the sixteenth Margaret Thomas, 16.
day, 7. month, 1655. sp^aking to Priest Farmer.
day of the same month, Margaret Thomas being moved of the Lord to testify
against Priest Farmer aforesaid, and being at Nicholas Steeple house, after he
had done his Prayer before his Divination, the Lord opened her mouth, and she
said unto him, Woe unto the Idol shepherds, that devour and scatter my flock,
says the Lord. And to the people And the people.
she spoke, warning them to repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, and
that the Lord was coming to look for fruit; with much more: but the Mayor and
some of the Aldermen being present, commanded their Officers to carry her to
Bridewell, Committed to Bridewell.
some of the people striking her as they drew her out of the Steeple-house,
where she was continued till the third day of the week following, at which time
she was removed to Newgate, without being called before the Rulers, or examined.

And as deep calls unto deep, so violence called to Tempe^ance Hig^^ll, 23.
day, 7. mon^h, 1655. speaking to Priest Brent.
persecution; for Temperance Hignell being commanded of the Lord to witness
against Jacob Brint Priest, at Temple Steeple-house, and coming thither on the
23 day of the same month, being the first day of the week, after he had ended
all that he had then to say to the people, she beginning to speak to him,
saying, Woe from the Lord God to thou Jacob Brint; and was (before she could
speak another word) struck down by some of his hearers to the Struck down.
ground, and therewith astonished, till some of them took her up; upon which
the tumult flockt about her, who gave her many blows, beat her so in the face,
that her eyes were swelled, and blood came from Tumulted, b^a^. Her blood drawn.
her, which she wiping off her face, showed to the people, and bid them behold
the fruits of their Ministry. Her hat was also struck off her head, and her
handkerchief about her neck torn off, and taken Clothes re^t.
away; and being haled out of the Steeple-house, some would have dragged her to
the Pond, and have thrown her in there; but one present withheld them, and
brought her into the street, into which being come, the Tumult about her was
very great, shouting and whooping, and some danger appeared of her * life;
whereupon she asked, whether Since dead, being carried out of the Prison
dangerously sick, of which he dyed three days after.
there were any Constables present? he that withheld them from throwing her
into the Pond, answered, he was one: To whom she spoke, If I have broken any
Law, let me suffer by the Law, and let me be defended from the rude multitude.
Then she was Examined.
brought to Alderman Knight, who having demanded of her what her name was, and
where she lived; to which she answered; he asked her, what she had to do to
disturb the Minister? She replied, she was moved of the Lord to speak to Jacob
Brint, and said, she came not there to make a disturbance. Then his son asked
her, what she came there for? and whether what the Minister had spoken, was not
the truth? She replied, that he was a Deceiver of the people, and of their
souls, for dishonest gain. Then the Alderman aforesaid commanded the Constables
to have her away to Bridewell, where he said she Committed to Bridewell.
should be soundly whipped on the morrow. She demanded a Mittimus, to know what
she was committed for; he answered, his word was a Mittimus; so she was had
away to Bridwell, the tumult of people following of her, shouting and making a
noise all the way thither, and one plucked ^ff her neck-cloth.

The next day she was brought before the Major 23. day, 7. month, 1655.
Examined the second time.
and Aldermen, who demanded of her what she had to do to go to Mr. Brint, and
disturb him the day before? She answered, she was moved of the Lord; but as for
making a disturbance, that she denied. Then John Knight said, that her coming
into the Church caused such a disturbance, that the people looked after her
more than to hear the word of God. To which she replied, if I shall have
liberty, I shall here declare what I spoke; which being granted her, she said,
It was Woe from the Lord to thou Jacob Brint, and this was the truth of it, I
declare it to you in the presence of the Lord; and unto them she related the
passages aforesaid, of being beaten and misused by the rude multitude. Then
they asked her, wherefore she pronounced Woe unto him? She replied she spoke not
her own words, but his that sent her. They asked her, how she knew she was
moved of the Lord? She answered, it was like fire in her bones. And after many
other questions asked and answered, of little consequence, she was asked
whither she would go again? and whether she would be sorry for what she had
done? She replied, she could say little to that. Then the Major asked her,
whether she would find good Sureties for the good behavior? She answered, she
should find none. So he ordered her to be sent to Newgate Prison; She desired
to Committed to Newgate.
know for what she was committed, and also a Mittimus. He replied, his word was
a Mittimus. The day following, she sent a Letter to Jacob Brint, in these words.

Jacob Brint,
UPon the 23. day of this month I was commanded Her Letter to Jacob Brint.
of the Lord to come unto thee, and say: We from the Lord to thee Jacob Brent:
with much more; but before I could deliver that which I had to say to thee, I
was thrown down by some or one of thy hearers, and haled forth of the Steeple
house, by which means I was prevented to declare unto thee that which I was
commanded from the Lord: Now for the clearing of my conscience that thou may
not be ignorant of the mind of the living God concerning thee, I am moved now
to declare it to thee in writing; Therefore hear the word of the Lord; Woe from
the Lord God unto thee Jacob Brent, thou Idol, and dumb Shepherd, that seek
for the fleece, and cloathest thy self with the wool, and devourest the souls
of the people for dishonest gain; verily the Lord God is risen to plead with
all flesh by fire and by sword, therefore repent, and prize the day of thy
visitation, lest his wrath should be kindled further against thee, to cut thee
off for ever. This is that which I was moved to declare to thee from the Lord;
and now also I am moved to declare more unto thee; All trees which bring not
forth good fruit, are to be hewn down, and cast into the fire: Therefore sink
down, and look into thy self, and see what fruit thou have brought forth, that
scarce any of thy hearers, but what are swearers, drunkards, strikers,
fighters, and railers, persecutors of the Just; ye are of the same generation
that persecuted the Son of God, and now ye persecute him afresh where he is
made manifest. I warn and command thee in the presence of the Lord, to silence
flesh, and stop thy mouth, and be ashamed of what thou have done, and let the
time be sufficient that thou have spent in vain, l^st the blood of the Innocent
be required at thy hands; for I bear testimony, that my blood was spilt amongst
thy h^arer; whereby thou may clearly see the fruits of thy Ministry; so thou
art now left without excuse.

From a Prisoner for the Truths sake, known to the World by the name of
Temperance Hignell.
From Newgate Prison this 25. of the seventh month, 1655.

The same 23. day of the seventh month, John John Smith, 23 day, 7. month,
standing silent whilst Priest Farmer divined.
Smith being moved, went to Nicholas Steeple-house, there to declare against
all false ways and worships, and all hypocrisy and deceit in Priest and
People: But Ralph Farmer the Priest having ended his Sermon, before he began to
pray, spoke to the people, that John Smith should be uncovered, who pulled off
his hat; and all being ended, and the Clerk having published something he had
to say, John Smith perceiving the people to be enraged, said, Why do the
Heathen rage? He that does break one of the least of the Commands, and does
teach men so to do, shall be called least in the Kingdom of God. And told
Priest Farmer, that he was covered with a covering, but not of the Spirit of
the Lord; and that as many as were led by the Spirit of God, were the sons of
God: But thou wast not led by the Spirit of God when thou said thou would
bring one to swear; which he offered to prove, and further said, that because
of swearing Jerem. 23. 10. Mat. 5 33, 34, 35, 36. James 5. 12.
the Land mourns; and Christ says, I say unto you, swear not at all; and the
Apostle says, Above all things, my brethren, swear not at all, neither by the
heaven, neither by the earth, nor by any other oath, lest ye fall into
condemnation. And told him, that the Scriptures were fulfilled upon him, which
says, the Leaders of my people cause them to err; and that he said, that he
the said John Smith was a Puppy; and asked him whether he did not sin in
likening a man which God created after his own Image, unto a dog? but the rude
multitude fell upon him striking Tumulted, beat.
him on the face, and kicking of him; and one Sandsford dragged him by the
Cloak with much violence. Dragged.
And whilst these things were acting, John Gunning the Mayor, Alderman Lock,
Sheriff Lawford, and others of the Council passed by, whom he asked whether any
of the People of God did ever beat or abuse any, and said, that he spoke not to
upbraid or condemn any thing that was good, but to reprove that which was evil;
and that if he had transgressed any Law, let him be tried by the Law. But they
heeded not, nor did they cause their Officers to appease the rude multitude;
yea so far were they from doing it, that Walter Sandy, one of the Council,
laid violent hands on him himself; and as he was passing to go out of the
Steep^e-house door, his Cloak was rent in twain, Garment rent in twain.
and the greatest part taken away, the other piece whereof he showed to the
Rulers aforesaid, and asked them whether that were the fruits of their
Ministry? and whether they did Justice? To which Sheriff Lawford said, he had
no call or command to be there; He replied, that he came to declare the truth,
and said he, let your blood be on your own heads, the wicked shall be turned
into Hell, and all those that forget God. And passing up the High street, he
said to the Mayor, and those of the Rulers with him that the Law was made for
fighters, drunkards, swearers, and perjured persons. But nevertheless, and
though they saw the rude multitude following him, they did not send any Officer
to appease the tumult; but the multitude followed him to his lodging and broke
his glasse-windowes, and would have forced his door upon him.

The next day the Major and Aldermen, sent their 24. day 7. Month 1655.
Officers, who finding him upon his employment for the State, brought him
before them, viz. the Major, Apprehended.
Joseph Jackson, Richard Vickris, George Hellier, John Lock, and George Knight
Aldermen, with others, who commanded him to Come near them, and asked him
whether he knew whom he was before, Examined.
and whether he saw not the sword? and his hat was taken off at their command;
He replied he honored all men in the Lord, and out of him he honored none, and
those who ruled for him, ought to be men fearing God and hating Covetousness,
and such bore not the sword in vain, but were a terror to evil doers, and a
praise to them that do well; and that he stood in the presence of the Lord; and
further, that Christ said, How can ye believe that receive honor one of
another? and asked them whether that were Scripture, and whether they would own
it? At which Joseph Jackson scoffed, and Alderman Knight called him Rascal,
and another said he was led by the Devil, and he was charged by them with
words which they said he spoke at John Youngs against Priest Farmer, viz. that
he the said Farmer should swear, or forswear, or words to that purpose,
whereupon he asked Ralph Farmer (who was there present) whether he could say,
that he spoke those words? But he could not so say, nor was any such thing made
to appear, Then they asked him what he did say at John Youngs to him? he
answered that he asked Ralph Farmer, whether he was or professed himself to be
a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but he did not say he was, and that
he told him the hireling did not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and asked him
if he did? And said that the Priests that preached for hire, and the Prophets
that Divined for money, were them that did build Sion with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity; All which he offered to the Magistrates to prove by Scriptures,
but they admitted him not; Then they charged him, with making a disturbance in
the Church, he answered, he was peaceable, they replied he had his hat on, or
was covered, he asked whether many of them had not their hats on? They
answered, not at prayer, He bad them prove by Scripture that it was unlawful,
but that was not done; and said that Ralph Farmer was covered with a Cap,
besides another false Covering; not of the spirit of the Lord. And with Caps
were some of the Rulers covered also; And Ralph Farmer stood with his hat off,
saying, he came to their worships for Christ, and spoke to them to send for one
to make oath before them. John Smith replied, that swearing was out of the
Doctrine of Christ, and alleged, that Jeremiah said, Because of oaths the
Land mourned; and Zachary, This is the curse that go^th over the face of the
whole earth, every one that swears shall be cut off. And Christ, swear not
all, and James, Above all things my brethren swear not, and bad them take
notice of the oath which many of them had taken, never to assist the
Parliament; and see whether they had observed and kept it, Joseph Jackson said,
they had business, and must have swearing, and Ralph Farmer called him Jack, he
told him his name was not Jack but John: yet he so called him in a scoffing and
deriding manner, and those who called him Master he reproved not: When as
Christ said to his Disciples, Be not ye called of men Masters, Nor did any of
Christ's disciples ever endeavor to bring any to swear before the Magistrates,
that they can prove: And upon the saying of some on the Bench, you said you
would prove Mr. Farmer to be no Minister of the Gospel: he said, he was ready
so to do. But they would not hear him; but cried, look you here, look you here,
away with him, and indignation arose in them, when he spoke of the Scriptures,
and asked whether they would own them? Then they cried again, away with, and
asked him whether he Committed.
would find sureties for his good behavior? He bad them read or show him any
Law he had transgressed; Then one John Sandford (who has been a bitter enemy
to the Commonwealth, and who assaulted him in the Steeple-house, as aforesaid)
was brought in to swear against him, and was accepted to be a witness against
John Smith, who adventured his life, and often lost his blood in the service of
the Commonwealth, as a member of the Army, to whom they gave a book to swear,
which he was very forward to receive and to swear, Priest Farmer standing by,
to whom Joh^ Smith said, Christ says, swear not all, yet swear he did, that
John Smith taxed him for laying violent hands upon him, and bad him the said
Sandford have a care that where ever he met with him, he would lay violent
hands upon him, or words to that effect, which latter words John Smith asking
him if he ever spoke; the Magistrates cried out that he interrupted him in his
oath, John Smith answered, he would not have him forswear himself, for that he
never spoke those words, and desired to make his Defense, and said, Paul, when
he was accused, had that Liberty, and that they might as well have those who
witnessed against Stephen to testify what Sandford had sworn against him, and
did declare in the presence of God, as he does now, that he never said, that
where ever he met him, he would lay violent hands on him, or any words to that
purpose; and asked Sandford whether he did not lay violent hands upon him, the
said Smith yesterday in the Steeple-house? he said he did, and that Alderman
Lock commanded him so to do; Then he told them, that Sandford had transgressed
the Law, by his own confession before them, that he laid violent hands on him
in the Steeple-house, and spoke that Justice might be executed upon him: But
the Magistrates refused. Then he told them they must all come to Judgment, and
give an account of all things done in the body, and further they permitted him
not to speak in his own defense, though they promised he should, after Sandford
had declared what he had to say upon oath, but cried away with him: At which he
perceiving Priest Farmer to rejoice, he said, if thou had the power that
Bonner had, what could be expected from thee? Then he demanded a Mittimus, but
they refused to give him any, but called the keeper and sent him to Newgate
Prison, without signifying for what crime they had so committed him.

On the eight day of the eight month, Jon Smith The eight day of the e^ght
Month 1655. brought before the Rulers the second time.
was brought forth of Prison before the Major and Aldermen, of whom the Major
demanded what he was brought thither for? He replied, he desired to know of the
Major, wherefore he was sent for? Joseph Jackson answered, it was right, and
that he sent for him, and said, that John Smith had petitioned them, which he
denied, and asked them what they had against him? And bad them prove that he
had either broken the Law of God, or the Nation, which they did not, but sp^ke
to send him away to the place from whence he came? he told them he was worse
than an infidel, that did not provide for his family, and they had taken him
from his family and employment, and sent him to prison, when neither the breach
of the Law of God, or the Nation, was justly proved upon him, and demanded a
Mittimus to show the cause wherefore they had imprisoned him, and said it was a
thing unreasonable amongst the Heathen to send a prisoner, and not to signify
the Crime laid against him.

But they would not give any Mittimus, nor was there any thing proved against
him, and they commanded their Officers to take him away: Thereupon he spoke
aloud, that he had broken no Law, and demanded again a Mittimus, or else to
prove what Law he had transgressed, and threw them a writing containing the
oath and protestation which was formerly taken by many of them for the King
against the Parliament, and bad them read that and says, that he did not
venture his life and loose his blood to set up his enemies to rule over him:
but they would not read the writing, but threw it to him again, knowing
themselves guilty, for many of them could not deny but they had taken it and
the Major was going away, But the other Aldermen would not suffer him, but drew
him in again, he seeming as if he were unwilling he should to Prison again;
And Joseph Jackson with the other Aldermen, urged and pr^ssed him very much to
return him to prison, and the Officers were R^commit^^^.
bid to take him away, and they laid violent hands on him, to hale him away,
but he held fast by the bar, and bad them first prove that he had broken any
law, or to grant a Mittimus wherefore he was sent to Prison. But they by maine
fo^ce, and strength haled him from the Bar, then he spoke aloud to the
people, and bad them take notice that he had broken no Law, but was taken from
his family and employment contrary to Law, and sent to Prison without any
Mittimus.

Whereunto shall this Generation be likened? Those whom the Lord has moved to
bear witness against the deceit of the Priests and their false Mininistry and
Worships, in the time of the exercises thereof, have been tumulted, beaten,
punched, and otherwise abused, even in the Synagogue, in that which they call
their Churches, in the places of their worships in the time of their
worshippings, by the worshippers, in the presence of the worshipping
Magistrates, who have thereunto added long and sore imprisonments upon them at
the instigation and desire of the Priests, who have called upon them openly so
to do, upon pretense of Queen Maryes Acts, made in the time of Popery, by a
Popish Parliament; and a Popish Queen, at the instigation of the Popish
Highpriests and Bishops of that Popish Generation, for the defense of Popish
Priests and Jesuits, in their Preachings for, and exercising of their
abominable Popish Doctrines and Idolatries of the Mass, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Worshipping of Images, etc. against the witness of God, then born
against them by the Protestants, thorough flames of fi^e, touching the
invalidity of which, even in point of Law, something has already been offered,
by which does not both Priests and Magistrates show themselves to be of the
same generation? Those whom the Lord has moved to bear the same testimony,
after the Priests have finished their Divination, and dismissed the people, have
been inspired in the same manner, and some of them knocked down in the
Steeple Houses, and their blood shed in those Idol Temples, and their garments
rent, and their lives endangered, and much hereof in the presence of the
Magistrates, who when called to, have not relieved them, nor caused the tumults
before their faces to be suppressed, nor punished any for making tumults, though
contrary to their Order of Sessions the 16 day of the 11. month 1654. and to
the Law, but instead thereof some of them have commanded violent hands to be
laid on them, in the Steeple Houses, and with others have committed those, who
have been thus tumulted, beaten, injured, and their blood shed, to prison, and
^ave kept them for a long time there from their families, and relations, whose
maintenance depend upon their Liberty, of which they are not ignorant, though
there is not so much as any shadow of Law, that they can lay to their charge,
to have broken; And Christopher Birkhead being moved of the Lord to come to the
Steeple-house and standing silent amongst them, in that place which is free for
all men, not speaking a word till the Priest required him to speak, and to
declare his business, received much of the same in the presence of the Rulers,
one of whom, when the people were quiet, came out of his seat, and commanded
him to be taken away as a Disturber, when he disturbed no man, and thereby
raised a tumult, which neither he nor others present appeased, but added
thereunto the imprisonment of his person, as the particulars aforesaid at large
mention; and yet those who beat, and strike, and make tumults in the
Steeple Houses, are neither bound to the good behavior, nor punished according
to the Law, though on the behalf of the Commonwealth, because the Peace is
broken, such offenses ought to be brought to issue at Law, should the party
beaten and tumulted be silent. And though the Law enjoins the Justices and the
Sheriff to enquire of Riots by a Jury, and to hear and determine according to
the Law within one month, upon pain of 100 l. a piece, making default, as has
been aforesaid. And here the Reader has several more views of this Priest
Farmer, who calls himself a Minister of the Gospel, but whose servant he is,
the sober may easily judge by the instances aforesaid, without any repetition
or aggravation. And were it not to show how the Ministers of Satan work now, as
of old, against the Lords Witnesses, his name or actions are not worthy the
mentioning; For the memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall ^ot. The wise in heart will receive commandments, but a prating fool
shall fall, faith the Spirit of the Lord, Prove. 10. 7, 8.

The 27. of the 7. month was the Jail-deliver held at Bristol for the City and
County, at which, Goal delivery, 27. day, seventh month, 1655.
according to Law, was expected the trial of all Prisoners, and issue which the
Murderers, Robbers, Thieves, and other Offenders had: but the Witnesses of
Jesus are not thought fit to have the privilege the Law allows, but are kept
in custody without being called till the 10. day of the 8. month, being the
General Sessions of the Peace (so called) at Sessions, 10. d^y 8. month, 1655.
Trial of Prisoners.
which time the Jailer having brought them with his Axe through the streets to
the Hall, where though innocent, they stood and were numbered amongst the
transgressors: And were called as follows.

Benjamin Maynard was the first; to whom was Benjamin Maynards Trial.
read an Information concerning his going to the Steeple-house to John Paul, as
aforesaid; To which he answered, What I have spoken, I will own. The Court
asked him, whether he would be sorry for what he had done? He answered, nay, I
will not be sorry at all for what I have done. Then they read some of Queen
Mary's Law to him, against disturbing the Priests: To which he answered, that
Law did uphold the Popes, and the Bishops, and Popish Priests, all whom I deny;
and said, man commands to do so and so, but the Lord commands to do so and
so; and so contrary to the will of man, I am to obey the Lord. Whereupon they
caused him to be put by.

Then Margaret Thomas was called; to whom Margaret Thomas her Trial.
Robert Aldworth the Town Clerk said, Know you not wherefore you are committed?
She replied, she had been three weeks in Prison, but never brought before them,
or examined, till now. Then he read an Information, which, he said, was upon
Oath, which was to this effect, Her going upon Sunday into Nicholas Church to
Mr. Farmer, and after he had ended his first prayer, her speaking, Woe unto the
Idol Shepherd, that devoureth and scatters my flock, with much more to that
purpose; and asked her, whether she owned those words? She answered, yea, I own
some of the words, as being some of the words that I spoke. Then he asked her,
whether she desired her liberty? She replied, she desired to be at home with
her three Children, to work for them. Then he asked her, whether she would be
sorry for what she had done, and promise to do so no more? She answered, I will
not. He said, she must then go to Prison again. She replied, content. And so
she was caused to be put by.

Next, Temperance Hignell was brought to the Temperanc^ Highnell her Trial.
B^^, whom the Town Clerk asked whether she did know for what she was
committed? She answered, nay, I have no Mittimus to know what I was committed
for. He bad her take heed of lying. She replied, Lying I do deny, for I had no
Mittimus whereby to know for what I was committed. Then he asked her whether
she would be sorry for what she had done? She answered, nay, I am not sorry for
what I have done. Some other questions were asked of small moment, to which she
made answers. Then one of the Court asked her, whether she would promise to do
so no more? She replied, she could not promise that. So they put her by.

John ^mith was the fourth whom the Town-Cle^k John Smyth his Trial.
c^lled Captain Smith, which title he denied. Then he called him John Smith;
That I own, said he. You know wherefore you are brought hither, do you not,
said the Town Clerk? He replied, he was not there to accuse himself, where were
his Accusers? and said further, that by the Law of Mary, which they pretend to
act by he should have been examined within six days after he was committed to
Prison; and the Fact ought to be croved by two sufficient Witnesses, whereby he
had broke the Law: but he had been fourteen days in Prison, and had not been
examined, nor any thing proved against him; and caused a Paper to be delivered
to him, wherein was contained some of their unjust proceedings against him,
contrary to Law, and desired him to read it out, that they might bring their
deeds to the light. But he refused for to read it openly, but looked it over,
and put it up; the substance of which was as follows.

Robert Aldworth, I spoke no word until Ralph ^is Note delivered to Robert
Aldworth to be read in the Court.
Farmer and the Clerk had ended, and therefore transgressed no Law. John
Sandford being asked upon his his oath whether he did lay violent hands on me,
or not, he confessed he did it at the command of Alderman Lock; so it appears
that Alderman Lock (so called) was the Commander, and John Sandford the first
Actor in the Riot; yet I was imprisoned contrary to Law, and they were not.
Read the Statute, made 1. Mary 12. and 1. Elizab. 17. and see the Penalty for
Riots. I was sent to Prison without a Mittimus, although I demanded it, which
was a thing accounted unreasonable amongst the Heathens, to send a Prisoner,
and not withal to signify the Crimes laid against him, Acts 25. last. That
although (them) called Magistrates, saw the Riot, and the rude Multitude follow
me in the street, they sent none to appease the Riot, neither have they
imprisoned the Rioters according to the Law. Read 2. Henr. 5. 8. Now if these
men are sworn to do Justice according to Law, to that of God in thine and their
Consciences, I desire to be made manifest, whether they do act according to
their Oaths? But to this he had no answer.

Then he demanded, what Law he had broken? or what they had against him? It was
answered, he had disturbed Mr. Farmer, and the Congregation. He replied, He
that is called Master, did not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, who commands
his Disciples, not to be called of men Masters; and bid them prove in what he
disturbed them. Then there was an Information read against him to this effect;
That upon the 23. day of September he came into Saint Nicholas Church with his
hat on, at or in the time Mr. Farmer was in his prayer, which disturbed him,
and hindered the Congregation from harkening to the Word of God. He answered,
That which was read against him was false, for Ralph Farmer was not in his
prayer when he came in, for he was preaching. So that lie was shuffled over. So
he bid them prove in what he had disturbed the Congregation. To which was
replied, That to stand with his hat on in the time of prayer, was a
disturbance. He answered, For a man to pray or prophecy with his head covered,
dishonors his head: but I, said he, was silent, and did not speak, and
therefore they could not say I did pray or prophecy: but Ralph Farmer did
preach and pray with his head covered, having a cap on, besides another false
covering, not of the Spirit of the Lord. And said; what he spoke there, he was
moved to speak by the Spirit of the Lord, for the good of the people; and bid
them prove what words they were that he spoke, or wherein he had disturbed
them: but there was nothing proved. Then he asked, if any of the People of God
ever persecuted, or beat, or imprisoned; indeed the Heathen did so. Then it was
said, that he abused Mr. Farmer (as they called him) by some words pretended by
him to have been spoken to Ralph Farmer at John Youngs. Now the said John
Young, who heard the words, was on the Bench, and Priest Knowls and Priest
Farmer were standing by; to whom John Smith said, Here is John Young, let him
speak the truth: but he was silent, and did not answer. John Smith was asked
what the words were? He replied, I asked Farmer whether he was, or did profess
himself a Minister of Christ? He said, he would not answer a Trister. Then he
asked him, whether that was a tristing question? Ralph Farmer pointed to the
Steeple-house, and bid him come there, and he should Yet when he came to the
Steeple-house, how was he used? See the foregoing passages concerning it, and
thereby understand, that what he came to know of Ralph Farmers being a Minister
of the Gospel, was to be beat, dragged, haled, and followed out with Tumults,
and his Garment ^ent by his hearers, and justice not executed by the
Magistrates present, though in their sight the things aforesaid were acted, and
though again and again demanded; but in stead thereof, himself was by them
committed Prisoner, the proper effect of coming to Priest Farmers
Steeple-house, to know whether he be a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
and Ralph-Farmers tongue and hands did presently manifest what information
therein he should receive, as appears by the relation. When the testimony of
the Lord against the Priests comes to the Steeple-house, those who bring it
thither are beat and abused, and say they, Why are we not spoken with at our
houses? when at a house violent hands are laid, the tongue abuses, and
direction is to the Steeple-house, and there beatings, and halings, and tearing
of clothes, and imprisonment, in stead of protection and justice, is the effect.
know; and called him Puppy and Booby, and laid violent hands on him, and
forced him out of John Young 's door, another man's house, into the street; upon
which John Smith said, he ought to be no striker.

Then something was said concerning obeying Magistrates. He answered, he
honored all men in the Lord, and did disrespect no man's person. And further
added, that when he ran into the same excess of riot with men, he was accepted
amongst them; but now he departed from evil, he became a prey, and that he owed
no injury to Farmer, but desired he might repent. Alderman Lock reproved him
for calling the Church a Steeple house, he replied the Church was in in God,
made all of living Stones, elect and precious, Christ Jesus himself being the
Chief Corner Stone, and bid them show him one Living Stone in that
Steeple-house. They asked him whether he desired to be at liberty? He answered,
he desired, not to be in bondage, but to go to his employment; Then they asked
whether he would acknowledge his offense and be sorry for what he had done? All
which he denied, and told them he had broken no Law, and suffering for Christ
sake, he was happy: and that for his Conscience he suffered. Nevertheless,
though no breach of any one Law, either of God, or the Nation was proved
against him: yet they sent him back to Newgate Prison, where they keep him from
his employment, which should maintain his family.

Then William Foord was called, being out of Prison William Foord his Trial.
upon sureties, to whom the Town-Clark spoke concerning his being bound to the
good behavior; which he denied: Wherefore are you here then, said the
Town-Clark? He answered, he Came there to Clear those of their bonds who had
bound themselves, unknown unto him; for his appearance, upon which they
searched their Papers, and were silent; Afterward the Town-Clark asked him for
what he was examined at the Tolsey, and imprisoned? He asked whether they had
it not upon R^cord? then they called for Richard Goodwin, supposing he had been
the man that prosecuted against him: But that not serving their turn; they
seeing Thomas Hayter; they asked him: He told them it was for keeping a
stranger at work? Then the Town-Clark asked William Foord where the Stranger
was? He answered, He knew not: when saw you him, said the Town Clark? He
replied he had not seen him a great while, the Town-Clark asked Thomas Hayter,
whether he knew where he was? He answered he knew not; but thought he was out
of Town, Then the Town-Clark asked him whether he was sorry for what he had
done? He answered, he had committed no evil, therefore he had no cause of
sorrow, nor had he broken any Law: which being urged again and again, and he
still refusing, they Commanded the Keeper of Newgate to to take him away.

And lastly, Christopher Birkhead was brought before them from Bridewell, where
he had been a Prisoner five weeks and three days for standing silent in the
Steeple-house, till the Priest required him to speak, as aforesaid; To whom he
said, I stand in obedience to the Righteous Law of God in my Conscience, I have
neither offended the Law of God, nor the Nation, whereupon Alderman Joseph
Jackson stood up in fury, and asked him whether he would contemn the Court? He
answered: He contemned not those who judged Righteously; Then Robert Aldworth
asked him whether he was sorry for disturbing the Congregation at Nicholas? He
answered, He disturbed no man; where was his accusers? Robert Aldworth replied,
that must come after: Joseph Jackson said, take him away until he find
sureties for his good behavior: So they put him from the bar: But
Christopher stood up again, and said, first prove me to be of evil behavior,
but he heard them make no answer: and so he was put by without any examination
of the cause of his imprisonment, or what he had done: Neither was an accuser
brought against him, though he had been so long in prison: as they were
swearing the Jury, he was moved of the Lord to speak to them and said: All
these that swear are out of the Doctrine of Christ; to which they hearkened
not, but returned Christopher with the other five aforementioned, to Newgate
Prison, with the transgressors amongst whom they were caused to stand^, and
were numbered, though four of them have families which depended upon their
liberty for maintenance, as is well known to these Rulers, who care not how
they oppress a man and his house, and take the Parents from their Children,
and husbands from their Wives, and Wives from their Husbands, and Masters from
their families, not fearing the Lord, who has said, Against such he has
devised an evil out of which they shall not remove their necks, nor go
haughtily, for the time is evil; and that he will come near to Judgment, and
be a swift witness against such. And with them they also returned to prison,
and continue there Richard Jones, who has always Richard Jones
been faithful to the Parliament, and in their service has often stoutly
adventured his life, lost his estate, and several times been a Prisoner twice
in this City, whom they committed the 28. day of the 6. month, and kept in
durance from his family, which depended upon him for maintenance for some evil
words which he had spoken, above a year since, Concerning George Hellier then
Major, in the time of his Ignorance, and Heathenish nature, wherein (as he
Confessed, and spoke in the Court) he ran with the world, into the same excess
of riot, into evil words, wicked ways and customs of the world; which after
his Conversion, and becoming obedient to the truth: were remembered against him,
though spoken by him so long before, and he punished as aforesaid, beyond the
directions of any known Law in that particular: Now all evil speaking is
denied, by the Children of the light, and by him also, as he said to the Court
in these words, since the day has appeared of my Convincement and Coversion,
the grace of God that has appeared to all men, teaching the Saints to deny all
ungodlyness and worldly lusts, the same grace has appeared unto me, and does
teach me to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and
righteously in this present evil wo^ld.

But as to all the tumults, riots, insurrections, violences, outrages,
beatings, injuries and abuses, aforementioned, raised, acted, and committed
upon the Innocent servants of the Lord, the witnesses of Jesus, no enquiry, and
proceedings according to Law, were had, either at this Sessions, or at the Gaol
delivery, or at the Sessions 19. day of the Eleventh month 16, 4. nor at any
other time, except as before expressed; Nor any one offender therein questioned
and proceeded with according to Law, to this day, though of so unheard of, and
unsufferable a nature, and so contrary to Law Justice, Order, Government,
Humility, and the Scriptures of Truth.

On the fifth day of the ninth month, five of the Prisoners aforesaid, viz. John
Smith, Richard Jones, Christopher Birkhead (who had been there sick, about a
fortnight) Margaret Thomas, and William Foord (who also had been sick) were
turned out of Prison, upon two becoming bail unknown to them, or any of their
friends, for their appearance only, at the next General Sessions, of which
they having information, after they had notice from the Keepers servants, that
they might go forth, protested against their being freed on that account, and
also for clearing their Consciences, and that the truth might not suffer, wrote
to one of them, advising him to take up their Bond least they should bring
themselves into trouble, and to let them stand to their own Master, who would
deliver them, for that in the will of God they stood, and not in their own, or
in their own time, and did not know whether the Lord might carry them to bear
witness to his name before the time came, and moreover that they did not accept
of deliverance at all, by any such means who were innocent and did suffer for
the truth of God, according to their measures, Notwithstanding they put them
forth: And Temperance Hignell, who was knocked down to the ground to the
astonishment of her senses, and afterward sorely beat and bruised, and her
blood drawn, and some of her Clothes torn off her back in the Steeple-house
for speaking to Jacob Brint Priest of Temple, after all was ended, as
aforesaid, and after in the street by the rude multitude, by whom she saw her
life was in danger, having not been well in her body, from that very time that
she was so beaten, and misused, was carried out of the Prison in a basket very
dangerously sick, of which in Temperance Hignells death three days after she
was carried dangerously sick out of Prison.
three days after she dyed, (being turned out with the rest upon the Bail
aforesaid) leaving her blood for the testimony of Jesus on the heads of her
Persecuters, who thirsted so much after hers, and her fellow witnesses of the
Truth: For whom to be thus beaten by the Tumult was not punishment enough, in
the eyes of these Magistrates, though she informed them thereof, but to prison
they send, and continue her notwithstanding that she had broken no Law; of
which they have her life in issue, and her bones being laid in the same
Steeple-house yard, where her body was bruised, and her blood drawn: Instead of
calling to account, and punishing according to Law, those by whom she thus
suffered, not one of whom has been questioned and punished as the Law requires
to this day. But Benjamin Maynard, against whom only of the seven (as is said)
Judgment was given at the Sessions, as an offender of Mary's Act, is still
continued a Prisoner.

Thus are we the People of the Lord trampled underfoot, persecuted as a thing
of naught; Thus are the Liberties of those who have stood for the Liberties of
their Country, and have kept close to the Public, slighted and violated;
Thus are the Innocent and Peaceable whose principles lead out of transgression,
and from that which is the occasion of the Magistrates sword, tumulted,
imprisoned and abused, when transgressors are let go unpunished; Thus is
Judgment turned into gall and wormwood, and the fruit of righteousness into
Hemlock, so that Justice stands afar off, Truth is fallen in the streets, and
Equity cannot enter; By a generation of men who have always been enemies to
Reformation, and to the life and power of Godliness, as it has been witnessed
in its several days; who have endeavored what in them lay, the destruction
of the Liberties of their Country, and of those whom they persecute for owning
the same; who have and do strengthen the hands of evil doers, and are wrath
and fury to those who do well, who cause Injustice to run down as a stream,
and unrighteousness as a mighty water; and neither regard the Law, or their
oaths, And yet nevertheless are called and call themselves Christians, and
require that honor which God never gave to any in authority, Of whose
Malignancy, misgovernement and other qualifications, a particular account could
now be given, were it the intent of this discourse, in which nothing of
reflection has been intended or used, but where their own injustice has given
necessary occasion, and therein but a little of what might be mentioned, though
it they may expect, if they administer further necessity, That so all people
may know as well, what are the men under whose lusts and wills these people do
suffer, as their sufferings, and the manner of them: And to these things these
men have been and are encouraged, because they suppose the people, whom they
oppress in so high a manner are bound up in their Consciences, from
prosecuting their remedy in the Law, and have experienced them quietly to abide
under their Cruelties and injustice, till themselves, being weary of oppressing
them, have caused their release, otherwise its not unlikely, especially being
innocent, but they had passed untoucht, as have several, who have taken the
boldness to ruffle it with them, and whose resolutions to try it out, they have
well understood; of whom particular instances could be given, it being well
known how little Courage they have to deal with such, though in the discharge
of their oaths and duty, and how fearful to engage where they know men will
not receive wrong at their hands, especially in such cases as these, whereby
they are so obnoxious to the penalties of the Laws; And amongst those who
indeed have the spirit of men in them, to injure and oppress, because they
think those, whom they so cause to suffer, will not return again; nothing is
accounted more base and unworthy, being that of which the nature, even of many
brute beast, is not guilty; But much more is it in Magistrates, whose
Judgments should be the Lords, not their own; and who ought to execute Justice
without respect of persons, according to the Law and not otherwise: and indeed
were there no such thing as Law, for the rule of those in power, but all things
Arbitrary; had Law and Liberty been never the subjects of Contest by the sword;
had Liberty, and Law fallen in the Contest, or been necessitated to terms of
composition, or been betrayed therein by the treachery of their opposites; it
had been a great mitigation to the outward sense of these peoples sufferings,
and reasonable matter of bearing and silence; But now that of late Liberty and
the Fundamental Laws have been, not only in deep and perilous contests by
the sword, but have through the presence of the Lord, been thoroughly
vindi^ated, and the enemies thereof destroyed and totally subdued, and the
Captain General of their forces possessed of all power Military and Civil,
and the constitution of the present Government protecting such as profess
faith in God by Jesus Christ; in the profession of the faith, and exercise of
their Religion, from which it says it shall not be restrained, except in the
cases of Popery and Prelacy, and such as under the profession of Christ hold
forth and practice Licentiousness, for those who have borne the heat of the
day, the misery of war, the hazard of their lives in the field and other where,
for and with the Publicque interest aforesaid, to which they have been firmly
faithful, active and unmovable, throughout all changes, and particularly
against these very men, who have sought to destroy See the Act of Parliament
dated the 8 of October. 1655. and O. P. his Proclamation 21. Sept. 1655.
prohibiting delinqu^nts to bear office, or to have voice, or vote in Election
of any public officer.
it, and them and all friends thereof, and who ought neither to be in Office,
nor to choose any one into Office; to be trodden under foot, scorned and
persecuted by such generation in the violation of Law, Liberty and Justice, and
Government, as has been demonstrated, as the issue of all these wars and
blood: Let the impartial judge whether (all things considered) there were ever
such high sufferings and intolerable oppressions, and whether the case of
these people be not their own, for what is done Arbitrarily to the violation of
one man's Liberty, is done unto all? Though as to their inward man, they are
still quiet in the will of God in this hour of his Patience, Rejoicing that
they are counted worthy to suffer any thing for the sake of Christ: And knowing
that thorough great tribulation they must enter into the Kingdom of God. And
these things are rehearsed for no other end, than the manifesting of Deceit,
and declaring of the manifold, unjust and cruel persecutions of the Innocent,
for the Testimony of Jesus in that City.

Hearken unto me ye stout hearted that are far from Righteousness, I will
bring near my Righteousness, it shall not be far of, and my salvation shall
not tarry, And I will place Salvation in Sion, for Israel my Glory. Isa. 46.
12, 13. That which is seen in thee (O Bristoll) upon the Earth, out of which
grows the Briars, and Thorns; which is covered with darkness, which is Foggy,
whose trees scarce bear leaves, whose Winter is appeared, and come, who is
Judged, not with the hearing of the ea^, nor with the seeing of the eye, whose
tree scarce bears its own seed, on whom the rod must come, and whose trees must
be broken down, and bundled up for the fire, and gathered up of the Earth,
before it be dressed, and it be brought into order, who are as dry trees, when
the Sap is in the root, husky, and bald, which the wind clutters together,
which blows up many by the root, The Lord is hedging up together, and bringing
the wilderness into a narrow place, and plucking it up, and making it fit for
himself, and burn up the wood with fire. The night is gone, the day is come,
rejoice ye Children, that be at work, whilst it is day, labor, for with fire,
and Judgment will the Lord rule, which cleanses away the dark air, which fire
take away the venom, as the fire through the Wilderness goes: Read, and
Consider, Ye, whose eyes are open, for the Lord is dressing the earth, and his
husbandmen are at labor, who reign above briars, and dry trees, That crawle
one among another, but many dead briars, and wood lies upon the ground, that
bears not fruit to men, much less to the Lord, which must be plucked up, and
burnt, that the earth may be clean, that it may come to enjoy her Sabbath, it
has layne long undrest, and rough, and thorny, and briary, and that which
cumbreth it, has reigned, but now the Lord of the Harvest, and Vineyard, is
risen to cleanse, that which plowes up, is enterd, and turns over, goes on,
and overthrowes, that the ground may be fit for the seed, He that has an ear
to hear, let him hear, the Lord is hedging up that, wherein lodges the
darkness, the briars, and thorns, and coverings, and shutting it up, and
bringing to the unquenchable fire, and making the earth fit for his seed, who
will gather it into his garner. Thus briars, and Thorns, and Trees stand in
battle against the Lord, whose fire is coming upon them.

The End.

