JESUS CHRIST, The same to day, as yesterday, in Life and Power, in Afflictions
and Sufferings: And the Seed of the Serpent the same now, as ever, in Darkness
and Emnity; in Rage and Persecution. BEING For Removal of the stumbling Block
out of the way of the Simple, concerning the Testimony now given against the
Priests, and their Worships, (viz.) Cannot you let them alone, why do ye
disturb them, and their Assemblies? go unto their houses, or to some private
place, and speak to them there; Cannot you give the same Liberty to others,
which you would have your selves? WHEREIN Is manifested, that what Estimation,
and Enterrainment the Witness of Jesus receives at this day from the men of
the World, is the same, as it has always been from the Beginning. GIVEN FORTH
For the sake of the honest-hearted, and in Witness of the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, every where spoken against, scorned, and persecuted; under the
Reproachful Name of Quaking. GEORGE BISHOP --

But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born
after the Spirit, even so it is now, Gal. 4. 29. And shall say, Cast ye up,
cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling Block out of the way of my
People, Isa. 57. 14. For ye Brethren became followers of the Churches of God,
which in Judea are in Christ Jesus; for ye also have suffered like things of
your own Contrymen, even as they have of the Jews, who both killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they please not God,
and are contrary to all men: Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they
might be saved, to fill up their sins always, for the wrath is come upon them to
the uttermost, 1 These. 2. 14. 15, 16. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the
Black-spread Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1655.

JESUS CHRIST, The same to day, as yesterday, in Life, and Power, in
afflictions and sufferings; And the Seed of the Serpent the same now, as ever,
in Darkness and Enmity, in Rage and Persecution.
Whereas it is said concerning the Testimony now born against the Priests,
Cannot you let them alone, and their Worships? why do ye disturb them, and
their Assemblies? go unto their houses, or to some private place, and speak to
them there: Cannot you give the same Liberty to others, which you have your
selves?

We say: Our Own, and the Will, and Wisdom, and time of Man, which says, We
will go here, and there, and do, and forbear this, and that, we deny: Did that
Spirit rule, it would say, Be it far from thee, Let these Priests, and their
Assemblies alone; none of those Beatings, Tumults, Reproaches, Imprisonments,
taking from Families, and Relations, and from ways of maintenance, whippings,
drawings of thy blood, and hazards of thy life shall be unto thee.

And we deny the making of disturbance on our Part, and the Principle from
whence it proceeds, unless the speaking of the Word of the Lord be a
disturbance, as it was always accounted even the troubling of Israel; For our
Backs are turned to the Smiters, and our Cheeks to the Nippers, and the
Pullers off the Hair, and to him that strikes on one Cheek, the other is
turned; neither do we resist Evil with Evil: For, the Principle of Light
which we witness, in measure, leads us out of wars, strife, envy, debates,
or doing Evil to any, or rendering Evil for Evil; but being cursed, to bless;
being persecuted, to pray, that their sins may be forgiven; and is desisirous
that none should perish, but that all might come to the knowledge of the Truth;
and Vengeance we leave to the Lord, whose it is, and who will repay it.

Nor do we deny the same liberty to others, which we ought to have; For
whatsoever we would that men should do unto us, the same we do unto them,
according to the Royal Law; and for this purpose do we meet together, and wait
upon the Lord our Teacher, to receive his Word and Testimony, whether for
Instruction, or Reproof; and, in our measures, we know his Voice from a
Strangers, and can try the spirits: and even those who oppose themselves have,
and may come into our Assemblies freely, and speak, whom we judge in the spirit
of Christ Jesus, who is the Spiritual man that judges all things, and yet he
himself is judged of no man, whose Weapons we make use of, which are spiritual;
not in the flesh, or the spirit of this World, or with the weapons thereof,
such as are Beatings, Strikings, Tumults, Imprisonments, shedding of blood,
calling to, and before Magistrates, and such like; Though out of our Meetings,
have some of our Friends have drawn and imprisoned, and others have been
disturbed and abused.

And this we further Declare, That what is fallen upon this Generation, and is
set before their Eyes, and testified against them, is no new thing, but what
has been witnessed throughout all Generations, and of which the Scriptures
bear Record: For, since Adam fell into the Transgression, to this very day, God
has not left himself without a Witness; but in all times, by Him who is the
Rock of Ages, has he testified against the sinful and Adulterous Generation,
and the worships and ways thereof; Against the Sacrifice of Cain, by Abel;
Against the Old World, by Enoch and Noah; Against Sodom, by Lot; Against the
People of that time, by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Against Egypt, by Moses;
Against all the Nations, by the Nation of the Jews, who had the Law and the
Testimony; Against the Idolatrous Worships and wickedness of the Kings,
Princes, Priests, Prophets, and People of the Jews, by his servants the
Prophets, whom he caused to rise up early, and sending them, who testified even
to their faces in the time of their Idolatrous Worships and Sacrifices: When
the Word was made flesh, he cleansed the Temple, scourged out thereof the sheep
and the Oxen, poured out the Changers money, overthrew the Tables, said unto
those who sold Doves, Take ye these things hence, make not my Fathers house a
place of Merchandise; And in the Temple he disputed and reasoned with the
Doctors, and testified against the Traditions and Customs of the Scribes and
Pharisees, the painted Sepulchers, the Graves that appeared not; Against them
that held up the Figure, when Christ the substance thereof was come, by the
Disciples and Apostles, who having received Power from on high, witnessed Jesus
who was dead, and rose again, and ascended to be the Lord of Glory, and that
there was Salvation in no other; and against the Temple, and the services
thereof, did they testify, even in the Temple, and the Synagogues, in the time
of their Worships, and also against the Idol-Gods, and Vanities of the
Heathens; And since the Apostles times, to this day, throughout all the
Apostasy has he witnessed by some, or other, to this or that Branch of
Righteousness, against the seduced World, and Antichrists.

Now as the Spirit of God, in all Ages, carried forth his servants to testify
for him who is the Rock of Ages, against the world, and ways, and worships,
and Customs thereof: And as the Prophets spoke the Word of the Lord against
the Altars, and their Priests, and Prophets, in the presence of the Kings, and
Princes, and People, in the time of their Sacrifices; And as the unchangable
Priest in the Apostles, and Disciples, witnessed against the Changeable
Priesthood, the whole body of the Jewish Services, and Worships, in the Temple,
and the Synagogues, in the times thereof; And as during the Apostasy, the like
Witness has been born by some, or other, to this day: So now, the true
Ministry and Teacher being come to be witnessed, and the worship which is in
Spirit and Life, and the Witness of God raised from the Dead in Thousands,
after these many Hundred years of Apostasy; It carries forth in the Power, and
at the Command of the Lord many of his Sons and Daughters in whom it is born
up, to bear Witness against the false Ministry, Priests, and Worships, even in
the times thereof, and to the faces of the Priests, and in the presence of the
Rulers: And woe be unto them, if (upon any consultings with flesh and blood,)
they therein disobey the Commandment of the Lord. For the Amos 3. 8.
Lion has roared, who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but
prophecy? God has given the Psalm. 68. 11.
word, and great are the Company of them that publish it: He that can receive
it, let him receive it.

Should not Exodus 5. 4.
Moses have gone in to Pharaoh, when the Lord commanded him; and say, Thus
says the Lord God of Israel, Let my People go that they may hold a Feast to me
in the Wilderness?

Should not the 1 King. 13. 12, etc.
Man of God that came from Judah to prophecy against the Altar of Bethel, have
cried out against the Altar in the Word of the Lord, and have said, O Altar,
Altar, thus says the Lord, Behold, a Child shall be born unto the house of
David, Josiah by name, and upon thee shall he offer the Priests of the High
Places that burn Incense upon thee, and men's bones shall he burn upon thee;
because King Jeroboam stood by it to offer Incense, and because it was in the
time of the Sacrifices, which were offered by his Command, and the Princes, and
People, and Priests thereof were present: Should he have gone privately to the
Court with Cap and Knee? and have spoken gently to the Priests, and by a many
of May it please your Majesty, and other flattering Titles, have whispered the
King in the Ear, or the Priests; or applied to some Courtiers, so to do;
instead of coming so boldly to disturb their Worships, to affront the King, and
his Princes, to their faces, and to weaken the hands of the people, in telling
them they should be brought under the Power of the King of Judah their Enemy,
by his Sword, who should offer men's bones, and the bones of the Priests, upon
the Altar, as such a thing would be now accounted? Should he have gone to
Jeroboams house to have refreshed himself, and to have a reward, at the desire
of the King, after he had prayed, and the Lord had restored to him his Arm
which was withered, when he had stretched it forth against the Prophet, and
said, Lay hold on him: was he not neither to eat bread, nor drink ter in the
place, nor to return by the way he came?

Should not the Prophet 1 King. 18. 1, etc.
Elijah have gone at the Word of the Lord, and have shown himself to Ahab, who
had cut off the Prophets of the Lord, so that he only remained; and by reason
of the great dealth, for want of Rain, had sent to all Nations to seek him; and
where he was not found, took an Oath of that Kingdom and Nation, that they
found him not? And when Ahab said to him, Art thou he that troubles Israel?
Should he not have answered the King; I have not troubled Israel, but thou, and
thy Fathers house, for that ye have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and
thou have served Baalim. Now, therefore, send and gather unto me all Israel
unto Mount Carmel, and the Prophets of Baal 450, and the Prophets of the Grove
400, which eat at Jezabels Table; And being there gathered together, should he
not then have said to them all; How long halt ye between two Opinions? If the
Lord be God, follow him; and if Baal then follow him, put on the Bullock on the
Altar, and let the God which answers by Fire, be God. Should not the Prophets
of the Lord, during the times of the Kings of Israel, and Judah, have spoken
the Word of the Lord to them, and to the false Prophets, and Priests, and
People, against their Idolatries, and wickednesses, though it was to the
cutting of them off, both Kings, Princes, Priests, Prophets, and People,
whether they would hear, or whether they would forbear: Him that dies 1 King.
21. 24.
of Ahab in the City the Dogs shall eat; or he that dies in the Field the
Fowls of the Air shall eat, etc.

Should not Jer. 36. 28.
Jeremiah have wrote another Roll like to the former, which Jehudi in the
presence of the Princes and King had cut with a Penknife, and thrown in the
fire? Should he have been Jer. 1. 17, 18.
afraid of their faces? had he not then been confounded before them? was he not
made a defenced City, an Iron Pillar, and Brazen Walls against the Kings,
Princes, Priests, and People?

Should not Amos 7. 10. to the end.
Amos (the Gatherer of Sycamore Fruit) have prophesied again at Bethel, because
Amaziah the Priest of Bethel, sent to Jeroboam, King of Israel, saying, Amos
has conspired against thee, in the midst of the house of Israel, the Land is
not able to bear all his words; for Amos says, Jeroboam shall die by the
sword, and Israel shall surely be led away Captive out of their own Land; and
said, O thou Seer, flee thee away into the Land of Judah, and there eat bread
and prophecy there; but prophecy not at Bethel: for it is the Kings Chapel,
it is the Kings Court.

Should not Mat. 3. 7.
John have said to the Pharisees, and Saducers, Ye Generation of Vipers who
has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come? Should not John 2. 14 15.
Christ Jesus in the days of his flesh have cleansed the Temple, and have
testified against the worship that was not John 4. 23. 24.
in spirit, against the Doctors, Lawyers, Scribes, and Pharisees, who were the
highest Professors, and outwardly most religiously strict of any in their time?
Should not the Apostles and Disciples have gone into the Act. 3. 1. to the end,
5. 19. 20, 21.
Temple and into the Synagognes, every Sabbath day as their 10. 17. 14. 18. 4.
19. 26. 19. 8. Acts. 5. 29, 30, 31. Act. 5. 19, 20. 21.
manner was, and there have testified against the Outward observation of the
Law of Moses, through the Resurrection o Act. 9. 20. 13. 5. 14, 15. 14. 1. 17.
12.
of Jesus Christ from the dead, whom they had with wicked hands slew and hung
upon a Tree; and whom the Lord bad highly exalted, and made Lord and King: and
were not the Prison doors opened by the Angel, and they bad him to go and
speak in the Temple all the words of this life? Should not Stephen, even before
the Council, have Act. 6. 12. 13. 14. 7. 48, 49. 50.
said to the high Priest, and Pharisees, and People, and testified, The most
High dwells not in Temples made with hands; Ye stiffenecked, and
uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your
Fathers did, so do ye: which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted,
and they have slain them that showed before of the coming of the Just One, of
whom ye have been the Betrayers, and Murderers, though they had a law that
whosoever made himself the Son of God, he should die? Should not Paul have gone
into the Acts. 19. 16. 17. 16. to the end, 17. 17.
Schools, and on Mars-Hill, and in the Market place, and have disputed against
the Idol Gods? Should not the Martyrs have testified against the Priests, and
Idolatrous Mass in the times thereof, though they knew therefore they should
be murdered with Torments? Should not the Superstitious and Formal worships
in this and their later generations have been witnessed against, though guarded
by laws, and fortified with the powers of these Nations? Was not the Dread of
the Lord upon his witnesses aforementioned, and necessity laid upon them so to
do? Consulted they with any other Oracle? Had not woe been to them, should they
have been disobedient? Are these things new, are these things strange? Again,
were not the witnesses of God in their Generations accounted of as scornfully
and basely as they are at this day, and the Word of the Lord, which they spoke
contemned and slighted as it is now? received they any other, or better
entertainment of the Generations, to whom they spoke, and against whom they
testified, from the beginning? Mind and consider.

He that lived in the days of Genesis 4. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Abel might have seen Cain hating his Brother Abel, because his Sacrifice was
accepted: And though God witnessed it to Cain, and testified of Abels Gifts,
and reasoned with him: If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted. if thou
do evil sin lies at the door; Yet, he lifted up his hand and slew him. He
that lived in the days of Genesis 6. 7. chap. 2 Pet. 2. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 19. 20.
Noah might have seen how that world slighted his preaching, and how ridiculous
was his prophesying of a Flood accounted, and the making of an Ark to swim upon
the dry Land? Those who lived in the days of Lot might have heard the men of
Sodom say, This Genesis 19. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Fellow came in to Sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge, when he said to them;
Nay, my Brethren do not so wickedly, upon their calling on him to bring out the
strangers that they might know them, and how he seemed to his Sons in Law, as
one that Genesis 19. 14.
mocked, when he told them, The Lord would destroy that City. Exodus 5. 2.
Pharaoh said unto Moses, who is the Lord that I should obey his Voice, to let
Israel go, I know not the Lord, nor will I let Israel go; Ye are Idle, ye are
Idle, wherefore do ye Moses and Aaron let the People from their works? get you
unto your burdens. Did not 1 King. 13. 4, 5, 6.
Jeroboam stretch forth his hand, and say, Lay hold on him, by the Man of God
that prophesied against the Altar, and though his Arm was restored, and the
sign came presently to pass which he gave: to wit, the Altar rent and the
ashes poured out, as the Man of God said? and at his prayer, did he, or Israel
believe the Word or the Lord, spoken by him, to turn from their evil ways,
that the Judgments threatened might not befall them? Did 1 King. 18.
Ahab forsake Baal, or the people his worship, though he 24.
could not answer by fire, and though they 29.
said, it was well said, That the God that answered by fire should be God; And
40.
slew all the Prophets of Baal, because the Lord whom Elijah prayed to,
answered by fire, and though afterward at his prayer, they that day had 45.
abundance of Rain, which for Jam. 5. 17. 18.
three years and six months before was shut up; Was not Elijah the very next 1
King. 19. 2 3.
day constrained to fly for his life? 1 King. 21. 25.
was there any like Ahab who sold himself to commit Iniquity, though the Hand
of the Lord appeared more in his days, then any of his Successors against
Syria, and in mighty wonders, through his word by his Prophets? Said not 1
King. 22.
Ahab of Micajah, This man prophesies no good of me but evil. Thus says the
King take Micajah, and carry him back to Hamon the Governor of the City, and
to Joash the Kings Son, and say, thus 26, 27.
says the King, put this Fellow into the Prison, and feed him with Bread of
Affliction, and with water of Affliction until I come in Peace; And, 24.
which way came the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee, said Zedekiah
the False Prophet, the same time, when he smote Micajah on the face. What made
this 2 King. 9. 11.
mad fellow with thee, said the Captains of the Host, to Jehu, by the Prophet,
when he came and anointed him from the Lord to be King of Israel? Fared it any
better with the rest of the Prophets, whom the Lord 2 Chro. 36. 15. 16. Jer. 7.
25. -- 25. 24. -- 35. 15. -- 26. 5. -- 29. 19. -- 32. 33. -- 44. 4.
rising Early sent unto them; saying, O do not the Jer. 44. 4.
Abominable thing that I hate, was the Burden of the Word of the Lord, any
otherwise esteemed? said they not unto the Amos. 2. 11,
Prophets prophesy not, and gave they not wine to the Nazarites to Drink?
Answered not all the Jer. 43. 2.
Proud men, thou speak falsely, as for the Word of the Jer. 44. 16, 17, 18,
19.
Lord that thou have spoken, in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken
thereunto, but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own
mouth? Who has believed our Isa. 53. 1.
Report, and to whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed Isa. 65. 2. Romans
10. 21.
? But to Israel he says all the day long have I stretched forth my hands to a
Gainsaying, and a Rebellious People; Then I said I have Isa. 49. 4.
Labored in Vain, I have spent my strength for naught, I heard the Jer. 20. 10.
defamings of many, fear on every side, Report, say they, and we will report
it; all my Familiars watched for my haltings saying, peradventure he will be
enticed, and we shall, prevail against him, and we shall take our Revenge on
him. How were they x mocked by every one, and despised, and the Jer. 6. 10: 20.
7. 8.
Word of the Lord made a reproach unto them, Isa. 8. 18.
and a derision daily and for signs and wonders? Then I said I will not Jer.
20. 9.
make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name, but his Word was in my
heart, as burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing,
and I could not stay. How was Isa. 20. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Isaiah brought forth walking three years naked, and barefoot? And Jer: 13. 4,
5, 9, 7.
Jeremiah hiding a Girdle in the bank of Euprates till it ir was marred; And
carrying Jer. 25. 51. to the 30.
a Cup to all the Nations to drink, that they might drink and be drunken, and
be moved, and be mad, and spue, and fall, and rise no more? And Ezekiel. 4. 1, 2,
3.
Ezekiel pourtraying Jerusalem on a Tilestone, laying siedge against it,
casting up Mounts and raising battring Rams, and setting an Iron Pan between
him and the City: Ezekiel. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Digging through a wall in the middle of the day, and bringing out thereof his
stuff in the sight of his People; Ezekiel. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Cutting off his hair from his head, and beard, and weighing it in a Balance
openly, and casting one third thereof into the Air, and another third burning
with fire; And cutting another third in pieces with his Knife Ezekiel. 4, 5.
Lying 390. days on his left side, and Ezekiel. 4. 6.
40. days on his 9. 10, 11, 12, 15.
Right side, and during the times aforesaid, eating his Bread mingled with
Beasts dung by weight, and drinking his water by measure? How ridiculous were
these things in the Eyes of those Generations, and how were they accounted as
the Actions of Jer. 29. 24, 25, 26.
Madmen: How did they cast them into Prisons, and Dungeons, and the Stocks, as
Madmen, and how were some of them put to death? And 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16, 17,
18.
the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up
betimes, and sending them, because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place; but they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, and there was no remedy.

Was not John the Mat. 11. 11
greatest of Prophets, who came in the Luke 1. 17. Matthew. 11. 14.
Spirit and Power of Elias, turning the hearts of the Fathers unto the
Children, Mat. 3. 2, 3.
crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
strait: The Messenger that went before his face, preaching, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; the Mat. 3. 10.
Ax is laid to the Root of the Tree. Every Tree that brings not forth good
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire; called Luke 7. 33.
a Devil, though he came neither eating, and drinking but in a Garment of
Camels Hair, tied about with a Leathern Girdle: was he not cast into prison,
and Mat. 14. 3, 10.
beheaded?

When the Son of God, of whom all the Luke 1. 70. 24. 27. Act. 3. 18, 21.
Prophets spoke, came himself: was he otherwise accounted of? was he otherwise
entreated by those who cried out against their Fathers, for persecuting and
killing the Prophets, whose Tombs they built, and whose Sepulchers they
garnished: was he John 1. 26. 9. 29. 1 Cor. 2. 6, 8. Act. 13. 27.
known by his flesh to that Generation? Phil. 2. 7.
made he not himself of no Reputation? was not his ( x) Visage more marred then
any man's, of no Isa. 53. 2, 3.
Comeliness and Beauty, whereby he should Isa. 52. 14.
be desired? Was he not a Isa. 53. 3.
man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, esteemed as Isa. 53. 4.
stricken, and smitten of God, and afflicted, despised, and rejected of men;
and were not their faces as it were hid from him? Was he not Isa. 53. 7.
afflicted and oppressed, John 8. 49. 10. 39. Luke 4. 28, 29, 30.
tumulted and stoned, blind-folded Luke 22. 64.
and buffetted, smote on the Cheek, and Mat. 27. 30.
spit upon, Mat. 27. 29.
crowned with Thorns, Mark 15. 15
and scourged, Luke 23. 35.
derided, Mark 15. 29
rayled on, and Mat. 27. 39.
and reviled, and Luke 18. 32.
spightfully entreated and mocked, on the Cross, Mat. 27. 41.
by the chief Priests, and a Murderer Luke 23. 11
desired before him, Luke 23. 18, 19, 24, 25.
and in his Act. 8. 33.
Humiliation, was not his Judgment taken away, Esa. 53. 12.
numbered amongst Transgressors, and put to death, and his Esa. 53. 9.
Grave made with the Wicked? Was he not called a Mat. 11. 19.
man Gluttonous, and a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, Joh. 5.
18. Luke 6. 4. to the 12.
a Breaker of the Sabbath, and of the Law of Moses, and of the Mat. 15. 2. 3
Traditions of the Elders, ( w) a Madman, one Mark 3. 21.
besides himself, a Joh. 8. 48.
Samaritan, a Mark 3. 23.
Devil; yea the Mat. 9. 34.
Prince of Devils; yea, and a Mat. 26. 65, 66.
Blasphemer, and put to Death as such a One, though he Joh. 7. 40.
spoke, as never man spoke, with Mat. 7. 29.
Authority, and not as the Scribes, though none John 8. 46.
could convince him of sin, Isa. 53. 9.
neither was any deceit found in his mouth; And though mighty Act. 2. 22.
Signs and Wonders were done by him? For a John. 10. 33.
good work we stone thee not, but for Blasphemy, that thou being a man make
thy self the Son of God. We have Luke 23. 2.
found this Fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding Tribute to be given to
Caesar, saying, that himself is Christ, a King. We have a Joh. 19. 7.
Law, that whosoever says he is the Son of God shall die. Ye have heard his
Matthew. 26 64, 65 66. Mark 15. 61, 62, 63, 64.
Blasphemy, what think ye? And they all cried out, He is worthy of death. When
he said he was the Son of God, upon the High Priests adjuring him to tell him,
Whether he was Christ the Son of the Blessed? And he said, I am; and ye shall
see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds
of Heaven. And was not the Portion of the Apostles and Disciples, who witnessed
him, even Jesus risen from the Dead, the same? were they not Act. 22. 19.
beaten and Act. 21. 30.
haled out of the Synagogues, Act. 8. 3.
and out of every house, both men and women, Act. 16. 20, 22, 35, 36, 38.
brought before Magistrates, commanded to depart the Mat. 8. 24. Act. 16. 39.
Country, cast into Act. 5. 18.
the common prisons, and into the Act. 16. 24.
Stocks, Act. 17. 32.
mocked and scorned, Act. 22. 25. 5. 40. 16. 22, 23, 37.
scourged and ( x) stoned, and Act. 14. 5.
despightfully used: were not Act. 14. 5. 17. 5, 6, 7.
Tumults made upon them, and Uproars, and Act. 7. 58, 59. 5. 19.
houses assaulted to bring them out to the People? were they not Romans 8. 36.
killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter, and slain
with the sword? Were they not set forth as 1 Cor. 4. 9. 13.
spectacles to Men and Angels? accounted as the off-scowring of all things, and
the filth of the World, 1 Cor. 6. 8. Mar. 27. 63.
as Deceivers, Act. 24. 5.
Movers of Sedition, Act. 24. 5. 16. 20, 21.
turbulent and pestilent fellows, Madmen, Act. 17. 6.
turners of the World up-side down, Act. 16. 20.
Disturbers of the Peace, Act. 16. 11, 13.
Blasphemers of the Law, and of Moses, and of the Holy Place: This Fellow Act.
18. 13.
persuades men to worship God contrary to the Law; Act. 17. 7.
Enemies to Caesar, Act. 21. 28, 29, 30.
Polluters of the Holy Place, Act. 26. 6.
Profaners of the Temple, Act. 6. 14.
Changers of the Laws and Customs, Act. 21. 28.
unlearned men, Act. 28. 22.
a Sect every where spoken against, their Act. 17. 18.
Doctrine babbling, Act. 2. 13, 15. to the 22.
the Powrings forth of the Spirit as Joel had prophesied, a filling with new
Wine, Drunkenness, Mat. 24. 9.
a People hated of all men, as was Christ Jesus, the Captain of their
Salvation, who was their Ensample in sufferings; who of these things foretold
them, and that those that u killed them, should think they did God good
service, and as were the witnesses which went before them, who were Heb. 11. 35.
tortured, not accepting deliverance; who had Trials of Cruel Mockings, and
Scourgings, of Bonds and Imprisonments, who were stoned, and sawn asunder, and
tempted and slain with the Joh. 16. 2.
sword, and who wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, in Deserts, and
on Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the earth, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy: wherefore God prepared for them a
City, and is not ashamed to be called their Father.

And since their times have not the witnesses of God throughout the Apostasy to
this day tasted, endured, and gone through the same sufferings, and their
testimony after the same manner accounted of and despised, in which to be
particular, would fill a volume; and of which this very Generation does not
want many pregnant and living Testimonies?

And these things received not Abel from his Brother Cain? Lot from the men of
Sodom, whom whilst he was amongst, were preserved for his sake; and from his
sons in Laws, whom he sought to preserve? And Isaac from the son of Hagar
the Egyptian: And the Prophets of the Lord, from the Kings, Princes, false
Prophets, Priests, and people of Israel and Judah: And the Messiah, the son of
God, from the Nation of the Jews, the Highpriests, Lawyers, Scribes and
Pharisees, amongst whom he came, according to all the Prophecies: And the
Apostles and Disciples from their own Countrymen, and from those who were
called the devout, and honorable, and were most strict in the profession of
the Law of Moses, which was once commanded of God.

And the substance from those who held the shadow: the Jew inwardly, from the
Jew outwardly: the life from those who stood for the letter: the heavenly
things from those who were for the Pattern: the Circumcision without hands,
from the Circumcision made with hands: the Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck from the Priests after the order of Aaron, the Prophet whom Moses
said the Lord their God should raise up like unto him, whom whosoever did not
hear, should be cut off from his people, from those who professed the Law of
Moses. The seed when it came, until which came, the Law was added because of
Transgression, by those who were in the observation of the Law. And the Martyrs
and witnesses of Jesus to this day, from the Chief in the profession of
Religion.

And of the same Cup do we drink, and the same Measure do we receive, who come
to witness the same life made manifest in us, from this adulterous Generation;
yea, even from those who in profession exceed any who have been in the world,
as they do in persecution, according to their power, who condemning those in
words, who persecuted and killed the Prophets, and Jesus, and the Apostles, and
the Martyrs, etc. do themselves persecute us now, who not long since were
persecuted with them; and being under the same condemnation, were sought to be
cut off, and (having lost the savor they once had) become one with those in
our persecution, who formerly so persecuted them and us, (a crime of which
former Ages have not been guilty) for that we witness (in our measures) the
life of much of what themselves profess, as the Apostles did the substance of
the Law of Moses; in the observation of which, their persecuters were so
blindly zealous, and also; the day come, which they have been so long
expecting, and earnestly desiring, though the Scriptures bear Record to us of
all these things to this Generation, which the Generations in the Prophets
days had not, nor those in the Apostles for much of what they were led into by
the spirit; and though this Generation pretend to the Scriptures as their Rule
and Judge, and trial of spirits, and to the Apostles and Prophets, but are not
so much as in the letter of things to which they pretend; they who were
despised, despise, and those who were persecuted persecute, though when it was
their own case, they cried out against persecution.

Thus is Jesus Christ the seed of God, the same to day as yesterday in life and
power, in afflictions and sufferings; and the Children whom God has given him
out of the world for signs and wonders in the sight of every generation of
their enemies. And thus is the seed of the Serpent the same now as ever in
darkness and enmity, in opposition and persecution; and every Generation of
them more blind and envious, then their Fathers, who now are come to persecute
us for the same things practiced, which themselves professin the letter. And
thus is the eternal spirit from which the Prophets spoke and the Apostles, and
by which Jesus Christ offered up himself, a Mystery which from the beginning
has been hid in God, whom those who believed not in the light never knew, nor
can know: from that eye it has been, is, and ever shall be shut up, even from
the wise and prudent, who by wisdom know not God, who has created all things
by Jesus Christ, who is the light of the world, who enlightens every one that
comes into the world.

He 1 Pet. 3. 9.
preached in the days of Noah, to the spirits in prison, but that old world
neither repented nor believed: He was with the Acts 7. 38, 39
Church of the Jews in the Wilderness, and with the Angel, who spoke to Moses
in Mount Sinai, and with the Fathers who received the lively Oracles, but they
would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts returned to
Egypt: He spoke and testified in the Prophets; but they would not hear; they
who handled the Law knew him not; and Jer. 2. 8.
the great things of his Law, which he sent to Ephraim, were Hos. 8. 12.
were accounted as a strange thing: He came in flesh, yet he was not 1 Cor. 2.
8.
known to the Princes of this world, nor his voice, nor Acts 13. 27.
the voices of the Prophets, which spoke of him, though they were read every
Sabbath Day. He came in spirit and power in the Apostles and Disciples, and
there he is Acts 13. 45.
contradicted and blasphemed, and Acts 3. 13. 14
denied above the measure of former Generations, as the z Acts 13. 45.
measure of the spirit in them exceeded: and they judged themselves unworthy of
eternal life.

In his Prophets times who Isa. 10. 11, 12.
were all ignorant, who were all dumb Dogs that could not bark, who were
blind, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber, who were greedy Dogs, who can
never have enough, who were Shepherds that could not understand, who all
looked to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter, who said,
come ye, I will setch wine, we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant, but the Watchmen of Israel?
Who Ezekiel. 22. 25
conspired against the Lord, and were in the midst of Judah, as a roaring Lion,
ravening the prey, devouring souls, taking the Treasure and precious things
making many Widows, and speakers of lies in the name of the Lord? to whom was
the Isay 29. 9. 10, 11, 12.
Vision of all become as a Book sealed? on whom did the Lord power out the
spirit of deep slumber, closed their eyes, and covered? who were drunken, but
not with wine, who did stagger, but not with strong drink, to whom was night,
and no vision, and darkness that they could not divine? upon whom went the Sun
down, and the day became dark? who caused the people to err, and bite with
their teeth, and cried peace, and he that put not into their d Mic. 3. 5. 6.
mouths, they prepare War against him, who taught for hire, and divined for
money, and yet leaned upon the Lord, and said, Is not the Lord amongst us? none
evil can come upon us, for whose sake Sion was plowed as a field, and
Jerusalem became heaps, and the Mountains of the house as the high places of
the Forests; who were confounded, and had their loins covered, for that there
was no answer from God, but the Priests, the Prophets, the Seers, and the
Diviners, Whose Zach. 11. 17
right eye was to be utterly darkened, and whose Arm clean dried up? but the
Idol Shepherd, Whose soul abhorred God, and his soul loathed them, who in
Companies in the way murdered by consent, as the Troops of Robbers wait for a
man, f Hos. 6. 9.
who violated the Law, and profaned the holy things, and hid their eyes from
the Sabbaths, and put no difference between the clean and the unclean, whose
blessings Mal. 2. 2.
were cursed, but the Priests?

In the days of his flesh, who kept away the Luke 11. 52.
key of knowledge and neither entered into the Kingdom, nor suffered others,
but the chief Priests, Pharisees, Lawyers, Scribes and Doctors, who read him
daily to the people? who above all men were outwardly most holy, whom he
notwithstanding calls Mat. 23. 16. 17. 19. 26. 15. 14.
blind Guides, leading the b inde, and both falling into the ditch, though
they said to the Ioh. 7. 47. 48, 49.
Officers, Are you also deceived, have any of the Rulers, or the Pharisees
believed on him, but these people who know not the Law, are accursed? how high
were all their expectations of the Messiah, the Prince of his people, and of
the powrings forth of his spirit in the Prophecies; but when he came, and the
Prophesies in him fulfilled, and the spirit powered forth, how basely esteemed,
despised, rejected, unbelieved, and persecuted? and the same was also in the
days of the Apostles. Where the life has been most manifested, there that
has been most in mystery, to those who believed not in the light; behold he
comes in Clouds, and the flesh in which it has so appeared, with the least
comeliness and beauty, whereby it should be desired, and most persecuted: Who
believed in Jesus by seeing him in the flesh, to be the son of God? And above
all men, as to this world, the Apostles were accounted most miserable? For. 1
Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29.
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the
weak things to confound the things that are mighty, and the base things of the
world, and the things that are despised has God chosen: yea the things that
are not, to bring to naught the things that are, that no flesh might glory in
his presence, and 2 These. 2. 10.
that the truth might not be received, but for the love of it.

When Luke 19. 41. 42, 43, 44.
Jesus came near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, Saying, if thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes; for the days shall come upon
thee, that thine enemies shall cast a Trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee, even with the
ground, and thy Children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one
stone upon another, because thou knew not the hour of thy visitation.

Friends, It concerns your precious souls eternally, to know this hour of your
visitation, least you continuing to fall upon the Cornerstone the Rock of
Ages, and thus to persecute it, and evilly to requite the dear love of God to
you, in raising up his witness against you, warning you of all deceit, and
directing you where Redemption is to be found, and eternal life, it fall upon
you, and grind you to powder. For, verily the Kingdom of God is come amongst
you, the Son is come to the Vineyard, to look for fruit, and upon such days of
the Son of man are you fallen, that you are not aware of, whom if you shall
still consult against, cast out, and murder, and call the spirit of judgment
and of burning, of the Devil, whereby the filth of the Daughter of Sion is
purged away, and which makes the earth to shake, and the Pillars of the house
to tremble, and the strong man to bow, and the mighty man to cry bitterly, he
will Luke 20. 13. 14, 15, 16. Mat. 21. 41.
miserably destroy you, and let out the Vineyard unto others, and sad will be
your portion; for all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men and
blasphemies, wherewith soever they shall blaspheme; but he that o Mark 3. 28.
29, 30.
shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in
danger of eternal damnation: This said Christ, because they said, He had an
unclean spirit.

Sink down therefore, to that of God in every one of your Consciences, the
light of Jesus Christ, wherewith he lightens every one that comes into the
world, the faithful and true witness, to which we speak; And let us reason a
little together, what is that about which you so much contend, and for which
you have drawn, and are drawing, and ready to draw, the blood of those, who
longing for the Redemption of the seed in every one of you, which lies, and is
sought to be held in Captivity by the Priests, and their worships, and knowing
whom you resist, and the terrors of the Lord are made to testify against the
ways you walk in, as leading to hell, and as tending to the Chambers of death;
and to show you, would you hear, the way that leads to eternal life, whose
Bowels, even when under sufferings by you, for so witnessing, and against the
spirit that rules in you, earn after you, and the salvation of your souls,
which are precious, God is their witness?

Are they Churches of Christ? search and see in the Scriptures, which you say
is your Rule, there all might 1 Cor. 13. 31
prophecy, one by one, and when any thing was 30.
revealed to another that sat by, the first held his peace, and the 29.
Prophets, two or three might speak, and the rest judge there was the 1 Cor. 2.
15.
spiritual man, who judges all things, and yet he himself is judged of no
man. Therein 2 Timothy 2. 25.
meekness were instructed, those that opposed themselves. There, 1 Cor. 15. 24.
25.
the unbeliever and unlearned by found Doctrine was convinced of all, and
judged of all; and secrets of his heart made manifest, so that falling down on
his face, he worshipped God, and reported, God is in you of a truth. There were
no strikings, nor quarrellings, nor Tumults, nor drawings of blood, nor calling
to, or haling before Magistrates, or carrying to prisons, whippings, stockings,
throwing into Dungeons, and keeping close prisoners from friends, and
maintenance, for speaking or opposing; nor sending such to their homes from
Tithing to Tithing, who came to visit them, never were they found persecuting,
but were always after this manner entreated, and persecuted: who ever
persecuted was out of the Doctrine of Christ. The 1 These. 1. 1.
Church is in God, the 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5.
liveing stones, built a spiritual house upon the living Stone. Are yours
such, are these things found amongst you? Be cool, and consider, for these
things are plain, he that runs may read them: be not always deceived; by their
fruits, you may know them to be the Rev, 2. 9. 3. 9.
Synagogues of Satan, the Rev. 18. 2.
Cages of every unclean and hateful Bird, the Haitation of Devils, and the
hold of every foul spirit: plain dealling you will find at length to be best.
Are the Members of Harlots, Drunkards, Enviers, Swearers, Liars, Hypocrites,
Cheaters, Strikers, etc. the Members of Christ? are such the Pillar and Ground
of Truth? are those who are dead in Trespasses and sins, living stones built
upon the living foundation? Is striking, tumulting, and such like, in meekness
instructing those who oppose or convincing the unbeliever, and unlearned, and
manifesting the secrets of his heart? what Churches are they, when such things
as these are found? where neither the Testimony of the Lord will be endured,
nor an unbeliever, and unlearned so accounted, either convinced, or permitted
to stay there so to be?

Are your Priests, Ministers of Jesus Christ? search and see: they were Tit. 1.
7.
blameless, as the Stewards of God, not self-willed, nor soon angry, nor given
to wine, nor to filthy lucre, no strikers, nor 1 Timothy 3. 3.
strivers, nor brawlers, nor envious, nor raylers, nor covetous, Isa. 56. 11.
nor seeking their gain from their Quarters, Mic. 3. 5. 6, 7. 1 Timothy 12. 24.
nor Biters with their teeth, nor preparers of war, where it is not put into
their mouths, nor receivers of Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, etc. or suers for
treble damages, or casters into prison, of those who refuse, for whom they
neither plant nor plow, nor sow; nor makers of 2 Pet. 2. 3.
Merchandise of the people, through covetousness with feigned words, or having
2 Pet. 2. 14.
hearts exercised with covetous practices: they were not called of men, Mat.
23, 10.
Masters, nor Luke 11. 43 Mat. 23. 6. 7, 8
stood praying in the Synagogues, or for a pretense made long Prayers, nor
loved the uppermost seats in the Assemblies, and at Feasts, nor greeting in the
Market place, Mich. 3. 11
nor preached for hire, nor divined for money, nor had or sought for approbation
of men, or a State-maintenance, or a state consistory; nor spoke Jer: 14: 4: 9.
14:
a lying Divination, and imagination of their own heart for the word of the
Lord; nor came with 1 Cor. 2. 4.
the entising words of man's wisdom, nor by Gal. 1. 1. 11.
or in the will, and time of man, nor Jer. 13. 21.
ran when they were not sent, nor made the 2 Cor. 11. 9. 12. 13, 14.
Gospel burdensome, nor had they any 1 Cor. 4. 11.
certain dwelling place, nor did they persecute, nor called they to
Magistrates, nor haled to prison, those who spoke to them in the name of the
Lord, or opposed: nor had Jud. 16.
men's persons, in admiration for advantage; nor were James 2. 1. to 13.
respecters of persons. But Tit. 1. 8.
were lovers of Hospitality, lovers of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate,
holding forth the faithful word, by sound Doctrine, exhorting and convincing
gainsayers, 1 Timothy 2. 24.
gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing them that
oppose, 2 Cor. 4. 2.
commending what they said unto every man's Conscience in the sight of God, even
to those that opposed themselves, Gal. 1. 1. 12.
receiving the Gospel not by man, nor the will of man, nor were they raught it,
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in them. In all 2 Cor. 6. 4. to the 11th.
things approving of themselves, as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in
Tumults, in Labors, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by
long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word
of truth, by the power of God, by the Armor of righteousness on the right
hand, and on the left; by honor and dishonor, by evil report, and good
report: as deceivers, and yet true, as unknown, and yet well known; as dying,
and yet behold they lived; as chastened, and yet not killed; as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things: troubled on every side, yet not distressed, perplexed,
but not in despair; always bearing about in the body, the dying of the Lord
Jesus, that the x 2 Cor. 4. 11. 8, 9, 10, 11.
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in their body, always delivered
unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest
in their mortal flesh. Are those whom you call your Ministers found such, or
do not those whom they set you on, now to persecute, appear such as these and
they the Contrary? Are they not plainly manifested by their fruits? Search, and
see, how long will ye be deceived, and shut your Eyes against the noon day, and
seek to support such as plainly appear not to be the Church of Christ, or the
Minsters of his Glorious Gospel; Whom the Lord, the Jealous God, is now come
to pull up, being plants whom he has not planted, and against whom his Sword
is drawn, and fourbished, by which both they that help, and they that are
helped, shall fall together: and shall not be put up, till the thoughts of his
heart be accomplished; And how long will ye beat, tumult, imprison, and cruelly
entreat his witnesses, whom from amongst your selves he has raised up to
testify against them, and to lead you out of the ways of destruction into the
Paths of Peace, and out of dear love to your souls, press through all
hardships, and sufferings, and difficulties at your hands, yea, theit lives are
not dear to them for the finishing of their Testimony, and that your souls may
be saved in this Powerful day of the Lord Jesus? will not these things be
bitterness in the end? What will you answer the Lord, whom ye thus requite for
all his kindness?

Mind, and consider: did not the Word of the Lord from the beginning, take hold
on those to whom it was sent, though Zach. 1. 5, 6.
the Fathers dyed, and the Prophets lived not for ever; and though they did put
the z Evil day Amos 6. 3.
far from them, and caused the Seat of Violence to come near, and mocked at the
Word of the Lord, and misused his Messengers: Was there ever a Witness of God
born against any thing, but the downfall thereof was at hand, according to the
Witness, and assuredly came to pass, as they did abide Sufferings, who bore
against it their Testimony; and the hotter the Sufferings, drew not the time
the nearer? For as Jesus Christ in his flesh, on the Ephesians: 4. 8.
Cross, lead Captivity Captive, so tthrough Sufferings his Truth conquers,
Heb. 2. 14, 15.
thorough death it overcomes him that has the power of death, and 2 Colo. 15.
triumphs over all and when the world seems to have upon it its greatest
Advantage, then is it ascending on the Throne, and reigning over all.

Turn a little over these later times, and observe calmely; When raged the
Fire, and Faggot more furious against the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, than
when the hour was come, wherein that body of Popery which became so cruel, was
to be extinguished in this Nation? when were the Persecutions of the Bishops
more fierce, then when the Parliament drew near, which pulled them up by Root,
and Branch? What is become of that body of Popery in England to this Day? Where
are the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, the Common Prayer, and those heaps of
Ceremonial, and Superstitious dead services, and all that Hierarchy with the
Appurtenances which had fortified it self with such laws, and length of time,
and mixed it self so in, and with the Civil Powers, that as her Mother
Babylon, she said, I have set my Nest amongst the stars, I sit as a Queen and
shall see no sorrow, when loss of Children, and Widdow-hood came upon her in
One day, fear, the snare, and the pit, and a horrible desolation, even by the
power that supported her? How contemptible and base, how much less then things
of naught, were the Martyrs in those days accounted of, and the factious
Puritanicall Non conformists, as they were then called? and how unlikely in the
eyes of men; yea, how impossible a thing it seemed for those witnesses, to
turn the hand upon those Generations, who in the height of their pride, scorn,
and confidence, thought of nothing, but to swallow them up quick, and to root
them out of the Land of the Living by the hand of Authority, which they had
wholly made their own, and the Laws, and were stretching out their Arms so to
do; Even when the Jer. 4: 7.
Lion came out of his Thicket, and the Fuller had laid his Axe to their Root
and Branches. And when many of those men of Israel, who, with others of their
Brethren, compassed about those Walls of Jericho with the sound of Rams Horns,
(so despicable was the Witness to that Generation of men) before whom they
fell, and in whose hearing (by it) was it said, Cursed be the man before the
Lord, that rises up, and builds this City Jericho, he shall lay the
Foundation thereof in his Firstborn; and in his youngest Son shall he set up
the Gates of it; strived so eagerly, and with vehemence to build it up again,
as a City in Israel for them to dwell in, by the Name, and in the Rule of a
coercive Presbytery, hating and despising the rest of their Brethren, before
whom Jericho fell, the witnesses against them, as Heretics, and Schismatics,
upon whom they made very sharp steps, and joined with the men of Jericho, the
Common-enemy, to effect it: how laid they the Foundation thereof in the Synod
their firstborn, and set up their Gates in the youngest Directory, and little
Catechism?

By what strange Overturnings, wonderful Revolutions, fearful Desolations, and
streams of the Blood of these Nations, has the Lord (as of old) fulfilled the
Testimony of his poor, contemned, and suffering Witnesses, before the Eyes, and
in the midst of this Generation, beyond the Example of former times; in which,
to be further particular, would be needless, and troublesome, since with the
Points of Steel, and in Letters of Blood, and Miseries of War, they are
freshly engraven every where throughout these Dominions.

And, yet, though there is to these things such a Cloud of Witnesses from the
beginning, throughout all times on Record in Scripture, as aforesaid; though
since the Apostles days, Histories have filled up of these things whole
Volumnes, to the times of this Generation; Though in the sight this Generation,
and by their hands whole Multitudes have been destroyed, and carried out dead,
who have opposed, and persecuted the Witnesses of Jesus, beyond the President
of former times: And though the Feet of the Righteous Judgments of the Dreadful
God, which carried them out, are standing at the door; yet do not the men of
this Generation Tremble and Fear before the Powerful God, and the words of his
Holiness, uttered forth by the Spirit of Jesus, who is risen in this his Mighty
Day, carrying forth his Witnesses to testify thereunto against all false
Worships, and Deceit, and Vanities, and Customs of the World, and Deeds of
Darkness, and Powers of Wickednesses, whom he brings forth as Signs and
Wonders amongst them, and makes living Testimonies for himself against them all.

Who knowing the Terror of the Lord: and his Dreadful Day Approaching,
wherein he will yet Heb. 1. 2. 26, 27.
once more shake not only Earth, but the Heaven also; and in Jude 14. 15.
Ten Thousands of his Saints comes to execute Judgments upon all, and to
convince all that are Ungodly amongst them, of all their ungodly Deeds which
they have ungod^ily committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him, and with his mighty and strong One, to render
Vengeance with Isa. 66. 15, 16. Esa 28. 21. ane 29. 6.
Whirl-winds, Storms, and Tempests, and Thunder, and Earthquakes, and great
Noise and Flames of devouring Fire, upon the head of the wicked: Therefore do
their Jer. 23. 9.
Bones shake, and their Lips quiver, Hab. 3. 16.
and their Bellies tremble, and their Isa. 16. 11.
Bowels sound like a Harp, and their Eyes are like t Rivers of water, and their
Jer. 4. 19. and 9. 1.
hearts are Psalm. 119. 126.
pained, as it was with the Lords servants of Old, not ceasing to warn men, as
in the sight of God, to know the hour of their Visitation, that so they may be
hid in the day of the Lords fierce Anger, which verily is coming on the
Inhabitants of the Earth: In requital of which, and their love therein, they
are mocked, and scorned, and reviled, and reproached, and beat, and tumulted,
and imprisoned, and cruelly scourged, and some of their Blood drawn, and some
of their lives taken away, and thought not fit to live upon the Earth, as was
Jesus Christ, and his Witnesses, since the Foundation of the world.

Do ye thus requite the Lord, O ye foolish People, and unwise! What will ye do
in the day of Visitation? where then will ye flee, and where will you leave
your glory? Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken: Give
glory to the Lord God of Israel, before he cause darkness, and before your feet
stumble on the dark Mountains; and whilst ye look for light, he Jer. 23: 16:
turn it into the shadow of Death, and make it gross Darkness; for verily it
hastens on this Generation: But if you will not hear, Our souls shall weep for
you in secret places for your Pride, and Our Eyes shall weep sore, and run down
with Tears, because you will not know in this your day, the things that belong
unto your Peace.

And thus have I discharged my Conscience unto you, as in the sight of God,
whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, which you shall one day
remember whether you will, or no, in the day when the Book of Conscience shall
be opened, and wherein God shall judge all men by the Man Jesus Christ, whom in
our measure we witness, and you persecute.

Behold a Whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grievous
Whirlwind, it shall fall grievously on the head of the Wicked, the Anger of
the Lord shall not return until he has executed, until he has performed the
thoughts of his heart; in the latter days, ye shall consider it perfectly.
THE END.
ERRATA.
LIne 16. read entertainment, for enterraynment.

Page 4. line 33. read been, for have. P. 7. l. 27. r. water for ter. P. 8. l.
17. r. and, Title Page. Book.
for or. P. 9. l. 9. add (o) Synagogues; and (p) 17. 1. 2. 10. for 17. 12. 10.
Margent. l. 16. r. And did he not bid them go, for, and they bad him to go. P.
34. r. the, for their. p. 10. l. 13. Add Heb. 11. 4. Margent. p. 11. l. 21. r.
Amon, for Hamon; add (i) over Amon. p. 12. l. 15. add (x) over Ier. 6. 10.
Margent. p. 16. l. 4. add Heb. 11. 16. Margent. p. 17. l. 33. add the, after
of. p. 18. l. 28. blot out were. p. 20. l. 19. r. it, for that. p. 23.l. 3. r.
Habitation, for Haitation. l. 14. r. where, for when. p. 26. l. 14. blot out
by. p. 27. l. 34. add of, before this. p. 29. l. 22. r. measures, for measure.

Friends, By reason of the Authors absence; and the extraordinary haste of
giving forth the subject in hand, some Errors have escaped in Printing, which
you are desired thus to observe, viz.
LIne 16. read entertainment, for enterraynment. Title Page. Book.


Page 4. line 33. read been, for have. P. 7. l. 27. r. water for ter. P. 8 l.
17. r. and, for or. P. 9. l. 9. add (o) Synagog es; and (p) 17. 1. 2. 10. for
17. 12. 10. Margent. l. 16. r. And did he not bid them go, for, and they bad
him to go. P. 34. r. the, for their. p. 10. l. 13. Add Heb. 11. 4. Margent. p.
11. l. 21. r. Amon, for Hamon; add (i) over Amon. p. 12. l. 15. add (x) over
Ier. 6. 10. Margent. p. 16. l. 4. add Heb 11. 16. Margent. p. 17. l. 33. add
the, after of. p. 18. l. 28. blot out were. p. 20. l. 19. r. it, for that. p.
23.l. 3. r. Habitation, for Haitation. l. 14. r. where, for when. p. 26. l. 14.
blot out by. p. 27. l. 34. add of, before this. p. 29. l. 22. r. measures, for
measure.


