ENDEVORS Aiming at the GLORY OF GOD, THAT PEACE and TRUTH may meet together:
Wherein is contained the excellency, benefit, and necessity of good Government
and Governors: A loving Reply to Mr William Prynnes Speech made to the House of
Commons, and afterward published.

Some matters are propounded to the Consideration of the Ministry; and also to
particular (and to all) Opinions.

The first, purest, best and most blessed form and manner of Government,
prescribed by God, (and recorded in Gods sacred Word;) together with the way of
entrance, or Gods calling of persons to places of chief Government, the great
consequence thereof.

Wherein is showed, That Government by Succession, from the Father to the Son,
was none of Gods Institution, in the first and purest Times.

And also the Government by Judges is plainly proved to be the best form of
Government, being Gods immediate direction, most blessed and approved for Gods
glory, and for a peoples greatest Good, Comfort, and Safety.

By JOHN BLACKLEACH.

Isai. 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors
as at the beginning; afterward thou shall be called a City of Righteousness,
(and) a faithful City. Deuteronomy. 28.1. If thou shall obey diligently the voice of
the Lord thy God, and observe and do all his Commandments, then the Lord thy
God will set thee on high, above all the Nations of the Earth. Genesis 49.18. O
Lord, I have waited for thy Salvation. LONDON, Printed by John Macock for the
Author, and are to be sold in Popes-head-Alley. 1656.

To my dearly beloved Countrymen of England, and to all of what Country
soever, namely, to all such as love the true, only glorious, and blessed God,
and endeavor unfeignedly to do his Will, to such as have obtained like precious
faith with us; Grace, Mercy, and Peace be to you, through the acknowledging of
God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord.
Dearly Beloved,
UPon the serious and often consideration of that happy and blessed condition,
and unparaleld benefit, which the blessed Angels do (and the elect Children of
God shall) enjoy to Eternity, in having God for their defense, and their
exceeding great reward.

The benefits thereof, for number and greatness, far exceed what the eye [of
man] has seen, or the ear heard, or what the heart of man can conceive.

Amongst other privileges and benefits this is not the least, That they shall
have God to govern them, (whose wisdom is most absolutely perfect) to lead
them, and to direct them.

Revel. 19.11. John says, I saw heaven open, and behold a white horse, and he
that sat upon him was called faithful and true, and he judges and fights
righteously.

Verse. 12. And his eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many
crowns, and he had a name written, that no man knew but himself.

Verse. 13. And he was clothed in a garment dipped in blood, and his Name was
called, The Word of God.

Verse. 14. And the hosts which were in Heaven, followed him upon white horses,
etc.

Verse. 15. And out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that with it he shall smite
the Heathen; and rule them, etc.

From this place (being full of consolation) I shall only collect this one
point of Observation, (pertinent to the matter by me intended,) namely, That
the whole host of Heaven, the blessed Angels, the Saints and Children of God,
shall have this unmatchable, this exceeding great benefit; namely, They shall
be guided, ordered, and governed, by the Word of God. All the Hoasts of Heaven
followed the Word of God upon white horses: Which shows, That this shall be
the happiness of the blessed Angels and Saints, to be guided by, and subject to
the Word of God.

We may easily discern our own weakness, in guiding our selves; we all, like
sheep, are apt to go astray, and to run into many dangers.

But God is infinitely wise to direct us, he is strong to protect us, he is
rich in mercy, abundant in mercy; as the heavens are higher then the earth, so
is his mercy.

He likewise is able to fill and to satisfy our Souls with good things, with
him is the wellspring of life.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God.

By this means, namely, by being guided by God, we shall not need to fear, we
may lie down, and rest in peace, because the Lord is our Keeper; read Psalm. 23.

The consideration of this leads me further to consider of Government amongst
men here on earth.

Upon diligent enquiry into the revealed will, and mind of God, recorded in
the sacred Scriptures; I find,

That, on earth, it is a matter of the highest concernment to have good
Government, good Shepherds, such as are sent of God.

Search the Scriptures, and you shall find, That when the People enjoyed godly,
wise, faithful Governors, they were endowed with many other singular and great
blessings from God.

On the contrary, when their Governors were corrupt, the People were disturbed,
oppressed, and afflicted.

The Scriptures are so full, so copious, so evident in the proof of this, that
I shall spend the less time in quotations.

Read the story of the Judges, the book of Kings, and the Chronicles of Israel;
and that (being blessed to you by God) will help you clearly to discern the
truth of this matter.

The experience of all Ages will show, That from good and evil Governors
proceeded the prosperity and adversity of the Nations: Search the Chronicles
and Records of the Ages and Times, from Moses his time, to these days wherein
we live, and it will evidently appear, That from this principle, from this
root, namely from Government, arose the prosperity or adversity of the People
and Nations. If we look but back from the time of King Henry the eight, we
shall see this State tossed to and fro, suitably to those persons that were the
principal Governors, and that both in religious duties and in other temporal
matters.

The experience, the Records of all Ages do abundantly testify (being duly
weighed and considered) of what great concernment Government is of, to render a
people blessed, or despised of God.

To the intent that we may the better and more clearly see the singular benefit
that it is, to have a good Government, I shall propound briefly some
particulars to consideration.

For instance, look upon the universal works, the Creation of God; Consider the
Sun how it goes his due course, not failing to perform his great journey,
round about this world, in twenty four hours; the Sun knows his rising, and
his going down, not altering nor failing one minute of time, nor failing one
foot of ground in all his great and unwearied journeys; O how excellent are all
thy works O God.

Consider likewise those excellent virtues and operations with which the Sun is
beautified and enriched, as namely,

First, Light, which shows man the way and work he is to perform; without
light Man is miserable.

Secondly, The Sun heateth the air, and comfort man, and all creatures.

Thirdly, The Sun causes the bud of the herb to spring forth, it causes the
Corn to grow, whereby man is nourished.

Now consider whence or how this creature the Sun is so wonderfully and
excellently made, is it not from the wisdom and excellency of the most high God
that made it, and governs it?

Now let us but consider, That if God should but withold his hand, if God
should but withdraw himself, his wisdom, his power, his faithfulness, his
skill, for want of such a Work-master, these glorious works of God would be
confused and fail.

This shows, that there is a necessity for the well-being of matters of great
consequence, especially (such as are the Governments over and amongst men) that
the Governors be chosen men; we cannot be too circumspect what Governors we do
receive, and that they be men chosen of God, etc. If we err in this Governor,
we shall find that great trouble will follow.

Consider likewise the Stars of Heaven, which although they are to us
innumerable, yet every Star has his proper place; they go their appointed
journeys and courses, which they keep without jarring or alteration, performing
those operations to them appointed.

Consider likewise the Tides, how they do ebb and flow, keeping within the
limits of time and proportion; Thus far they flow, and so return, in their due
and appointed seasons.

And does not this come to pass from the excellency and perfection of that God
that created, and is the Governor of them?

Consider likewise amongst men, in every great and useful work, if the guide
and governor of the work be skilful and able, does not the work committed to
him prosper proportionably?

On the contrary, if a foolish man, a disordered person, have the government in
chief of such matters, are they not likely to fail and be confused?

Consider likewise in a Ship, when the Master is godly, wise, skilful, and
able, is not the Voyage by him likely to come to good issue?

But on the contrary, if a foolish, disordered, unjust man be the Master, is
not the undertaking endangered, if not overthrown?

And is not this matter, namely, the Government of a Commonwealth, to be
looked upon with as much regard?

Ought not men to be very heedful and circumspect, who, and what manner of
persons they accept to govern them?

Does not this matter immediately concern Gods glory?

Does it not concern the good and comfort of our Souls, of our Bodies, of our
Estates, and of our Children?

Yes certainly, the matter is of great concernment.

And yet are we not to lament this, namely, That men often rush upon the choosing
of Governors, as the horse into the battle, with too little fear or wit?

Men are too much of these tempers:

First, Either they will admit of no Government, whence springs misery,
confusion, and every evil work; by this means some say, as Pharaoh said to
Moses, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and let Israel
go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.

Thus will it be with many who acknowledge none to be their Rulers.

And some David speaks of, Psalm. 12.4. who say in their hearts, Our tongues
are our own, who is Lord over us?

These men know not what they do, they desire that which would assuredly make
them miserable: But of this in another place, if God will.

Or secondly, Others they desire to have Government, but they consider not of
how great concernment Government is of.

Hence it comes to pass, that like the people in Samuels time, men will have a
King, they will have a Governor, not duly weighing and considering what manner
of Governor they desire; whether he be godly, or ungodly; whether he be wise,
or foolish; whether he be a man sent of God, or a man of their own inordinate
desires; whether he come in (to be the true Shepherd) by the door of Gods Word,
according to the rule there prescribed, or whether he come in at the window, or
creep in some other way, by friends, beauty, riches, eloquence, fraud,
flattery: Thus lamentable experience teaches us, has been the practice of the
People and Nations, from the time of Samuel to this day, too often.

Hence it comes to pass, that so many Wolves enter into the sheepfold, who
miserably devour, persecute, destroy the sheep.

The consideration of these miseries, which arise from, and attend upon those
people that have wolves in sheeps clothing instead of true Shepherds, occasions
us to search and enquire what may be the true ground or fountain whence this
evil springs.

There are two main and principal Causes which occasioned God to suffer Jsrael
to be so misled, so seduced, so deceived, so afflicted.

The one Reason was, Because the people slighted, dis-esteemed, and undervalued
this pearl of great price, namely, to have God to be their King, and to have
him immediately to choose their Governors for them.

The second Reason was, Because the people did not diligently observe, and
cleave to the Commandments of God, but instead thereof, they followed their own
inventions.

And if we shall warily consider, what the cause has been, and is, why the
People and Nations have done, and do so miscarry in their Governments, it
arises from these two forenamed Grounds, namely, the slighting Gods Mercies,
and departing from prescribed Rules.

For the first of these read Deuteronomy. 6.11, to 16. where God admonishes them to
take heed, and to beware, lest when they had abundance, when they had eaten,
and were full, that they did not then slight, disesteem, or forget God.

Reason God gave them in this admonition, as namely, because verse. 12. God
brought them out of Egypt, out of a low condition; verse. 15. and because God
was a jealous God among them, and lest the wrath of God were kindled against
them to destroy them. Notwithstanding those and many other Exhortations and
Cautions which the Lord from time to time laid before them to warn them, yet
they soon and often turned aside from God the Fountain of living water, and
dug to themselves broken Cisterns, that would not hold good water.

And touching the second, namely, their departing from the Rules prescribed,
Moses did often admonish them, as in this Chapter, verse. 16. Ye shall not tempt
the Lord your God, etc. Verse. 17. But you shall keep diligently the
Commandments of the Lord your God, and his Testimonies, and his Ordinances, etc.

Dearly beloved, this is very apparent, That Government is of very great
concernment: Therefore it is to be prized at a great value. We ought, with
great diligence, to seek and to search the Scriptures, that so we may find the
right and pure way prescribed, owned and blessed by God for the choice of our
Governors.

By this means we shall obtain a blessing from God, we shall have true
Shepherds, we shall discover wolves in sheeps clothing, who slily creep in to
devour and to destroy: If God so often wills us to take heed to keep all his
Commands, then certainly this, which is of so great concernment, is not to be
slighted, but valued at a high price.

Now to the end that we may more deeply imprint this in our affections, and
that we may never forget the great good and benefit of good Government, it
behooves us to consider what should be the Reason that God permits such
corrupt Governors to be in the world. It is not because God wants either Power,
Wisdom, or Will to do us good? for as a father pitieth his children, so, and
much more is our Gods favor toward us. And as the Heavens are higher then the
Earth, so is his Mercy, etc. God is of great bounty, abundant in goodness, rich
in mercy. If it be so, as it is certainly so, then we may learn this, That the
cause why God suffers us to err in this matter of Government, is for his
Glory, and for our learning, for our good.

Good things are best seen to be good by their contraries.

The benefit of light is best discerned when we have been in darkness.

The absence of the Sun and cold in Winter, causes us to value the benefit of
his nearer presence in the Summer.

The full loatheth the honeycomb, but to the hungry bitter things seem sweet.

When God brought Jsrael out of Egypt, he could have brought them to Canaan a
nearer way.

God sees it meet, that we must sow in tears, before we reap in joy.

God placed Adam, our Grandfather, in happiness, he valued an apple at a higher
price then Gods favor, therefore God made him to know sorrow, that seeing the
difference, he might be more wary afterward, and value better things according
to their worth.

Israel was Gods first born Son, and God bestowed this favor (not to be enough
valued) upon them, namely this, That he did immediately appoint the persons
that should govern them. But Israel were full, and fat, they were wanton, and
slighted Gods mercy in this matter: Therefore God suffered them to reap the
fruit of their inventions.

They disliked that form of Government which God had prescribed, which God had
owned and blessed.

They would alter that form of Government appointed by God, namely that of
Judges, and they would have a King.

Against this form of Government by Kings God expressly declared his dislike;
for here note, it was not about the person, but about the form of Government,
the difference lay directly between Government by Judges, and Government by
Kings. They were at the first content that God should choose the person, and to
make him King, who the Lord their God chose: But, after they fell more grossly,
they chose Kings themselves, without enquiring of God; as I purpose, if God
will, to show afterward.

Well consider we of it, God gave them a King in his wrath, etc. Note well what
God says, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with
joyfulness, and with a good heart, for the abundance of all things:

Therefore thou shall serve thy enemies in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in need of all things, and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy
neck, etc.

Beloved friends, Let us not cast away our Reason, that noble faculty of our
Souls: consider that both they and we have had a long and large experience of
the difference between Judges and Kings.

Compare those Judges of Israel, before Kings were, with those Kings that were
after them.

Consider this, That of, or amongst those Judges immediately appointed by God,
from Moses to Samuel, there was not one of them but were blessed by God, his
good Spirit helped them to judge righteously.

Secondly, God made them a blessing to the People; they did not addict
themselves to voluptuous pleasure, nor to build stately Palaces, not to
idolatrous wives; not to many wives, not to voluptuous diet, or much wine, not
to multiplicity of attendants, not to Plays, Pastimes, Hawking and Hunting; not
to Oppression of their Brethren, not to idleness, not to swearing and
profaneness. They did not nourish, and promote and put great Titles of Honor
upon men, and keep company with such most familiarly, which openly and often
blasphemed and despised God, the most high God, by swearing, revelling,
whoring, and what not profaneness? nor did those blessed Judges neglect the due
administration of Justice and Judgment.

Quest. But what did these Judges then? What manner of persons were they?

Ans. First, Note that God sent them; they came into the sheepfold by the door,
by Gods appointment, they did not creep slighly in by beauty, friends,
eloquence, money, indiscreet Elections of the people, not by any unjust fraud or
force.

Hence it came to pass, that God blessed them with a good portion of his good
and blessed Spirit; God owned them.

Hence it came to pass likewise, That the sheep owned them, and willingly
obeyed their voice, and followed them in the paths of righteousness.

These Judges likewise loved the People: see how Moses intercedes, and pleads
with God, by prayer and supplication for them.

Oh, it is a precious benefit to people, to enjoy godly Governors.

These Judges were humble, meek, painful, they did not swell with conceit that
their veins were full of Royal blood.

For they still acknowledge the people to be their brethren.

It Is said of Moses when Jethro came to see him, that he judged the people from
morning to evening.

And afterward his burden, or charge, was not laid aside (by Jethro's counsel
only) it was eased.

It is said of Samuel, That besides the pains he took (where he dwelt) in
judging the people, he likewise went about and judged the people in other
places, year by year.

Now dear friends, concerning the fruits that came by Kings, I appeal to God,
to his sacred word, to the Records, to the Chronicles, to the experience both
of our own and other Nations, whether Kings have been to be compared with those
Judges: have not Kings been addicted to those vices, and very empty of such
graces as were requisite for men in such eminent places? For though some may
cavil, and object, that some Kings were good, I shall (if God permit and
assist) answer, I hope to satisfaction, both this, and all other objections
that I have yet heard of, and can remember, that tend to confirm and strengthen
the continuance, and beings of Kings amongst us.

Because I judge that from evident grounds plainly laid down in the sacred
Scriptures, the word of God, the most true, and the most unerring rule to
direct us.

Kings were neither the first, nor the best way of Government.

Consider likewise those precious promises of God, who has not left us without
hope, for the word of God seems to me, plainly to declare and show, that in
these last days (which days and times (I believe to be) these verytimes, or
times very near approaching, as by the opinion of many Godly and learned men)
in which God will destroy corrupt Government, and Governors, and will exalt his
mountain in the top of the Mountains, and will give and restore to us, Judges,
as at the first, and Counselors, as at the beginning.

Afterward thou shall be called a City of righteousness, a faithful City,
Isai. 1.25, 26, 27. and chapter 2.2, 3, 4.

Of this I purpose to speak more afterward.

Dearly beloved friends, thus much I can and do affirm to you all in the
presence of that all-seeing ^od, who will bring hidden things, deeds of
darkness to light, even in the presence of that God who I do Love, Fear,
Worship, who is my Hope, my Joy, from whom I received all the Good I have, from
whom I expect my comfort for the time to come.

I have not (so far as I know my own heart) any prejudice nor respect of
persons, nor any past, present, or future, by, or sinister respect, in the
writing this little Treatise.

I have never received the value of one penny in recompense of my endeavors,
and for the time to come, I am so far from thoughts that way, That I do expect
rather that I shall receive injury hereby, and that this may be a great
hinderance to me in wordly respects, only this is my comfort, That I know whom
I have trusted.

And this further can I say likewise, That at the writing hereof I know not,
nor did ever see, either those truly honorable Generals, the Lord Fairfax, nor
the Lord Cromwell, nor any Captain or Soldier amongst them, except some few I
lately saw in, or near to London, as I passed by them, nor do I know any one of
them if I see them again, so far as I conceive.

It is possible some of my acquaintance may be in the Army, but if it be so, I
know it not.

And concerning those worthy men (for so I esteem them to be) that now sit in
the Parliament, I never saw any one of them (to my knowledge) except one who I
have seen, I think, three or four times, yet I know not certainly whether he be
of the Parliament or no, only I think he is.

Whereas I affirm that I know not any of the Army, or of the Parliament, I
intend that I know not the persons of the men, but by their fruits, I know much
concerning them.

Some may judge this to be superfluous to mention, but I shall show you what
moves me so to do.

In discoursing with diverse men, I find, to my best apprehension, That there is
such a crooked and perverse generation of men, that imagine mischief, that
invent base, false, and slanderous reports against Parliament, Generals, Army,
and indeed, against the most that truly fear God.

Blame me not therefore (courteous Reader) if I labor to prevent slanderous
and lying Tongues.

And this likewise I affirm, That with due regard of Gods presence, in the fear
of God, (being much sensible of my own weakness, seriously considering of how
great weight it is to write books and to present them to public view) I am
very fearful to presume above what is meet: and this I say further, that my
purpose is to propound the matters and causes I shall principally insist upon
in this following Treatise.

I purpose likewise, according to the measure of light, grace, and opportunity
that God shall give me, to prove and clear the matters propounded, and then
having presented the cause, I shall earnestly desire of God to stir some
persons (who are more learned and better able then my self) and to enable and
direct them so, That they may more largely and clearly show forth to public
view, the mind of God in these matters of Government, and Governors.

It is now a long season that the Nations have been so kept under by Corrupt
Governors, above two thousand years; during which time, where (or who) was the
man that durst, or did punctually discover the Corruption of Governors, or of
Government.

1. This is one reason that moves me to present the cause to public view,
namely because I know not, or do not discern that any one writer, from Samuels
days to this time (the pens of the Scriptures excepted) that has punctually
written upon this subject.

2. This is another moving cause, because now being a time of more Liberty, and
considering that I, my children, and posterity are concerned in the case of
Government, I conceive there is reason good why I should present this cause to
public consideration.

3. This is another motive, I look upon the great effusion of blood that has
been shed about this matter, the cause (for ought I know) being not yet wholly
determined, but is still so, that (I conceive) that our godly Governors are
ready to prefer Gods glory and the common good, before their own interests, in
those matters that they shall clearly see to be the mind and will of God.

4. This is another motive, seeing apparently our miserable condition, people
being divided in judgment, and in affection, so that our condition is much like
a ship in a Tempest. Therefore the end of my endeavors shall be (so far as God
shall assist) that I may reconcile differences, and that Peace and Truth may
meet together, as Moses and Aaron met together in the mount of God, and kissed
each other. And as this is the end I propound to my self, so likewise I purpose
it shall be the Title or Superscription.

Dearly beloved friends, all you that love and fear the Lord, all you that have
obtained like precious faith, I earnestly entreat you to assist me in this work
with your prayers, with your most best, uttermost, and strongest abilities.
Contend for the truth in love, but strive not, lust not to be contentious.

Reject not that Truth, that Good wholly, which is accompanied with some
blemishes.

Men cast not away a good garment, because of a little dirt.

Consider the great differences and troubles about Governors and Government.
Therefore I humbly request thee to weigh, try, prove, examine, search the
Scripture, cleave to the Truth.

Seek the favor of God with more then ordinary prayer, That the good and holy
Spirit of God may lead thee into truth. For it is evident that many unclean
Spirits, many false and lying Spirits, are permitted to deceive many in these
our days.

This point of Government is of great concernment; if God help us to discern
the good and right way (prescribed, practiced, owned, and blessed by God) to
choose persons, so that God may be said to choose for us; to shut up all windows
and by-ways, that so Wolves, Foxes and beasts of prey may be kept from the
Sheep: If God help us to discern the way, the true and right way, and in that
way to set open the door, that the good and true Shepherds may enter, whose
fruits will soon discover them to be good and true Shepherds, for they will
love the flock, they will watch over them (not for the fleece mostly) but to
defend them from beasts of prey: These good Shepherds will seek the comfort of
the Flock, they will drive them to the wholesome pastures, and to the still
waters, where they may be refreshed, where they may bless the name of the Lord,
and lie down without fear, (for true love casts out fear) and so rest in
peace, because a good Shepherd is their watchman.

Was not this the very foundation and cause that David (Ps. 23.) found such
great comfort and refreshment, namely from his Shepherd.

Dear Friends, if God help us to obtain good Shepherds, good Governors, our
strife will end, our differences will be composed: Corrupt Opinions on the one
hand, and desperate Blasphemy and Profaneness on the other hand, will vanish as
smoke before the wind. The very presence of Moses destroyed the profaneness of
Idolatrous Worship.

Dear Christian Friends, if God help us in this matter, then shall peace and
truth meet together, and as Moses and Aaron they shall kiss one another in the
Mount of God.

Then shall we well provide for the comfort of our children, and for their
posterity. Then shall the generations to come have cause to bless us.

Then shall the Name of the Lord be praised with joyful hearts.

Then shall the Lord bless us, and we shall be blessed.

I shall endeavor to write, in this ensuing Treatise, without partiality,
without turning to the right, or to the left hand, without respect of persons,
further then, in a way of righteousness, accept of this my mite.

And let those men who have received more abilities, and opportunity, put more
into the Treasury.

Dear Friends and Countrymen, I dare not say, that for your sakes I could be
content to have my name blotted out of the Book of Life.

Nor, with Paul, That for this cause, I could be content to be a castaway from
the presence of God for ever.

For the thought of that would be more bitter then death.

But this I do say, That (so far as I know my own heart) (provided that the
loss of my temporal life would be the means to procure this happiness to you,
namely, that you might possess Judges as the first, and Counselors as at the
beginning) I could be content to lay down this temporal life that for a little
season I do here enjoy.

Beloved Friends, I considering that there is so great a distance at this time
between Opinions, but more especially there is a greater difference between the
affections of many; I shall desire leave of the courteous Reader, that without
offense I may propound some other matters to consideration: My ends therein
are, that I may extinguish that heat (if not wholly, yet in some measure) that
is burning or smothering in the hearts of many.

For otherwise these will lie as a block, or as a bar in the way, to hinder,
that peace and truth should not meet together.

I remember Jacob his example herein, he being intended and desirous to be
reconciled to his brother Esau, who had determined or threatened his death.

He labors to prevent and pacify his brothers anger, by sending presents and
soft answers, good words before him.

Such gifts as I have, I offer to you; Silver and Gold I have but little: I
desire that I may find the like acceptance that Jacob did.

The first and great hinderance that I find laid in the way to hinder Peace and
Truth from meeting together, is the death of the late King, the removing of
diverse Lords, and some others, from their present Being, or acting as Members
of that Court, and the pretended wilful breach of a former Covenant.

I am not desirous to call back those things that are done and past; I am not
desirous to take abroad those imbers in which, wherein, has been or may be
contained coals of fire, that might or may kindle such f^^^es as are not easily
quenched.

It is better for peace sake to suffer some, yea, much wrong, then to endeavor
to right our selves in such a way, as may turn to far greater loss.

Our Savior counsels us, rather to suffer wrong, then to contend in Law;
and rather to lose our garment, then to contend too earnestly for it.

In those things wherein sin is committed by others, and we no actors nor
consenters in it, we may, in some cases (especially then, when by seeking
revenge, we may plunge and throw our selves ^^to greater dangers and
temptations,) in such cases we may wait patiently, and commit those cases to
God that judges righteously.

Sin shall slay the wicked doer, and God will bring down the evil and the
deceitful men.

He that rises up to right another man's cause, must look well to his own
calling and abilities.

Did not these lie as a bar in the way to hinder Peace and Truth from meeting,
I should be silent, and commit the matter to him that judges righteously, and
so I desire to do.

I shall not use here any carnal weapons, only make some use of Truth, (so
well as I am able) that thereby we may find the way to Peace.

And first, touching the late Kings death, consider that we cannot recall that:
What then? Are you resolved to set up the eldest Son upon the Throne of his
Father?

Consider well of it; Can you tell whether he will prove wise or foolish? Can
you tell whether he will care for the Flock? Can you tell whether he will love
or hate the Flock?

Can you tell whether you should obtain your desires? or whether that the
pursuance thereof may not be a means to ruin your selves, and many others,
that desire to live in peace?

Are you nevertheless resolved to have such a Watchman, such a Shepherd? Will
you expect grapes from thorns?

I have indeed, to my sorrow, heard this with my ears lately spoken, That if a
Turk, or any other as bad almost, should come hither, and contend for the
Government, there would be a great party for him: Oh horrible impiety, that men
should so far be transported beyond the bounds of Reason and Religion!

Indeed there is a generation too apparent, that by their works, by their
swearing, and profaneness, and hatred of those that love and fear the Lord,
declare evidently, that they are Gods enemies.

It is therefore not to be wondered, that God should give them over to strong
delusions, to believe lies.

What if Gods Word declare evidently, That the Government by Judges be better,
more agreeable to his mind, more useful, and more comfortable to us, will you
nevertheless have a King? consider of it.

Friends, Countrymen, Beloved, I have no prejudice against a King; but this I
say, I honor, love, worship, and desire to cleave to the Precepts and
Commandments (of him that is the King of Kings) of him who gave me life, and is
able to raise me up to life, when this span of time is past, when the King of
Terrors has done his utmost spite.

I was no actor in the Kings death, I had taken a great journey above four
years before the death of the King, and was many hundreds of miles distant from
this Land, and returned hither very lately, I speak therefore the more freely,
with more liberty.

I have endeavored, with the greatest care I could, to weigh men's words and
passages in the balance of the Sanctuary, and I find many that speak loosely,
carelessly, and many more profanely.

Is Government of so little concernment to us, that we should rush upon men
that must be our Shepherds, in whose hands our lives and comforts must be next
under God?

I have heard many Reports touching this person whom many do so labor after;
consider well what fruits you see from that branch, what tokens of godliness is
there in him? David says, That he loves those that love the Lord, and hates
those that are Gods enemies: Read Psalm. 22.21, to 29.

David says, Psalm. 37. That the end of the just man is peace.

But the transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked
shall be cut off: Read Psalm. 37. and consider well of it.

Now, is it not apparent, that the person so much desired, has correspondency
with Idolaters, and profane persons?

Does he not love them, and converse most familiarly with many such? Do not his
Letters and Intelligences import so much?

Friends, You that are so eager, do you know what you should gain, in case he
were made your Guide and Ruler?

It is not unlike, but that those persons which are your enemies, should be
made your Judges and Governors, in case you obtain your desires.

To further this end, there is a Malignant party that hates those that love
and fear the Lord, these report, That in the Army there are many Jesuits
countenanced, and that the Parliament and Army prefer and countenance such;
amongst others they mention one Mr Peter's, who they say is a Jesuit.

Let us now, as in the presence of that glorious and strong God (who will one
day destroy the workers of iniquities, and those that invent, love, and sow
lies, (as the devil sows the tares to choke the good corn) these shall feel
the fierce anger of God, when they shall desire that the mountains might fall
upon them, to hide them from the glorious God who loves the Truth,) let us
impartially weigh these Reports.

First for Mr Peter's, I my self have known the man many years, and I have often
heard him preach, I never heard him teach such Doctrines as might give us
occasion to suspect him to adhere to the Jesuits, his Doctrine was godly and
sound; he is zealous and active, but no way addicted that way; and unto this
testimony, I doubt not but that, if need require, I can bring the testimony of
many thousands.

But consider, (unpartial and friendly Reader) it is not on him alone that they
lay such calumnies, but on many others, which are eminent for piety and
holiness.

Now let us a little enquire for the rest of those many Jesuits, touching the
Army, upon the best intelligence that I am able to get, I am informed, that the
General is truly devout and godly, and that there is not any Jesuit (known so
to be) that is either an Officer or a Preacher in the Army.

And touching the Parliaments favoring Jesuits, this I experimentally see and
hear, that in this Kingdom those Ministers whom they countenance and allow
chiefly, are such as teach sound doctrine to my understanding.

And the Royalists, in argument (I never heard any but) do acknowledge so much,
and I have purposely discoursed (about that matter) with diverse of them.

This I see, that (to my understanding) we have just cause to praise God, that
the Gospel is so freely preached

And although some leaven of corrupt doctrine be (against their minds, as I
believe) sown here and there;

Yet it is to be considered, that their hands are full of business, they cannot
yet reform many matters, (I do undoubtedly believe) they will hereafter reform.

Countrymen and Friends, let us consider well of this; do not we, by our
gainsaying, by our perverseness, by our sins, hinder the Government in the
work of Reformation? And if upon just examination we do find our selves guilty,
let us repent and amend, for God will prove and try all our works.

In the mean time consider, that if the contrary party should prevail, can they
that truly love and fear the Lord by that means expect (especially in such
troublesome times) that they shall enjoy more liberty to serve God aright?

Object. But many complain of great Taxations, and that there are defects in
the Administration of Justice; many Debts unpayd, and the impotent Poor
unprovided for.

Answ. I desire every man duly and unpartially to consider, That the Times are
troublesome, many disbursements they have that they cannot avoid, the Army here
and in Ireland, the great number of Ships, of Munition, of Provisions, former
Debts, and many other charges, which every man is not sensible of; all do
hinder, that they cannot do what otherwise they would: I hope (and believe that
it is a great burden and grief to them) that such burdens and taxations
should be, and I believe it is their desire, their study and care, to ease the
People, and to take off these Taxations, with what expedition they can; And I
am not without hope that God will show them a way so to do, (and give them
hearts to make use of it) by which these burdens may be taken off, and the
People comforted. And for the other Grievances, I desire that we may, for the
time being, bear with some inconveniences; I do hope shortly we shall see a
greater Reformation.

In the mean time I desire that we, by our distempers, do not weaken their
proceedings, so that they may not effect such Reformation as otherwise they
might.

And likewise I desire that we may not, by our gainsaying, both hinder those
comforts we might enjoy, and bring upon our selves more and greater Troubles.

This I take notice of, In the Country, sin goes on, and is committed with an
high hand; swearing and cursing, lying and other sins do abound in the sight of
the Sun.

What sin is strange? but for those that fear the Lord, they are an abomination
to the wicked.

Consider this, It is the duty of all men to walk circumspectly and precisely,
as in the presence of an holy God.

Therefore I desire that men, such as are guilty, may no more hate other men
for that which is our own duties.

The consideration of this grievous sin, so abounding, namely, the contempt of
them that fear God, causes me to fear, that God that is jealous of his Honor,
will not suffer this sin to go unpunished.

I fear that a further scourge will pass through the Land, without timely and
serious repentance.

But this I believe, that God will deliver his Church and People.

About sixteen or twenty years ago, I remember, that the profane distinguished
or differenced those that feared the Lord (those that walked the more
circumspectly, and had respect to all Gods Commandments) from themselves, under
this and the like notions, they called them that feared God, by way of disdain,
Puritans, etc.

And now I find, that in company, in many places, if a man out of due regard of
the truth (and fearing to speak that which may provoke Gods displeasure) do but
argue religiously concerning the truth of the passages of Gods Providence, and
persuade others from such open provocations of God, as swearing, whoring, false
speaking, and like sins;

Presently many are apt to mischieve him, it is well for him if he escape with
base language, as Roundhead, Whores-bird, Roundhead, etc. with bitter hatred; I
have lately seen this, and heard it to my sorrow.

It is said of the wicked, That they cast up mire and dirt.

This I say unto those that fear God, Walk humbly, circumspectly, mourn for
these abominations;

And God will spare you, as a man spares his son, in the day of calamity, when
the wicked shall be destroyed together.

I pray you, that are more sober, consider; you hear such complaints against
the General, Officers and Army, put these complaints in the balances of Truth,
bring them to the Touchstone: You have had experience of the behavior of both
parties, on which side did sin (profaneness, plundering, and such acts of
profaneness) most abound?

Were the Officers and Soldiers of the Malignant Army more holy, more
harmless, then this party of this Army?

For which side did God witness? or, do you judge, that God sees not, or
regards not? etc. Well, seek not evasions; do not resolve not to see, not to
consider, not to acknowledge.

Object. But some, I believe, will find fault with me, because I do not name
and particularize actions, persons, times and places more particularly, with
more evident witnesses, etc.

Answ. 1. My time will not suffer me to be so large, although I purpose (if God
will) when I come to points, wherein I purpose to engage or insist in those
things, I purpose to be more punctual.

2. I answer, That men do not use candlelight at noon days, when the Sun
shines bright, but in dark places.

So are these matters, they are not done in corners; these matters are
accompanied with a cloud of witnesses.

Your own experiences, your own consciences, rightly balanced, are more then a
thousand witnesses.

There are extant in some Books, many of these particulars, where they are more
largely handled; only I hope it will not be grievous, if I put you in mind of
those things whereof you have experience already.

Moreover those miraculous passages of Gods Providence, wherein (Digitus Dei)
the finger of God evidently appeared, and does still appear to admiration.

So that if our hearts be not hardened, and our eyes blinded, (I conceive) these
are witnesses sufficient.

But notwithstanding, if we shut our eyes, if they be not opened, I do
conceive, and answer as Abraham answered to Dives, being in torments;

That if one should arise from the dead, you would not believe.

But let men judge what they please, this is the comfort and stay to them whose
hearts are right with God, namely this, That God sees, he regards, he is a
strong God, a wise and faithful God, he will make bare his arm, and mightily
work for the good of his chosen, and to the confusion of his enemies.

Object. Courteous Reader, Christian Friend, lest thou should take offense,
because I kept not more close to the matter propounded:

Answ. I seeing and considering the great bitterness, the great heat that
evidently appears to be in the prejudiced and fore-stalled hearts of many men.

I endeavored only to qualify that heat, and in part to remove that prejudice,
otherwise (I conceived that) there would be no place for Peace and Truth to
meet together. But to proceed.

The man that has most effectually written (to my apprehension) that yet has
come (to my knowledge) to hinder Peace and Truth at this time from meeting, is
Mr William Prynne, in his Book called The substance of a Speech made in the
House of Commons.

Touching this man, I have no prejudice against him, I never saw him, to my
knowledge.

I have likewise met with some other of his Labors, and upon some consideration
of the matters in them contained, to my best apprehension, this I find, That
he has taken much pains, that he is a man endowed with diverse good gifts (if
they be sanctified:) I do believe he is zealously affected, and that his
intendments are for the glory of God, and for the good of the People.

I love the man, and do believe that we shall both meet before God, and his
glorious Angels, to both our comforts, through the rich mercy and free favor of
our God, in his dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ.

I would not cast dirt upon all his Labors, but only I shall endeavor to sift
and winnow them, and desire him to recollect his thoughts, and to revive his
Works over again; and where he finds an error, I desire him to recall that,
and to revoke it.

Who knows the errors of his life?

In many things we sin all: This persuasion I have of Mr William Prynne, That
he is so zealous, and so ingenuous, that he will not persist in a known error.

Paul being in an error, when he persecuted Christ in his members, brought much
glory to God, great advantage to his Church, and left himself as an eminent
pattern for others to imitate.

When, and after he saw his error, he recanted, and repented, and repaired his
error.

In the first Scripture alleged, I find this place cited out of Mat. 5.9.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of GOD.

This place, in his intendments, points out that which he hoped (as I
believe) should be the issue of his Labors in the work following.

But here I find that of Solomon verified:

That the race is not always to the swift, nor riches to men of understanding.

For had this speech of his prevailed, it would have been so far from causing
peace, that I do believe both we, and the children yet unborn, should have had
cause to lament it.

Had his speech, there declared in that book, prevailed, it would have effected
much more sorrow and trouble then before.

The next Scripture is, Psalm. 68.30. Rebuke the company of spearmen, scatter
thou the people that delight in War.

Some Translations read it thus, Destroy the Company, etc.

This Text here is placed as a leading exhortation to the Reader, to persuade
them to follow this example.

This place, compared with that which goes before, and with that which
follows after, plainly holds out thus much:

That Mr Prynne did endeavor to render the Army, root and branch, odious, (for
the Army consisted of the Head and Members) which appears in the first leaf,
in the Title or Inscription of his Book, in these words; namely,

The Armies Remonstrance, November. 20. is a way to speedy and certain ruin, and
a mere plot of the Jesuits to destroy us.

This he presents to the whole Kingdom.

I hope by this time Mr Prynne sees cause to recall and revoke this: For he
inviteth the Kingdom with him to pray, That God would destroy the Army, in the
Scripture before cited.

I say, with Steven the Martyr, Act. 7.60. Lord lay not this sin to his charge.

I answer, by way of reply to this Scripture, That when men do lay unjust
slanders and reproaches upon others, and hate them without just cause, it
comes to pass oft-times that God does turn these slanders and unjust
reproaches into blessings.

Balak sent for Balaam to detest Jacob, and to curse Israel.

But God turned that curse intended into a blessing, Numb. 23.8.

How shall I curse, where God has not cursed?

Verse. 24. Behold, the People shall rise up as a Lion; he shall not lie down
till he eat of the prey, and till he drink the blood of the slain. etc.

Numb. 24.5. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Habitations, O Israel!
Verse. 6. As the valleys are they stretched forth, as the gardens by the rivers
sides, as the Aloe-tree which the Lord has planted, as the Cedars besides the
waters.

Verse. 9. Blessed be he that blesses thee, etc.

These things I desire may be well noted and weighed.

In this matter, first, Has not God, in the sight of all the world, turned
this imprecation into a blessing.

For God has been so far from destroying that Army, that, on the contrary, God
has destroyed their Enemies, and preserved them.

Note, secondly, That this imputation was unjustly laid upon this Army, namely,
that they delighted in War.

For this I do undoubtedly believe, That the Generals, and chief of the Army,
and many others, were so far from delighting in War, that it was their grief
that they could not find the way to true Peace without War.

God is the Searcher of all hearts, and he has shown, and will show, who those
blood-thirsty men are, there meant by David.

Thirdly, Note, That it is evident (if we consider the substance of Mr Prynnes
speech, in the latter part especially,) that the Officers of the Army were
rendered odious by Mr Prynne, in the face of the Parliment publicly, in so
much that he says, That they sought the destruction of the Commonwealth.

This could not be hid from the Army.

Dearly beloved Countrymen, Do by them as you would be dealt withal, had you
been in their places, judge righteously.

Consider that this Army hazarded their lives, and many lost their Lives
amongst them, of their dear Friends, in defense of the Parliament and
Commonwealth.

There was now but a step between them and death.

For may not any rational man see plainly, That they being, at the time being,
rendered odious, and Enemies to the Commonwealth, by Mr William Prynne, in a
public way: What wanted then to bring them to destruction? Only this in a
rational way wanted, That the King might be made their Head and Governor; and
by that means who is so blind that does not see, that the Kings helpers, in
time of his Troubles, should have been exalted, and made their Judges: The Army
themselves were to be disbanded, that Mr Prynne seeks in his speech to
effect; and without controversy, it had been disbanded, had not God showed the
Army the danger, and the snare, that they were in: and withal, if God had not
given to the General, and to the Army, an undaunted courage, and if the
blessing of God had not gone along with them, they had been destroyed.

For, as touching the Kings party, of them, of their former mercies (or
cruelties rather) the Army had had experience too much, for to trust them upon
such slight pretenses.

Consider now, deal unpartially: would not you, if it were your case, rather
your enemies, and Gods enemies, and the countries enemies, should perish,
rather then your selves and many others?

Well, had the Army sat still, till they had been destroyed; we might have
lamented over their, and our miseries in David's language, 2 Samuel 3.33. Thus
dyed Abner as a fool dies.

Verse. 34. Thine hands were not bound, nor thy feet tied in fetters of Brass.

But here I end with this Scripture, hoping that God may one day show M. Prynn
cause to revoke this imprecation.

In the mean time he may evidently see, that it is turned to a blessing.

Concerning M. Pryns Speech, I could answer to the particulars; but considering
the straitness of present time, and likewise considering, that if I should be
long, some of his papers might be read of too many. Therefore I observe David's
counsel in another case, who desiring to cover Saul's death, and Jonathans,
desired That it might not be told in Gath, nor published in the Gates of
Askelon, least it caused the daughters of the Philistines to rejoice.

I shall therefore endeavor to bind up his answer fast together, his Speech may
be divided into two parts, viz.

In the first, I find many witty and ingenious contrivances, fine twined threads
(or to give them a term more suitable to his intentions) let them be taken for
such cords as the Philistines used to bind Sampson with: Therefore we shall let
them pass under this name, M. Prynns new inventions, to bind the King, and
secure the Commonwealth to be in a firm lasting peace, etc. and future
felicity.

The Second part may be considered under this notion; M. Prynns endeavor to
render the Army odious, and enemies to the Commonwealth.

I do hope and believe that M. Prynne his aims and intendments were real, for
to obtain Peace and Safety.

But I believe that he was mistaken, and erred from the pattern showed in Gods
revealed will, very far.

When I looked well upon M. Prynn his Speech, with what learning, wit and
eloquence it is contrived, considering his parts.

It occasioned me to remember Paul's speech, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. Thus ^xpressed.

God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and the
weak things of the world, to confound the mighty.

Verse. 28. And vile things of the world, and things which are despised, and
things which are not, has God chosen to bring to naught things that are.

Our blessed Savior shows us a reason of this, Math. 11.25.

I give thee thanks O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise, and men of understanding, and have opened them to
babes.

Verse. 26. It is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such.

In our times it is not to be much marvelled at, that wise men come short, when
we consider of former times, the children of Israel were very apt to break,
slight, and neglect Gods commandments, and to prefer their own inventions.

Was it not strange that they should forsake that Fountain of living Waters,
that great God Jehovah, of whose Faithfulness, Wisdom, Power, Goodness,
Long-suffering, They had had such large experience of?

Yet search the Scriptures, and you may see many instances how they distrusted
God, how they forsook God, murmured, complained, despised, and provoked God,
from time to time.

Was it not to be admired that they should forsake God, and set up a golden
Calf in Moses his absence?

Was it not to be admired, That having had such experience of Gods Providence
and Blessing, under the Government of those Humble, Wise, Faithful Judges or
Governors, being such men as entered into their Offices by the immediate and
prescribed will of God, from Moses to Samuel?

Under which Governors they had no cause to complain, as by their own
confession upon Samuels enquiry appeared.

Yet notwithstanding, They would and did reject God their King, and his
Deputies, the Judges, and they preferred obstinately Kings of their own
invention, in imitation of the Heathen round about, and so they changed the
form of Government prescribed, owned, and blessed by God, and set up their own
inventions, (against which, God opposed) with many circumstances, arguments,
threatenings, and by miracle from heaven.

Yet they went on obstinately, they would have a King whatsoever it cost, what,
or how great evils soever came thereof.

And if we consider, the very root and branch that leads M. Prynn, and many
other wise men out of the way, arises from hence. Because they depart from
Gods wisdom revealed in the holy Scrsptures.

And in the stead thereof, prefer their own inventions.

M. William Prynn endeavoreth in the whole substance of his Speech, to bind the
King with new ropes, such as the Philistines bound Sampson with, and likewise
with seven green cords, and with new ropes never occupied; and yet more, he
plats his locks (as it were) and fasteneth them with the thread and pin of the
Web and the Woof.

But all this to little purpose, for I would grant M. Prynn some part of his
argument, which he often rehearses, namely, that such contrivances, such
manacles, were not put upon any (or scarcely any) King for a long season or
from the Creation etc.

Yet all to little purpose, for bind Sampson, and miss that way or place
wherein his strength rests, and he will break all your Cords asunder.

For in the first place it evidently appears, That these obligations and ties
were sinful, if they could have taken effect.

Secondly, They were too weak to hold him under, namely the late King.

Thirdly, They failed in regard they reached not the place where his strength
lay.

Fourthly, These matters propounded by M. Prynn were not likely to prove to be
a means to help the people, but rather to trouble them, and would have brought
upon the people, if they had come to effect, many and great evils, and
adversities which the people could no way have shuned, as I doubt not but that
I shall make it evidently to appear in the following part of this book, by the
help of God.

Concerning M. William Prynn; I look upon him as a man of far more eminent
parts then my self: this I speak not out of by-respects, but in the presence of
that glorious God who I do love and fear.

I am very fearful to presume above that which is meet.

Yet this I say, That in this matter I believe the Lord has showed to me his
weakness.

I am willingly content to be tried by the word of God, in which trial, I
desire all such as truly love God, and his Truth, that (without turning to the
right or left hand) they will judge uprightly.

First I conceive, That this M. Prynne sinned in; namely, because that he
invented and prescribed a way to take away from the King diverse rights and
privileges which God allowed to all lawful and good Kings, (which all Kings
ought to be) and recorded in the Scriptures, the unerring rule of Truth.

I say it appears plainly that this was sinful, because this way, prescribed
by M. Prynne in the endeavors of his whole speech, was not a way prescribed by
God, but directly forbidden in the whole tenor of the Scriptures by evident
testimonies, which speak directly of that power or authority which God gave to
Governors and to Kings.

I doubt not but that will evidently appear, (being duly, and thoroughly tried)
that it is as great an evil to deprive any lawful Governor, or King, of that
authority and power which God allows to them, by deminishing it, as it is a
sin and error on the other hand to give to them more power then God does allow
them in his Will, revealed in his Word.

And further it will plainly appear upon due examination, That both these are
very injurious to the peoples good, comfort, and safety; That is to say, it
will appear that M. Prynnes advise in deminishing that power and authority due
to Governors, was both a breach of Gods Law, and very injurious to the people.

God says expressly, Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2. Hearken O Israel, unto the Ordinances and
laws which I teach you.

Verse. 2. Ye shall put nothing to the word which I command you, neither shall
ye take ought therefrom.

We may not do that which seems good in our own eyes, but all that God
commands us.

We sin as well if we turn to the right hand, as if we turn to the left hand,
if we add or deminish, to, or from Gods commandments.

Now let us note M. Prynnes own expressions, which are often repeated, words to
the same effect.

M. Prynne says, fol. 37. The King has wholly stripped himself, his heirs and
successors, for ever, of all that power and interest which his Predecessors
always enjoyed, in the Militia, Forces, Forts, and Navy of England, Ireland,
etc.

First, In this observe, That the King did not this willingly, but by the
seeking and consent of M. Prynne.

Secondly, To be stripped wholly for ever of all that power which his Predecessors
always enjoyed, was more then God allows.

For observe well, this must needs follow, That either all the power which the
late King, or his Predecessors enjoyed, was unlawful, (which could not possibly
be, except they were usurpers, and entered not into the sheepfold aright at
the door, etc.) or else it is evident that Mr. Prynne would have taken from the
King that power which God, and the people gave, yielded, and did acknowledge to
be due to all lawful and good Shepherds or Governors, that entered by the door
into the Sheepfold, in all former times.

This will appear by record of holy Scripture, That Governors were allowed by
God and the people: Government in those matters, of and in which M. Prynne
prescribed a way to take from him a power very eminent and considerable.

The Judges of Israel never claimed nor exercised more power over the people
(whether it were in War, or in Peace; whether in those things we distinguish
under names of Spiritual or Temporal matters) then the King did afterward, for
in this matter the Kings took more power.

Now it is evident, That the Judges took, and the People willingly gave to the
Judges, and afterward to the Kings which succeeded, that Power and Authority
in many cases; which lawful Power M. Prynne labors to take away, and that in
an high degree.

Now consider that it does expressly appear, if we consider what power God
offered to Joshua, and the people promised him; Recorded,

Jos. 1.16. All that thou command us, we will do, and whithersoever thou
sendest us, we will go.

Verse. 17. As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee.

Secondly, God gave to Kings, and the people gave to Kings, as much power of
Government and command, as unto the Judges, in lawful things.

It is evident, That at Joshua's command, the people were armed to the war, and
that they were directed by him without asking leave of other inferior Officers,
or of the people.

It is evident likewise that David, Saul, Solomon, etc. did many acts of War
and Peace, without any such manacles.

I would not multiply Scripture to prove such apparent matters.

Now if this be not a sin, if it be not the direct breach of Gods command, in a
high and great measure, for Mr Prynne to take from the King his lawful
privileges, my understanding fails me.

This sin has been punished severely, both in the times of the Judges and
Kings; let the godly wise consider it.

Beloved Countrymen, it is no light matter who we make to be, or receive to be
either King or Governor.

We had need to pray to God (to search the Scriptures) we had need to enquire
of God who shall govern us.

For we must give, and yield unto Gods Stewards (and our lawful Governors) so
much and no less power, then God has afforded to them in the holy Scriptures.

It is just with God, for the looseness, wantonness, and wickedness of people,
when they enquire not of God (when they attend not to the prescribed Rule of
his Word) to know who shall guide them, but rashly, carelessly, and slightly
follow their own inventions about Governors:

I say, It is just with God, that Wolves in sheeps clothing should deceive
them: And whereas they might lie down by the still waters in peace without
fear, if they would take counsel of God who should govern them.

For the want of this watchfulness, for want of enquiring of God, and keeping
close to those patterns, those rules appointed by God in his revealed will, the
sacred and unerring rule of truth the Scriptures, it comes to pass that the
People err in their choice and in accepting of those persons to govern them,
that are not men appointed by God.

Hence it comes to pass the People they are molested, persecuted, devoured,
and rest in continual fear: and the misery is, they see not the cause of their
disease.

God well knew this, therefore when he would show mercy to Israel his first
born Son, when no strange god was with him, then he took especial care to
provide good Shepherds, which Shepherds he furnished with his blessed Spirit.

He commanded them to carry the Sheep of his pasture in their bosom: God
blessed, directed, strengthened, protected such Governors and Government of his
own devising.

Moses a man much in favor with God, a man enriched with a great measure of the
Spirit of God, did well know, weigh and consider, of what great concernment it
was for the peoples good, That God (and not the People) should appoint a man to
be the Shepherd of his people.

No doubt he considered as much the Peoples Liberty as we do, and that the
People might (unwarrantably) have chosen themselves a Governor after his
decease, but he saw much of Gods mind, and the Peoples good rested in the
choice of the person.

Therefore Moses knowing that the people might err in choosing themselves a
Leader, he therefore seriously and earnestly desires of God that he would
appoint a man, Numb. 27.16. Let the God of the spirits of all flesh appoint a
man over the Congregation.

Verse. 17. Who may go out and in before them, that the Congregation of the Lord
be not as sheep without a shepherd. Mark how God answers them that seek for
safety and direction to him, and trust not in themselves.

Here we may note two considerable matters:

First, That Moses looked more at Gods glory and the Peoples good, then at the
preferring his Children to Government.

A true Note of a true Shepherd.

Secondly, Note, That in the Government, that in these first and purest times,
(when Israel his strength was as an Unicorn) then, when God prescribed
Governors, in Mercy to his first born Son, Government went not by succession,
from Father to Son, in those times, from Moses to Samuels time.

Indeed afterward, when the people would slight God, and obstinately cast God
off, from being their King, it is considerable likewise, That God removed,
then, his gracious presence farther off from them then before, (though for his
own goodness sake he did not wholly depart from them) yet he stood at a farther
distance from them.

From that time to this, Government has usually followed by natural
generation, from Father to the eldest Son: (I say not that it has been thus by
Gods Commandment, for I purpose, if God will, in time convenient, to speak a
word to that, to try the case.)

Hence it has come to pass, That a good Father begetting an evil Son, the
People have been miserably afflicted.

O that People would be wise to learn by their own experiences!

Well, let the world do what they please, I purpose (seeing God has promised
to restore Judges as at the first) that I will not cast away my confidence and
hope that God will perform his Word, and that we may see it performed.

Object. But why might not the People have chosen themselves a Governor, was
there any great matter in that?

Ans. The People were so well instructed in Joshua his time, that after his
time, the State being left vacant of a principal Guide, they did not count it
to be safe for them to choose themselves, therefore they asked counsel of God,
and attended to Gods direction, as appears by their actions, Judges 1.1.
After that Joshua was dead, the Children of Israel asked the Lord, saying, Who
shall go up for us, etc.

On the contrary, look how it fared when the people chose themselves, and by
succession, recorded Judges 9.6. And all the men of Shechem came and made
Abimilech King, etc.

By which choice of the peoples own invention, in which they consulted not,
they enquired not of God, who should govern them.

If we read the place recorded, for our learning, we may see what great
afflictions did befall them; which did evidently spring from this root, namely,
their mistaking the man.

More I purpose concerning this matter afterward, if God will.

Our Savior says, If the first fruits be holy, so are the branches: This was
the first president (I conceive) revealed, That the Son of a chief Judge
succeeded in Government next after his Fathers death: and I conceive the people
liked this so well, that during the time of the Judges till they had forgotten
this, and grew wanton (till they rejected God) there was not the like example
or practice.

This I insert only as a taste, and to prepare your minds to consider of what
concernment it is to eye God in choosing Governors, for we may not warrantably
deprive Governors of those lawful rights and privileges granted them by God.

Neither is it in the power of the People to remove a King or Governor: I would
not be mistaken here, for where I affirm, that it is not in the power of a
People to remove, depose, and punish a Governor in case of Delinquency, the
Reason I intend is, Because that such eminent persons are usually compassed
about with such giant-like assistants, that although it be evident in
Scripture, that the People have right in diverse cases to depose and to punish
offenders, yet they dare not, they cannot at their pleasure; they may possibly,
by woeful experience, come to see they are mistaken in the man, and they may cry
out by reason of their afflictions, but how to remedy them they cannot tell,
for want of power.

Woeful experience we have now had of this, whereby we may easily discern how
hard a matter it is to remove a King or Governor, though never so apparently a
Delinquent, let us be warned, and enquire of God who shall govern us, so shall
we be sure we shall not err.

But to return, we may further observe in the same leaf, that Mr. Prynne does
acknowledge, That this way, and these prescriptions, were such as he had no
warrant for, neither from the sacred Scriptures, nor from any other president,
recorded in humane Records.

Fol. 37. his words are these, None of our Ancestors ever demanded or enjoyed
the like; nor no other Kingdom whatsoever since the Creation, etc.

I will not contradict his Testimony in these his expressions.

In this I fully agree, that the sacred Scriptures, the unerring Rule of Truth,
is so far from retaining such a president, as that the Scriptures Testimonies
are evident, copious and eminent in the direct opposition.

Consider what Mr Prynne further speaks in his Speech, fol. 39. his words are
these, These great Officers and Judges having now no dependence at all upon the
King, who can neither place nor displace any of them. And a little further he
adds these words, As the King has entrusted you with etc. so has he entrusted
you with his Conscience, and Courts of Equity too, etc.

This was a rare matter for a King, or Supreme Judge, to entrust another man
with his Conscience, and more, with his Courts of Judicature.

A little further he adds, ( fol. 40.) That never any Parliament in England
claimed or enjoyed such matters as these, etc.

I do verily believe a great part of the former.

I hear some use very bitter expressions against new opinions, and against some
that are not so indeed.

But let the godly Reader unpartially consider, That these matters are new
Opinions, indeed such as neither Scripture, nor humane Records can produce, by
his own confession.

And further note, That these are not new Opinions, about circumstantial
matters, but they do much concern Gods Glory, Kings, Governors, Peoples future
security: Are not these Opinions Capital? If Errors, they are great ones.

I shall but touch one Use I make of this, and desire all that are godly to
consider, namely, That it is good to be humble, meek and lowly; for God says,
That he will teach the humble, and instruct the meek.

Jam. 3.17. That Wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated.

Verse. 14. But if there be bitter envying and strife in our hearts, rejoice
not; for this Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and
devilish.

Verse. 18. The fruits of Righteousness is sown in Peace, of them that love
Peace.

Many in these times cry out against Opinions, that never knew, nor seriously
examined their own hearts.

First, It is good to examine our own hearts, where we shall easily see much
ignorance, much pride, much evil.

In many things we sin all, Jam. 3.2.

Now this benefit we shall have thereby, that we shall be the more merciful, in
censuring others.

There is a generation abounds now, that will be wiser then those Governors
that God has set over us:

And do exclaim against our Governors, for their remissness, in that they do
not at once root out all Errors.

But consider, thou that do thus, may not thy lot fall amongst the number of
those Heretics, against whom thou art so fierce?

Could we wait and persuade our Governors, in meekness of wisdom, for
Reformation of things amiss, then we should sooner prevail, because God would
go along with us.

Mr Prynne is very hot, at some times, in censuring and delivering other men's
opinions over to the Sword of the Christian Magistrate; I could advise him to
take heed, that he be not too quick-sighted, to spy, to condemn and persecute
other men for their opinions: I advise and counsel him, and my own heart, to be
slow to wrath, slow to censure others.

Let us set the staff at our own doors, for we know not how soon it may come to
our own turn to be in error.

James 3. That wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, etc.

Mr Prynne was in a great Error, in laboring to take from the King, as a King,
any power rightfully due.

God helped the Army, and the remaining part of the Parliament (I do believe)
to discern the way that God had appointed to remedy those evils in such a way
as he himself had appointed.

Consider we well of two things in this Mr Prynne's Speech.

First, he says, That the King should be deprived of all Right and Power in
the nomination of Governors.

Against this the Scripture is directly in opposition; for in the first and
purest time Moses had that authority to appoint, or, at the least, to approve
of the Officers under or inferior to him: Read and observe the place, Exodus
18.24.

And Moses chose men of courage out of all Israel, and made them Heads over the
People, and they judged the People at all seasons.

David he appointed the Officers of the Army, as namely, Joab, the Captain of
the Host, and others; and we may read, That the Kings placed and displaced
many, put to death and pardoned many.

I cannot be large in proving such evident matters, I shall have occasion in
the Sequel to treat more of these matters.

Such as will have Kings (against Gods will) they may here see that verified,
that Samuel speaks of, namely, That they shall cry out by reason of their
afflictions, but God will not here them.

It is many years since the days of Samuel, and the people have been much
corrupted and oppressed by evil Kings, which no doubt the people discerned
plainly, but none durst, none could help themselves.

And had not God stirred up these worthy men (men that to posterities to come
shall be recorded) for their courage and faithfulness, in helping the Lord
against the mighty, in delivering the people out of that Egyptian Bondage.

Consider a word, dear Countrymen, under Kings we bestowed time and cost to
instruct our children in the ways of godliness.

Suppose the King, then being, should dye, or some Idolaters poison or make him
away, and set up his Son, who they see is inclining to Idolatry, in his stead,
what then follows? Answ. Then all our labor is lost, or else our children
shall be persecuted and slain, for not forsaking their former principles; and
this comes often to be the affliction both of the Father and of the Child.

Oh that God would open our hearts to be wise!

Well, by my consent, these Noble Acts of these worthies of the Lord shall be
recorded in Capital Letters, that the Posterity following may praise God for
them, that they have been a means to restore Judges as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning.

I do not dive much into the Laws of man, because as my time will not suffer
me, so likewise my intent is to have recourse to the Original, the Will of God
revealed in the Scriptures.

For this I doubt not, but that all other Laws are (or ought to be) derived
from Gods Laws, those being both the Root and Fountain from whence they do
spring, and also the Pattern and Rule to square them by, and to try the Equity
of them, their bounds and limits.

I labor (with the best abilities that God does afford to me) that I may not
decline from Gods Laws, either to the right or to the left hand, and that I may
neither add nor deminish from these Rules prescribed by God.

I see that diverse men look so much to other Rules and Inventions, that they
forget or turn aside from Gods Testimonies.

Fol. 39. Touching the other part, M. Prynne says, That the King has
entrusted others with his Conscience, etc.

I conceive it is one great part of the duty of a superior Judge, to have a
chief influence, and an especial part in the determination of the most weighty
matters of the State.

Therefore (I do conceive that) where any shall depart with this chief part of
his work and trust, and put it wholly out of his own power, it may truly be said
of them, That they likewise do part with their conscience too, namely, with
their good conscience.

It is evident that when Moses (for the ease of himself, and of the people) did
appoint other Judges or Officers.

Yet, the most weighty and difficult cases, he judged them himself, as
appears in these words;

Exodus 18.26. But they brought the hard causes to Moses, for they judged all
small matters themselves.

This is clear, That both the judges, and afterward the Kings, did judge the
most weighty affairs of the State.

Therefore (it seems to me to be evident that) it is sinful to take that
power from Governors that God allows to them.

And this (I conceive) is so far from securing the Peoples Peace, That
contrarily it brings heavy burdens, and unavoidable inconveniences, as (God
willing) shall after be showed. Untempered mortar will hardly well, and
strongly, cleave together.

I shall now proceed to show, in what respects M. Prynnes endeavors were too
weak to bind the King, had he been restored to his Throne, which is the second
Thing propounded.

Solomon says, Prove. 20.2. That the fear of a King is like to the roaring of a
Lion; That is, it is terrible: and Prove. 30.31.

We may see, that even the godly oft-times, out of fear, do consent to do those
things, which they ought not to do.

When David desired to number the People, his Officers desired him (so far as
they durst) that he would desist from it; 2 Samuel 24.4. Notwithstanding the
Kings word prevailed against Joab, and against the Captains of the Host, etc.

Consider, I pray you, That in case that the late King had been restored to his
Throne, would not many have subjected to his Commands? would not many have
sought his favor? Solomon knew that experimentally, Prove. 29.26. Many do seek
the face of the Ruler.

To my apprehension, it is very evident, That considering how strong a party
(for number, personable men, fitted with many outward appearances, very likely
to prevail, and so they must needs have prevailed, had God been on their side,)
I say, considering what great numbers did appear, and attempt with all their
strength and skill, to the end that they might have raised the King into his
Throne by force, against the wills (and without the consent) of the Parliament,
without the consent, and against the force of the Army, and of the People;
without any Articles and Agreement:

And considering further, That these Attempts were then made when the King was
in adversity, when he had no authority or means to recompense them:

And considering further, That these Attempts were made in such a time, as
there were some armed Forces, in some measure, ready to oppose and punish them:

To my apprehension, (it is very evident) That had the King so far prevailed,
to have gained his Throne again, he was likely to have had many more helps,
when he had so many advantages more.

For many of the Parliament (it is more then probable) would have taken his
party; many of the people that before were afraid to help him, would now have
flocked in to strengthen him; many that were fled out of the Land, would have
returned; many that would have helped him, for the hope reward: Neighbor
Nations, in all probability, would have complied with him; and many more helps,
which now I cannot reckon of up: The Army, his opposites, they were to be
disbanded.

Who now would or durst have spoken against his proceedings? It is more then
probable, that in short time the godly must have counted that a mercy if they
could have fled into a corner; yea, many of those which then and now were, and
are so much forward to have restored him to his Authority which formerly he had
had, even these likewise should have tasted of the cup of his indignation: who
knows not the danger of a reconciled enemy, especially against whom they had
so many ways offended, and more especially when he had had power, and they
dejected?

It is likely that the Army, those especially as had been most eminent and most
faithful to the State, should have drunk deep of the cup of his indignation;
but God helped them to see, and to prevent this, in which we may see (except we
will shut our eyes) Digitus Dei, the very finger of God, against all
opposition: For had they sat still (having a lawful power in their hands, as I
conceive they had, to help themselves) till they had been destroyed, we might
have lamented over them, Thus dyed Abner as a fool dies: His feet were not
made fast in the stocks, neither were his hands bound with fetters of brass.

Consider these things, you that fear God, judge righteous judgment; might not
our children yet unborn have had just cause to have bewailed their fathers
folly? Do we, or can any man (endowed with reason) think (if we will speak, and
plainly declare our hearts) that the King would ever have been so confined as
Mr Prynnes Speech imports? No, doubtless these bonds were too weak to bind
Sampson, because they reached not that place wherein his strength lay.

Consider but this, in the next Point, which is the third point propounded,
namely this, That these Propositions reached not the seat of his strength; the
essence or being of his strength lay (to my apprehension) in these two
considerable places, namely, in his Throne, in his Power, that by virtue of
that place was belonging to him; his strength lay in his inward affections,
there is the second place lay his strength.

For the first, I have spoken already, it armed him with sufficient Power to
oppose his opposers, and to suppress them.

And touching the second, namely, his inward affections, this was the next
security to the People; in both these Mr Prynnes Arguments do fail, and lose
the end propounded, namely, our security.

For touching the first, his Arguments, they tended to bring the King into his
Throne, where had he been settled, we should have found, by experience, to our
cost, that Kings are of too great Power to be put into, and kept in such
fetters long or often.

And touching the second, namely, his Heart, of that we have had much
experience; for if we look to the fruits, (a sure rule to discern the heart,
where actions are apparent,) there we may plainly see, that his heart was
carried away from us to our adversaries; for proof of this, I desire that we
may look back to his favoring Idolatry and Idolaters, and profane persons,
and his suppressing and discountenancing the most faithful Ministers and People.

Was it not for these, and such like matters, that the whole Kingdom in a
manner did forsake and oppose him at the first? And did it not evidently appear
afterward, during the War all along, that his helpers, and his Favorites were
Papists, (and I believe many little better then Atheists,) and most profane
persons, insomuch that they distinguished or differenced themselves from them
that feared God by titles and carriages, suitable to their profane hearts?

Have we forgotten the horrible Blasphemies, damnable swearing, profane
cursing, a note which the Holy Ghost gives as a property of Gods enemies? Romans
3.14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; destruction and calamity
are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, the fear of God is
not before their eyes, etc.

Have we forgotten their whoring, plundering, their perfideous dealings, their
fine designs, their bloody cruelties? Beloved Friends, these sins were not
committed in corners, in secret, but in the sight of the Sun.

And were not many or most of their principal Leaders, leading men to give them
patterns in sinning?

I would advise our Royalists now to take heed what they do, for it is very
evident, that to this day a great part (to speak with as much moderation as I
may) of those that are so bitterly against the Army and Parliament, declare too
evidently, That there is too little fear of God before their eyes, but much
blasphemous swearing, much cursing, much hatred against them that fear God.

I am a witness of this to my sorrow.

They, that party, that cry out most especially against the diversity of
Opinions, but in the mean time many of them agree in one joint Opinion (witness
their fruits) namely this, That they will cast off Gods yoke, his Commandments;
They will be so far from doing the good will of God, that they hate him that
they perceive has respect to Gods Laws.

I hope there are many that fear God, that through weakness seem to side with
that party, but let them beware, for if that party could prevail, they should
find a strong party against themselves.

Well, if I should be silent, and the stones they tread on should hold their
peace, yet the most high God sees these things, who is a God jealous of his
honor, and will not hold such wicked guiltless.

Dear Friends, (I call God to record) That with grief I rehearse these matters,
neither do I do it out of hatred to that party, but aiming at Gods glory, their
true good and conversion.

Consider, dear Friends, Do not those intelligences and correspondences, which
the King held all along with Papists, Idolaters, with those bloody Murderers
in Ireland, (who filled their shoes with the blood of so many thousands in
Ireland, and that in a time of Peace, as if it had been in a time of War;) Do
not these declare, That the late King his heart was not right with the Lord?

Can any man shut his eyes so close to hide these things from his sight?

Note further what the King granted, and Mr Prynne lays down as a sure
foundation to build a sort upon against the revival of Bishops; In his Speech
he says, That the King consents to put down corrupt Bishops, and their
appurtenances, etc. but with this clause, That he will still allow of
Apostolical Bishops: He says, The King contendeth for no other now, but their
power of Ordination only.

Who is so blind, now, that does not see the Kings heart in this lowest time
of his dejection?

Now for us to hope, That our power shall prevail more then the King his power,
in case he had been again received as a King, (I do conceive) our hope should
have been built upon the sand.

Consider we further, That suppose that the Kings heart was most cordial for
the Papists, (of which there was just cause of suspicion, if we consider of all
the premises together) then we may easily gather, That a Dispensation from the
Pope would take away all these bonds.

Moreover, let us but consider, That in case the late King had been restored,
if his heart had not been firm, he should not have wanted enough men that would
have persuaded him, that these ties or cords, with which he was bound, were
forced upon him in his afflictions, and that God had afforded to Kings other
and more power:

And that it should be a sin in him not to break such unlawful Covenants forced
upon him.

And like it is, That the King would have readily consented.

Then should they that had been actors in making those acts, been accounted
vilde, and sinners, and no doubt but that they should quickly have tasted of
the cup of his displeasure.

4. Lastly, Consider, That in case that these obligations could have prevailed,
yet what comfort or benefit should the Commonwealth have received thereby?

Ans. 1. We should have had the maintenance of a titulary King, and his
Company, to have provided for.

Secondly, We should have had continual emulation and jealousies between the
King and the Subject, or Parliament, who must have kept some armed Force for
their defense.

For, can we conceive, That the King and his Favorers would ever have taken it
well and quietly, to have been thus deprived of those things that they would
have conceived to have belonged to all his predecessors always, and that no
Record from the Creation (neither divine nor humane) could give a president for?

Thirdly, Do we think this would have brooked, if the Parliament must (in a
full Body, consisting of Lords and Commons) have given their direction and
consent to so many State-matters, from time to time?

Then (it seems to me that) it would have unavoydably followed, That the
Parliament must have sitten continually, or at the least very often.

From which (or upon which) I do not see but that the Parliament Men would have
been so wearied, that they would have sought to have relinquished this.

And (I do conceive) that the People would by this means have been distracted,
divided, and molested with Taxations to bear this great charge, besides many
other grievances I forbear.

Fourthly, To sum up all Mr Prynnes Endeavors together, they hold out thus much.

First, He laboreth to exalt him to the Throne, to that honor to be our
Shepherd, our Governor; a man, who (I believe) God had appointed to death.

Secondly, He seeks the setting up, and the continuance of a Kingly
Government, which (I believe) God has numbered and finished.

Thirdly, He seeks to destroy, or to weaken those which were (instrumentally)
our best friends.

Fourthly, He held it safer for the Commonwealth, and more advantageous, for
to have the constant Government of the Commonwealth to be determined by such a
great number of Parliament Men, rather then by one as chief, and other
Officers, as Judges, distributed unto their several Charges: but how far this
would have been from the pattern of the will of God revealed in the Scripture;
and how far this would have burdened the people, and put them from their peace
and comfort, I purpose, if God will, to show afterward, in the place thereof,
more at large.

All these arise from this root, He sees the Commonwealth to be troubled, and
out of order; and (I believe) he labored painfully to cure and remedy those
troubles: But God hid from his eyes what was the true cause, and thence
proceeded his mistakes in the remedy.

Consider only this task, When Moses sat, and the whole People came about
him, from morning to night, it was too great a burden both to him and them:
But in case many Moses's, many Judges, had been appointed to sit, and determine
every case of the peoples, then Causes must needs have been longer in the
issuing them, and both the Judges and the People should have been more
burdened; but I forbear in this place.

It is observable, That a disease truly and evidently known, it is in a ready
and probable way to be cured with more ease, more speed, less danger, and less
cost.

On the contrary, Physicians mistaking the disease, oft-times administer such
potions, as do more hurt, and do more endanger; So it is in this matter, the
distemper is mistaken.

My advice therefore is this, That we follow the wisdom of God, revealed in the
sacred Scriptures, without turning to the right, or to the left hand: For, I
believe, if we do follow our own inventions in these weighty matters, Peace and
Truth will hardly meet together.

If God help us to agree in this weighty point, namely, That our Governors be
such true Shepherds as come in at the true door of Gods revealed will,
contained in the holy Scriptures; Then we need not to doubt but that such will
love the sheep, and upon such God will bestow his blessed Spirit upon them, to
guide them: Such God will own, and the People will find the benefit by them,
and will hear their voice.

We are not left without hope, for God has promised to restore Judges as the
first, and Counselors as at the beginning; then shall we be called a City of
Righteousness, Isai. 1.26. And by this means we shall again acknowledge the
great happiness that it is to have God to reign over us.

Now let us consider the other part of Mr Prynne his Speech and Endeavors,
which was to render the Army as enemies to the peace and safety of the
Commonwealth, as appears in the first leaf in the superscription, or in the
Directory to the Reader, that he might thereby point out to the Reader what he
intended in the following Treatise, or matter of his Writings, the words are
these, viz. The Armies Remonstrance, November. 20. is a way to speedy and certain
Ruin, and a mere Plot of Jesuits to destroy us.

This (if we read and consider the substance of Mr Prynne in his Speech) will
evidently appear, that he labors to render the Army as enemies to the
Commonwealth, as those that sought to bring another War, and more
bloodsheding, as those that were favorites to, and complotters with Papists,
Jesuits, as those that sought the destruction of the Kingdom.

Let us now consider, whether this Charge were true or no; and first let us
begin at the Root, after consider the fruit that grows upon the Branches.

Mr Prynne makes this the Root or Ground, That the Army labored to bring the
late King to a just Trial for the breach of Gods Laws, who is the King of
Kings; he says, That this was plotted by Jesuits, to the end they might
hinder the re-establishing the late King in his Throne.

Now (when it is uprightly considered of) I believe it will appear directly to
be contrary to his Propositions, even as light is contrary to darkness, which
appears, if we consider these two matters:

1. That the Officers held no correspondency with Jesuits, so known to be, nor
did they favor the Jesuits so much as other men.

2. That if there had been many Jesuits in the Army disguised, yet it had been
directly contrary to their Principles, to their Prosperity, to depose those
Members of Parliament secluded or restrained; and likewise it was more contrary
to the Religion and intentions of Jesuits, to bring the King to a lawful Trial.

First, Touching the first, It is evident (in my apprehension) that the Army, I
mean, the principal Leaders of the Army, held no correspondency with the
Jesuits; first, because their Tenants, their Religion, and their Practice was
directly in opposition to the Jesuits: For if we consider this, that the
Jesuits maintain the Worship of Idols, and they, the Jesuits, teach and
maintain, That Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, and to further that, they
will not suffer the Lay People to read the Scriptures in their own language;
the Jesuits will not suffer the Lay People to dispute religious matters, much
less to speak to an Assembly of People by way of Prophecy, and many other like
matters, too tedious to rehearse.

Now if we do consider unpartially, the Army, both in their profession and
practice, are directly opposite to these matters: And that the Army held no
correspondency with the Jesuits, appears in this, because in all this War
they used the utmost of their endeavors to pull down, or destroy, or captivate
that party. Indeed it is considerable, that the Kings party were a great party
of either Jesuits, or those that highly esteemed Jesuits, and by Letters and
writing, discovered and intercepted, it too evidently appeared, that they held
correspondency with them; but I never heard (that I remember) that the Officers
of the Army were tainted with that infection, nor that any Writing was
discovered, or other act done by them, that might lead us to have such hard
thoughts of them.

And since that time we may take notice, That those Ministers that they
appoint, or those that they favor, are such men that do teach sound doctrine,
we cannot deny it: And likewise, let any Jesuit be produced, that they have
preferred to the Ministry to this day, if there be any such (as I believe there
are none) they came in, and remain, disguised, so that the Army does not know
them to be such.

Secondly, Let us consider this, That it was contrary to that which the
Jesuits and Romish party all along labored after, for the Jesuits to desire
that the King should be tried, much loss that he should be removed from the
Throne of Government; which appears plainly (if we will not be wilfully
blind) in as much as the Romish Catholics were chiefest men to help the King
to get into his Throne, upon his own terms; They were the chiefest Enemies to
those that feared God, such as they termed Roundheads, which were of the Armies
side.

If the King had been restored to the Throne of Government, it is apparent that
the Romish party should have had much more advantage by that, then in case the
Army prevailed to do Justice upon him.

I would not spend too much time to light a Candle at Noonday: Rev. 22.11. If
any will be filthy, let him be so still; he shall shortly have his reward.

Now let us briefly consider of the fruits and success of the Armies
proceedings since the late Kings death, because Mr Prynne prophesied in
exceeding large terms, That the bringing the King to condign and worthy
punishment, for his breach of the Laws of the most high God, with whom is no
respect of persons, This would bring upon us (says he) a speedy and certain
ruin, and more present and great Wars, and effusion of blood amongst our
selves: This is the very substance of his Prophecy, to my apprehension.

Let us now judge true and righteous judgment, as in the presence of the most
high, and glorious, and blessed God.

Is not the direct contrary of this Prophecy, in a great measure, fulfilled,
and come to pass, which discovers that this was no true Prophecy? This will
evidently appear, if we consider, That in the very time of the Kings death,
God so wonderfully ordered it, that not one man lost his life (that I heard of)
by any way, in standing up to rescue the late King, although it was not acted
in a corner: This is a matter not to be passed without due consideration.

And from that time God did so wonderfully turn about the wheel of his
Providence, That we have had peace and quietness, in a great measure, both by
Sea and Land, to this very day, in this Commonwealth, notwithstanding that the
contrary party were numerous and bitter.

Can we possibly reply against this, wherein the very finger of God has
appeared, to the astonishment of Gods Enemies?

I do believe indeed, That some being led away with those apprehensions, That
it should have been well pleasing to God that the King (though guilty of
Idolatry, though guilty of much former profaneness, of much bloodshed in other
places before this War begun; Though guilty in putting (or suffering, or
causing many innocent persons to be put) to death, both in England and Ireland,
and guilty of letting the wicked go free, and exalting them; Though guilty of
the blood of so many thousand of Englishmen: Though guilty of the capital
breaking of Gods Laws, in not punishing and suppressing those horrible and
openly known Blasphemers, Robbers, Adulterers, Whoremongers, and what not sins
were committed openly (not in darkness, but in the sight of the Sun, in a
continued way of wickedness?) Of which sins, so committed, with an high hand,
it was not possible but that he must be guilty of them; Though guilty of many
more sins, not here to be reckoned up:) I say, some have been led away through
infirmity, so that they thought that it would have been well pleasing to God
that the late King should have been clad in Royal Apparel, and have washed out
these spots, and been again exalted into his former Throne, and been made the
Head, Guide, and Governor of so many thousands: I say, That for those that have
been so misled through infirmities, I pray God give them sound and timely
repentance, and lay not this sin to their charge.

It is well to be noted, That when David caused that one innocent man Vriah to
be put to death by subtlety, 1 King. Chap. 11, 12. David gave sentence, that
such a person should dye, and make restitution; The Prophet tells him he was
the man condemned.

Observe well, That David lay under this sentence till the most high God
himself proclaimed a pardon to his person at that time; yet so, as that David
should feel the breach of Gods Law; although it is to be considered, That David
had been an eminent man for Gods honor many years before.

Let us further consider, That God has, since the late Kings death, showed his
approbation; which has appeared, if we consider, That before the late Kings
death, as we had many Risings, which occasioned much trouble, danger, and
bloodshed; so likewise, God frowned upon us in smiting the fruits of the
earth, so that Corn, and most other provisions, failed, and were very dear:
Whereby God did (to my apprehension) show, That he was displeased that the
People, or those in whose hands it lay, were so slow in proceeding to punish so
great an Offender.

But we may take notice, That since the late Kings death God has turned his
favorable countenance toward us wonderfully, as appeared by the Harvest of
Corn; for they had seasonable weather to reap and to lay up their Corn in
safety; and I hear the people in Cornwall and Devonshire report, That their Corn
yielded more increase in the threshing, then former years, abundantly; in so
much that one sheaf yielded more Corn then two did in some former years: Our
Fishing and Trading has prospered.

Moreover, God has gone forth with our host, with our Army, so that which way
soever they turn themselves, God makes them to prosper, and victoriously to
prevail; The very finger of God appears: I am ashamed, and even astonished,
to find any that should object against this; yet I find too many that will not
see, nor acknowledge, these wonderful works of a glorious and righteous God.

Object. Some say, That the wicked may prosper for a time: Did not
Nebuchadnezzar prosper? and did not Joab prosper? etc.

Answ. There is no reasonable proportion in these Arguments; for I do evidently
see, That their Objections, in this kind, arise from this root, namely,
because they are partial, and unwilling that God should favor the now being
Government and Army; for whom I do believe that, in the conclusion, both we,
and the posterity to come, shall have cause to praise the name of the Lord for
them.

These Objections arise not out of well balanced meditations, for compare we
Nebuchadnezzar, and other their victories against the Israelites, and we may
read, That sometimes God suffered the Enemies to prevail against Israel; but
how was that? it was by bringing a multitude of Enemies against a few
Israelites in comparison: But that such small numbers, such weak men, upon such
unequal terms of disadvantage, should prevail against such great numbers of
able men (in outward appearance, so well furnished and armed, with so great
advantages and encouragements, as in outward appearance) the Opposites and
Enemies of our present Army and Government had, I do believe the like is not
recorded, either in the sacred Scriptures, or in any humane Records. God
drives their Enemies before them, as chaff before the wind.

It is true, That if contrarily we look upon this Army and Government as those
that love and fear the Lord, then we sometimes, in Scriptures, find God doing
wonderful and miraculous matters, exceeding these Victories, but not usually,
for these are transcendent Victories.

But if we should look upon the Parliament and Army as upon Gods Enemies, I
doubt not but I may safely affirm, That there is no Record, neither divine nor
humane, that shows that God did ever do such wonders, give such victories,
upon such unequal terms of disadvantage, to the Enemies of his Church and
People; so many, and in so short a space of time, as these have been effected:
The Lord open the eyes of all those that love and fear him.

Consider further, That in all these proceedings we may note, That our worthy
(and dearly beloved) Generals have not aspired to any place of Government
further then they have been evidently called: in all these Wars they have
endured many perils, much affliction, much hardship; and when God gives to
them victories, they lay down their Conquests, and give those places into the
hands of the State.

Consider that we may read of men, that had not such opportunities, as they
have had, that have attempted and obtained Crowns and Kingdoms to themselves by
violence.

Consider further, That in those Propositions that the Army, their Officers,
propounded to the Commonwealth, to settle a Government, by men selected,
through the Land, did they name themselves to be chosen into great places? No
certainly; They put it further off, into the hands of others, who in
aftertimes must have been their Judges? And further, The choice of those they
committed to others that were strangers to them: Whereby it plainly appears,
That (according to that measure of Light (in that matter) that God imparted to
them) they sought Gods glory, and the good of the Commonwealth, and not
themselves.

Object. There are many other Objections very impertinent or inconsiderate, as
namely, That this State now suffers many evil Opinions and Practices.

Answ. I could desire every man to take heed first to his own ways, for it is
the practice of too many, to be careless in examining themselves, and forget,
not altogether, that many now leap over the offenses of the contrary party, and
bury them in silence, or call evil good.

I do not doubt, but that the Government does labor to suppress all known sin,
and I believe that as God gives to them time and opportunity, we shall see it
appear by their fruits, which God grant.

Something more I judge my self in duty bound to write, touching that Book
entitled, The Sword of Christian Magistracy Supported, written by Mr William
Prynne.

From the general consideration of the whole matter, as it is there written;
and the manner thereof: Considering likewise what pains he has taken in the
alleging and searching so many Records of humane Authors, of Emperors, Kings,
States, Magistrates, the Consent of Ancient and Modern Writers, the Statute
Laws of England: Considering likewise the great pains, time and charge he spent
about the other his Labors, namely, that Speech of his to the House of
Commons, dated the 4 of December. 1648.

Upon the consideration of the whole, it causes me to consider, how we are
oftentimes mistaken, when we too earnestly, and with much care and industry,
endeavor to attain matters, which could we accomplish, (those things that we so
affectionately labor after, which oftentimes we fall short of,) yet they would
but little avail us, and oftentimes turn to our great disadvantage.

We often travel in those ways that are a great way about, when we might go a
nearer and safer way, and attain the end of our journey with more ease and
safety.

I do not judge, That it is unlawful to cite the Testimonies of other Records,
besides the Testimony of the Word of God, but to spend much labor or time in
the allegation of other Testimonies besides the Word of God contained in the
Scriptures, the unerring Rule of Truth, I do conceive it ads but little
strength to the cause, if it be a matter that binds the conscience in holy
duties: For when we alledg the Word of God, delivered by the Prophets and
Apostles, (men immediately sent by God) this comes with the Authority (and
has the Majesty) of God stamped upon it; this comes with power, it searches,
tries and convinces the heart, and inward affections, it is like a
two-edged-sword, it pierces speedily unresistibly: The Writings of men are not
useless, but being compared with the Word of God, they then are but as a candle
compared with the Sun. Now for men that would walk by the benefit of the light,
(and desire that others should walk by the same light) for such men to spend so
much pains, to light many candles to show the way, (then at noonday, when the
Sun shines in his strength) is not to so much purpose.

The Word of God comes thus, namely, Thus says the Lord, etc.

But when men alledg the Testimonies of other Writers, they must come clad in
this habit (namely) He says.

2. It often comes to pass, That when we are so intent, so studious, and spend
so much time in searching, examining, and alleging so many other Authors,
(besides Gods unerring Word) it often comes to pass, that we are too short in
our allegations of the Word of God it self, the lively and clear Fountain of
Living Waters.

3. By this means of looking too much upon humane authorities, and neglecting
(or too little taking heed) to the Word it self, it comes to pass oft-times,
that humane Authors, varying in their judgments, lead us aside into those
Errors that they hold.

4. From this Root it comes to pass, that the Servants of God are too much
slighted and despised, for they being conversant, and studious chiefly of the
Word of God, they are but meanly respected, because they come adorned and
decked chiefly with plainness and simplicity: Paul comes thus apparelled, 1
Cor. 2.4. Neither stood my words, and my preaching in the intising words of
man's wisdom, but in plain evidence and power. Was not this the cause that
Christ Jesus was so much despised? Was not this the cause that his Apostles and
Disciples were despised? Read 1 Cor. 2.11, and 13. Which things also we teach
or speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches.

5. Oft-times this (being adorned or apparelled so much with the authorities of
so many other Writings besides the Word) lifts us up in our affections, to
presume more then is meet, and causes us to despise many of Gods Saints, and
little ones, that are not thus apparelled with so many humane authorities: And
(I believe) it too evidently appears, that from this very Root is sprung up
such a flame of fire, that will with much difficulty be quenched: God grant it
may be quenched.

6. My Endeavors are primarily the glory of God, and that Peace and Truth may
meet and kiss one another.

To all those that earnestly and heartily desire and endeavor the same, namely,
Gods Glory, Peace and Truth, I doubt not but that I may safely and boldly say,
That if they deck themselves inwardly with lowliness of mind, let them be but
low enough in their own eyes, (let them but learn of Jesus Christ to be humble
and meek, a lesson much urged by Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles,
and yet how little do we profit?) and I doubt not but Gods Name will be much
honored, many of our brethren will be much edified, the weak much strengthened,
our selves much more approved in the hearts of others, and the flame of the
fire of hatred and contention will be much abated, and thereby we shall possess
our own Souls with more peace, and Peace and Truth will meet and embrace one
another sooner.

Dear Countrymen, and Christian Friends, Be not many Masters, knowing that we
shall receive the greater condemnation, Jam. 3.1. As if the Apostle should say,
Consider, that by these contentions we shall receive no profit, but much loss.

Now consider, whence come our contentions? come they not through pride? Yea
certainly they do, witness the Prophets and Apostles; consider, That God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble and meek, Jam. 4.

God will teach the humble his ways, Psalm. 2.

Oh Brethren, Countrymen and Friends, That I could prevail with you in this
particular, That you would forbear one another, and instruct one another, and
build up, and edify one another in love; Let every man esteem other better
than himself: Let there be no root of bitterness amongst us.

Psalm. Wait upon God patiently, and he shall bring it to pass; thine eyes shall
see it, and thy heart shall be glad.

And this I doubt not, but that I may safely affirm by the sacred Authority of
Gods revealed Will in his Word, That if ever thou shall meet Christ Jesus as
thy Husband, in his Kingdom, to thy comfort, thou must come to him as a Bride
prepared for her Husband, (in which preparation this is a principal part)
namely, to be inwardly adorned, enriched, and furnished with lowliness, with
humility. Pretend what faith in Christ thou will, or can, whosoever thou art,
if thou have not this grace in some good measure, thou shall never meet Jesus
Christ to thy comfort.

Excuse me, dear friends, if I digress, or be large (though not large enough)
in this matter; for this is a principal preparation to the way where Peace and
Truth dwells: Time bids me forbear.

To return to the matter of Mr Prynnes Book: in the Book entitled, The Sword
of Christian Magistracy supported, I find therein many precious sentences
alleged, or taken from of the Word of God, out of the Word of God, being the
very authority, the very writings of the Apostles and Prophets: These
Scriptures come to me with authority; I consent unto them, whether they were
written (before the Coming of Jesus Christ in the Flesh) by the Prophets, or,
since the Coming of our blessed Savior, by his Apostles, I acknowledge them
all, and rejoice to consider the splendour, beauty, excellency and comfort that
is contained in those Scriptures. For whether such sentences were written,
before Christ's Coming, by the Prophets, or, since his Coming, by the Apostles,
they were all Gods Ministers, his Messengers, his Ambassadors, blessed
Messengers, God sent them, his Word is true and faithful, unalterable.

I consider, That God that sent those sentences is not, as man, variable, that
is to say, of several minds, but is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever;
Therefore I hope God will not so far leave me, as to refuse the authority of
his Word; for I had rather my tongue should cleave to the roof of my mouth, and
that my hand should lose its use, then that I should refuse or dislike the Word
of God, the rule or square of Jerusalem, and one of Jerusalems chief joys.
Within that precious Word is contained all those precious streams that refresh
and make glad Jerusalem, the City of God. God has magnified his Word above all
his Name, Psalm. 138.2. I hope none dare presume to speak any thing, to cavil
against the Word of God.

Most of the sentences, so alleged by Mr Prynne, being the Word of God, I do
acknowledge (and to my understanding) they are of moral equity and use: I do
except against none; I have not exactly viewed all.

I do acknowledge likewise, That he has drawn many necessary Observations and
Conclusions from the Scriptures, such as (I do believe) are agreeable to the
Will of God, as they are the truths of God. Yet I should humbly desire M. Pryn
to review his Labors, wherein, I do believe, he may (if God help him) find
cause to revoke certain matters there in that Book contained.

Two things, in my apprehension, are very offensive and sinful:

First, The jeering, or deriding men, under the names of the Saints, or the
Brethren.

Secondly, For that it seems to me that he does turn the edg of the Sword
against many of those that love and fear God, and desire to do his Will.

In the first leaf (in his Epistle directed to the House of Commons) I find
him use these expressions, To M. Dell and his Independent Saints; and the like
again is used, fol. 2. Mr Dell and some of his Saints: and in the same leaf
again he expresses himself thus, Saint Lilburn, and Saint Overtons; And a
little further thus, The Sectaries and Independent Saints: Thus in diverse
places he reproacheth many under these names of the Saints and the Brethren,
and such like terms.

To my understanding this is a just cause of offense:

First, Because this name of Saints, and of Brethren, are not in themselves
evil, but they are used and approved of in the Scripture phrases, as Deuteronomy.
33.2. He came with ten thousands of his Saints. Psa. 31.32. O love the Lord all
ye his Saints. Dan. 7.18. The Saints of the most high. Mat. 27.52. Many bodies
of Saints. Romans 1.7. Called to be Saints. And so the name of Brethren, Deuteronomy.
15.7. and 33.9. Psa. 122.8. For my Brethren and Companions. Romans 12.1. I
beseech you therefore Brethren. I do believe, That it is unbeseeming a
Christian, to call any other Christian, or any man [Saint] by way of reproach;
We may not play with holy things: God gives this name of Saints and Brethren
to his Elect, as a Title of honor and respect: It cannot be good for any to
reproach another with the title, or badg, or cognizance of his own profession.

Secondly, Because there is more then an appearance of evil in such expressions
by way of reproach: It was the custom of the Heathens to upbraid the Christians
by those names, by way of disgrace. And it is the guise and custom of too many
profane English, at this day, to scoff and scorn those that truly love and fear
God under those names of the Saints, or the Brethren. Do we not know that this
is properly and truly our Titles, our names that we ought to own? For if we be
not of the number of the Saints, of the Brethren, it had been better for us
that we had not been: The ungodly are apt enough, and too apt to learn this
custom; we need not to put words into their months.

2. Touching the second matter offensive, it is because he does often direct,
or incite the Magistrate against Separates, Anabaptists, Independents, etc.
under these names, in so much that the outward show of his Writings strikes
much at all of these sorts.

For the name of Separates, there are few (that doubtless he intends) that call
themselves by that name. But thus much I should say for that matter, M. Pryn
himself is a Separate in some sense; He is, or ought to be separated from the
evil works of the Devil; he will acknowledge that he will separate from those
works. Secondly, He is (I believe) in judgment and profession separated from
Idolaters and Unbelievers. Thirdly, He is separated, or ought to be separated,
from false doctrines, and from the openly known, obstinate, and notorious,
sinful, unrepentant sinners. In these senses (I conceive) he will allow of
Separation: Therefore all Separation is not unlawful.

It maybe those Separates, that he intends, go something further; They separate
likewise from such Congregations as are out of order, conceiving that where
order is not, there will be confusion in the administration of holy things;
conceiving that thereby Gods precepts must be made void by such confusions:
There is not power in the Church to purge and reform things amiss in the
Church. Thus much I would say, That, I believe, amongst that number there are
many of those little ones, concerning whom Christ says, Mat. 18.6. That it
were better that a millstone were hanged about the neck of them, and that they
were cast into the Sea, that shall offend one of them that believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ.

I shall propound to consideration the case, first of the Anabaptists (so
called;) These deny the Baptism of Children, (this I believe is clearly their
error,) yet if they differ in this point only, why may they not be suffered to
live in love and in peace with us, so long as they lead a godly, a peaceable,
and a quiet life? If they do not rail (or speak evil of Baptism it self) but
only differ concerning the circumstance of the time when it should be
administered. Let us consider that we our selves do not tie the Dispensation (so
to an hour, or to a day) but that upon several occasions we do differ: So it is
to be considered concerning diverse other Opinions, so long as they lead a
godly, a peaceable, and a quiet life, why may not they live lovingly and
peaceably amongst us?

Consider circumspectly, That concerning all persons (that were not of the
natural seed of the Israelites) there is no part of Gods Law (I believe) that
does command or bind them to partake with the Israelites, either in the
Passover, or Circumcision, nor in other holy duties that were peculiar or
proper to the Church of God.

Consider likewise, That there is no precept (I believe) in the Gospel that
gives authority to Magistrates to force men to believe or practice such holy
duties: This is considerable, That God has expressly given power and command to
Governors, in diverse cases, to punish matters of commission, or evil things,
provided that Governors go not beyond the rule. I am no Judge in these matters,
therefore these matters being weighty, I shall refer it to those that God
appoints to judge.

This I would say to all men, to all Opinions, Let us keep close to Gods rules,
that so God may choose our Governors for us; and let not us then fear, for if
Governors be of Gods sending, God will bless them with his Spirit, they will
love the Flock, and give true and righteous and merciful judgment.

The point is weighty in matter of Separation; I dare not presume to determine
many points in controversy about that matter: I do acknowledge (that I do
conceive) That Reformation is more agreeable to the Will of God then rigid or
total Separation: But here I speak only to defend them from more violence then
(I conceive) is meet.

But further, suppose that things, matters, in and concerning the Worship of
God, be so unsettled, or disordered (to their understanding) that they can see
no other present way to please God but by Separation; I had rather leave them
to God to judge, then rashly to sentence them: I am no Judge in this matter,
therefore I leave it to them to judge the cause, whom God has appointed for
that purpose.

Touching the Independents, I could wish that none would acknowledge that name,
without due and circumspect declarations of their intents touching
Independency. For there is a direct and total Independency, and there is an
Independency according to that reference, or object, or matter, with which it
is compared, or to which it is referred: As for instance, if God command one
thing, and the Magistrate command that which is directly contrary thereunto; in
this case a man has no such dependence upon the Magistate's Authority, but
that Gods command is to be kept, although thereby the command of the Magistrate
be neglected: And I believe that this is the true intent of those (or many of
those that are called Independents. On the contrary it would be a great Error
to conceive, That the Magistrate is not to meddle in spiritual matters, as
duties of the second Table; for the Magistrate watches for Gods Glory, he is
to see Gods Laws kept, and the Delinquents punished, according to a Rule
prescribed by God, whether it be for the breach of the Duties of the first or
second Table; and for the distinction of Spiritual and Civil, this is evident,
That the breach of any Rule, of any Command of God, is of a spiritual nature,
and either we must acknowledge no punishment for any sin, or else for all sins
according to a Rule: This is only to be referred to the wisdom of them
appointed to judge; many are afraid to acknowledge that power which God has
given to Governors, namely, because so many Governors have exceeded the Bounds
and Limits of the Rule prescribed, and by that means many have been persecuted
that should have been spared.

Now that which offends in this work of Mr Prynne (in my apprehension) is
because he strikes too generally, and by that means endangereth many that
should be spared and helped.

I would not engage to try the equity of the whole work of The Sword of
Christian Magistracy Supported, because I believe God has not called me to
that work, I shall leave the consideration of it to those, that God has
appointed to judge.

The Cases that will come to be tried in this kind, or of this nature, are
many, and differ much according to the Objects and Circumstances, and cannot
wholly be so determined, but that much must be left to the wisdom of the
Governors.

Concerning the death of the late deposed King, Mr John Goodwin has learnedly
tried and determined the justness thereof, (to my best understanding,) to whom
I should refer the Reader; only a word or two I conceive may not be
impertinently spoken concerning that matter.

The first thing that I propound to consideration is this, namely, Whether that
at and before his Trial for his Life, his Judgment and Execution, he was
properly a King, or was deposed from being a King, so that in that condition
may we not look upon him as one that had been King, but for such just cause
deposed, that to the equity thereof, both the Houses of Parliament, together
with the Army, and the Commonwealth, consented, and were actors therein, and
consented thereto?

Does not this evidently appear, if we consider that the Parliament formerly,
many and several times, by public writing, declared, That the King was so far
a Delinquent, that they were forced to disclaim his former authority, and to
take up Arms against him? In the prosecution of Justice, they subdued the late
King, and his party: Now in this condition the King remained, not being
restored to his former Kingship, which being considered, will it not appear,
That those that gave sentence against him, and those that brought him to his
Trial, and did cause Justice to be executed upon him, did not take away the
life of a King, but of one that had been King, and hoped so to have been again?

Secondly, I do propound to consideration, Whether it be not lawful to desert,
and to depose Kings, and to bring them to punishment, for the breach of the
Laws of the most high God?

This (I believe) appears plainly, if we first consider, That both King and
People are all Gods Subjects; God is the King of Kings: God says, That one Law
shall be to all, Exodus 12.49.

It is to be considered what God gave Joshua in charge, Josh. 1.8. Let not this
Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night,
that then may observe and do according to all things that is written therein.

To this very purpose God speaks the same matter as the duty of Kings, Deuteronomy.
17.18. And when he shall sit upon the Throne of his Kingdom, then shall he
write him this Law repeated in a Book.

Verse. 19. And he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may
learn to fear the Lord his God.

Verse. 20. That he may prolong his days in his Kingdom, etc.

From these places it appears. That both Joshua and the Kings were to be
subject to Gods Law, otherwise God would have left them to their liberties, but
contrarily God does directly impose upon them the diligent observation of all
his Laws.

2. We may note, That the breach of Gods Laws were punishable in Kings, plainly
employed in these words, That it may go well, that his days in his Kingdom may
be prolonged; By this we may plainly see, That on the contrary, if a King do
neglect and transgress Gods Commands, then his days in his Kingdom may be
shortened.

The end wherefore God does expressly charge them to regard the Law, imports
plainly, that it was to that end, that it might be their Rule and Bounds: And
so likewise, if by diligent need to Gods Laws the days of Kings may be
prolonged, then on the contrary, for the neglecting (and much more for the
grievous breach of) Gods Laws, their days may be shortened.

To this purpose we may read, That although Joshua were a man that was placed
as Governor over Israel by God himself, and although he were so eminent a man
for piety, a man that had long and constantly walked in the ways of God, of
whose godliness the people had had long experience; yet observe what the people
answered to Joshua in point of their obedience, recorded Josh. 1.16. Then they
answered Joshua, saying, All that thou have commanded us we will do, etc. Verse.
17. As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee; only the Lord thy
God be with thee, as he was with Moses.

Hence we may observe, in these words, Only the Lord thy God be with thee, as
he was with Moses, is plainly employed a conditional subjection in the people;
as if the people should have said, We desire to be excused, in case that we do
see it appear by those fruits that thou bring forth, that God is departed
from thee, and that thou forsakest those paths in which God has commanded us
to walk, and has commanded thee to observe, in such cases we will be free, we
do not promise to be obedient to thee: This is a plain conditional engagement,
employed plainly in those words, Only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was
with Moses. There is no King, Emperor or Governor whatsoever, but they are
included all of them within the Rule of Gods Law, that is to be the Rule and
Guide of all their Actions, the Bounds thereof they may not pass by, turning
aside either to the right or to the left hand, nor by adding to the
Commandments of God, nor by taking any thing from Gods Commandments. Moses was
a notable, excellent, and eminent Example to Governors, he observed Gods Laws
willingly and circumspectly, so did Joshua, and all those Judges that were
chosen immediately by God: Thus David did endeavor to walk in Gods ways, and
some of the Kings of Israel, although they lay under great temptations, being
lifted up so high in the opinions of the people; these all acknowledged the Law
of God to be their Rule, their Guide, and their Bounds.

For the breach of this Law old Eli was punished with temporal death, although
in his own person he were circumspect and obedient, yet because that he
suffered Gods Laws to be violated by his own sons, God is so provoked, that he
takes away his sons by the sword, and the father by an untimely death; an
eminent pattern for Governors to look upon.

Governors are leading men, their example is more prevalent then others, they
do more hurt then others by their evil examples, therefore great men shall be
greatly tormented.

God spared not Kings that broke and violated his Law: Saul, though he was
chosen to his place by God immediately, and therefore was anointed with oil
after an extraordinary manner, yet when he went beyond the Bounds of Gods
Commandments, though it were in offering Sacrifice, a matter good in it self,
yet because it was more then God commanded, God cast him out of his place for
it. If we add to Gods Will revealed in his Word, we sin, or if we deminish.

Object. But is there any president or example that warranteth a people to
depose and punish their Governors?

Answ. The condition expressed, and recorded in the Book of Joshua, does
plainly hold out, That the whole body of a people, or such as represent, or are
Deputies for the Commonwealth, or part of that body, may, in cases wherein
their Governors act not for God, but contrary to his revealed Will, in such
cases (I conceive) the Word, recorded in the Book of Joshua, plainly
warranteth, and teaches people, That they ought to make such exceptions: This
people that gave Joshua his Answer, were a part of the people; And although
this Covenant, or Caveat, had not been expressed, yet it had been the peoples
duty and wisdom to follow him in Gods ways, but not other ways.

If we take notice, and consider that place, recorded Numb. 25.1. The people
began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab, etc. The people for this
cause were commanded by God to slay those Governors that were guilty in this
matter; The Lord said to Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang them
up before the Lord against the Sun, that the fierce wrath of the Lord may be
turned from Israel, Numb. 25.4.

Now this shows, That it is Gods Will that Governors shall by the people be
punished in such cases as are notorious breaches of Gods Law; for although
these Governors were not equal, but inferior to Moses, yet they were Governors
of the people; as for example, all Governors are not Emperors, nor all Kings,
nor all Judges, of an equal rank, yet they are all of one kind, Gods Law
binds, and has the same authority over all.

But further, consider this, it is there recorded for our learning, Number. 25.6.
That one of the children of Israel brought unto his brethren a Midianitish
woman, in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of, etc.

Note, That this man was a Prince, Verse. 14.

Verse. 7. And when Phineas the son of Aaron saw it, he rose up, etc. and took a
spear in his hand, and followed the man of Israel into the Tent; and thrust
them both through, etc.

From this Text it plainly appears, That in such openly known sins Princes
are liable to punishment; nay further, That God takes this as a matter that is
so acceptable to him, that he rewards it with an extraordinary commendation
and reward.

Verse. 10. Then the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Phineas, the son of Aaron,
has turned mine anger away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous
for my sake amongst them, therefore I have not consumed the children of Israel
in my jealousy. Verse. 12. Wherefore I say unto him, Behold I give unto him my
Covenant of Peace.

Here note, That Phineas stood not to search over the Punctilioes of the Common
Laws, neither was he a Judge, nor ordinary Officer to put men to death, he
stayed not till this man was tried by his Peers, but he considered that God was
highly dishonored, the case was extraordinary, therefore, he put his life in his
hand, and courageously and zealously pursued the transgressor, and slew him,
this is recorded for our learning; Ro^. 15.4. Whatsoever things are written
aforetime, are written for our learning.

It is to be admired, That people they should be offended at the Army, and at
some of the Parliament, because they executed Justice upon such an offender as
had sinned in the sight of the Sun, by setting up Idolatry; that had sinned, in
shedding innocent blood; such an offender as was tried and found guilty to the
knowledge of the Land, and by the opinion of Lords, Commons, Army, and People,
witness their Writings in Print; and is this so heinous a matter?

This makes me call to mind the Prophecy, Revel. 18.16, 17. Alas, alas, that
great City that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and
gilded with gold, and precious stones, and pearls; For in one hour so great
riches are come to desolation: And every ship-master, and all the people that
ocupy ships, and whosoever does trafique on the sea, shall stand afar off, and
cry, etc. But what says the Spirit of God? Verse. 10. O Haeven, rejoice over
her, and ye holy Apostles, for God has punished her to be revenged on her for
your sakes.

Dear Friends, you that are not drunk, but in good frames of heart, consider,
that this great Tower of Confusion is fallen; the Prophets foretold of these
days, Isaiah, Daniel, Hosea, Micah, and others, they tell us plainly, That
corrupt Governors must down; I believe the time is accomplished that God did in
his counsel determine these matters, therefore hang down your heads no longer,
but you that wait for the Salvation of Israel lift up your heads.

I pray you, Countrymen, note, That the Army and the Parliament they being
zealous for Gods glory, they put their lives in their hands, they look all
oppositions in the face, they executed Justice upon an offender; this was Gods
work that guarded them with strength, this act of theirs was beyond their own
abilities: I pray you compare this act with that of Phineas, is not there the
same cause in the offender? Is not the zeal of Phineas and their zeal like in
the very countenance, and of near affinity? And has not God crowned this act
of theirs? Consider, that God has blessed the fruits of the earth, and has
enriched our barns and stores; Has not God blessed us in our fishing abroad?
not the like for many years before: Has not God blessed us by giving us
Victories at Sea, and Victories at the Land? Whithersoever they turn themselves
they are blessed, since the death of the late King.

This makes me commend to your consideration that blessing that God gave to
Joshua, and is acknowledged thus, There was not a City that God delivered not
into his hand, nor place was too strong for him: Consider it well, and apply
it. If any will be obstinate and blind, let them be so, I cannot help it.

But to go on, in 2 Kings 11.15 Jehojada the Priest commanded the Captains of
the Hundreds that had the rule of the Host. Verse. 16. And they laid hands on
her, etc. and there she was slain.

We may here observe, That there is a president recorded in Scripture that
shows, That when a principal Governor shall do evil in the sight of the Lord,
the people did account it to be their duties to punish such great offenders and
offenses by death; thus was Jesabel slain.

The example of the Israelites likewise is considerable, 1 King. 12.20. where
the ten Tribes by reason that Rehoboam would not hearken to them, in easing
them of those Taxations that they said were too heavy, they therefore deposed
or rejected him from being their King; for although that Jeroboam forsook Gods
Commandments afterward, that was his sin: But touching their act in casting
off, and renouncing all obedience to Rehoboam for his sin of oppression, God
plainly allows that, and owneth that act of the peoples, as appears, 1
Kings 12.24. Thus says the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your
brethren; for this thing is done by me. The peoples sin lay in another way,
They enquired not of the Lord who should govern them, therein lay their evil:
From that root sprung up their error, and this error was the very cause (I do
undoubtedly believe) that they had so many corrupt Governors that ruled over
them: It may evidently be seen, that men usually run into extremes, and all is,
because they are not circumspect in following Gods Commandments, they depart
from the Rule.

Now, dearly beloved Countrymen, I judge it will be seasonable (because such
precious liberties are not usual) to consider a little what our condition is,
and what we are, and in what relation we do truly stand, according to the true
Rule of Gods sacred Word, the most blessed and unerring Rule of Truth.

God in great, rich and singular mercy (undeserved by us) has put a great
difference between us and the beasts of the field, and between us and these
senseless creatures, lands, houses, and such earthly inheritances. How comes it
then to pass, That when a King dies (the breath is scarcely out of his body,
or his body quite cold) there is such post-haste, such running and riding to
proclaim one King in his room; what is the matter of such great haste? surely
there is something in it: Do they not take us, as young heirs take their
fathers inheritance, as beasts, lands, houses.

This makes me to consider sometimes the manner and actings of such men of War
as do live upon the labors of honest and true men; they, when they espy a
prey, presently up top-sail, top gallant sails, and all the sails; it were
oft-times better for the true honest and plain-dealing men, that they should
make less haste: observe it well, your honest Merchant men make less speed to
pursue after others, because they mind their own: Surely Moses, that godly man,
made no such haste, nor did the good Judges of Israel, they stayed till they
were called by God.

Certainly I should note it to be the Character of a good Shepherd, or
Governor, when they do first consider the great weight and concernment (for
Gods glory, and for the peoples good) that Government is of; certainly if it be
heartily and duly considered, there is not just cause for so great haste; Moses
and Gideon, and the rest, considered the great weight, for says Moses, My
abilities are but weak; and Gideon said, he was but mean (in his own esteem)
for such a work; it is like they considered, That except God did in an
extraordinary manner promise to assist them with his blessed Spirit, they
should be insufficient for so weighty employments.

Indeed if any look at their own glory, and ease, and worldly riches, it is no
marvel then if such make speed: but consider, that if any want Gods blessed
Spirit, into what a truly miserable condition do they plunge both themselves,
and those poor people that must be judged, preserved, and protected by them? I
do confess, I see no such cause of haste, when matters are truly considered of:
There will or would be less bloodshed, and more peace, if men were truly
conscientious of their duties; Crowns would be of less esteem.

It is well to be noted, That in the first and purest times, God owned and
blessed the people as his proper and peculiar inheritance, and so carried
himself to them; for Moses had children, yet God so honored and loved the
people, that he did not leave them, the people, to the Judges, as their
inheritance, (although the Judges were blessed Judges) but did keep them as his
own inheritance, and so provided men, (whose inward affections he knew) and God
did immediately appoint Judges himself for them, and those God blessed with his
good Spirit all of them; such did not claim the people as their inheritance,
and so leave them as beasts, lands, or houses to their children; this continued
all the time of the Judges: But when the people preferred their own inventions
before the wisdom of God, and would be governed by a King, and so cast off God
from reigning over them, then a declining people, and a forsaking God: Not long
after God made David a promise, That some of his posterity should hold the
people as their inheritance in some proportion; Government went then by
Succession.

But consider now (beloved Countrymen) That there is no King upon Earth has
such a promise as David had; now the partition wall is broken down, God is
reconciled; if we believe therefore for any King now to claim Government by
Succession, they must show some Charter, some gift from God for it; for my
part, I have searched the sacred Records of Gods Will revealed, and in all the
Word of God I can see no such Scripture; if they can show any hidden light, let
it be shown, that I may see it too, but till then I shall conceive, that we
(Believers) are Gods inheritance, and God, by my consent, shall be our King,
and appoint our Governors in his own way, and then I am sure this people; I,
and my posterity may rest in secure peace, for then God will not fail to bless
such Governors with his good and blessed Spirit.

Beloved Countrymen, GOD has preferred us in honor above beasts, or lands; and
shall we like those asses, beasts, prostrate our selves to such a servile
condition?

Object. But suppose a King can say, His forefathers obtained the Kingdom by
the Sword, by Conquest?

Answ. I look upon that as the worst and meanest title of all: For our Indians
(that know not God) can show such a title for their unjust encroachments upon
other men's Lives and Estates.

And consider, That that man that possesses but the Goods or Lands of another
man's by violence, shall hold that no longer then till the other man has power
to take them again: but we acknowledge a God, and his Word must be our guide.

But further consider, That suppose that we should grant to a King as good a
title to Government as Moses, Joshua, Saul, had, who were men immediately
appointed by God, (which no King (I believe) can show the like) yet these could
not rightfully claim the people as inheritance to leave to their Children, that
is Gods proper right, and God is a jealous God. Kings must therefore show such
a Promise, made to them by God (and recorded in Gods Word) as David had, or
else I must desire leave to be excused, if I conceive that I and my posterity,
through the gracious bounty of a good God in Christ, do look upon my self as
free, and not as a bondman.

And yet further, Could Kings show as good a promise as David had, yet God must
choose the man which should be Governor; For Gods Word is express, Deuteronomy. 17.
Thou shall make him King whom the Lord thy God shall choose: This is a sentence
recorded, and never repealed to this day. There is an apparent difference in
Gods Word, between man choosing the man, and God choosing the man, Samuel had
order from God to appoint one of Ishai his sons to the Government and yet
nevertheless God would not give Samuel that privilege to choose the man, God
reserved that honor to himself: Good it had been for the people, had they kept
close to God in that particular.

Beloved Countrymen, Custom has worn out Truth; but let us enquire for the
old and good ways of our gracious God: Christ says, It was not so in the
beginning.

Further consider, That all Governors, high and low, they are all subject to
Gods Commandments, both to do, and to suffer; For if we should admit that the
Chief Governors (call them by what Titles you will) were to be free from
punishment, should we not by that means diminish part of Gods Laws, which
contains two parts, namely, for man to do, or to suffer?

Consider further, That that Law of God that binds all men (without respect
of persons) to the observation of it, must of necessity allow a way for the
observation of it; would it not otherwise show an imperfection in it?

Now for men to say, That chief Governors are only accountable to God;
Consider that God is in Heaven, and has given us his Laws, wholly to be
observed upon Earth, by all men, high and low, either by doing, or suffering;
therefore we, having Gods Laws upon Earth here below, must see them observed by
all men, by doing or suffering. Is it not an absurd thing to say, That when a
man breaks Gods Laws upon Earth, he must be punished only in Heaven? and in
the mean time be suffered to run forward to do more mischief: There will be
another account to be given there, and other punishments, without Faith and
Repentance.

Consider further, That God, for the sins of Kings, gave commission to men on
Earth to put them them to death, read 2 King. 9.7. And thou shall smite all the
house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the
Prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord: For the whole house of
Ahab shall be destroyed. Now note what followed; 2 King. 10.30. And the Lord
said unto Jehu, because thou have diligently executed that which was right in
my eyes, and have done unto the house of Ahab according to all things that were
in my heart; therefore thy sons, unto the fourth generation, shall sit upon the
Throne of Israel. Now (before this) we may note, That Jehu had not only slain
Jehoram, 2 King. 9.24. but also Ahaziah King of Judah, verse. 27. We may
observe, That this Ahaziah was noted to do evil in the sight of the Lord; Chap.
8.27. And there he is noted for marrying a woman addicted to Idolatry; after
this God commends Jehu.

This I believe, That in all parts of the World where Kings are, and are
lawfully (according to Gods will) made Kings, if I were there present, I should
labor (in all lawful matters) to be obedient to them; and I believe that it is
the duty of all men so to do: But in any place, where ever such Governors shall
turn from Gods Commandments, and shall draw people from Gods Service, and shall
(in stead of feeding, defending, and seeking the good of the Flock) ^^ek to
devour and destroy the Flock, doubtless Gods Laws have force against them in
such cases: And also, if in Gods way I might be free, I should choose it much
sooner; for servitude is not pleasing. But where Governors are called by God,
in his own way, there God will bless them with his good Spirit; Therefore I
choose willingly to be obedient to such, because that is my greatest comfort
(under God) and is indeed true Liberty.

My purpose was to have been large in this matter; but there is come to my hand
a Book written by one Mr John Goodwin, called, The Defense of the Honorable
Sentence passed upon the late King by the High Court of Justice, to which Book
I refer the Reader for further satisfaction; He has written largely,
learnedly, and faithfully upon that subject, so far as I am able to judge.

I should desire all men to wait patiently upon God, and I do undoubtedly
believe God will further clear these proceedings. I do believe the time is come
that the Government by Kings is finished in our Land: To my best understanding
the Prophets speak evidently, That God will restore Judges as at the first;
Then shall we be called a faithful City, a City of Righteousness, Isai. 1.26.

Now I shall humbly crave leave of the Ministers and Messengers of the Lord,
that I may, without offense to them (or to any others, for I desire to walk
without giving any just cause of offense to any man whatsoever) speak a word to
them.

I do perceive diverse of the Ministry do, or have taken offense at the
proceedings of the Army, and of the present Government.

Beloved, dearly beloved Fathers, you are men whom I love, and have in high
estimation for your works sake; How beautiful are the feet of those that bring
the glad tidings of peace and of salvation!

I desire that I may propound to your consideration some few lines: You see
that by reason of the late Wars (and because the State has yet had so much
business) there is not that Reformation of many things amiss, as it were to be
(and is) desired.

I pray you to consider, you are conversant in the meditation of Gods Law; You
(I believe) exhort the people to turn from their evil ways, and to be obedient
to, and observant of Gods Laws: I humbly desire you to give a good example to
the people, they look much upon your actings; You study the Word of God; I
beseech you do not hinder the work of the Lord: If you desire Reformation let
it be done orderly, and then it will prosper; Therefore I pray you to
strengthen the hands of the present Government, which I believe do truly
endeavor to do Gods will: encourage the Army, with whom Gods gracious presence
is evidently to be seen. There are offenses too many abroad; but woe be to them
(says our blessed Savior) by whom offenses do come: I do beseech you to
consider whether or no, there would not have been much more Reformation, if you
had not drawn back, and discouraged in a great measure this present Government.

I humbly beseech you, (if you know any that do publicly sow or stir up
strife) I pray you to persuade them to forbear. Consider I pray you, you know
that a Kingdom divided is dangerous, and it cannot stand with safety and
comfort. I pray you call to mind that motherly and tender respect Rebecca
showed to both her children; Esau being offended with Jacob, Rebecca does not
seek to make a party, although she knew that Jacob was her obedient son, and
had obtained both the birthright and the blessing, by means whereof Jacob was
truly Esau his superior; but she considered the dangerous consequences of
manifest division between such near relations, between Brethren; Therefore she
rather parts with her beloved son Jacob, and gives Jacob this reason, Genes.
27.45. Why should I be deprived of you both in one day?

I pray you consider that we have suffered much already: If any should endeavor
to bring new and more dangerous breaches, would it not be very grievous? Are
there not some that by their public practices have so divided our families,
and our friends already, that one friend dares hardly trust another?

Consider I pray you, That this present Government are men that seek your
honor, your good, and your peace, so far as God shows to them that it may be
for Gods glory and the good of the Land: and would such discontented men
forbear such direct and such palpable provocations, I believe the desires of
this Government is to honor and respect the Ministry yet more.

Consider what will be the issue of such men's endeavors that seek to stir up
strife: It is not possible to avoid, but that either the Government must fall,
or such as sow discord must fall: These matters cannot long be suffered with
the safety of the Land.

Now therefore consider the Government loves you, and (I am verily persuaded)
would pass by former offenses, provided that for the future there might be an
amendment.

I do believe that you have done what you have done (in some measure) with
zeal; I do consider that Peter swerved more then once; and likewise that in
many things we sin all.

There is much wickedness committed by too many, and likewise there are many
unsound Opinions, many corrupt Opinions: You desire these matters may be
amended; Then I do beseech you that you will seek to strengthen the hands of
the Governors: Is it possible that they should work a Reformation, if you
should divide your selves? Did not Moses and Aaron go hand in hand?

I am sensible of the matters that offend you; do but obtain this, namely, That
a Governmont may be established, countenanced, and obeyed; I mean, such a
Government as God has prescribed, (owned and blessed in his holy Word,) and I
dare engage that it is the nearest way to obtain your desires; only in that
pray earnestly, as a matter of concernment. Touching the Government by Kings,
they are gone and past, labor not to bring them again, for certainly it is
evident, that that shall neither be according to Gods mind, nor for your
comfort.

If men, famous in the Congregation, withstand Moses, it is no wonder that the
whole Congregation be out of order: Moses must be strengthened and obeyed, that
so the true Levites may do their duty, and be defended from injurious persons;
but if men famous do withstand Moses to his face, yet God will vindicate and
defend his cause, Moses's true authority shall stand. Touching these
corruptions and evil opinions, do but give Moses his authority, and God will
give him his Spirit in such a measure, that vice will fly away as chaff before
the wind.

Concerning these evil and corrupt opinions, that in these troublesome times
have evidently appeared, consider this, That God can make all work together for
the good of his Elect; they may see thereby the evils with grief and
detestation, they may see of what great concernment of what benefit, of what
necessity it is, that there should be Governors to defend them from the
violence of the wicked, to defend them from erroneous persons, to support Gods
Word and his Laws, to punish Delinquents, and ungodly men, that so the fierce
anger of God may be turned away from us: Pharaohs oppressions, and Isreal's
sufferings in Egypt; God in his wisdom used them for the instructions of his
people afterward: And in the very beginning, and next before the delivery of
the Law, God recorded that to be remembered, as being of eminent use and
instruction to his people, Exodus 20.1, 2. God spoke all these words, saying, I
am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of bondage. This God (by Moses and the Prophets afterward) used as an
effectual argument to invite to, and to put the people in mind of their duties,
Remember thou wast a bondsman, Pharaoh an oppressor, and I delivered you,
therefore, etc. Bread or food is most welcome to us when we be most hungry.
England was wanton, and proud, and full; God now proves them. God (I believe)
is about an eminent and great work of Reformation, marvel not therefore if God
leave the impression of tyranny and wickedness, in a more then ordinary manner,
to be recorded to posterity.

Dearly beloved Fathers, I pray you suffer me (without offense to you) to
propound this to your consideration, namely, That forasmuch as there has been
and is such a great and too general falling off from the true ways of God, in
the practice of godliness, sin having so generally overspread the Land in the
open sight of God and men; Therefore my humble Request to you is, That you will
consider whether it be not now a season to gather your Churches (such as are
not already) into good order, let the Septer of Christ's Authority be advanced
openly, so that all men may see that you have power of the Keys and Censures,
and that there may be some outward solemn act, (the form I leave to your
wisdoms, only it must be equivalent to a Covenant) whereby the people, that
shall willingly avow or acknowledge God, and Jesus Christ to be their God, (in
such a manner that they willingly will submit to him in all the ways of his
Worship, according as it is revealed and recorded in his holy Word the
Scriptures,) may be orderly gathered into fellowships, and all known sinners
may be hereby brought to repentance: This will be a means, that many that now
divide (and stumble at the profaneness that is in many places suffered, and
the disorder and want of power that is conceived to be in many Congregations)
will give and reach out unto you the right hand of fellowship.

I would not prescribe the way precisely, but so far as you may perceive my
meaning: This may be a way to curb and cut down much profaneness; and if God
give you hearts to stand up and labor diligently to do Gods will herein with
courage, industry, and all your might, I hope your labor will not be lost.

I cannot but with humble (hearty and unfeigned) thankfulness to God,
acknowledge his great mercy to us, (who have highly provoked God by our crooked
and froward behaviors,) in and for that God has stirred up many godly
Ministers and People to reform many things even now in these troublesome times:
I humbly pray you, labor now with all diligence to go on and perfect (so much
as in you lies) the Work of the Lord.

Consider (I pray you) That Israel repeated or renewed their Covenants upon
several occasions. None (that are godly) can take any just cause of offense.

Paul became all things to all men, that by all means he might win some; and
the Apostle, guided by Gods holy Spirit, rejoiced to behold the Order of the
Churches of God; God is the God of Order.

And the rather now I put you in mind of it, because now you have an
opportunity to do it, do it therefore circumspectly and speedily, because such
precious times of Reformation, as now you have, are not ordinary: And the
rather now do it, because the Government (I doubt not) is ready to support and
strengthen you in this great and excellent work of Reformation.

One matter more, Beloved Fathers, I humble desire you to take into
consideration, If you should discourage this present Government (being men that
do desire affectionately to do Gods will, I am verily persuaded,) and if you
should labor again to bring a Government over us by Kings, (which God forbid;)
weigh well these two matters, (I pray you,) first concerning Kings: You are
both uncertain of obtaining a King, and also unlikely; and what effects and
fruits such endeavors will produce in the issue, who can tell? It may occasion
much trouble to those that desire to live in peace. Can you tell whether the
King you desire or labor for (if you should do so) be wise or foolish? whether
he be godly or ungodly, what experience have we of it? Doubtless it is a matter
of high and exceeding great concernment, who we receive to rule over us. But
what if he should prove a persecutor both of you and Gods people? Is it not
very hazardable? For in Government by Kings we must take the next of kindred by
birth, though we should evidently see that he were an evil person, or else we
must endure another War. But suppose we should obtain a good King, yet we know
that they are set in slippery places, he may soon be taken away: What then? his
next of kin, or his next successor may be a persecutor. We have had many
experiences in this kind to teach us, and yet I fear we have profited too
little: King Edward a hopeful King, quickly gone; the next Queen Mary
persecuted his most beloved friends: Search the Records of holy Writ, and there
God plainly shows (which God plainly foretold) the bitter fruits that the
people should reap by having Kings: We may behold what miserable fruits the
people reaped by Kings; Solomon, heavy Taxations, Jeroboam, Idolatry: It would
be too long to reckon up Ahab, and others, and some in the streets shed the
blood of innocents.

But amongst all the Judges there was not one man but he was blessed of God,
and was a blessing to the people, if he were called and entered into his place
by Gods Appointment.

Indeed when people will not consult with (and enquire of) God, to know who God
sees meet to govern them, then God may justly leave them to their own choice,
to choose a King Abimelech, that may prove a scourge to them.

But secondly, I pray you consider, That this is one motive why you should
rather adhere unto, and desire a Government by Judges, namely, because Moses
and Aaron were nearer in relation, nearer in kindred. It was not in vain that
God did in the very first Governors that he did in mercy appoint (to govern his
first born Son, his Church and peculiar people) order it so, that both did
spring from one root. Moses and Aaron were brethren, they were very familiar:
Such God gave to the people; Which holds out, That God saw such a Government
to be most for his Glory, and the peoples good, namely, such as were most
nearly related, such as were brethren, such as came from a low condition: But
when God was angry with the people, God appointed one of another Tribe, a
mighty man, the son of a mighty man, in power and in wealth, to be their King,
1 Samuel 9.1.

To my apprehension, it is more agreeable to have Judges and Ministers, then
Ministers and Kings.

It is observeable, That the first King put to death Ahimelech the Priest, and
all his fathers house, the Priests that were in Nob, 1 Samuel 22.11, 16. And
further, Verse. 19. Nob, the City of the Priests, Saul smote with the sword. Did
the Judges any of them such an act? And did not the Kings many of them do worse
acts? Consider of these things I pray you, and the Lord give you to see aright.

Dearly beloved Fathers, you that are the Ministers of the Lord of hoasts, you
are men that I highly esteem of for your works sake; therefore be not offended
with me: I hope, in the following part of this little Treatise, you will see
cause not to be offended that I labor for Gods glory principally, and that
Peace and Truth may meet, as Moses and Aaron met in the Mount of God, and
kissed each other; nor, for that I desire that we may have Judges as at the
first, for then shall we be called a City of Righteousness.

And now, men and brethren, you that are different in judgment, or in practice,
suffer, I pray you, a word of Exhortation; I desire Peace and Truth, if your
desires be the same, I hope we shall more nearly accord. I humbly entreat That
no man may lust to be contentious; It is the Apostles counsel, 1 Cor. 11.16. We
have no such custom, neither the Churches of God: But, as the Apostle
counsels, 1 These. 4.11. We beseech you brethren that you study to be quiet.
Remember, I pray you, That through pride comes contention; Jam. 3. Does a
Fountain send forth sweet water and bitter? Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouths.

When we consider that happy condition in which man was created, and consider
how far we are degenerated, we may justly take up the Prophet Jeremiah's
Lamentation, O that our eyes might be a fountain of tears, that we might weep
day and night for our iniquities.

It is recorded in the Word of God, That all mankind proceeded from one root;
we have all one Father, and one blood runs through all our veins; one Law of
God is (or ought to be) our rule and guide: we have one and the same promises
of Grace; we have one Judge that must judge us all; and there is but one way of
good hope. God tells us, That whatsoever show of godliness we have or
pretend, yet that without Love all profits us nothing. This is that new
Commandment that God gave to man, namely, That we should love one another;
without this we shall never see God with comfort: And yet we see, That man that
is in honor is like to the beast that perishes, Psa. 149.12, 20. Which
occasions the Prophet to say, Isai. 29.13. This people come near to me, and
honor me with their lips only: Nay, may not I say, That their condition was
far better then ours; for we depart far from God, (too many men do) and from
his Rules prescribed in his Law, and do behave our selves as if there were no
God to control us. David gives that as a brand, or mark, of a wicked man,
Psalm. 12. He says in his heart, Our tongues are our own, What Lord shall
control us? It were well (or better then it is with too many) if they were no
worse then the beasts that perish; for many now cannot, or do not, agree so
lovingly as the unreasonable beasts that shall perish: Do not the wild Bears
agree amongst themselves? But, to leave the world in the broad way to
destruction, I entreat you, Countrymen, you that desire to do Gods will, do you
seek to be made conformable to that glorious image of God; Lev. 11.45. Be ye
holy (says God) for I am holy. Ephesians. 4.2, 16. Follow the Truth in love,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another. Mat. 5.43, 44, 46. Joh.
13.34. Consider, I pray you, That that wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable, then gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy;
Jam. 3.17. Verse. 14. But if you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts,
rejoice not, neither be liars against the Truth; for this wisdom is not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish.

Dear Friends, amongst the many sins of our times, I find, or shall rehearse
three or four predominate corruptions, and notorious sins, namely, First,
Contempt of the Ministry. Secondly, Contempt of those that most truly fear God.
And thirdly, Dividing and separating one from another upon too slender grounds.
I could reckon up many more, but these I only mention at the present: The
Devil laboreth to deceive men in those things that are most precious, in those
things that may be most effectual to draw us from God.

For the first, God says, Do my Prophets no harm, 1 Chronicles. 6.22. And again,
the Apostle says, That we should have the Ministers of God in high esteem for
their works sake: And Nahum 1.15. Behold upon the mountains the feet of him
that declares peace, (which are the Ministers and Ambassadors of the most high
God.) Thus the Prophet Isaiah expresses his estimation (by Gods own direction)
concerning the Ministers: Isai. 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that declares and publishes peace, and good tidings, and
publishes Salvation, saying unto Sion, thy God reigns? Thus Romans 10.15. How
beautiful are the feet of them that bring the glad tidings of peace, and
tidings of good things?

Observe here, That if the feet of Gods Ministers, which is the lowest part of
the body, and most soiled by dirt, be so beautiful; of what high estimation
ought the person of the Ministers to be of?

It it an argument, That where we see men so abuse and contemn the Ministry,
that those men are apt to slight the Word of God. If one bring us a precious
Jewel, would it not be a great part of ingratitude to throw dirt and dung in
his face that brought it? And observe well, where you see men so much abuse,
slight and contemn the Ministry, there and then, it is more then probable, God
is withdrawing his gracious presence from those men. When Came once discovered
his fathers nakedness, was not he near to a curse? And are not Ministers our
spiritual Fathers?

Consider how the Galatians behaved themselves toward Paul their Minister,
Gal. 4.13, 14. And ye know how that through infirmity of the flesh, I preached
the Gospel unto you: Which trial ye despised not, but received me as an Angel
of God, yea, as Christ Jesus.

In the primitive Times of the Church, in the next Times after those great
persecutions, we may read, what estimation and respect both Constantine and the
Christians yielded and gave to the Ministers; and shall we decline so far from
the Rules of Scriptures, and from the Examples of the Churches in the purest
Times?

Friends, or Countrymen, Consider what Jude speaks, Verse. 8. Notwithstanding
these sleepers despise Government, and speak evil of them that are in
au^hority. Verse. 9. Yet Michael the Archangel, when he strove against the
Devil, and disputed about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed
speaking. Verse. 10. But these speak evil of those things they know not. Verse.
11. Woe be unto them, etc.

Consider that evil words do corrupt: Does a Fountain send out sweet water and
bitter? etc. Remember (I pray you) That that wisdom that is from above, is
first pure, then peaceable: Look well first to your own hearts, and you shall
there find cause enough to bear more with those things (which you conceive to
be errors) in other men, but especially in Ministers. The Devil laboreth most
to corrupt men in those matters that are of the greatest concernment: For,
consider that the Ministry they persuade men to serve the true God in an
eminent way; If therefore the Devil can but bring their Ministry into contempt,
then the people will take but little heed to their Ministry. So likewise, if he
can draw men to disgrace those that fear God, and have most respect to Gods
Commandments; this is a very effectual way to draw others into those ways that
are opposite to them, that lead to certain destruction: Remember Christ's
caveat, Mat. 18. Take heed that you offend not one of these little ones, etc.

And touching the third matter, consider that Satan laboreth to sow discord
amongst brethren: for this weakens both parties, and the known Rule is to be
noted [Divide and Rule,] and doubtless in such Divisions the Devil he rules
too often, and too apparently.

Moses commends to us an humble frame of spirit, and left it in his last
Exhortation to the people, when he says, Deuteronomy. 32.2. My Doctrine shall drop as
the rain, and my speech shall distill as the dew, as the shower upon the herbs,
and as the great rain upon the grass.

His speeches were weighty, lovely and precious. Note, I pray you, how, and in
what a beautiful frame and habit he blesses and commends to the people an
humble frame of heart and spirit, Deuteronomy. 33.1. Now this is the blessing
wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the Children of Israel. Verse. 2. The
Lord came from Sinai, etc. Verse. 3. Though he love his people, yet all the
Saints are in thy hands, and they are humbled at thy feet to receive thy words.

Note, I pray you, to observe, and lay it up as a Treasure in your hearts, That
God accounts men then fit to profit, or receive Gods Word, when they are
humbled at his feet, that is, when we lie most low, which is plainly showed in
these words, At the feet of God, which is the lowest part, in our
apprehensions. Consider that this grace is of great esteem in Gods sight: Mark
upon what terms the glad tidings of Salvation are tendered, even to such as were
in a low condition, to such as were in their blood, and no eye pityed them, to
such as see their own (not so much other men's) wants, to those that are lost in
themselves. David says, Psalm. 25. God will teach the humble, etc.

Countrymen, Friends, Beloved, We have many risings of heart amongst us, many
differences; do but obtain, and keep, and make use of an humble heart, and I
doubt not but that peace and truth will meet, notwithstanding all other
oppositions: And on the contrary, so long as you carry in your company proud
hearts, you shall not enjoy and obtain peace and truth; the Reason is plain,
because God resists the proud, he knows the proud afar off: What says Jam.
4.1. From whence are wars and contentions among you? are they not hence, even
from your pleasures, that fight in your members? Verse. 2. Ye lust, and have
not; ye envy, and desire immoderately.

I shall conclude this Exhortation with that Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. Verse. 30. And grieve not
the holy Spirit of God. Verse. 31. Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, and
evil speaking be put away, with all maliciousness. Verse, 32. Be ye courteous
one to another, freely forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
freely forgave you.

There has been, or is still, a great variety, distance and difference of
opinions amongst too many; if I should or could answer to the satisfaction of
all, (a work much beyond my compass) yet new opinions springing up, I should
still have more and continued labor and trouble: Yet I shall propound (to the
consideration of the godly and well-affected) that way that God has
prescribed, owned and blessed, for the composing and ending of all differences
that are or shall arise.

Much labor, and travel, and pains, is, and has been taken to compose
differences; I pray you, that you will consider, That God, who is wise, and
knows what is in man, better then man himself, this God brought his Church
and chosen People out of Egypt through the Wilderness, being a Type and Figure,
showing us how we must through the wilderness of this world (through many
temptations and trials) pass, before we arrive at the Land and place of our
Rest. Many are the sentences recorded by Moses, (that man of God) which show,
That God took an especial care of his Church and Chosen: and as in other
matters, (so especially in this matter, namely, That in all cases of
difference, whether it were in the duties of men appertaining to God, in
matters of his Worship, or in such differences as did arise or should be
amongst men, which likewise had a reference to the breach of Gods Law; in all
of these cases) God left not the people without order and means, to try,
determine, and compose differences, for otherwise it had been the peoples great
misery; but God is the God of Wisdom and Order, and not of Confusion.

Now if we do consider well of it, the way that God ordained, and owned, and
blessed, to that end, to compose differences, was by appointing Moses to give
Judgment in all cases of difference, this plainly appears, Exodus 18.15, 16.
by this means all matters of difference were desided: And so likewise the
Ministers counsel was of great use, as appears, Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10, 11, 12. there
God does directly command his people to seek counsel of the Ministers; and
likewise does will and command us to hearken to their counsel: The Gospel is
not against that good order that God in his wisdom prescribed. Now, Beloved
Friends, the way to compose differences, I believe, will lie much in this,
namely, That we highly esteem of the counsel of our Governors temporal and
spiritual: Government is established and strengthened by the Gospel; and who
can or dare prescribe a better form (for the Administration of Justice) then
God himself has described and prescribed, and never repealed?

Moses was the first in Gods Ordination, and had the preeminence of matters of
Judicature; and Aaron likewise had his charge and authority, very nearly
assistant to Moses; the Ministers counsel was to be of force: By Moses all
matters (whether they were breaches of the first or second Table, whether they
were matters more immediately committed against the Majesty of God, or whether
they were mediately committed against our neighbor,) all these matters were
examined, tried and judged by Moses; God appointed him to judge, and to put an
issue to all matters: The Ministers had their place likewise, their counsel was
of great use. I purpose to speak more particularly to these in place afterward.

This Use only I commend to the consideration of all who it may concern,
namely, That seeing that God has given such authority to Governors, as it is
evident that God has; for this was not cancelled or removed by the coming of
our blessed Savior, but contrarily this was confirmed, as seasonably, I hope,
will plainly appear.

Consider of that place, 1 Cor. 6.4. If then ye have judgments of things
pertaining to the life, set them up which are least esteemed in the Church,
etc. Was not this the way to heal their distempered differences? namely, by
Governors or Judges; and rather then they should pretend some excuse, he says,
Set them up which are the least esteemed, etc. not that the Apostle intended
that they should set up any carelessly, but verse. 5. he speaks this to shame
them.

This matter being of such great concernment, it behooves us, for the good of
us, and of our posterity, to take special care, that (so far as it may be in
our power) let us use all circumspect care, That we allow of, set up, and obey
such men, as may be according to Gods mind; there lies much weight in it, for
let our differences be what they will be, or shall be, or can be, yet the
Governors will, they must, they ought to hear, try and judge of them: This is
doubtless Gods own way, it has his Image and Inscription.

I grant, That if any Governors, any whatever, shall not act for God, but
against Gods Laws, the Body of the People, or their Representatives have, or
ought to have, power to depose and punish such; for in relation to God and his
Laws, both the Governors and the governed are and ought to be subjects to Gods
Commands.

But beloved Friends, do not so far trust to this your liberty, that by reason
thereof you neglect to enquire and take counsel of God who shall be your
Governors; have an especial eye to the Rules contained in his Word, about this
matter ask counsel of God: For consider well of it, let the Experiences
recorded in Scripture (let the Experiences recorded in other Nations, let our
own Experiments recorded in this k nd) teach us, That when a Government is once
settled, it is a difficult matter to remove or alter, either the person, or the
form of Government once established, although we should apparently see that
they were evil toward God and us.

We have, I believe, much cause to be thankful to God, That he has granted
unto us more liberty now in these matters, then our Fathers obtained from the
days of Samuel to this day.

Those Governors that now we enjoy, both in the Parliament, and in the Army, (I
believe) they are men that prefer Gods glory, and the Peoples good, much before
any private respects to themselves; and I do believe (if God give us patience)
we shall see it evidently to appear: Let it be our wisdom and care to know, and
not to exceed the bounds of our lawful Liberties in this matter, and the Rule
of God forget not.

I do beseech all you that love God, and do desire to do his Will, That you
will wrestle with God for a blessing in this matter, for I believe the time is
near, that God will restore Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the
beginning; then shall we be called a City of Righteousness, a faithful City,
Isai. 1.26.

Touching the great difference that seems to be amongst many, I have no
doubt, but that the godly (if they obtain a blessing in this matter of
Government, and study to be quiet) shall plainly find a means (in Gods own way)
to compose their differences.

Dearly Beloved, You that are of different opinions, and that do unfeignedly
desire to do Gods good will and pleasure, I would put a great and vast
difference between you, and those men that manifest by their fruits, That the
fear of God is not before their eyes, that manifest by their fruits, That
touching Gods Commandments they agree in one opinion, which is, That they will
have little respect to Gods Commandments, because concerning these David says,
Psalm. 10.2. The wicked speak with a double heart; that is, they pretend that
they hate diversities of opinions, and that they will be comformable to Gods
Laws; but alas, does it not too evidently appear, That they acknowledge not God
in all their ways; for under pretense of conformity, they shelter themselves,
and so make ready their arrows, that they may shoot at them which are upright
in heart, as David witnesses, Psalm. 11.2. Job says (of such) Job 29.17. I
brake also the jaws of the unrighteous man, and plucked the prey out of his
teeth: And in the next Verse Job says, I was a father unto the poor; and when
I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently.

To those that fear the Lord, and earnestly desire to do his Will, I say, That I
believe, (that by reason that evil Governors have so chased, so afflicted, and
so persecuted you) that from the apprehensions of your former miseries you fear
all Governors, you are very shy of Government: But dear Friends, let me say
this to you, Stay a while, and look back again, God has promised that he will
restore Judges as at the first, etc. What then? then the case will be altered;
good Governors will love the Flock, and defend them from the wicked, and
ungodly, and blood-thirsty men; they will feed the Flock; God commanded Moses
to carry the flock in his bosom, near his heart, Numb. 11.12. Carry them in thy
bosom, as a Nurse carries her sucking child, unto the Land that I will show
thee: Be not afraid therefore, for a Nurse that loves her sucking Child, will
love it, and not cast it away because of her own trouble, nor yet though the
child have blemishes, and is not so beautiful as some others: I pray you be not
afraid of Government, for if you eye God, and enquire his counsel who shall
govern you; fear not, follow but the rule prescribed, and I doubt not but that
God will bless that Government to you, the Spirit of God will rest upon them.

For consider, That God is the Author of Government, therefore do not fly from
Government; for this I can tell by experience, That I have seen a people that
have, out of Conscience (to my apprehension) professedly separated themselves
from other Societies in the wilderness, and allowed Liberty of Conscience
without any disturbance: I have seen, and noted, and experimentally known these
people and passages, and what have been the fruits of such a boundless,
monstrous and deformed Liberty: They have rent and divided so amongst
themselves, that it has come to open hatred one of another, and they have even
cried out for to have some Government, that men might not speak and do what
they list. For consider of it, That when God does withdraw his good Spirit from
men, and let the Devil loose to deceive them, it is scarcely credible to
believe how far such men are drawn away, even to blaspheme God and his sacred
Word, (which are unseparable Companions;) And some may be drawn to believe,
That they may murder their Neighbors, and take their Wives, Children, or Goods.

Now consider, That it is a singular and precious mercy to us, that God has
wisely and strongly prescribed Rules, and Bounds, and Government, to these
raging waves of the restless Sea, beyond which they may not pass. Dear Friends,
Look upon Government as a precious mercy; it were not to be expressed, the
greatness of our misery to be without Governors; or to be without the blessed
Laws of God to be governed by. For consider it well, That as the Laws of God
are for Gods glory, so likewise the Laws of God are for our exceeding great
good: There is no Law of God but our Good is contained in it; and without those
Laws we should be miserable: The wicked of the world would dishonor God that
made us, and they would make servants and vassals of us: The strong would
oppress the weak, and would devour another.

Note well all along from Moses to Samuel, and you shall find, That when the
condition of the People was in a state of such a Liberty, to be without chief
Governors, then the people committed wickedness, and are punished: and the way
that God delivered them was by raising up good Governors. For this take for an
assured truth, That from good Governors and good Laws arises blessedness:
Therefore cleave close to the Laws of God, they are a precious treasure: And
likewise, take heed that your Governors be of Gods sending: Follow the Rules by
God prescribed, exactly, diligently.

There are some books written by some that I forbear to name, (both because the
matter seems to me to be ended, and also because I follow after peace) I will
not meddle with the Cause they or he pretends that moved him to write: But
this I say, They, or he, have not cause to complain of unkindness from this
present Government, for he has just cause to say, they were patient and
forbearing; for I desire those who are guilty to consider in what an high
degree they have sinned. The Holy Ghost commands us, That no corrupt
communication should proceed out of our mouths: and the Apostle Jude shows
the great evil of those that are hold in their own conceits: I desire God to
give them repentance if it be possible, That the thoughts of their hearts (and
their transcendent evil) may be forgiven to them: For consider, That (let men
slatter what they will or can) yet there is a glorious God, whose eyes are as a
flame of fire, from his sight such deeds of darkness cannot be hidden; and
remember, That God is a jealous God.

There was a great ado, a great tumult, but (I believe) the greater part know
not what they would have done.

Some cry out against the Government, who if they well consider of it, they
know not their own hearts: For this I do believe, Let them have what Government
they desire, yet they would still find some matter to be discontent.

Beloved Country men, A great part of England surfeit with pride and wantonness:
Take heed, God has many ways to abate our pride and to humble us: Do we not
forget the great mercy of God, in giving us his holy and sacred Word in our own
Language? Do we not forget that other places worship Idols, and have their
Inquisition houses, where many sad hearts do not behold the light of either Sun
or Moon. I do verily believe, if some men were in other Countries, and should
speak but the hundred part of what they say here, they should then know the
difference of Government. But if some do speak what they list, (as if there
were no God) yet let us all lay it to heart, there is a righteous God.

And now I desire, without offense, to propound to them that are separated from
the Assemblies, namely, Whether that now in these times, wherein the Government
are desirous and do endeavor a Reformation, first, ought not there to be in all
good Christians a readiness and willingness (and not a backwardness and
unwillingness) to join in (and to help forward) this work? It is recorded for
out Learning, Judge. 5.15. That for the Division of Reuben there were great
thoughts of heart. It is noted, That when the Children of Israel, for the sin
and obstinacy of the Benjamites, destroyed their City, when the matter was
over, how did they lament for their Brethren! They had no pleasure that a Tribe
should be cut off from the Church of Israel: Read Judges 21.2. And the People
came unto the house of God, and abode there till even before God, and lift up
their voices and wept with great lamentation. Verse. 3. And said, O Lord God of
Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that this day one Tribe of Israel
should want?

We may see here what a loving and godly frame of spirit was in this people;
They were so far off from rejoicing, that there was likely to be a Tribe
separated from Israel, that they do consult, and consider, and use means, That
this Tribe may not wholly be cut off.

O that I could evidently (now in these times of Liberty and opportunities) see
such a frame of spirit: But alas! does it not on the contrary appear, That
here are now but a few wet eye, but little lamentations, for the differences
that are so great, and so many?

Dear Friends, On all hands lay it to heart, and be humbled for it, That there
is no nearer affinity in your affections: Do you expect on all hands, that you
are not to move forwards, toward this uniting in brotherly fellowship, till
you be sent to, or till you be drawn to it with strong bands? I pray you
consider, Is not our union by faith in Jesus Christ as near a relation as any
bond or tie that Israel had? Is not Christ's Precepts, and Exhortations, and
Commands, as prevalent, and as evident, and as strong, to persuade us to unity
and a closing in brotherly fellowship now under the Gospel, as before under the
Law? Does not Christ say, A new Commandment I give unto you, That you love one
another? Does not Christ tell us, That if we forgive not men their Trespasses,
neither will our heavenly Father forgive us our Trespass? who was the
Samaritans Neighbor? was it not he that bound up his wounds? Luke 10.30. Does
not the Apostles tell us, That if we had faith to remove Mountains, yet
without love it profitteth us nothing: The Apostle asks this question, he
that loves not his Brother that he has seen, how shall that man love God
that he has not seen?

I stand not in such known truths to particularize Chapters and Verses: where
can you read the Doctrine of Christ, or of his Apostles, where these matters
are not evident to be seen?

Beloved friends, may I not say with the Apostle, that I am afraid of you: that
your hearts are not right in the presence of God.

Object. But you will say unto me, what would you have us to do? are there not
many lets in the way to hinder us from reaching out the right hand of
fellowship to our Brethren or Neighbors, (for some will not allow of the
brotherhood) are there not many sinful practices and much disorder?

Answ. Is there not a wise man amongst you, to heal and to make up these
breaches? Let me propound this to your consideration, do but remove one
poisonous weed out of your hearts, and instead thereof plant two sweet
smelling Herbs, and meet when you will, I should not doubt, (by Gods
assistance) but that all other differences may easily be composed, so that you
may join together in brotherly fellowship, a great many of you that now stand
at distance.

The poisonous weed to be removed is Pride, pluck up that by the roots.

The graces or herbs to be planted in the steed thereof, are Love one to
another, and Humility; be sure these be safely preserved: in giving honor go
one before another: Friends or Countrymen, you stumble at some failings, but
do you not (in the mean time) leap over Mountains, and plung your selves
into dangerous places? It was the very leaven Christ reproved in the Scribes
and Pharisces, they tithed mint and annise, and at the same time were guilty of
the breach of the Law of God, in weighty matters.

You are loath to close, lest you should hold communion with sinners? It may be
so, but consider well, That that heavenly wisdom that is from above, is first
pure: Let us search well our own hearts, let us try them well, and (I do
believe) we shall see as many and as great sins there, as we do see in many
of those with whom we will not close because they are sinners; Remember, forget
not what condition we were in when Christ lays down his life, and sheddeth
out his precious blood for us? were we not then all over from head to heel
defiled in our blood? And did then Christ reach out the right hand of his
fellowship to us? and are we so shy one of another? Christ wishes us to be
merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful.

Dearly beloved Country men, I must forbear, times quick motion bids me go
on. I pray you yet that I may propound to your consideration, whether
Reformation be not now more meet, and more agreeable to the sacred
Scriptures, (now in this time of liberty, and when we may have the strength of
authority to help us) then separation, in such a manner, as that we seek nor
greatly the love, fellowship, or communion of many, more then we now do. I
propound it in as easy terms as I can.

For the unfoulding of this matter I conceive it necessary, for expedition, to
propound the objection that may afterward arise in the chief.

Object. Jer. 15.9. If thou take away the precious from the vile, thou shall be
as my mouth, let them return unto thee, but return not unto them.

Answ. In such matters as we find recorded in holy Scriptures that leads us
to extraordinary duties, or to such practices as are not usually followed in
other places of Scriptures (being construed or understood, in the severest
interpretation) for otherwise (being favorable taken, consonant to the
continued practice and presidents of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles,)
there will not in my apprehension) be any matter of moment to hinder communion
between many that now are divided: I hold it a lafe way to have recourse to
other and in ore plainer; laces of Scripture, which show us how these darker
places are to be understood, construed, and practiced.

I believe the Prophet Jeremy (directed by God) sought to draw and win the
godly in his time, from those sins that the People (many of them) then lived
in; so that they might not partake with the wicked in those evils, which God
had forbidden: and in this sense he enviteth the godly not to return to the
abomination of the wicked, but let them return to thee, that is to say, let
them return to thee, and then in those things that God instituted in Gods
Ordinances thou may join with them; but note I pray you, That the People
were not hereby exhorted to devide in the Passover, nor in any of Gods own
Ordinances; for then I conceive it had been vain for the Prophet to have left
that door open, that the wicked might have forsaken his evils and have returned
to them, if upon their return, the godly had stood at a distance in houlding
fellowship in Gods own institutions.

If the question now were, Whether it be lawful for Believers to join with
other (though believers) in the commission of sin; it might easily be issued
for it is clear, we may not break Gods Commandments.

But now I conceive the case may be otherwise considered of, for it is desired
that there may be fellowship in those things, which both parties acknowledge
to be Gods own Ordinances, as in the celebrating the Sacrament, etc.

It is to be well considered that many times the state of the Jewish Church
was much corrupted, many corruptions there were, and yet the Prophets did in
those times join with the people, in these Ordinances that God had instituted,
as namely the Passover, Circumcision, etc. but not in their sins. The People
in the time of Elijah were fallen foully, he joined not therefore with them in
their sins; but when the People were present he offers Sacrifice, 1 Kings
18. and upon the Peoples acknowledgement of God, he then joyneth with the
People in doing Gods Will, namely in staying Baalls Prophet. The People of the
Jews in the time of our Savior were very sinful, Christ does not speak with
them in sinning; but in Gods own Ordinances he joined with the People, or did
celebrate with them the Passover, and so did the Apostles join in the
celebration of the Passover, and in the observation of circumcision.

The height of my persuasions reach no further then to this effect, namely,
that there might be a Brotherly closing, and the right hand of fellowship in
those things that are of God, and so acknowledged by both parties.

Friends there are many Lions in the way to hinder your closing, but this I
believe, that if there were unfeigned love, and sound humility in many of your
souls, there would be great sorrow in your hearts, for the divisions of
Reuben, and also an attempt, (means would be used) to join together in
Brotherly fellowship: now that there are so fair opportunities, as to my
apprehensions there are to be reconciled.

But I speak it with grief, I see but little means used, do not Christians,
Acquaintance, and Friends, carry themselves as if there were no great matters
in it, whether former breaches be healed or no?

Note and consider well of the Apostles words recorded Philip. 3.15. Let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if any be otherwise minded
God shall rev^al even the same unto you. Ver. 16. Nevertheless in that
whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one Rule, that we may mind one
thing. Ver. 17. Brethren be ye followers of me, and look on them which walk
so, as ye have us for an example. Ver. 18. For many walk of whom I have told
you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross of
Christ: ver. 19. whose end is damnation, whose glory is their shame.

Consider of it upon all hands, there is much evil somewhere, the mouths of
the wicked are much opened by reason of our divisions, and the hearts of the
Godly Ministers much grieved, and our Government much weakened, and disturbed,
by the many divisions that are amongst us; consider it, look to it, for the
many precepts, presidents, exhortations, and invitations, that are recorded in
the Scriptures, will not be as water spilt upon the ground, but they shall
either prevail in our hearts, and show themselves in our fruits, or else it
had been better for many that they had never known such precious directions.

We have many or diverse examples, in the Scripture recorded for our learning
which speak of Reformation of Churches, but not one (that I know of) that
shows a wilful and contented separation of Believers from Believers, in
those things agreed on, to be Gods own Institutions being considered in a
general way, whole Churches.

There is an apparent difference between that separation, when the Church
casts out a sinner (for some offense obstinately continued in) wherein we
may note, that the person offending, is a passive, and not an active, in the
matter of his exclusion; he does not voluntarily exclude the Church, but the
Church him: and also during the time of his separation he is not to be counted
as an enemy, or unbeliever, but admonished as a Brother: and between this
separation, so much now practiced, is it not a wilful or contented
separation, whereby, many stand at a manifest and great distance from Believers
and Churches, that are willing to be at peace and unity with them?

I should desire all men that willingly separate to consider, that their is a
great difference, between, partaking in sin, and partaking in those duties,
which God has prescribed. And that suppose that there be blemishes or some
things wherein we conceive there is sin, if we according to rule do proceed
therein, so far as our places do extend, we may then live in some societies,
wherein some may remain, and not excluded, which we count sinners.

I conceive Christ his example is evident and clear in this matter, who
continued his fellowship in the Church of the Jews, in Gods Ordinances, and
nevertheless did not partake with them in their sins.

But secondly, I desire that we may duly and well consider, wherein consists,
whereupon depends, and from what root arises, and what is the cause, that
God has granted this precious favor to us, that are by nature Gentiles, etc.
that we shall be his children; of his househould, and have brotherly
fellowship: does it arise from any inherent righteousness in us, more then in
others? Or from any actual holiness in us? or does it not arise from a
righteousness imputed to us? we are called Saints, not because we of our
selves are more righteous then others, but because we believing the promises
of God, Christ his righteousness is imputed to us; this is the root and cause
of our fellowship and brotherhood. Thus it is recorded, Romans 3.21, 22, 23, for
there is no difference, for all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of
God. ver. 24. and are justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus. verse. 25, 26, 27, 28. and Romans 5.4. being justified by
Faith we have peace toward God thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Gal 2.16.
from this root we are said to be ingrafted and united unto Christ by Faith;
This is the true cause of our brotherly fellowship. Suppose that ten men be
the brethren of one Father, it is not a sufficient cause to dissolve their
brotherhood, because that one wants an eye, another a hand, and another is
blemished, and not so beautiful.

But thirdly, consider we all of us, how far, and in what manner we are
polluted and defiled with sins our own selves, and by that means, we shall
not so easily separate the bonds of Brotherly fellowship: because we see that
others are sinners.

I beseech you that mourn for the breaches that are in the Israel of God, use
diligence, follow after Peace, go to other societies, and show that you are
desirous, to repair and make up the breaches that have been and are; show
your grievances what they are, I am persuaded the Godly Ministers, and many
people, will meet you and be willing to remove any just cause of offense and
to do any lawful act, or acts, for the reuniting, and for the obtaining of
Peace, and of Brotherly fellowship: but dear friends, be sure before you
come, pull pride out of your hearts by the roots, and instead thereof labor
to plant and bring love and humility, and then I dare undertake a
reconciliation.

I pray you give me leave (without offense) to propound to your consideration,
an instance or two, which I can be experience witness. There is a place where
the Governor and Ministers were godly: they out of zeal did separate wholly and
with some few others did join together in Covenant or fellowship: and did at
once refuse to join with all other in Gods own Ordinances, as namely in the
celebration of the Sacrament and Baptism, etc. What followed? whereas before
the whole place was (in my apprehension) in a hopeful way of Reformation, and
turning from evil to good; the Ministers were generally beloved, and so was
the Governor, by the most of the inhabitants, till this time of their total
separation; but afterward, those that saw not light for such a practice, first
withdrew their affections from the Ministers, and from the Governor, and still
the flame increased till the Governors and Ministers, were displaced, and worse
(in regard of godliness) obtained their places, and that place now is become
more evil, then before, and less hopeful.

Might not these godly Ministers, and Governor, have reformed all the evils,
as well in a way of Reformation, as in a way of rigid and sudden total
separation? which if they had orderly proceeded in, and so have dealt with such
as had been known sinners according to any clear rule, and by just process have
excluded every known, Obstinate, and unrepentant sinner; this I believe would
have bin bo^ne by the People, and the Ministers and Governor might (I believe)
have still remained in their places, and might still have bin beloved of the
People, and they might (I believe) have done the same (in effect) by a way of
Reformation, that they endeavored to do in a way of total separation, which
brought such sad events.

I could instance in another People some matters tending to the same effect, in
both which I have noted with diligence the fruits, and I cannot see the
gracious presence of God to succeed such proceedings.

Therefore I desire all who it may concern warily to consider the fruits of
separation, where we may do the same matters, in a way of Reformation. And
further consider that it is a more facile way to separate from other sinners,
then to separate from the sins of our own hearts. God forgiveth us every day
our sins, and yet how sharply do we proceed against our brethren.

This matter requires that much more should be spoken to it, but I forbear
because I fear to offend any of Christ's little ones.

I have only endeavored to remove those hindrances which I conceive do
chiefly hinder Peace and Truth from meeting and embracing.

Now dearly beloved Fathers, you into whose hands God has committed, the
Government of this Commonwealth, and the People, and the affairs thereof; I
humbly desire that you will not be offended, that I do propound to your godly
consideration the few following lines contained in this little Treatise; I pray
you do not disdain to look over (and consider) what is in them contained,
because the instrument that offers them to you is but weak and mean.
Consider that God sometimes chooses weak, and mean instruments, to bring
about his own purposes: It was a great Argument that the great men and learned
Doctors used (in the time of our Savior) to bring his Doctrine, and the
Doctrine of his Apostles into contempt, namely they said, is not this the
Carpenters Son? are not these unlearned men, poor Fishermen? and the like; I
hope this shall not be a prevalent Argument with you, to cause you to despise
what I here offer to your consideration; despise not altogether the day of
small things: I have not that rich store of (neither do I much seek for) those
rich garments of the sentences drawn out of many other Writers, to cast over
and to adorn this little Treatise, to make it appear beautiful, I must
present it to you in the plain simplicity of the Gospel. The authority (I
shall allege) is drawn only or chiefly from the Word of God, which I shall
endeavor to tender to you (so far as God shall assist me) without addition or
diminution, not turning to either hand.

Through much difficult trials and temptations, I have bin helped (I believe
by God his good Spirit) to obtain this benefit that I might tender these
things to your consideration; and as you are more eminently considered in them,
yet I also and my posterity and many of my friends are likewise truly
concerned in these following lines. I confess they are but as a mite, yet I
pray you accept them, and lay them up, let them be put into the treasury of
your hearts, to be considered of.

Dearly beloved Fathers I pray you accept favorably of these few following
lines, wherein I have labored to present to your godly considerations, such a
platform, or draught of Government, as is drawn from (or out of) the
unblemished and most perfect pattern, prescribed, and revealed in the sacred
Scripture, those straight and unerring rules of truth: in the description
thereof I have endeavored, without adding or diminishing, (according to the
measure of Grace and strength from God received) to present it to you with
faithfulness.

These reasons following have moved me to present these following lines to your
considerations.

First, aiming at Gods Glory: having an especial respect to the accomplishment
of those precious promises, foretold by the Prophets.

Secondly, because that I my self and my posterity are concerned in the cause.

Thirdly, because that such an opportunity (I believe) has not been offered
from the days of Samuel to this time, considering I look upon you as men that
aim principally at the glory of God, and not so much at any worldly respects,
yon knowing and seeing the brittlenesse, the uncertainty, the mutability, and
vanity that is to be attained in any worldly comforts, compared with those
true, weighty, precious treasures, provided, promised, and reserved, for all
those that love God, believe in him, and do unfeinedly desire to do his Will
and Commandments.

Fourthly, I do consider that your actings now, and the platform of Government
that you are now considering of, is such as is like to concern posterity. It
will concern England, Ireland, Scotland, and our Neighbor Nations, they will
warily look upon it, and it will concern the Islands in the Indies, Barmoedas,
Virginia, New England, Newfound Land, and other places.

Consider therefore, I pray you, with the greatest respect, that you have an
eye to the pattern of the Sanctuary, to those rules, and warrantable
presidents recorded in Gods revealed Will the holy Scriptures, I pray you turn
not to the right hand, nor to the left hand, remember what an express charge
God gave to Joshua: Chap. 1.8. Let not this Book of the Law depart out of thy
mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do
according to all that is written therein, for then shall thou make thy way
prosperous, and then shall thou have good success. I beseech you dear Fathers
consult not too much with flesh and blood, follow not the many and uncertain
presidents and inventions of men. If you keep close to Gods Rule, you shall
not err, you shall be safe, and then shall I and my posterity (some of your
little children), shroud our selves, under the protection of your wing, with
more peace and comfort, conceiving our selves by Gods Providence, to be secured
from the many Wolves, and Bears, and Lions, that lie in wait to hurt us.

I have traveled through many difficulties, forsaken Wife, Children, and some
worldly comforts, that J might present these following lines to your
considerations, (which I would not mention but to this end,) That it might take
some impression in your hearts, and cause you advisedly to read and to consider
what is contained in these following lines, and that so all my labor may not
be lost, and these matters cast aside as wast paper, to that end I pray you not
to look so much at the Garment as at the substance, and not so much at the
Order, or Form, as at the Truth and true Meaning, of what J have tendered to
you: but whatever my success shall be, I know my dependancy, and whom I have
trusted.

Dearly beloved Fathers, J mean not to exclude my requests from being
presented (and are intended by me) to be tendered to those two worthy Servants
of God, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir Oliver Cromwell, being Fathers of this
Commonwealth in an eminent manner. To them and to the rest of those worthy
Governors of this Commonwealth, to you all, I present my requests and what
shall be contained in these following lines.

Dearly beloved Fathers: you have now a great, and glorious, or precious
opportunity put into your hands of Reformation, be but Faithful in this, and
God will make you Rulers of more and greater Cities; of Heavenly places. In the
mean time, till you can settle Government according to your desire, I pray you
let the administration of Justice come thorough as few hands as with equity you
may, that so the poor may come at their right, with as little difficulty, or
charge, and with as much ease, as may be, which ( I do believe) you do
endeavor.

I humble request of you likewise, that you will take off from the
Commonwealth what burdens and taxations, you can. I pray you be deeply and
thoroughly affected, with the many sad complaints, and sighs of many poor
hearts, that are under your Government, that are of your flock, remember what
frame of spirit was in that first, and godly, and eminent pattern of piety,
namely, in holy and humble Moses, that blessed man of God, he sought the good,
the ease, and the comfort of that people God committed to his government, he
changed this transitory life, and now lives with God, and with his blessed
Angels to eternity, the memory of him is recorded (for our learning) in Gods
Book of Records, and is precious, and blessed in all Ages.

Remember how our blessed Savior delivered us from those oppressions of
sins, and from Satan and from Death, and laid down his life to redeem us;
and all this he did freely for us, when no eye pitied us, yea even then when
we were at emnity with him, and he was a precious pattern for us to imitate,
and now he sits in glory, and is blessed to all eternity. He regarded not,
the momentary trifles, of worldly wealth, the Foxes had holes, and the Birds of
the Air had nests, but the Son of man had scarcely a place whereon to rest
his Head; be merciful because your Heavenly Father is merciful.

I do believe you do earnestly desire, and endeavor to take off from the
people what burdens you can, J do consider that you have very many and great
engagements, that for the present you cannot avoid Taxations, but I hope those
occasions will in time convenient be removed, so that then I hope you will ease
the people what possibly you can. ( I hope God will show you a way to do it:)
of this I am persuaded that we might be more eased in this matter, were it not
for the gainsayings and molestations, that diverse bring upon us by reason of
their irregularities.

I pray you be mindful of our Trading and Merchandise, to encourage that,
that so the poor labourer may be employed, and relieved.

I cannot but with thankfulness acknowledge your great care, and charge that
you have already taken, in setting out Ships, to secure our Merchants at Sea;
I pray you still continue your watchfulness that way because these times, are
times wherein many ungodly men, blood thirsty, and deceitful men, lie in wait,
to devour the labors, and the persons, of many honest and well minded men.

I pray you to encourage the Soldiers, by allowing unto them such a competent
maintenance, that they may comfortably live, for otherwise it will occasion
them to rob or steal, whereby our lives and our estates shall be more damaged,
and endangered. I hope that God will give unto us your people such seeing eyes,
such willing and cheerful conformity, such wholesome, and peaceable, and well
ordered tongues, such a freeness of heart to acknowledge, and be thankful
for all your former faithfulness, and your great labors of love toward us,
that we shall have such a loving agreement, and such a general peace and
blessedness, that you may free us from many of our military men, and they may
with honor, and comfort, and a blessing from God, and from you, and from us
all, return to their own homes with peace and comfort.

I humbly desire you to have a favorable respect, to those that separated from
us, and to those that are different from us in some particulars in their
judgments, out of tenderness of conscience, so long as they lead a godly, a
peaceable and a quiet life. Consider I pray you that such fear and love God,
and desire to do that which is well pleasing in Gods sight, and fearing to
offend and provoke God, or to break his Commandments, they do abstain or
refrain from doing some things which they have liberty to do: consider that the
sins or offenses of such persons, are usually in the matters of omission. God
did not command in the Law (so far as I understand) that men should, (I mean
those that were Gentiles by nature) be compelled to partake either of the
Passover, or Circumcision, nor to adhere to the Church of the true Israel of
God by way of spiritual fellowship. Moreover have not these men
notwithstanding (I mean Believers, though they fear to join in fellowship with
other Believers for fear of offending God thereby) the mark or character of
Gods servants? See 2 Kings 17.39. Nehe. 1.11. and Chap. 5.15. Psalm. 25.14. and
34.9. and 103.11. He has not dealt with us after our sins: neither rewarded
us after our iniquities. Ver. 11. For as the Heaven is high above the Earth, so
great is his mercy toward them that fear him. Ver. 13. As a Father has
compassion of his children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear Him.

Consider I pray you, that all men have not the same measure of grace; but can
we deny but that these men fear the Lord?

I pray you drive these that fear the Lord softly, do not drive them
furiously, least as Jacob said of his slock, it should endanger them; Moses
carried the chosen of God tenderly in his bosom, although they were in some
respect a froward and a crooked Generation: I pray you put a real and broad
difference between these, and those Wolfes, and Bears, and beasts of prey, that
regard not Gods Commandments. Because these have the characters of Gods
enemies. Of these David says, Psalm. 101.8. betimes will I destroy all the
wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity, from the
City of the Lord.

I pray you to take a special care in the mean time for the honor of that
most glorious and high God, from whom we do receive all that we have, both life
and all other comforts, that he be not dishonored; Remember I pray you that God
is a jealous God of his honor. Suffer not sin to march so openly in the sight
of the Sun, and to go without speedy and due punishment, suffer not such
corrupt speeches, such foul contentions languages to go without control,
suffer not the wicked to speak what they list, as if there were no God to
control them: Remember I pray you what a world of wickedness, trouble and
evil, that little member the tongue, (not being regulated and bridled) may
produce, to the dishonor of God, to the disturbance of our peace, and to hinder
my weak, yet true, and faithful endeavors, that peace and truth might meet
together, as Moses and Aaron met together, in the Mount of God, and kissed each
other.

Dearly beloved Fathers I am yours in true affection, and in all Christian duty
to be commanded, (...).

ENDEAVORS Aiming at the glory of God, THAT PEACE and TRVTH may meet together.
HAving endeavored (in the few lines preceding, or going before) to remove
such hindrances as lay in my way, and also to view some of those materials
which may be useful, in the drawing out a Platform of such a Government and
Governors, as God has prescribed, recorded, and blessed, in his holy Word; I
shall therefore in the first place lay down this Foundation, namely, That that
government that God has himself prescribed, and blessed, (in the first and
purest times of government, and then when he did in mercy and great favor
most immediately prescribe government;) is to be preferred very much and very
far, before that government which came in long afterward, being such as the
people chose, and invented in imitation of the heathen Nations, and being such
a way and form of government as God himself does immediately oppose, and that
in a very direct and eminent manner,) and is better then all other governments
that men can prescribe or invent whatsoever.

The first reason why that government is best that God prescribes is, because
Gods works and rules are the most perfect works and rules: there needs
nothing to be added to them, nor nothing to be taken from them, as may
evidently be seen, by and in the whole frame of the Creation of Heaven and
Earth, and all the creatures in them contained.

The second Reason is because God is infinitely wise, no wisdom is to be
compared with his wisdom.

The third Reason is because God varieth not; he is yesterday, and to day, and
the same for ever.

The fourth Reason is, because God is most strong, able to protect his own
Works.

The fifth Reason is, because God loves and blesses his own Works, and
Rules, and makes them to prosper.

The sixth Reason is, because God is true and faithful, in all his Word and
Promises: now God has promised to bless and to prosper his own Rules, and
Directions, and so it evidently appears that he has done.

On the contrary that government which people prescribe is very much worse, and
exceeding inferior, to that which God prescribed: first because that man's
wisdom, power, truth, and mutability, is infinitely inferior, to the wisdom,
power, truth, and immutability of God. As does appear plainly in that men, when
they laid their heads and wills, and powers together, to oppose Gods
Determinations; all their highest labors and endeavors, reached no higher,
nor no further, then to build a Tower of Babell, tending to confusion; this
will further appear if we consider this particular case in the matter of
government, for those Judges, and that form of government, which God did in
his wisdom appoint to his beloved first borne Son, in the first and purest
times of government from Moses to Samuel, was much better then that government
of Kings, which succeeded afterward in more corrupted times, when God was
angry with the people, and was such a government as the people invented, in
imitation of the Heathens.

Secondly, this government of God was better, and the Peoples worse, because
God blessed his own Directions, and Prescriptions. It is to be noted that of
all the Judges that God appointed, immediately, or in which the people asked
counsel of God, those governors God blessed them with his good and holy
Spirit, all of them from Moses to Samuel, there was not one of them an evil
governor (that I can find) and they all proved blessings to the people; But
those governors that the people chose and invented themselves, many or most of
them God did not so bless with his good and holy Spirit, and they proved
curses and crosses to the people, and were great afflictions to the people, as
appeared in Abimeleck, in Jeroboam, in Ahab and others.

Next let us consider, That this people the children of Israel had the best
form of government from Moses to Samuel, which appears from the
considerations of diverse Scriptures, Exodus 5. God there says ye shall be my
chief treasure, though all the people of the Earth be mine; this place shows
that God preferred this people at this time above all other people, therefore
it may plainly be gathered that God took more special regard to appoint them a
better government then other Nations; but other Nations had Kings at that time,
and God prescribed, and appointed to them Judges at that time. Therefore
government by Judges in that first and purest times, were better then
government by Kings. Read Exodus 33.16. So shall I and thy people have
pre-eminence above all people that are on the Earth; here again the same is
repeated, to show that this people had pre-eminence above all other people; and
should they be preferred in smaller matters, and not in this matter of
government, being a matter of the greatest concernment? Read Levit. 9.23. and
the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the People: from this place it
appeared, that in this most excellent mercy, they were far preferred before
other people, for did any other People see the glory of the Lord as they did?
no verily. Read Levit. 26.12. Deuteronomy. 4.5. Behold J have taught you Ordinances,
and Laws, as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do. Ver. 6. keep
them therefore and do them for that is your wisdom, and understanding. Ver. 7.
For what Nation is so great to whom the Gods came so near unto them, as the
Lord our God is near unto us in all, etc. Ver. 8. And what Nation is so great
that has Laws so righteous, as all this Law that I set before you this day?
Ver. 9. But take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently, that thou
forget not these things, and that they depart not out of thy heart all the
days of thy life, but teach them thy sons and thy sons sons. Ver. 2. Ye
shall put nothing to the Word which I command you, neither shall you take ought
there from, that ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, etc.

Dear Friends, let us well weigh the very express, and direct force of such a
plain downright Rule of God: God tells them that they had Laws and
Commandments, such as no people on Earth had the like. Consider what was meant
by Laws, and Precepts and Ordinances: This is meant by it, the whole frame of
their government: For Rules, and Laws, and Ordinances, implies most plainly
two things: the governors, and the governed; for else to what purpose had God
given the laws: if he had not appointed governors to see those laws executed.

We see it to be of necessity and most principal concernment, that in all
combinations or societies, wherein many act together, there must be Order,
which is nothing else but government.

We see likewise that this government, being regulated, and ordered wisely,
justly, mercifully, etc. This puts a beauty upon all matters to be acted by
Societies. This Order in Government it puts a shining luster upon all pieces of
work, and upon all Societies. Do but withdraw a wise and good government, and
let either a fool, or a negligent person, or a disordered Epicure, or a Tyrant
manage actions; and you shall presently find that Works or Societies guided
by such, will either turn into a Chaos, or into disorder: or at the least (in
the best cases) the luster and beauties of such societies, will be taken away.

That which I shall then gather from these Scriptures is, that no Nation under
Heaven had so good a government, (which is plainly expressed, in that none had
so righteous Laws, and Ordinances) as this people of Jsrael had now in this
time of the Judges, now in these first and purest times, now in this time when
God showed his glory so eminently, now in this time when God came so near unto
this people as no Nation upon Earth had such a government, such governors;
which is plainly implied, and expressed, under these words Laws and
Ordinances. This being true, then it follows plainly, That this government by
Judges was better, then the government by Kings: for at that time they had
Kings in their Heathen governments, the Egyptians they had a King, a Tyrant, an
unrighteous oppressor, a ripe of the Devil, but God says that at that very
time the Ordinances and Laws, the whole-frame of their governors, and
government was better then all other Nations did enjoy; then certainly it was
better then the government by Kings. We can no way evade, or avoid (in a plain
way of righteousness) this truth, it follows plainly, directly and strongly.

But further, it appears clearly that this government was better then that
government by Kings, because God in his wisdom saw this government to be best
for his Church and people. God was the Author of this government by Judges, God
did prescribe this government and bless this government. And God is not as
man, his works are not imperfect, God sees and knows at once what is best;
consider then, That God is likewise unchangeable: Concerning the Government by
Kings, God was not ignorant of it, he saw that, but it plainly appeared that he
approved not of it, because nevertheles God prescribed to the people this way
of Government by Judges; this was Gods own Ordinance, and God says, This
Government was the best, no Nation had so good a Government, take it in what
respect you will or can take it. Further let us consider, That these Ordinances
of God, these Laws, this Government prescribed and blessed by God himself, do
continue in force to this day, they were never changed nor repealed to this
very day.

Object. But do we not find, that there were some good Kings, as David, and
some others?

Answ. That proves not in the least, That the Government of the Kings was to
be compared to that Government by Judges, because this Government by Judges was
Gods prescription and direction, but that Government by Kings was the
prescription of the People, the Peoples invention, in imitation of the Heathen
round about, and this was expressly forbidden by God before in Deuteronomy, Thou
shall not follow the manner of the Heathen Nations round about: And it was
expressly against the Counsel of God, recorded by Samuel; it was against Gods
Will, for though God did permit Kings to be, yet he did not originally appoint
them, but contrarily God dehorteth the people from having Kings in a vehement
manner, and taking it in the highest degree to be both the breach of Gods
Commands or Institutions, and likewise a very forsaking of God, recorded by the
Prophet Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7. They have not cast thee away, but they have cast me
away. And further note, That God out of his tender compassion to the people,
notwithstanding that they had cast him away in the form of their Government,
yet God lovingly admonishes the people, God gives warning to the people what
they should get by having a Government by Kings, namely, 1 Samuel 8.11. This
shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you, He shall take your
sons and your daughters, your fields and your vineyards, your servants, your
cattle and your sheep, and ye shall cry out by reason of your oppressions, but
I will not hear you in that day.

Further consider, That God did permit divorce in sundry cases, and did permit
the Israelites to have more wives then one; this matter (to my apprehension)
has a better footing, and much fairer show of Gods approbation, then the
Government by Kings; and notwithstanding Christ our Lord says, That this was
not originally right, God did not in the first and purest Institution ordain
this matter; yet God did act in many cases, and blessed children, and married
persons in this way. In the first being of Kings, God did act in this cause, as
namely, God chose Saul and David, yet nevertheless God did expressly by the
Prophet Samuel, in threatening manner, admonish and foretell the people, That
Kings would oppress the people, and make them cry out, and GOD would not alter
the Government by Kings when they would.

Observe we well, That where men do not cleave close to Gods Ordinations, to
his Institutions, and do not prefer the Wisdom of God before their own wisdom,
it is a righteous thing with God to suffer them to smart, and to endure bitter
afflictions, when we shall not have ability to help our selves: We have had
experience of Kings from Samuels time to this day, and now God has given such
an opportunity as has not been a long season, now we have comfortable hope,
that God will give and restore Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at
the beginning. Oh dearly beloved, whosoever thou art, hinder not Gods Work of
Reformation, left thou be found a fighter against God; remember that our
forefathers have been a gainsaying people, let not us, I pray you, resist the
good Spirit of his grace.

2. But further consider, That although David, and some other Kings, were
better then the rest, (God would not suffer the Rod of his Wrath to lie always
so heavy as at sometimes,) yet even David and Solomon, and others, were not
blessed with the like measure of grace that the Judges were blessed with:
Consider, did Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Samuel, did they kill innocent Vriah? Did
they commit Adultery with Bathsheba? Did they number the people with David? Did
they set up Idolatry, or suffer Idolatry? Did they build sumptuous houses, and
gardens, and orchards, as Solomon? Did they commit such abominations as many
other Kings did? Consider of it, That this Government by Judges, instituted by
God himself, in these first and purest times, was the best Government, it was
most for Gods glory, it was according to his will, and it was most for the
peoples good.

3. Consider, That although God commends David in the general, yet that
proved nothing in this particular case, namely, it neither proves to them be
of Gods, first Institution, nor any Institution, not that place; for instance,
if a master of a family having an hundred servants, some of these may be as
personable, nay they may some of them be beloved of the master, and be rulers
in the family; but this does not prove. That the form of their government
(being a form of their own invention) was or is so good a form, as that form of
government that the master himself appointed. We ought warily to distinguish
between those matters that God does permit, and between those matters that God
does institute and ordain. Adam, our grandfather, sinned by eating of the
forbidden fruit, yet nevertheless God made some of his posterity Instruments of
his glory, and they were beloved of God, yet it does not thereby follow, That
Adams condition was so good after as before. God says, David was a man after
his own heart, but it neither follows thereby, That all Kings were men after
Gods heart in that sense, nor does it thereby follow, That the government by
Kings was so good a government as the government by Judges, for that is against
the express letter of the Scripture, and against the experience of all ages to
this present.

Object. Does not God say, That Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens
thy nursing mothers?

Answ. This shows, That although the people had deserved, that God should
make all Kings to be enemies or scourges to the people, for rejecting God their
King, and for their evil and obstinacy, in forsaking the first and best form of
government by Judges, (a form prescribed and blessed by God,) yet this shows,
That God would not always be alike offended, he would let some Kings be nursing
fathers, although many were evil toward God and the people.

Another instance consider, A father, having many children, employeth, or there
is employed diverse nurses, some of his own choosing, and some of his childrens
choosing; the father considering the childrens weakness and offense in choosing
other for nurses without his order, he does neither allow of their act in
choosing, nor of the persons, although he may forgive his children part of their
offense, and promises that some of these should prove nurses to them, though
many should prove crosses; this does neither approve of his childrens act in
breaking his way prescribed, neither does this indulgence or mercy in the
father encourage or warrant other children to follow that way not prescribed,
but expressly witnessed against.

One instance more to open the matter, consider, Certain men being to go to a
place far distant from them, there are diverse ways that lead to the place, the
master of the company he shows to them the best way, but the company are
obstinate, and will (...) to King and Princes by descent, without enquiring
Gods counsel, and so continued in the breach of Covenant, and of Gods Law; they
had not yet restored God to be their King, as in the days of old, as in the
beginning, This is plainly expressed in these words, Kings not by me; Princes,
and I knew it not: As if God should have said, I expected they should repent,
and turn from their evils, and have enquired at, and taken my counsel, who
should be the man that should be their chief Governor; but they go on, and
obstinately follow the counsel of their own hearts; They have Kings, but not by
me; they have Princes, and I knew it not: that is, They did not come and make
me acquainted, they did not enquire of me who should govern them: therefore the
Enemy shall pursue them. But to go on, They have transgressed my Covenant, and
broken my Law; whence I gather plainly, That the Government by Judges, together
with their entrance into their places, it was part of the Law of God; God did
ordain and appoint that the Government should be by Judges; and that God would
have that privilege, that preheminency therein, that he would be consulted
withal, who should be the man that should be principal Governor; that is to
say, God, and not the people (without the express counsel of God known) should
appoint the man, and name the person; and the erring from this here God calls
the transgression of his Law, and the breach of his Covenant: That this is the
very true mind of God, (I believe) the very words in the Text, and their
application by God himself, do naturally and plainly hold out so much.

But secondly, I gather this to be the meaning here, considering the presidents
prescribed and practiced by God himself; God mediately appointed Moses, Joshua,
Gideon, Samuel, and some others: This shows, that God did ordain and
institute not only the form of Government by Judges, but also God did himself
immediately appoint the persons; in which nomination we may observe, That God
did not appoint (in these first, and purest, and uncorrupted times) that
Government should go by Succession, from Father to the eldest Son; Moses had
children, and other of the Judges had children, yet God in his wisdom saw it to
be most for his glory, and for the peoples good, that the principal Government
should not be continued by descent: This plainly appears by those presidents
in which God himself did the most immediately appear in, and the most
immediately appoint: Afterward, in more corrupted times, the people chose by
descent, but this proved not to be compared with that way which God in his
heavenly wisdom did appoint in the first, and in the purest and best Times.

I should further note diverse things here, as their casting God off, their
punishments being the fruits the people reaped; but I forbear, and proceed; The
Lord says, Deuteronomy. 4. Verse. 2. to 9. That God had taught them Ordinances,
therefore keep them, says God: What Nation is so great that has Laws so
righteous as all this Law? Take heed to thy self and keep thy Soul diligently,
thou and thy sons, and thy sons sons; Ye shall put nothing to the Word that I
command you, neither shall you take ought there from: This people they were
well disciplined by God, and they had the presence of God so near to them, and
God was so tender over them, as appears Deuteronomy. 32.10. God led him about, he
taught him, he kept him as the apple of his eye: Verse. 11. As an Eagle stirs
up her nest, fluttereth over her birds, stretches out her wings, takes them
and carries them on her wings: Verse. 12. So the LORD alone led him, and there
was no strange god with him. Thus did God nearly show the people his glorious
majesty, his power, his wisdom, his Truth, his grace, goodness, bounty, mercy,
his unchangeableness: When we consider of it, we may say with the Prophet
Isaiah, Oh that we had harkened to Gods Commandments, then should our
prosperity have been like the floods, and like to the mighty waters: But alas,
this people grew to be full, they were at ease, they were wanton, which God
noted, Deuteronomy. 32.15. He that should have been upright, when he waxed fat,
spurned with his heels; that is, he esteemed these precious mercies to be of
little value: Therefore God seeing this, says, Deuteronomy 32. Verse. 15. Thou
art fat, thou art laden with fatness, thou art gross; therefore he forsook God
that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his Salvation: God being most
infinitely wise, he knows which way is best to remedy this distemper, namely,
these surfets in prosperity; This therefore God tells the people, admonishing
them in the times of their prosperity to take heed to Gods Commandments, and
not to turn any way aside to the right or left hand, nor to add nor diminish:
But observe we, this people would not harken, they would not be convinced that
the wisdom of God was best and safest for them: God had himself immediately
prescribed both the form of Government and the persons; yet this people
preferred the GOVERNMENT by KINGS, such as the HEATHENS round about had (of
which the LORD had said to them, Ye shall not follow their Manners nor
Customs,) before the Government by Judges; and therefore the Prophet Samuel
tells them, that such things would befall them by having Kings, but they
would not harken to God, to the Prophet; Therefore the Lord foreseeing and
knowing what would follow, he admonished them; they will not now be persuaded;
Take heed, for it is no light matter, for hereafter you shall cry out by reason
of your afflictions, but I will not hear you; that is to say, you shall feel
this breach of my Law and Covenant, Kings shall be your Oppressors, they will
slay my Priests, set up Idolatry, force you to Idolatry; they will worship the
host of Heaven, they will fill the streets of Jerusalem with blood; they will
be the causes that my anger shall be kindled against you; they shall be the
causes that I will bring an Enemy upon you, and deliver you into captivity:
Hosea 8. Therefore, says the Lord, the Enemy shall pursue you; that is to say,
he shall prevail against you: This shall come to pass, because you have broken
my Law, and transgressed my Covenant; you have set up Kings, but not by me; and
Princes, but I knew it not; as if God should say, I did not acknowledge the way
of Kings, I knew it not, etc. and yet you repent not, you return not to me,
etc. Samuel faithfully and plainly foretold this, 1 Samuel You shall cry out by
reason of your afflictions at that day, but I will not hear you; you have
chosen a form of Government by Kings, and Kings you shall have: This shows,
That the matter of Governors and Government is no light matter in Gods
estimation; we may make as light a matter of it as we will, but God knows
that Kings will afflict us, and oppress us, Kings will draw us to Idolatry,
they will cause the fierce wrath of the Lord to break out against us.

Consider of it, we have had the experience of above two thousand years, what
the fruits of Kings have been; search diligently the Records of the sacred
Scriptures (from Samuel his time to this present day) and the Records of all
ages; How often have the people been tossed to and fro in Religion, in War, in
bloodshed, under the Government of Kings, the Father of one Religion, the Son
of another? How much War and contention has there been for to obtain Crowns
and Kingdoms? Consider of it; Was it so under the Government by Judges
prescribed by God? Did they persuade the people to Idolatry? Or contrarily, did
they not from time to time persuade the people to the true Worship of God?
Which of the Judges did strive for the Government? But contrarily, the very
first of the Kings did shed much blood, having in aspiring mind to obtain the
Crown, etc. Search the Book of the Judges, concerning Abimelech and his fruits.

Countrymen, beloved, Consider of it; I am persuaded, That if such
experiences, such admonitions, such warning, as God has given us, (recorded in
the Scriptures) and from our own, and other Nations, if these will not prevail;
though Abraham should send one to us from the dead, it would not prevail: One
admonition more I desire we may remember; God says to Israel, They were full
and fat, they would not serve the Lord in their own Land, in the abundance of
all things; they would not observe Gods Law and Covenant without addition or
diminution, they would follow their own inventions: Therefore says the Lord,
they should serve their Enemies in hunger, cold, and nakedness, in the want of
all things, and in a strange Land.

Consider (dearly beloved) That from the excellency of Government does arise
the happiness and blessedness of the Saints in the Kingdom of Heaven: I pray
you therefore let us set a high price upon Government. Let us proceed warily in
matter of Government; let us enquire of God, let us follow the purest, the most
clear and evident presidents and prescriptions, without turning to the right or
left hand; let us enquire for the old and good ways, prescribed, owned, and
blessed by God himself; against this there can be no just exception: And it may
be God will see and regard us, and remember the riches of his own compassion,
of his own precious promises, Isai. 1.26. God will restore (which argues they
then were not in being) Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the
beginning, then shall we be called a City of Righteousness, a faithful City.

I might multiply Testimonies, the Scripture is obvious and copious, but time
bids me forbear; Therefore I go on to consider a little more particularly
Kings, concerning whom the most high and wise God did both see and know what
and when the first King should be, and how long the continuance of the
Government of Kings should continue, and when their Kingdoms should be
finished; of this I doubt not, now the end of Kings and all other afflictions
work together for the glory of God, and the good of Gods Elect: and I doubt not
but that God would use some Kings as instruments, in some particulars, to be
helpful to his Church and People.

Object. Some (and too many) use this as an argument, That Kings were good for
Gods Church and People; for, say they, did not God make Promises to Kings of
good things? and were not some Kings good instruments in some things to promote
Gods glory? Did not Solomon build a Temple to the name of the Lord? etc.

Ans. One instance consider, Adam our great Grandfather, after he had broken
Gods Commandment, and eaten the forbidden fruit, after this, and presently upon
the occasion of what came to pass by reason of his transgression, God out of
his bounty and goodness makes a Promise of great worth to Adam and to his
posterity, namely, That the seed of the woman should breaks the serpents head:
Consider now, would it be safe or sound arguing to argue thus? Adam did well,
because God in mercy gave him a precious promise? No verily; Or would it be
safe to say, That we, some of his posterity, may follow his steps in sinning,
because that he obtained a precious promise? No verily; because we are first to
have respect to Gods Covenant, to his Law; And also we are to consider, That
the root from whence this promise sprung, was not from, or because God was
pleased with (or approved of) Adams transgression; but the Promise sprung out
of Gods abundant and rich mercy, and free grace.

From the premised respects and considerations I gather and conclude, That
those gracious promises, or acts, wherein God used Kings as instruments or
actors in some good things, these do neither approve of the Government by
Kings, nor do they prove that the institution of Kings was approved by God; and
much less do they prove, That the Government by Kings was of equal goodness
with the Government by Judges; in which the Word of God is plain and evident,
That God prescribed, owned, and blessed the Government by Judges: And
contrarily the Word of God is plain, evident, and copious, That God did not
allow of the Government by Kings, but did expressly disapprove of that form of
Government by Kings; and to this we may add the experience of the fruits of
Kings to this very day.

Object. Some do use this argument to strengthen the continuance of Kings,
namely, That God did foretell that Kings should be, and some Kings God did
himself appoint.

Ans. God did foretell that Israel would kick with their feet, and slight his
Commandments; God did foretell that the people would reap bitter fruits from
Kings: This does not show, that God did allow or approve either of the one, or
of the other.

God did appoint some Kings immediately, showing, that in this way, if the
people had kept close to God, and have gone no further backward from his Rules
and Directions, then it should have been better and safer for the People; it
was too much to alter the form prescribed by God, but it was an addition to
and aggravation of this sin, when they slighted God and did not enquire of
God, who should be the man that should be their King, from time to time. When
they followed the Rule and made him King whom the Lord did choose, (it may be
noted that) God chose Saul immediately by lot, wherein we may note that although
God were angry, yet he took thus much care for the People, that God let Saul
(rightfully) reign no longer as King, but so long as he walked in Gods ways,
and during that time God gave Saul some portion of his good Spirit, or a spirit
which made him suitable in some proportion to govern his People, as appears. 1 Samuel 10.9. God gave Saul another hearts, and all those tokens came to pass,
etc. And when Saul departed from God, and forsook his Law, we may note that
God rejected him from being King. 1 Samuel 15. ver. 26. Thou have cast away the
word of the Lord, and the Lord has cast away thee that thou shall not be King
over Jsrael. Ver. 28. Then Samul said unto him, the Lord has rent the Kingdom
of Israel, from thee this day. And note now, that when Saul was deposed, Chap.
16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit sent of
the Lord vexed him.

We may note, that because the people made David King a man chosen by God,
(and not by the peoples rash proceedings) that God gave to David his good and
blessed Spirit. 1 Samuel 16.13. Then Samuel took an horn of Oil and anointed
him (David) in the midst of his Brethren: and the spirit of the Lord came
upon David from that day forward: here we may note that it is no vain thing
that God should appoint our governors for us, God let the people taste of the
difference between Kings and Judges, in that Solomon set up or countenanced
Idolatry, and laid great taxations upon the people, yet it did not extend so
far, not by very much, as afterward the People felt under the government of
other Kings, which were set up rashly by the people, without such an immediate
call, (and for ought I know) not being anointed with Oil, by any true Prophet
of God.

This I note the rather, because I have respect to God his express Command and
Direction (which was never reversed to this very Day) recorded, Deuteronomy. 17.14.
where God says if thou shall say, I will set a King over me like as all the
Nations that are about me. Ver. 25. Tou shall make him King over thee, whom
the Lord thy God shall choose.

I shall only at the present observe these two notes from this place, first
that God does not hereby either command, or allow that the People should set up
a Government by Kings; for the Lord says, if thou shall say I will set a King
over me, this came to pass in the Days of Samuel. Then the people they would
have a King, the People here did not inquire of God, first now it does not
follow, that because the People said we will have a King, that therefore God
does either approve or allow of this matter, but the direct contrary appears,
1 Samuel 8. in most eminent manner.

But secondly, I do observe that God says thou shall (if thou will be wilful
and have a King, yet) thou shall make him King whom the Lord thy God shall
choose; here I put a real difference between a King or governor being chosen by
God immediately, and between the choice that the People make, I purpose if God
will to speak more of this in place afterward.

But this Rule also the People soon forsook, namely they made themselves
Kings of their own choosing, wherein ( I conceive) they did not inquire of God,
who should be the man, therefore the Lord says they had Princes and he knew
it not; that is to say, they did not according to the Rule inquire of God, who
should be King. Thus much to show, that it was better with the People when they
eyed God, and kept close to the Rule (when God chose the person) then it was
when they fell more foully as afterward they did; but this still does not prove
that God did institute that form of government by Kings, or much less that
this form of government was as good, and as well approved of by God, or so
blessed, as the government by Judges.

But to go on to speak more punctually, or more particularly to the being of
Kings; I shall endeavor (according to the measure of grace received) to speak
of them in true proportion, as God has spoken of them in the holy and sacred
Scriptures.

The first King that I find recorded was Abimeleck, Judges 9. it is noted that
this Man was no lawful governor appointed by God; but one that usurped the
Kingdom, because he entered not by and according to the true way, wherein and
whereby, God had prescribed; which I believe was principally in regard that the
People did not enquire of God, who should govern them: but contrarily the
People chose him out of, or for sinister respect, because of affinity, kindred,
and also, because he entered by force; we may see what is recorded Judges. 9.
By this man's government there were very sad events, or fruits that followed or
sprung, for he was the occasion of much evil and bloodshed; this serves to
warn us to take heed that we enquire of God who shall govern us, and that we
do follow the most clear and evident Rules and Presidents, prescribed and
recorded in the sacred Scriptures the sure Rules of Truth: our Savior teaches
that the true Shepherd enters at the true door, that is, according to the
revealed will of God. And on the contrary those Wolves and Foxes, do enter in
at the window, that is (as I conceive) by some way that God has not
prescribed, as by friends out of by respects, or by Fraud, Force, Money,
Beauty, Personage, Eloquence, or such like; all of them not in such away as is
prescribed in the most unerring Rules of Truth.

After him arose Saul to be King, concerning his person, he was truly and
rightfully called, being chosen by God, but concerning the form of government
by Kings; this was the Peoples invention, in imitation of the Heathen Nations,
as appears, 1 Samuel 8.5. The people said make us a King to judge us like all
Nations: from this place I observe that it was not the Peoples demand to have
this, or that man in particular to be their King; but they desire only to have
a King. By which it appears that this sin lay, not in regard of the person,
but it was in respect to the form of government; before they were governed by
Judges, which Form of govermnent God did immediately prescribe and own it,
and bless it; but this Form of government by Kings the people they did invent
it, in imitation of the Nations round about; concerning those Nations God had
expressly said, that they should not follow the manners and customs of the
Nations.

But secondly, against this way of government by Kings God does (I believe)
expressly, evidently, and eminently oppose himself, in these particulars:

First God says, that (by this means or way that the people here lusted
after) they had cast off God from being their King, or reigning over them.
Which is expressed, 1 Samuel 8.7. They have not cast thee away, but they have
cast me away, that I should not reign over them; this ( I conceive) is
plainly implied, and expressed, that the greatness of their sin lay in
regard of the form, and not in regard of the person, as if God should have
said, they have not so much sinned in desiring another Governor, (although I
believe this also was their sin) but they now have rejected the form of
government by me immediately prescribed.

Further God opposes this form of Government by Kings, immediately in showing
the People the great evils that they should reap, by Kings, noted, 1 Samuel 8.
From Ver. 9. to Ver. 19. Kings will take your Sons, and your Daughters from
you, and will appoint them to serve themselves. (This God does not say was
lawful for Kings to do) for Gods Law was express to the contrary, Exodus
22.21. Moreover thou shall not do injury to a stranger. Neither did Gods Laws
permit that they should wrong any man: and Samuel uses that as a strong
argument to convince them of their evil, namely, in these words, 1 Samuel 12.3.
Behold here J am, bear record before the Lord of me, whose Ox have I taken,
or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I done wrong unto, or whom have I
hurt? Ver. 4. Then the People said thou have done us no wrong, nor have hurt
us, neither have thou taken any thing of any Man's hand. Hereby appears the
Peoples great evil and ingratitude, and their unrighteousness in forsaking
that government, with which they could find no fault. Further this showed that
Kings would prove great evils, because they would be great wrongers, and great
oppressors, because they would take by violence their choicest comforts from
the People. And further this showed, that Kings would rule by the Rules of
their own wills, (in our days called their prerogatives) this is showed in
these expressions, Kings will take these and these things from you, but this
they ought not to do, for herein Samuel shows his integrity: we may observe
that the Law of God ought to be the guide, the Rule, and the bounds, to all men
high and low, to King and People, this is evident, Deuteronomy. 17.16. to 20. There
God says, that the King should have the Book of the Law, and that he should
read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord
his God: and to keep all the words of this Law, and these Ordinances to do
them: that his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn
not to the right hand, or to the left hand, etc. From hence we may see that the
King is not to do what he lists: but he is as expressly commanded to observe
and do the Law, as any other man, yea and in some sort more, because his
example is more prevalent to draw others, either to good or evil.

But further we may here note the difference between Kings and Judges; the
Kings they will do thus and thus, they will break the bounds set unto them,
but the Judges were humble meek men, this God knew when he put in that clause
(so nearely linked to the observation of his Law) namely, that his heart be not
lifted up above his Brethren; experience has taught us much of this (could we
be warned) That Kings their hearts will be lifted up. Observe I pray you, the
Judges they acknowledged the People to be their Brethren, but Kings they say
their blood and their descent is more Royal, more Illustruous, more Excellent,
then those they call the baser sort, and the more ignoble.

It is to be noted that in the first and purest times, those men that were
truly godly, truly virtuous, those men that were most precize, that were the
most observant of the Law of God. Those men then were accounted to be the most
noble, and so we find they were in Gods esteem (for we find Moses taken
from keeping the sheep. And Gideon from threshing, and David from the
Sheepe-fold, and made Rulers of the People. But the World is now turned
upside-downe, for what do some men now applaud and worship but the Blood
Royal, and Noble Blood? we have men now, that are truly noble and eminent for
Piety, that sway the government of the Commonwealth; but what is the tumult?
They say they cannot see their Nobility. (I would speak soberly and
forbearingly,) consider warily and truly, is it not because the God of this
World has blinded the eyes of many men?

But let us further note that this King Saul, or a King, or the Government by
Kings, would not only deprive the People of their Sons and Daughters, but
also Kings would take their seed and their Vinyards, 1 Samuel 8.15. Their
Menservants and their Maide-servants, and the chief of your young men, and
your Asses, and Sheep: and ye shall be his servants; Note I pray you, that
this People had great liberty and freedom under the government by Judges
(could they have improved these with thankful and contented hearts) but they
would reject and slight these mercies, they would be governed by Kings, under
which Government they should endure many afflictions, but when it comes to
this height, that they themselves should be servants, then they begin to be
more sensible, then they cry out, but says God, Ver. 18. The Lord will not
hear you in the day, and time of these afflictions.

By this evident admonition it plainly appeared that God opposed in threatening
manner, this government by Kings, for note that the cause here was not so much
about the person to be made King, but it was about the form of government by
Kings. Note further how Samuel humbly and patiently does argue the cause with
the People Chap. 12. ver. 7. to 13. where Samuel puts the People in mind
how God had not bin wanting to them, but from time to time had raised up and
appointed good governors for them. Which governors God protected, guided and
blessed to them, and made them Saviors (and not oppressors nor destroyers) to
them; sometimes (for their sins, and to prove them whether they would cleave
to God, and to show them the benefit that it was to have God to appoint good
governors, and for other ends which God knew to be for his glory and their
good) God did leave them without chief Judges, and then we see the People they
run into many bypath, and sinful courses, and then God suffered them to
feel afflictions by enemies; but note that when the people considered the
cause and sought the favor of God, and cried to God to help them, God never
failed but answers their petitions; note in what manner God answered them, he
raised up Judges, which God made to be blessings, and Saviors to the People.

From this expostulation of Samuel, we may observe that God by Samuel reproves
the People for altering that form of government which God in his wisdom had
prescribed, and blessed to the People; And the People could not deny the truth
of this: but further note that God to the end that posterity to come might
evidently see his displeasure, for that cause, because the People had altered
the form of government by Judges, and instead thereof had wilfully and
obstinately desired a government by Kings, Therefore the Lord shows the
People by an eminent and wonderful way expressed thus; 1 Samuel 12.17. I will
call unto the Lord and he shall send Thunder and Rain, that ye may perceive
and see how that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of
the Lord, in asking you a King. Ver. 18. Then Samuel called unto the Lord, and
the Lord sent Thunder and Rain the same Day, and all the People feared the
Lord, and Samuel exceedingly. Ver. 19. The People said we have sinned in
asking us a King besides all our other sins, etc.

Concerning this King we have occasion to note, that Gods Presence did remove
now and stand at a further distance then before, God did not wholly depart from
them, but remembering the multitude of his mercies, he did still favor the
People, but as the Tabernacle, for the sins of the People was removed out of
the Host, Exodus 33.7.8. (Yet not wholly out of their sight) so here God removed
his gracious presence further off from the People.

The next King was David, who was a good and virtuous King, God would not
afflict the People so much that they should have no good Kings. David's
blemishes I forbear, though some blemishes he had, such as (I believe) were not
to be found amongst the Judges, that were immediately appointed by God to their
place after succeeded Solomon, how far he declined from the straight Rules of
Gods revealed Will, are to be found recorded in the Book of Kings.

Rehoboam Reigned, he had 18. Wives and threescore Concubines, and desired many
Wives, 2 Cro 11, 21 23. He forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with
him, for which cause Shishack came up against Jerusalem, and took the strong
Cities, which were of Judah: The People were made servants to Shishack. 2 Cro.
12.1. to 9. Further he did evil and prepared not his heart to seek the Lord.
Ver. 14. Ahijam reigns, he walked in all the sins which his Father had done
before him, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord, 1 King. 15.3. Asa
reigned he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, he put down his
Mother, because she had an Idol in a Grove. 1 King. 15. Nadab reigned, he did
evil in the sight of the Lord, and made Israel sin. 1 King. 15.26. Baashaw
reigns, he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and caused Israel to sin. 1
King. 16. Elah he reigned, did evil, being drunk was slain. 1 King. 16. Omri
reigns he did evil in the sight of the Lord, worse then all that were before
him. 1 King. 16. Zimri reigns was burnt. 1 King. 16.18. Ahab the son of
Omri reigns and did worse then all before him. 1 King. 16.3. Ahaziah
reigns, he did evil, he sought help of Baallzebub, the God of Ecron. 2
King. 1. Iehoram reigns, he did evil in the sight of the Lord. 2 Kin. 3.2.
Iehosaphat reigns, he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord. 2
Kings. Ioram reigns, he did evil. 2 Kin. 8.9. Jehoram son of Iehosaphat
reigns, he did evil. 2 Kin 8.17. Jehu reigns, he regarded not to walk in
the Law of the Lord God. 2 Ki. 10.31. He is an occasion to cause Israel to sin,
and therefore they are smitten in all the Coasts of Israel. Ver. 23. Athalia
reigns, did evil is slain. 2 Ki. 11.3.6. Iehoash reigns, he did good in
the Eyes of the Lord during the time the Priest taught him. 2 Ki. 12.2. But the
high places were not taken away, he is slain. Ver. 21. Iehoaash son of Iehu
reigns, did evil in the sight of the Lord, and causes Israel to be
delivered into the hands of their enemies. 2 Ki. 13.2.3. The Destruction of the
People was so great, that there was left but 50 Horsemen, and 10 Charrets, and
10000 Footmen, they were destroyed and made like Dust beaten to powder. 2 Ki.
13.6, 7. Iehoash son of Iehoaash reigns, he did evil in the sight of the
Lord. 2 Ki. 13.10.11. Jeroboam reigns, he did evil in the sight of the Lord.
2 Ki. 14.23, 24. Amaziah reigns, did uprightly in the Eyes of the Lord, but
not like David. 2 Ki. 14.3. Azariah reigns, did uprightly in the Eyes of the
Lord, but they burnt Incense in the high places, and the Lord smote the King,
and he was a Leper to the Day of his Death. 2 Ki. 15.3 4, 5. Zachariah
reigns, he did evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 Ki. 15.8.9. Shallum
reigns, is slain, 2 Ki. 15, 14. Menahem reigns, did evil, 2 Ki. 15.17,
18. Pekahiah reigns, He did evil in the sight of the Lord. 2 Ki. 15.23, 24.
Pekah reigns, He did evil. 2 Ki. 15.28. The People carried away captive.
Iotham reigns He did uprightly, but the People burnt incense in the high
places, in his Days, the Lord sent enemies upon the People. 2 Ki. 5.34, 37.
Ahab reigns, He consecrated his Son in the fire, he did much evil. 2 Ki.
16. Hoshea reigns, He did evil in the sight of the Lord, he becomes
servant to Salmanasser King of Ashur. 2 Ki. 17.2, 3. The People besieged, and
carried captive. Ver. 6. Because they kept not Gods commands diligently. 37.
Hezechiah reigns, He did uprightly, according to all that David. 2 Ki. 18.
Manasseh reigns, He did evil in the sight of the Lord, after the
abomination of the Heathen. 2 Ki. 21.2. He did much evil, and filled Jerusalem
from corner to corner with innocent blood, 2 Ki. 21.16. And he caused Judah to
sin, and to do evil. Ver. 16. Ammon reigns, He did much evil in the sight
of the Lord, 2 Ki. 21.20. Josiah He reigns, He did uprightly in the sight of
the Lord, 2 Ki. 22.2. Iehoahaz his Son reigns, he did much evil in Gods
sight. 2 Ki. 23.32. The Land in his Days was put under great tribute. Ver. 33.
Iehojachin reigns, He did evil. 2 Ki. 23.37. very much evil. Iehojachin his
Son, He reigns, He did much evil, 2 Ki. 24.9. The People carried captive
in his Days very much People, Ver. 13.4. Zedechiah He reigns, and He did
evil in the sight of the Lord, very much 2 Ki. 24.9 20.

It is well to be considered of, that amongst all the Judges of Israel, (that
came into their places according to Gods institution) there was not one man of
them (that I know of) that was taken away by the Sword of the enemy, nor by
treachery slain by their own People, nor came to any untimely Death (save one
man) and that was not for practical evil of himself, but for suffering sin
to go without due punishment, in his children. But contrarily they are noted
much for Humility, Sincerity, and Piety. Certainly, the Spirit of God does
wisely describe Governors, for our learning, had we but hearts wisely and
diligently to observe them. But note contrarily that amongst the Kings, how
many were taken away by untimely Deaths, some by Gods command slain, some by
the Sword of the enemy, some carried captive, and the greater part slain by
the People; and the most of them are noted to be notorious sinners. I shall
rehearse some of them, although I believe not all.

The first fruits of their King Abimelecke, Judge. 9.6.53. The next was Saul,
slain, was his own Executioner, 1 Samuel 31.4. Nadab slain by one of his own
people, 1 Ki. 15.27. Elah slain in like manner, 1 Ki. 16.9. And of Baasha his
predecessors progeny, God says. 1 Ki. 16.4. he that dies of Baasha his stock
in the City, him shall the Dogs eat, and he that dies in the field the
Fowls. After him Zimri pursued by the People, burns himself, 1 Ki. 16.18.
Jehoram slain by his own people. 2 Ki. 9. Ahaziah slain in like manner. 2 Ki.
9.27. Iesabell slain, 2 Ki. 9. Ahab slain, his posterity slain, 2 Ki. 10.6.
by the Elders of his own people. Ver. 7. Athalia slain by her own people. 2
Ki. 11.3.16. Iehoash slain by his own servants. 2 Ki. 12.20. Shallum slain by
his own people. 2 Ki. 15.10.12. Pekahiah slain by his own people. 2 Ki. 15 25.
Pekah slain by his own people. 2 Ki. 15.30. Amon slain by his own people. 2
Ki. 21.23:

I know not any one of these, but that they are noted to be notorious sinners,
I do let pass some others slain, and carried captives, only these briefly
(as the shortness of time will permit) the Lord give us hearts to understand
the meaning of the blessed spirit of God aright. Note here that God in his
righteous Judgments suffered, and appointed Kings to be punished on earth. God
did not let them alone to be punished in another World.

I do believe that all these were not to be approved in the instruments and
manner of their slaughters; but some of them are approved, and all of them are
noted to be taken away by Gods righteous judgments, for the breach of his
Laws and Commandments.

Now let the sincere godly hearted unpartially compare this government by
Kings, with that government by judges, in which I pray God to direct you aright.

Thus have I endeavored to present to our view the Kings that reigned over
Judah and Israel, the Lord give us understanding to consider what bitter fruits
the People reaped by changing their form of Government. I shall only in this
matter consider that (doubtless) these Kings many of them or others in their
room would have been much better, had the People kept closer to the Rules
prescribed, and from time to time enquired of God, who should have been the
man that should have governed them; for we may note that although God promsed
David, that some of his posterity should govern; yet they ought to have made
him King whom the Lord should choose, Deuteronomy. 17. But we may note that God did so
withdraw his good Spirit from the people, that I remember not that it is
recorded from Solomon's time and after, that the People did ever solemnly
enquire counsel of God, Who should govern them. I do believe that if the
people had solemnly and seriously sought to God in this matter, God would have
provided some of David's posterity from time to time, and so have blessed and
guided them by his good Spirit, that they should have been much better then
they were; but I do believe God suffered them to swerve, that we by their
examples might learn wisdom, whatsoever was written before time was written
for our learning.

Having thus far proceeded in laying down, or describing the Cause or
Foundation, wherefore or whereupon I endeavor (in the fear and love of the
great and most high God according to the measure of Grace received) to describe
such a government, Governors, together with their entrances and authority, as
God has prescribed, owned and blessed; in all which I do consider, that from
the time of the Prophet Samuel to this day, there has been so great a
swerving and declining, from that first most pure, and clear Fountain, from
those most straight, wholesome, and good Rules, Precepts, and Commandments,
described by that most high and only Wise God; therefore I pray you blame me
not if I decline from humane authorities, in all this description, I desire to
enquire for the old and good ways of our good God. And I consider that Gods
Ways, (his good Will and Pleasure,) is most certainly (most wisely, most
apparently) made known in the Scriptures written by the Prophets and Apostles,
men that most truly and faithfully made known Gods good Will and Pleasure
(without mixture of their own or other men's inventions.) Therefore I shall
most chiefly and only in comparison, allege the authority of the Scriptures:
and the rather because I consider that as the interposition of the Earth,
between the Sun and Moon, darkneth that light (and makes an Eclipse) whereby
we are hindered from the more apparent and clear light and benefit, that
otherwise we might receive; so I fear it would come to pass, if I should
follow other inventions; I am sure that in this way the true light is most
unerring. I shall next endeavor to show what encouragement I find recorded in
the sacred Scripture, that do strengthen or encourage me to believe; That God
now in these latter Days and Times, will restore and reform government, so
that we shall have Judges as at the first, and counselors as at the beginning:
and then we shall be called a City of righteousness a faithful City. I shall
begin to propound to consideration this Scripture, Esai. 1.24. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel, Ah I will ease me of mine adversaries,
and avenge me of mine en mies. Ver. 25. Then will I turn mine hand upon thee,
and burn out thy dross till it be pure, and take away all thy tin. Ver. 26.
And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy counselors as at the
beginning, afterward thou shall be called a City of righteousness a faithful
City.

From this place I observe, That corrupt Governors are the great hindrances of
Reformation, because the Church shall then be a City of righteousness, when
they have Judges as at the first.

Secondly, I observe, That such corrupt Governors, and Governments God has
determined shall be put down, this is expressed in these words, J will ease me
of my enemies and burn out thy Dross, this is plainly employed in these
words, I will restore thy Judges as at the first, etc.

Thirdly, I observe that at this time when the Prophet Esaias wrote this sentence
or this precious promise. The government that then was in being (which was a
government by Kings) was neither the first government, nor the best, or pure
government; but hereby noted to be a corrupt government: If this were not the
plain and true meaning of these words (I believe) God would not have made this
to be the way and means, whereby the Church should become (in Gods estimation)
a City of righteousness, and a faithful City, and this appears if we do
consider that the way how, and cause why, they should become a City of
righteousness, was Because a better government should be to the Church and
People of God, and that which then was in being should be destroyed, but then
the government was by Kings.

Fourthly, I observe that this government should be reformed, or regulated
according to the first and purest times, and by Judges, which being considered
(I believe) it plainly follows that from the time of Samuel to this day this
prophecy has not bin fulfilled and accomplished; because, there has not from
that time to this bin such a Reformation, such a Government by Judges, as was
in the first and most pure times, instituted, the most immediately, by God
himself; and is held out in these words, As at the first, etc.

Fifthly, I observe that there is just ground to hope and believe that such a
Reformation God will work, namely, that God will restore Judges as at the
first.

Sixthly, I believe there are good grounds from this place (compared with the
acts and great works that, God is now working, and has wrought) to expect,
that this very time, is the time, or the beginning of the time God pointed out
in this prophecy; Because, that corrupt government by Kings is put down, in
such a way of burning and righteousness, as has not bin from that time to
this day (as I believe) and such an earnest seeking and strong endeavors, as
has not bin usual, for to set up and restore a government by Judges as at the
first; in which endeavors I cannot but acknowledge that (I believe) it
evidently appears. That, many men have affectionately endeavored (with the
hazard of their lives and of all their worldly comforts) to obtain a
government, such as might be for the glory of God and according to his Will
revealed, as at the first.

Object. How comes it then to pass that sin abounds so much, and that
wickedness is not more suppressed?

Answ. We are to consider that great works are not always finished, so soon
as they are begun. God may suffer some sins now more then ordinary to appear,
that by that means we may see them, and see the ev^ll of them, and the danger
of them, and by seeing them we may see how, and where they may be rooted up:
this government is yet in agitation not fully settled, (as I conceive) they
have many occasions, their Enemies not wholly subdued.

We may observe that in those times when God was about to work the greatest
deliverances for his Church, God works by contraries, (in man's apprehension,)
when Israel was nearest to their deliverance out of Aegyt, then God let them
taste the most bitterly of he yoke of their oppression, although Moses at the
same instant was laboring for their deliverance.

Secondly, can we see no reformation? consider, that the Gospel has free
liberty to be preached, many Congregations are much reformed, and a free
liberty for Reformation to others, Idolatry is suppressed, the Ministry and
People are freed from those troubles in conscience, that formerly they would
have been glad to have been eased of, and further consider, that in these
times there is much more light; many things (formerly obscured and hid) are now
appeared, and concerning those sins that are a just cause of grief (I believe
when government is settled) they will be driven away as chafe before the wind;
and touching those Burdens and Taxations, I believe they are our governors
grief to impose them, and I hope God will show them a means to ease them, and
to take them away; in the mean time let us seek God unfainedly, and God will
answer us graciously.

Thirdly, let us consider which party (those that are for, or those that are
against this present government or Army) be most guilty of the sin, most
reigning; I shall speak something what my own experience reaches, and so far
as my memory and opportunity has received from other men.

Those generally that stand for the Army and Parliament are godly, or civil
the most of them, I know not one other ways.

Those that are against them are many of them, such as I have heard my self
(with much grief, that have bin swearers, most notoriously, and have spoken of
the secrets of nature of Men and Women, in such a manner, as if they had never
lived where Gods Word had come to their knowledge, in such a manner as the very
Indians (that are civilized) are ashamed of, or not accustomed to; in such a
manner, as That their mouths are filled with cursing and bitterness,
destruction and calamity are in their ways, the way of Peace they have not
known.

I leave them, and speak to some other, I believe there may be many (some I
know) of whom I am persuaded I may safely affirm, That they are the elect of
God, and yet nevertheless through weakness (for so I judge it to be) do not
favor the Army and the present government; I hope God will show them just
cause to see their error, and to acknowledge it in this particular. But
concerning those that stand for the present government and Army, I know not,
nor have I discoursed with, nor heard of any one Man that has cordially
favored the proceedings of the Army and this present government, but they
appear to be either godly or civil, not openly prophain (I would not be
mistaken, I speak not in this particular what the Soldiery may be, I mean the
common Soldiery may be) I know nothing against them; but this I can affirm
upon my own knowledge upon inquiry, in Cornwall, and in Devonshire, they
behave themselves so orderly, that I much rejoiced to see their civil and
orderly carriage; and I did purposely enquire of the Inhabitants, and I
remember not any one but did acknowledge, that they carried themselves orderly.

To conclude my Answer to this Objection, I do acknowledge sin is committed too
openly in the sight of the Sun, there are many offenses. Let us all look to it,
for Christ Jesus the Son of the blessed God says that, woe be to him by whom
the offense comes. Certainly there is a righteous God that will prove and try
all our hearts and works, to whose righteous judgment I willingly refer the
Cause.

I humbly request those that fear God not to be offended, for consider that
many take liberty to the utmost to detract the Army, and present government;
therefore give me a little liberty. I would not exceed the bounds prescribed
by God. But to return to show cause why we may now expect Reformation Judges is
at the first: this following is the seventh Observation gathered from this
prophecy: namely, because God has stirred up many godly and learned, in these
times to put in writing what they have gathered from the prophesies of the
Prophets, and these jointly and unanimously do agree (so far as I know) that
near to these times God will do great things, such as have not bin done for a
long season) in reforming matters, in exalting, and lifting up his Church out
of affliction. This is an encouragement to us, to hope and expect, that we
shall have Judges as at the first, and counselors as at the beginning, then
shall we be a City of righteousness, a faithful City. Unto the foresaid
Scripture we may add that Esai. 2.2. It shall be in the last days, that the
Mountain of the house of the Lord, shall be exalted in the top of the
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it: I leave this to your consideration. Read Dan. 7.24, 25, 26, 27. The
ten Horns that thou saw, are ten Kings that shall arise, and another shall
arise, Ver. 25. and shall speak words against the most high, and shall consume
the Saints of the most high, and think that he may change Times and Laws;
and they shall be given into his hand until a time, and times, and the
dividing of time. Ver. 26. But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take
away his Dominion, and consume it, and dectroy it unto the end: and the
Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom, under the whole
Heaven, shall be given unto the holy people of the most high, whose Kingdom is
an everlasting Kingdom, and all powers shall serve and obey him. From these
precious Promises or Prophesies recorded by the Prophet, I shall collect such
things as (I do conceive) do plainly arise from the Text.

First, that Kings should be enemies to the Saints and people of the most high,
and should do much damage to them during their government, and that they should
be lifted up in their own imaginations to think that they might change Times
and Seasons: by which, I conceive, is meant that they shall endeavor to govern
(not according to the prescribed rules of God, but) by their prerogatives
royal (as they term it) that is, according to what seems good in their
eyes, being beyond those limits which God has prescribed in his Law: this, I
conceive, is plainly held out in these expressions, and think that they may
change Times and Seasons: by Times and Seasons may be meant such things as are
already prescribed, by a higher power, within bounds, and by the wisdom of him
that had true authority to appoint such Rules.

Secondly, I observe that such corrupt Governors shall be destroyed and put
down by those that God in his wisdom appointed as instruments, to accomplish
his decrees. This is plainly held out in these expressions, And they shall take
away his Dominion to consume, and to destroy it unto the end, noted Ver. 26.

Thirdly, that now in these latter times God has determined, to restore and to
reform government, which (I conceive) is plainly held out in these
expressions. Ver. 27. The Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom, under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the holy people of the most
high, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom.

Fourthly, that this prophecy is not yet fully accomplished, because it
appears plainly (to my best understanding) that from the Prophet Daniels time
to this time, the government under the whole Heaven was not yet given to the
holy people, and also because this Kingdom this government, or this power taken
out of the hands of the foregoing Kings, shall be everlasting, it shall
continue notwithstanding all oppositions against it, I leave these things to
due consideration. Read Micai 4.1. to 9. But it shall come to pass in the
last days, that the Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in
the top of the Mountains, and it shall be exalted above the Hills. Ver. 3, And
he shall judge among many people, and rebuke mighty people a far off, and
they shall break their Swords into Mattocks, and their Spears into Sithes,
Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn to
fight any more. Ver. 4. But they shall sit every man under his own Vine, and
under his own Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid, for the Mouth of the
Lord has spoken it, Ver. 7. and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Sion
from hence forth for ever. Ver. 9. Now why do thou cry out with lamentation
there is no King in thee, is thy counselor perished? for sorrow has taken
thee as a woman in travel. Ver. 12. But they know not the thoughts of the
Lord, they understand not his counsel; he shall gather them as sheaves in the
barn. Ver. 13. Arise thresh O Daughter of Sion for I will make thy horn Iron,
etc. This prophecy (I do conceive) is not fully yet fulfilled and completed,
for although it might have respect to the coming of Christ; yet it holds out
more matter then (as I conceive) yet is come to pass, because the prophecy
recorded that men should break their swords into mattocks, and their spears
into sithes, Nations shall not lift up a sword against Nations, neither shall
they learn to fight any more. This I conceive cannot be accomplished, because
if we understand it in any sense (I see not that) this is yet accomplished, but
is still to be accomplished. And for several other reasons here aledged, which
I leave to consideration. Read Revel. 11.15. And the seventh Angel blew the
Trumpet, and there were great voices in Heaven, saying the kingdoms of the
World are become the Lords, and his Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore.
From this place (I conceive) may be gathered that the governments shall be
reduced to such a method and form as God has prescribed in his holy Word,
according to the first and most immediate pure instruments. Read Revel. 14.8.
And there followed another Angel saying, Babylon that great City is fallen is
falen; Now we may note that Babilons confusion springs from this root, for
want of good Government; this is the very root of the sin and disorder, namely,
evil Government; for if we read the Records of the Kings of Israel, and take
notice, we may plainly see, That evil and corrupt Governors brought confusion
to and amongst the People; on the contrary consider, That in an orderly, and in
a rational way, when God will bring his people out of confusion into order, God
will certainly reform Government, that being the principal instrumental way of
Reformation; so then, when God foretells, That the Babel of Confusion shall
fall, this is a principal part of the meaning, namely, That corrupt Governors
must fall with or before it.

Time bids me forbear to multiply places, there are many godly and learned men
that have written largely and learnedly concerning Babele fall, to whom I refer
the Reader for further satisfaction, and shall conclude this Point with that
which is written, Revel. 18.8. Therefore shall her plagues come at one day,
death, and sorrow, and famine; and she shall be burnt with fire, for that God
which condemns her is a strong God: (Note I pray you in the verse before, She
sat as a Queen, and lived in pleasure;) Was not this draught much like the
picture of evil Kings? But Verse. 9. The Kings of the earth shall bewail and
lament over her: (Note, that the Kings of the earth are noted to lament and to
fear her torments: Why should they fear? Ans. Because a guilty conscience
causes fear, they being sensible that they have so slighted Gods Law:) which
have committed fornication, (note like fornication,) and lived in pleasure,
(note usually, that is one note, they lived voluptuously) with her, (these
words (with her) imply a near conjunction,) when they shall see that smoke of
that Her burning: Verse. 10. And shall stand afar off for fear of her torment,
(and why? Is it not because it threatened them?) saying, Alas, alas, that great
City Babylon, that mighty City, (is fallen, is fallen,) for in one day thy
judgment is come. Verse. 11. And the Merchants of the earth shall weep and wail
over her, etc. Verse. 17. And every ship-master, and all that occupy ships, and
ship-men, and whosoever trafique on the sea, shall cry, Alas, alas, that great
City, etc. is made desolate. But note I pray you what the blessed Servants of
God esteem of this fall of Babylon, this is noted, Verse. 20. O Heavens, rejoice
over her, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has punished her to be
revenged on her for your sakes. I pray you consider why the Prophets and
Apostles should in such primary and particular manner rejoice over her? Answ.
Was it not because she ruled by her prerogative, by her own will, and would not
be ruled and guided by the Writings of them, the Prophets and Apostles;
therefore the Prophets and Apostles (whose Writings this great Whore had
slighted) are noted in such a peculiar and eminent manner to rejoice at her
downfall

To conclude, (if she be falling or fallen) I hope God will keep me that I
shall not under-prop her to keep her up.

Thus (I believe) by this Babel of Confusion is plainly held out (by the
blessed Spirit of God,) That corrupt Government and corrupt Governors are to be
understood thereby, which Babel of Corruption must be put down, this being the
root (of confusion) must be plucked up by the very roots.

And further note, That the very true way to be beautiful and good order must
arise from good Government and good Governors, therefore if ever we do become a
City of Righteousness, and a faithful City, let us very circumspectly and with
all diligence) labor, that we may have Judges as at the first, and Counselors
as at the beginning; that is to say, as in the first, and in those most
uncorrupted times, when God did the most immediately appoint Government and
Governors: Let us keep close to Gods Rules, and then we shall not err.

Thus much briefly I have writ to show some grounds that strengthen me to
expect, That now in these latter times God will do some eminent matters in the
Reformation of Government, and (to my apprehension) these actings of God in
these times do hold out such a thing, namely, That God is exalting his poor
afflicted (and so much despised Servants and People.) I leave it to
consideration.

I shall, by the assistance of Gods good Spirit (which I hope and believe I am
guided by) now proceed to describe Government according as I find it
prescribed, owned and blessed by God, and recorded in the sacred Scriptures,
and as at the first in the purest times: Therefore, first, I find, That God did
begin the model, or the form, or the composition of Government at the head or
chief Ruler: Moses was the first, touching his entrance, he was called
immediately by God, and so were diverse others till Samuels time. And because
Gods presidents and doings are done in such perfect manner, with such wisdom,
and so exactly useful and fit for those employments that God disposes them
unto; therefore I conceive it may not be unuseful to commend something to
consideration touching this man; and first God sets out or describes his
parentage, Exodus 2.1. There went a man of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of
Levi: Verse. 2. And the woman conceived, and bare a son, (which was Moses.) Here
God does not describe any great difference between his parentage, and the
parentage of the rest of those people that God called him to govern. The like
is noted in the rest of those Judges which God did immediately call, and in the
best of Kings, David, who was a man God did immediately in mercy appoint to
govern his people Israel; this David, the best of the Kings, was chosen by God,
and taken (not for his eminent kindred, but) out of a low condition. From hence
I observe, That God does not look or choose Governors out of or by respects, as
man usually does: Man usually looks upon the outward man, this was Samuels
error; man looks at beauty, riches, kindred, rich or great parentage, at
eloquence, and the like, which respects usually lead men to choose those men
that prove usually neither any great promoters of Gods Glory, nor of the
Peoples good. God looks at the inner man, at the graces of his own Spirit in
their hearts, and principally God looks at his own Institutions, when such a
man is made Judge as enters into his office and charge purely according to
Gods Institution, ^o as God in his Word has prescribed, then God blesses such
with his Spirit. It is remarkable, that Moses pleaded his insufficiency for
that work God appointed him unto, (recorded for our learning,) Exodus 4.10.11.
Then the Lord said unto him, Who has given the mouth to man? or who has made
the dumb, or the deaf, or him that sees, or the blind? have not I the Lord?
Therefore go now, I will be with thee.

This consideration holds out to us, of what high and great concernment it is,
to observe with carefulness and diligence how our Governors enter in, and take
their offices and charges in Government; we cannot be too circumspect in this
matter, let us keep close to those first, most pure and unblemished directions
that God has most immediately prescribed, that are most clearly revealed in
his sacred Word, for that is our most certain guide, and the most sure way to
our future safety that possibly we can attain or reach unto.

It is very observable, That of all the Judges that God did immediately choose
(I cannot find) but that God endowed them all with his good and blessed Spirit,
and not one of them but proved to seek Gods Glory, and the Peoples good, from
Moses to Samuel, which was so long as the people followed Gods Institution in
their Government.

And observe well, That so soon as the people were negligent in following those
first and pure Institutions, most clearly and primarily prescribed by God,
concerning Government, then God did withdraw his gracious presence from them,
and what misery and affliction followed to them, and to their posterity, God in
his sacred Wisdom has left recorded (for our learning) in the Books of the
Chronicles and Kings of Israel and Judah: How did these Kings draw the people
from God into sin, and brought the fierce wrath of God upon the people? And did
not all this proceed from this root (namely from this) Because they were
negligent in the circumspect observance of Gods Prescriptions, and because they
leaned to their own understandings, and followed their own inventions.

Oh that we, the People of England, might now be wise, and learn (by our own
and other men's harms) to cleave close to the most pure, most immediate, and
first Institution of Government, recorded in the sacred Scriptures, so should
we secure our selves and posterity, and obtain a blessing and protection from
the glorious God of our Salvation.

Oh dearly beloved, consider I pray you, now there is such an opportunity as (I
believe) God never offered to any generation, from the days of Samuel to this
present time; now I pray you seek Gods favor, seriously put forth your best
and utmost endeavors, that we may obtain Judge as at the first, and Counselors
as at the beginning; then shall we be called a City of Righteousness, a
faithful City, Isa. 1. by this means we shall become good examples to our
neighbor Nations, and the generations to come shall have cause to praise the
Lord for us, and the memory of our names recorded in Gods Records shall be
eternally blessed.

Concerning this man Moses, being the first president God set to be Governor to
his Church and People, because Gods Works are most perfect, and of most
singular use to posterity, therefore I judge it necessary to note somewhat
touching his qualifications, he was a man painful and diligent in his charge,
he sat to judge the people from morning to night, Exodus 18.13. and afterward
in all his life we may note how studious he was, and diligent, and active in
observing Gods Commandments, and in exhorting the people to the same matters,
he was not ambitious to seek great offices and preferments for his own children
after his decease; which may be noted, when Israel the people had highly
provoked the Lord, so that God threatens to destroy the people, and promises
Moses, that he would so far prefer him, that he would make of him (that is, of
his posterity) a mighty people, Exodus 32.10. Now therefore let me alone, that
my wrath may wax hot against them, for I will consume them, but I will make of
thee a mighty people. Now Moses prefers the Glory of God, and the Peoples
good, before any by respects, either to himself, or to his posterity, noted
Verse. 11.12, 13. But Moses prayed unto the Lord his God, and said, O Lord, why
does thy wrath wax hot against thy people which thou have brought out of the
Land of Egypt? etc. Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, He has
brought them out maliciously, to slay them in the Mountains? etc. Turn from thy
fierce wrath, and change thy mind from this evil toward thy people, and
remember Abraham, Isaac, etc. Verse. 14. Then the Lord changed his mind from the
evil which he threatened to do unto his people. This is recorded for the
learning of succeeding ages, to show of what concernment and what benefit the
people get by living under such a Government and Governors as God sends; such
Governors stand in the gap to keep off Gods displeasure, and to procure a
blessing for the people. Many respect not much under what Government they live,
this was Lots sin, who deeply tasted of the cup of Gods displeasure by living
under or amongst the ungodly in Sodom.

But secondly, This example of Moses is of singular use, an eminent pattern to
all Governors succeeding, namely this, That he sought Gods glory, and the
Peoples good, before his own or his childrens preferment: It is to be noted the
like of him when God told Moses he should be taken away or dye, he does not
request of the Lord to continue the Government to his children, but this he
does, he loves the people, he looks at Gods glory, and the peoples good,
therefore he remembers the peoples good, and makes earnest prayer (recorded
for our learning) to God, entreating God, That he would appoint a Governor for
the people; where note the modesty and humility of his heart, his spirit being
not lift up above his brethren, therefore he expresses it thus, That he may go
in and out before the people, that the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep
without a shepherd: Where we may note, That he styles himself and successor
but under these expressions, Number. 27.16. Let the God of the spirits of all
flesh appoint a man over the Congregation. Verse. 17. Who may go in and out
before them, and lead them out and in, that the Congregation of the Lord be not
as sheep without a shepherd: Note his expressions, A man over the Congregation,
(not only a King, or by the name of Commander, but) only a man, and a shepherd;
he had true respect and understanding of the nature of his charge and office,
which was to order, to provide for, to feed, love, and defend the stock, (and
not to persecute, or to suffer Wolves to devour them, not to feed upon them
himself,) therefore note his expression, Verse. 17. that the Congregation of the
Lord: He remembered and modestly acknowledges the people to be Gods heritage;
He does not style them his Subjects, or his Vassals, (and so seek to leave the
people, as inheritance of Goods, Lands, Beasts, and Cattle, to his Children,)
but he esteems the people, and so they were (of more value then earthly
inheritances) Gods inheritance; and so in express words he calls them, The
Congregation of the Lord, the Lords Inheritance, the Lords People; and
therefore he does not lay claim to them as the Inheritance for his Children, he
knew Gods mind better, he speaks no such matter; for succession in Government,
from the Father to the Son, came in long (many hundreds of years) after, in
more corrupted Times; God did not, in these first and purest Times, in the
original, order it to be so; neither did Moses expect, or desire it, because he
looked after those matters that were truly his own; He truly sought Gods Glory
and the Peoples good: But thus much to show his opinion and respect that he had
of the people in those days. Those first Governors owned the people to be their
brethren, and so they behaved themselves toward the people as brethren: Is not
the World much altered in these days, when many great men will scarce
acknowledge the poor people to be any of their kindred afar off, much less as
brethren? Yea, this Governor, in these first and purest Times, did not only use
the People as brethren, but as children, he carried them in his bosom, near his
heart, (and tenderly too) as sucking children; and that also by Gods own
direction, as Moses himself witnesses, and willingly acknowledges: But when
Kings obtained the Government, we may observe how soon the case was altered,
Abimelech he slays his brethren, that he might obtain the preeminence; and
Saul he persecuted an innocent and virtuous man, fearing lest he might hinder
his son from reigning after him; yea he pursues this with such violence that
he makes little account of Gods Commandments, if they stand in his way to
hinder him to make sure the Government to his son Jonathan, blood is not much
valued in his sight, witness the death of Gods Priests, 1 Samuel 22.19. And Nob,
the City of the Priests, smote he with the edg of the sword, both man and
woman, both child and suckling, both Ox, and Ass, and sheep with the edg of
the sword; and David's life, which he earnestly sought: Witness his unjust
molestation of the People, whom he forced from their own dwellings to pursue an
innocent and good man: These were some of the first fruits of their Kings, more
followed afterward; But thus it was not the practice of these Judges in the
first and purest Times.

But further we may note, That this man Moses and his successors (to the days
of Samuel) such as God instituted (I do not mean such as crept in at the
windows, and in bypath, not in the way God instituted) but Moses and the rest
of his successors to Samuel, we read much recorded concerning their virtues,
their pains, and diligence, but we do not read that they addicted themselves to
gather great Estates to leave to their children (and such as they had fleeced
from their brethren the People unjustly) nor do we read much of their
banqueting houses, nor of their sumptuous palaces, nor of their numerous
servants, nor of their hunting and hawking, nor of their excerable swearing and
blaspheming the great and glorious Name of the Lord, nor of their Prerogatives
Royal, to overtop and annihilate Gods Commandments, and to seize upon the
wracks of poor distressed Merchants and Seamen, which suffered shipwreck upon
their borders; a custom, I believe, hateful and abominable in the eyes of the
Lord, and directly in opposition to his Commands, who commands us to help and
relieve the oppressed and afflicted, and not to strive to add to their
afflictions, by taking away that little that God had otherwise spared to them.
(I heard of one ship since my arrival, that the people seeing themselves in
danger, forsook the ship, yet after this ship was so brought to the shore, that
much of the loading (being rich, and of value) was saved from the violence of
the Sea, but not returned to the Owners* that I could yet learn:) I humbly
entreat you that are our Governors, make diligent enquiry, that no more such
crying sins be committed, lest it bring upon us the fierce wrath of the Lord.)
But to return; Neither are these Judges noted to keep a company about them of
swearers or other vicious persons, such as I here name not, but such as your
ears have heard of, and such as God abominateth. These Judges, in these first
and purest Times, were humble, faithful, watchful, and pious men, men whose
acts are recorded by Gods direction to all generations, that they might be
examples to follow.

[O Lord,] shall we ever live to see those, (or such as those Governors that
were in those first and purest times?) Have thou given us hope of such a
Reformation? Blessed be thy Name; I believe thou have promised, that we shall
have Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; then shall we
be called a City of righteousness, a faithful City.

Having spoken thus much (although it be very much less then the scripture
records for our learning) touching the qualifications and virtues of these
Judges in these first and purest times, wherein God did the most eminently and
the most immediately appoint and prescribe Government and Governors, to and for
his Church, and peculiarly chosen people Israel; I shall now endeavor to
propound to consideration (according to the measure of grace received) to draw
out of Gods sacred Word what find there recorded concerning the principal
Governors and other Governors distributed in several administrations, and also
their power and limitations, and also the entrance of them into their places.

I find, That God, in his divine wisdom, saw it meet for his Church, and
chosen, and peculiar people, to ordain, institute, and appoint one chief Judge,
and not many: Thus it appears in the book of Exodus, and in the records of
Joshua, and of all the Judges, and in the book of the Kings, that one chief
Judge had the charge: for although Judah and Israel were divided, it is there to
be noted, that afterward they became as two distinct and differenced
Governments: and also we note, that this was not so in those first and purest
times, wherein God did the most immediately and clearly appoint Government: And
also we may observe, That this division did not strengthen them, nor did it
turn to their peace and welfare, as afterward appeared, and is recorded in the
Books of the Kings and Chronicles; For although God suffered it to be so, yet
we may also consider, That God suffers, and brings upon the people for
their sins, many trials and afflictions, which yet God knows how to make use
of for his own glory: This people would not keep within the bounds of Gods
first institutions, therefore God causes them to see the difference of
Government, to see the difference between his prescriptions and institutions,
and their own inventions: and also, that God might show the fruits of such
irregular proceedings to us that should come in these latter times; Whatsoever
was written, was written for our learning: Considering this, I dare not turn
aside from Gods Commandments in those first and purest times, wherein God
appointed, that there should be one Governor, and but one as chief.

And that this is the best way of Government, most for Gods glory, and the
peoples good, these Reasons guide me thereunto.

First, Because God in his wisdom did see meet that it should be so; witness
the immediate pattern God gave to the people, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Samuel,
and the rest.

Secondly, Because this is the pattern of that glorious Government in Heaven,
one God distinguished, but not divided in three persons, which governs over
all. God inviteth us to be like to himself, and seteth forth himself for us to
imitate; Be ye holy, for I am holy, says the Lord, (a place well known,) From
hence I conclude, That that Government is best that is most like, most
conformable, to Gods Government in Heaven.

Thirdly, We know that Forces united are strongest, and occasion less
difference and discord: We may see in the Records of our own Nation the many
Troubles, Wars, and Discords that many several Governments brought forth and
produced. If men should commit the constant Government of a Land into many
hands of equal authority, call them by what names you will, would not this be
the issue and fruits thereof? First, They should turn from the first and most
pure way prescribed by God, (which God forbid:) And also would not such
Governors be themselves over burdened with business? and would not the People
be worn away, wearied and oppressed thereby? It was Jethroes counsel to Moses,
and the Lord allowed or approved of it, namely, that there is recorded, Exo.
18.18. Thou both weariest thy self and this people that is with thee. Verse. 21.
Provide thou among all the people men of courage, fearing God, men dealing
truly, and ha^ing covetousness, and appoint such over them: Verse. 22. And let
them judge all small matters; so shall it be easier for thee, etc.

We may there note, That this distribution of Justice into many hands was not
to the intent that many should judge ordinarily in every one case, for then it
would have brought both a greater burden upon Moses, and upon the people,
because when the judgment of a cause goes through many hands, these many
hands, or Judges, are with more difficulty brought together, and with greater
charge, greater expenses; and likewise their judgments not easily reconciled:
And also such cases, in such a manner heard, are longer in issuing, fewer
causes can be heard, and likewise the people will be burdened with long
waiting, and great expenses to maintain this ch^rge: Therefore there were not
more Moses's added, not more Governors of equal authority to assist Moses in
the hearing such causes as came ordinarily to be judged by him: But it is
evident, That this multiplying Judges was to that end, that these Judges, or
Rulers, being chosen, might be distributed into the several Tribes where the
People lived, to the intent that the People might not travel far, but might
have their causes tried and judged near to their own habitations. And this did
not weaken, or lessen, nor diminish from Moses his authority, there was this
still reserved, that Moses the chief Judge should still have the sole judgment
and determination of the weightiest matters and affairs. This further
appears by the extent of Joshua his authority, Joshua 1.16, 17. Then they
answered Joshua saying, all that thou command us we will do, and
whithersoever thou sendest us we will go: as we obeyed Moses in all things, so
we will obey thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses.
Ver. 18. Whosoever shall rebel against thy Commandment: and will not obey thy
Words, in all that thou command him, let him be put to death, etc.

Here it may be noted that the chief judge or governor, that was over Gods
heritage, had power to command and to determine all the weightiest matters that
concerned the people of the Lord.

If we look but upon a Family, (which represents a little commonwealth) we
shall there find that God appointed one chief governor: (although the woman
be in such a relation) yet God knew that it was meet to ordain one to be
chief governor, whose word should be of force. This does avoid much
contention, where it is willingly consented unto by all in the Family. But on
the contrary where the wife (which is the nearest relation and the most eminent
in the Family next to the man) does contend for the guidance of all matters in
the Family, What sad events do follow in such cases? That mutual love that
otherwise would be between the Man, and the Woman, is separated, the Family
disturbed, servants and children grieved, neighbors offended, and God much
dishonored. Even so and much more (I believe) we shall find the Commonwealth
to be disturbed, where no one is chief.

Object. But is it not said, that in the multitude of counselors there is
safety?

Answ. That shows that the chief governor should not be so proudly lift up
in his spirit, that he should despise the advice of others, in which respect
David shows an humble frame of heart, when he says that he will not reject
the advice of his servant, much more not of those that are in nearer relations.
It is a precious virtue to be of an humble frame of heart, to hear the counsel
of others: but this does not destroy the lawful authority of Order in
Government.

Touching Parliaments, or Assemblies of the Elders of the people doubtless (I
conceive) they may be, in diverse cases, as in the case of the defect and want
of a chief Judge, or in case that the chief Judge shall degenerate and
decline from the Institutions and Commandments of God, they are ordained and
approved of by God in such cases and in other cases, provided that they do not
diminish the power and lawful authority that God does allow to such good
governors that walk in his ways. This appears by that quere that the
Prophet Samuel makes to the People, when he demands, 1 Samuel, whose Ox have
I taken, or whose Ass have taken, or whom have J done wrong unto, or of whose
hands have I taken any bribe to blind my eyes therewith? as if he should have
said, if you could justly lay to my charge these things, there might be some
just cause, wherefore you should come together to demand another governor
(although neither would this warrant you to change the form of government, for
therein you should break Gods institution.) This appears likewise when the
people assembled to depose and punish Athaliah, and diverse others: and the
reason is plain, because God must be honored above al, he is the supreme
governor, and ruler of rulers, and people

Doubtless that Law of God that binds all men (without respect of persons)
to the observation of it, must of necessity find a way, and allow a way for
the observation of it, otherwise it would fall short in the perfection of it;
but to say that God only must punish chief governors for their offenses in
another world, to me plainly appears to be of no validity, for God gave the
Laws to Men on Earth to be observed, and the breach of his Laws to be
punished upon earth, without any respect of persons or limitation, and one Law
of God binds all men.

But to return, that lawful power, and authority, that God gives; and has
been given and yielded to all good governors (by Gods Church and People) must
doubtless be yielded to all good governors in like relations, and with the
like respects: therefore I believe this is evident from the whole premised,
that the principal governor of a Commonwealth must be one, and must have
neither less, nor more authority then Moses and Joshua had, in those first and
purest times of Gods institutions: And because we have the like liberty to
punish or to remove such offenders as break the Law of God that they had: if we
see that such chief governors do evidently act to Gods dishonor, and the
Peoples ruin, (which are unseparable companions) Gods Laws do help the
people, in case that God give the people hearts to improve them to his glory.

Do but warily cleave to Gods ordinances, to his institutions. Let the chiefest
governor be subject to the punishment that God prescribes in such cases, for
such offenses in his sacred Word.

Secondly, let none succeed by succession, from Father to Son.

Thirdly, take heed that God choose governors, let them be of his sending, and
this is of more validity, (then all the ties, fetters, charters, acts, and what
ever inventions of man) to secure Gods glory, and the good of us, and of our
posterity, (as I believe); for our danger and misery arises from this root,
namely, when governors creep in at the windows, and in by-pathes, and are not
indeed true Shepherds, but Wolves and Foxes: and shall we love them so well,
that we shall take them by succession; and not enquire of God, who shall be the
man? thirdly, if we are yet more negligent, so that when they appear to be (as
they too often prove) Wolves in sheep clothing, yet do we observe Gods Laws,
which lays such open to punishment?

The reason seems to me to be evident that caused the People, from time to
time, to use such pains, and diligence, to obtain from former Kings, grants,
that the Kings should not oppress, or tyrannize over the People, or their
consents to several such Acts in Parliament; was it not because the Law of God
was kept in obscurity? (the time fore determined by God, was not then
accomplished) who, or where was the man that durst, or did so far adventure, to
declare the Law of God in that particular; namely that Kings were subject to
the Law of God according to the true latitude of it; for had the Law of God bin
fully, plainly, and clearly opened, the People might easily have seen, that
they had had less need of such promises, because the Law of God is a more
strong, a more clear, and shining light, then all the Laws of man whatsoever.
And was not this the very grounds why it came to pass, that notwithstanding
all the grants that the People could obtain from former Kings, they proved too
weak to hold down their loftiness. Witness queen Mary: did not she and many
others break the Laws of God, and draw the poor people to Idolatry, and take
away the lives of the poor servants of God, notwithstanding, all the Charters,
that the People had obtained in former Ages?

Was it not because the People were kept partly in fear of their great
overtopping power? and partly by reason they were kept in ignorance that the
Kings (and great men of the earth were equally without respect of persons)
subject to the Law of God, and most especially because (Gods time
fore-determined for the Reformation of government not being fully completed)
the People did not see (nor cleave steadfastly to) Gods prescriptions, to the
way God in his word appointed, for the calling of governors, but on the
contrary the People were careless and negligent in the matter of governors,
they made too light account of governors, not thoroughly seeing it to be of any
great concernment; and did not God so withdraw his good Spirit of illumination,
from the People, that he denied them wisdom, power, or opportunities, to
punish offending governors? Dearly beloved suffer this truth of God to be
fully and freely opened, and I believe, we shall not need to fear to set up
one as chief. And this likewise will be beneficial to us, for by this means
we shall not have so much bloodshed, for to obtain Crowns and Kingdom^^.

I pray you further to consider, that if a people should set up government
composed of many heads, or many members, making or head, or chief, having all
equal authority (in the steed, or for the want of one chief, governor) and
if this should be their places, their power, and actings; constantly to judge,
and determine, the affairs of a Commonwealth, this must needs be considered
that they likewise are subject to err (yea are they not often times more
subject to err) and to break Gods Laws? Now in such cases of delinquency, must
not there be left a way open to punish them, which must be some other
invention, and will it not follow thus ad infinitum, multiply what numbers you
will?

Consider o^ the benefit that a People get by having one chief governor, from
this example: suppose there were a hundred thousand Men in a Campe^: and
suppose that there were one hundred Generals, over every thousand of Men one
General, and suppose that every one of these Generals had an equal
authority. and not any one to command in chief. Consider, would the Camp be
in greater security, because their Cheiftaines or Generals were many, no one
commanding in chief above the rest? No verily, but in much more danger
thereby, not only in regard of a common enemy, but also in danger of emulation,
and strife amongst themselves. And suppose further that these Generals should
agree, that no act should be done by any one of these Generals that should be
valid, and of force, without the consent of the rest; would it not follow that
the People thereby should be more burdened; because when they had a matter,
they could not have it ended without the consent of the whole, would not their
matters be longer in agitation, and obtained with greater charge and
difficulty* and it would be a great danger, trouble, and burden (not to be
borne) to the Generals themselves: let us therefore be exhorted to follow Gods
wisdom in this matter, I doubt not but that a Parliament or Assembly of
Elders may be of eminent use and benefit, to the People, especially in such
times as these, till matters be fully ended and settled, and after they may
assemble and meet, to that end that Gods Commandments may be observed by all,
and to question, and punish any governor for the breach of Gods Laws, because
God approves and blesses two or three that meet together in his Name, to do
Gods work: but is not the constant Government of the Commonwealth to be put
into the hands of one Man, and must not he have so much power as Joshua had,
and other good Judges of Israel? the more we strengthen the authority of a good
governor, the more it is for Gods glory, and for our comfort and safety.

Consider another instance, if a Merchant or a great Tradesman had many people
to deal with all, by reason whereof he has occasion to employ 20 or 40, men
under him to dispatch business, these are not to the intent that they shall
constantly act in every business, for then (if they had all equal authority,
no one commanding in chief) they would one hinder another, and business would
go more slowly forward. Therefore the end why he calls or takes more men to
help him, it is to the end that they may at once tend upon and dispatch
several occasions, and also these are all of them to be subject to the Masters
order, and all the rest orderly to be subject one to another. Thus did God
ordain one Moses chief governor to whom God committed the government, (which
did nearly resemble Gods government in Heaven) but through Man's weakness,
(not being able to act like God) therefore God permitted Moses to ordain other
Rulers inferior to himself, and those were distributed amongst the People over
thousands and hundreds and fifties and tenns. Whereby it appears that the end
was not that all those rulers should act, in the judgment of the same causes
that Moses acted in. Neither were any of those governors (much less were they
all) to have equal authority with Moses. This did further appear by the
authority that all the Judges of Israel had successively.

I do but labout to set before you, these instances; and it is because I am
not like (so far as I know) to have any more opportunity in this World to speak
in the cause, blame me not therefore if I propound these things to your
consideration, for I and my posterity are like to be subject to what form of
government, you establish, and I evidently see that from Government will arise
great blessings (if it be such government as God approves, if it be such as
God has prescribed) then I know that the blessed Spirit of God will rest upon
such governors.

On the contrary I know that if you mistake in government. I do expect that
great afflictions will follow, and Governors not entering into their places
according to the Rule of Gods Word, I shall not expect that the gracious
Presence of God, will accompany them, And this I evidently see (by the records
of the Sacred Word of God, and by the experience of all Ages recorded) that
where government is corrupted, they are a means to draw the People from the
sincere worship of God, and they are a means to bring the Wrath of God upon
the People:

I doubt not but there are amongst you many wise, godly, and men precious in
Gods esteem, I pray God double the Spirit of his grace upon you; and direct you
to see much more of Gods mind, however let it not be grievous, if I put you in
mind of those things which you know, and which are plainly recorded in Gods
sacred Word. Moses put the People in mind of the same things often, and so did
Joshua, and so did Christ, and his Apostles. This is all that I can do by all
the instances or arguments I can allege, it is but only to persuade, or put
you in mind of what is already recorded, plainly in Gods Word which is a
bright shining light; all that I can say, (in comparison of Gods sacred Word)
is far short of the darkest night, compared to the brightest shining light of
the day, therefore all that draws me, (or is any motive to me) in this cause,
is this, namely, The records of the sacred Scriptures show such a Government,
and such Governors, God did prescribe, in such a manner, and they were blessed
by God, they were a blessing to the People, and the holy, good, and blessed
spirit of God was given to such. God in his wisdom did so appoint.

On the contrary I have observed (both from the Records of the sacred
Scriptures, and from the Records of all Ages, and from well considered
experience) that although the inventions of men, which swerve from the most
approved Rules of Gods Word, may have a fair show in some men's eyes, yet he
that well notes such inventions shall in the issue find Gall and Wormwood,
bitter fruits, and Gods good Spirit does not accompany such inventions, which
causes me to keep a loofe from Man's inventions, especially in such a weighty
matter, and of so great, eminent and high concernment, both for Gods glory, and
for the Peoples blessedness. I conceive we cannot possible be too circumspect,
nor cleave too close and steadfastly, to the most approved and blessed form of
Government, and Governors prescribed, owned, and blessed by God, and recorded
in the sacred Scriptures, for our learning. Dearly beloved Fathers I speak
freely, and willingly, and with more liberty of speech to you, because I am
persuaded that your heart^ do* really seek Gods glory, because I believe that
you seek not your selves, and have better learned to tread under foot these
trifles, these sublunary comforts, and do seek for an immortal Crown of glory
provided for those that seek Gods glory; you beloved know how to value Eternity
better then a moment, better, then this short span of time. Therefore I pray
you be not offended.

But further, where there are many Judges of equal authority (though Men
fearing God, and seeking Gods glory) yet in many, or in some causes, and most
especially in the most weighty causes, do not respects sway much? As namely,
loath to displease one another, and lothfully to discover themselves? Are not
numerous companies, having all equal authority, subject to emulation, to
jealousies, yea and sometimes to be so divided, that does it not sometimes
appear so violent, that it occasioneth civil wars? or contentions? I pray
you to consider mortal man is subject to frailty. Therefore seeing the
Heavenly frame of government is by one ^od, and unto Gods Word the whole Host
of Heaven is willingly obedient; and considering that that government that God
appointed ( in the first and purest times, when God most immediately appointed
government, to his beloved first borne, and peculiar Church and People)
considering that God appointed this form of government, namely, by one Man a
chief Judge, who had sole power to judge and appoint, and to determine the
weightiest causes; is not this the safest way to avoid confusion and
contention, and most like to be blessed. Herein indeed will lie the great
weight of all the matter, namely, that we cleave close to Gods Rules. that so a
Wolf may be prevented for getting into the sheep fold. For let us but seek
God in those ways he has appointed seriously, and heartily, and (I doubt not
but that) we shall obtain a blessing, a Man sent of God. And then let us never
fear, but God will accompany such a man, with his blessed Spirit. Did ever a
People seek GOD humbly (following GODS Rules) and heartily, and failed? I
believe no Record of Divine authority will demonstrate such an example, in such
a cause, so prosecuted.

Object. But was not this form of government, peculiar to the state of the
Israelites, is it not abolished, at the coming of Kings?

Answ. I desire every one that does unfeignedly desire to do Gods Will to be
wary of this Objection, and consider that it is too much for us to turn aside
from Gods Institutions; but to deny Gods Institutions, this is a sin of a deep
impression. How often does GOD bid us beware that we do neither add, nor
diminish? this being duly considered I answer.

First, this Order of government by Judges, in this manner, was Gods own
Order. God did most immediately appoint this Order.

Secondly, God did prescribe this, to his Church and People, before the Law was
given. Moses was appoin^ed, and had his power and place, and the rest of the
Judges were orderly distributed, before the Law was given, at Mount Sinai.

Thirdly, this order of government was continued, confirmed, and blessed
immediately by God himself under the Law.

Fourthly, this O der was further confirmed by GOD, when the People in the
Days of Samuel desired a Government by Kings, which appears in that GOD
plainly affirms, that the People cast God off when they altered this form:
and further it appears that God was the same long after, by the expressions
of the Prophets.

Fifthly, there was never any Government since* to this Day, to be compared
with this Government, nor so blessed by God, as appears by the Records of the
Chronicles, and the books of the Kings of Israel, and Judah: to which we may
add the experiments of all Ages.

Sixthly, Gods Wisdom is most perfect, and God is unchangeable.

Seventhly, this Order was never repealed in any Age to this day.

Eighthly, the Promises of God in the Scripture, do plainly show that when God
will have mercy upon his beloved People, it shall be showed the most eminently,
and apparently, by restoring Judges as at the first, and counselors as at the
beginning.

Ninthly, this government by one chief as head and governor does the nearest
resemble, that Heavenly frame of government.

Tenthly, consider who ever thou art that harbourest such thoughts, that such
thoughts do arise from unsound Principles, I believe, not well balanced
considerations. Because admit or suppose thou were left at liberty, now to
prescribe a form of government, what form of Government could thou invent?
Consider that God witnessed evidently and eminently, that (when God prescribed
government by Judges (in such order as Divine records do mention) this form
was better then any other Nation, had in the whole World. No Nation was so
blessed by God in those times that had Laws and Ordinances so righteous (by
which is meant Governors or Judges, and Laws to be their Rules) as God in
those first and purest times did prescribe to his first borne Son.

And further consider, that we are not now a separated People from the true
Israel of God, we are not strangers to those Laws which God, then in those
times, gave to them; but contrarily we by Faith in Jesus Christ, are ingrafted
into the true Olive Tree, we now are part of Gods household, and do subject to
all the Laws of Gods first borne Son, and though they were our elder
brethren, yet now also God has, in his rich abundant, and not to be
sufficiently expressed mercy, begotten us also to a lively hope, so that we
also are their younger Brethren.

Therefore for any man to conceive, that he could invent a better form of
government, then any in the World in those times had, and a better form of
government, then God himself did the most immediately prescribe, and own, and
confirm, and bless; such a man (if there be any such) had need to consider
this matter first very advisedly; least wanting wisdom, to prescribe and power
to uphould, and power to bless and prosper such his inventions, he should be
found to be an opposer of God himself, and likewise exalt his wisdom above the
wisdom of God.

The next matter I conceive it will be meet to propound to consideration;
other judges or governors, that are in order inferior to this chief Judge
before mentioned. Exodus 18.25. And Moses chose Men of courage out of all Israel
and made them heads over the People, Rulers over thousands, Rulers over
hundreds, Rulers over fifties, and Rulers over tens, Ver. 26. and they judged
the People at all seasons, but they brought the hard causes to Moses, for they
Judged all small matters themselves.

The end wherefore judgment or Judges were thus distributed, is to that
intent, that both the chief governor may not be over burdened, nor the People
over burdened, recorded Exodus 18.18. Thou both weariest thy self, and this
People that is with thee greatly: the end being duly considered, we may more
easily distribute the governors: Governors are suitable to this proportion to be
distributed into the several Shiers, Cities, Towns, and Places, where the
People live. (which plainly appears the end being considered) for the very
affection of a loving Father is so prevalent, that love causes him to seek the
comfort of his children, and to provide for their comforts, and conveniences;
to this purpose the Apostle says, that he is worse then an Infidel that
provideth not for his Family. Now consider that the Commonwealth in some
respect, is the Family of the chief Governor.

It is a lamentable case to consider, have not the People bin, (I could wish it
were not so still) forced to travel many miles, to their great detriment, for
to get those causes decided, and determined, that might with much ease, have
bin ended at, or near to their own dwellings. Yea moreover have they obtained
the determining or ending of their causes, without making many or diverse such
chargable journies, to the undoing of too many Men, Widows, and poor
Fatherless Children; have not many for want of means, bin forced to loose
their rights, and lawful maintenance? Consider of it dear Fathers, and now let
it be remedied, and doubtless God will shortly say unto you, well done good
and faithful servant thou have been faithful in these things, come be ruler
over more and better things, enter into thy Masters joy.

But on the contrary consider that oppression is a crying sin, God will
certainly hear the cry of the oppressed, the cry of old, and young, the cry of
the Widows, and of the Orphans, God will certainly hear them, God will do
it, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Therefore dearly beloved Fathers,
I humbly beseech you let Governors be distr^buted into the several Shires,
Cities, Towns and Places where the people dwell. And keep close to the rules
prescribed in these first and purest times; namely, let the determination of
causes be in proportion, to these first patterns, let not the end be neglected,
which is, that Gods Laws be observed, and the People may be eased. I pray you
to consider what is recorded concerning Samuel, that good and pious Governor,
he, rather then the People should travel far, did travel himself to the
places where the People dwelt. 1 Samuel 7.16. And Samuel went about year by
year to Bethell, and Gilgall, and Mispeh and judged Israel in all those
places. No doubt he appointed Judges all over the Land, that did judge the
people l kewise. I pray you to avoid multiplicity of Judges, being of equal
authority to judge at one tim^, in one and the same cause, I believe, it will
not be so much for the Peoples comfort, not so suitable to the first and most
pure institutions, and, I believe, t will be too great a burden to those that
should be Governors, in such causes, in such a manner constantly.

I do conceive that from that end of the multiplying Governors, recorded Exodus
18. which was to ease the People, and Moses, and that Gods Commandments might
not be broken; and from the acting and president that Moses left there
recorded, it appears, that many governors are needful in their several
places, but not many governors of equal authority, constantly to act in one
cause, and not in the weightiest causes more and most especially. My reasons
mentioned are gathered from the president and wisdom of God himself.

Now I shall proceed to describe that way, for the calling or entrance of th^se
governors into their places. Being a matter of the highest and greatest
consequence to us, next under God, we cannot possible use too much diligence,
nor too much intention, nor too much watchfulness in this matter; which does
so nearly concern the glory of God and the good of us, and of our posterity. I
find that God does desc^ibe a clear, evident, and great difference, between
the chief, or principal Judge or Governor, and the other Governors inferior
to them, in regard or respect of their callings, or of Gods sending them, into,
and unto those places of government; therefore I shall observe the wisdom of
God, who first ordains the head, or chief governor* and shall begin with the
chief Judge.

We find that God did himself immediately appoint Moses, Exodus 3.10. Come now
therefore I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou may bring my people the
children of Israel out of Egypt. Ver. 12. And certainly I will be with thee,
etc. Here is Moses call: so likewise God did immediately appoint Joshua. Read
Joshua. 1.1. Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord, the Lord
spoke unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses Minister, saying Ver. 2. Moses my
servant is dead, now therefore arise go over this Jordan, etc. Read. Number.
27.18. And the Lord said unto Moses take Joshua the son of Nun in whom is the
spirit, and put thine hands upon him, etc. We may note here that in the Verses
before, Moses did earnestly entreat God, that he would appoint a Governor, or
Shepherd, to go in and out before the people; Moses knowing of what concernment
it was to Gods glory and the peoples good, that the people should have a good
shepherd, note that God does not presently answer Moses thus, let the people
choose a Governor themselves; but on the contrary, God owneth this way, of his
own prescribing, as appears, because as God did immediately choose Moses, as
is before considered, so also here again God proceeds as before, and does
immediately choose Joshua, to be the chief governor of his people.

And secondly we may observe, that God gives this further manifestation of his
mind, in these words, in whom is the spirit, wherein, and whereby God shows,
that the People might have erred if they had chosen, for they could see but the
outward man. But God knew exactly who would be for his glory and for the
peoples good, he knew in whom his blessed spirit was. Next read Judges 1.1.
After that Joshua was dead the children of Israel asked the Lord saying, who
shall go up for us, against the Canaanites. We may here note, that the people
had bin so well instructed in the days of Moses, and Joshua, that they did
account it to be Gods Will, and their duty, to let God choose their chief
Governor; no doubt this people did not do this unadvisedly, but upon knowledge,
and due consideration, that it was the Will of God; and that it was the most
surest, and safest way for them, that God should choose their principal
Governor for them. Therefore they used the means, they enquired Gods mind who
should govern them. And it is to be duly considered that this People (nor any
of their posterity) did never seek God in such weighty Causes, Humbly,
Heartily, Earnestly, but God did usually, mostly, if not always, condescend
unto them, and answer them graciously, whether they enquired Gods Mind by the
judgment of Vrim, or whether by lotts, I cannot tell; but God answered both
these ways, and God owned and prescribed both these ways; as appears by
Samuel his practice in choosing Saul by Gods immediate direction. 1 Samuel, etc.

We may note further, that the people are recorded by God, to be a people that
did cleave close to, and were observant of, Gods Commandments, Josu. 24.31. And
Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders
that overlived Joshua, and had known all the works of the Lord, which he had
done for Israel. We may note that after this Generation, the people grew wanton
and forsook the straight, and pure ways of the Lord; therefore the Lord
delivered them into the hands of their enemies, Judge, 2.12, 13.14. But the way
that God helps them, is by raising up Judges, Judge. 2.16. Read Judges 3.9.
And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, and the Lord stirred up a
Savior to the children of Israel, and he saved them, Ver. 10. And the Spirit
of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel. Here we may note, that it is
not a vain thing to seek the Lord, for although the people had done wickedly,
yet when they cried unto the Lord, the Lord hears them.

And secondly, we may note, that God owneth this way; that himself chooses
Government immediately. Thus we may read that God did immediately send Gideon.
Judge. 6.14. And the Lord looked upon him and said, go in this thy might, and
thou shall save Israel, have not I sent thee. I note that where God does
immediately send, or appoint government from the days of Moses, to the days
of Samuel God does not institute or appoint the Son, to succeed in Government,
next after the Fathers death; and this continued all the time of those first
and purest times, and those times wherein God did most immediately appoint
Government in favor, and in mercy, to his Church and People. Whereby it
plainly appears that succession from the Father, to the Son, was none of Gods
institution, in those first and purest Times.

God chose Samuel to be Governor, or chief Governor immediately; by which (and
by the former Governors mentioned before) it plainly appears that God did
prescribe, and own, and bless this way, it appears that it was Gods mind,
and will, to choose Governors himself immediately. The next way that God did
prescribe of choosing governors, was by lot; whereby God did immediately choose
the chief governor, recorded, 1 Samuel 10.19. Now therefore stand you here before
the Lord according to your Tribes, and according to your thousands. Verse. 20.
And when Samuel had gathered together all the Tribes of Israel, the Tribe of
Benjamin was taken, and afterward he assembled the Tribe of Benjamin according
to their families, and the family of Matri was taken, so Saul the son of Kish
was taken; and Samuel said, See ye not him whom the Lord has chosen.

By this place it plainly appears, That God did ordain this way for the
choosing the principal Governor namely by lots, whereby God is said to choose.
There were some Judges, the manner of whose choice is not so expressly recorded
(those most eminent) are such as God first raised up, and used as instruments
in more then an ordinary manner; such, for ought I know, may be made useful for
Gods glory, and for the peoples good, such as God has raised up to work
deliverances for the people, such as (in that respect) may be called Saviors,
and such as are men well known to be men of courage, humility, and p ety: We
find, That God afforded deliverances, protection, and peace to the people, by
such men as, for ought I know, were so raised up; this way is the nearest to
these most pure and immediate callings of Governors by God to their places in
those first and purest times. But this is not so safe and clear a way, (so far
as I understand:)

First, Because we read not, we cannot find it recorded, (that I can find, and
I have searched the Scripture with diligence,) that God did appoint the people
to choose that way: Consider, That those acts that the people did, are not
therefore Gods Commandments and Institutions, for then we must follow them in
many actions, which would be vain to conceive.

Secondly, The People may err, and are much subject so to do.

Thirdly, Gods Law is express, we may not add nor diminish, we may not turn to
the right nor to the left hand, to or from Gods Commandments.

Fourthly, I believe the promises of God lead us to choose most exactly,
according to the purest Institutions, noted in Isai. 1. I will (that is, God
will) restore thy Judges as at the first, etc. that holds out as in the
purest times, etc. Before I make Application of what is mentioned, touching the
calling of these chief Judges, I conceive it will be needful to answer an
Objection, which is this:

Object. May not the people choose chief Governors? did not the people choose
Jepthtah?

Answ. The exact manner of Jepthtah's choice is not so plainly described, but
that, for ought I know, they might have some further enquiry then is set down;
much we read not of Jephthahs acts, this is to be noted concerning him, That he
did such an act as no other Judge did, (that we re^d of,) namely, he vowed such
an unllimited and unlawful vow, as occasioned him to sacrifice his daughter,
(and so he did) which was the direct breach of Gods Command in a high degree.

But secondly, consider, That it is a safe way in dubious matters, (especially
in such eminent matters as do so immediately concern Gods glory, and the
peoples good) to walk by the plainest, by ^he most evident ways that God has
prescribed.

3. God says expressly with many threatenings, and many times, That we shall
neither add nor diminish from his Institutions: Now this is evident, That God
choosing immediately either by voice, by Prophet, or by lot, is Gods own
appointment, It is without denial or question: and God foreseeing that the
people would corrupt their ways, and break his Institutions, by desiring to be
governed by Kings, yet God was so jealous of his honor, and tender of the
peoples good, in the choice of the chief Governors, that he says expressly,
Deuteronomy. 17. Thou shall make him King whom the Lord thy God shall choose: Therefore
considering that we may neither add nor diminish, it is without comparison much
safer to choose by Gods plain Rules: For in both the Government by Judges, and
in the Government by Kings, it is to be noted, That God did immediately choose
Governors; and I cannot see that a people that will follow Gods express Command
and President, can avoid but that God (and not men) must choose the chief
Governor: It is expressed and recorded, That God raised up Judges, and made
them Saviors to the people; but because the manner how God raised them up, is
not so plainly expressed, therefore (I conceive) that it is the safest way to
follow the plainest and clearest ways, by which are plainly declared, the
manner how God did choose, and wherein God did act, own, and most eminently
bless; but where God raises up men, and makes them eminent Instruments for
his glory, and by them works deliverance to a people, in such a case I dare
not oppose it, doubtless, I believe, it is a way nearest to Gods immediate
callings, and nearest to the plainest Presidents recorded in the sacred
Scriptures.

Fourthly, If the people choose, they are subject to err and mistake, they see
but the outward appearance, and they may intend one man, and it may be a great
number carries the choice to another, or they may be mistaken in the man most
meet for Government, which will appear, if we consider, that Samuel, a wise and
holy man, was mistaken in choosing but amongst one man's children, how much
sooner may we be mistaken, when we, having less understanding then Samuel, are
to choose out of a multitude, and we may be overpowered by money, by friends,
by kindred, by beauty, by eloquence, by fraud, or force, or ways we know not of.

Fifthly, Experience may teach us, That people do err very often, and choose
those men to be their Judges or Governors, that prove direct enemies to them
and to their posterity; witness Abimeleck, and a multitude of others, recorded
for our learning, and for our instruction.

Sixthly, God never erreth, and he does bless with his holy Spirit men of his
own sending.

Seventhly, God complainenth of this by his Prophets, formerly cited, saying,
They had Kings, but not by me; Princes, but I knew it not.

From the premises may be gathered three ways, whereby Governors were in those
first and purest times chosen and ordained; two of them are very clear, the
third I dare not absolutely oppose, but leave it to the consideration of the
godly-wise-hearted: I shall propound to consideration somewhat touching the
particulars, and then make a general Proposition, to consideration, touching
all the three jointly, as God shall assist.

First, concerning the immediate Call of God by voice, or Prophet, or some such
way as God shall see meet; I know no place of Scripture that does declare, That
God will no more appoint Governors as at the first, as he did Moses and Joshua.

Secondly, This Prophecy, Isai. 1. holds out much, for these words [as at the
first, and as in the beginning] may (for ought that I know) be determined by
God, to be accomplished in the full latitude, namely, as in the time of Moses
and Joshua: That Prophecy, Dan. 7.27. (in these words) And the Kingdom, and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the holy people of the most High: This seems to me to import, That
God intends to do great things for his people in these latter times: Read
Micah 7.17. According to the days of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt, I
will show unto him mavelous things: This (to my apprehension) holds out, That
God will do mavelous things; God is not limited within bounds, he can do as
great things now in these latter times, as in the former times. Thus in other
places.

Thirdly, I believe, That (with limitation and submission to Gods good will and
pleasure) we may safely present our humble prayers to God in the Name of his
Son our blessed Savior, That he would be pleased to appoint our chief Governor
for us: The Lord was so far from rejecting the people, Judge. 1.1. when they
sought his gracious favor in this particular, that he graciously grants
their request; God doubtless will not be offended, when people, with the
greatest care and diligence, cleave closest to him; the Apostle wills us,
That in every thing our request should be made known unto God by prayer and
supplication.

Fourthly, This way is a way that God did most immediately act, appoint, and
practice* and bless, from Moses to Samuel, and God never repealed or
contradicted this immediate way of his; God is unchangeable: If the people
formerly cast off God, and therefore God removed from them, and hid his face
from them, they never turning to God to seek his face, being much hardened in
their sins; yet if God now give us hearts to repent, and to see the evil of
them, and of our selves, and to turn again, and to long, and lament, with an
earnest affection, to do Gods will, without turning to the right or to the left
hand, without adding or diminishing; and if we do humbly and unfeignedly seek
his favor, who can tell but God may fully answer our petitions? God has done
already so much for us, in opening a way to further us in this particular, as
has not been from the days of Samuel to these times: I believe I may safely
affirm it.

Fifthly, Consider what a rich jewel, what a precious favor we shall obtain,
in case that our good God hear our petitions, and do immediately appear in the
choice of our chief Governor, for then we shall be sure to have a true
Shepherd, (and not a Wolf in sheeps clothing,) then we shall be certain that
the good and blessed Spirit of GOD will rest upon such a man, (and not an evil
and deceitful spirit,) then the people shall be drawn to God, (and not caused
to forsake God,) then the people will be blessed of God by the means of such
Governors, then shall we obtain a man from the Lord, then shall we have Judges
as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning: Consider I pray you, is
not this jewel, this precious favor worth the looking after? Is it not worthy
our most fervent prayers? Have we not safe Rules (and clear) to warrant and to
direct us to cry to God in this very case of Government? Did not Israel cry to
God, and enquire of God for Governors? Did not God himself prescribe and
practice this way to choose Governors himself most immediately? Are we not
commanded, that in every thing our requests should be made known to God by
Prayer and Supplication? Did ever a people return empty from God in such
seekings of God? Nay, is it not evident, that (usually, mostly, if not always
God answered graciously, and granted peoples request in this very case of chief
Governors?

Consider further, you have endured much trouble, war, and bloodshed about
Government, if we should now fall short, and mistake in our governors, then our
labor is lost, we are undone: But on the contrary, if we obtain a man from the
Lord, we shall have a rich recompense for all our former labors. Therefore let
us not lose such a precious favor for want of asking at the hands of the Lord:
Who can tell but God may immediately answer us in some way of his own
prescribing? however let us not fear, nor doubt, our prayers shall not be in
vain, they shall be kept in Gods good treasury.

Sixthly, Consider that if you should mistake in the form of Government, or in
the persons, (which must govern us all,) such mistakes are very hard and
difficult to be amended; for when a Government and Governors are established,
let experience teach us, that we may sooner be sensible of our misery (which is
not ordinarily taken notice of, nor truly discerned) then know how to be free:
we may cry out, but not be able to help our selves. It is a long time since any
man durst plainly show to his familiar friend, where his grievance lay, if it
concerned Government. Consider it warily, and deeply, and thoroughly, for the
glory of God, for the good of thousands, and that your posterity and your
selves may remember with joyful hearts, how you preferred Gods Prescriptions,
Gods Rules, Gods Presidents, and the true good and safely of your Nation,
before any other momentany, light, and vanishing deceiving respects whatsoever.

Seventhly, Consider that where people choose the form of Government and
Governors, they are most usually mistaken, because they can discern no more but
the outward appearance (and few amongst many can discern that) they know not
who God knows to be meet: kindred is a relation that in outward appearance is
of great force; but by that means Abimelech obtained the way to Government,
Judge. 9.2. Say, I pray you, in the audience of all the men of Shechem; Remember
also that I am your bone and your flesh. Verse. 3. Then his mothers brethren
spoke of him, in the audience of all the men of Shechem, all these words; and
their hearts were moved to follow Abimelech, for, said they, He is our brother.
But note what followed, Verse. 23. But God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech
and the men of Shechem; There you may read what misery and bloodshed befell the
people.

I would shortly note three things from this Example.

First, That even those that immoderately thirst after Government, are usually
unmeet men.

Secondly, It usually is a means for the hurt of such Governors, and usually a
means to shorten their own lives.

Thirdly, That it usually, mostly, proves very bitter to those very men that
prefer others for by respects; and it is very dangerous when people venture to
choose the principal Governor, and do not therein seriously enquire of God who
shall be the man that shall govern them: And as we have many examples in this
kind; so, on the contrary, we shall find them blessed that let God choose
their Governor in chief.

But further, Remember that Samuel was mistaken in the person (amongst David's
brethren) fit for Government; how much sooner may we be mistaken? How many have
been lifted to chief Governors places by kindred, by unadvised multitudes, by
fraud, by force, by eloquence, by beauty, by hypocritical pretenses; Therefore
I pray you suspect your own hearts, lean not to your own wisdoms; for although
Custom have overshadowed Truth from our view, for a long season, (so that Truth
looks so strangely, now we see it, that we can hardly believe it is Truth,)
yet now I pray you let us own Truth, lest, if he depart again out of our sight,
we shall not know him again: Therefore I pray you seek after Gods Rules of
Truth, take his counsel who shall be our chief Governor, and this benefit will
certainly follow, The good and blessed Spirit of God will rest upon that man.

Next concerning lots, this is a way that God himself prescribed (though at
some more distance) as appears 1 Samuel God directed Samuel that the people
should choose their chief Governor this way, namely, by lots; by which way the
Lord (and not the people) did appoint their Ruler: And Samuel no doubt had
respect to Gods prescribed Rule, Deuteronomy. 17. Thou shall make him King whom the
Lord thy God shall choose: whereby it appears evidently, that Samuel so
understood Gods will in that Scripture, that there was a clear difference
between God choosing a governor, and the peoples choosing a governor; therefore
he chooses a governor by lot, wherein and whereby God chooses: therefore Gods
direction and institution is, that God shall choose: This is most for Gods
glory, and for the peoples greatest safety. Lots are Gods own Ordinance, as
appears in many places, Josh. 7.17. So Joshua rose up early in the morning,
and brought Israel by their Tribes, and the Tribe of Judah was taken: And he
brought the families of Judah, and took the family of the Zarhites, and he
brought the family of the Zarhites, man by man, and Zabdi was taken: And he
brought his household, man by man, and Achan was taken. God could have showed to
Joshua, who was the man, so well as he showed to him that there was an offense;
but he causes Joshua to enquire his will in such a way as God had prescribed:
This shows, that in difficult cases God ordained that people should enquire
his mind by lots: and this Samuel knew, and therefore he enquireth Gods mind
by lots, in this very case of government; this was never repealed to this day:
for God is not yea and nay, God is not contrary or opposite to his own Rules:
This is certain, it is better and safer for people to be directed by God to
choose the man; yea, although God for our sin should be angry with us, yet even
in those causes it is better to fall into the hands of God, then into the hands
of man; and this David well considered, when he chose to fall into the hands of
God, and not into the hands of man: But further we may observe, That this was
the usual way (namely, by lots) that the people took, to enquire Gods mind in
weighty and difficult causes, as appears, Josh. 18.6. I will cast lots for
you here before the Lord: thus Verse. 8, 10. read 1 Samuel 14.42. And Saul said,
casts lots between me and Jonathan my son, and Jonathan was taken: Here we may
see that God appeared, and gave a true determination, and this was a way to
avoid strife: Read 1 Chro. 26.13. And they cast lots, both small and great, for
the house of their fathers: Here again we may note, That this use of lots was
to show what Gods mind was, and to prevent all jealousies or indirect means,
and to prevent strife. Read Nehem. 10.34. We cast lots for the offerings of the
wood, even the Priests, the Levites, and the People. Read Jonah 1.7. And they
said every one to his fellow, come and let us cast lots, that we may know for
whose cause this evil is upon us; so they cast lots, and the lot fell upon
Jonah: By this it evidently appears, that the people in weighty cases did
enquire to know Gods mind this way, namely, by lots.

Secondly, We may observe, That God does answer the people this way.

Thirdly, We may observe, That the lot did not err, nor fail to show, that
which the people sought to God for. Read Act. 1.24. And they prayed, saying,
Thou Lord, which know the hearts of all men, show whether of these thou have
chosen. Verse. 26. And they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell on Matthias.
This shows, that lots were not abolished, but they are now of the same use
that they were under the Law; this is an example of the Apostles, men in an
extraordinary measure guided by the good and holy spirit of God; and this was
written no doubt for our learning; this was and is a clear and evident
direction in the very case of governors, for the Apostles were Gods
Ambassadors, his own Witnesses, they were the Penmen of the holy Scriptures;
this matter was an eminent and a weighty matter, they chose but one of two: The
Reason is evident, because the nature of their cause required no more.

First, Because not any amongst all, although holy, would serve, they must be
men that had been the most noted to be eyewitnesses of what Christ had done
and suffered, and so that they had seen and heard those things themselves.

Secondly, The Apostles were present that had an infallible spirit.

Thirdly, This cause differs from the Governors of a Commonwealth, because God
in his wisdom ordered the Governors of a Commonwealth to be chosen by God out
of all the people: and I do conceive (with due and humble respect to those that
shall see Gods mind more clearly) that it is the safest way to follow the most
direct and evident Rules prescribed, owned, and blessed by God, in the same
cases: Now it evidently appears, that the Prophet Samuel (directed
immediately by God himself) did choose out of the whole twelve Tribes of Israel;
by that means God did fully choose (according to Deuteronomy. 17. to make him Governor
whom the Lord did choose immediately) in this very case of choosing the Governor
of a Commonwealth; for, in this case, this president by Samuel was a certain
and an approved president, in choosing the person that God saw meet to be chief
governor; This was not about the form of government, whether it should be by
Judges, or by Kings, for of that matter God showed his mind by Samuel before,
expressly witnessing against the form of government by Kings: but this was a
Rule to show how God is said to choose the person that he sees meet to govern:
I leave it to the consideration of the godly.

From these places before mentioned, first, I observe, That it plainly and
clearly appears, that lots were ordained by God, and that God owned them,
because God truly appeared, and truly gave answer by them, and because that God
blessed this way of his own devising.

Secondly, I observe, That the lot (when men cast themselves, or referred
themselves, wholly to, or upon God, in such cases) did never err, it always gave
a true direction, a true determination in all weighty causes: Search the
Scriptures, and it cannot be found, that the lot ever erred. Let not as fear
therefore to choose our chief governor by lot; for let us not doubt, God is the
same unchangeable God, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: Will not
this way compose all our differences? Will it not heal all distempers? Will not
this way end all our strife? Will not this way keep out all Wolves, and Foxes,
and other beasts of prey? Shall not we by this way return again to the Lord?
and by this means God shall be our King, his Laws our guide; by this means we
shall obtain a man from the Lord, and we shall be blessed, and Peace and Truth
shall meet together; and so shall we have Judges, in some proportion, as at the
first, and Counselors as at the beginning, and we shall be called a faithful
City.

Thirdly, Let us remember the great effusion of blood that has been shed, and
the great envies, hatred, malice, that is at this day reigning in the Land; Is
it not in every Country, in every City, in every Pa^ish? Nay, there are but a
few Families (comparatively) where there are not some breaches about this
matter; and what the issue will be, the Lord knows: If therefore there be any
bowels of pity, if you love Gods glory, if you be lovers of peace and truth,
then fear not to trust in God in this matter, God is not changed. Do we not
trust our Souls with God? and shall we not trust God with our Bodies? The Lord
give us understanding.

And now I shall speak a word to the third way of choosing Governors, it is said
in sundry places of Scripture that when the people had forgotten, or cast
behind them, Gods Commandments, yet even when they earnestly sought Gods
help, Gods counsel, then God stirred or raised them up a Savior, or
Deliverer. The way being not so plainly described, where we may take notice of
the peoples negligence in not seeking to God for Governors; for at such times
when the people committed such wickedness, (we shall usually find that) the
State or Commonwealth, was vacant of a chief governor. Read Judge. 3.7. So the
children of Jsrael, did wickedly in the sight of the Lord. Ver. 9. And when the
children of Israel cried unto the Lord, stirred them up a Savior, and he saved
them. Ver. 10. and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him and he judged Israel;
We may note here, that the people were negligent in inquiring of God before
their distress, for a chief Judge, the state was empty. And we may note that
till they sought the Lord, God suffered them to be afflicted, but when they cry
unto the Lord, when they do cleave to the Lord, the Lord relieveth them and
shows to them mercy this way, namely by stirring them up a chief governor.
And further we may note, that when God puts his spirit eminently in such a
person, then he judges Israel, no doubt but the Spirit of God came upon him in
some extraordinary manner. Read Jud. 3.12. Then the children of Israel again
committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord. (This was after the death of
their former governor) Ver. 15. And when the children of Israel cried unto the
Lord, the Lord stirred them up a Savior, etc. Jud. 4. The children of Israel
again committed wickedness. Ver. 3. And the children of Israel cried unto the
Lord: and we may there read how the Lord showed them favor by stirring up a
Savior. Where the Man was nominated that was their leader by the prophetess
Debora, but Debora at that time judged Israel* Ver. 4. And so Debora by Gods
appointment, I believe, judged Israel to the day of her Death.

The next was Gideon, Judges 6. He was immediately called, concerning diverse
Judges it is not so expressly noted, after what manner God stirred them up.
Whether it was by immediate Revelation, or by Prophets direction, or put his
Spirit into their hearts, and made them to be notable and eminent deliverers of
the people. In all such dubious cases, the safest way is to follow the most
evident, and clear Rules, Wherein, and whereby, God does most evidently
prescribe, own, and bless. Now consider, that Gods immediate call is clear
without all doubt, and choosing Governors by lot, is evident, and clear, to be a
way that God himself prescribed, and the lot never erred.

The third way is more dubious, yet I dare not oppose it, where God raises up
a man, and makes him an eminent deliver of his Church and people, if the
people in such a case choose such a man to govern them, God may blese it, this
way is left recorded in the sacred Scriptures, and we find that thus far God
blessed this way, that he made such Men (so raised up, or stirred up by God)
to become saviors, the people were protected, and not devoured, and the people
were blessed with peace in their days, this is the nearest way next to the
former, but in any wise take heed not to establish government by succession,
from Father to Son, we have tasted deep of the cup of affliction in this kind.
The Father a good man, the Child otherwise, the Father holding one opinion, and
the children another, this plainly appears from the Divine Records in the
Sacred Scriptures, and by the late sad experiences, in this kind.

We may plainly see the bittter fruits the people reaped, by Government from
Father to Son, if we consider and compare the fruits by Judges, with the fruits
that the people reaped by Kings, which succeeded by succession; Note well, that
the Government had continued from Moses to Samuel, which was many hundred
years, many generations; and yet we see God so blessed these Judges, that (came
not in by succession, but) were by God appointed where he saw meet, Read 1 Samuel
9.8. And the servant answered Saul again and said, behold J have found about
me the fourth part of a shekell of silver (which was about five pence, Read
Genesis 23.15.) that will I give the man of God to tell us our way: note well the
plainness, and godly humility, of the Judges in those times, that would accept
of five pence.

Note likewise, that in a short time when the Government, went by succession
from Father to Son, the case was altered, we may note in three or four
generations, the governors built stately houses, rich gardens, a thousand Wives
and Concubines, great multitudes of Charets and horses, these things were
directly against Gods Commandments, Deuteronomy. 17, In any wise he shall not
prepare him many Horses, neither shall he take him many Wives, neither shall
he gather him much silver and gold: but we may note, that Kings quickly
overtoped, and annihilated Gods Laws; This God knew, when God put a bit in the
mouth of Kings, to curb their pride, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. namely, Gods Laws, that
so their hearts should not be lift up: but these Laws would not hold them,
their hearts were above Gods Laws; God warned the People of this, the 1 of
Samuel, but the People would not hear till, they cried out under Rehoboam by
reason of their oppression, I believe a doorkeeper would not now accept five
pence.

Dearly beloved Fathers, if you should consent to government by succession, it
might be just with God, to let their hearts be lift up like to Rehoboam, that
God might make their little finger bigger then the former Kings loins, the
Father chastised us with rods, but the Son may with scourges. I pray you
therefore let us have plain, humble, blessed Judges as at the first (not
chosen by succession) but as in the beginning.

I shall now from these considerations make one general proposition (and humbly
lay it down at your feet, dearly beloved Fathers) which is, Considering the sad
and lamentable envy, emulations, strife, differences, that have been, and are
at this day in the Nation; may it not be meet, solemnly, after an extraordinary
manner, to humble our selves, and to cry unto our God for direction who shall
be our governor? It may be, before the time (which you set apart for this
occasion) be expired, God may reveal his mind in some extraordinary manner;
but if God appear not, then let us, within some little considerate time,
(before the time be ended, which God directs you to set apart for this work)
proceed to choose by lot; It is a safe way, it is a way God himself prescribed,
it never erred: Will it not be a way to remove all jealousies and subtleties,
and to compose all differences, and to put an end to all strife? But, dear
Fathers, I pray you however, in some convenient time, choose some one chief
Governor, eminently known for courage and for piety, and give him all the
lawful power that God in his wisdom, gave unto Joshua, and to other lawful
governors; This will be a way for Gods glory, and for the peoples (for us your
childrens) safety, and comforts, for Gods Wisdom is infinitely beyond all man's
inventions. I pray you let us not have a Titular Governor, if you shall not
think meet to condescend to any of these ways, I know whom I trust; and I hope
I shall show my self obedient, in all lawful matters, to such as God, and
you, shall see meet to appoint, and I shall not cease to entreat God so to
direct you with his good and blessed Spirit, that you may do that which is well
pleasing to him.

Now I conceive it will be meet to speak something touching those Governors
inferior to the former, which are for the glory of God, for the ease of the
chief Governor, and for the Peoples ease and comfort.

Now again I look upon the most glorious, perfect, and beautiful frame of
Government, which the blessed Angels do, (and the elect children of God shall)
enjoy to all eternity. Where I find one blessed God, the governor, and the rest
all appointed and distributed into their several places by the power, and
wisdom, of that blessed God. This leads me to conceive, that God
proportioneth his Works, like unto himself, for so God did in the Creation of
the World, and the creatures therein, God made one man governor of all the
creatures upon Earth, and that man named the Creatures, and disposed other
matters: it had bin man's happiness (provided that Gods glory had bin
maintained) that the government of the World, might have continued in, and
according to that lovely order. Secondly, God made that one man in his own
image, like to himself, and I believe we shall find that God composed, or
framed the Government of his Church, and People, in some proportion like to the
frame of the Heavenly Government: my time will not admit to speak much of that
blessed Spirit of God, part whereof God did communicate, or bestow upon Moses,
and so let him represent his place, so far as might stand with Gods glory, that
is so far as Moses might be subject to Gods Commandments, for therein God
reserved to himself his own glory, in Adam, the great Emperor, or governor of
the World. Yet he was subject to Gods Commandments; from these considerations
I shall proceed.

When God, in those first and purest times did appoint the distribution of
governors, recorded thus, Exodus 18.25. And Moses chose men of courage out of all
Israel, and made them heads over the people, Rulers over thousands, Rulers over
hundreds, Rulers over fifties, and Rulers over tens. Here I find that God gave
Moses authority, to appoint the governors, that were to govern the People.
Which authority, I do believe, does undoubtedly belong to all good governors,
being chief governors, only this is to be considered, that the People here
were ne^re to Moses, so that Moses knew many, or all of them. Therefore I
believe that God, that is the God of wisdom, and of Order, will allow, that
where People live further off, and the chief governor may not know all the
men, whose dwellings are further off from him, and therefore cannot so well
know the qualifications, and fitness of men for government, in such cases it
does much differ; but Moses must (I mean the chief governor must doubtless)
approve of all governors under him, that govern for Gods glory, and for the
Peoples good, ease, and comfort; There must be no inferior governor that he
approves not, for that would be directly against the frame of the Heavenly
government, and against the express letter of these first, and purest
institutions. And Moses must, I mean the chief governor must, choose
immediately (if it be possible with convenience) the chief next to himself,
namely the governors of thousands, this most nearely resembles Gods President.
God chose Moses, and Moses chose them under him, the words are express, and I
dare not alter them; I dare not prefer my wisdom, before Gods Wisdom, nor
dare I add, nor diminish, to or from Gods Prescriptions; the rest of the Rulers
of hundreds, fifties, and tens, may be chosen proportionable to this president,
(provided that the chief Governor approve of them.)

Now that this way, is most for Gods glory, and the Peoples good, appears, if
we consider that government distributed resembles, or supplieth that defect of
man; who cannot be every where present, nor here all causes (for otherwise they
all represent but one entire, and absolute governor) therefore God appointed
one chief governor, namely Moses, like to himself; but through the occasion of
man's weakness, to supply that defect, God suffers the Government to be
distributed.

Secondly, it appears that this is the best way, that the chief governor
should appoint (or at the least approve) the rest, because the Wisdom of God
saw meet it should be so, as is expressly recorded.

Thrdly, consider that it does strengthen, uphold and knit together the whole
frame of Government, forces united are the strongest.

Fourthly, it does prevent divisions; and may be a means to reform abuses,
when inferior governors are offenders, thus God when he sees his Laws
broken, does remove, and punish delinquents. For if you should admit of
governors against the mind and approbation of the chief governor, it must
needs follow, that that State so doing, must be corrupted, divided, or sore
shaken, and endangered, in short time; for let but Gods Laws take place, and
then the governor in chief is subject alike with the rest, and the rest acting
for God, have power to punish him, because God is their highest governor, and
they must obey God although it be against the chief of men. Therefore the
danger cannot be great thereby, but on the contrary, it is for Gods glory, and
for the peoples good, that the chief governor should appoint, or approve of
the rest, at the least.

Fifthly, it will appear to be Gods appointment, by the Records in the sacred
Scriptures, not only in the first institution (which is the best, and the
surest) but also in the continued practice of chief governors, all along, from
time to time. This appears Joshua 1.17. As we obeyed Moses in all things, so
we will obey thee, but Moses had the authority, to appoint governors; therefore
Joshua had so, and it appears by Joshua his actings afterward.

Thus we may read that Saul, and David, did appoint governors, recorded in
many places, and so did the Governors, and the Kings of Israel and Judah.

I shall refer these matters to the consideration of the godly, and of the
learned, if any lust to be contentious; I strive not to contend, but contend to
be quiet, and seek for Peace, and Truth.

And now I conceive it is requisite to speak a word, touching the Lawyers.
Gods Laws if we observe them well, are pithy, and short, they are contained in
a little room, if we substract the Historical matters, (or matter which show
Gods actings, and man's actings, which are not so properly Laws, but rather
show Gods glory, and man's conversation) from the direct Commandments of God;
in what a little volume, would Gods Laws be contained? which shows the
purity, and excellency of them, of Gods Laws.

The Laws of some Countries contain great Books or Volumes in comparison of
Gods Laws, many Lawyers look much upon the Letter of the common Laws, I
would there were many more looked faithfully to the true meaning of those
Laws, contained in the Sacred Word of God. We read but little of other Laws,
during the times of the Judges of Israel; I do believe that the multitude of
Laws did originally spring, from the iniquity of the Lawyers, and from the
iniquity of the People, scarce any words were sufficient, so to express the
truth, but either the Judge, or the Lawyer or the People, would break through
the Law; I believe there is just cause of sorrow, and of shame, to consider it.

The best way (that I know) to reform this, is to keep closest to the true
Original, which is the most true, perfect, and clear rule, and is the rule of
all rules; because all other rules, are but derivatives from thence.

Doubtless our Laws ought to be as few as may be, and those Laws distributed
into such several places, where the People dwell, such as do concern those
People, in those parts, for the Peoples ease, and comfort.

Secondly, the Laws ought to be in our own language, so as the People may
read, and observe them; because God does afford that benefit to the People, in
the giving, and publishing his Laws, which are of the most excellency. And if
we consider the end why Judges were multiplied, as Gods glory, was the chief,
so likewise the Peoples ease, and comfort is expressed: so ought it to be in
those Laws that are branches of Gods Laws, as Gods glory is the highest, and
true end of them, so likewise the Peoples ease and comfort, by, and from them,
is to be respected. A great help, both for Gods glory, and for the Peoples
comfort, is to have good, and faithful Judges; for such will not (so much)
seek themselves, (which is truly to destroy themselves) as they will seek
Gods glory, and the Peoples good. These things have bin mightily perverted, yet
God has not left us without hope, but that God will restore Judges as at the
first, and counselors, as at the beginning, then shall we be called a City of
righteousness, a faithful City.

What ever I have written in this little Book or Treatise; I do and have
only propounded to the consideration of all you that do love, honor, and fear
the true and ever living God, who is blessed for ever. I do humbly (with all
due respect to the godly and to the learned) acknowledge, I am but a weak
frail man, (of my self) I may err; therefore if any man can, and will show we
any error (provided that they bring the authority of Gods Sacred Word according
to the plain and sincere meaning of the blessed Spirit of God) I hope, God will
give me a heart, willingly (not constrainedly) to acknowledge any error; I ever
held it as a principle, that we cannot please God better, (nor bring more true
honor, and safety, to our selves) then by hunble unfeigned and willing
acknowledgement of any of our errors, in some proportion suitable to our
offenses. Receive nothing from me, further then you find it agreeable to
Scripture. But this I say, that in what ever I have here in this Book written,
I have set God always in my sight, I knowing that I am ever in his sight, to
whom I must give account for what I have written. I account it to be a matter
of no small moment to write any Book, neither had I written, if I had not
believed God called me to it, (of my self I can do no good matter) but this J
do believe that in this writing contained in this Book, I am strengthened,
protected and guided by the good and blessed Spirit of the true and ever-living
God, To whom I desire to acknowledge and give, as is Gods due, and my duty, all
praise, and service, glory, and honor, and power, because God is worthy of it,
for he has created all things, and for his Wills sake, they are, and have bin
created. Rev. 4.11.

Now beloved, and approved Commanders, and Soldiers, you that have bin helpers
of the Lord against the mighty, although I have not made mention of your Names
in this little Treatise, yet you are in my eye as men of precious esteem, and
so I believe you are in Gods account precious, (I mean such as out of godl^
zeal, and true love have acted in these Wars, of which sort I b^l^eve) there
are many amongst your Army) may I not account you amongst David's worthies? yes,
I believe, I may: and further, I believe, I may truly say that many of you,
Revel. 21.27. Are written in the Lambs book of life, and that you. Ver. 24.
Are of the people that shall be saved and walk in the light of it. Ver. 1.
That new Heaven, Ver. ^. That holy City, that new Jerusalem, God himself shall
be your God with you. Verse. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from your
eyes, and there shall be no more death^, for the first things are passed. Cha
22.12. And behold I come shortly, says God, and my reward is with me, to give
to every man, as his works shall be. Ver. 14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that their right may be in the Tre^ of life. Ver. 11. He that is
righteous let him be righteous still, and he that is holy, let him be holy
still.

Have you been co-acters in fighting Gods battles? and should I or my
Posterity, be forgetful, that you, many of you, have borne a means, that we
enjoy Gods Word freely preached, and that we still enjoy Gods sacred Word in
our own Language, and that we are not forced to bow down to dumb Idols, to
Idolatry, and that we are not cast into those dark, miserable, noisome,
golgotha's, those places which have bin the destruction of thousands, where no
eye could see, or speak to them, to pity them, where they have bin murdered
out of the view of men; I mean those accursed inquisition Houses. This comfort
only they had (which those workers of iniquity could not take from them) that
there was one open place, where the bright and beautiful eye (like to the eye
of the Morning when the glorious and brightest Sun appears) the eye of the
blessed God, and their Maker, looked clearly upon them, and vouchsafed to some
of those poor prisoners of hope, to look upon him also; have not you godly
Soldiers, bin a means, to redeem us the people of England (had we grace to see
it, to acknowledge, and be thankful for it) from that Egyptian bondage, a
corrupt form of government, wherein we like Lands, Beasts, and Asses, were
left as inheritance, from the Father to the, supposed, Sons, the Father of
one Religion, the Son of another, did they not run, and ride, with fury, and
all possible speed (horse and man) from generation to Generation to seize upon
us, thus entering in at Windows, back-doores, and in By-pathes, they (too
often) proved, in^ sheep clothing, and the blessed Spirit of God was not
given unto them, and they kept the People from true Shepherds, men of Gods
sending, upon whom the good and blessed Spirit of God would have rested.

I should much admire, that all men should not joyfully see, and acknowledge so
great deliverance, and salvation; were it not that I consider Gods righteous
judgments for sin, and also considering how prevalent custom is, insomuch
that often times it consumes truth and yet is lean still, are not your
Carriers horses often very sore loaded? and yet being accustomed to bear
burdens, they are even contented, or look no higher, they keep jogging on,
loath to go out of their pace, nor out of their accustomed way, although it
sometimes be up to their bellies in mire, and dirt, where because of times
quick motion, I must leave them to their content, and I and my house will (by
Gods gracious assistance) freely, joyfully, and with all hearty praise bless
the God of our protection, salvation, and deliverance, for our freedom, and
better way.

Have you, dearly beloved, godly Soldiers, bin used by God, as instruments,
to accomplish the precious promises of God, (recorded, concerning Babels fall,
corrupt government, and governors) and should I forget you? No verily, for I
believe that the generations to come shall have cause to bless God for you,
and your memory shall be blessed; times quick motion, bids me (unwillingly) to
forbear, and because (I conceive) I shall never more in this World speak of
you, or to you, in this kind, till I believe, we shall very shortly meet
(though of our selves unworthy, yet through the free and abundant mercy of God,
in Christ,) with joyful hearts, before God and his blessed Angels, with whom,
we shall be, and never more be separated to eternity: this span of time
hasteneth, and shorteneth, our glass runs apace, as swiftly as the Sun runs
round the World; when our work is done, come Lord Jesus, come graciously, and
quickly. Therefore I shall at present conclude my speech to you, Revel. 12.10.
(being sorry that I have not opportunity to see the faces of many of you, and
to rejoice with you for all the great works God (by you^ hands.) Numb. 23.23.
According to this time, it shall be said, of Jacob, and Israel, what has the
Lord wrought?) Then I heard a loud voice, saying, now is salvation, and
strength, the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, for the accuser
of our Brethren is cast down. Ver. 11. But they overcame him by the blood of
that Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives
unto the death. Verse. 12. Therefore rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in
them.

And now beloved Countrymen, let me speak a word to you, may I not say (to
many of you) with Jeremy, O that mine eyes were a Fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the iniquity of the People? is it possible, that
after such clear, evident, and wonderful gracious works, and actings, of our
good God, (in these very times) that any rational man should be so far led
aside and prejudiced, that he should not acknowledge, with joy, and
thankfulness, to God, and to those that God has used as instruments of so
great deliverance? it is possible, for some they cry out, Oh the King, the King
is gone, (is so great pomp and riches, come to desolation, in one hour)?
others, they would have all opinions (openly manifested) to be tolerated under
pretense of liberty of conscience; others would have their own opinions, and
no other to be tolerated, that they may lord it over their weak Brethren.
Others they speak with a double heart as David took notice, and so make ready
their arrows, and bend their bows, that they may shoot at all that are
upright in heart, Psalm. 11. For they speak against Government, and Governors,
saying they hate these opinionists, they by this means, show (too evidently by
their fruits) that this is but a cloak for their own sins, for under
pretext of conformity, they shoot at Government, and governors, and in truth
at those that are the humble, true and faithful servants of our God, at all
such as are circumspect, and fear to offend God.

I would first say to them that unfeignedly desire to do Gods Will, though in
some matters, some having larger talents then others, there be difference in
their judgments, (although in many matters the difference being thoroughly, and
truly considered, is more in show then in real substance): would you take the
best and safest way? Then begin in the right manner, and place, labor to
strengthen, and encourage this present government, who, I believe, many of
them, do humbly, cordially and unfeinedly desire to do Gods good Will; now
stand still, and see the salvation of God, proceed regularly, pray earnestly
to God for them, that the good Spirit of his grace may lead them into all
truth, for doubtless, in their peace your peace and prosperity in a great
measure is contained. Let government be thoroughly settled, according to Gods
own ways which (if we pray earnestly, and walk humbly with our God) I
believe God will direct them to establish government, according to Gods mind;
you would have this issued, namely what liberty shall be granted to several,
or to all opinions, which is a matter unpossible to be done, for much must be
left to the judgment of authority, (it cannot be avoided) because many
opinions do not yet appear, and the Governors do not know their own hearts,
before hand, I know this by well observed experience, and could instance in
many cases, but I forbear. Therefore join unanimously in this, to seek, and
to pray God so to direct our present governors, that they may be so directed by
God, that they may discern, and follow that way, for the calling of our Judges
into their places, that God has prescribed, owned and blessed; for this is the
root, from whence our greatest safety, under God, consists. Such Governors,
sent of God, I know God will bless with his holy Spirit; and agree upon what
you will before hand, it will be of little moment, because it is not agreeable
to Gods proceedings: and if governors enter in at the windows, and in
by-pathes, expect bitter fruits; GOD has not promised his holy spirit to such;
let the experience recorded in Scripture, the sure rule of truth, teach us
this, such corrupted governors will be what they truly are, and they will
alter, break through, and evade Gods Laws, much more your agreements. Observe
we therefore GODS Presidents, and Rules, cleave fast, and close to GOD; now
observe GOD did first settle government, a chief Judge, before he prescribed
Rules for Judges or People; Moses was chosen before the Law was given, to
direct both him and the People; therefore do not in the mean time break out
preposterously.

And now to all discontents, whether through weakness, or malice, consider,
you did run well, you were co-actors in the late Wars, what hinders you? you
complain of Taxations, and at the same instant, by your irregularities and
gaine-sayings, do not you unavoidably pull these charges, (in a great measure)
both upon your selves, and upon us? might not matters be quieted sooner and
with less charge, did not you so crookedly imagine evil matters? you
complain of this government, in many things, both unjustly and unworthily; but
I am sure, we that seek after peace, have true cause to complain of you, for
these matters, consider, will not the issue prove bitter, and dangerous to your
selves? bear the burdens the more willingly, because they are the fruits of
sin; our governors doubtless they study, how to ease, and help you, and us,
and shall we be so ungrateful to study evil against them? Consider I pray you
that God has divolved, and turned the government, let us not strive against
God, we see it is not an arm of flesh: it must not be, that because you think
that is good to have government so, and I think it is better thus, and a third
he conceives contrary to us both: in all these cases it must not, it ought not
to be, what any of us think meet, further then what Gods counsel has
determined; which (I believe) God will guide this present government, whose
charge, and place it is, to drect our course, and this I believe, that their
hearts, and ears, are free, and open, to hear any regular, and loving
counsel; for David says he would hear the advice of his servant.

Dearly beloved Countrymen, I pray you study to be quiet, we have had
experience of the sad events of war, I do believe that if we have not profited,
it is because God has yet greater afflictions to bring upon us; labor to pray
for, to uphold, and to encourage this present government, and our selves to
walk evenly, and humbly with God, and I dare affirm it is the nearest, the
safest way, and best pleasing to God, and the most for our own comfort; how
ever I am much greived for many, especially for those malevolent inventers of
evil things, because they provoke wrath against themselves.

Now dearly beloved Fathers, the truly virtuous Generals the Lord general
Fairfax, and the Lord Lieutenant general Cromwell, who though I never saw
either of them, yet I know them by their godly and gracious actings, for the
glory of God, and for the good of us the people of England and for the good of
our posterity, cannot but unfeignedly love them, how has God used them as
instruments to free us from that miserable bondage? to them therefore and to
the rest of those worthy and godly men, that now govern this Land, may not that
which is recorded, be spoken of you all, Numb. 24.5. How goodly are thy Tents O
Jacob, and thine habitations Oh Israel? as the Valleys are they stretched
forth, as Gardens by the River side, as the Aloe Trees which the Lord has
planted, as the Cedars beside the waters. Ver. 8. God brought him out of
Egypt, his strength shall be as an Unicorn, he shall eat the Nations, his
enemies, and bruise their bones, and shoot them through with his arrows. Ver.
9. He coucheth and lies down as a young Lion, and as a Lion, who shall stir
him up, blessed be he that blesses thee, and cursed be he that curses thee.

Dearly, and unfeinedly, beloved Fathers, suffer me to use a word of
exhortation, (Moses often repeateth the same things, knowing how weak and
frail our nature is, and how apt we are to forget those most perfect and
blessed directions of our good God) consider I pray you, that as our God is a
God abundant in mercy, rich in mercy; so also he has made known himself to be
a God, jealous of his glory, and will not give his glory to another. Exodus
20.5. For I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God. Exodus 34.14. Because the Lord
whose Name is jealous, is a jealous God. Deuteronomy. 4.23. Take heed unto your
selves, least you forget the Covenant of the Lord your God. Ver. 24. For the
Lord thy God is a consuming fire, and a jealous God. Chap. 6.9. Jos. 24.19.
Joshua said, he is an holy God, he is a jealous God, he will not pardon your
iniquity, nor your sins, if you forsake the Lord. Ver. 24. And the People
said unto Joshua the Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey. 1
King. 19.10. Eze. 39.25. Rev. 1.13. In the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of Man, clothed with a garment down to
the feet, and girded about the paps with a golden girdle. Ver. 14. His head
and hairs were white as white Wool, and as Snow, and his eyes were as a flame
of fire. Revel. 2.1. These things says he that walks in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks. Ver. 5. Remember thereofre from whence thou art
fallen, and do thy first works. Rev. 22.12. Behold I come shortly and my reward
is with me. Ver. 3. J am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. Ver. 14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments.

Remember that God is jealous of his honor, who says expressly we shall not
do that which seems good in our own eyes, but all that God commands. Note
this Rule well, it is Gods own Word, and counsel, the neglecting this Rule is
(and has been) the root and branches of a world of mischief. Eye the Word of
God thoroughly, follow those blessed rules prescribed by God, in the first, and
purest times, This is your wisdom and safety: no doubt, when Israel chose
Abimeleck, it seemed good in their own eyes, when they chose to be governed by
Kings, it seemed good to them when the people lived without any government,
that condition seemed good in their own eyes, although it brought the fierce
wrath of God upon them, when they worshipped the Host of Heaven, when they
worshipped Jdols and other wickedness, no doubt these matters did seem good
in their own eyes; Therefore dearly beloved lean not to your own wisdom, to
your own strength, follow the straight rules of Gods sacred Word, in the
purest manner and times, the most plainly described, consider that government
is of very weighty concernment, proceed warily with all diligence in the
form, and in the persons for that Babylon, that great City of corruptions is
compacted in, and by disorder corrupt governors and government is the very root
of all her abominations; And note it well, when Gods Church shall become a City
of righteousness, a faithful City, God names this as the principal
ingredient and cause, namely, that they shall have Judges as at the first, and
counselors as at the beginning. Observe well that frame of that Heavenly
Jerusalem, Rev. 21.2. The holy City, the new Jerusalem, Come down from God out
of Heaven, as a bride trimmed for her husband; Note well in what a beautiful
and perfect order she is proportioned, read the Chapter, see there what
blessings came to the People, when good Order comes. Ver. 4. Then God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow. Ver. 5. And he that sat upon the Throne said, etc. write, Ver. 6. It
is done, I am Alpha, and Omega, etc. Ver 11. Having the glory of God; and her
shining was like unto a stone, most precious, etc.

Note I pray you, what a direct opposition there is between the Babylon of
confusion, and this City ruled, and proportioned by the Wisdom of God; you
know that Babells Tower brought confusion at the first building, and from that
day to this, that great strumpet is corrupted, and defiled, by forsaking Gods
blessed Rules recorded, she slighted Gods Wisdom, she would not follow his
Prescriptions, but turned from God, and followed her own inventions. Therefore
she not being trimmed as a Bride prepared for such a glorious God, he being
jealous of his glory, does give her a Bill of divorce, for her adultery: let
this serve for to warn us to follow Gods Prescriptions, his Rules and
Presidents recorded in the Word of truth.

Note it well the maine end of the Creation of Heaven, Earth, Man and the rest
of the Creatures, was, and is, that man may learn to see the difference
between Gods good government, and evil governments; between Gods Wisdom
contained in the sacred Rules of Gods holy Word, and between man's seeming
better inventions, contrived by man's own wisdom.

Is not this the lesson that God teaches us from our cradle to ur deat?
Observe well, God lets us see the difference between his Government recorded
and prescribed in his Word of Truth, and between the Devils Government, who is
the Father of lies. Amongst the Nations of the World, God suffers evil
Governments and Governors; It is not because he wants wisdom, power,
opportunity, or goodness to reform such, but God teaches man to see the
benefit and excellency of good Governors and Government, by letting them see
evil and corrupt Governors: We have a long and large experience, from Samuel
and from Moses to this day, recorded for our instruction; I pray God that we
may now at length learn to profit, and to set a high value and price upon good
Government; proceed exactly, let no Governor enter into his place, but purely
through the door of Gods Word, follow those Rules most purely and plainly
prescribed by God himself.

Consider what is the main, the very end of Gods actings, and man's actings, all
our prosperity, our sufferngs, all our afflictions; is not this the very moving
cause, and the highest end? To teach us, that it is safest, and most for our
comfort, that we should follow those Rules prescribed by God, without turning
aside to any hand, or upon any pretense, and especially in this weighty matter
of Governors and Government; God looks upon this with a wary and with a
jealous eye, he knowing of what near concernment it is, for his glory, and man's
good; Therefore when the people went about but to alter the form of government
by himself prescribed, in what high contempt does God take this? He says, That
the people had cast God away from governing and reigning over them, in so doing.

Consider, do but take away two things, namely good Governors, and Gods good
Rules of direction, contained in his sacred Word, and this world, the people in
it, would be turned into a confused Chaos, a heap of rubbish, of ruinous
desolations, much worse then that Chaos recorded Genesis 1. When in the beginning
the Earth was void, and without form, and in darkness. Witness diverse Nations
that at this day have not Gods Laws, his blessed Word to govern them, but have
evil Governors; in such places it is certain and true, they do degenerate so
much from goodness, that the strongest captivateth and oppresses the weaker,
and they do devour one another, yea, they sell men's flesh, and women's, and
childrens flesh, as we do buy and sell beef in the shambles. Dearly beloved, we
are the very same by nature, were it not that we submit to the Government of a
good and blessed God, and to his Laws, and to his blessed Rules. Therefore now
I pray you to set a high price upon Government, good Government, for God loves
to bestow the richest and choycest mercies upon those that value them according
to their true worth; he will not prostitute such rich jewels, such precious
favors, unto such a people as make light account of them, for swine will
trample upon pearls of the greatest value; but God gives Grace to the humble,
and to the thirsty: by the hungry food is thankfully and gladly accepted, but
the full loatheth the honey comb; Israel was wanton, they slighted Gods form of
Government, and those good Governors that were the most immediately appointed
by God himself; therefore God makes them to see the difference, he makes them
servants to serve strangers in a strange Land, in hunger, and cold, and
nakedness, and oppressed, and in the want of all things; the Lord reach us
instruction.

Therefore now, dearly beloved Fathers, join all your hearts, and endeavors
together for Gods glory, set aside, cast behind you, all comberances, all
by-respects, tread under your feet these sublunary matters, in comparison of
Gods glory, the good of your Nation, the good of your selves, and of your (and
our) posterity: consider that Satan tempted our blessed Savior with the
seeming show of these, empty, deceiptefull, deadly, lying Serpents, namely
making a show of that to be found in worldly honors, and preferments, which is
not to be found in them, if Satan labored with Christ (much more with his
Disciples) to persuade that these earthly things are more worth then Gods
favor; for the show of these, which were not his to give, labored to draw
Christ from God; Therefore (in comparison) cast behind you, under your feet,
these venomous Cockatrices Eggs of worldly honors, let them not be preferred
before Gods commands. For these deceiptfull shows of these momentany vanities,
do deceitfully work too much upon our affections, to lead us aside (out of
that good way that leads to true blessedness) into that broad path that many
great and wordly rich men do walk in, which leads to certain Destruction.

I believe, amongst you that now govern this Commonwealth, there are of Gods
precious servants, that do truly, and unfeignedly endeavor, and desire to do
Gods Will; well then, here is a precious opportunity, for if you should study
all your life, to do an act well pleasing to God, this is the very act (being
an act concerning these worldly matters) that is acceptable to God; namely, to
follow Gods choicest Rules of direction, (with all your heart, with all
diligence) in the matter of the form of government, and the persons to be
governors, that so Gods blessed Spirit may rest upon them.

For consider that if you mistake, or turn aside from Gods Commandments, and
so do mistake in the form, and persons, we are undone, the glory and splendour
of your labors are lost, for if the person of our chief Governor be not
chosen exactly, according to the choicest Rules, gathered out of the blessed,
and good Word of our God, how shall we, the People, lie down and rest in
peace, without trouble, and fear? for we know that in by-pathes Wolves and
Foxes do come into the Sheepfold, which although they should come softly to us,
as if they meant us no hurt, yet our hearts cannot be quiet, for Wolves, and
Foxes, mean us no good. Nay further, if they should come disguised in sheeps
clothing, so that we know them not by outward appearance, yet if any should
come in by any indirect means (which God forbid) in those paths those beasts of
prey come in, certainly our hearts cannot be securely and contentedly quiet,
because we shall look back upon former experiences, recorded in the Scriptures,
where we may find, that such men as have attained to the places of chief
Governors, not in a way of God, upon such persons God has not bestowed his
good (but an evil) spirit; and such persons have proved to draw the people to
sin, and have been a means to bring the fierce wrath of God upon the people.
Therefore I do seriously confess (in the presence of our glorious God) that
when I do consider the great danger, weight and charge of a chief Governors
place, I see no cause (in any worldly respect that is truly real and
substantial) why any man should covet, desire, or thirst after it: but
contrarily, considering the great charge of souls, the great account they must
give to God; for to whom much, many Talents are given, of them much shall be
required; God is a jealous God of his honor: Considering likewise the shortness
of our lives, being but even (comparatively) a moment; and considering likewise
the danger that attends men in eminent places, they are set in slippery
places; and considering likewise what diligence God requires, and self-denial,
in such places, To me it plainly appears, That a quiet or peaceably life
(with competency) is much to be preferred, and is truly and solidly better, for
a man's own comfort.

Moses and Gideon are recorded in Gods Records for their humility and wisdom,
and for that they looked upon places of charge. Governors places, as being very
weighty to bear, above their own abilities. Consider therefore, that if any man
should attain Government in any bypath, not being sent of God, into what a
deep, miserable, and woeful case (for soul and body) should such plunge
themselves and so many thousands of Souls? for this undoubtedly I shall
expect, that where any do attain governors places, not according to Gods
Rules, that to such God will not give his good Spirit, but rather an evil, and
a deceiving Spirit. Note I pray you, that although God was offended with the
People, yet because the People, followed Gods counsel, in accepting the person
that God saw meet to Govern them, therefore the Spirit of God came upon Saul,
all the time that he rightfully reigned; but presently when God had rejected
him from governing, it is noted, and recorded, that an evil spirit came upon
him, though he retained his place after. Therefore I humbly request you, lay
aside all worldly respects, in this case, and join all your strength,
diligence, and hearts, cheerfully and unanimously for Gods glory and the good
of us your People, and of our (and of your) posterity.

Remember, dearly beloved, how often God does repeat these instructions,
namely, that his People should diligently take heed, to observe) and note his
Commandments, (and meditate in them, day and night, to do and to observe
them; how often does God admonish them to take heed, not to add, nor diminish,
to or from his Commandments? and not to turn aside to the right nor left
hand? how many eminent examples has God recorded of his anger, against such as
have cast away his Commandments? and likewise his blessing upon them, that
with the greatest intention, have followed those ways that God directed; and
our Savior tells us that those that do Gods Commandments, are like to the
wise builder, that builded upon a Rock. Consider what great compassion God
has showed to us that are Gentiles by nature, and were Aliens from the Israel
of God; and Strangers from the Covenant of the Promises; now God has broken
down that partition wall, and has given us hope of salvation, and has made
us partakers of those precious promises of Grace, that are like to the balm of
Gilead; God through his blessed Son, and our Savior, has freely forgiven us
our Offenses; and has given unto us an assured hope of salvation; Remember
then what Christ says, that if we love him, we should keep his
Commandments. And consider, we shall get no benefit, by turning from our God,
if we could obtain the wings of the Morning, and go over the face of the whole
Earth, yet we sall certainly find, that there is no God, like to our God, nor
no devices, or inventions of Men, to be compared with those most beautiful,
and perfect ways of our God. And notwithstanding that Israel knew all this,
yet how apt were they, and how often did they forsake the strong and gracious
God, and rejected his Commandments; And preferred their own inventions,
before Gods Commandments, and before his Blessed Institutions; in so much that
GOD complained, that the Ox acknowledge^ his owner, and the Ass his Masters
Cribbe, but Israel would not obey the Lord, their God.

Consider what could God have spoken, or done more unto us, he has sent his
Prophets rising up early, he has set before us Life and Death, Good and
Evil, Prosperity and Adversity, God has set before us an eternal weight of
glory, a Crown of glory, God has given us, (us unworthy such great and
precious favors) hope, nay sure hope, that we shall shortly (our glass runs
apace) see God and enjoy him (and the company of his blessed Saints and
Angels) to all eternity, who is the Fountain, and perfection of all good,
beyond what the eye has seen, or the ear heard, and beyond what ever entered
into the heart of man to conceive.

Consider I pray you, that notwithstanding that Israel knew many of these
things, yet they forsook the Fountain of living waters, in so much that God
says of them, Esai. 48.18. Oh that thou had hearkened to my Commandments,
then had thy prosperity been as the Flood, and thy righteousness as the Waves
of the Sea, thy seed also had been as the Sand, that is numerous: and our
blessed Savior says, Mat. 23.27. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as the Hen gathers her chickens, under her
wings, and you would not; Ver. 38. Therefore behold your habitation shall be
left unto you desolate.

But (Dearly beloved Fathers) I hope better things of you. God has used you
already as instruments of his glory to do great things; God has by you opened
such a door for Reformation, as (I believe) has not been since the days of
Samuel the Prophet. Now you have a precious Pearl^ in your hands, now you have
an opportunity, the Lord give you hearts not to slight it, but to improve it,
for the honor of God, and for the good of his Church and People; you may (I
believe, if God give you hearts) be a means, that we may have Judges as at
the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, then shall we be called a City
of righteousness, and a faithful City. Isa. 1.16. And then shall Peace and
Truth meet together, as Moses m^t Aaron in the Mount of God, and they kissed
each other, Exodus 4.27.

And then shall we be a People whose governors, and government shall be (like
in form) like unto the resemblance of that blessed form, and frame of
government, in Heavenly places, amongst the blessed Saints and Angels; which
they do, (and the Elect children of God shall) enjoy to all Eternity.

The consideration of that blessed, and happy Government in Heaven drew me to
desire, that our Government upon Earth, might be (in some proportion) like to
it; this was the first mover, (under G d) that caused me to write these few
Lines, and it is the utmost (and only) end of My Endeavors.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

John Downame.
December. 28. 1649.
Errors in Printing discovered to be rectified.
Page 20. line 26. for revive read review. P. 29. l. 28. for offered r.
afforded, P. 39. l. 18. Some words omitted. P. 40. l. 14. for task r. case. P.
53. l. 3. for second r. first and second Table. P. 81. l. 26. for speak r.
join. P. 100. l. 26. for mediately r. immediately. P. 113. l. 16. after
Abimelech there wants part of a sentence. P. 125. l. 37. put out only. P. 141.
l. 11. for to r. for. P. 157. l. 6. for Lawyers r. Laws.


