THE BISHOPS MANIFEST: OR, A Comparative Relation of conformity of the English
Prelates to those treacherous and deceitful ones in the Reign of King Hen. the
eighth.

Wherein more knavery of theirs is discovered to the world then we think of; in
which many of their notorious pranks are made known.

Humbly presented to the High Court of PARLIAMENT.

English royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

LONDON: Printed for W.R. 1641.

THE BISHOPS MANIFEST.
1. AS the prestigious Priests in their Woolfe-like ravening under Romes
cruelty, H. Stalbridge his Epistaprinted at Basil.
Ann. 1530. were as deceitful as crafty foxes; in whose dens were bred such
cruel Adders as have ever since carried stings in their tails to oppress the
Church of God, So are those Foxes whelps now become not only as subtle as
their Dammes, but as cruel as their Sires in their subtilties.

2. In that Reforming Parliament, Rho Mors his Lamentation, title of Chapter 23. B.
Hall his Remonstrance, and Replies, and any of them all will now confess it.
the Prelates pretended to be fearful of the destruction of the Church, and
the ceasing of that glory in which this kingdom then was, and therefore
pretended to take great care for both. And thus do our Prelates imitate them;
if we remove them and their Discipline, they traduce us to believe, there will
never be any settlement in the Church of England, and if they be taken from
their palaces, and dignities, all the glory of this Nation will be eclipsed.

But for all the cruelty of those Romish Woolfes that were then resident in
this Island, Hol. Chronicl. Prelates like Satan can transform themselves into
Angels of light.
yet were they such subtle foxes, that when they saw that the Roman
jurisdiction was contemptible, they then put upon them the skins of those
Lambs which before they had devoured, as if they had been those harmless
ones: they joined, as if they had been both associates, and assistants in the
work; and therefore pretended not only to write, but to swear solemnly against
that Roman jurisdiction; nay they would pretend any thing, and transform
themselves into any shape, so they might but hold their livings, and be
permitted in their dominions, and dignities, as they did Anno 1534. And just of
their disposition are our Prelates now, They are apparent by the Protestation
enemies.
for whereas (as who will may clearly enough perceive) that they are more
cruel now against the poor Protestants, then any woolfes: witness their
cruelty (to their power) executed in their Courts, their forwardnes against
the Protestants in Scotland, to work their overthrow; their backwardness to
have the poor distressed Protestants in Ireland relieved, The Prelates were
willing to help against Scotland, but have no pity to the poor Protestants in
Ireland to help them. H. Sta. Epist.
or the Rebels there subdued: they would give great sums to devour the
Protestants in Scotland, or England, or any where indeed; But where is one of
them now, that will part with any thing to hasten the expedition against the
cruel Adders, and viperous Rebels in Ireland, that have crept from under the
Rubish of their heaps, that have been bred in their dwellings: And yet now they
see the whole Land to lament for these poor distressed Protestants in Ireland,
they dare not be so bold as to make a show of siding with the Rebels, but we
may easily perceive what lies at their hearts, when the Scots rose, they soon
procured them to be proclaimed Rebels; but now the Devil, and Rome, and
Prelates, and Papists, and Rebels, rise in Ireland, they never solicit the
King for any such matter (I warrant you.) They sit in Parliament, and they will
make a show to the world to join with the Parliament in the great work they are
about. But have we not just cause to complain against them, that they are but
as knots in the thread that should sew up the Seames and Rents of these
Kingdoms, and yet they sit as Agents in the work; And what has been done
there, they (but how unwillingly who does not know) have assented to? Nay, they
have taken the Oath too, Prelates took the Protestation only to color and
daube over their Popery and Innovations.
in which they have protested against all Popery, and Popish Innovations; they
have grown brazen faced ever since, they are hardened now, they have got whores
foreheads; and instead of scarlet blush (which they affect well enough too)
they have got black and white obstinacy, and will be daunted with nothing. And
yet indeed now as the case stands, they are willing a while to preach, they
will be ruled by the Parliament, they will forsake their Canon Law, they will
be the Kings Bishops, they will stoop to any thing now, so they may abide in
their livings, and enjoy their dominions and dignities; which if they be let
alone, they hope in short time to rise up again as high as ever.

4. Now if we do but examine the matter, B. of Martyrs, Rh. Mo. Chapter 23.
we shall find how deceitful those Prelates were. For after they had thus
bound themselves by their own cords, and past it over as before, Foxes Acts and
Monuments.
which they did to make the King and State believe, that the Popes
jurisdiction, and all Popery was utterly banished out of England, See Tho.
Walls. Ypodigma Neustriae, Ann. 1371.1.132.
and that all was now settled for the conforming of the Protestant Church here;
But see how both the King and the State was deceived by them; a company of base
dissembling Prelates (that they were) for the very same day they both by word
and letter, at home, and abroad, took all occasions to draw back King Hen. the
8. his Highness from Reformation.

And are not our Prelates now as false as they? who for all they have passed
the Oath, and protested against Popery, and entrey into Covenant with the Lord
by the said Protestation, to make the King and State believe, that all Poperd
was banished from their hearts; yet how have they jugled in the business,
Prelates are Juglers, even the most modern of them are faulty herein. B. Hall
Arch. B. of York, etc.
and dealt deceitfully with us already, even since their Protestation.
Themselves still maintain their former Popish dominions, and government, and
discipline; many and great points of Popish doctrine, laboring to bind men's
consciences to observe their Lithergie, and many of their Innovations; and
those of them in whom was the greatest hopes (if any: How notorious is their
Protestation against the high and honorable assembly in Parliament, December.
30. 1641.
One has since purchased an Archbishopric, and what his Adherents be, the
exploytes of his Abbey-lubbers can testify: And is it not too apparently
manifest to us all, how active the whole body of the Popish Prelates have been
against Reformation: Have not they been the greatest trouble both to his
Majesty, and both the Houses of Parliament hitherto in the great Work they are
about.

5. On the other hand, 8. Martirs, Epist. of Gr. F. La. Is. Cr.
those Prelates, Anno 1540. did procure Injunctions and Articles, with
penalties attended; and themselves sat in Commission, and were the chief
prosecutors of such as withstood them. And is not the spirit of our Popish
Prelates at this day so qualified also?

The Prelates labor to hinder Reformation all they can.
Have they not already procured votes in the Upper House for the strict
observance of their Lithergie, and a Proclamation from the Kings Majesty also,
have they not taken all the pains, and made all the friends they can, and used
all the policy that they can invent, to have Reformation broken off, and their
tyranny to be brought on foot again; have they not (even at this day) set the
Land in a great fear of them? Witness December. 30. 1641.

6. Their attempts afterward appeared more plain, to be both against the King,
the Queen, the State, the Church: Queen Katherine Parr Earl Cromwell, etc
yea and the whole Land too; for all their pretenses, and deceitful boastings:
They appeared to be but Woolfes in Fox skins, for they were the chief cause
then in attempting of the death of the Queen, of some good Nobles, and many
faithful subjects besides.

They by their dealings with us expose both King, Queen, Prince, Parliament,
etc to danger.
And our Prelates are their right shapen sons, qualified with as blood thirsty
spirits as they; Do they not to this day expose the whole Land to danger for
them, sparing neither King, Queen, Prince, States, Parliament, Church, nor the
whole land? Do they not more earnestly solicit for seven condemned Jesuits,
then for the poor distressed Kingdom of Ireland? nay does it not easily
appear, that they had rather expose us all to the merciless cruelty of the
Popish, then themselves to be bercaft of their Pope-like domineering.

They are blood suckers.
In a word, how do the Papists Prelates in Ireland suck the English Protestant
blood there? And how do the English Prelates labor daily to make England to
become a slaughter house to them, that thereby they may share our blood amongst
them, and so we become their prey.

English Chro. B. Matter.
7. King Hen. his Prelates caused diverse godly Citizens of London, and other
Ministers, and godly people to be imprisoned; cast into the fiery flames, and
stirred up the State against them, even at the same time, when others died for
executing their office under the Pope, and adhering to the Bishop of Rome.

They are Jesuits friend, but Protestants enemies.
And at this day when such care is taken against Popish Priests and Jesuits (as
God be thanked there is) and some have suffered: and if it were not for the
Prelates, doubtless the others would also* yet how do our Prelates enveigh
against the City, and diverse godly Ministers, and people of God, witness
Ireland, who has been the cause that Kingdom had relief no sooner: Was it not
the English Prelates? Who was it that stirred up the Constables about
Westminster, to withstand the City, was it not they? Do not they agree in
Parliament with the votes of the Popish Lords against Reformation?

They would take upon them to settle the Land, a fine way to bring in Popery,
if they could obtain it.
Oh how they take upon them, how they could settle the Land in quietness, when
as themselves have been the boy sterous winds that have so disturbed our ways;
yet they boast, that if the Puritans, and Brownists, and some Sectaries, as
they call them, were cut off, and some of the Citizens, oh then the Land would
be quiet. And this they do to the end that they might gain an opportunity
again to share the Romish government of the Land amongst themselves; which
could they obtain, they would so reduce us, that they would soon reduce the
Land to Popery, and (we may justly fear) bring us under as much cruelty as
ever Queen Mary's Prelates, or King Hen. 8. his Prelates subdued them.
Therefore I conclude with Rodericke Morse in his Lamentation, Oh England,
England, The Conclusion.
if thou will banish Antichrist, and the Pope out of this Realm, thou must fell
down to the ground those rotten Poasts the Bishops (which be clouds with out
moisture) and utterly abolish all and every his ungodly Laws, Decrees,
Traditions, and Ceremonies, without significations; No security can be expected
till they be removed.
for they do but wait for a time, to rob some Nobleman of his wit. And this is
certain, that as the Pope is enemy to the Gospel, so be his children the
lesser Bishops; therefore they cannot be suffered thus to reign, except we be
partakers of their iniquity, and spillers with them of the blood of the
Righteous.

FINIS.

