A REJOINDER Consisting of TWO PARTS, The FIRST entitled, The BALANCE, OR, A
VINDICATION OF The Proceedings and Judgment of Parliament and their Ministers,

In the cases of
WILLIAM (called Lord) CRAVEN, CHRISTOPHER LOVE.
From the scandalous Allegations, and Ironical Reflections of RALPH FARMER, (a
pretended Minister of the Gospel at Bristol) in a late infamous Libel of his,
named, The Impostor Dethroned, etc. Dedicated to the Former.

Wherein the Commonwealth's Case as to the One is briefly stated, and the
Treasons of the Other are rehearsed as a LOOKING-GLASS for the PRIESTS, and an
AWAKENING to ENGLAND.

The second, EVIL scattered from the THRONE, and the WHEEL brought over the
WICKED: In an EXAMINATION of that part of the Impostor Dethroned, as is in way
of Reply to the Throne of Truth exalted, etc.

GEORGE BISHOP.

He that is first in his own case seems just, but his Neighb^r comes and
searches him.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

To the sober READER.
TO shorten the ensuing Vindication, and to give thee more perfectly to
underst^nd the ground of the Contest between Ralph Farmer and my self, I
desire thee to take notice that it was not on my part; for though he gave me
many provocations, (who had not done him any wrong) yet I began not with him,
but rather chose to abide in silence, (knowing the man) then to have to do with
such a one, The beginning of the words of whose mouth is foolishness, and the
end of whose talk is mischievous madness, as Solomon says of the fool, Eccl.
10. 13.

And in the same purpose of mind I determined to have continued, had he not in
his Narrative of J. N's coming into Bristol, etc. charged the blasphemies
[there] affirmed, upon the truth of the living God, and the many thousands of
the friends thereof in this Nation, scornfully called Quakers; and me in
particular with matter of fact, as to my public Trust, which with more then
ordinary Care, Hazard, and Faithfulness, I have a witness in my conscience as
well as amongst men, to have honestly discharged.

In all which knowing the truth, and those people and my self to be innocent;
and being assured that a principal cause of his vilifying of me was Geo. Fox
his Letter, sent unto and taken upon J. N. (wherein the spirit that then led
him and that company, and their actions, was judged and denied) which being
wrote with my hand, he expected would be made use of, and my Testimony therein
for the clearing of those people from his slanderous imputations of
detestableness and biasphemy; and being sensible that the great design of the
Devil in all, was to dis-savor truth, and to make it abhorred with those to
whom the Relation should come; I was pressed in spirit (being a^ Bristol during
the time of this transaction, and well informed in the truth of the
particulars) to make answer thereunto, (not purposely in reference to my own
particular, as if I were troubled, but) for the clearing of the truth, that all
who would, might see it free of the monstrous apparel in which he had clothed
it, and that those that should notwithstanding shut their eyes, might be left
without excuse in the day that God shall judge the secrets of all hearts by the
man Christ Jesus: And that my Answer I styled as it was, viz. The Throne of
Truth exalted over the Powers of darknes^, etc.

Whereunto he being constrained to give up the Cause, and being sorely plagued
and tormented therewith, and at the discovery of his wickedness, he not only
falls upon me with all the rancor lodged within his malicious breast, but
having compassed the earth, and rummag'd thorough the unclean bowels of the
Nation, and consulted with his black Generation, he grovels up into his
bottomless pit what false reports he could meet with among the Enemies of the
State and Truth, and having in his first seventeen pages bid defiance to
Perfection, (the work of the Ministry for which Christ gave gifts unto men when
he ascended up on high) and to those who are made clean by the Eternal Word,
the blood of the New Covenant which cleanses from [all] sin, (Christ Jesus the
light of the World, that lights every man that comes into the World) and to
conversion from evil, as of the Devil, (to show himself whose Minister he is)
he casts up all again at me from the depths of darkness, in the following 100.
pages, the whole of his Book, which he calls (such is the fervency of the heat,
of his scorched Tongue) The Impostor Dethroned, (who is proved to be the man)
Or, The Quakers Throne of Truth detected to be Satan's Seat of Lies: (which is
not true of it, but is true of himself and his generation) By way of Reply to a
quaking railing Pamphlet written by Capt. Bishop, (The slanders are his own,
the Truth is mine.) entitled, The Throne of Truth exalted over the powers of
darkness; (So it is, and so it shall stand over his head for ever;) wherein is
briefly hinted the rottenness of the Quakers Conversion and Perfection in
general, (It Is the state of his own stock, whose root is rottenness, and whose
bl^ss^me is going up as the dust, not of those people whose Rock is the Stone
of Israel.) Exemplified in this busy Bishop; (The busy Bishop appears to be
himself in the behalf of these men's Treasons; what I did was in discharge of my
Trust) In special instanced in his practices against the Estate of the Lord
Craven, Life of Mr. Love; (The one adjudged by the Parliament, the other by
their High Court of Justice, and my duty faithfully done in both, long before I
knew the thing that is reproach't a Quaker.) By occasion whereof this Truth is
asserted, viz. Jf we may judge of the Conscience, Honesty, and Perfection of
quakers in general by this man in particular, a man may be as vile a person as
any under Heaven, and yet a perfect Quaker. Which being proved a Lie both in
ground and conclusion, this is affirmed of a truth, and made good, viz, That if
the conscience, honesty and profession of the Ministers of England in general,
may be judged by Ralph Farmer, [and wh^^ he writes] in particular, a man may be
one of the vilest of mer, yea, a notorious Traitor, and yet a professed
Minister of the Gospel.

This is the sum of the Beast, and the number of its Name, with which, as a
Servant to the State, I am now to encounter, like as I answered the Narrative
as a friend of Truth, unto which I shall presently apply my self.

Bristol the 13th. day of the 11th. Month, 1657. G. B.

THE BALANCE, OR, A VINDICATION, etc.
BEfore I come to any new Engagement, it is requisite that I first state the
old, and briefly show what has already been, and how it is now; and wherein a
Reply is hitherto declined.

The great Question or Cause in controversy between Ralph Farmer and my self,
(in his Satan Enthroned.
Narrative, and my Answer thereunto) was this:

Viz. Whether J. N. and those with him (as to his coming to The Throne of
Truth, etc.
Bristol, and what was done to him by them) and the people called QUAKERS, were
one?

This he affirmed, and for this purpose published his Narrative, Satan. Title
page, and former part, etc. Impostor, p: 24: Throne, first ten pages.
and called it Quakerisme in its exaltation; and concluded what he had said of
the one, upon the other.

This I denied, and proved by plain demonstration, and full testimony of Truth,
(which shall stand for ever) That they were not one, not led by one and the
same spirit, but seen (to be gone forth) and judged, and denied, and the spirit
that led them, long before their coming thither; and consequently, That those
people, and the truth they witness, were clear, and unconcerned; and that his
Narrative, and its Page 25.
Title, Design of it, and End, Foundation, and Matter therein contained (so far
as it related unto them, whom, and their faith he had taken that occasion
highly to charge, revile, and abuse) was a Lie.

For the clearing of this (being the Axis, or that on which the weight of the
whole did hang) I expected [when I heard of his Reply] him to have spoken (had
he any thing to say) but when I had viewed it round, I found the field quitted,
and the Cause left me without an Engagement.

The next thing in dispute, was his Narrative, Whether it was a true Relation,
or not?

A true Narrative and Relation it is, says he in his Title Page; Satan.
Title Page. Epistle.
and in his Epistle to the Reader he pledgeth for it his faithful Assurance in
these words, But this I can, and do faithfully assure you, That there is
nothing here of the one, or the other, but what is real truth, as will be made
good upon any occasion.

[Then which, What higher Engagement can there be of honesty to induce a
belief, for which end it is held forth?]

It is not so, (replied I) for the examination of one of Throne. p. 29, 30.
them, which gives the lie to his Conclusion, upon the rehearsal of their
Papers and Examinations, he has wholly left out. Page 30.


That Passage of the Examination of a second, which checks the design and drift
of his Relation, he has ommitted. Page 28, 29.


The Examination of a third he has affirmed to say, and produced to prove
(contrary to his own Record of his said Examination) that which it says not.
Page 26, 27.


All the contents of a fourth Paper he has neither repeated, (though short)
nor in the very words (which clear the matter) but makes up a pack of his own,
and then presents it as the language of the Paper, to slander the innocent.
Page 27, 28.


A fifth Deposition he brings forth clipped of that clause, which renders it
false sworn. Pa. 2 5, 7, 8. 9.


And a sixth Letter wanting diverse words, and a material part of a sentence;
and in the close, changed from its own, into such an expression (forged in, and
then pointed to with a marginal Note, OBSE^VE) as not only quite altered the
sense, but rendered it very scandalous, and the life of him liable to danger,
had it really been his, whose was the subscription. Page 25, 31, 32


Hereupon I concluded his Narrative a lie, and him as a Narrator reprobate to
faith and honesty.

Of this (being the hinge on which turned the whole of his Reputation, as on
the other did the Cause) I listened for a thorough Vindication (could he have
made it) but throughout the whole Reply I could not hear a whisper of his said
Engagement in his Epistle, nor of the words, Reprobate to faith and honesty;
Nor of his quotations of his own Page 74.
books, which I had charged upon him to have made to belie one another, and
both to give himself the lie, and to prove him a false Prophet in such a
business of consequence as foreseeing and foretelling things to come, of which
he so highly vaunted: No nor of, nor to my demands, viz. By what spirit did
thou foresee, and foretell? The infallib^e spirit thou have not, so thou have
confessed, page 34. and the spirit of the Lord is infallible. Is it not the
Witch, the fallible spirit that is out of the truth, that has divined? seeing
that spirit that does foretell, which is not the spirit of the Lord, is such.

Then I considered him as to Religion, and I found (proving it upon him by
plain Scripture) That his share in Page 61, 62, 63, 70, 71.
Christianity he had renounced. That his [ Page 61.
] hopes to be saved, his [ Page 65, 66.
] happiness, and way to true happiness, was a lie; and that his [ Page 63, 64,
65.
] Ministers, Ministry, Word, Churches, Unity, Orders, Peace, Civility, good
Manners, and all [that] Religion which he says Apollion and Abaddon the
destroyer is tearing, laying waste, and confounding is the same; for all that
is confounding, tearing and laying waste, (and he says the [ Satan. Epist. to
the Reader
] destroyer is tearing, laying wast, and confounding ministers, ministry, Word,
Churches, Unity, Order, Peace Civility, good Manners, yea O horrible blasphemy!
None but Christ Jesus is Truth it self, and Truth it self (says this Priest)
Apollion, etc. is confounding.
Truth it self, and all Religion) is shaken, and all that is shaken is of
things that are [made] and that they are shaken, signifies the removing of
those things that are shaken, as of things that are [made] that those things
which cannot be shaken may remain, Heb. 12. 26, 27. But of these slain heaps
upon heaps, I find no mention.

I also weighed his [ Page 80. to page 90.
] Profession, his Coat, and Craft, and Generation, his [ Page 80. Satan, page
34.
] Argument (in his Answer to his own objection) formed against the friends of
truth as Knaves, Impostors, and Deceivers, and found it and them all too light,
and proved them (turning his Argument on his own* and the heads of his
generation) Knaves, Inter alliis, [they are his own words] Impostors,
Deceivers, who say they are Ministers of the Gospel, and yet pretend not to the
infallible spirit, which they had who were Ministers of the Gospel, who affirm
that their necessary deductions from the Scriptures are as true and certain as
the Scriptures; yea, that they are Scripture, and yet deny that they speak by
inspiration, (by which all Scripture was given) and as the holy men of God did,
(who spoke as they were moved of the Holy Ghost) or that they have
infallibility, who declare that they deceive not the people in stretching
beyond their line and measure; whereas in stretching beyond their line and
measure, in the line and measure of others, is the whole of their Trade of
Divination, who confess that they may he deceived, and may err; and say that
they do not lyingly and hypocritically pretend to an infallibility, and yet
undertake to lead people the right way to salvation; the ground of whose
Ministry is no other then according to practice to speak from the Scriptures,
[We pretend to no other, we preend not to infallibility, says R. F.] in which
Satan, page 34.
are found the Devils and false Prophets, and the certainty of whose speaking
according to the spirit, is no other then their speaking according to the
Scriptures, whose dictates (he says) they are, of which they are no more sure
then were the false prophets and devils aforesaid, who spoke the words of
Scripture, and from the Scriptures, and according to the words of the
Scriptures, and yet were reproved by Christ, and his Prophets, and Apostles,
for so speaking; for it is not the words that are said, nor the actions that
are done, but the nature in which they are said and done, and from whence they
proceed, that renders them good and accepted before the Lord; and there are but
two natures, the Divine, and that which is in the transgression; but two
principles* the one of life, the other of death; as is the root of either, so
is that which proceeds from it; and he that ministers can minister no other
then that principle from which he ministers, nor to any other then to that
which is of the same principle, whether of death, or of life. And as for the
Scriptures, they are for the Man of God, to be read, to be believed, to be
fulfilled, to be practiced; they are the things of God, not to be made a trade
of for so much a year, or to be talked, or spoken of from, or by the wisdom of
this world, no not in the words which man's wisdom, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches -- Here his lips are covered.

Many horrible blasphemies I charged him with, against the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. Many notorious lies, slanders, and false accusations; many filthy
scoffs, and profane jeers, yea of the spirit, many gross absurdities,
confusions, and contradictions, line against line, page against page, one part
of his Book against the other, slaying and confounding one another, and he
them, and they the end and drift of his work, of which he is silent.

The justification of the Doctrine and Principles of the people called Quakers,
and of Geo. Fox from his foul calumnies and aspersions he has not informed;
nor has he endeavored to quit himself of the instances of blood-thirstiness,
charged by me on him and his Generation; nor of the assertion, viz. The dog it
is that bites, the Lamb does never. Nor has he said a word of the great Tumult
and Sedition of which I charged him to be the chief stirrer up, and principal
mover, nor of many things more; in all which should I be particular, time would
fail me, being the contents of the greatest part of my answer; and with what
juggling, lying, and sophistication he has replied to the rest, and how little
to the purpose, I shall dissect, and plainly make manifest.

Now when as Reason would that of these things aforesaid, and the residue of my
answer, he should have cleared himself, or have been silent, (and so to have
done, had been somewhat becoming the seriousness of man) instead thereof, (as
one forlorn and desparate) h^ falls violently on my person, pouring forth at it
the evil treasures not only of his own, but the venomous hearts of those
generations, of whom, and their Treasons, he appears a Patron, and Advocate,
who are (and he with them) become mine Enemies for having been instrumental (in
the discharge of my Trust) to the detecting and preventing their secret plots
and bloody conspiracies against the Commonwealth, and Treasonable Adherencies
to the chief and declared Enemies thereof, in the day of its general
designment, and greatest conflicts, not considering that amongst wise men
Recrimination is always accounted an indicament of a bad cause; and instead of
making good a general charge, particularly to asperse, and personally to
reflect, is a very foul blemish.

And here (having gained the Cause) I might withdraw my Pen, and sit down in
silence till R. F. shall have quitted himself an honest man in print, and have
taken off what is laid by me on him in that my Answer; it being reasonable that
he whose honesty as to a Narrator, I have so highly impeached; whose Narrative
in the material parts thereof, I have so fully answered; whose Ministry and
Religion I have so manifestly overturned; whose share in Christianity himself
has so openly renounced, should so do before he gain credit unto what he has
now wrote, or receive from me thereunto a Reply.

But forasmuch as the level of his, and the poisoned Arrows of the generation
aforesaid, (who shoot under his cover) is laid at my Reputation, as to matter
of Fact; and for that his, and their entrance unto me is made thorough the
Authority of Parliament, their High Court of justice, and the Cause of the
Nation, for which all the blood has been spilt in the late Wars, and in regard
the Parliament (as is said) have appointed to hear the Case of him whose Cause
is the principal pleading of this Impostor at their next Sessions. And because
after all the vomitings up of his venomous filth, he says in his last page,
And now from he^ceforth let none of these Quakers trouble me, I have done with
this gen^ration; but if they will be troubling, let them know that I will not
be troubled -- And as for any further Answers, R^plyes, Contendings or
Debatings with them or him, I declare this as my Goronis, my farewell to
quakerism. (And so I may stay a long day e're I appear for clearing of my
Innocence, and the justice of the State.) Therefore I shall (waving in this
place all other particulars) immediately descend to engage him and his
Confederates, in his and their Two great Battalions, the sum and end of his
Work, and the strength of his mischief, viz.

The case of
William L. Craven, Christopher Love,
in reference to
My Self. I mention myself first, because I am accused; it being convenient
that I clear my own innocence before I appear in the vindication of others.
The State.
To the first, viz. Cravens Case.
Ralph Farmer in his Satan Enthroned, having vilely traduced me in the
business of this man, I judged it necessary for the satisfaction of all such as
neither desired nor delighted in the defamings of others, to declare my
innocence therein, which I then did, and do again in these words, I do Throne,
p. 102.
declare in the presence of the Lord, before whom I fear, who searches the
heart, and tries the reins, and brings every work to judgment, That I am
clear and innocent therein; nor have I used, nor do I know of any indirect
proceeding in that whole business of Craven and Fauconer. At this my
declaration he raves exceedingly, and is greatly moved, singling it out in the
front, and discharging against it the wrath and fury of the envenomed body of
that his Reply, well knowing that if that stand, he is cast in the groundwork
of his defamings of me, (on which he says, page 117. his discourse and
discovery is founded) as my Answer has overturned the foundation of his
blasphemings of the truth.

But stand it does before him who sees all things (in the fear of whom I have
spoken this twice) and I question not but stand it will (notwithstanding all
this dirt) before the sober and truly wise in heart, who shall read and
seriously consider what shall be said in this matter.

And here I shall not rehearse, nor speak to all he has written, it deserving
neither, nor shall I trouble the Reader with a voluminous discourse (with
whithe of necessity I must, should J be particular in every thing) nor shall I
defile my Pen with the repetition of all his unclean and unsavory language in
abuse of me; but shall bri^fly come to what he calls his Evidence, upon which
he says page 83. Clear he is, That if any Jury in the world (of discreet,
sober, impartial, and understanding men) were to pass upon me, they would give
in this verdict, That I do know of many indirect proceedings in the matter of
the Lord Craven and Fauconer, and that J my self has used them, and that
therefore I am not clear and innocent in this matter: Which I shall examine and
scan, and then leave it to all understanding, impartial, sober, discreet men,
even to that of God in the conscience, which is just to judge, Whether
notwithstanding all his Evidence, I am not clear and innocent; yea, whether his
said Evidence, viz. the pretended Paper said by him to be signed by Major
Fauconer on his Deathbed, and the Book, entitled, The Lord Cravens Case, etc.
do not make me so to appear.

For the pretended Paper, said to be signed by Fauconer. Although the black
character which himself has drawn over the man as one most scandalous and
perjured; and his producing the said Paper in the behalf of his Lord Craven, to
prove him such, be material Arguments against himself for the invallidating the
credit of any thing said to be wrote, or signed, or spoken by Fauconer against
me; and although the said pretended Paper, as it is set down by R. F. without
date or witness, and with an etc. at the foot, appears rather as a forged
Libel, then a true Record, and so not to be taken notice of, especially coming
forth on the single credit of him whom I have proved to be a falsifier of his
own Records, etc. yet upon supposition that the Paper is Fauconer^, and that
every word thereof as it is set down by R. F. without any variation,
interposition, or omission of word or syllable, was wrote and signed by him,
and that it is all, and every word and syllable that was so wrote and signed,
(which whether it be or not, I shall leave to the sober to judge, and those who
are concerned to look after upon what by and by shall be offered to
consideration in that particular) I say, Upon supposition, as aforesaid, I
shall thereunto thus speak.

First it says, And here I dare not say that any man bribed Impostor, p, 28.
me; no, none d^d. Whereby I am cleared from that false and slanderous
imputation of corrupting Fauconer to swear falsely in the Case aforesaid, which
Cravens friends at the trial of Fauconer at the Upper-bench, and the Author of
the Pamphlet, entitled, A true and perfect Narrative, etc. and R F. in this
his Reply have so industriously sought to fix upon me.

Secondly, the Words, I dare not say that any one bribed me; no, none did; do
plainly intimate, That strong temptations (to affirm the contrary, viz. That
some did bribe Fauconer) were on him, who ever he were, that wrote it; but the
dread or the righteous God, who pleads the cause of the innocent, was such
upon him, that he said, I dare not; no* none did. Unto the witness of which God
of truth, had thou R. F. hearkened when (as thy self confesses, page 18, 19)
upon the first reading of the declaration of my innocence, (which thou calls my
bold and daring appeal) it caused thee to make a stand, and seriously to
observe it, and astonished thee, and made thee to read it again, and to
consider whether there might not be some equivocation in the language and
expression, [how was thy evil eye abroad R. F se^rching for iniquity?] which
nor appearing to thee, thou then beganst to think that possibly I might not be
guilty, this being an age, say thou, wherein many things are charged upon
many men very slightly and ungroundedly, and sometimes very falsely, which is my
case Ralph, in this matter, and that by thy self: I say, Had thou still
hearkened thereunto, and obeyed it, then thou had done me right, as has the
other, instead of wronging of me in so high and wicked a manner as thou have in
this thy Reply, for which a strict reckoning thou have to make with him who is
the Judge of all, before whom thou must shortly appear, and then thou shall
know what thou have done, and what it was that made thee stand, and seriously
to consider, and astonished thee, and put thee to reading again; and
notwithstanding thy evil eye which searched for equivocation in the language
and expression, to set it by, judged in my behalf the second time, and caused
thee to begin to think that possibly I might not be guilty, and further to
express thy self as has been said, which is the truth, and which shall stand a
witness against, and plead my cause with thee for ever; for I am innocent
before the Lord in this thing, and his Witness it was that stopped thee in thy
way this twice, and gave judgment for me, and shall do it eternally against
thee, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it; though thou heeding, and
being guided by that spirit which watched and searched for iniquity against the
Witness, did suffer the evil o^e to get over, and to hurry thee forth into
very bitter and violent expressions of me, and did then, and have since
(through the just judgment of God upon thee) trampled it under foot, and
may do yet for a little season, till the measure of thine iniquity be filled
up; yet shall it revive again, and then shall thou know that the Lord has said
it, and that thou art the man, and that the things are true of thy self which
thou have uttered forth against, and upon occasion of me in the following lines
of the pages aforesaid.

Now this Paper (which after much travel is procured and made use of as the
foundation of this last attempt for the retrival of the said estate, and the
blemishing of my Reputation in order thereunto) acquitting me thus manifestly,
as has been said, what need I any further vindication?

3. The particulars in which I am named in that Paper, are only these:

And here I utterly renounce, etc. especially a late Pamphlet sent to me by
Capt. Bishop; the cause of my writing that Pamphlet was, etc.

And when I made a demur at the words Barbarous and inhumane Rebels, Capt.
Bishop said, If you leave that out, you do nothing.

True, I had done great services for them, but not by employment; and Capt.
Bishop kept me low with small pittances, so that I was at his Bow.

To the first; J sent him no such Pamphlet as there is intimated, nor put J him
in any such, either by my self directly, or by under-actors upon the
consideration there mentioned, or any other.

To the second, J know not of, nor do J remember or believe that any such demur
was made by him at any time, or that J returned any such answer; nor that he
scrupled his information; nor had J any suspicion that he was not clear in the
certainty of any part thereof, [had it been so, J should have stopped his
deposing thereof, though himself had offered it] but had he made such a demur,
and had J replied as is expressed, does it therefore follow, or says the
paper, that J bade him swear it notwithstanding, or left him otherwise then to
his liberty, either to leave out these words, or to put them in, as he was
satisfied in the truth of them, or the contrary, so to have done had been
indirect dealing indeed, and such an abominable wickedness as my soul ever
abhorred: Besides those words pretended to be spoken in answer, are justifiable
according to the common acceptance of that phrase amongst men.

To the third, it is a further justification of me who by it am made to appear
to have been so far from encouraging any such thing as false information, or
perjury in Fauconer, that though he had done great services for the State, yet
J kept him low with small pittances, so that he was at my bow; What! to swear
falsely? nay the contrary, as the reasonable may judge.

And here by the way the Reader may take notice of the confusion of R. F. who
one while seeks to prove that J corrupted Fauconer with [great] sums of money,
expressing what they were, and by whom paid, page 90. Another by keeping him
low with [small] pittances, who affirms page 90. That though he were not bribed
with money [beforehand] yet it was promised him, and liberty too; and presently
says, Why was it promised him? No doubt, That he might not flintch from his
oath; so making it [after.] And a few lines following that demands, But I pray,
Why was not the money [paid him which was promised?] and yet (in the next
words) instances several sums of money which (he says) was [paid him by my
direction;] and then says, Why was not the money [promised him, now paid?]
Thus as to money, and as to liberty, (having made a slanderous relation
concerning my being the occasion thereof, out of Newgate, (thereby endeavoring
to prove the performance of the promise of liberty, as of money) and reflected
upon me with a heap of notorious lies therein) nevertheless of both, viz. Money
and Liberty, he says thus, But I say, Why was not his liberty procured him
now? and the money paid him now? and immediately answers himself, Oh! (says
he) the business was done, the Estate sold, let him hang, let him starve now;
it may be the sum promised him was too great, and they could not agree who
should pay it, the Estate being sold; (wickedly insinuating a combination to
make up his pack of scandalous falsehoods.) And thus like a swift Dromadary,
traversing her ways, and as a Bear bereft of her Whelps, he raves up and down
with A ^ea and No; and It is so, and It is not so; doubling and redoubling the
counter again, and all to bring forth this lie and foul aspersion on me, with
which he sorely travels, viz. That I bribed Fauconers perjury; Which he being
not able to compass, (his own sayings in this point, as so many false Witnesses
not agreeing among themselves; but disproving one another with Diametrical
opposition) yet such is his Wickedness, that he will have it so,
notwithstanding as aforesaid, and that the pretended Paper (his Libels chief
Engine raised up against my reputation) clears me (as does my conscience) of
any such thing in these full and express Words, And here I dare not say that
any one bribed me, no, none did; as has been rehearsed: This is Priest Farmer,
and the villainy of him who pretends himself to be a Minister of the Gospel.

The Paper does not say that Fauconers information, or those Words, Barbarous
and inhumane Rebels, or any other part of it, arose from any one but himself;
nor that any one knew that the information, or any particular thereof was
false; or that any one, knowing it to be false, used any means, or provoked him
to swear it; but it says, The Words, [viz. Barbarous and inhumane Rebels being
once (not but once, as R. F. belyes it, page 89.) named by me, they were as
quickly inserted; Which (granting it to be so, though I know of no such
snatching) was no more then what ought to have been done, it freely proceeding
from the Informant, and being of such importance to the State, though R. F.
keeps so great a-do in several pages, to wrest it to the contrary: (So by the
Paper) the fault, if any, lies on Faulconers part who gave the information, and
who (it says) falsely swore it, (as he since remembers, says the Paper, not
when he deposed it) and upon no other; or if it be, it appears not on whom to
fix it; for though the Words, [I was hastily after a great sickness provoked to
it] seem to intimate the contrary; yet whether it was by inward temptation, or
outward suggestion, (to either of which the term Provoke, is convertible) who
can determine? or who it was that used such provocation, seeing therein the
Paper is silent? For my part I know of neither, nor of any such have as the
Paper mentions; or that the information, or any part of it was false; or that
he doubted of the truth of any thing he deposed; The information was wholly
from himself, and he was very free in giving it; and time there was enough
[Dayes, and Weeks, and Months] for consideration, had he doubted in himself,
between the first Discourse, wherein Faulconer mentioned Cravens Name, and the
beginning of his information, and the deposing of what he had informed.

[5. The Paper says; So that I do here solemnly protest, that I did not then
(when he made oath) absolutely remember whether the very words Barbarous, and
Inhumane Rebels were expunged; and premises these as the reasons in the
foregoing words viz. For after twenty Weeks sickness (says it) this was done,
my body being low, and in much haste, being much infeebled; and above three
quarters of a year after I came over Sea; Which plainly clears his information
as to those words (and no other clause was insisted upon at the trial as a
perjury) from being a packt, feigned, or designed thing, and himself from
being guilty, viz. of Corrupt, Wilful, and Malicious perjury, (the verdict
brought in by the jury against him:) And so what does there remain as a ground
of clamor? For on these two hinges, viz. That his information as to these
words Barbarous, and Inhumane Rebels was designed, feigned and packt, and that
he wilfully and in malice, and being corrupted thereunto, swear it does turn
all the late endeavors for the Retrivall of this Estate; and on these two
Pillars is founded all the outcryes that has been made of Fauconers Perjury,
and of the injustice, and indirect dealing of the Parliament Counsel of State,
their Committee for examinations, etc. and of my self their secretary in order
thereunto, as the only Game they had left to play, and the last stone they had
to turn for that purpose; which nevertheless (after all this great a do) is
but as aforesaid by their own reckoning; for after twenty Weeks sickness this
was done, my body being low, and in much haste, being much infeebled, and
three quarters of a year after I came over, so that I did not then absolutely
remember, whether the word Barbarous and inhumane Rebels were expunged; says
the paper: And that Fauconer drew the Petition, and that he put into it those
very words, Drury, and Brisca (the only witnesses against him at the trial)
confessed on their Oaths, though they said they were afterward expunged, so
that as he solemnly protests, he did not well remember wheher those words
Barbarous and Inhumane Rebels, which as I showed you before, he motioned to
have put into the Petition, and might therefore have some confused remembrance
of them; I say he could not well then in haste (as he says) remember whether
they were expunged, or no; says R. Farmer, Page 89. Here is the sum of this
whole matter, and the Criticisme on which it hangs, and the narrow compass into
which it is drawn by the friends of Craven, and Fauconers enemies: And thus
has their evidence over-turned their cause, and their management thereof
declared (against their wills) their juggling to Posterity.

But whether the said pretended paper, and the whole contents thereof be really
Fauconers, and of his hand writing and signing, I shall offer a few particulars
to men of understanding to consider (and as I have said) to those who are
concerned to look after.

1. I have by me a Declaration every line of his own hand writing and signing,
to the contrary, which he sent to me to publish in his vindication, without any
foreknowledge of mine, direction or preocupation either of the thing, or
matter therein contained directly or indirectly, which follows in these words.

A Declaration of Major Ric. Fauconer, Prisoner in the Upper Bench, humbly
tendered to all honorable persons of trust, and employment, and to all other
impartial Readers.
HAving endured a strict imprisonment these two years His death pr^vented the
publishing of this Declaration.
and a quarter, being exposed to all wants and extremityes, that possible a
prison can reduce a man unto; languishing also in a deep Consumption,
contracted by my cruel sufferings; And for that I perceive the malice of my
adversaries to be most insatiable, by rendering me daily more and more odious;
thereby to invalidate my testimony concerning the Lord Craven: I have therefore
after a strict examination and scrutiny into my very soul, issued forth this
ensuing declaration, most humbly tendering it to the just censure of all
honorable persons of trust and employment, and to all other Impartial Readers.

And first I declare of my self, that as by Birth and Education, I claim a
parity with the better sort of Gentlemen; so my affections were showed most
early to the Parliament, when the Fature Mountaynous troubles were but an
Embryo.

In the service I continued constant in arms, even to the latter time of the
late war; I also expended out of my Patrimony four hundred Pounds, and
upwards, in raising Horse in Wales; as has been and will be attested to by
several Officers, under Major General Horton, of all which I never received
yet one Penny: After this I undertook my employment beyond Sea, there I run
many hazzards, traveled many hundreds of miles, through France, Flanders,
Holand, Iersey, etc. to and again, and peformed matters with all vigilant care:
On my return for England after a year and a halfes time, in the Packet Boat of
Ostend, the said Boat was robbed, and some seventeen or eighteen Passengers
carried Prisoners, and my self only and the Boatmen free; surely in this I
observed the hand of Providence then, which preserved me to come safe to
London, where I rendered an ample account all of the whole Treaty at Breda, and
all the transactions, with diverse matters of importance; As my services were
many, so I shall instance but one to avoid prolexity, and by that the whole
body of the other may be judged; Expede Herculem.

At Breda, several commissions were granted by the Scotch King, for the
raiseing of horse and foot in diverse parts of England, by those numerous
insurrections to have gained a Body of an Army, whereby to have diverted the
Lord General, and the Army, from hindering the Scotch in their design for
England; this was carried with much secrecy by the principal Agents there,
the chiefest, and most desperate of those insurrections as well as the rest;
notwithstanding the great secrecy, I gave a particular account of four Months
before it happened; nay of the Colonel who was chief Agent, and taken an actor
with several others: By this timely hint the Parliament had time enough to
prevent their enemies; which they did, and by crushing them, all the intended
insurrections in the West, and Wales, they vanished: The Parliament and
council of State did solemnize a day of thanksgiving at Margrets in
Westminster, and orderd a day to be observed thorough the whole Nation for that
great deliverance, of which instrumentally under God I was the principal
Author; and Judge Jermine was pleased to tell Mr. Maynard, who was most bitter
against me, that without that service of mine, and some others, neither he had
set there, nor Mr. Maynard pleaded there: I wonder Drury and Brisco, did not
acquain^ the State with the intended dangers, they both knew it a^ Breda: No,
they stayed to see the last man born of all the Royal Games; and then came into
England after they could act no more mischief, as good Common Wealths men.

And now a word or two of them, the chief evidence against me, I have in part
related what I have been, what I have acted, and what J am, and let the
indifferent man Balance us; Drury was always a Papist in arms against the
Parliament; so irreconcilable an Enemy, that after all endeavors at home, he
Petitioned the then Scotch King, (as himself confessed at the Upper Bench
Court) to be enabled to serve him, as he had done his royal father: one who
went from Bredato Antwerpeto place his son there with the Jesuits, this he
cannot deny and J am sure diverse can testify it: For Brisco, there was enough
declared on Oath concerning him viz. that he betrayed and sold his Countrymen
for twelve stivers a man, he was always an invetterate enemy against the
State, and formerly belonged to the Lord Cravens Regiment; J will spare to
touch at their personal vices, although some of them have falsely blasted me,
and rendered me odious, and notorious of which J shall speak anon. And now J
desire of all honest men to judge, whether my evidence may not stand in
Competition with theirs; Drury confirms that J drew the Petition, also, which
was presented at Breda, and sure J have then best reason to remember the
contents of it; notwithstanding a Copy which he said he preserved in his Sonns
book, yet that was but a Copy; not the mayn original Petition, nor can Drury
upon his Oath deny, but that himself related to me and others, that the Lord
Craven told him, it would not be safe for him to deliver the Petition; but he
would speak to the Queen of Bohemia; this he cannot deny on Oath, unless by a
mental reservation, he can dispense with any Oath: If this man who has
forfeited his life may stand in competition with me; nay overthrow my evidence,
who so long adventured my life, and who have been under God, a means of so
great deliverance to the Army and Nation; then I may safely cry aloud, Terras
Astraea reliquet; indeed a large and a strange Verdict was obtained against me
on their evidence; viz. Corrupt, Willful and Malicious Perjury; but I would be
informed where either of the three were, or on what evidence the jury should
ground it, to bring in corruption, Malice and Wilfulness; ^ as for corruption
Ideclare before God, and to the whole world, that I never was enticed animated,
or procured, to put in the information given by me at white H^ll, touching the
Lord Craven, by any person or persons whatsoever nor did Jever receive one
penny of money, or any moneys or reward to do it, or for doing it: My long and
extreme poverty remaining in a perishing condition may easily confirm it.
For Malice J am sure the Lord Cravens person was altogether unknown to me,
until the Treaty at Breda; and for Wilfulness, it was upon oath attested by an
Honorable and an honest Patriot, that it was first accidentally delivered in
discourse; of which when J was called before a public authority, J thought in
my conscience, and do still think, J was obliged to declare the truth, and in
this J will live and dye.

Nor can I omit the subtle malice of my prosecutors, who being backed at home
and abroad with potent Friends and large Purses, compassed Sea and Land to gain
their Proselytes (whilst I was detained most strictly in prison) by them to
blast me in my Repute, so to make way to their Verdict, Knight, the first of
those Proselytes, was condemned to be hanged at Tiburn, and was carried in the
Cart as far as the Bars in Holborne: The rest were Catchpoles, and
Catchpoles-followers; only Mr. Worllage an Attorney, who could not charge me
with any particulars: and one Jaques, alias Jackson, the son of a Bailiff, one
who by the ruin of many young men and others, from a poor Alehouse, came to be
an Inne-Keeper. These were their good substantial Evidence, as they term them;
nay, this Jackson was prosecuted by Mr. W^rllage for cheating a Neighbor of his
with false Dice, of a great sum of money. This Jackson was perjured in a deep
manner; and if he can produce any one to attest what he falsely swore, viz. That
I on my knees drank a health to the Devil at noonday in the Market Town of
Peters-field some six years since, as he falsely and wickedly swore, I will, as
J should deserve, suffer the most ignominious death: It is strange that at
Noonday, on a Market Day, and in the Marketplace, none should see or hear
this; No surely, nor perjured Jackson neither; and J beseech God in his due
time to manifest this exemplarily on one of us, either by his mercy or justice.

And that the World may most apparently behold the machivilian projects, and
pestilent divices of my adversaries; I do here declare, that after that false
verdict obtained against me, several Agents, and some of them Note.
persons of good quality often times were with me, and solicited me to discover
and acknowledge what I was not guilty of, offering me from my chief
adversaries indempnitie, Liberty, etc. And if any shall say, this is but my
bare assertion, and that I will say any thing to help my self in this sad and
desperate condition; to them I answer, and to my adversaries, that I defy them
in this, and that I have their Letters under their hands kept safe, to this
hour; wherein I am offered indemnitie, Liberty, etc. So that I would but comply
in their devices, with them to the ruin of others, and shipwreck of my soul
and conscience: These These Letters I have by me.
Letters I say I have, and it was a long time on treaty, and if I produce not
these letters before any authority, than let me be hanged, and spare not:
Surely these men have dealt with me, as some Witch-finders do, as I have heard,
who have put poor innocent old Women to so great torture, that they have been
forced to confess themselves Witches, though nothing so, choosing a present
death rather then their continued torments; but let their cruelty be as
rageing as Hell, and Devil himself, as I am exposed to all wants, and deserted
by all, I shall yet rather choose to walk in the direct line of my conscience,
than divide from the truth: To conclude, as all and each particular in this my
declaration is truth, so I once more declare before God, and to all men, that
no manner of person or persons whatsoever Ho^e,
did in the least, entice, persuade, move, or procure me to give in the
information touching the Lord Craven at White Hall, but as I have declared, I
thought my self obliged to declare the verity before a public authority,
before which authority I was called after I had accidentally discovered it in
discourse to a person of quality, and trust.

Rich. Fauconer.


2. He suffered a very sharp and cruel imprisonment in Newgate, and the Upper
Bench Prisons, under such deep necessity of apparel, bedding and other
Provisions, that he was even eat with Vermin, and wasted with an incuraeble
Cough, and Consumption, (as from himself by many sad and lamentable Letters,
expressing how his Dogs and horses, stood warmer and cleaner in the days of
his prosperity, and by others I have been informed (that he dyed; dureing which
time of his said sad imprisonment, both before and after his Trial, he was
treated, tempted, and sought to be corrupted, die in diem from day to day for
many weeks together, not only with Threatening, and Terrifying expressions that
he should be severely prosecuted, his Cheeks Branded, his Nose slit, and (...)
such like, but with large offers of Money, Liberty, Indemnity, and the sta^ing
of all, to some such thing, of himself and me, as is the intent and drift of
the recital, and use made of this Paper: now produced after his death* and
said by Ralph Farmer to be his, which (when living) he withstood, and chose
rather thus by lingering cruelty to wast into death, than by yiedling
thereunto [and so to make himself and others guilty, who are innocent] to
live, though in the possession of the largely promised Indemnitie, Money, and
Liberty.

Now of this Tampering to corrupt him, I was not only informed at White Hall,
from time to time as it was transacting, but I have the Papers by me ready to
make i^ appear, yea the original Letters (subscribed and wrote all with the
same hand) of the copies of which, and the Negotiations of that person and his
outward quality; he thus expresses;

Now Sir, I have sent you a Copy of two Letters, of which I have the originalls
by me, whereby you may perceive how they have been at me; their spleen being at
Coll. Joyce, your self, and others, etc. I have forborne to affixe his name, in
regard he is a Gentleman of quality: As Soon as it is known that I have
imparted it* I shall be surely murdered (which I am confident is far from your
desire.) Now I am deeply engaged to secrecy, therefore should the Gentleman be
summoned, and I remain here where he has a Brother Prisoner; I say again I
should be surely and out of hand murdered: This Gentleman came in all haste to
me, as soon as he understood the Book mentioned their large offers to me before,
and since my trial (now, this Gentleman ^^^^^ed with me before, and since my
trial) and said it could not possibly be but I had revealed it to you, but I
protested you knew not his name, which I am sure you do not, although I wrote
to you of the matter in general, but I told him that indeed, one went to you,
and told you of some large proffers were made me, which in part pacified him; J
have the original Letters subscribed with his hand, and he is a Gentleman of
worth and good descent; And in the Postscript he says, as J shall answer it at
the Dreadful day of Judgment, to my knowledge J have not written one false
matter or circumstance in this Letter.

Rich. Fauconer.


Besides the aforesaid, J have (among the rest) a Paper of another, (whose name
I shall forbear to mention) who (he says) is a Gentleman of quality, and an
ancient and intimate acquaintance of his, and who came to him, and tampered
with him in the same matter, and told him, that he could tell how to put a brace
of hundred He o^ ten expressed himself that he was offered some Hundreds a year
if he would say, he was Corrupted.
pounds into his Pocket concerning the Lord Craven. And that a Parliament man
assured him (his said friend) that if he would but subscribe who enticed him to
it, that the Lord CRAVEN would recover his Estate, and how they were
conspireing to have all his creditors to arrest him, etc* with much more, which
J shall forbear further to repeat: The poor man through extremity of misery
(though Chief Justice Rolls, and the Judges of the Upper Bench, saw cause to
arrest Judgment; which arrest of Judgment they never took off) is languished
and dead, his blood will lie somewhere and be required; for my part J am clear.

3. Those Passages, [J here protest before the Almighty God, that J never
nudertooke any employment, nor never any one mentioned it to me, but J went
over in a poor desperate condition, supported by others;] And [true, J had done
great services for them, but not by imployment] Renders the said Paper either
very unlikely to be Fauconers or (if R. F. and his fellows will have it to be
his yet) that it is not truth, and so the Paper is not to be believed upon the
account of the confession of a dyeing man; for that he was employed beyond the
Seas to discover the designs of the enemy against the Common Wealth, Lievt.
Coll. Joyce deposed in Court, at the trial, as being discoursed with by him
thereabouts before he went over; and Lievt. Coll. Joyce it was that brought him
to me (after he returned) to give an account of the discovery he had made
beyond the Seas of their conspiracies; and himself has confessed it under his
hand in his Declaration aforesaid, and that he was employed afterward, others
can testify; against which so known a truth to himself and others and by him
subseribed, for Fauconer to protest and affirm as aforesaid is most
improbable, and hardly to be supposed, as the matter of the said Protestation,
and assertion appears to be most notoriously false; which being so in these
particulars, so solemnly in words protested and affirmed; what credit is to be
given to the rest of the said Paper, as of the words of a dyeing man pretended
to be delivered under the sense (as it says) of a touched conscience, and from
a soul woefully perplexed; Upon the bare reputation of which; (viz.) as the
words of a dying man so sensibly expressed; this Paper for the ends aforesaid is
dropped into the world as truth to be believed, but is thus proved a lie and
blasted.

And thus much concerning this pretended Paper (Ra. Farmers main foundation of
what he calls his evidence, and indeed, upon the matter, the sum of it) and to
what I seem therein to be concerned.

For the other particulars which he endeavors to fix upon me, as indirect
dealing from certain passages out of the Book, entitled the Lord Craven case:
etc. picked, parceld, and mangled by him, and then set down as his other ground
of (what he calls) his evidence for that purpose: I need no clearer vindication
than that very Book, wherein is not only related, stated at large, and argued
that whole business of Craven and Fauconer; but objections, and those very
things which he lays to my charge answered in a short examination of a certain
Pamphlet entitled, (A true and perfect Narrative of the several proceedings in
the case concerning the Lord ^^aven, etc. The substantialitie and truth whereof
he has not (by any thing that he has said) infirm, nor can he refell; yea
those very passages as related by him, considered abstractively from the
particulars of the pretended paper, which by horrible wresting he has sought
to make speak, what they say not, and then has joined them to those passages
to force them (if he could) to pronounce the same, (which I have already cut
off and answered) clear me sufficiently; therefore I shall not (being desirous
to ease the Reader) rehearse what he has said therein, nor further answer to
it as I might, though so to do would tend much to the infamy of him, and my
advantage; but shall refer the unprejudiced Reader to the said Book, and the
Pamphlet examined as aforesaid, and that part of R F 's reply, wherein are
those passages, and upon serious consideration of the one and the other, with
this my defense, let him judge, whether Ineed desire amore fair and fuller
vindication? And whether any man (besides R. F. and such as are led by his
spirit) pretending to ingenuity or honesty, would not have blushed so to have
produced and misused them as he has done? whose cankered bowels so plainly
work to convert against me, what is my justification; and whose black malicious
spirit so apparently runs through the body and members of what he has written
as the very source and contagion thereof, that I need not give it any further
demonstration; And indeed were it otherwise, yet it is so circularly interwoven
with mingle mangles, and wrapped up with such interrogatory uncertainties and
Ironicall reflections, that there is nothing so positive as might deserve a
rational reply; and the ground work or foundation falling, or rather shakeing,
of what he has sought to build thereupon, what he has endeavored so to raise
must needs come to the ground; True it is, I readily lent him (at his desire)
the Book aforesaid partly to try what he would do therewith, and partly to
leave him without excuse although I then expected some such wretched mis-use
thereof as he has made, and poisonous extraction which the Book it self
corrects, to the recording of his shame and disingenuitie for ever.

And now having (or rather what he has produced as evidence against me)
cleared my innocence from his gross and slanderous imputations, I shall
proceed to speak a little more particularly of this matter, the clamor whereof
has made such a ring in this Nation.

To what has been already said, I do further declare, that as I have used no
indirect dealing, so it has not been in my heart, or desire at any time to do
this man wrong, much less to design the ruin of his Estate, that J might
have part, as is most falsely suggested; my soul even abhorred, and my hands
have always been kept clear from any such wickedness, (as my whole course in
public affairs and many families in this Nation whom J freely endeavored (as
J saw just cause) to keep from ruin, and was isntrumental to preserve, (can
witness:) But being entrusted by the State J was faithful thereunto, that the
Commonwealth might receive no detriment, and did (in the discharge thereof)
communicate what came to my knowledge of him (as of others) to those in
authority whom it did concern, who considered and did therein, as they saw
appertained to justice; And that I neither desired nor designed to do him
wrong, but the contrary, I shall give one plain (I may say undeniable)
Demonstration, of which I leave the reasonable to judge, viz.

Drury and Brisco (the two only Witnesses against Fauconer as to perjury)
being in custody by virtue of the Council of State's Warrant, as Traitors, and
under my Examination; J had then an opportunity (had J desired or designed any
such thing as R* F. lays to my charge, or had been such a man as he represents
me) to have shut the door against this last attempt, (viz. the conviction of
Fauconer) for the retriving of this Estate, and consequently to have prevented
all that wrong and abuse which (in order thereunto) has been since done me
(both in print and otherwise) by his Agents and Advocates. For these two having
been always Enemies to the Common-we^lth, and in arms against it; the o^e a
Colonel [a Papist] the other a Captain; and having been at Breda in the time
of the Treaty there, and the conclusion thereof between the Scotch
Commissioners and their King, where (and in those parts) they waited for new
Employment (under him) against the State, till they were ready to perish, and
then petitioned him to take into his Princely consideration their extremities
who had been always ready to prostrate their lives in his Majesty's most royal
Fathers service, and were no less willing and ready to prosecute the same in
what he should command, and that some course might be taken for their present
subsistence, that their future endeavors might not be buried in that
unavoidable calamity which their known loyalty had reduced them unto, (as the
Petition has it, which Drury upon examination tendered to me as the original
draught of the Petition presented by themselves and other Officers, to the said
King for the effecting of their desires) wherein they entreated the Lord
Cravens assistance. And Drury appearing to me (as did Brisco) by his pleading
on Cravens behalf before I asked him one question, or signified the reason of
his apprehension, and by his continual interjecting his Plea to the same
purpose throughout his examination, to have come over from beyond the seas upon
some such Errand, as they were afterward made use of: And they both having
given me in their Examinations under their hands, an account of their bearing
arms against the Commonwealth from first to last, and of their being at Breda,
and doing as aforesaid, I might either have recommitted them to prison, or in
prison detained them, or have procured them to be tried for their lives, and
executed as Traitors (they being desperate Enemies to the Commonwealth, and
without the Act of Pardon, and coming over without the allowance of the State,
and their own Examinations, as well as others, witnessing against them) or have
taken from Drury the original draught of the said Petition, wrote (as was said)
with Fauconers hand; and so there had been neither matter on which to raise, or
Witnesses whereby to effect what has been done against Fauconer: But contrary
hereunto, I continued their liberty upon paroll, and took not from Drury the
said draught of the said Petition; and when I was asked by some why I did so,
as foreseeing and being sensible of the use that would be (and which has since
been) made of it against the Commonwealth, and expressing somewhat to that
purpose; I replied to this effect, That J did so in regard there were
mutterings abroad, as if the Lord Craven had received wrong, and now that there
were some which could testify in his behalf, the Council had laid their power
upon them. And I added, That whatever were the issue, yet this I had done in
uprightness, and that the Commonwealth might not sustain the least blemish
upon their proceedings. And this is the naked truth as it was in my heart; for
it was always my desire, and I often expressed it, That the Commonwealth might
not have a Tittle of any man's but what was right; and the same I pursued as I
saw just cause, and had opportunity and power, and bore my Testimony against
such as endeavored the contrary.

Now whereas it may be said, How do these things agree with the remanding Drury
to the custody of the Sergeant at Arms, and detaining of him there till the end
of that Sessions, wherein the Indictment was found against Fauconer; so that a
Trial could not be had before his conviction, and before the next Sessions the
vote passed for sale of his Estate? And with the not reporting of Drury and
Brisco's Examinations aforesaid, which tended to the vindication of the Lord
Craven; when as those that made against him were reported? And with my
purchasing a considerable part of his Estate? (all which R. F. has laid to my
charge as indirect dealing, (and therein keeps a great a*do) from the Pamphlet,
entitled, A true and perfect Narrative, etc.

I answer, Although that Pamphlet; with all the particulars therein, and the
residue of the contents thereof, are at large argued and answered in the
aforesaid Book, entitled, The Lord Cravens Case, which, as I have said, I lent
R. F. at his desire, that of the truth of things in behalf of the Commonwealth,
he might not be ignorant, and unto which (because not refell'd or infirm'd by
R. F.) J have already, to avoid prolixity, referred the Reader for
satisfaction; yet that J may not seem to avoid speaking because unable to
answer; nor leave the Reader for the clearing of these things, at such a
distance as the perusual of those books which he may not have by him; J shall
in short Reply.

1. To the first, Drury was not remanded into safe custody by me for any such
intent or purpose in the least, as to obstruct proceedings that Sessions, nor
was it so much as in my thoughts; but because Drury being a prisoner to the
Council for Treason, which he and his fellow Brisco had confessed, and under
examination, did suffer himself to be treated, sworn, and examined in a Case
wherein the Commonwealth was concerned, without first acquainting the Council
or Committee, or me (who had let him have his liberty upon perol) therewith,
which he ought to have done; or declaring unto them (who so treated, swore, and
examined him,) that he was in such a condition, by which his behavior he
appeared not to be in that indifferency and uprightness as became a Witness,
but in combination against the State, whose Prisoner he was: Not that the
offense was because he was examined on his Lords behalf (had that been the
thing in design to hinder, it could, as has been said, easily have been
prevented either by keeping him and Brisco prisoners, or taking away the
draught of their petition, or having them both tried:) Nor that J apprehended
that his Testimony could acquit his Lord of the guilt, for which the Parliament
adjudged his Estate to be confiscated; his very examination being a further
proof of his Lords delinquency, not an acquittal, as anon will appear. Nor
that proceedings should not have been had against Fauconer in a legal way, (had
it been so, he would have been detained longer then four days, and his Lords
Friends constrained to have past thorough the bars and locks of the Authority
of the Council (which was by Act of Parliament) thereunto) but for the Reasons
aforesaid. Nor had Drury been at liberty, could there [reasonable] have been
expected a Trial that Sessions, though the Narrator aforesaid, on whose bottom,
or rather falsehood, R. F. has raised this slander upon me, has alleged, That
Fauconer might have been tried, had not Drury been restrained by me, and lays
it before the Reader, as if his not being tried that Sessions, was the ground
wherefore the passing of the Bill engrost, was not prevented: And before the
next Sessions, says he, the Bill of sale of the Lord Craven's Estate to be
sold, did pass; For neither was Fauconer (who must have pleaded to the
Indictment ere a Trial could have been) summoned to appear; nor was he in
custody; nor was there a certainty whether he might be found in that short
space of time wherein Drury was detained* which was but four days; or had he
been found, summoned, or attach't, could it be expected that (in a case of such
concernment to himself and the Commonwealth) he should have Witnesses, in so
short a time, ready, the matter of Fact being done beyond the seas some years
before, where none but Enemies to the State were present, (who must be, if any,
his Compurgators) and the Parliament's adjudging of the Case, having put by the
expectation of any such Trial; or that the chief Justice Rolls would have bound
him up peremptorily to have pleaded within that time, and so consequently have
constrained him to impossibilities, he having so rational and just ground of
Plea for a longer: Nor (had all these things concurred) could it have been
tried that Sessions, in regard the Indictment was wrong laid; or if it had been
tried, could it have done otherwise then miscarry? for that the original
deposition on which the Indictment was grounded and recited in hac Verba, could
not be found, as is more at large argued in Cravens Case aforesaid, page 31,
32, 33, 34. which R. F. (such is his fallacious manner of dealing where he
cannot answer) calls a company of blind supposals, and childish arguings; and
bids me print it, and says he will be my bondsman if it any way help me, nay, if
it does not further discover my folly, and that he would have wrote it, but
that, he says, it is as long as impertinent; and then says, This is enough.
[Priest-like indeed.] But whether his saying so, does convict the thing, or
render me, or him as deserving that which he casts on me, and whether he be not
my bondsman, let men of understanding upon perusing these passages, and what is
here asserted, judge.

To the second, I neither transmitted, nor reported any of the informations in
this affair to the Parliament, nor was I so to do, but to the Committee of the
Council of State for examinations and discoveries, who reported them to the
Council of State, and the Council to the Parliament; unto which Committee I
communicated the said examinations of Drury and Brisco, as I had done the
others; but neither from them, nor the Council, received I any order to
transmit them, or not, and so had nothing further lying upon me as my duty, but
to keep them safe with the rest of the things of that nature with which I was
entrusted; nor do J know of any reason wherefore the Council reported them not;
perhaps it was (and it is very likely the reason) because the Parliament took
not the informations on which they grounded their first vote of confiscation,
again into consideration; but notwithstanding the often and long debates
afterward, during the space of full seventeen Months, and what was offered,
urged, and earnestly sought to be enforced upon his behalf, still saw cause to
adher unto what they had at first voted; and so the Council might judge the
reporting of these needless, especially being taken above a year after their
first information, as their dates make manifest.

But as for concealing these Examinations because they cleared his said Lord,
which the Narrator aforesaid, page 44. and R F. page 96, 97* 98, 99, 100. and to
know the reason of me wherefore the Council of State reported them not; Cravens
Council so much insisted upon in prosecution of this question, for that purpose
in behalf of his Lord, at the Committee of Parliament fitting in the
Star Chamber November. 23. 1654. to whom his Petition was referred as unjust and
indirect dealing, and done in design to ruin his Estate, and of which so much
clamor is made. J say, Jt's an abominable and false calumny; for, as J have
said, J concealed them not, but communicated them, as J did the other
informations; nor have J known nor perceived any such intention in the Council
or their Committees in letting them lie unreported, or any thing in them but
integrity and uprightness in this whole business, as J then declared to the
Committee of Parliament aforesaid, and am now made free to do the Council and
their Committee this right in the face of all men; and that this is so, their
permitting Drury and Brisco to enjoy their liberties upon what J said to some
of them as aforesaid and Drury to keep the pretended original draught of the
Petition, and not restraining their liberties afterward, nor trying them, nor
at all hindering the course taken for the conviction of Fauconer; nor
interposing with their, or the Authority of Parliament, then sitting: These
proceedings though of so bold and high a nature (as the like has not been
heard of) and tending in the very foundation of them (as is manifest by the use
since made of it) to the scandalizing of their proceedings, and arraignment of
their justice, is a plain demonstration. Had J known to the contrary, I should
not have kept silence, but have born my Testimony against it, as having
received mercy not to have served (knowing it to be so) the base ends, or
unjust commands of any in Authority, or other person upon any consideration
whatsoever.

To conclude this particular, let the impartial understanding men in the Laws
(who are Friends to the Commonwealth) read and weigh the Examinations of Drury
and Brisco, hereunto annexed, and judge whether instead of clearing their Lord
from the guilt of Delinquency, viz. Adherency to the Enemy of this
Commonwealth, (the ground on which the Parliament voted the Confiscation of his
Estate, of which more by and by) they do no^ prove it strongly upon him? And
whether they are not sufficient enough in themselves to bottom a sequestration
upon, (by the Law) were there no other Testimony? Finally, If so be the said
Examinations of those two men (their choice Witnesses for the disproving of
Fauconers Testimony, the grand Wheel on which has turned all the late
transactions in Cravens behalf) do render him guilty, (as upon perusal and
weighing, let it be judged whether it does not so appear) what need there any
more to be said for the clearing of the Council, the Committee, and my self
from the foul calumnies and false suggestions, as aforesaid, of concealing the
said Examinations which they say (and thereupon make such a noise) tended to
his justification?

3. To the last, I did contract for part of his Estate, and why might I not as
well as another, being sold by Act of Parliament upon their Judgment of
Delinquency? But I withdrew, and went not thorough with my Contract because I
foresaw what use (as has been since discovered) would be made thereof, viz.
The rendering of me a party, and so to cut off my Testimony in the behalf of the
Commonwealth, (which Testimony of mine is their great trouble, and a principal
cause of the s^inging up of all this, and the rest of the dirt in this Libel,
and other-where upon me) though such my withdrawing and reserving of my self
free, was much to my prejudice, as there be that can bear witness; and I could
largely make to appear: And he that went on where I left, had it, (as far as I
know) at the very same rates as I had agreed to, without any consideration of
advantage accruing thereby to me whatsoever. And so as I am not, nor never was
possessed of any part or parcel of his Estate, either in my own, or under any
other Name, so I am clear of having carried on any private bargain therein with
any one, or of ever having or designing a Title-consideration upon the quitting
of that my interest, or upon my Relation to that business directly or
indirectly; or of having under pretenses of public interest drove on a design
of my own private, (with which R* F. slanders me, page 103.) in this or any
other business in relation to the public, and under covert or pretense
thereof; Charge me who can, I here bid open defiance to all the World to prove
any such thing upon me during my whole course in public Affairs, in which it
is well known, I had opportunities and temptations enough, but always obtained
this mercy, to be kept clean in heart and hand from any such thing: And so in
the presence and fear of the Lord, whose dread was with me, and kept me; I can
say I came into, and passed through, and left all public employments, which
were neither few, nor inconsiderable; and hereunto I have the answer of a good
conscience, even the Witness of him who is greater then all, that my life, and
all I had, was never so dear to me as the Commonwealth, nor minded in
comparison of it, but for its sake was put to the stress, which is now in my
retirement (during this hour wherein all unclean and malicious spirits are let
loose) my rejoicing and exceeding great reward, though of man I have, and do
receive the contrary.

But as for denying such my contract, its a wicked lie, I have not done it at
any ^^me; nor did I relinquish it upon any apprehension of scandal that either
was, or like to be, (as R. F. by information, as he says* suggesteth p. 103.)
for I was always clear on the contrary, but for the reason aforesaid, nor did
the Committee of Parliament lay it to my charge, Whether I did contract or no?
but only put the question to me at the desire of Cravens Counsel in behalf of
his Lord, who thought (but he was mistaken) to have found me a purchaser, and
so to have taken off my Testimony in the behalf of the Commonwealth; but I was
present there for the information of the Committee, for which cause they had
desired, (not summoned as to a charge) my coming to them by their Register as
they did at the same time several who were eminent members of the Council of
State, and of their Committee for Examinations and Discoveries when that
business was transacted; and Secretary Thurloe also (who was then Secretary to
the English Ambassadors in Holland, when the Appeal was made to the States
General, and their jurisdiction, in the behalf of Craven in the case aforesaid,
from the jurisdiction of the Parliament of England.) And (...) that question
asked me by the Committee as afores^^^ in my answer thereunto; I did neither
shuffle nor prevaricate with the Committee, nor put off an answer till I saw
those present who were ready to produce the Contracts out of the book, (as R.
F. falsely affirms, as he says, by information) they are all abominable lies,
especially the last, which I neither saw, nor came into my thoughts. And as for
the rest of what thou say thou have by information, but do not mention of
whom, and thy Queries whether I said not so and so to one in my study at
White Hall, whom thou namest not, when I shall see any thing relating unto me
deserving an Answer under the hands of either of them to whom thou pretendest,
I may make a Reply.

To close this particular, Had any thing been in design, as R. F. and his
Confederates would fix upon me, otherwise might have been found then by meddling
with that Estate, (which could not otherwise be^^ expected then to raise a
clamor) to have answered such ends, of which neither he nor his Accomplices
might have once heard so much as a whisper; but as J was clear, so J proceeded
boldly, knowing that innocence would in the end triumph, and my open
contracting at that time was not without reason as to the public, it being a
demonstration to honest men, that if J had known any thing but honesty in the
bottom, on which was grounded that Judgment, J would not have contracted my
self for part of the Estate which by that Judgment was confiscated.

As for Major Fanconer, J neither knevv him, nor heard that such a man was
beyond the seas, till (after his comeing from Breda, where he was at the time
of the Treaty between the Scotch Commissioners and their King) he was brought
to me to give an account of what designs he knew there to have been hatched
against the Commonwealth, which I received according to the Trust committed to
me by the Council in things of that nature; and finding it to be of seasonable
and great importance to the safety of the Commonwealth, it being of designs
generally laid over the Nation, and of several of the Heads and chief Actors
therein particularly in Norfolk, (which a few months after brake forth into an
open insurrection) and it agreeing in many particulars with what I had received
from other of my Agents, I gave credit thereunto. And this as J have said, is
the first knowledge J had of the man, and that which gave the occasion of my
conversing with him; but as for any thing designed by me against Craven; and
then sending Fauconer over the Seas to effect and act it (as has been
whispered into the ears of some in chiefest Authority) or corrupting of
Fauconer by moneys, or otherwise, to swear falsely; or any knowledge or
apprehension that he had in any particular untruly deposed; or putting him upon
straits of time, or any other inconveniences whereby he might be surprised in
his understanding or memory, or using any provocation for that purpose, or that
he might give in a wrong information, J am (in the presence of the Lord who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and coming) clear and
innocent.

And thus much in reference to my self.
As to the STATE.
THE question in the Case is not Whether the Words Barbarous and inhumane
Rebels, were in the Petition of the Officers presented the King at Breda, in
which William (called Lord) Craven, is said to have assisted? or whether what
Fauconer gave therein, be a true Testimony? as that on which the Parliament
grounded their Vote of Confiscation at first; and afterward their judgment
for sale of his Estate, (though it has been the design and artifice of his
Agents and Advocates (and of R* F. in particular) thus fallaciously to state
it, and in prosecution thereof, having got a Verdict of Perjury against
Fauconer, as to that clause only have thereupon founded this loud lying
outcry, viz. That upon the single Testimony of that scandalous and perjured
person, the Parliament did give judgment for the sale of his Estate; and have
upon this Wheel turned all their late transactions for the retrival thereof, to
the undermining the Act of Parliament, and blemishing their Justice.) But
whether he the said Craven being a Native and Subject of this Commonwealth, did
not repair to the declared Enemy thereof, viz. Charles Stuart, Eldest SON to
the late King (then at Breda in Treaty with the Scotch Commissioners, for the
instateing of him into the Throne of England, and where it was agreed to
instate him by force of Arms into the said Dominion, and where many of his
Counselors of State, and Officers were met, and were there hatching and laying
designs to be acted throughout the Commonwealth of England, and which
afterward were endeavored to be put in Execution.) And whether he the said
Craven had not then, and thereat, and during the time of the aforesaid Treaty,
and the conclusion thereof, (where it was agreed as aforesaid) converse and
familiarity with the said King (the declared enemy of the Commonwealth) in his
privy chambers, and otherwise, and with his Counselors of State, select
Juncto, and Officers? which to do is adherency to the declared Enemy of the
Commonwealth, and consequently Treason by the known Laws of the Land. And that
he the said Lord Craven has so done, is positively proved [to say nothing of
Fanconers Testimony, to invalidate which as to what he has said in this
particular, nothing has yet been offered] not only by four Witnesses, viz.
Reyley, Ketchingman, Benson, and Moubray, sworn before the Vote of
Confiscation, and in consideration with the Parliament when they resolved that
Vote, but by Bardsey, (sworn before the Council of State, and before the
Parliament, when they ordered his Name to be put in the Bill for his Lands to
be sold) and by Priswick, sworn before the Commissioners for Sequestrations,
Nov. 18. 1^51. and by Drury and Brisco in their Examinations, which they owned
upon their oaths at the Upper-bench on the Trial of Fauconer, where they being
produced in Cravens behalf as the only Witnesses for Fauconers conviction of
Perjury, proved his Delinquency. And the Aherency aforesaid to the declared
Enemy of the Commonwealth, [thus proved] is When I speak of that on which the
Parliament grounded such their Vote and Judgment, I speak Ex manifesto, upon
what the Testimonies themselves say; but as for that which directed every
individual member to give his Vote and Judgm^nt, and what further Evidence
might be of, or amongst themselves when they debated and pronounced i^, I
meddle not with.
that on which the Parliamen^ have grounded such their Vote and Judgment, as
aforesaid, Against which and its proof, nothing has yet bren offered, as J
have seen or have heard.

So that Cravens Case as it is stated by his Agents and Advocates to have been
grounded by the Parliament as to the Confiscation of his Estate on those Words,
Barbarous and inhumane Rebels, and on the single testimony of Fauconer therein,
[on which particular clause of his information only, they have endeavored to
fix a Perjury] withal they have said thereabouts, the clamors that have been
made, the noises raised, are clean out of doors, as is manifest; for neither
was the Parliaments Vote and Judgment grounded upon those words; nor on
Fauconers single testimony therein, but otherwise as aforesaid; nor is there any
^eed at all of Faucon^^s testimony to prove that on which their vote, and
Judgment was so grounded.

And thus the Deceptio Visus, Blind or Foggy Mist of Barbarous, and Inhumane
Rebbels Corruption, Perjury, etc. (raised to deceive the understandings of men,
into an apprehension as if there were never the like horrible injustice, and
Indirect proceedings used, and exercised) being struck aside, removed, and
dispel'd, the true and substantial ground of the Parliaments Vote and Judgment
is apparently to be seen, and the reason of the justice, to every sober
understanding: Thus much for the ground.

As for that which gave the Parliament occasion at first to take Cognizance of
this matter, and their particular Votes thereupon, and the Appeal made in his
behalf from the Judgment and Jurisdiction of the Parliament to a foreign
power viz the States General of the United Provinces; instead of addressing
himself to the Parliament in his defense, and the particulars thereof, and
this whole business, I refer the understanding Reader, to the relation of them
all at large in the Book aforesaid, entitled the Lord Cravens case etc. and to
the answers of the objections raised therein on his behalf; and upon serious
consideration of the whole, let such judge; Whether the manner of the
Parliaments proceedings therein, be not cleared, as is the ground of their
Judgment.

For though such an Appeal was made (as I suppose) never the like before was
hard of, Arraigning, and charging the Justice of the Parliament in their
proceedings on that cause, and Judgment therein with oppression, and
injustice, as grounded on proof ridiculous, and utterly false; or if true, yet
frivolous, and not applicable to the cause whereon the Judgment was given
against him: And in case that there had been proof, yet affirming that there
is no Law in England to warrant such proceedings: And so concludeing the
Judgment to be unjust, and void; And demanding that the same be annulled,
cancelled, and revoked; that the Witnesses be as perjured calumn^ators, and he
put into the possession of his estate again, alleging that he was a sworn
servant to that State, and therefore not to be condemned by the Parliament, for
his courtesy, and duty (as he calls it) toward their Lord. And pressing them
thereunto from their usual goodness in upholding, and assisting the oppressed,
and for the redress of their own honor, and upholding of their power,
authority, and prerogative, etc. And though the Laws, of this nation are so
severe, and strict against such as make their Appeals to Foreign
Jurisdictions, from the authority and Jurisdiction of their own Country, (viz.)
That such Incur Praemunire, which is forfeiture of their Liberty, and estates,
and all th^^ have but life (this crime being in effect a denial of the
supremacy of the Jurisdiction of their own Country, and the Subordinateing, and
subjecting it in that particular, to that State to whom the Appeal is made.)
And, though the Parliament had a full relation of the said Appeal, from their
VV^ have here with sent your Lordships an appeal in the behalf of my Lord
Craven, from the justice of the Parliament of England unto the Assembly here,
which as the papers bea^^ is intended to be d^livered to us, and which whether
it be or not, we do intend to take a convenien^ time to Vindicate the honor and
power of the Parliament, and shall do the same upon the other Paper, herewith
sent concerning the Queen of Bohemia; whereby the King of Scotland, is asserted
likewise to be King of England etc. S^y the Ambasadors St. John and Strickland
in their letter to the Council; dated Hague May 30. 1651. Read (...), June 6.
1651. In our Letter to the council, you will see how the Prince El^ct^r, and my
Lord Craven have fallen upon the Parliament in a [tender] Point; your Lordship
will see all the p^rticulars, and we shall in due time do our duty, here to
present it. In my judgment the Elector, and queen, and Craven have given you a
good ground to do more then you resolved to do, Says Ambassador Strickla^d in
his Letter dated Hauge May
extraordinary Ambasadors then in Holland, by Letters dirceted to the Council
of State, and of the States general taking Cognizance of the cause, and
assumeing Jurisdiction, and authority judicially to proceed therein, by
receiveing all the Papers concerning the particulars aforesaid (though for
matters only concerning the Commonwealth of England, and in behalf of a
person who was a Subject, Native, and Member thereof) and causeing them to be
Registered, and permitting Witnesses to be produced, and examined before them in
his behalf, and in ordering their Commissioners, (appointed to Treat with the
said Ambasadors) to deliver the said Paper (wherein amongst other particulars,
the then King of Scotes is affirmed to be King of Fngland) in the name of the
said States, to the said Ambasadors etc. And though the Parliament also
received an account as aforesaid, of their said Ambasadors high resentment, of
the said appeal, and the reviveing, and owning thereof by the States, as
absolutely Derogatory, to the Undoubted interest, Rights, Power, and
Jurisdiction of the Parliament, who have absolute power, Jurisdiction, and
authority of it self, without depending on any other State, or Prince
whatsoever, etc. And of the said Ambassadors, answer thereunto; suitable to
their trust, and the Independent Soveraingnty, and honor of the Parliament of
England, who in so high a measure were, reproached, and slandered with the
false-hoods, and absurdities mentioned in those papers: And of their
Protestation therein against the matter of the said Papers, and the States
assumeing the Cognizance, and Jurisdiction; And of their Declaration, that it
did not in right, or justice appertain to them to intermeddle therein etc. And
of their demands that the said papers and proceedings thereupon be cast out,
and the registers thereof vacated, that nothing so Degrogatory to the honor,
and interest of the Commonwealth, of England, might remain upon their Record
to Posterity, or Note.
that might give ground to any subject, or member thereof to seem to have cause
to justify any Treasonable practice against it, though a sworn Servant to
those States, out of his duty to the said States, or from any order of Note.
their ministers, which he, the said Lord Crav^n had done etc. I say
notwithstanding all these things, and their knowledge of them; yet the
Parliament ordered, and caused a Summons to be issued out, Proclaimed and
Printed, July 3. 1651. for him to make his personal appearance before them on
the third of September following, whereby he had an oppertunity to allege what
he had to say in his own behalf. And although he neither made appearance at
the said time limited in person (it falling out to be the day on which the King
of Scots and his whole Army were routed at Worcester) or by Petition so
testified to the truth of his being seen to have subscribed it, as might give
the Parliament ground to take cognizance thereof, (for there came along with it
so to witness; and therefore the Parliament permitted it not to be read, and
if they had, there was no other thing in excuse in that Petition, but that he
desired to be permitted to answer by his Friends and Council, in regard the
present conjunction of affairs there did not permit him to come in person) yet
they took not the advantage to make sale of his Lands till June 22. 1652. above
nine months after his said limited day of appearance; at which time [and not
before] they voted his Name to be put in the Bill (after the reading of his
Petition then presented) for his Lands to be sold, (the Rents and Profits being
only received till then, as is usual in Sequestrations.) And although until the
said 22. of June there appeared nothing before them in defense and excuse of
his not personal appearing then as aforesaid and in his Petition then read not
a word thereof, but to be heard by his Council: Yet upon the Petition of his
Friends, they took his Case into debate again the day before the Act passed as
a Law; and on that very day as it passed as a Law, viz. Aug. 4. 1652. they
considered something that concerned the Entail, of part of his Lands, yea upon
his own Petition, Read October. 29. 1652. (above two months after the Bil past
engrossed, and his Name therein as aforesaid) they took in consideration his
tender of a sum of money for the redemption of his Estate, and debated twice
thereupon. But neither then, nor at any time before during the space between
the first Vote of Confiscation, and the passing of the Bill (which was full
seventeen Months) did they upon any debate take the said Vote into
consideration again, but (notwithstanding the many great Debates, Overtures,
and Influences in his behalf, and the representation of Fauconers being
convicted of Perjury, as the last and great attempt) did see cause to adhere
still to the same, and to rank his Name amongst other Delinquents mentioned in
the said Act for his Lands to be sold; Upon what weighty reasons and just
grounds, the understanding Reader may by this time plainly perceive through all
the mysts that have been cast before it; for whose right information in the
truth of these things (of which such a Dim is made in the World) as well as for
the vindication of mine own innocence, and the proceedings and Justice of the
State (which R. F. in his Epistle to Craven, terms CLUB-LAW, and says it is
the fortune of the Wars, where many an honest man that stands by and means no
harm, gets a knock as well as those who began the quarrel. I have been
constrained to be thus particular.

Thus much as to CRAVEN.
Secondly, for Christopher Love.
THE man is dead, and in his ashes, he has answered long since the Justice of
the State, and before the Tribunal of him who has with an outstretched arm
delivered England from the Traiterous designs, and Bloody Plots of him (whilst
alive) and his Confederates. Therefore I shall say little more then I am
constrained to what is pretended to be by him charged on me before the time of
his Execution, choosing rather by silence to be exposed to the censure of some,
then by replying (how manifest soever in my justification) to seem to raise my
defense upon the Grave of a dead man, who whether he wrote so of me as is
suggested, I know not; this I am sure of, he cannot answer.

But of his Spirit alive in Ralph Farmer, and the men of this generation, and
to the Treasons of him and his brethren and confederates, whereof they were
attained, (upon presumption of my having a hand in the discovery of which, and
bringing them to Justice, he charges, and seeks thereby to prove me not only a
blood-thirsty, but a bloodsucking person) I am constrained in my own, and the
vindidication of the State, to speak, and briefly to show,

First in general; What these Treasons are. Secondly in particular, how far
they respect Christop. Love.
First in general, What these Treasons are.

No sooner was the breath out of the late Kings body, but the men of this
generation (who before had strugled so much to break in pieces the Army, and
the honest interest wrapped up in it, and desperately engaged ENGLAND and IRELAND
for that purpose) began to entertain thoughts of setting up his Eldest Son King
of ENGLAND, in the subversion and overthrow of the Government of the
Commonwealth, newly declared thereupon, (whether out of love and truth of
heart to him and his party, or to serve their own Domination and revenge, I
leave to him and his Friends to judge.) And the Scottish Nation having the same
Game to play, and not knowing how to effect it otherwise then by the
discontented interests and influences of these men as an expedient, or third
party, (whom they had experienced well enough how to cajole and engage under
the pretense of a Kirk and Covenant Interest) acquaint them, That they intended
to apply themselves to the King, in which application they would consider the
Presbyterian party in England, as themselves; and that the Foundation of the
Agreement, should be the Covenant; and desire a constant correspondency, and
good understanding between those here, and them in Scotland.

This overture occasioned the first meeting of the men concerned in the
following Treasons, at which the gracious disposition of the Prince was spoken
of, and how that loyalty and the sense of his suffering^, engaged them to
attempt something in his behalf, if he would close with the Scots and take the
covenant; and this produced the first Treaty at the Hague.

That Treaty bringing forth nothing, the King of Sc^ts sends to these men to
procure another Treaty between the Scots and Him, (as the Scots had before for
a Treaty with the King) and assures them, That if they could obtain it, and the
Scots to moderate their propositions, he would give satisfaction to the Scots.

This they take into consideration, and send to the Scots to make another
application to the King, and to moderate their propositions.

The Scots returned, That they would make another application to the King; but
withal* they said it should be upon the same Terms, for that the former
breach at the Hague had occasioned rather the heightning of their Propositions,
then the moderating of them, and desired them to make use of their interest
with the King to give them satisfaction.

Hereupon these met, considered of, concluded, and sent a Petition to the King
for that purpose, and Letters to the Queen, Jerm^n and Percy to persuade the
King to give the Scots satisfaction.

These re^urned, That however things seemed to them, yet the King was resolved
to give the Scots satisfaction, and that to that end a Treaty was appointed at
Jersey, and Percy advised them to send one from hence to the Treaty:
Furthermore, That if the King and his Privy Council could not agree there, he
would remove the Treaty to Breda, and at last cast himself on the Scottish
Commissioners.

Accordingly an Agent was pitched upon and resolved, viz. Capt. Titus, who is
sent from these to Jersey, and one hundred pounds raised amongst them to bear
his charges; Where he spoke with the King, and Libe^ton the Scotch
Commissioner, Tells him from what party in England he was sent, represents the
Presbyterian party considerable; had assurance and Letters from the King to the
Ministers, and Presbyterian partyhere. That he would give satisfaction to the
Scots: That to that end the Treaty was removed to Breda, whither he advised
them to send Commissioners, and that he took notice of their noncompliance
with the present powers.

This Treaty being ended, Capt. Titus hearing that the Council of State
understood that he had been at Jersey, dares not go to England, but sends a
Letter (amongst other things) for one to come to him to Callice, to receive the
account of his Agency.

Upon the reading whereof these agree, and send one of their confederacy to
Callice, who having received of Capt. Titus the account of transactions,
returned, and to those who sent him gives the relation thereof, and the Copy of
the Kings Letter aforesaid, (the original being sent to Ald. Bunce in Holland,
for fear of miscarriage) and Titus his Narrative also in Writing, which were
[all of them] then communicated. Also that Titus was in debt, having borrowed
some money of Jermyn.

This occasioned the drawing of a Note.
Commission, enabling their Lord Willoughby of Parham, Ald. Bunce, Major
General Massey, and Capt. Titus, to treat in the Name of the Presbyterian party
in England with the King at Breda, and to assist their brethren the Scots; and
when it was moved by some, What power they had to send a Commission? It was
answered. The King had sent to them so to do, and they had also many secluded
members, whose Authority they looked upon to be better then those at
Westminster; which together with instructions thereunto annexed, are sent by
Mason, P^rcy's servant (who came hither on purpose to give the King of Scots an
account of proceedings, and at Graves-End had those Papers brought him by three
of the correspondents) Letters also were drawn and sent to the Queen, Perey,
and Jermyn, Willoughby, Massey, Bunce, etc. to forwatd the Agreement, and to
act as authorized, and Titus had more money.

The business being thus put into a likely way of issue, private No^^.
Fasts were by them appointed to pray for a blessing in the Treaty, and for the
continuation of the agreement afterward; and Percy wrote to them to lend 10000
l. to the King, as that which would add much to the agreement; with how it
might be raised, one of the Ministers moved a way, viz. The Ministers thus to
move their friends, Sir, you shall give me 20, 30, 40, 50. l. etc. for a
charitable use, but you shall not ask me wherefore; but because they were not
assured of the Kings giving satisfaction, it was forborne.

This Treaty having produced the end designed, the King sends his Letters to
several of the The substanc^ to this effect, To acquaine the said Ministers
with his Majesty's agreement with the Scots, and with what he would do for
satisfaction in matter of Religion and Presbyterian Government here in England;
That confidence of their assistance, was one motive that induced his Agreement:
That they would now join heartily with him and the Scots in the endeavor of
his restitution: And that they having influence (not only upon their Parishes,
but also on other parts of the Kingdom) would stir up not only their several
congregations, but also other places where they had interest to join likewise
with his Majesty for that purpose; and that they would privately pray for him
and his good success.

The Ministers to whom to be delivered; to Edm. Calamy, James Cranford,
Christo^^er Love, and William Jenkins, to be by them communicated to to the
rest of the Ministers in and about the City of London.


Ministers, That if Note.
they could not live quietly in England, they should come to him. Three or four
of them also he desired for his Chaplains, and gave instructions to his General
Agent to treat them civilly, to give * Letters to them, and the Presbyterians
in the City from him, and to press them to action.

But the Scots having got the King into their hands, through the mediation and
influence of these, and so served their ends, deal with them otherwise: For
though they did prepare (as they promised at Breda) to raise arms to put him
in the Throne of England; yet not Massy, Titus nor the English (whose interest
in the Presbyterian party in England was made use of to bring the King, and
them together) were considered.

Of this, Massey and the rest complain to those here who very ill resented it,
and thereupon sent a long Letter to the Kirk, and Commit of Estates,
complaining thereof, attributeing it to their pride, laying open in what
condition they were; which with much more was wrote with white ink in a Table
Book, and sent to Scotland.

Dunbar Fight follows, after which great Rout (most of the Kirk party) the
Scots being in need of their help, court these here again; and the Kirk and
Estates, and Massey wrote to them by Sea and Land; signifying the cause of the
Rout, adviseing them to stand fast to the cause and Covenant, desireing money,
and 3. or 5000 Muskets and Cases of Pistolls; and Massey and Titus particularly
pressed for money, because of their wants.

These Letters, the correspondents aforesaid received, considered of, and
agreed at that present to raise about three hundred pounds, to send to Massey
and Titus, which the correspondents performed by 5. and 10. pounds etc. a man,
and Letters were also by them returned to the Kirk, and Committee of Estates,
and Massey.

Hereupon the Correspondencers begun to have life again, the Scots preparations
to be in the Field are signified hither; advice also to those here to Caution,
Steadfastness, Timeing of a Party seasonably here, and to write to the Kirk
for Union etc. These here return the same Cautions to them, and advise Massey
to take heed how he came into England, and that he bring with him a strong
party: And from Scotland came hither returns of the Receipts of the money
aforesaid, and of the Letters to the Kirk and State aforementioned, how
seasonable they were, how much union they effected, how it brake the designs
'of the adverse Party, and how considerable it made them: And ways of settling
intilligence were also signified, and made use of.

At length in March 1650. 1651. came an answer to what was signified in the
Table Book aforesaid by Coll. Bamfeilds man, which gave an account of the State
of Sco^land; and in the same Packet, Letters came from Bailey (their former
Correspondent, in the behalf of the Kirk) and from their Lords Belcaris,
Argile Loudoun, and Lowthian, wishing ^h^m here to give Credit to Bamfeilds
Nego^iation (in regard he was a Cavaleire) press for 5. or 10000. pounds in
money to buy Arms to furnish, and Ships to bring over from beyond the Seas
into England, 5000. old Soldiers; propose a General to be chosen by these
here, to command them and promise repayment when (as they said) God should
bless their endeavors so as to cause a free Parliament in England. This Agent
was returned with money in his Pocket, and a Bill of exchange to Bamfeild.

Presently upon the comeing of this Packet to them, from Bamfeild, ^homas Cook
(General Agent for the King of Sco^'s designs in England) was taken: Capt.
Po^ter, (an Apothecary in Blackfryers Lond^n, one of these Correspondents) was
imprisoned; Titu^ his Letters and Papers (mentioning the designs, agitated by
Bamfeild in England particularly, the 5000. Soldiers from beyond the Seas as
aforesaid, expressing at large, the p^rts from whence they were to March; the
place on which they were to Land in England; the name ^f him in a Cipher, who
was to command in chief those f^rces; with Letters from the Marquess of Argyle,
and several Noble men of Scotland, from the Queen concerning Titus his
N^gotia^^ons from France,) were brought (with several other things) in their
originalls by ^i^us his man to our extraordinary Ambassadors in Holland, who
sent them to the Council of State; and Christopher Love with diverse of his
Brethren, and other confederates in the Cabinet Juncto of the transactions
aforesaid were apprehended by order of the Council; upon the aforesaid, and
other Informations, and upon the report of a large Narrative of those designs,
as they had been traced along by a member of the Council and Commit.

These apprehensions, and discoveries put a stop to the treasonable proceedings
aforesaid, and gave occasion for the beginning of New, but of an other nature,
(viz) the Examining, and bringing to justice the Actors therein as aforesaid,
by order of the Council.

And not only was the matter so highly Treasonable and dangerous, but the
manner of transaction was as Private and Subtle: For their meetings were upon
pretense of Religious Exercises; the places either in Shops of Comerce, or
Ministers Note.
Studies; The way of communication as of news, seldom any Letters produced in
their originalls, but by Copyes, and those mostly in Characters, which for some
time were kept in a Book; The person from whom it came as seldom asked, (that
being generally known,) nor were any to enquire of names, and the Letters and
Papers also were before hand put under a Candlestick: The contribution of money
was under pretense of Charitable uses, for the Widow and O^phans, and poor
distressed Gentlemen beyond the Seas: This money generally brought in Baggs, or
papers, laid down in Warehouses, Studyes, and Chambers, but nothing said when
brought, nor any seen to receive it.

For the Conspirators who agitated, and carried on the Wheel of the design,
they were men Tenaciously fixed thereunto upon a mistaken Conscientious, and
Religious Principle, having the Ministers in greatest admiration, who were with
them in Council, diverse of them Soldiers, and some of them such as had served
in the Army: These trained up at a Club another generation of such as had be^n
Officers, and others where they were instructed, and informed as occasion
served, and as it seemed good to the former, some of whom usually resorted
thither for that purpose. A third rank consisted of the chief and great men for
Purse, Conduct and Interest, of which I shall here be silent, in regard little
as to them, was produced at the High Court of Justice; to whose proceedings,
and what was made there to appear, I have confined for the most part what I
have hitherto said of these Treasons in the general.

Secondly in particular, how far they respect Christopher Love.

Titus Letter (to say nothing of what preceded) signifying his fearfulness to
come into England, and desiring one to be sent to Calice to receive an account
of his Negotiations in Jersey (as aforesaid) was read in his House, where he
was present with diverse others, and where they concluded to send one to Calice
to Titus.

In his study the person that was sent to Titus, as aforesaid, being returned,
gave an account of his Journey, where Christopher Love was present, and many
others, and where was read Titus his Narrative in way of a Diary of proceedings
at Jersey and the Copy of the Kings Letter, as is beforementioned.

There the Commission and Instructions to Willoughby, Massey, Bunce etc. and
the Letters to the Queen, Jermyn, Percy, were read, debated, and concluded, and
when some debate arose concerning what Authority they had to give or send a
Commission, being private persons; unto which it was answered, The King having
sent to them so to do, was Authority sufficient. Christopher Love said, Come,
come let it go.

There the Letters were read which were agreed to be sent to Scotland upon
Masseys complaint for their being neglected in Scotland; there the Letters from
Massey, Committee of Estates, General Assembly after the fight ^^ Dunbar, were
read, which desired Money, Assistance, Arms, etc. There he pressed for the
raising of Money upon those Letters from Massey, Titus, Committee of Estates,
etc. viz Four or five hundred pounds, saying, if they would not raise it
themselves, they must with their Friends; and spoke to some to lend on that
account, signifying the Contents of the letter, for Money, Arms, etc. and from
whom, which sum was brought down to three hundred pounds.

There some of the Money was brought in, and laid down in his Room where he was
present. There some of the Fasts aforesaid were kept, and he officiated at the
same Fasts, and at other places.

There the Packet from Bampfield was read, (having a Letter [L] on it) the
Letters also from their Lords, Belcarris, London, Argyle, and from Bailey their
Agent, moving for five or ten thousand pounds, for the furnishing of Arms; and
shipping for five thousand old Soldiers to be brought from beyond the seas, the
time when it should be repayed, and for a General to be nominated by them for
those Forces.

There forty pounds was thought convenient by him and others to be sent to
Bampfield, ten pounds to Bampfields man was paid, and the other thirty pounds
was sent by Bill of Exchange to Btampfield, and a Letter wrote with [B.] on it,
brought to Capt. Potter for Bampfield, and said by the party that brought it,
That it came from Mr. Love, Christopher Love and another being spoken to before
to draw up the Letter.

These are in brief the Treasons against the Commonwealth, and the manner of
their transaction, in which Christopher Love, his Brethren and Confederates in
the geral, and he in particular were concerned, and for having to do in which
he was executed, and unto which Doctor Drake, Capt. Massey, and Coll. Vaghan in
one Indictment, and Capt. Potter in another, upon the arraignment for the said
Treasons at the Bar of the said Court, pleaded guilty, as the Examinations,
Papers, Indictments, and Proceedings upon record do make more at large to
appear; to which I refer, and to the Book entitled, A short Plea for the
Commonwealth, etc. Where they are set down with their effects, and the Trial
of Christopher Love, and his Demeanor thereupon; and on his Examination and
Sentence, and his application to the Parliament; together with the generation
this case respects, their deportment ab initio, their influence, Number,
opportunity and Principles, and the danger of the Common Wealth as to all: For
should I herein be particular, and draw what naturally would flow from thence,
I might fill a Volume; the very confession of one of them (viz. Doctor Drake)
upon his examination, which he gave me with many tears, and which I took from
his mouth with my own hand, whereunto he signed, being (as I remember) near
twenty sheets of Paper wrote on the right side, and Captain Potters as many
more.

Nevertheless through the mediation of the (now) Prorector, whom, and the Army
of which he was (then) General they had in the highest hatred, and sought to
cut of; they received mercy, and pardon from the State, after such their
Arraignment, and confession; though sentenced to dye, as did the rest, who were
not so much as brought to the Bar, though they were some of the most
transcendant acts of high Treason that records witnessed to have been
discovered, brought unto, and proved at Bar of justice in this Nation;
designing and endeavoring by secret Plots, and open force the total overthrow,
subversion and destruction of the Parliament, and Government of the
Commonwealth, their Army, friends, yea the very cause of Liberty, in which
themselves engaged, and acted (many of them) in the beginning, worthily in
their generations: And for this purpose espousing, falling into, and joining
with the contrary interest; viz. the King against whom they drew the first
Sword, and vehemently sounded out the Alarm of war; and with the Queen, whose
Idolatryes as a Papist) they had bewailed publicly on their days of
humiliation, and charged to be a cause of the Plagues on the Nation: And with
Je^myn and Percy; And with the Episcopalls under whom they had suffered so
much, and of whom they cried out so loud, that the sword was awakened, and
taken up to avenge their quarrel: And with all the parties of the bad men of
these Nations, whose Wickednesses, Bloodsheds, and Delinquencies they had
publicly confessed: And with Papists and Rebel^s, (for having espoused the
interest, they must needs be partakers with the friends thereof, and Carriers
of it on against whom they declared themselves to be in the most
Irreconcilable opposition; and with Foreign, Soldiers so highly enveighed
against by them in the late King, (viz. the design of the Germans Horse) and
laid to his charge. And lastly with another Nation, viz. the Scots, and those
People therein, whom they opposed at first, upon the account of their being for
the King; to bring whom, and their King, and all these Interests together they
become the third Party, to which each apply, and by whose warmth and influence
they are all united, and made one, with them they enter into a strong
confederacy, and jointly proceed in the laying of the foundation, and carrying
on of a New, Desperate, and Bloody War, wherein thousands lost their lives, and
the three Nations were hazarded in such a manner, and for such ends as has
been in part expressed.

Unto which should I add, how this spirit ran generally through the men of the
same When I so speak I do not intend all that are called Ministers, for those
of the Independent and Baptists, and Seekers so called, were faithful to the
Commonwealth; and many of them in arms; nor, all that are called Presbyters,
for there were diverse even in Parliament, and the Council who abominated,
d^nyed and acted against this Spirit and those practices of some to the
b^inging of Christophes Love to justice.
Principle in this Nation, what designs were hatched, how subtly contrived;
how deeply plotted, how strongly laid, by the Cavaleirs and them (in order to
the same end) over the Counties, chief Towne^, Garrisons, Field and Navall
Forces thereof, and by the Cavaleirs, on the Parliament, and Council of State,
and chief members, and Ministers of each, and of the Army at Land and Sea, (by
Assassinations, Po^s^nings, Murders, Fireings, Vio^ences, Blood, to have cut
them off.) What numbers of thousands of men listed? What Arms and Horse
provided? What monyes raised and how? What Foreign Princes and Forces treated
with, engaged and how prevented? What men of Estates Conduct, In^e^est
concerned? What Armies formed, how ^imed in all things for general
insurrections to answer the S^ots preparations, and motions in the Field, and
their Councils and Motions depending upon, and answering unto the intelligence
of the state of these designed insurrections, whether as to their perfection or
irruption (the Army in the mean time abiding the sharp colds, necessities and
Hardships of that naked country during the winter-season, waiting upon their
motion and action out of, and from their Fastnesses) or should I be particular
how they were discovered, traced from the beginning, certainly known all along,
and understood, with their Agents, Heads, Principals, Variations, Extents and
limits, and in the Nick of time when they were known to be ripe, and the time
of Execution even come, utterly broken in pieces, (and with that junctures of
Providence as well beyond the Seas as in these Nations) as were all their
Forces in the Field, their King, Nobles, Counselors, great Men, Captains,
Ministers and Soldiers; or could this place admit of so large a Discourse, it
might prove an astonishment to the World in the Narration, as the total rout of
the other was in the Report and evidently manifest that no other thing but the
all-seeing eye, and outstretched arm, and tender bowels of the Lord did
discover, or could deliver the Parliament Council of State, Armies at land and
sea and honest people of these Nations from being wholly cut off and destroyed,
even our Enemies themselves being Judges; and would prove a warning to all
Nations, especially to England (upon whose high places in fields of blood, and
the sad cala^ities of many years War it has been sorely experimented) to take
heed of, and watch over that spirit and generation who to effect their
tyrannical domination over State and conscience (to which they would give the
Rule, but will not receive it from any) appear not to care with whom, or with
what they ioyn, or to what they turn, or how they engage their country and
themselves into ruin and destruction, under the pretense of Religion and
Conscience, whereas Christ Jesus says, My Kingdom is not of this world; if my
Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight. And his Apostles and
Ministers declared, That their weapons were not carnal, but mighty through the
spirit; and prophesied that in the last days men should be Here are Teachers
Traitors.
Traitors, whereby the last days should be made perilous; which before our
eyes in this very age has been fulfilled (as aforesaid) in the men of this
generation, with whom I have to do, who notwithstanding pretend themselves to
be Ministers of Christ Jesus and of his Gospel, and the Successors of his
Apostles. O my people (says the Lord) remember what Balaak King of Moab
consulted, and what Balaak the son of Peor answered from Shittim unto Gilgal,
[from Scotland into England, from England into Scotland* from Scotland to the
Hague, from the Hague to England; from England to Scotland again* from Scotland
and England to Jersey; from Jerse^ to Br^da; from Breda to Dunbar; from Dunbar
to Fife; from Fife to St. Johnstons; from St. Johnstons to Worceste^] that ye
may know the righteousness of the Lord.

Thus far of these Treasons in the general, and how far they respect
Christopher Love in particular, the effects of them, and proceedings thereupon:
In the rehearsal whereof (through this urgent and necessary occasion* I have
been the rather thus particular, that those who are concerned may be awakened,
and look out ere it be too late; for if this spirit which but the other day was
struck down with such an astonishing stroke from heaven, as the like thereof
has not been heard of in these later ages, be so far already recovered out of
its swoune, and gathered into such life and confidence as that it dares to
appear thus openly in the justification of them in whom it so work't and acted
(as it has in this R. Farmer's Libel) stiling them Ministers of the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus, Servants of Christ whose Names are yet precious in the
Churches, [as are the Expressions, page 110.] and Christopher Love aforesaid (a
chief designer and actor of them, for which he was beheaded by sentence of the
High Court of Justice) as a man most innocent, fallen into the hands of
Huck-sters, of whom it says, I Will say nothing of the man, I need not, he was
well enough known in England, in his death, bewailed of thousands, and his Name
precious with many godly, [as are the very words, page 110.] and the detecting,
examining, and bringing those their unparalled Treasons to Justice, Rancour,
Malice, Spightful, and most cruel prosecution, Blood-thirstiness,
Blood-sucking, sucking and swallowing the Bloods and Lives of men, Ministers of
the Gospel, [as the same page has it.] And the taking notice of his not
bewraying the least grudging or repentance of his death for any thing acted
therein, (though such were his actions as aforesaid) a going about most
unchristianly to undervalue, debase and disparage that comfort and confidence
he professed to enjoy at his death, a killing of his good Name, and endeavoring
maliciously to kill him twice, and the latter with more cruelty then the
former; with such like, as it is set down page 106, 107. And the discovering of
those his, and his other fellow-Traytors Treasons, a Trappanning; as it is
termed page 105; 106.) and spending ten pages thereabouts, and in reviling and
abusing the State and their Ministers in the Examination thereof, and doing
Justice thereupon, which I shall no further repeat: I say, If this Spirit be so
gotten head thus above-board, in print to manifest it self, even whilst those
are in Rule whom it sought to cut off, and who were made the Battel-Ax of the
Lord, and his Weapons of War, to the hewing down, and cutting in pieces the men
in whom it appeared and acted. What under-ground-work (upon rational grounds)
may hereby strongly be suspected to be forwarded and near perfection? The
tender eye of the Lord has watched over and his outstretched arm delivered
England (as has been said) from its devilish contrivances, and bloody
Workings, through the rolling of thousands of Garments in blood, and multitudes
of other sharp and sore extremities of War, as the effects thereof: Let those
who are concerned look to it now; out of a deep This I felt and wrote before
the second Session of Parliament, with an intent to have published it against
th^^ their coming together; but their s^^ting was short, and their dissolution
sudden; and some workings were discovered, and I stop^ the publication.
sense upon me do I give them warning; Who may also take it into consideration,
Whether such an infamous Libel as this is, wherein the proceedings of
Parl^ament, the Council of State, Committee for Examinations, etc. and their
Ministers in case of the former, are so highly reflected upon, charged and
reproached with such horrible indirect dealings, corruption and injustice; and
their deliberate Act and Judgment therein, expressly termed CLUB-LAW, (the
highest affront that can be given to an Act of Parliament) The fortune of the
Wars, etc. in the Epistle to the Delinquent himself, to whom it is dedicated
for Patronage, as to a worthy and considerable person, under the Name of Right
Honorable, A lover of his Country; wherein the proceedings of them all in the
case of the latter, is called Trapanning, spightful and malicious prosecutions,
etc. (and that eminent execution done by sentence of the High Court of Justice
authorized by Act of Parliament, (in which the whole body of honest men to the
interest of the Commonwealth and the Army, (all of whom those Treasons sought
to destroy) are concerned) Blood-thirstiness, blood-sucking of a man, intimated
as one most innocent, fallen into the hands of Hucksters, etc. (For these Acts of
Justice were the Parliaments, and the proceedings therein had, were in, and by
virtue of their Authority, in order to the safety of the Commonwealth, and
nothing was done by me but by virtue thereof, in the discharge of my Trust,
wherein I exercised, and have the answer of a good conscience, serving my
generation in uprightness of heart: And what is said, concerns and strikes at
them and their Authority who gave the Judgment and the Sentence which so much
troubles them, and by whose Power they were acted, though the direction be at
me, at whom it is revengefully flung, supposing it their safest course, and
that for so doing they have now their day and liberty, as is plain to any sober
understanding.) And lastly, Wherein that Treasonable spirit which plotted the
designs, raised, embodyed, and carried on those desparate and cruel Wars, as
aforesaid, is warmed and cherished: I say, Those who are concerned may consider
whether it consists with their Honor and Reputation, and the Justice of the
good and wholesome Laws of the Nation, and due estimation and regard they would
have given to their own Acts by the generations to come, and with the safety of
the Nations, to permit such an infamous libel to pass up and down without a
reproof.

By this time the serious Reader may plainly perceive who is the blood-thirsty
and blood-sucking person, that can suck and swallow the bloods and lives of
men; Whether I who had (with others as aforesaid*) to do in the examination and
discovery of those Treasons which had their influence to the actual shedding of
the blood of Thousands, and thirstingly sought to swallow the lives of the
Parliament, Council, Army and its Friends in these Nations: Or Ra. Farmer who
has thus appeared in the justification of these Treasons, and calls the
bringing of one [a chief] of them to execution, and of others to the Bar of
Justice, a swallowing of the bloods and lives of men, blood-thirstinesse, and
blood-sucking? Whose are the malicious, most spightful, and cruel prosecutions,
whether mine (as he presumes) in order to the bringing such Blood sucking
Treasons to light (according to my duty) and blood-thirsty Traitors to Justice;
or his in seeking to kill my good Name, (which is far out of his reach) and to
render me as vile a person as any under Heaven, upon his presumption of my so
doing? Who are the Ministers of our Lord Jesus? Whether those who Treasonably
design by War and Blood, the ruin of their Country, and the overthrow of a
Commonwealth, and this in opposition to the Cause and People they once engaged
in, and with, and in the behalf of the contrary, and all its Abettors and
Assisters; or those whose Gospel was Peace on Earth, and good will toward men?
Who are the Churches of Christ? Whether such in which prayers were made for
Kings and those in Authority, that under them they may lead a peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty; or those in whom the Memory of them are said to
be precious, who conspire the overturning and destruction of the Government,
under which they might lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, and
for that purpose had of them full liberty and large protection? And lastly,
Whose Name shall rot and perish, or if it be remembered, it shall be with
abhorrency and detestation; Whether mine whose actions have been as aforesaid,
in the discovery of those Treasons, or R. Farmers, who in the behalf of those
Treasons and his Brethren, has thus appeared and acred?

Thus much of his Charge in general, and of the Treasons of Christo^her Love,
and his Brethren and Confederates, and his spirit, (now alive in R. F. and that
generation) in whose behalf I am thus charged and accused, and in discharge
whereof I have been constrained thus to draw them forth as a LOOKING-GLASS for
the PRIESTS, and an AWAKENING to ENGLAND.

The ground of the Charge as it is laid down page 106. is this.

Viz. That I was a zealous prosecutor of Christopher Love, UNTO, yea AFTER
death.

First, After death, (for with this he begins, as that which it is like, he
supposes he can most positively prove, and may best serve his purpose) and for
this his only instance is the Book entitled, Mr. Love's Case; of, and
concerning which he says, and peremptorily charge me in these express words.

That you were a zealous prosecutor of Mr. Love unto, yea, and after death, is
so manifest, that as impudent as you are, you will not deny. That you
prosecuted him after death, appears by what you published against him when he
had no being to answer for himself; wherein you endeavor maliciously to kill
him twice, and the latter with more cruelty then the former, killing his good
name, and what in you lies, making him a reprobate and an outcast from God and
Glory. I suppose you will own that piece called Mr. Love's Case, printed by
Peter Cole* (as well as the other Books you published against him) wherein you
go about (most unchristianly) to undervalue, debase and disparage that comfort
and confidence he professed to enjoy in, and at his death, and this upon
several accounts, which I will not recount to avoid tediousness; one only I Will
mention to show your spirit of envy and bitterness; It is the Animadversions
upon the first Section, page 34. Mr. Love (say you) it is more then probable was
not only vehemently exhorted, encouraged, importuned, but even solemnly by all
the sacred Interests of High Presbytery, conjured by his Clergy Companions, to
dye like a valiant and resolute Champion of the Cause, and not bewray the least
grudging of any fear, or repentance for any thing he had acted upon the service
thereof, lest it should be said of Presbytery, Her glory was stained and
betrayed by the Cowardice of her Fitst-born. And page 38. Here we have the
second part of the Theatrical Flourishes of Mr. Loves confidence -- Much might
be animadverted, but I forbear. You have a strange spirit that his comforts and
confidence in God trouble you. And then you go on to charge him with hypocrisy
and lying, and other base imputations all along, bespattering and bespotting,
and besullying him (as you can) even to his last. I know what slight touches of
charity you have now and then; and at the close of that Pamphlet, which are
inconsistent with that you had charged him before, as that he acted the part of
a most unchristian Calumniator upon the Scaffold in the very approaches of
death, page 38. but page 46. You most unchristianly reproach him and his
Doctrine, as follows, Whereas in purging himself [he means Mr. Love] from the
aspersion of lying, he says thus, I hope you will believe a dying man, who
dares not look God in the face with a lie in his mouth; intimating (say you) as
if his being ready to dye was a bridle in his lips to restrain him from lying.
The truth is according to that principle of his, That he who once truly
believed, can never by any sin or wickedness whatsoever, lose the love and
favor of God. -- His being ready to dye, in conjunction with a persuasion of
his Saintship, should rather be a temptation upon him to lie, or commit any
other wickedness, then an engagement upon him to refrain lying. Thus you. I
have done with that; but I pray that you may find more favor and mercy from
God, then he found from you, and to that end let him grant you Grace to repent
of these spightful and most cruel persecutions.

This is his Charge, Inference, and Conclusion, and every word of it, which is
a lie in every particular, a heap of lies and falsehoods; therefore I deny it
all, though he is so brazen-fac't as to say of me, viz. As impudent as you are,
you will not deny it: For I am so far from having wrote the Book aforesaid,
entitled, Mr. Loves Case, or from having the least hand therein, that I do not
certainly remember that ever I read it over; but write it I did not, nor had I
any hand in it, nor do I know who is the Author thereof; yet how positively,
and with what confidence does this impudent Liar affirm it mine? how often? about
twenty times he falsely charges it on me) with what bitter invectives and
reflections, and with what height of impudency and zeal, as one whose life is
concerned and touched, and suffers in every word spoken of, or thing done to
that his dear Brother, the sober may plainly read in these his Expressions? And
by this single instance (had I said, or should I say not a word besides) such
may judge, Whether ever man of a more impudent face, flinty forehead, seared
conscience, vile and lying spirit has appeared in Print? And whether he fears
God, or regards man, or cares what he says or does, or is to be believed in
any thing he affirms? This is Ralph Farmer. This is my Enemy without a Cause.
This is he that writes against Perfection, of Satan enthroned in his Chair of
Pestilence, and then calls it Quakerism in its exaltation; of the Impostor
dethroned; and styles it The quakers Throne of Truth detected to be Satan's seat
of lies; of the Rottenness (as he blasphemously reproaches) of the quakers
conversion and perfection in the general, exemplified in this (he says) busy
Bishop, in special instanced in his practices against the Estate of the Lord
Craven, life of Mr. Love; who says, By occasion whereof this Truth is
asserted, viz. If we may judge of the conscience, honesty, and perfection of
the quakers in general, by this man in particular, a man be as vile a person as
any under heaven, and yet a perfect quaker. [Whether I or he be the man of whom
the substance of this may be said, and on whom it is found? Reader judge.] This
is he that so abominably arraigns, reflects upon, and traduces the Acts and
Judgments of the highest Judicature and Court of Justice in the Nation, in the
most weighty executions (one of them) as England has brought forth; and so
highly reproaches the proceedings of them, their Council of State, Committee,
Court of Justice, and Ministers aforesaid. This is Cravens Advocate, in whose
behalf he reviles and abuses (as has been said) in hope of, and in order to
the retrival of his Estate, and then dedicates it to him for Patronage, in a
Light, Lying, and Frothy Epistle. This is the Champion of Edmund Calamy,
Christopher Love, and his Brother Traitors and Confederates as aforesaid, and
of them called Ministers of the Gospel, whose Names (he says) are yet precious
in the Churches. This is he, for the b^aring testimony against whose deceit,
and speaking and writing in the Name of the Lord, many have suffered long
imprisonments, and some have been whipped. This is he that has poured forth all
this filth and rage at me, that talks of making An Agent in the Marches of
Wales; of the Machivillian Maxim, LIE, Calumniate, slander, and do it boldly
and with confidence, and some of it will stick; it will take with some or other
of the Hebrew Proverb, If all enter not yet hal will; of a common-lyar, a
shameless forehead, a profligate spirit, a most supernaturally and
God-forsaken hardened heart and seared conscience, etc. Ralph Fa^mer who calls
himself A servant of that Josus Christ who was crucified at Jeru^alem 1600
years ago* whose blood (he villanously and falsely says) the quakers (who
witness it and its cleansing) trample under foot (this instance proves it true
of himself, as a c^mmon thing; and who is called, and calls himself a Minister
of the Gospel: A Minister of the Gospel! get thee gone to thine own place, the
Gospel denies thee; the children of Light spue thee out. No marvel after all
his Trades, he took upon him this Name, and turned thither to shelter him; do
thou say to me, Turn Turk, man, or become a Jew, to whom [thou sayest] the Name
and Gospel of Christ, and Christian is odious? Turk and Jew shall rise up in
Judgment against thee, and shall condemn thee: This is some of the groundwork
on which (he says, page the last) his Discourse and Discovery is founded, and
that he is well assured that it will stand firm; and thereforesaith, As for any
farther Answers, Replies, contendings, or debatings with them or him, I declare
this as my Coronis, my farewell to quakerism.

What say thou now R. F.? Were they No babes in the world, and yet honest;
[as thou expresses, page 106.] Who advised thee to these things?

Thus much of the prosecution of Christopher Love after his death, (the killing
him after he was dead) most falsely charged upon me as aforesaid, by this Liar
Ralph Farmer.

For those before his death, he says, page 108. -- As for the persecu^ion of
him in his l^f^, and of his Trial, I shall not enter upon the st^ry of -- So
(as to proof) that is given up, as the other is taken down: Where is then the
hypocrisy with which he charge me for accusing the Priests, and him in
particular, with Blood-th^rs^inesse, the More (as he says) in th^^r ey^,
before I had pulled out the B^^m (blood-thirstinesse, blood-sucking) in mine
ow^? I shall not enter upon the story, says he, etc. And yet in the next page
109. he enters upon the story of that, upon which he said before he should not
enter, and spends several pages therein, saying (to palliate the matter) I
shall not (as I said) engage to the whole of your prosecutions against him,
when as he has said no such words, but the contrary, viz. I shall not ^n^er,
etc. So his own handwriting proves him a liar, a belyar of his own Record: Does
not, will not this man say any thing? Well, seeing he will enter upon the story,
and that he chooses rather with his own Pen to Register himself a false man to
posterity, then to miss it, What Is then the part of my prosecutions (as he
says) against him, to which he will engage (for it concerns me to sift this
matter) and in what pieces finds he it? Why in a Book written and published
(says he) by Mr. Love himself, (and yet) finished [but] the last day but one
bef^r^ his death: ^he Title of it thus, A clear and necessary Vind^ca^i^n, etc.
What is that to me to prove prosecutions? Why, I desire you (says he) to take
notice that there is a lying Pamphlet put forth, entitled, A short Plea for
the Commonwealth; ^n which there are many gross lies, especially in things
that rela^e to me. Well, what of all that? Why (says this liar page 111. 112.)
He supposes Capt. Bishop wrote the lying Book. He supposes! Supposition is no
proof nor sufficient ground to charge, nor reasonable matter for a Reply; nor
shall I therefore make any thereunto But to come nearer the matter, (and to
search thy bowels R. F. (they are the words of thy Epistle) for a real
discovery, that the world may no longer be deceived with a windy conception.
--) If Christop. Love did suppose I wrote it (and so say thou, page 111. and
also the words which thou say are his, page 113.) Then how comes I (in the
enumeration of those pretended lies, and the observations thereupon said by
thee to be Christop. Love's) to be expressly charged therewith, page 111. in
these words, -- Another thing he charges him with, is a loud lie, etc. -- and
page 112. -- Where he further says, he (Bishop) charged him, etc. no less then
four times in the space of twenty eight lines, page 111, 112. Does he charge me
positively by name? Now either these words are Christop. Loves (as is said and
pretended) or R. Farmers? If Christop. Loves, then he is one while saying he
supposes, at other times absolutely charging what before he only said he
supposed, and so he is not to be believed in what he says (in that his
pretended book) No, not as the words of a dying man; and if his words when
dying be such, at which time R. F. says, what ever I say, men are most
serious, and to be believed; what are they when he is not in that condition,
and how to be accounted? If they be not Christop. Loves (which I incline to
believe) then they are Ra. Farmers forgeries soisted after his death, into
(what he says are) the writings of him, who h^ accounts his dear friend, and
Brother, finished the last day but one before his death, for whom he seems to
be as zealous as for his life; and being so forged, foysted, and sophisticated,
they are not to be considered, or taken as Christop. Loves writings, but as R.
Farmers forgeries, and so not to be believed or answered. Thy malice at my good
name R. F. drew deep, when thus to bespatter it, thou plungest thy self into
this Labyrinth. But to proceed a little further, What are those lies said to be
in the said Pamphlet, so supposed to be mine, and so observed? Why, It will
not, says R. F. page 111. be to any purpose to set down the particulars,
because my Reader has not the book whereby to judge of the truth or falsehood,
I shall therefore content my self to give you what observations Mr. Love ma^es
on the man, and his lying stories. If this, viz. to give the observations, and
not the thing, to rehearse the conclusion, and not the premises; to charge so
and so, and yet to be silent wherein, on purpose to reproach; if this, I say,
be fair dealing, fit matter to reply unto, or sufficient proof of such a
charge, let the reasonble, yea my enemies themselves be Judges.

Is there any more yet? Yea, but like the former; They viz. his NO BABES* etc.
aforesaid, advise me to re^d a book concerning Mr. Loves d^signs, and his
death, written and penned by you, and they say it will give the Reader further
satisfaction: But you have dealt as craftily in the printing of this as of the
former, printed so few, and kept or given so at your own pispose that I cannot
get it, page 106. Which being a lie, and the book neither named, nor got* nor
seen by him, and it together with the pretended further satisfaction therein,
being but matter of hearsay, and that from his No Babes, etc. (they did advise,
they say) I shall pass it by as false and frivolous, and not deserving a reply.

Thus has this liar rusht, as the horse into the Battle with his -- But yet
what I find from other pieces, I have met with in this matter. (What matter?
the Antecedent is -- who did Trepan Mr. Love, and some of that party? the
pieces (and J have mentioned all of them) say nothing ^hereof, and of nothing
nothing can be found, nor nothing met with) I will communicate to yo^, and the
world; and this the rather to show you; what a^ hypocrite y^u were in chargeing
us Priests (as in I call ye not Priests in scorn, (its a lie, scorning I deny,
and therefore thee and thy Generation of scornets) but Priests ye are by
profession, who are Tythers, and your old Ordination was by the name of Priest.
And tbe Common Prayer Book has it Priest and Clerk. And page 37. in a scorning
manner thou say of thy sel^; Is it not pity that any man (much more a
Minister of the Gospel, and if you will, a Priest) should, etc.
scorn you call us) with blood-thirstinesse, and my self in particular, as in
Title of your Pamphlet; you should have pul^'d the be^m out of your own eye,
before you reproacht us with a mote in ours. I suppose, here I have done,
though it be partly done already, you will appear to be not only a
blood-thirsty, but a blood-sucking persion. -- I say, thus has he rusht into
this case, as the horse into the battle; but to what disadvantage, the sober by
what has been said, may easily perceive: For neither has he or any of his
pieces so much as looked toward the matter, viz. -- Who did Trepan Mr. Love,
etc. which must be the matter, or what he says is inconsistent, and nonsense.
Nor has he made so much as one thing hitherto to stand as a beam or mote of
blood-thirstinesse, or blood-sucking in my eye, as to any prosecutions of
Christop. Love, before or afte^ his death; the work it seems he aimed at ^erga
Versa, but has thus mist and hit himself; so what he says he has found, and
communicated to me and the world from the other pieces; which he says he has
met with in this matter, shows what a hypocrite himself is, not me and an
abominable vile person, who has charged me with blood-thirstinesse, and
blood-sucking, (and committed such wickedness in the prosecution thereof) as a
mote in my eye, but makes no such thing to appear, and has not first* or at
all, pulled the beam of blood-t^irstinesse (charged and proved, not reproached,
that is a lie by me on him, and his Generation of Priests, which he has not
otherwise then by this Recrimination attempted to disprove) out of the eyes of
himself and generation.

And here I might conclude this case, for ought unto which I am obliged any
further to reply. But forasmuch as Ra. Farmer has expressly charged me with
practices of f^rgery in these Words, v^z. I shall discover the ground of your
so easy an entertainment of the thoughts (at least suggestions) of forgery in
me, from those practices of forgery which I shall declare to have been really
acted by you, page 106. And for that the Committee for Examinations, and one of
the Members thereof in particular is accused, reflected upon, and scandalized,
as well as my self, as in that his (as he calls it) Declaration thereof. And
because the design of what is so said is to blemish the credit of what should
be made public of those Treasons on the behalf of the Commonwealth, which the
Author supposed would be, and therefore so speaks, and sollicitously beseeches
the Reader not to believe any thing that should so be made. And in regard the
Charge relates to my trust, and therein as to the lives of men, lest I should
seem to any to decline speaking because of guilt, or to take advantage by the
dis-reputation of another to cover what may be thought my own; I shall speak to
both his instances, viz. Christopher Love, (though parcel of the foresaid
attainted vindication) and the nameless Letter, [though it come forth so, and
on the single credit of this Liar, soften by me proved Reprobate.]

The first is this, viz. That whilst he was examined, he faith I did put in
six or eight lines into his Examination, which he never said, I supposing he
would be so mealy-mouthed as not to read it, or to put his hand to my Forgery
without any more a-do; but that he did [to my shame] make me blot out at least
six lines in his Examination, which was but very short; and that some of the
Committee did ingenuously say sometimes, That he did not speak such Words as I
had put in; and that he did refuse to put his hand to it, seeing he was abused
by me, but told them if they would give him a copy of it he would subscribe his
hand; but that they denied him a copy, which made him to suspect they did not
intend to deal fairly with him, as he found true after. And then goes on to
show wherein [sayes this Liar, but gives no instance, yet saith] and that to
their conviction; and concludes thence thus, Wherefore I beseech the Reader not
to believe any thing that shall come forth, either pretended to be my
Examination, or the Examinations of other men against me; they are but the
Forgeries and Contrivances of Mr. S. and Capt. Bishop, page 113. And further,
That the Examinations of the Witnesses were taken from them in private, and
patched together by Mr. S. and Capt. Bishop, That they were not ashamed to
produce them and read them in open And why not in open Court, the Witnesses
desiring it, and referring thereunto (the particulars being many and lon^) and
the Court allowing it?
Court. That some of the Witnesses had so much Capt. Potter being the first
Witness produced, bogled at what he had wrote, and signed, and sent from the
Tower; but upon his arraignment pleaded guilty to it all; what honesty he had
left that so did, let wise men judge.
honesty left, as to disavow them in open Court; and therefore (says he again)
believe nothing but what was sworn in open Court, nor all that neither; for
some of the Witnesses swore falsely as [he saith] he made He being (as I
remember) touched with the words concerning the Commission, Come come, let it
go; fl^w out in a rage, and said, That he was against the going of it, or words
to that effect. Whereby he discovered himself to be in the principal part of
the design, of which himself professed, and others would account him innocent.
appear in his Defense, page 110. And that because he was belyed about his
Examination before the Committee, and may be more abused after he is dead;
therefore he was necessitated to discover that juggling and baseness of Mr. S.
and me about his Examination, which he thought [as it saith] never to have made
public, page 112. And thus this Liar brings all this in.

Among all these lies thus generally hinted, I have reserved one in special,
wherein Mr. Love charge him not only with lying, but also with forgery, page
112. And concludes, And well might Mr Love think how this Bishop injured other
men, and that in the like ^ind, page 112.

Vind. Christopher Love being apprehended by virtue of a Warrant from the
Council of State for High Treason; and being brought before the Committee to be
examined, before any question was demanded of him as to the cause of his
apprehension assigned in the Warrant, he voluntarily made such a deep and
general profession of his innocence, (as to the Treasons which afterward were
charged upon, and proved in Court against him, and in part by himself confessed)
that the Committee were at a stand how to ask such an innocent professor any
question of guilt; and so unto him they declared: Whereupon he (supposing (it is
like) that he and his actions were hid from them, and lay in the dark.)
gathered spirit, and said in these, or words to this effect, Gentlemen, I look
upon you as honorable persons, ask me any question in particular, and I will
ingenuously answer you, as I have made a general profession. Hereupon I put to
him (as from the Committee) some questions concerning himself; corresponding
with the cause of his apprehension, assigned in the Warrant aforesaid, which
giving him to see that the Committee was within his Vail, Instead of making an
ingenuous, or any answer thereunto, he fell into a great passion (being closely
touched) and particular reflections, and refused to answer, saying he would not
accuse himself, and that it was the High Commission Court. It was answered,
That it was not the High Commission Court, for he was not put to answer to
interrogatories upon his oath, to accuse himself when none did or could accuse
him; which was the High Commission Oath, Ex Officio, condemned by the
Parliament: But he being in custody, and accused of such High Treasons, and
informations being ready to be produced (and I then brought forth two) relating
to the matter whereof he stood charged, and unto which he was demanded to
answer; by the ancient Law of England he ought to answer, YEA or NAY,
thereunto, which was what the Committee required of him. Then he was demanded
as to other Correspondents in the same Treasons: To which he answered, He would
not be an Informer. This his neither answering to the questions demanded
against himself, nor as to others, though he had said, Ask me any question and
I will ingenuously answer; and made such a general profession of innocence as
aforesaid; I say, This and his other high and peremptory carriage occasioned
many Words to pass between the Committee and him; so that there was not such a
proceeding in setting down his Examination, as was usual in such cases by the
Committee, viz. The question leisurely put, and wrote down, and read, and then
the Answer demanded, and wrote, and then read and expessed, and altered as the
Prisoner desired, before another question was asked. But amidst the much
speaking I took notice of some few things which he said, and having wrote them
(after the heat was somewhat over) read it in the hearing of him and the
Committee, to the end that he might have it expressed, altered or changed to his
satisfaction, (as was usual to every one that was examined, before he be
required to set his hand thereunto;) upon the hearing of which read, he liked
not some part thereof, whereupon I struck it out, and drew his Examination as
he would have it, and then read it, which he not objecting against, the
Committee required him to put his hand thereto; but he refused to sign it
except he might have a copy thereof, which they thought not fit to grant
without an order from the Council, it being not usual in cases of Treason
otherwise to do: So he was returned into the custody of the Sergeant at Arms,
without having signed his Examination, which (for the contents of it) was not
material, nor was any use made thereof at his Trial. This is the truth of the
matter.

Now whether so to take, prepare and draw an Examination in the presence of the
Committee, and the sight of the Examinant, and with such changes and
alterations as the Examinant does desire, (suppose I had mistaken in some Words
or Expressions, as easily I might (but do not grant) considering the manner of
the Examination as aforesaid) be Forgery, Juggling, Baseness? Or whether it be
Mr. S. and my B^senesse, Juggling and Forgery, or a discovery thereof, who
neither dictated to, nor advised with me, as to what I wrote? Or whether this
or any other passage mentioned in this case makes to appear, or proves that
whatsoever shall come forth as the Examination of him, [Christopher Love] or
the Examinations of other men against him, are but the forgeries [as he saith]
and contriv^ments of Mr. S. and me, patch't together in private, and so not to
be believed? Or, Whether the bare saying of these Words only, Which made me
suspect they did not intend to deal fairly with me, as I found true after: And
then goes on [sayes R. F.] to show wherein, and that to their conviction, [but
how or in what, R. F. says not] be sufficient to ground such a charge upon the
Committee, as of unfair dealing, or makes manifest wherein they dealt so
unfairly with him, or convicts them thereof? Or whether the design and end of
all this, be not apparently to justify Christopher Love as innocent, and to
render the Parliament and their Ministers, and those that prosecuted and gave
judgment against him, guilty of his blood? And whether such things ought to be
suffered, I leave to the sober to judge, and those who are in Authority to
consider.

Had the Examination been perfected, and he set his hand thereunto, and
committed to my custody, and should afterward have inserted any word or
sentence that he had not signed, without his knowledge or consent. This indeed
had been forgery in me; and I [had I so done] deserved indeed to have been made
a public example; but no such thing did I, nor does this Instance accuse me of
any such; nor did I ever exercise in such things as these, otherwise then a
good conscience, doing unto all men [therein] as I would they should do to me,
and always abhorring the contrary as a most abominable Wickedness.

And as for my putting in six lines into his Examination which he never said,
supposing he would be so meal-month'd as not to read it, or to put his hand to
my forgery (as he slanders) without any more ado. It is false, and a thing (in
the understanding of wise men) not likely by m^ to be supposed, viz. That he
would sign what I had wrote (as said by him in his Examination* being concerned
as to his life, and making such a stir as he did) without reading of it, or
speaking against what was wrote by me, as spoken by him which he had not said,
had any such thing been: Nor was any such thing, as to put what was not his, as
his Examination, upon the supposition aforesaid, or any other consideration, so
much as in my thoughts; nor did I any thing of which I was ashamed, or that
deserved it, but the contrary: Nor do I remember that any of the Committee did
say somet^mes that he did not speak such Words as I had put in, (though they
by reason of his passion and prevarication, and the Words it occasioned, not
taking such notice of his expressions as I did, who minded them as my business
to observe, and set down might express themselves, as not remembering in some
things that he so said; and himself by reason of his rashness, might forget;
and not liking when he was come coolely to consider what was wrote as said by
him, might deny his own expressions; whereby it does not follow, That what I
took as his, was not by him spoken* or to such effect.

Thus much to his first instance, and of the passages at the Examination of
Christopher Love, in which I have hitherto been silent, and thought not to have
made it public, but R. F. having so highly charged me and the Committee in
this Case, page 110, 112, 113. and falsely concluded thereupon, page 114, 115,
116. I am constrained thereunto for my own, and their necessary vindication.

The second follows in these Words; I have one instance more under: he hand of
a godly, reverend, and faithful Minister of the Gospel now in being, well known
to most of the inhabitants of this City, and many in London so to be, who
writes to me, That being to be questioned about M. Love's business, (as he was,
and imprisoned) Bishop (says he) was Clark to the Comm^^^ee of Examinations,
and wrote down all that I said, and add a d^vers things, t^ereby endeavoring
to ensnare me, for which I sharply reproved him, telling him that I knew his
Birth and Breeding, and therefore I did scorn to be ixamined by such a one as
he was, at which both he and the Committee were much offended, threatening to
use much severity against me, but the Lord restrained them.

Vind. What Is this to the purpose, as to Forgery? to prove which on me it is
produced, (taking it as it is, and for granted that it is so, as is expressed)
it says, I wrote down all that he said; It does not say that I wrote down
more. And should I not have wrote down all he said? What crime is this? Is this
Forgery? How does malice render him void of understanding? For the passage, And
added diverse things, there^y endeavoring to en^nare me; it manifestly appears
by what immediately follows, that it intends Words spoken by way of
Examination, not an addition of Words which he spoke not, inserted into his
Examination; which latter (had it been so) would have suited his Case, not the
former; it seems the questions pricked him to the quick, that he was so wroth
at the applying of them, that the Committee saw cause to threaten to bind him
(so much he was from it) to the good-behaviour and that the substance of the
questions was such truth, and so applicatory to him in the behalf of the
Commonwealth, that he reckons the proposing of them matter of Ensnarement;
that is to say, if he had answered to the questions as he could, he should have
confessed what was demanded. And added (says he) diverse things, thereby
endeavoring to ensnare me. What a pitiful generation have I to deal with, and
how sottishly malicious?

Now as to the story, I remember that Matthew Haviland sometimes of Bristol)
being in custody as a Confederate of Christopher Loves Treasons, and brought
before the Committee to be examined thereabouts, manifested much filth and rage
at me (but in what particulars I do not perfectly remember) because of some
questions that I put that nearly touched him, for which the Committee sharply
reproved him, as he deserved, who knew not a bridle for his tongue, and ^et
professed himself to be a Minister of the Gospel. Notwithstanding I was so far
from being provoked thereby to do him harm, that I (considering him as a
froward, peevish, inconsiderable, ignorant weak man, and drawn in through
simplicity rather then design) accomplished (of mine own accord) his liberty
from that which otherwise might have proved hard upon him; for at some of the
meetings aforesaid, at Christopher Loves he was, for which there was proof.

If this be the man that wrote the pretended namelesse Letter aforesaid, and if
he so wrote as this Liar has rehearsed, let the reasonable judge whether he
has returned me well for that my moderation and voluntary kindness: And
whether such a one be a Godly, Reverend, and faithful Mi^ister of the Gospel,
(as R. F. Epethites) who is not ashamed to express himself under his hand such
a Scorner, as that he scorned to be examined by such a one whose birth and
breeding he knew, and this in such a manner as that the Committee by reason
thereof were much offended and threatened (as he says) to use much severity
against him; and what a one R. F. is, who calls such a scorner, a godly,
faithful Minister of the Gospel, and a Revere^d, (and blusheth not to print it)
whereas of the Lord only it is said; Holy and Reverend is his Name.

These are his instances, and yet thus this impudent Liar concludes, page 114.
Oh horrid and dreadful! Not only to be a common Liar, but to forge, to put in,
and to add words on purpose to ensnare men. No marvel you catch at Fauconers
words but once spoken, and put them in hastily to take away ones Esta^e, when
you forge and put in words, many words, (whole lines in a short Examination)
which were never spoken, and this to take away m^ns lives.

But where are (all this while) those practices of forgery, which thou say
thou shall declare to have been really acted by me, as proof of what thou have
affirmed, and as a plain and just ground for those thy conclusions? Does all
that thou have produced, prove one practice or tittle of forgery really acted
by me? Do thy instances bear thy conclusions? [Let the impartial judge.] Or
discover they any thing more then thy false and slanderous spirit, who carest
not what thou scrapest together, and say, nor mindest thou how it and thee
may stand before the Judgments of Wise men, so it may but seem to reflect
upon, or any ways prejudice (as thou think) my Name and Reputation. My Trust
was great, laid upon me, and faithfully passed thorough in as dangerous and
difficult a season as Englands Commonwealth has known. Thou have charged me
Ralph Farmer expressly, (but very falsely and maliciously, as has been made to
appear) with practices (as thou say) of forgery really acted by me, with the
putting in, and adding words, many words, whole lines in a short examination,
which were never spoken, on purpose to ensnare men, to take away men's lives;
the lives (as thou say) of Ministers of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, in the
Cases of High Treason, whilst I was in the exercise of that my Trust, and to
the high abuse and breach thereof. Therefore how can thou but expect another
manner of reckoning with thee for the Vindication of my innocence from these,
and thy other charges and ironical expressions of Corruption and indirect
dealing, as to Perjury for the taking away of a man's Estate, during, and in
relation to that mine Employment, then what is made in these few sheets of
Paper, which to check thy lies and slanders, I have at present thus sent forth
into the World.

And whereas thou say, I shall discover the ground of your so easy an
entertainment of the thoughts (at least suggestions) of forgery in me, from
those practices of forgery, etc. Thy ground and discovery is every way false;
neither have I really acted practices of Forgery, nor have thou proved upon me
any one such practice; nor was any such thing the ground of my so easy (as
thou say) an entertainment of the thoughts of Forgery in thee; but thou
having publicly declared and professed in the Epistle to thy Satan Enthroned,
etc. concerning the matter of thy Narrative in these Words, viz. And this I can
and do faithfully assure the Reader, that here (in the said Narrative) is
nothing of the one, or the other, but what is real truth, as will be made good
upon any occasion. And I finding upon perusal of that Narrative, that in the
rehearsal of a principal paper and part thereof, viz. the Letter of G. F. to J.
N. taken upon him, thou had thus set it down, The Light of Christ in you all
I AM -- and in the Margin over against it, the Word OBSCURE, as a special note
of observation to the Reader, to give him to mind the import thereof; and upon
comparing those Words so affirmed and plighted by thee, with the original under
G. F.'s own handwriting, (which I had by me, and out of which I wrote what was
so taken) that the Words were not so but these, viz. The Light of Christ in you
all I OWN -- upon consideration thereof, and the vast material difference
between those two words, AM, and OWN, in the ground, especially in that place,
and how they turn the sentence, and of the dangerous tendency of that
alteration to the life of G. F. (in that season) as a high Blasphemer, and thy
noting him thereby to be such; and of thy bold-thirsty and cruel spirit
manifested in that thy Pamphlet. I say, upon consideration of all these things,
I did in my Answer charge thee with Forgery, and expressed my self as thou have
repeated, viz. You may here see of what a false and mischievous s^^rit this
Priest is, and what a devilish wickedness it is to forge in such a wo^d; as
for it, were it tru^y so, would take away a man's life: What credit is to be
given to what such a one says? Is not he that can do this past blushing? Is
there any wickedness so great that such a one may not be well conceived to be
ready to act? Is such a one a Minister of the Gosp^l? Words needs not further
to express such an act, which in its very f^^ce is so manifestly wicked and
abominable; A wickedness not found in the Roll of those evils which the Apostle
mentions should make the last days perilous. This was my ground of charging
thee with Forgery, and this is part of the conclusion I drew from thence, which
whether it be not substantial, and bearing what I have inferred therefrom, or
whether thine of me be like it in the case, let understanding men judge.

Thus much in vind cation of my innocence, from this liars charge of forgery;
there are yet some questions laid in my way, to remove, ere I close my
vindication as to this part of his Libel with which he begins, and with which
he ends, and in which he wraps it up, and by which his spirit is further made
manifest, and the ground and conclusion of all Edmund Calamy, and his Brethren.

The first Questions are these.
I was desired to ask you, who did trepan Colonel Andrews into a design, for
which he lost his life, when as he had given over all thoughts of engaging,
till he was moved thereto by a Trepanner, as he declared before his death?

;And who it was trepanned Sir John Gell into a misprision of Treason?

And lastly, Who did trepan Mr. Love, and some of that party? These questions
are proposed by those who are No Babes in the world, and yet honest; and they
say this Bishop can (if he will) give satisfaction in: You know George what
these things mean, and I know what the last means; and they advise me to read a
book, concerning Mr. Loves designs, and his death, written and penned by you;
and they say it will give the reader further satisfaction. Thus this liar
begins the case of Christopher Love; and these are the very first words
therein, as they lie together, not a word omitted, page 105. 106.

The last Questions follow.
But let me ask you, Were these all whose blood you thirsted after? Did you not
write a Letter to a friend of yours in Bristol from White Hall, that until
Calamy, and some others of the Priests were dealt withal as Love was; it would
never be well? I hope I shall one day get that book of yours, which you wrote
against him, (mentioned before) viz. A short Plea for the Commonwealth. Those
who have seen it tell me, it most fully sets forth the fierceness and
bitterness of your spirit, not only against him, but that you show your
rancour and malice therein against many of the servants of Christ, whose names
are yet precious in the Churches, and the memory of whom shall live, when your
name shall rot and perish; and if it be mentioned, it shall be with abhorrencie
and detestation as infamous as poor Fawconers is. Thus he ends, page 115.

Reply. This is the head and the tail of this Bloody Monster (whose belly I
have already cut out) and the feet on which it goes, -- viz. -- I was desired
to ask you who did Trepan, etc. by those who are no Babes in the world, and yet
honest; these questions are proposed; and they say this Bishop can give
satisfaction in, and they advise me to read a book, etc. And were these all
whose blood etc. Did you not write a Letter? etc. that until Calamy, etc.
Here Is the middle and both ends brought together: I shall proceed presently to
dispatch the two ends as the middle, and so finish this case.

First; the aforesaid Colonel Andrews, and Colonel Gell, were the early men
of this generation, who conspired against the Commonwealth, one of whom, viz.
Colonel Androws their High Court of Justice cut off, which stroke, and that
upon Christophrr Love, etc. (it seems) this liar, and his No Babesin the world,
and yet honest fee^, and call the discovery of their treasonable conspiracies
a trapanning of one into a design, for which he lost his life, and the other
into a misprision of a Treason* Christopher Love, and his Brethren and
Confederates were the nex^, who were discovered to take up where they left, and
to design and act the Treasons aforesaid, for which Christopher Love was
beheaded, as has been declared. This he and his No Babes etc. call a
trepanning likewise. -- Who did trepan Mr. Love, and some of that party, says
he; so that in the Treasons aforesaid, he and they were, and the root of the
matter was in them, otherwise into what were he and they trepanned? and why is
it demanded who did trepan, etc.* How comes he and they then to be innocent
men, and all the ado aforesaid to be made in their justification, the
lamentation of his death, and the admiration o^ them as precious? Does not this
liar and his No Babes, etc* hereby show themselves to be No Babes in
wickedness? Do they not show themselves to be in the same spirit, and one with
what that spirit brought forth? Those who are concerned may hereof take notice,
and consider, whether the discoveries of such high Treasons, and the eminent
execution of Justice on some of the chief actors therein, should be thus
publicly arraigned, and grossly abused, especially by one who pretends
himself to be a Minister of the Gospel. Is not the Armies fighting against, and
destroying those who appeared in the field to act the same, and of as high a
nature as the discovery and execution of some of those, by Sentence from a
Court of Justice who conspired the action? Can the one then be reproached and
traduced; and the other clear? Sithence the cause was one and the same, and the
enemy, and the end of his designs, and the deliverance to them who fought in
the field, as to those who sat at the Stern. And this I say to the Army,
either lay down the cause^, and confess your selves guilty of all the blood
spilt in the war, or let that be reproved as it deserves, which thus spits in
the face of it, and of you, and of those who acted with you, and of their
Authority and Justice from whence you received your Commission.

Next, consider the ground, bottom, and foundation of all these clamours of
this liar, and his high accusations of me, as aforesaid: Is it any thing of his
own knowledge, or that he has seen, or read under my hand, or does he name his
Informers, or advisers? Nay, but I was desired to ask you who did trepan? etc.
These questions are proposed by those who are No Babes, etc. and they say this;
and they advise me to read a book, etc. but I cannot get it, and th y say it
will give the reader satisfaction, etc. I hope I shall one day get that book,
etc. those that have seen it tell me so and so. And let me ask you, Did not you
write a Letter, etc.? This and such like is all that he has produced as
certainty in this whole matter, and whethet it be a sufficient ground, bottom,
and foundation [or indeed any at all] for such his clamours, charges, and
accusations, let the reasonable judge.

Lastly; in answer to the Questions, to the first and second, I had nothing to
do in the execution of Colonel Andrews, nor the misprision of Colonel Gell,
nor in the discovery of either of their Treasons, nor in that whole business,
nor can I give so much as a particular account of them. So this liar who has
asked, and those other who he says desired him to ask these questions of me,
(on purpose to render me as a person who has made it my trade thirstinglie to
design the shedding of the blood of men, and the ruining of estates) have shown
themselves what No Babes they are in malice and wickedness, and how
exceedingly dishonest, not only thus to insinuate, but to affirm that I can,
if I will, give in this satisfaction; and how impudent this liar is, as to say
positively to me, You know what these things mean: That is to say, that I am
the man that ^repanned them, as aforesaid, and that I do know my self to have
thus designed, who am thus free, as has been declared

To the third; I know not of any man that in the behalf of the Commonwealth,
either tempted, or drew forth [nor do I believe any did] the Treasons
aforesaid, which secretly lodged in the discontented breasts of Christop. Love,
and his Brethren, for ought I know [and I am perswaded] his and their own
spirit was the father and mother of those Conspiracies; or [to give them their
own word back again] the Trepannor of them all: Nor if his bosom friend, who
was as his Confessor before his death cannot, do I guess who of his generation,
or any other, can give satisfaction to this question, except this liar who asks
it, though he says, I know what this last means.

To the fourth; I neither thirsted after the blood of these, nor any man; but
these and all other who thirsted after the blood of the Commonwealth, and not
only endeavored, but put these Nations into War and Blood to effect it, I
sought to discover, as was my place and Trust, and their designs for that
purpose; upon which discoveries some of the chief of them were brought to
Justice, whereby the spilling of blood was much prevented, my heart being more
tender to the blood and being of a Commonwealth (such a one as England) and
the hundreds of thousands of innocent persons therein, that it might be
preserved, then to one man who sought and designed its ruin and destruction;
and to me he that by design, counsel and contrivance, effects that which sheds
the blood of men, though he draw it not with his own hand, is a Murderer in a
higher degree then he that violently does the execution; And whosoever sheddeth
Genesis 9. ^.
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God made he
man, is the Law of God, unto which agrees that of God in every man's conscience.

Now in case of the Treasons aforesaid, there was one patticular which put it
out of the capacity of pardon, viz. The assuming unto themselves ^ supreme
Power within the Jurisdction of the Commonwealth, to give Commission and
Instructions to diverse persons, authorizing them to treat with a foreign
State, (the Scots) and the proclaimed Enemy to the Commonwealth (Charles Stuart
King of Scots) for the setting of him by force of Arms into the Throne of
England; which Treaty they effected, and at which Treaty it was so ^^^cluded,
from whence sprang the War aforesaid: Whi^^ ^eing a most transcendant Act of
High Treason, and ^^^king at the very Root of the Authority then in being, (for
it is impossible that two Supreme Powers in o^e Commonwealth can consist; and
if that War had ^^complished the said result of the Treaty, the Commonwealth
had not been) the Parliament saw it not only just, but necessary for the
safety of the Commonwealth, to make it exemplary in his Execution.

To the fifth and last, I wrote many Letters when I was at White Hall, and much
business was upon me and went through my hands, it is impossible for me to
remember precisely all that I wrote so many years ago; nor do I remember
whether I wrote the matter of this Question, but this I say, Produce my Letter,
and what I wrote I shall not deny; in the mean time, and for the close of this
case, let Edmund Calamy and his Brethren take heed, lest what this Liar has
queryed concerning him and them, they prove it to be a truth. It Is good advice,
however it be received, from him who knows what he says, and wishes no evil to
him or them, or any man; but an irreconcilable Enemy is to the spirit of
darkness, which works in the dark by design, war, and bloodshed, to set up
its own dark domination over State and Conscience; of which (even of his and
their generation, as has largely been made to appear) England has been of
late made deeply sensible.

And now R. F. let me ask thee one question, Is not the hand of Joab in this
business? were not those of Christopher Loves brethren and confederates (who
were lately at Brist.) thy No Babes, in the world, and yet honest, (or some of
them) by whom those questions aforesaid were proposed, and who desired thee to
ask them of me, and advised thee as aforesaid, or from whom, or by whose
intimation, or direction, or instigation thou have charged, wrote, and reviled
as aforesaid? Are not these thy Rowers, and have they not brought thee into
deep waters?

Thus much of the Case of Christopher Love, and in vindication of the
Proceedings and Judgment of Parliament, and their Ministers, in the Case of
him, and of the said William (called Lord) Craven, from the sc^ndalous
allegations, and iro^ical reflections of this Liar R. F. in his Libel
aforesaid, as to both, and in conviction of his false charges therein of
corruption, as to Fauconers Information, and other indirect dealing in the Case
of the one, and of blood-thirstiness, blood-sucking, etc. in the Case of the
other, and of all his mire and dirt cast up at me in the management of each, on
purpose to render me (if he could) the vilest of men: Upon serious
consideration of all which, the wise and sober may judge whether his
Exemplifications (as he ^earms it) prove me to be such a man as he has
represented me to be, or the rottenness of the (people called) Quakers
conversion and perfection in the general, as he blasphemeth; or that I am the
busy Bisho^, (in meddling with that which I should not) as he affirms; or
whether that be a truth which (he says) by occasion of my practices in special
instanced against the Estate of the first, and life of the last, is asserted,
viz. If we may judge of the conscience, honesty, and perfection of the quakers
in general, by this man in particular, a man be as vile a person as any under
heaven, and yet a perfect quaker, as his Title Page, and other parts of his
Libel has it: Or whether I have not proved this to be a truth; viz. If the
conscience, honesty, and profession of the Ministers of England in general, may
be judged by Ral^h Farmer (and what he writes) in particular, a man may be one
of the vilest of men, yea a notorious traitor, and yet a professed Minister of
the Gospel. And lastly, Whether by any thing he has said, the Declaration of
my innocence in the Case of Craven, is impeach't or convict?

Thus much in reference to the first part of this Rejoinder; for the rest of
his stuff as to the cases aforesaid, I reckon it not worth any further Reply*
but do leave it to fall with its foundation, which is thus raced down, and
overturned.

WHITE HALL, May. 1652. So much of the Examination of Coll. Edward Drury, as
relates to the business of Craven.
HE says, That whilst he was at Breda; he, this Examina^t, and several
Officers of the King of Scots, as Lievt. Coll. James Bardsey, Capt. John
Brisco, Capt. Tho. Hutt^^, Capt. Tho. Hunt, Major Rich. Fauconer, and others,
to the number of five or six and twenty, did join together in a Petition to the
King for some relief, which Petition was drawn by Major Richard Fauconer in
this Examinants Lodging, the rest of the Officers being present, which was to
this effect, May it please your Majesty, the great sense we have always had of
your Majesty's present condition, has been the prime cause of our long
silence; but now our necessities are grown so great and unsupportable, that we
are enforced to petition or perish, most humbly desiring your Royal Majesty to
take into your Princely consideration their extremities who have been always
ready to prostrate their lives in his Majesty's Royal Father his service, and
are no less willing and ready to prosecute the same in what your Majesty shall
command; Most humbly petitioning your Royal Order that some course may be taken
for our present subsistence, that our future endeavors may not be buried in
that unavoidable calamity which our known Loyalty has reduced us unto; And We
shall cordially pray.

After this Petition another Memorial was wrote to the King, to this effect,
May it please Your Majesty, We whose Names are subscribed, humbly desire your
Royal Warrant in order to your gracions Promise to Mr. Secretary Long, that
when the Money was brought in by the Scotch Commissioners, We should be
relieved, and that the poor Inhabitants of Breda who have preserved us from
perishing, may be paid. And we shall cordially pray, etc.

The Examinant says, That being with the King in his Privy-Chamber the day
before the King departed from Breda, toward Scotland, the Queen of Bohemia
being there also, the aforesaid Capt. Brisco delivered the said Memorial to the
King, who laid it upon the Table; presently upon this the Lord Craven came into
the Privy Chamber where the King was, as aforesaid, with the queen of Bohemia,
to whom the said Brisco went, and informed him that there were several
Gentlemen ready to perish, who had presented a Petition to Secretary Lon^, to
be presented to the King, and a Memorial delivered by the said Brisco to the
King in their behalf, which the King had laid on the Table, and had done
nothing therein, and desired his Lordship to speak to the queen of Bohemia to
move the King in their behalf, who casting his eye toward the Table, and the
memorial that lay thereon, as this Examinant conceives, said to the said
Brisco, as he said to this Examinant, Well; and went to the queen of Bohemia;
but what he said to her, this Examinant knows not, nor had they any real effect
of their desires; only ^he Princess Royal, and the Governor of Breda, ten days
after (upon this Examinants solicitation) discharged their quarters so far as
one hundred Gilders came to; but says, That what the Lord Craveu might say to
the other Officers, or they to him before he came to the King, as aforesaid, or
what he said to them, or they to him after the said Lord came from the King,
this Examinant knows not.

Edw. Drury.

WHITE HALL, June 10. 1652. The Deposition of Captain John Brisco, aged about
forty years.
Who deposes, That at the time of the late Treaty between the King of Scots,
and the Scotch Commissioners at Breda, he, this Deponent, with several other
Officers of the late King, and the King of Scots being in great want, and
having nothing to discharge their quarters, met together, and Major Rich.
Fauconer, one of the said Officers, as this Deponent conceives, drew a Petition
in the Name of the said Officers in Coll. Druries Lodgings, where the said
Officers were met, which was directed to the King to relieve them with some
money; but this Deponent says, That he being very lame of his wounds, tarried
not to see the perfection thereof, and therefore cannot further depose, as to
any other contents of the Petition.

He says, That the said Petition was put into the hands of Secretary Long, who
told the Petitioner that nothing could be done in it till the Commissioners of
Scotland had brought in some money to the King. He further deposes, That the
said Petitioners understanding that the King of Scots was to depart suddenly
toward Scotland, they drew another Paper to remember the King of his Promise
to Secretary Long, that the said Petitioners should have some relief; which
memorial this Deponent says he presented to the King himself, his own
condition being very sad, who took it into his hand, and carried it into the
next Room, and put it down on the Board; this Deponent says, That he went into
the Room where the King was, and seeing the Lord Craven there, he, this
Deponent, desired the said Lord to help the said Deponent, and diverse other
Gentlemen in distress, who had presented a Petition to the King for relief, and
also a memorial to put them in mind of his promise to Secretary Long, that he
would afford them some relief; whereupon the said Lord said, Well: The
Deponent says, That the queen of Bohemia was in the Room at the same time with
the Lord Craven and the King, but whether the Lord Craven spoke to the King, or
to the queen of Boh^mia, this Deponent cannot say, but says that Major
Faucon^r, and Lievt. Coll. James Bardsey, were left by the said Petitioners to
wait on the King till he took water to see what might be done in point of
relief; who sent this Deponent and the other Petitioners notice, That they
could get no money. Afterward the Governor of Breda did cause the said
quarters to be discharged.

The Deponent further says, That about twenty six Officers petitioned as
aforesaid, and that he, this Deponent had served in the same Regiment under Sir
Horat^o Vere, with the Lord Craven in the Low Countries, which was the reason
wherefore this Deponent spoke to him to present the Petition as aforesaid.

JOHN BRISCO.


