THE SPEECH OF James Bird, Gent. Who was Executed at TYBURN, on Friday the 18th
Day of September, 1691. for the willful Murder of his Wife Elizabeth Bird.
Mr. Sheriff.
I Know it has been expected by this Company, that I should give some
particular Account to the World of this Fact for which I dye: It is from God
alone from whom I must expect a Pardon, and God only knows how far I am
concerned in it; so I shall not trouble my self with any Public Declaration of
the matter here, but this far I take my self obliged to let the World know,
That it has been Deposed by Mr. Willis, That my Father should desire me to get
my Wife made away; but I do protest, solemnly, and as ever I hope for Salvation
in and through Christ's Merits, That my Parents were no ways concerned in it;
nay, so far were they from knowing of it, that they did not know that I was
Married to her, till I was carried before the Justice of Peace.

It has been also urged by several, That my Father's Severity had caused it,
but those are altogether false Suggestions, for my Father has been always a
Kind and very Indulgent Father to me. Another thing is, That my Father had made
away, or given his Estate from me; but that is not true, for I saw his Will,
after he had Information given him of my Marriage, and I found that he had
given his Estate to me, leaving but very small Portions to the rest.

Mr. Sheriff, I shall not make any Reflections upon any Magistrate; I pray God
that they may not deserve any.

As for the Witnesses that swore against me, particularly, as to what Mr.
Holdernes swore, I have so much Charity for him, as to believe that he did see
such a Man walk up and down the Field in the Grass; and I must say, That they
deposed nothing, as to that, but what was really true, And I must do Justice
also to the Constable and my Father, that as I am a dying-man, the Crevat was
the same that I was taken in, and there was not any Art or Skill used, (I dare
say it upon my Salvation) to take out any Blood that was in it.

Mr. Sheriff, I shall not Reflect upon the Judges of the Court, though perhaps
they were a little hard; and as to any one else that was accessory to the
Murder, I know of none: But Mr. Sheriff, Let not any one seek Vengeance,
elsewhere, but let my Blood satisfy for it: And let the Queen and the Judges
be satisfied in what I have said, as I hope they will; and that is all that I
have to say, Mr. Sheriff, as to this matter, only I desire the Prayers of all
good Christians.

And Mr. Sheriff, If any thing be made public concerning me, I desire that you
would do me Justice in it.

Then he Prayed again for himself, and immediately after he was turned off.

LONDON, Printed for W. Humphries. 1691.


