THE BIRTH, LIFE, DEATH, VVIL, AND EPITAPH, OF JACK PVFFE GENTLEMAN.

depiction of Jack Puff

London, Printed for T.P. 1642.

The Birth, Life, Death, Will, and Epitaph, of Jack Puff Gentleman.
THe people shun the wall, lo here he comes,
With fierce aspect, the ^^lgar before runs,
To see his stradling gate, his hat advanced
His down cast eye, upon his boots are glanct
Who huggs himself he is viewed so strangely fine;
But one cries there is a changeling of the time,
A moorcalfe; that does change so of his shope.
In clothes, as does the Moon her bulk abate.
Stay cries a second, you have fed enough,
All this same creature that you see's a puff,
A blast, a vapor, that only a year,
Can make Invisible for to appear:
His birth did make his mothers mountain shake,
While all the women did stand by and quake,
As did the people in old Aesops time,
At the shockt mount, when forth a Mouse did clime,
So did this creature, this same piece of stuff,
Appear, but forth at last came out a puff,
But now grown up, as innocently good;
As he is ignorant, so long he stood
From ill: but now he is to London come,
For to see fashions for fashion he is undone,
And must be ill, for if he be nor, then
He is not so as other Gentlemen,
And to become a gradiate of the time,
He learnes the fashions for to make him fine:
Then next, to scoff and flout a Citizen,
Tearming them Round heads, for that they begin,
To ask their debts: but stay let me not err
In blaming him who loves his Crediter;
One that does mean to pay, but alas he
Thinks it belongs not to Gentility:
For it is his glory, who thus can speak,
I in one year ten Tailors did break.
And now grown impupent, him next degree
Is to despise all manners that here be;
For it is the Frenchman does his only please
Who buyed their forms, they give him their disease;
So that the vapor is all frenchified,
With our stuck b^nim, straight breech; and spit at side.
More fool then feather, less wit then hair,
Though there is one thing that in him is rare,
A true decorum, each in him does find,
A simple carriage, to a foolish mind,
No puritan, I vow I think he is none,
For what he is he glories to make known,
He will not mind his oaths, or stick to swear,
God dame him; does he man or Diveil fear.
Not cares he, for his credit unto men,
If that the person be a Citizen:
But here he plays the Pope that does no stick
To brearke all faith with an Heriticke:
He with a Citizen, what shall I pay,
My money to a Round, head, let him stay
I Will see ^he rogue first damd, my whore shall have,
A gown, my money is not for a slave.
Now sweld with debt, our Puff to France is blown,
England unworthy is of such a one,
A land that borrowes all their wit from France,
Who cannot like them, on anticke form advance,
They only by the virtue of the shire,
Can make a Country puff so wife appear
That when he is caist in a new suit of clothes,
No Councellor, carries so high his nose;
But nere before, his mothers curds and c came,
Could add, to make him thus so wifely seem,
Ariv'd in France, he does not long remain,
Another puff, soon puffes him back again,
But all be frenchifide, he vows the nation,
From all the world to excel in fashion,
His Countries vile, they clownes that in it dwell,
But France in clothes, and complement excel,
Shrouded in a strange garb he walks the street.
At l^st his Creditor does chance to meet,
Who ha^^ly now can know him by his feature,
and is amazed who should be this creature
Unto himself, them speaks, is this not him?
Whom that a year ago I ware did bring,
Sure his the same, or whosoere he be,
I Will venture to arest his bravery,
P^ffe then arested, takes his next degree,
Within the Counters University,
A staid m^n now he is, for he is none,
Of those that does not keept themselves at home,
Bu^ here he does not rest himself so long,
B^^ all his clothes and means is spent and gone,
That like some ancient escuchion he does seem
All tattered, in show of no esteem,
Save that he is honored of some, and for
He bears the coat of his brave ancestor;
Who was a man perhaps of worth and Spirit,
Whose son does but his means, not mind inherit,
But Puff not long within the Counter lie's
But that with melancholy straight he dies:
For being ripped, within was quickly found
Bills, bonds and notes of debt, that all lay round
His heart, that all men present did suppose,
The weight of these, thus soon his eyes did close,
His will he left, but alas 'twas his last will
H^d't been his first, his wealth he had kept still.
That all as he did now, should hate a whore,
For that and wine, did make him dye thus poor:
N^xt that no gallant should not ought suppose
That Prayers and glory, does consist in clothes,
Or for to court a wench with words compiled,
Such ever fame, has from her court exiled,
But that they rather should enrich their mind,
With arms and arts, it is those that fame does find,
Next in his will he Legacies did give,
First all his vices, with our blades to live,
And for his French disease he did bequeath,
To all those blades that cannot women leave.
Next that the Prentices should have his clothes,
To make shooclouts, for the shoes of those,
Their Masters, which before he had abused,
With n^me of Roundheads, and their debts refused,
As for his soul, I think it was forgot,
In's life, for here in's will, we find it not.
He never thought of it, sure to bequeath,
He ever that did to God's mercy leave.
His Epitaph.
HEre lies Jack Puff, wrapped up in his skin,
For want of a shirt he lveth thus thin,
Who like cut grass, did live but a day,
The sunshine of beauty soon burnt him to hay.
His bladder of life, by death being pricked
The bladder shrinkes up, Puff out soon then skip't:
The great miss of wind might soon cause his death,
For how can a puff be ought without breath:
But where he is gone, I hardly can tell,
Unless he does with Boreas dwell,
That as in his life, so after his death,
He might keep a storm^ng here still upon Earth.
FINIS.

