A MITE OF AFFECTION, Manifested in 31. PROPOSALS, Offered to all the Sober and
Freeborn People within this Commonwealth; Tending and tendered unto them for a
Settlement in this the day and hour of the Worlds Distraction and Confusion.

Yet a little while, and the light is with ye; but the Night comes shortly,
wherein no man can work. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the
Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's. 1659.

A MITE of AFFECTION manifested in 31. Proposals, offered to all Sober and
Freeborn People within this Commonwealth; Tending, and tendered unto them for
a Settlement, in this the day and hour of the worlds Distraction and Confusion.
_1. FIrst, that the Magistrate have no Coersive power whatsoever, in matters
of Religion, Faith, or Worship; but that all persons within the Dominions of
this Commonwealth, professing Faith in Christ Jesus, shall have full and free
Liberty of the Exercise of his or their consciences, in matters of Faith
toward God, to all intents without any restriction whatsoever, though of
different persuasions as aforesaid; and that none be secluded from peaceably
inhabiting within the dominions of this Commonwealth, who believe in the
Eternal, and Ever-living God. And that no person shall upon any pretense
whatsoever be imprisoned, or undergo any manner of punishment for the exercise
of their conscience toward God: And that all such as are so imprisoned, be
forthwith released, and freely set at liberty; And that no person or persons
whatsoever, within this Commonwealth, be forced or constrained by any Law
made, or to be made, by any power, pretense, or pretenses whatsoever, to
uphold, or pay toward the maintenance of any Minister, public or private
Preacher, in any kind whatsoever; but that every one be left to his own liberty
therein, to do as seems him good, and not to be forced to pay to any person
whom he neither hires, hears, nor sets at work; knowing this to be equal in the
sight of God, and just men.

2. Secondly, That none be compelled to swear, or take an Oath against their
conscience, it being contrary to the express command of Christ, who says,
swear not at all; but that the same punishment be inflicted on him that shall
speak falsely (cozen, cheat) or bear false witness in any case whatsoever, as
if he swear falsely; proportioning his punishment that shall do so, as he
thought to have punished the other by his false Testimony and Witness, which
is equal, the Law being for the lawless and disobedient.

3. That no person or persons within the Dominions of this Commonwealth (who
are not subservient to a foreign State) nor have forfeited their Liberty by
Delinquency, or having a hand in any of the late Plots, or Rebellions against
the Common-weealth, be secluded from any public trust, or place of trust,
either in Parliament, Council, Army, or other Judicatures, or place of Trust
whatsoever, within the Dominions of this Commonwealth.

4. Fourthly, That no person or persons whatsoever, who have persecuted any for
their conscience, or committed any to prison for their conscience, shall be
capable of electing, or being elected into any place of Trust within the
dominions of this Commonwealth, till a farther manifestation be given of his or
their good affection toward the people of God, and equal and just Liberty of
every individual person, though of different persuasions, within the Dominions
of this Commonwealth.

5. Fifthly, That no person or persons whatsoever, be tried for Life, Limb,
Liberty, or Estate, but by a Jury of twelve men of the Neighborhood, or
others who shall well know each other, reserving the right of just exception
against any Judge, Jury-man, or Witness, if any justly can be made; And that
no person or persons whatsoever, now residing or happening to be within the
Dominions of this Commonwealth, shall be condemned to death, or adjudged to
pay any Mulct, Fine, or undergo any penalty, or corporal punishment, or suffer
any prejudice whatsoever, but by known and lawful witnesses, being produced
face to face, or any other way destroyed, in privilege, Liberty or Estate, but
by witnesses as aforesaid; the which is according to the Declaration of the
holy men of God recorded in the Scripture of Truth.

6. Sixthly, That all servile Tenures or Copy-holds within this Commonwealth,
being the badge or yoke of the Conquest, be thoroughly considered, and made
consistent with the well being of a firm Commonwealth; due regard being had to
every man's just propriety.

7. Seventhly, that no person whatsoever within this Commonwealth, nor the
Dominions thereof, be put to death for Theft, but be forced to labor with
their own hands, till such time, that he or she so offending the just Law of
God and man, has restored to the party wronged 2, 3, or 4. fold, or otherwise
sold for their Theft, till satisfaction be made to the person wronged as
aforesaid. But he that spills man's blood, by man let his blood be spilt.

8. That the whole Law, and all proceedings in Law whatsoever, within this
Commonwealth, be forthwith removed into each County, Wapentake, Hundred, or
Town (commonly called Parishes) and that all unrighteous Patents given forth by
the late Kings, and others who have called themselves Rulers of this
Commonwealth, be forthwith called in, repealed, and made void; And that there
be one and the same just Laws holding, and Tenure made, and given forth to all
the people residing within this Commonwealth; and to the end that they may be
truly known to every individual person, let the Law be printed, that every one
may know that Law, which he is to be subject to, to the intent that no man may
be condemned by a Law he neither knows, nor ever heard of, nor understands;
neither indeed can he, when as it lies in the breast of other men: And further,
that so much of that Law may be read to every person (called or summoned before
any Judicature) as concerns the person or persons so summoned, as aforesaid.

9. That Courts of Record be firmly settled in each County within this
Commonwealth, with honest Judges, empowered finally to hear and determine of
all Causes that shall arise within each County respectively within this
Commonwealth, it being for the benefit and good of the faithful Denizens
within this Commonwealth.

And likewise, that all manner of Bonds, Bills, Obligations, Leases, Deeds,
Bequeathments, Assignments, Deeds of Gift, Donations, Wills and Testaments,
Contracts, Bargains, and Sales of Lands, Tenements, Seizing and Seizures,
Mortgages, Pledges, Pawns, or other dispositions and transactions whatsoever,
from five pounds downwards to 5. shillings, if the party or parties borrowing
and lending, contracting, Leasing, and selling, or any otherwise bargaining, as
is aforesaid, or can be said, shall desire the same, to twenty thousand pounds
and upwards, without limitation, be recorded in each County; That is to say, in
the Court to be erected: and is hereby declared fit to be erected; to wit, one
in the Shire Town of each County, Hundred, Ryding, Wapentack; and also that two
persons be appointed to be forthwith in each Parish throughout the
Commonwealth, freely chose of the same Inhabitants, to take, receive, and keep
for the present, and at the present making of any Bargain, entering into
Articles, Contract, or other dispositions whatsoever; or any thing for the firm
holding inviolably of all things relating to mine and thine, (made, and to be
made) and forthwith; that is to say, within forty eight hours, to have, and
see the same recorded in the County, Hundred, Ryding, or Wapentack Court, as
aforesaid; And that any Deed, Contract, Bargain, Will, Testament, or other
Deeds* or Writings whatsoever, that shall tend to the well being, and firm
holding, keeping, and defending of me in mine, and thee in thine, (as a
freeman of England) being delivered before two lawful witnesses, to the party
or parties so appointed to be chosen by the Freeholders, Tradesmen, or other
occupiers of Land within the said Parish, shall be as binding to all intents
and purposes whatsoever, in the mean while, till it be recorded in the several
Courts as aforesaid, as if it were recorded; as is ordered to be done within
48. hours, as is before expressed.

And that any party or parties whatsoever, that shall buy, lend, sell,
conveigh, pawn, pledge, Mortgage, or otherwise dispose, contract, give,
bequeath, or appoint to be given or disposed of, or exchange House for House,
Land for Land, or any otherwise contract or transact for any thing, or things
relating to this world, and the well-being of Mankind, and durable beyond all
peradventure, and without contradiction, continuing, and possessing, or
disposing of the same, If the parties on both sides shall desire it, be
delivered, received, and recorded, as aforesaid, that so every person or
persons, may be secured and defended in any and every outward thing, except by
his or their own and wilful neglect. For the binding Laws are for the
lawless, but the good man's word is as binding to him as the Law; and those
that shall take each others word in any of the matters relating to this world,
have free liberty so to do: But a provision shall be made to preserve and
secure every individual person within this Commonwealth, from being by cunning
and deceitful men ensnared, oppressed, defrauded, cozened, orcheated in any
case whatsoever, as aforesaid.

10. Tenthly, That every person within this Commonwealth, have full and free
liberty if he please to plead his own cause, in any Court, in any matter of
difference whatsoever, that shall or may happen to be between party or parties
within the Dominions of this Commonwealth.

11. Eleventh, That in cases of any differences whatsoever, arising between
party and parties within this Commonwealth.

The first appeal and trial of the same, be in the same Parish, where the
Trespass is done and controversy happens to arise, and that the manner of
this first Trial, be by a Jury of twelve honest men of the same Parish,
without respect of persons, or esteem of any man's outward quality; And that one
of those persons, who are elected by the Parishioners, to receive and record
writings in the Hundred, and Wapentack Courts, and as is said in the ninth
Article, be by a lot drawn (as is hereafter expressed) be enabled to give
judgment in any difference arising in the said Parish, Life and Limb, and
other personal Liberties excepted, which are to be referred to the County Court
only, and if the persons so adjudged shall any or either of them, dislike of
the judgment given, or verdict of the twelve men, or two thirds of them,
without which, judgment shall not be given; I say if any dislike be then, and
in that case, he, she, either, or any of them, shall have free liberty to
appeal to the Wappentack, Riding, or Hundred Court, where all the Justices
within the said Hundred or Wappentack are to be four times in the year, where,
and at which place and time, the party or parties grieved may appeal the second
time, and there be reheard, and the matter or matters fully and absolutely
determined by those Justices of the Peace; Always provided, that the verdict of
the Jury, and judgment of the first Judge thereupon, be by the Plaintiff or
his appointment fairly written, and to the Justices aforesaid presented; and
that, after the whole matter shall be by all parties concerned fully related,
and by the Justices being altogether sufficiently debated, each having heard
another judgment herein, and thereof. Then lots be given by an unconcerned
person, to all the Justices aforesaid; in one of which lots shall be written
these words, ( viz.) thou at this time and in this case, art to give final
judgment. And if the Plaintiff or Plaintiffes, any or either of them shall be
found in the fault, then the Judge to whom the lot is given, shall award him or
them to pay all the defendant or defendants charges; and likewise, give
Judgment that the said Plaintiff or Plaintiffs whatsoever* shall pay or be
forced to pay a sufficient sum of money to the first Judge or Jurymen or any
part thereof, whom he the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs accuses of false verdict or
Judgment; and that the same be equally inflicted upon the Judge or Jurymen of
the Parish aforesaid, or any or either of them, who in the first place
consented to the false judgment; if it so be found, and that the same be also
debated by the same Justices at the same time, and that that Justice who has
drawn the lot, do give final Judgment herein also, as aforesaid.

12. Twelfth, That all the Justices within the whole County meet twice in the
year at the County Town, and there to sit upon, and try, acquit, dismember or
put to death, all who shall be guilty of, and deserve the same, and make an
absolute Goal delivery.

The manner of which shall be ( to wit) after witnesses, Jury, and the Prisoner
being fully heard, and by all the Justices orderly debated; then lots be drawn
or given to all the said Justices, in three of which lots, shall be written
these words (to wit) You, or any two, or all three of you, shall give final
Judgment concerning the Prisoner now before you, and in your sight, and
remember ye judge not for man only, but for God the Father of Mercy,
Judgment, and Justice.

13. Thirteenth, That all Fellons, that is to say, Murderers, and the like, be
committed to the County Goal, and no other (unless upon necessity) but
however, that no Trial be proceeded unto, till such time he or they be
translated, carried, or transported to the County Goal.

14. Fourteenth, That there be an equal uniting of the places commonly called
Parishes, Towns and Villages, and that ten Parishes so equally united,
consisting of an hundred families or upwards, make an hundred, and that the
People within each such hundred may every year elect, and freely choose one or
two persons to be their Representative, or Representatives in Parliament, there
to branch forth the Proposals now proposed, and to make other good Laws and
Statutes, as need from time to time shall require, but still let it be
remembered, that no persecutor of any for Conscience sake, do Elect or be
Elected for the first Election, who shall sit but twelve Months, and be
dissolved, I say let such who have persecuted ignorantly or through zeal, or
maliciously, willingly submit, and see what those who have not persecuted any
for conscience, will bring forth.

And that every person that shall suffer himself to be elected, and stand to be
elected, and accept of the same, being not within the qualifications mentioned
in the 3. and 4. Article, and thereupon shall presume to enter in, and sit
within the walls of the house of Parliament, shall forfeit to the Commonwealth
a considerable sum of money, and shall be forthwith secured, till such time he
make payment of the same, and that the person and persons who shall give his or
their voice, for electing any such person, who is not qualified as is expressed
in the Article aforesaid, shall also forfeit, pay, or be secured, till he or
they so offending, five pounds.

15. Fifteenth, That any Officer, either Military, or Civil, or other public
Minister of State whatsoever, being employed in or by, from or under this
Commonwealth, or any the Dominions thereof, that shall be found to cozen,
cheat, or defraud, this Nation or Nations thereunto belonging, shall be
compelled to restore four fold; and forthwith be dismissed of his employment,
as a robber of his Country, and for ever made incapable of bearing any manner
of office or place of Trust within the Dominions of this Commonwealth.

16. That any person whatsoever that shall be put to death for any matter or
cause whatsoever, shall not forfeit to the Commonwealth, or any other person or
persons whatsoever residing within the same, one penny of his estate Real, or
Personal, but it shall go to his or their relations, as if no fault had been
committed.

17. That the unrigteous prison commonly called the Kings or upper Bench, and
all other illegal prisons, be forthwith made void, and that all men who have
estates, may so far as their estates will reach, forthwith be forced to pay
their just debts, and that such who have or will satisfy their Creditors so far
as they are able, be forthwith set at liberty.

18 That all unrighteous, cruel, and exacting Goalers, notwithstanding they
have a Patent for the same, they may have satisfaction for any such Patent, and
forthwith be removed, and others put into their places, fearing God and hating
covetousness; and that henceforth no Patent may be sold, settled, or given to
any person or persons whatsoever, for term of life, but upon his or their good
behavior; And that all Goales, Bridewells, and other houses of correction, or
prisons, or places of restraint whatsoever, within the Dominions of this
Commonwealth, may be repaired, made strong, warm and decent, that so all
Dungeons, Vaults, Little-Eases, or other nasty holes within the said prisons
respectively, may be filled up, or at least never more to be used, to the
abusing the Creature, the handiwork of of God, the Creator; that so all
persons whatsoever, may have decent prisons, and all other necessaries fit for
man or woman, though he or she be to dye for the fault for which they are
imprisoned.

19. That there be wholesome provision made, that so there be no man, woman,
nor child, suffered to beg or want within the Dominions of this Commonwealth,
But let such men, women, and children, that are able to work, be forced so to
do, and that such as through Age or Nonage, are not able, may be Christianlike
provided for.

20. That all Images and Places of Idolatry, and things which are without, and
are visibly seen of Men, belonging to the Commonwealth, which are the
nourishment, and upholding of Popery, and Popish Orders, be forthwith removed,
and abolished.

21. That all Card and Dice makers, Gameing-houses, Musickhouses, Dice, and
Card-players whatsoever, and all, and every profane pastime, and heathenish
customs be forthwith forbidden by a Law throughout the Dominions of this
Commonwealth, and that a sufficient penalty be laid upon the offenders, and
breakers of the said Law.

22. That no person within this Commonwealth, who has served an Apprentiship,
or by his own industry has attained to knowledge, and has wherewith to set,
or put himself in a capacity to provide for himself and family, may be
prohibited from so endeavoring within any the dominions of this Commonwealth,
notwithstanding any pretended Charter or Charters whatsoever.

23. That all Weights, Sizes, and Measures whatsoever be made equal, of one
length, breadth, depth, circumference, weight, and bigness, within the
dominions of this Commonwealth.

24. That the Estates that are or shall be at any time forfeited to this
Commonwealth, be Sequestered and the revenew thereof brought into a public
Treasury, for the speedy relief of the Widows of Soldiers, mained Soldiers,
fatherless and friendless children of such who have adhered to, and served this
Commonwealth, or otherwise suffered in the late Wars, and that the overplus, if
any be, may go toward the Payment of the Debts of the public, and that all
the Debts, and Loanes whatsoever, for which any Person has the public
engagement of the Nation, or any obligation, consonant thereunto, be forthwith
satisfied.

25. That in order to the defraying of the public charge of the Commonwealth,
all persons, be equally assessed proportionably according to their Estates real
and personal, always provided, that any person, or persons within this
Commonwealth, who shall pay his, or their tax toward the defraying of the
public charge, shall not be secluded according to their several abilities and
capacities from having interest, command or employment, and to be a Member,
Officer, Superior, or inferior in and of the Army, Navy, Parliament, Council,
or other place of public trust whatsover within the Dominions of this
Commonwealth, notwithstanding he or they be of different persuasions, or
differently denoted as to their Religion, provided they be such who have not
persecuted any for their Conscience, nor forfeited their right by Plots,
Rebellion, or otherwise against this Commonwealth.

26. That any Person, or Persons who have been by the late single person, for
his or their consciences, and without the breach of any just Law ejected or
unrighteously seeluded from any place of Trust, Military or civil whatsoever,
within the Dominions of this Commonwealth (be at least) forthwith restored to
his or their places respectively.

26. That the Government of this Commonwealth, and the Dominions thereof, be by
Anuall Parliaments; And until such time that the Wappentakes, and hundreds can
be settled, and equally divided, In the mean time, let each persuasion or sect
forthwith choose out from among themselves 20 or 30 persons, respect being had
to the qualifications expressed in the 3. and 4. Article, to meet and confer
together in order to an Election of Representatives to sit in Parliament; And
that all who shall so be Elected, may pass the examination and Trial of the
Persons before appointed, and that the Persons of the diverse persuasions before
mentioned do not sit and continue above three Months, that so there may be a
speedy and effectual settlement of this Commonwealth, in these high, and
scarcely to be parraleled ovetrurnings and distractions.

28. That any person residing within this Commonwealth (to wit) within England,
Ireland and Scotland, have free leave to Port, transport, transmit or any
otherwise to exchange, traffic, and Trade betwixt Port and Port, Haven and
Haven, or any other usual Landing place whatsoever, backward and forward,
within any or either of the three Nations, as to him or them shall seem meet,
without paying for any such goods whatsoever so transported backward or
forward, as Foreign, and let the three Nations in this matter be equally alike,
That so the long-talkt-on-common-weale may no longer continue to be a
particular Wealth; And that the three Nations be justly united, that God the
Father of mercy and Justice (whose righteous soul is grieved with oppression)
may take delight to dwell in the midst of us.

29. That the first Parliament agree upon such Fundamental Laws for the durable
settlement of this Commonwealth, that it shall be exclusion for any person that
shall be afterward Elected, and sit as a Member of Parliament to move the
alteration of the same; wherefore let the first qualifications be good, that
none hereafter but good men may be a admitted.

30. That no person whatsoever hold or possess any manner of civil employment
belonging to the public longer then one year, without being Elected or
appointed anew, and giving a complete account for his last years trust, to such
as shall by the peoples Representatives in Parliament be appointed to examine
and receive the same, that so every man may taste of subjection as well as
Rule, and that any person in public trust, who shall be found any ways to
defraud the Commonwealth, shall be forthwith dismised of his employment as a
public Thief, and likewise be forced to restore fourfold, and for ever made
incapable of being admitted into any public place of trust either Miliary or
civil whatsoever.

31. That any person who shall commit any sin by trespassing or otherwise doing
violence to any, and call that his or their Liberty, or conscience, shall be
punished as an evil doer, Always provided and it is hereby intended that no
man or woman be ensnared in any thing, which the Just Law of God written in the
heart shall lead unto, but have free Liberty to speak for, or declare the
truth, according to the example of blessed Jesus and the holy-men, in season
and out of season, in any place, time or season whatsoever, and that none be
hereby ensnared about any thing which is upon their consciences to do, for the
Lord, by declaring against false worship, and false worshippers, Their set
days times and places whatsoever, and let him that keeps a day, keep it to the
Lord, but let none be forced to observe the precepts or traditions of men, as
to their set days, times, places and worships, for which Christ nor his
Apostles have left no example, and he who worships the living God, must do it
in spirit and truth, and not by outward observations, neither is the holy One
tied to any place, time or season whatsoever, and that people who in their vain
imaginations think to limit or surcumscribe the holy One to, or from any place,
time or season, whatsoever fool themselves, for if the Disciples be there, he
will come in though the doors be shut, (or secured by an outward Law) and they
gladly receive him or any of his; and blessed is he who comes in his Name, as
also those who are not offended at him, though his visage be more marred then
any man's, and his shape uncomly to the Vultrous eye.

E. B.

Postscript.
ANd this I recommend to all the sober and freeborn people of this
Commonwealth, as a testimony I bear to my Country, and unto every Individial
person in it, this being an essay toward its speedy, firm and future
settlement on such a bases as may fully answer the just and righteous principle
of God in every man's conscience, unto which I leave it, and as it leads any to
add to the furtherance of this (good intended) work, it will be acceptable to
me, and unto all the upright hearted on the earth.

Wherefore let not this slip out of any of your minds as a tale that is told,
but let every one mind the good work of his generation. And do not join with
Moab, Amon, and Amelek, least ye perish in this the day of the Lord.

THE END.

