NEVVES From PEMBROKE and MONGOMERY.

OR OXFORD MANCHESTERD BY Michael Oldsworth and his Lord, who swore He was
Chancellor of Oxford, and proved it in a Speech made to the new VISITOURS in
their New Convocation, April 11. 1648.

As here it follows word for word and oath for oath.

Printed at MONGOMERY. 1648.

The SPEECH it self.
Mr. VISITORS,
I Am glad to see this day, I hope it will never end, for I am your
Chancellor: Some say I am not your Chancellor, but Dam me they lie, for my
Brother was so before me, and none but Rascals would rob me of my Birthright:
They think Marquess of Hertford is Cancellor of Oxford, because (forsooth) the
University chose him; 's Death I sit here by Ordinance of Parliament, and judge
ye Gentlemen, wherher He or I look liker a Chancellor: I Will prove He is a
Party, for he himself is a Scholar, he has Greek and Latin; but all the world
knows I can scarce write or read, 'dam me this writing and reading has caused
all this Blood.

Some say, I love not the University, but I say they lie; I love her, I count
her my Mother, for I had four Sons there. You know what a coil I had e're I
could get hither, Sleden did so vex us with his Law and his Reasons we could
get nothing pass; you saw I was fain to swear him down, and Mr. Rous, Gurdon,
Mildmay, Wentworth, Prideaux, Scot, and other friends voted bravely, else
Seldon had carried it. 's Death, that fellow is but Burgess for Oxford, and I
am Chancellor, and yet he would have the Parliament hear his law and reasons
against their own Chancellor. I thank God, and I thank you; I thank God I am
come at last, and I thank you for giving me a gilded Bible; you could not give
me a better book ('Dam me I think) I love the Bible though I seldom use it; I
say I love it, and a Man's ^ffection is the best Member about him; I can love
it, though I cannot read it, as you Dr. Wilkinson love preaching though you
never preach; what? cannot a man be Doctor of Divinity but he must preach? I
hope you will confess I have gotten you good Places, if I had not stuck to you
how could you have thrown out Bailey, Seldon, Foll, Potter, Oliver, Ha^mond,
Morley, and the rest? and then to what end had you been Visitours if ye got not
their places? you know Hammond is my own God son, and they say he is a
Scholar? 's Death I love You, what care I for deep Scholars? Mr. Cheynell (I
thank you) you have been kind to me, you have broke your brains again for me,
and I have given you another Head, for J have made you Head of St. John's, and
for you sake have thrust out Bailey, his wife, and nine pretty child^en. Master
Reynolds I feared you would have left us, for your pretended to take no man's
place from him, but I thank God you are of another mind; for you have both a
Man's place and a Woman's place, you have all that belonged to Fell and his Wife
and all his Children. Mr. Wilkinson you love me, and J am glad of it, for they
say you hate yor enemies to the Bottomless pit, I have given you my own
Chaplains Prebend, and Dam me while he served Me he was an excellent Scholar.
Mr. Corbe^ I love you too, I have made you Orator of the University, 'twas my
God-son Hammond's place, I hope none will blame me for displacing my own
God-son, you are now my God-son, for you are Orator; I hope you will speak for
me, I cannot speak for my self; you have a Tongue now though you want Eyes,
what cannot a man be a Visitour without eyes? Mr. Langley I love you also, I
have made you Dr. of Divinity, Malignants say it is impossible to make you
Doctor, but hang'em they lie, for you were Created Doctor, and nothing can
Create but God and a Chancellor; Nay I have made you Head of Pembroke
College, I cannot make you Governor, for a Rogue (they call him Poyer) is
Governor of Pembroke, and Dam me I think the King will make Poyer to be Earl
of Pembrooke. Mr Harris you are an old man, I have made you Head of Trinity
College, I love an old Head, Dr. Kettle was an old Head before, but he loved
us not, I love an old Head new made. Sir Nathaniel Brent I know you love me,
for you are Judge of the Prerogative Court, the Parliament gave it you, you are
a good man, and that is a good place, they say you have no Civil Law, what is
that toth purpose: you have an Ordinance of Parliament, a man may be a Civilian
by an Ordinance of Parliament, else why the Devil have we sat seven yeats? My
Father said, that a Parliament could do any thing but make a Man a Woman, and a
Woman a Man. Mr. Rogers you look as if you loved me, and I have made you
Doctor, they call you Aaron, I hate'em for it, for I hate Aaron, he was a
Priest, and I would have all Priests and Jesuits hanged. Mr. Cornish I love you
though your wife plays tricks with you, they say she gads abroad because you
are a sicky wea^se man, but I have given you Dr. Walls place, for the weakest
goes to the wall (you must give me leave to clinch, for those that have no wit
must be content with clinches.) Mr. Palmer I have made you head of All-Soules,
and have turned out Sheldon, I hope you love me, for you are a Physician, and
never any Physician was Head of All-Soules, they say their Statutes do keep you
out, hang their Statutes, I Will keep you in, you are a Member of the House of
Commons, and a Member of Parliament may be Head of any House, what? must the
Parliament be tied to Oaths and Statutes? I have for your sake clapped Sheldon in
Prison, was it not high time? Dam me he has more brains then all we together,
you saw to day what tricks he put upon me: I could not speak to him but he
made it Nonsense, so as I was forced to cry him mercy four several times; But
I have Sheldon'd him by the he is, and he Deserves it, 's Death, is he not
Clerk of the Closet, I love no Clerks of the Closet, J am not one my self,
Dam me if I be: There Is a young rogue one Palmer (I hope Mr. Palmer he is not
your Namesake) this little knave looked at me as if he cared not two pence for
me; But I have Sheldon'd him too, and I Will justify it, for he is at least
twelve years old, and the Parliament has imprisoned one not nine years old, I
mean Inchiquin's Son, a Plague upon him, for now Iachiquin is turned Imbiking.
Gentlemen, love one another, for there is twenty thousand do hate you, they say
you are all either Dunces, Knaves, or Madmen, 's Death they will say so of me if
they durst. But do you serve GOD and love your CHANCELLOVR, you have all the
good Places the University can yield; you desired us to make you Visitours, and
you have made your selves Heads of Colleges. J love you all, Dam me do, I
command you (Register) to wri^e it down that J love them all, your name is
French, and my ^ame may be French, for I cannot spell English. God bless you
all, and God bless me, and do as I do, for I fear God and obey the
Parliament; I will live and die with you, and God confound me if I leave the
Town these two days.

Copia vera MICHAEL OLDSWORTH.

FINIS.

