THE COPY OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE.

WITH A true Discovery of several false Pretenders to that eternal inheritance,
and of the right Heir thereunto.

Together With such safe instructions as will enable him to clear his title,
and to make it unquestionable.

Exactly evidenced by many perspicuous and unconstrained testimonies of
Scripture.

Penned, and published upon mature deliberation, and good advise.

By Robert Bidwel, a servant, and Minister of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

London, Printed by E. T. for Tho. Johnson, at the golden Key in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

TO THE Right virtuous, and truly religious, Dame MARGARET BOSVVEL of
Bradbourn place, in the County of Kent, my singular good Lady and Patroness.
Good Madam,
FOr though none can be said to be absolutely good, but God only: Yet, I hope,
it will not be denied, but that every true Christian may be said to be good so
far forth, as he, or she has attained unto the power of godliness. And if
your Ladyship may not be ranked amongst the most Eminent in that way of Piety,
and Evangelical Perfection: I am infinitely mistaken in mine accounts. I cannot
affirm, that a long continued experience has confirmed me in the knowledge of
your most excellent indowments. But for me to say, that ever I did, (till
within these few weeks) discover so much goodness in so little a time, were to
sin against the multitude of your merits, and the cognizance of mine own
conscience. Madam, I most humbly beg your Ladyships pardon for my
transgression against your much meekness, and humility: I find you to be such
a perfect enemy to pride, and adulation, that you cannot relish the sound of
your own just commendations, though but very sparingly expressed.
Nevertheless, being now (by Gods blessing, and your undeserved favor) become
a Member of your family: I dare not expose my self to the reproach, either of so
much ignorance as not to be sensible of your manifold virtues, or of so much
ingratitude as not to acknowledge them. I could heartily wish, that there were
any thing in these lines, or in any other of my more hopeful improvements,
that might make the memory of your name immortal. But your own illustrious
qualifications have already supplied my defects, and prevented my pains in that
particular. Mine only present Petition is; that you will be pleased to accept
of this pattern of your own perfections; The right Heir to that eternal
Covenant of Grace. Madam, if he may yet furt^er ingratiate me with your good
Ladyship; my care shall be to continue my self

Your Ladyships most humble and faithful servant in our joint Lord Jesus
Christ. To. Bidwell.

TO THE Right Honorable, Major General PHILIP SKIPPON, one of the Lords of his
Highnesses Most Honorable privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
ALthough the comfortable beams of your infatigable goodness do so
continually extend themselves to the supporting, and supplying the weak Members
of Christ, your great Lord and Master: that happily your left hand has forgotten
what your right hand has done for me the unworthiest of your servants for his
sake. Yet I can neither be so ungrateful, nor so ungracious, as not to record
your manifold favors, so freely conferred upon me: they are often in my mouth,
but always in my mind. And being led by Providence to this present
opportunity: I felt it as a duty incumbent upon me to manifest the sense of
those perpetual engagements, whereby you have obliged me to honor your
singular piety and bounty: And therewithal to present you with a Servant, or
rather an Associate: whom (being so like unto your self) I humbly conceive you
cannot but well like of. My Lord: He is the right Heir to the rich Inheritance
conveyed in, and by that eternal Covenant of Grace. It was upon your account,
that I was furnished with Oil to supply the glimmering Lamp, whereby I was
enabled to proceed in his search: which (contrary to your more Noble intention)
was so unhansomly snuffed, that it could hardly light me to my journeys end, Or
probably this poor Pilgrim had appeared unto you much better accommodated: Yet
the best array, that my conscience can afford him, is the naked Truth. It is
hoped, that being thus barely discovered, some abler hand will furnish him with
richer, and more suitable Ornaments: I humbly beseech you to entertain him
according to the reallity of his fidelity and sincerity. I shall not need to
say, that I will leave him at your door, for me thinks, I see him already the
Master of your house, and entirely familiar with your whole Family, As being
all governed by the same Doctrine and Discipline of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To which, I am confident, that you will constantly submit, according to the
condition of his Covenant of Grace: till he receives you into his Kingdom of
Glory. Which is, and shall be in the daily prayers of

Your honors most faithfully devoted servant Robert Bidwell.

THE COPY OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE.
John 3. 16.

God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

IN this precious portion of Scripture it pleased the Son of God, our only
Savior, to deliver unto us a brief Copy of the Covenant of Grace: or a
compendious Abstract, containing the principal parts, or points essential to
the Covenant of Grace. He that has any skill in Covenants, Assurances, or the
like Evidences; cannot but know, that such conveyances do chiefly comprehend
these parts or members.

First the Covenanters, or parties covenanting. Secondly, the Consideration, or
motive. Thirdly, the Gift, or the thing granted, or conveyed. Fourthly, the
Proviso, or condition. Fifthly, the Prevention, or freedom from encumbrances.
And sixthly, the Inheritance, or quiet possession.
And all these parts, or qualifications are most exactly and orderly registered
here in this Copy of Record. The Covenanters are God and the World.

God so loved the World.

The Consideration is Gods Love: his infinite Love.

So loved the World.

The Gift is Jesus Christ: the Son of God.

He gave his only begotten Son.

The Proviso is Faith.

That whosoever believes in him.

The Prevention is freedom from destruction.

Should not perish.

And the Inheritance is everlasting life.

But have everlasting life.

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Thus you see that this Scripture, according to the several parts, or branches
thereof, together with their number, and order, do very fitly and exquisitely
comply with the nature of a Covenant. And now I shall endeavor to make good
that these six parts, or members herein contained, are altogether proper and
essential to the Covenant of Grace.

And to that purpose: In the first branch, consisting of the Covenanters: I
shall make appear. First, That there is such a Covenant, as the Covenant of
Grace.

Secondly, By whom this Covenant of Grace was made: Thirdly, With whom it was
made.

And fourthly, when it was made.

For the first: Although we find not, that the word of God has set forth unto
us this Covenant of Grace, under that very Notion, or expression of the
Covenant of Grace. In totidem syllabis, as we say: In just so many syllables,
or in the very self-same words. Yet (by the consideration of some few
particulars) I doubt not, but I shall settle it very strongly, even upon the
weakest apprehensions.

For we find that the Lord has contracted, or made, many Promises, Grants,
Agreements, or the like Conveyances, under the name, or style of Covenants. I
will establish; my Covenant with you: and with your seed after you, says the
Lord to Noah, Genesis 9. 9.

The same day the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 15. 18.

Which not long after he confirmed in these words: And I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for
an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee,
Genesis 17. 7, 8.

And oftentimes in the same 17. Chapter he urges the said Covenant. He
commands obedience thereunto, verse. 9. And seals it with the sign of
Circumcision, verse. 11. The seal of the righteousness of faith, says St.
Paul, Romans 4. 11.

Again, we read of the book of the Covenant: And of the blood of the Covenant,
Exodus 24. 7, 8.

And truly these, and the like, were no other then representations, or
manifestations, or confirmations of this, which we call the Covenant of Grace.

In like manner the Covenant of peace, Isa. 54. 10.

The Covenant of the Redeemer, Isa. 59. 20, 21.

The everlasting Covenant, Jer. 32. 40.

The new Covenant, promised, Jer. 31. 31. and repeated, Hebr. 10. 16, 17. were
Covenants for Reconciliation, Preservation, and Sanctification. All which
(together with every other of the like nature) are but as so many Members,
which do receive their very life, and being from, and by, the virtue of this
original Covenant for Redemption and Salvation: which we call the Covenant of
Grace. The name and substance whereof are very well presented unto us in that
typical Covenant, extended literally to David: but intended really to Christ,
the Son of David; in these words: My mercy will I keep for him for ever more:
and my Covenant shall stand fast with him. His seed also will I make to endire
for ever: and his Throne as the days of Heaven. If his Children forsake my
law, and walk not in my judgments; If they break my statutes, and keep not my
Commandments; Then will I visit their transgression with the Rod, and their
iniquity with Stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him: nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, etc. Psalm. 89. 28. to
the 35.

Thus are we warranted to call this grand evidence of our Salvation by the name
of a C^venant: In regard, that our heavenly Father has made so many promises
and concessions to us, and our predecessors under that very title.

And now, that I may resolve you, in a word, why we call it the Covenant of
Grace.

Be pleased to consider: That God gave unto Adam great possessions and
privileges by way of Covenant. But revocable and destructive also in case of
his disobedience thereunto, Genesis 2. 17.

Yet Adam rebels to his eternal ruin, Genesis 3. 6.

Nevertheless, without the least desert, or desire of his: He is not only
reprived, but also restored unto favor, by virtue of another Covenant: Inplied
in the discovery of Christ, by the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15.

And does not that deserve to be called the Covenant of Grace? And not only
Adam, but we also have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God: But are
justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3. 23, 24. Yea, ye also were dead in sins,
but by Grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2. 5.

And all by virtue of this Covenant, which is therefore most worthily called:
The Covenant of Grace.

We come now in the second particular to show you, By whom this Covenant of
Grace was made. And I trust I shall not need to take much pains therein. For I
am confident, that whosoever can believe that there was a Covenant of Grace
made with the World, for redemption and salvation: they cannot doubt, but God
was the only author thereof.

It was God that was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19.

And it is the grace of God, that brings salvation, Tit. 2. 11.

And the only true light has made it most manifest here in this Text. God so
loved the World. God the father: for he gave his only begotten son. God: that
great Creator, and only wise disposer of all things, both in heaven and in
earth.

Who, having created the first man in his own Image, Genesis 1. 27.

That is (says St. Paul) In knowledge, Col. 3. 10.

And in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.

He gave him dominion over the Creatures, Genesis 1. 28.

Stated him in Paradise, Genesis 2. 8. A place abounding with all, and all manner
of happiness and pleasure, and plenty. And for the more secure and settled
enjoyment of the same: He promised him everlasting life; whereof the tree of
life, Genesis 2. 9. was the symbol, sign, or token. To have and hold all the said
premises, privileges, and prerogatives to him, and his heirs for ever. And
all this by way of Covenant: upon condition of the said Adams obedience to the
whole will of God. Notwithstanding, the only Proviso, expressed, consisted in
his abstinence from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil: and this under
the penalty of eternal death, Genesis 2. 17.

This is that which we call the Covenant of works.

And which the word of God commonly calls the Law. The matter, or substance
whereof is exemplified in the Moral Law, or the Law of the ten Commandments,
Ex. 20. which is sometimes called: The works of the Law, Gal. 2. 16. And
sometimes the Law of works, Romans 3. 27. But Adam, careless of his blessed
estate, believes the Devil rather then his God. Insomuch that he neglects his
Maker, and Master: And, despising his Covenant, breaks the condition.

By which rebellion, he incurs the penalty, and pulls the woeful ruins of
misery, death, and condemnation upon himself, and his whole posterity.

Yet this good God, this much offended Majesty, notwithstanding this his just
occasion of eternal displeasure: So loved the World, that he confirmed this
Covenant of Grace, wherein He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

I am now, in the third particular, to show you; with whom this Covenant of
Grace was made. Expressed here under this notion: The World; God so loved the
World.

We find that the holy Ghost has applied this word World, to several senses
and significations.

It is used for the habitable places of the world: for the universal frame of
the world: and for the Inhabitants of the world. All in one verse, Joh. 1. 10.
For mankind, Joh. 1. 29. For the whole earth, Math. 4. 8. For the riches, or
the wealth of the world, Mat. 16. 26. For the pleasures, lusts, and delights of
the worlds Gal. 6. 14.

But here in this place, it is restrained only unto Man, or Mankind: As being
the only Creature in the world, that was capable of such a Covenant: And unto
whom it was altogether needful, and absolutely necessary. So that it cannot
otherwise be: But that this Covenant of Grace was made with Man, or Mankind.

Yet not with the first man: who did utterly divest and deprive himself of all
possibility for such a glorious enterprise, or undertaking, by his disobedience
to the Covenant of w^rks. Neither was it made with any of his seed after the
flesh: I mean after a fleshly generation. For if flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God: As in 1 Cor. 15. 50. much less could flesh and blood
recover their lost title to the Kingdom of God.

We must know, that upon the first man's breach of Covenant, God and Man were
parted: Man flies from God in fear: and God could not follow man, but in fury.
Neither could any reconcile them: but he, that must be both God and Man: Man,
that so he might suffer for the sin of Man: And God, that so he might satisfy
the justice of God. For Adams disobedience had made God and Man enemies: Now,
it is not to be imagined that one enemy will make a league, or Covenant with
another, but either out of fear: And far be it from the Lord of Hosts to be
subject to any such passion: or upon satisfaction, which to poor decayed man
was a thing impossible.

And, notwithstanding Gods love toward his lost creature: and his pity toward
the distressed, helpless, hopeless Soul might plead for mercy, pardon, and
compassion: Yet justice might not, could not be abused without Gods infinite
dishonor, in whom it is essential.

Nevertheless, the mercy of God prevailed with his wisdom (not against his
justice; but) to find out a means, whereby to satisfy his justice: that so
his righteousness might be vindicated: his wrath appeased: and Man might be
impartially restored. And he saw that there was no Man, and wondered (or
considered) that there was no intercessour: Therefore his arm brought salvation
unto him, Isa. 59. 16. His arm: That is: His son Christ, According to that of
the same Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 53. 1. unto whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant. And so he goes on
with a Prophecy of Christ in that whole Chapter.

Or if you will understand the arm of God, for the power of God: according to
the more usual construction: Yet that also shall direct us to Christ. For he is
the power of God, and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24.

We must know, and consider, that man, by his fall, was so broken and
disjoynted, that he became too weak for such a weighty burden, as that of
eternal redemption. Therefore the Lord laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm
89. 19. Mighty to save, Isa. 63. 1. Moreover, God might not, in honor, yield
to man his enemy: But he could not, in gentleness, deny his only son: The son
of his bosom, John 1. 18. In whom his Soul delights, Isa. 42. 1. who does
always those things that please him, Joh. 8. 29. Nay, he could not, in
justice, refuse a competent satisfaction: from the hand of such an High Priest,
as is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 24.

And to that very purpose Christ came forth from God, Joh. 16. 28. To overcome
the evil of the world, verse. 33. And God was in Christ, reconciling the World
unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Thus you see with whom this Covenant of Grace was
made.

Not with the World universally propounded; Nor with mankind simply
considered: But with Jesus Christ, both God and Man; who being very God: Yet he
took upon him the very nature of Man, that so he might suffer for man's
disobedience on man's behalf. Not to abolish, or destroy the law, or the
Covenant of works: which man transgressed to his own confusion. For, till
heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5. 18.

But to fulfill the said law in his own person, for, and on the behalf of all
believers. And so Christ is said to be the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10. 4.

For which cause he is likewise called the last Adam. Because like as the first
Adam, as a public person received the Covenant of works, for himself and all
his posterity, and brake it: to their utter ruin, and universal undoing.

So Christ, the second, or last Adam, as the public head of his Church, has
undertaken the perfect performance of the same Covenant of works, in the name
and place of all believers: which he shall most exactly fulfill, and keep for
them, even unto the end of the world.

And therefore I may confidently say to all true believers, as Paul said to the
Saints at Rome: Ye are not under the law, but under grace, Romans 6. 14.

For Christ has, does, and will observe, and accomplish the whole Law, as it
is the Covenant of works, for us: That so he may estate, and settle us in this
Covenant of Grace, in, and by himself only, and for ever. He being, in truth,
the very essence, the only entire being thereof: With whom: For whom: In whom:
And by whom the said Covenant of Grace was made, granted, confirmed, and
delivered.

With whom it was made: For he is the Surety of the Covenant, Hebr. 7. 22.

For whom it was granted: For he is the Mediator of the Covenant, Hebr. 8. 6.

In whom it was confirmed: For he is the Seed of the Covenant, Gal. 3. 16, 17.

And by whom it is delivered: For he is the Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3.
1.

We pass on now to the fourth particular: wherein we are to consider when this
Covenant of Grace was made. I shall not stand to strive with those
unwarrantable opinions that are, or have been offered and received, in
reference to the Date of this Covenant. But I shall prove by Scripture, and
such truths as will conclude from Scripture; that it was framed from eternity.

For first, we find that Adam, soon after his creation, having sinned against
God in the Covenant of works: through the seducement of Satan: Immediately
thereupon the Lord, in the presence of Adam, cursed that old Serpent: And
denounced his destruction by the Seed of the woman; which was Christ, Genesis 3.
14, 15. To Satan's confusion, and man's consolation And truly it is to be
conceived, that God would not so suddenly, and so certainly have set forth his
Son for the Savior, at that very instant, had there not been some pre-contract
between them to that purpose.

Verily he was foreordained before the foundation of the World, says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 20.

Secondly, we read that Abel, the second son of Adam, did offer unto God a more
acceptable sacrifice then Cain, the first born. And this was by faith, says
the Apostle, Hebr. 11. 4.

Now this faith of his could not have been so effectual, had it not been built
upon some sure foundation.

And what might that be? His own righteousness in order unto the Covenant of
works?

Surely, No: He could not but know that to be a false ground: for it sunk under
his father; whereby both they, and we became liable to death and destruction.
And therefore Abels faith must of necessity be established upon some such
promise, as that of eternal life: which God that cannot lie, promised before
the world began, Titus 1. 2.

And to whom might this promise be made before the World began? But to Christ
the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. who was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was, Prove. 8. 23.

Nor can we imagine, that this promise of eternal life, was made by God the
Father, but upon some conditions to be accomplished by God the Son, which were
to be revealed, and performed in their season.

When he shall make his Soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his
hand, Isa. 53. 10. There is the condition prescribed, and the time prefixed.

Thirdly, this Covenant of Grace will appear to be eternal, if we shall
consider how mightily Gods truth was engaged in the Covenant of works.

Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for
in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, says the Lord, Genesis 2.
17.

Yet we see that Adam did eat, and died not accordingly, Genesis 3. 6.

Now how shall the truth of God be preserved in this case? but by virtue of
some such former act, as might dis-ingage Gods resolution, before it proceeded
to execution? which in all probability, must be according to that eternal
purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3. 11.

For albeit the truth of God might seem to suffer in the breach of the Covenant
of works: yet grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17.

Fourthly, if we shall seriously regard the Justice of God, we shall find this
Covenant of Grace to be eternal.

Almighty God creates Adam, and freely gives him great possessions: reserving
to himself the fruit of one tree only, in sign of homage due to his
supremacy: And in case of disobedience by eating thereof, he decrees the
penalty of death. Nevertheless Adam transgresses in this very particular.

And shall he eat, and not die? Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
says Abraham, Genesis 18. 25. But Adam eats and dies not.

Now the justice of God, which must not, cannot be violated, sends us of
necessity to some further consideration: There must be some preconclusion made
by way of prevention.

Doubtless, if Christ the Redeemer had not been ready by virtue of this
Covenant of Grace, to satisfy Gods Justice, even in that very instant of man's
rebellion against the Covenant of works: Death and destruction had immediately
seized upon sinful man, together with the whole Creation: But in that very
point of time, the Son of God appears in the presence of his Father, on the
behalf of miserable man: Saying, Deliver him from going down to the pit; I have
found a Ransom, as Job 33. 24. And in order thereunto: Christ suffered, the
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, or reconcile us to God, 1
Pet. 3. 18.

Fifthly, if we look back toward Gods Election: that will also prove unto us
the eternity of this Covenant. Blessed, (says St. Paul) be the God, and father
of the Lord Jesus Christ: who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places in Christ: According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.

Now in all reason, there was no occasion, why God should choose any in Christ
before the foundation of the world; but that, foreseeing man's general ruin by
his disobedience to the Covenant of works, a remnant might be preserved from
destruction by Christ, according to the Election of Grace. And therefore most
excellent to this purpose is that of Paul to Timothy. Be not thou therefore
ashamed (says he) of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner, but be
thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the power of God:
who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works; but according to his own purpose, and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus, before the World began, 2 Timothy 1. 8, 9. Let us consider the
latter verse more seriously.

Who has saved us, and called us: He saved us intentionally, before he called
us actually: Not according to our works: or according to the Covenant of works
made with us, but according to his own purpose and grace: or his own purpose in
the Covenant of Grace: which was given us: in whom? why in Christ Jesus: when?
before the world began.

The certainty of all these former four particulars will appear yet more
clearly, if we shall conceive, and consider: That God the Father almighty,
together with Christ, his only begotten co-essential Son, did from eternity
contrive to advance their glory, and to make it shine through their illustrious
attributes of Goodness, Power, Wisdom, Justice, Grace, and Truth.

And to that purpose this individual two: the Father and the Son did in the
unity of the Spirit, comply and conclude to modellize, or frame a goodly
creature called Man. Such a one as may be sensible of their intentions: capable
of their commands; and active to proceed in their designs.

The better to affect him with their goodness: they will create him of
contemptible materials: The dust of the earth: But they will shape him in a
royal mould: In their own Image. And least he should be wanting in any
particular whatsoever: To manifest the greatness of their power: They Will frame
for him a spacious Universe: A World completely, and abundantly supplied with
all things necessary, convenient, and comfortable, far beyond humane
apprehension: over all which Man shall have the sole dominion. To qualify, and
fit him for such a vast command: They will enrich his person with excellent
endowments, and his mind with admirable instructions. Nevertheless (in
reservation of their own original right) they will bind him by Covenant to the
observation of certain particulars: And in case of his disobedience thereunto,
they will cast him from the height of honor, into the depth of horror and
destruction.

But in their boundless wisdom they foresee, that man, their great Vicegerent,
will miscarry, and fall away from his integrity. And therefore, in reference to
their Justice, they can do no less than confound and destroy him for ever,
together with all those excellent dignities and dominions, wherewith they are
resolved to indow him.

But least, by this means, their glory should be buried in the untimely ruins
of such a promising fair enterprise. The Son supports it with the pillar of his
grace: the Monument of a most dear Redeemer. Father (says he) I will not
undertake to keep the Rebel from his cursed fall, least happily he boasts
himself to stand by his own strength.

But in his fall, I will keep him from the curse: yet satisfy thy Justice to
the full. Be pleased to deliver to my hand his Covenant so forfeited: return
him over debtour unto me, and leave him wholly to my custody: I Will be his
surety.

In the interim (O my Father) to magnify the riches of our Grace: let thou and
I contract a Covenant: A preventing Covenant, to take effect just at the very
instant of his fall: wherein I Will rise a Mediator between thy Justice and his
weakness: which if he, or any of his lost posterity, shall willingly receive
and seal unto: I will not only save him from thy wrath: but likewise I Will
restore him to thy love, in which I will establish him for ever.

To this the Father gives his free consent: And thus the Father and the Son
conclude to ratify this Covenant of Grace.

And truly, I doubt not, but all such as are truly godly will very well admit
of this supposed conference, provided that it be with holy reverence.

For we read: That Jesus Christ through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, Hebr. 9. 14. And that God received him with this
congratulation. In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a
Covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the
desolate heritages: That thou may say to the prisoners, go forth; to them
that are in darkness, show your selves: And they shall feed in ways, and
their pastures shall be in all high places, etc. Isa. 49. 8, 9. etc.

I beseech you, let us take these words of God the Father unto God the Son into
our further consideration.

For verily we cannot conceive at the first view, how punctually they may be
applied to that eternal Covenant. In an acceptable time have I heard thee on
the worlds behalf: And I have helped thee to work salvation in a day, most
proper for that purpose: And I will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant
of (or concerning) the people, or on the behalf of the people) to establish the
earth: which otherwise would be destroyed: To cause to inherit the heritages:
which otherwise would be made desolate. Adam and Eve together with their whole
posterity, in them, shall be prisoners to my Justice. But thou shall enlarge
them: That thou may say to the prisoners: Go forth; they shall hide
themselves from my presence, as in darkness, but thou shall make them
confident, saying, show your selves. And they shall live safely, pleasantly,
and plentifully.

They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places,
etc.

By this conclusion, between God and Christ their Creation is finished and
furnished: Man, their great Governor is constituted by Commission, and
confirmed by Covenant: which he, rebelling, breaks, and tumbles headlong
toward condemnation.

But in that very point of time, the Son (by virtue of this Cov^nant of Grace)
redeems him from destruction: Restores him to his Fathers favor: And
re-estates him in his first Command. Where he, with all of his elect posterity
(persisting in the faith of Jesus Christ) are mounted from the degree of
servants, to the dignity of Sons: according to the Tenor of eternal truth.

For as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God:
even to them that believe on his name, John 1. 12.

And thus we see, that Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works: According to that of St. Paul, Tit. 2. 14.

And God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

According to the words of our Text.

PRoceed we now to the second point, or Member contained in this Copy of the
Covenant of Grace: Being the Consideration, or motive that invited the Lord to
contract this Covenant: which we find to be his Love: God so loved the World:
So loved: A vehement forcible expression: So: So abundantly, So infinitely.
Indeed, we may not conceive that any other, but an infinite Love should proceed
from an infinite God: For Love in God is not accidental, but essential: And
therefore it is attributed unto him in the abstract by that beloved Disciple:
God is Love (says he) 1 John 4. 8. Love it self.

It is impossible for any creature sufficiently to commend the Love of God:
because we are not able to comprehend the love of God.

Yet we may commend it for a great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we
were dead in sins. According to St. Paul's expression, Ephesians. 2. 4. And
according to the Lords own example.

For God comemndeth his love toward us, in that, when we were yet sinners
Christ died for us, Romans 5. 8.

Neither does this commendation of the Love of God the Father from the mouth of
God the Son fall any thing short of either of the former.

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

But you will say: how does it appear, that the Love of God was the only
Consideration, or motive that procured him to conclude this Covenant of Grace.

We must understand and consider: That God being Love it self: As having the
very pure and perfect substance of love in himself essentially: He loves
himself by the necessity of his nature: And his Creatures by the liberty of his
will.

And so resolving to create the World, with every particular therein contained;
he looked on them with a general love, as being his good Creatures, Genesis 1. 31.

But on man he looked with a more peculiar affection: First, In respect, that
man was the only Creature, by whom the Lord intended to advance his own
immortal glory, Isa. 43. 7.

Secondly, For that the Lord intended to create him in his own Image: As well
in regard of the substance of his Soul, being immortal and immaterial, Genesis 2.
7. As also in regard of the perfections of his Soul, consisting of
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.

But then foreseeing man's accursed fall, procured wholly by his own default:
The God of goodness looks upon him, then even, with the love of pity and
compassion: which so prevailed in his Son Christ Jesus: That, He gave himself
for us, an offering, and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians.
5. 2. In whom our gracious God was fully pleased, Math. 3. 17.

Which so increased and confirmed his love: that he concludes this Covenant of
Grace.

And certainly (there being no possibility to be expected from decayed mankind
for the repairing of themselves, either by desert, satisfaction, intercession,
or any other way, or means whatsoever) we must needs conceive, consider, and
assure our Souls: That whatsoever God, or Christ, or God in Christ, or God for
Christ his sake, either did, do, or shall do, in order unto Man's salvation, or
whatsoever else may truly be called a blessing; They did, do, and shall do it,
merely by virtue of that undeserved Love, which they vouchsafed in this
Covenant.

Had not that prevailed, man had been destroyed: and God had lost the glory of
his grace, which shines most clearly through man's Redemption.

Without doubt, it is in reference to this eternal Covenant; That our
Redemption is said to be eternal; Hebr. 9. 12. our Salvation eternal; Hebr. 5.
9.

And our Inheritance eternal, Hebr. 9. 15.

And the only Consideration, or Motive, that procured all this, was Gods
eternal, or everlasting Love, wherewith he loved us, Jer. 31. 3.

He loved us generally as his Creatures: He loved us particularly as those
Creatures, by whom he intended chiefly to advance his glory.

He loved us more especially, as bearing his own Image. He loved us
compassionately, as foreseeing our fall in Adam our old Grandfather.

But he loved us most effectually upon the intercession of Christ his own dear
Son.

And thus God so loved the World.

But that this truth may gain our full belief, let us surveigh his gift, his
only Son. For, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son.
This is the next branch, which in the third place sets forth it self unto us in
this Copy of the Covenant of Grace. Being the Gift, or Grant conveyed,
assigned, and set over by the said Covenant, or Deed of Gift.

WHerein I am to show unto you these three particulars.

First, That Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, was the Gift conveyed
in that eternal Covenant.

Secondly, What manner of Son he was.

And thirdly, How, and to what purpose God did so assign him.

For the first, be pleased to remember what I have formerly delivered
concerning this Precontract.

How God the Father, and his blessed Son foreseeing man's destruction by his
fall: Least by that means their purpose concerning the Creation should
miscarrie: The Son Christ Jesus gives himself to God a surety for the Creature:
And in case of man's default, to satisfy the law on man's behalf. And thereupon
the Lord returns his Son by designation debtour to the law: which he must to
the uttermost discharge, by suffering death, which man of right must suffer.
Not presently, for yet there was no cause, why he should answer what was yet
undone: Nor at the very instant of man's fall: The Lord was pleased to take his
single Bond: And to defer the execution, until his own appointed time should
come.

Nevertheless, by virtue of this Covenant, God gave his Son for man's
Redemption intentionally, and by way of preordination before all time, 1 Pet.
1. 19. effectually in the beginning of time, Rev. 13. 8. And actually in the
fullness of time, Gal. 4. 4. Now albeit these several times were far distant
the one from the other in our apprehension: Yet they were not so in Gods repute
and acceptance: for with him all times are present: Eternity is evermore Gods
present Tense.

And thus it may appear, that the Gift, which God the Father gave in this
eternal Conant, was his only begotten Son.

And that he then gave him, not only intentionally according to our
discretion: But effectually and actually according to his own purpose and
satisfaction. Moreover, if we consider the occasion, why God and Christ did
make this Covenant: Namely, to save man from that woeful curse, which he did
voluntarily incur.

And yet to clear Gods Justice so engaged, us in the Covenant of works.

Then we shall find, that nothing could avail to bring to pass that intricate
design, but the only Son of God, both God and Man.

Gods Justice seiseth upon every sin: from which, nor men, nor Angels were
quite free, Prove. 28. 9. and Job 4. 18. And none but only God might stay Gods
hand. But man has sinned, and man must suffer for it. And therefore in Man's
Nature Christ must die: and Christ as God and Man, must satisfy Gods violated
Justice.

And very punctual to this purpose is that of the Prophet Isaiah. Unto us a
child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulder: and his Name shall be called wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God,
The everlasting Father, The Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. These glorious
expressions were too high for any, but the eternal Son of God: who was then, or
at that time, neither born, nor given, otherwise then by way of promise and
prevention: And that by this eternal Covenant.

Now that we may be the more sensible of that incomparable Love, which Almighty
God vouchsafed us in this most precious Gift: Let us consider, for what kind
of Son, the word of truth has set him forth unto us.

He is Gods own Son, Romans 8. 32. His only begotten Son, which is in the bosom
of his Father, John 1. 18.

His beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased, Mat. 17. 5.

His dear Son, or the Son of his Love, Col. 1. 13.

Whom he has appointed heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2.

In whom his Soul delights, Isa. 42. 1.

Who never displeased him, John 8. 29.

Did God give this near, dear, delightful Son of his, to suffer death, a
cursed death, to save accursed rebels from destruction? Truly, the though
thereof (if any thing serious) will enforce us to conclude with that beloved
Disciple: Herein is Love (the very power, efficacy, and excellency of Love) Not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4. 10.

But happily 't will be demanded, how, and to what purpose did God give his Son
in this eternal Covenant of Grace? I answer thus.

God, being simply and essentially one, considering man's eternal separation,
both from his presence, and his favor too, occasioned by man's rebellion. The
same one God did graciously decree, to take upon him in the Person of the Son
of God, the Name, and Nature of the Son of Man: By that mysterious means to
reconcile mankind unto himself. And thus as God the Father in his Justice
opposes man's contempt, so God the Son in mercy intercedes, and pacifies Gods
wrath for Man's offense.

And therefore very much to this purpose is that of the Apostle Paul. There is
one God (says he) and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus:
who gave himself a Ransom for all to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.

In which words I desire you to consider: First, that Christ as Mediator gave
Himself a Ransom: Not silver, nor gold, nor such corruptible trash, but
himself: Secondly, that he gave himself a Ransom for all: Not only for Peter,
and James, and John; and those that followed him in the flesh: But also for
Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah, and all that through the like faith either did, do, or
shall embrace him in the spirit: and thirdly, that this was not testified, or
revealed so soon as it was concluded: but to be testified in due time.

By which (me thinks) it does appear most plain: that Christ as Mediator,
first did give himself to God by this eternal Covenant, a Ransom and
Redemption for Mankind: whom God receiving in full satisfaction: Gives him
again. To suffer for sin, Isa. 53. 5.

To justify the ungodly, Romans 4. 5.

To fulfill the Law for every one that believes, Romans 10. 4.

To be the object of our faith, Joh. 6. 29.

The only object of our faith: For there is none other name under Heaven given
among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12.

And finally and eternally to be whatsoever is good, and profitable for the
children of men.

Behold (says God) I have given him for a witness to the people: a Leader,
and Commander to the people, Isa. 55. 4. For a witness, to testify unto the
people, that all the promises of God in him are; yea, and Amen. According to
that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

A Leader: to lead them to the Father in the way of truth, and life: I am the
way, the truth, and the life (says he) no man comes unto the father, but by
me, John 14. 6. And a Commander to the people: To work powerfully upon their
hearts. He taught them as one that had authority, and not as the Scribes, says
the Evangelist, Marc. 1. 22. He said unto Simon Peter, and Andrew his brother:
Follow me, And they straightway followed him, Mat. 4. 18, 19, 20.

They immediately obey his Command without any inquisition, either concerning
profit, or preferment: Such Queries as are much insisted upon by unconfirmed
resolutions.

He is made unto us of God wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Are you ignorant? Christ is your wisdom: Are you
sinful? He is your sanctification: Are you inthralled, or distressed, or any
way afflicted? He is your redemption.

Or do you fear, that you shall want any thing, that may concern either your
being, or your well-being? Why all things are yours: whether Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas, or the World, or life, or death, or things present, or things, to
come, all are yours. And ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22,
23. If Christ once comes to own you: ye shall have his Ministers to instruct,
and to edify you: The World shall not harm you: your life shall be gain, and
your Death advantage: Things present shall content you: And things to come
shall comfort you. All things are yours.

We know (says St. Paul) that all things work together for good to them that
love God: to them who are the called, according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28.
According to his eternal purpose in this eternal Covenant. Nor do ye doubt of
this.

For he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things, Romans 8. 32. You may happily
conceive, that your loss by Adam was very great: But truly you may be
confident, that your gain by Christ is infinitely greater. For though Adam in
his innocence enjoyed the riches of Gods goodness: yet he was not then
sensible of the exceeding riches of his Grace. For grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ, John 1. 17.

Secondly, Whatsoever Adam then received from God, he received it only as a
servant: But as many as receive the Lord Jesus Christ; to them he gives power
to become the sons of God, John 1. 12.

And thirdly, Though Adam in his Innocence was a righteous person: Yet, being
left to his own power, he fell into condemnation.

But there is now no condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1.

For they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, says
another Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

And this our Lord himself confirms beyond opinion.

My sheep (says he) hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand, John 10. 27, 28.

Thus have I shown you in the explication of the third point: First, that the
gift conveyed in this eternal Covenant was Christ, the only begotten son of
God.

Secondly, I have shown you for what manner of Son the Spirit sets him forth.

And thirdly, How, and for what purpose the Father did give, and send him.
Namely, to suffer for sin. To justify the ungodly, To fulfill the Law for all
believers. To be the only object of our faith. And to be all good things to
all good Christians: To all that believe in him: According to the proviso, or
condition expressed and required in this Covenant of Grace: which by the fourth
and next branch contained in this Copy appears to be faith. That whosoever
believes in him, etc.

God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

JN this fourth point, or Member we shall consider these three particulars:
First, What is intended by this word Believe: Secondly, Why God requreth faith
for the proviso, or condition of this Covenant: And thirdly, Why he requires
nothing but faith.

For the first, we must know, that this word believe: implies much more then
it seems to express.

But in as much as it has relation to the Word and promises of God: wherein
his Son is holden forth unto us: It does properly signify faith.

And this faith consists of two parts: that is to say, Assent and Consent,
whereof the first is an Act of the understing: The second an Act of the will.

In the first, the judgment is convinced to acknowledge and profess. In the
second, the will is disposed to embrace and practice. Nevertheless, this
Assent by it self, is often taken for a general faith.

And it has these three degrees: Opinion, knowledge, and assurance.

Opinion is, when a man believes a thing to be true according to his present
apprehension and judgment: Yet the same thing may be otherwise, for ought that
he knows: Or when a man verily thinks the thing to be true, which may
afterward appear to be contrary.

I verily thought with my self (says St. Paul) that I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth: which thing I also did in Jerusalem,
and many of the Saints did I shut up in prison. And so he proceeds to recount
in what horrible practices that erroneous Opinion of his had engaged him, Acts
26. 9, 10, 11.

The second degree is knowledge: when a man's judgment is so far convinced,
either by reason, or by some powerful argument: that his knowledge is
confirmed in the thing, whereof he was formerly somewhat uncertain.

Rabbi (says Nichodemus) we know that thou art a Teacher come from God: for no
man can do these miracles that thou do, except God be with him, John. 3. 2.

The third is Assurance: And this is, when a man becomes confident in the
thing that he thinks, and knows, in regard of the infallible authority of the
Author thereof.

Lord (says the Centurion) I am not worthy, that thou should come under my
roof: But speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed, Math. 8. 8. And
thus the Apostle.

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering (for he is
faithful that promised, Hebr. 10. 23. By these three degrees this Assent
amounts to the nature of a general faith. And as this general faith has
several degrees: So there are likewise diverse kinds of faith.

As first, there is a miraculous faith: or a faith inabling men to work
miracles.

Verily I say unto you: If ye have faith, as a grain of Mustard Seed, ye shall
say unto this mountain, remove hence to yonder place: and it shall remove, and
nothing shall be unpossible unto you, says our Savior to his Disciples, Mat.
17. 20.

Secondly, there is the Doctrine of Faith. Now the spirit speaks expressly
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits and Doctrines of Devils, says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 1. where
the Doctrine of Faith is opposed to the Doctrine of Devils.

Thirdly, there is an Historical faith, King Agrippa believe thou the
Prophets? I know that thou believe, says the same Apostle, Acts 26, 27.

Fourthly, there is a Temporary faith: Intimated unto us in the stony ground,
which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away, Luke 8. 13.

But the most considerable is a justifying, and a saving faith.

Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ: even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might he
justified by the faith of Christ, says St. Paul, Gal. 2. 16.

And thus the Savior to the sinful woman: Thy faith has saved thee: go in
peace, Luke 7. ult.

The first two kinds of faith: Namely the miraculous faith, and the Doctrine of
faith, were common to the Reprobate, as well as to the true believer.

For first, we read that the miraculous faith was given to Judas the Traitor,
together with the rest of the Disciples, Mat. 10. to the 9.

An^ secondly, we find that Himeneus and Alexander did sometimes incline to
the Doctrine of faith: But they put it away: And therefore St. Paul delivered
them to Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.

The third, being the Historical Faith, is not only used, or rather abused by
the Reprobate, but even by the Devils also. Thou believe that there is one
God, thou do well: the Devils also believe and tremble, says St. James,
James 2. 19.

The fourth kind, which is the Temporary faith, is likewise proper to the
Reprobate: we read that Simon the Sorcerer (whom we call Simon Magus) believed
and was baptized, Acts 8. 13.

Nevertheless, not long after, Simon Peter tells him, That he perceives him to
be in the gaul of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity, Acts 8. 23.

But the fifth, and last kind, which is the justifying and the saving faith,
is peculiar only to the Children of God. Ye are all the Children of God by
faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 26.

For by this kind of faith we are enabled, not only by Assent to believe the
Promises, but also by consent to embrace them. According to that of the
Apostle, Heb. 11. 13.

Now the want of knowledge, and ability to distinguish rightly of these several
kinds of faith, presented unto us in the word of God, under the general notion
of faith: is one main occasion of many dangerous errors, now promoted amongst
us.

For first, the miraculous faith is unseasonable.

For albeit it was necessary in the infancy of the Gospel, or at the first
preaching, or planting thereof: to manifest that it was altogether of God: To
which purpose the Lord Christ in his first Commissions to the twelve, Luke 9.
1, 2. And likewise to the seventy, Luke 10, 9. did empower them to work
miracles, as well as to preach. Yet in the greater perfection of the Gospel:
when the Savior had sealed it with his blood. In his last Commission to his
Disciples (wherein he promises) To be with them always, even unto the end of
the World, Math. 28. 19, 20. He makes there no mention at all of Miracles.

But you will say: There were many Miracles wrought after Christ's Ascension;
True.

Yet I find nothing to confirm me, that they were wrought by any other, then
some, or one of the former twelve, or seventy, or some such as the Lord was
pleased to empower personally to that purpose: as being the first, and chief
planters, and propagatours of his Gospel. For I do not read that he promised
that power to succession.

This I argue to inform the ignorance of such of our Protestant profession, as
do say, or think, that they cannot attain to any measure of true faith. For if
we had (will some say) as much thereof as a grain of Mustard Seed, we shoud be
able to remove mountains. But this is one great mistake arising from the
misapprehension of the word faith.

Secondly, the Doctrine of faith is declinable: It may be both declined,
slighted, and deserted: A man may both fail in it, and fall from it: like those
foolish Galatians, whom St. Paul reproved for that very offense, Gal. 3. to the
6. verse.

But though it may be declined, slighted, and deserted: yet it cannot be
wrested, falsified, or corrupted: for so the very nature thereof is destroyed:
And instead of the Doctrine of faith, it becomes the Doctrine of Devils.

Thirdly, the Historical faith is corruptible: It may be corrupted, depraved,
and profaned; as it is oftentimes by such as endeavor to countenance, or
excuse their own abominations, by the Histories of the Saints infirmities.

As their drunkenness by Noah's ignorance, or weakness, Genesis 9. 21.

Their Adultery by David's oversight, 2 Samuel 11.

Their Perjuries by Peter's denial, Matthew. 26. 72.

Their impenitence, or procrastination by the good thiefs last hours success,
Luke 23. 43. and the like. Abusing such Scriptures, as might serve to confirm
their faith in the mercies of their Savior: by making them serviceable to
Satan, wresting them to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

Fourthly, the Temporary faith is unfruitful, cowardly, and contemptible.

For we read of many in great authority that believed on the Messiah: but they
were frighted from their profession, John 12. 42. And the reason is annexed.
For they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God, verse 43.

Now, from the mistaking of these, or any of these infirm kinds of faith:
instead of the true justifying and saving faith: several errors have received
their original, especially that uncomfortable error of the Saints falling from
Grace received through the unsteadfastnesse of their faith. But I dare be bold
to affirm that such Apostates did never feel the force of an effectual faith:
of a justifying faith. This is the gift of God, Romans 12. 3.

And the gifts, and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11. 29.

I will not say, but a man may fall grievously in it: but he can never fall
finally from it.

For the Lord has said: I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5.

And truly, I conceive, this discovery to be very pertinent to our present
purpose: For faith being the only condition to be performed by us in this
Covenant of Grace; It is very necessary, that we be rightly instructed therein:
Least peradventure we either satisfy our selves with empty shadows instead of
the true substance. Or torment our selves with causeless discomforts,
concerning the loss, or uncertainty of that glorious inheritance, which our
gracious God by the purchase of Jesus Christ, has so long since estated upon a
true, and a lively faith, according to this eternal Covenant.

We proceed now to consider, why the Lord propounds faith for the Proviso, or
Condition of this Covenant of Grace.

First (I conceive) because he would have his gift received, which would
otherwise become fruitless, and unprofitable: He gave his only begotten Son;
And were it not a world of pity that such a precious gift should be neglected;
and not received, applied, and improved? Well, how are we to receive him? Into
our houses? No, but into our hearts.

By what instrument, or means? Verily, by faith only: According to the
Scriptures.

By faith Christ lives in us, Gal. 2. 20. And by faith Christ dwells in us:
in our hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17.

Questionless, there is no relation between the Savior and the souls of his
Saints, but what is contracted, fixed, and confirmed by his affection, and
their lively faith.

Secondly, the Lord requires faith: That so this gift of his might be
beneficial to the whole World in all places, and at all times indifferently.

For were Christ to be received any other way then: by faith: All men could not
have been capable of receiving him at all seasons.

Suppose he had come into the World in the day of the Creation: and continued
in the World till the day of dissolution. Yet in regard of his passive Nature;
his humanity; he could not have been received by any two persons in any two
several places at one and the same time.

But wheresoever he abides faith will instantly find him out, and lay hold
upon him.

And therefore there is no cause now, why any man should say in his heart: who
shall ascend into Heaven? that is to bring down Christ from above, or who shall
descend into the deep? that is, to bring up Christ from the dead.

The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is the word
of faith, which we preach, says St. Paul, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.

And this word of faith, which we preach (if truly believed, and rightly
applied) will do both: It will bring down Christ from above, with the virtue of
his Resurrection and Ascension. And it will bring up Christ from beneath, with
the virtue of his death and passion. It will do all things that may concern the
Remission of our sins: the justification of our persons: and the salvation of
our Souls, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

So then (says the same Apostle in the same Chapter) faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. But I say, have they not heard? Yes, verily
their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world, Romans 10. 17, 18.

And to that very purpose the Lord Jesus Christ, after his Resurrection gives
his Apostles this universal Commission: Go ye says he, into all the world, and
preach the Gospel unto ev^ry Creature: Well what is the tenor, or substance of
that Gospel? He that believes and is baptized shall be saved: That is, he that
receives Christ by faith, and manifests the same in his Profession shall be
saved, (as Romans 10. 10.) he that believes not shall be damned, Marc. 16. 15,
16. And as this Gospel; this word of faith is universal, so is it likewise
everlasting.

And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
Cospel, to preach unto them that dwell on the earth; and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people, says St. John, Rev. 14. 6.

But why does God require nothing else, but faith? We know there may be diverse
Provisoes in one, and the same Conveyance, or Covenant.

Truly, faith by it self is enough, provided that it be such a faith as
apprehends Christ.

He that has the Son, has life, says Saint John, 1 John 5. 1.

And it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, says St.
Paul, Col. 1. 19.

Whatsoever had been required besides faith (according to our apprehension)
either it must have proceeded from, or reflected upon our own persons or
performances: And then it is more then probable, that our corrupt nature would
have mislead us to neglect this all-satisfying gift: and to repose our selves,
either wholly, or partly upon our own deserts, or abilities. But faith comes
empty-handed, and by that means it takes the surer hold.

When a man gives liberally, we say he is open-handed. And truly, he that will
receive freely, and hold firmly, it is necessary that he be empty-handed.

Faith is very fitly called the hand of the Soul: For as we use to receive an
earthly gift from man by the hand: so we must receive this heavenly treasure
from God by faith. And therefore the Evangelist, in reference to this most
blessed gift, intimates unto us, that receiving, and believing do signify the
same thing.

As many as received him (says he) to them gave he power to become the sons of
God: even to soem that believe on his name, John 1. 12.

A place very well worthy of our consideration, for the proof of this
particular.

Verily this only begotten Son of God, is beyond all thought of exception, the
most satisfying, solid, and substantial gift: the most complete and weighty
gift, that either heaven, or earth can possibly afford us. And therefore
whatsoever we have, or seem to have of our own, whether it be work, or
worthiness: suffering, or satisfaction, ability, or possibility: our faith
must cast it wholly to the ground, or otherwise we shall never receive the Lord
Jesus Christ so, as to make him our own for ever.

A second Reason (which I conceive to be most proper in this case) is this.
Because whatsoever had been required with, or besides faith. It would have been
destructive of the very nature of this Covenant of Grace.

For if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
grace, says Saint Paul, Romans 11. 6.

It is the nature of grace to be free, we are justified freely by his grace,
says the same Apostle, Romans 3. 24.

If we shall look upon Gods words and works, we shall find, that it is the
will of God to give us his only begotten Son Christ Jesus, together with all
his benefits, and blessings altogether freely, without cost: without desert,
without assistance, and without seeking. First, without our cost, or charge.

Thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings, neither have
thou honored me with thy sacrifices: I have not caused thee to serve with an
offering, nor wearied thee with Incense.

Thou have bought me no sweet Cane with money, neither have thou filled me with
the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou
have wearied me with thine iniquities.

I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins, says the Lord, Isa. 43. 23, 24, 25.

Now this obliteration, or remission of sins is part of Christ's purchase: and
we cannot receive the one without the other. No Christ, no forgiveness of sins.

In him we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
says St. Paul, Ephesians. 1. 7.

Neither did Christ himself set his own graces to sale, when he stood and
cried, saying: If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink: he that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow Rivers
of living water.

But this he spoke of the spirit, which they that believe on him, should
receive, John 7. 37, 38. 39.

Secondly, God gives his Son with all his benefits, etc. without our desert.

We our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one
another But after that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man
appeared: Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost: which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, says
St. Paul, Tit. 3. 3. 4, 5, 6.

And to the Ephesians: God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith
he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ (by grace ye are saved.)

And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus.

That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in
his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 4. 5, 6, 7.

All this he did for us, when we were dead in sins. And alas! what can sinful
dead men deserve?

Thirdly, he vouchsafes us his Son Jesus Christ, with all his graces and
blessings without our assistance.

For if by one man's offense death reigned by one: much more they, which receive
abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one
Jesus Christ.

Therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life, Romans 5. 17, 18.

And if freely and merely by one, then without our Assistance.

Fourthly, and lastly, God gives us Christ without our seeking. When we shall
see him, there is no beauty, that we should desire him: He is despised and
rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid our
faces, as it were from him, he was despised, and we esteemed him not, says the
Prophet, Isa. 53. 2, 3.

The lost sheep sought not the Shepherd; but the Shepherd sought his lost
sheep, Luke 15. 4. etc.

I am found of him that sought me not, says the Lord our Redeemer, Isa. 65. 1.

Thus you see, that it is the nature of grace to give altoger freely.

And therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, Romans 4. 16. For to
him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt, Romans 4. 4.

By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8.

And this I conceive to be a second, and a solid reason, why God requires
nothing but Faith.

Because whatsoever had been required with, or besides Faith, it would have
been destructive to the very nature of this Covenant of Grace.

THe fifth branch growing in this Paradise: this Eden of the Covenant of Grace,
is the prevention; freedom from destruction should not perish, should not be
destroyed: I conceive, it will not be denied by any sound Christian, but that
Adams transgression against the Covenant of works did draw an universal guilt,
and punishment over the face of the whole earth: Insomuch that every man and
woman proceeding from Adam, after a natural generation is become guilty of his
sin, and by that means liable to his penalty.

First, we are all polluted by his sin: Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one, says Job, Job 14. 4.

Behold (says David) I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin my mother conceived
me, Psalm. 51. 5.

And St. Paul tells us: That the children of God by grace, were the children of
wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3.

And it is only sin that subjecteth us to Gods wrath, Col. 3. 5, 6.

And secondly, as Adams corrupted nature has engaged us in his damnable sin:
so has his sin likewise exposed us to his deadly punishment.

For as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned, or in whom all have sinned, says St.
Paul, Romans 5. 12.

Thus we see, that the contagion, or the infection of Adams sin: and likewise
the certainty of his punishment are both become universal.

And therefore this Hereditary corruptition has put us into a perishing
condition, although we had no sin of our own to answer for. But then, if we
shall consider all our sins, both original and actual: our sins of omission,
and our sins of commission, together with their several circumstances and
aggravations.

Who can forbear to cry out with Saint Paul?

O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of this death,
Romans 7. 24.

The body of this death, or the power of this death. And verily we shall
perceive the power of this death to be far more dangerous, then ordinarily it
is conceived to be: If we shall consider it according to the several sorts, or
degrees of death: Which we find to be four, viz. The spiritual death: the
cordial death, the natural death, and the eternal death.

The spiritual death is that, whereby we are said to be dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1.

And therefore St. Paul tells us: The widow that lives in pleasure is dead
while she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. And thus the Spirit to the Angel of the Church
of Sardis: Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead, Rev. 3. 1.

The cordial death (if I may so call it) or the death of the heart, is that
which happens upon the sense, or apprehension of some extreme danger, or
distress: when discreet Abigail had told her husband Nabal of the danger he
was in, by reason of his churlish behavior toward David's young men: The Text
says, That his heart died within him, and he became as a stone, 1 Samuel 25. 37.

And Pharaoh, in the plague of locusts, desired Moses and Aaron to entreat the
Lord, that he might take away that death only, Exodus 10. 17.

The natural death consists in the dissolution of nature, or the separation
between the body and the Soul: It is said, That when Rachels Soul departed, she
died, Genesis 35. 18.

And when the widow of Zarephaths son was dead, Elijah cried unto the Lord, and
said, O Lord, my God, I pray thee, let this Childs Soul come into him again.
And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah, and the Soul of the Child came into
him again, and he revived, 1 King. 17. 21, 22.

The last is eternal death, consisting in those eternal torments, which the
damned shall be cast into upon that peremptory sentence.

Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25. 41.

In these four sorts, or degrees of death, are comprehended all the
discomforts, mischiefs, and miseries, that mankind can suffer, or suspect:
whether they be spiritual, temporal, or eternal: And now I shall prove that
every one of them is the reward, or punishment of sin.

First, the spiritual death is the reward of sin: Because that when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened: professing themselves
to be wise, they became fools: And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God,
into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and to four-footed
beasts, and creeping things.

Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their
own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, Romans 1. 21, 22,
23, 24. For this cause God gave them up to vile affections, etc. verse 26.

Secondly, the cordial death, or the death of affliction, trouble, and
distress: that is also the reward, or the punishment of sin.

We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes, we
stumble at noon day as in the night, we are in desolate places as dead men. We
roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for judgment, but
there is none: for salvation, but it is far off from us.

For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify
against us: for our transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities, we
know them, Isa. 59. 10, 11, 12.

Thirdly, the natural death, that is also the wages of sin.

And unto Adam God said: Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy
wife, and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, thou shall
not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of
it all the days of thg life. Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee,
and thou shall eat the Herb of the field. In the sweat of thy face shall thou
eat bread, until thou return unto the ground: for out of it wast thou taken;
for dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19.

And lastly, eternal death is the punishment of sin.

And it shall come to pass, that from one new Moon to another, and from one
Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord.
And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have
transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire
be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh, Isa. 66. 23, 24.

Thus we see, that sin has laid us open to every degree of death and
destruction.

And verily the penalty annexed unto the breach of the Covenant of works (that
original rebellion) imports no otherwise: In the day that thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely die, Genesis 2. 17. Dying thou shall die, says the original.
Thou shall die every kind of death.

And now if it be demanded, how it may be said that we are redeemed from these
miseries, distresses, and calamities by this Covenant of Grace? I answer, that
Almighty God has redeemed us from them, by taking away the only cause of
them, which we find here to be sin.

And that for, and through the merits and mediation, the sufferings and
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son: whom he gave us, and for
us in this Covenant.

Provided always that we receive him by faith, according to the condition of
this Covenant.

And here we may do well to take notice, That the evil of sin is threefold:
That is to say:

The guilt of sin, The punishment of sin, And the power of sin. And it is
necessary that all these be removed, before we can certainly be said to be
redeemed. For where the guilt remains, the punishment is not to be avoided:
and whilst the power continues, neither shall the guilt be forgotten, nor the
punishment forgiven. You know that whosoever transgresses the Law, and is
found guilty thereof: he must suffer punishment, according to the nature of his
offense. And whosoever commits sin, transgresses the Law. For sin is the
transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4.

Now where is that Soul that dares stand upon her own justification, and plead,
Not guilty, to the whole Law of God?

Or whether our own hearts condemn us, or not, God is greater then our hearts,
and knows all things, 1 John 3. 20.

It is in vain for us to dissemble, or conceal our iniquities: For all things
are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13.

Verily the Lord sees our sins before we commit them. I knew that thou would
deal very treacher^usly (says he) and wast called a transgressour from the
womb, Isa. 48. 8. And he that transgresses the Law in the least particular, he
is cursed: For it is written:

Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, that are written in the
book of the Law, to do them, Gal. 3. 10.

And being cursed, he can expect no better, then to be condemned unto eternal
torments.

For the Son of Man sitting upon the throne of his glory, shall say unto them.
Depart from me, ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Math. 25. 41.

But being possessed of the Lord Jesus Christ, by an effectual faith (according
to the tenor of this Covenant of Grace) we are redeemed both from the Curse.
For Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us, Gal. 3. 13.

And from the penalty thereupon depending.

For he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities:
the chastisement of our peace was upon him: and with his stripes we are healed,
Isa. 53. 5.

And moreover of guilty sinners, we are become justified Saints.

For we have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood: to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25.

In which words we find the moving, or procuring cause of our justification to
be the free grace of God: the meritorious cause to be Christ the Son, the
efficient cause to be God the Father; the instrumental cause to be Faith in
Christ, and the final cause to be the glory of God. The glory of his
righteousness for the Remission of sins.

That he might be just, in being the justifier of him, which believes in
Jesus, verse 26.

For as it is just with God to punish the sins of a Reprobate, that dies in
his iniquity: So it is as just with him to pardon the sins of a believer, for
which Christ died.

And as the true believer is delivered from the guilt and punishment of sin by
the merit of Christ: So is he also preserved from the power of sin by the
Spirit of Christ.

And this he does: By redeeming us from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18.

By purging our consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14.

By crucifying our old man, the body of sin, Romans 6. 6.

By freeing us from the Law, the strength of sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56, 57.

By delivering us through grace from the dominion of sin, Romans 6. 14.

By strengthening us with might in the inner man, Ephesians. 3. 16. And by making us
partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

Who will not then conclude with S. Paul: In all these things we are more then
conquerers through him that loved us, Romans 8. 37.

And thus you see that our Lord Jesus Christ by justifying us through his
merit, has freed us from the condemning guilt and punishment of sin. And by
sanctifying us through his Spirit he has delivered and fortified us from, and
against the prevailing power and insinuation of sin. And (...) this means he
has redeemed us from (...) and destruction, being the just reward and
recompense of sin.

And all this merely, and absolutely upon the account of this eternal Covenant
of grace. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

But have everlasting life.

THis is the blessed Inheritance conferred, and confirmed by this Covenant,
according to this Copy.

Everlasting life, or eternal salvation. This is the glorious expectation, and
inheritance of the Children of God.

Blessed the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead: to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you: who are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5.

If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men (...)
^iserable, says St. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 19. (...) are troubled on every side
(says he) yet not ^^stressed: we are perplexed, but not in despair:
persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed. Always bearing
about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus: that the life also of Jesus
might be made manifest in our body, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10.

For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish: yet our
inward man is renewed day by day, for our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, verse
16. 17, 18.

Truly it is this Assurance that supports, and supplies the militant Members
of the Lord Jesus Christ throughout their whole warfare.

It removes all difficulties, sweetneth all discomforts, and relieveth all
distresses. Verily it elevateth the Soul beyond all expectation.

I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 10.

Good Paul: were these thy pleasant recreations? Truly it is not to be denied,
but that they are very profitable exercises. For when I am weak (says he) then
am I strong. When I am weak in the flesh, then am I strong in the faith.

For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared to the glory, which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8. 18.

What will not a true believer do, or suffer in hope of eternal life, which
God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began? Tit. 1. 2.

But forasmuch as there must be a temporal life, before there can be an eternal
life:

Therefore, as I have formerly set forth unto you the several sorts, or degrees
of death: So I shall here endeavor ^o show you the several sorts, or degrees
of life: which I conceive to be likewise four: That is to say, The natural
life; The spiritual life; The peaceful life, and the eternal, or everlasting
life.

And secondly, I shall apply my self to prove, that every one of them (as a
Member, or passage of, or to this everlasting life) is part, or parcel of that
eternal inheritance, whereunto the Son of God has entitled us by virtue of
this Covenant.

The first, I say, is the natural life, or the life of Nature: That which we
say, we receive from our Parents: And it consists in the union of the body
and the Soul, or of the flesh and spirit: according to the vulgar sense. But in
the Scripture sense, that is properly called the natural life, wherein a man
follows Nature for his chief, or only guide. And of such a one St. Paul
says: That the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

Now, this natural life in either of these senses may be said to be the issue
of the first birth, or of the fleshly generation. For that which is born of the
flesh, is flesh, says our Lord, Joh. 3. 6.

And they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh, says St.
Paul, Romans 8. 5.

Verily, whosoever lives merely this natural life, or this life of Nature
only it were better for him that he had never lived at all, that he had never
been born. For we are all by nature the children of wrath. According to that of
St. Paul, Ephesians. 2. 3.

Nevertheless, though accidentally by reason of the corruption of Nature, this
natural life tends toward eternal death: Yet originally, and as it affords
a being to the Creature, without which he could not be capable of everlasting
life: So, it may properly be said to be part of Christ's purchase, and included
within the compass of this Covenant of Grace.

The next is the spiritual life. For that was not firsi, which is spiritual,
but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 46.

This spiritual life is the fruit of that regeneration, or new birth, whereby
we are said to be born of God, John 1. 13.

And this birth is perfected, when the seed of the word is quickened by the
Spirit, in the womb of Faith.

First, the seed of this new birth must be the word of God. Being born again,
not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible: by the word of God, which lives
and abides for ever, says Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 23.

2ly. this word must be quickened by the Spirit. It is the Spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words, that I spoke unto you they
are spirit, and they are life, says the Son of God, John 6. 63.

And thirdly, this word must be quickened by the Spirit in the womb of Faith.

Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, says S. John, 1
John 5. 1.

And this may really be called a life, for it shall never be overcome of death.

If ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the spirit do
mor^if^e the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13.

Live eternally, for none can live this spiritual life: this life of grace, but
he that is raised from the death of sin.

Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection: on such the
second death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God and Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand yeaos, Rev. 20. 6.

A thousand years: Not according to the Millenaries account, who dream of an
earthly Kingdom to continue for a thousand years, contrary to that of Christ
himself.

My Kingdom is not of this World, says he, John 18. 36. But whilst they
contend for this earthly Kingdom: does it not appear, that, Their wisdom is
earthly, sensual, etc. According to that of St. James, Jam. 3. 15.

But a thousand years: The thousand years of the great Sabbath, that eternal
Jubilee, that shall be celebrated by the Saints of God in that everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 11.

Verily this spiritual life is the greatest good, that we can enjoy in this
World. Whilst we live a mere natural life, we live, at the best, but to our
selves: and we shall find our selves, but bad pay-masters. He is an empty
Vine, that brings forth fruit unto himself, says the Lord by his Prophet,
Hosea 10. 1.

But in serving our selves, we commonly serve worse Masters then our selves:
For we serve sin also. Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin, says
our Lord Christ, Joh. 8. 34. And the wages of sin is death, says St. Paul,
Romans 6. 23. Yea, and in serving sin and our selves, we serve the Devil too. In
time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the
prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.

And from such a cursed Master we can expect but a sorry reward. The Devils
wages is a Mark, Rev. 13. 16. But he that receives that Mark: The same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into
the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone
in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.
10.

But being by this new birth, or this spiritual life delivered from these bad
Masters: we are sure of a blessing. For being made free from sin, and become
servants to God: Ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end, everlasting
life, Romans 6. 22. And the end everlasting life.

You see here, that the end of this spiritual life, is everlasting life.

But in regard that many do dis-relish, and dislike this spiritual life as
disquiet and uncomfortable, therefore I shall desire you to take the peaceful
life in your passage. St. Paul, exhorts, That supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings, and all
that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

I will not deny, but there are many enemies, both spiritual and temporal, that
do continually endeavor to infest and molest this happy passage toward
eternity.

But what hurt, or hinderance can it be to a well resolved spirit, though the
Devil with all his smoaky legions do thunder forth their fantastic false
alarums?

The Lord will give strength unto his people: the Lord will bless his people
with peace, says that man of War, Psalm. 29. 11.

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives,
give I unto you: let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid,
says Christ to his Disciples, Joh. 14. 17. And he that said it, is well able
to perform it: For he is the prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6.

This is the peace of God, and it is more then an ordinary peace. It is a
perfect, and a perpetual peace: an infinite, and an inward peace. First, it is
a perfect peace.

Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee: because he
trusts in thee, says that Evangelical Prophet to his, and our God, Isa. 26.
3.

Secondly, it is a perpetual peace.

The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says
the Lord that has mercy on thee. According to that of the same Prophet, Isa.
54. 10.

Not so perfect and perpetual, that it shall never be interrupted, but so
perfect and perpetual, that it shall never be utterly overthrown.

Thirdly, it is an infinite peace, it passes all understanding.

And fourthly, it is an inward peace: It keeps your hearts and minds.

The peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and
minds, says the Apostle, Phil. 4. 7.

Yea, and it is an outward peace also, when a man's ways please the Lord. he
makes even his enemies, to be at peace with him, says that wise man, Prove.
16. 7. Or if they will not, it shall be upon their own peril.

For his heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire
upon his enemies, Psalm. 112. 8.

This is the peaceful life, or the spiritual man's peaceful passage to eternal
salvation, or everlasting life: which is the fourth and last degree, and that
which is expressed here in this Copy: as the only entire happiness, and
perfection of all the former.

For the matter, what these Covenanters do enjoy in this eternal life: we find
it shadowed out unto us under the notion of Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. as
being the secure, and safe receptacle for all the seed of Abraham, according to
the faith.

Of Paradise, Luke 23. 43.

Of a Kingdom, Math. 25. 34.

Of a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

Of an exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. With other the
like alluring expressions.

For the manner how the faithful are to enjoy this everlasting life. St. John
tells us, that: They are before the Throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his Temple: and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them.

They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7. 15. 16, 17.

And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and marvsllous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true
are thy ways, thou King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3.

But to set forth the truth and perfection, either of the matter, or manner of
those glorious, infinite, and unconceiveable enjoyments, by these, or any other
expressions, visions, or revelations: were to show you the brightness of the
Sun by the light of a Candle. For eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

And now I am to prove, that every one of these several sorts, or degrees of
life, is part of Christ's purchase, conferred upon us, for, and through his
merits and mediation, and that in, and by this Covenant of Grace.

And for the more clear manifestation hereof, I desire you still to consider,
that whatsoever Christ has done, or suffered for, and on the behalf of
mankind, the same he did and suffered before the world began: not only
intentionally according to our understanding, but effectually and actually
according to the tenor of Gods will, and the satisfaction of his justice. He
was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. 8.

And thus the Prophet Isaiah. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, etc. Isa. 53. 5.

You know, though a man has a bad, or a bankrupt debitour, yet if he has a
good sufficient surety, he will not be hasty to exact the penalty upon the poor
principal: in regard that he is well assured of full satisfaction from the
surety: and happily upon that security he keeps the bond unsued for diverse years
after the forfeiture, even till his own occasions call upon him.

Christ is our surety in this Covenant: And Christ his promise stands for
present pay, his free engagement for full satisfaction.

He gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time, says St.
Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 6.

Not presently, but even at such a time, as God determined, and agreed upon.

And next I desire you to call to mind what Moses, that man of God, has
delivered concerning the Creation. How God in creating the light, the
firmament, the waters, the earth, and those other Creatures necessary and
convenient for man's use, and sustentation: He only said, let it be so, and it
was so.

But coming in conclusion to make man: he calls his privy Council Son and
Spirit, and says, Let us make man in our own image, after our likeness; and
let him have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of the air,
and over the Cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth, Genesis 1. 26.

As if he had said, this is our great vicegerent, this is he, for whose sake,
and for whose posterity we have created this great universe: And on whose
behalf we did conclude that Covenant of Grace, to take effect at the instant of
his fall: That so both he, and all his seed may know, it is not of themselves
whereby they stand, but merely of our goodness and our grace: which
apprehended by a lively faith, their faith will work obedience by love.

Therefore let us make man in our own image, etc. In the first Chapter of
Genesis, verse 27. Man is created, in the 28. verse he is blessed, in the 29.
verse he receives his Commission: In the second Chapter at the 16. and 17.
verses he receives his charge: The Covenant of works: In the third Chapter at
the sixth verse he forfeits his recognisance: In the ninth verse God gives him
summons: And in the fifteenth verse he shows him his Savior: The seed of the
woman.

Nevertheless, least man should grow too idle, too insolent, or too old in his
iniquity: In the 19th. verse of the same third Chapter: God shows him his Task:
his Original, and his End.

In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, till thou return unto the
ground: there is his task. For out of it wast thou taken: there is his
original. For dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return: there is his end.

But you will say: If there were such a precontract, such a Covenant of Grace
formerly provided, as you speak of, why did not Christ thereby deliver Adam,
and his posterity from this tedious task, this sense of their base extraction,
and this subjection to a sad return? I answer, that in the first place (we may
conceive) that our Creator thought it necessary to leave us in perpetual
employment, thereby to keep us still in action, we have a proverb, that
idleness is the mother of all evil.

But, without doubt, idleness is the Devils best opportunity. It is like that
the Serpent found Eve gazing: as Shechem found Dina gadding: otherwise the one
had not been so soon deceived; nor the other so easily defiled.

Secondly, he was pleased to continue us under the sense of our contemptible
original, to keep us from presumption and pride. Had Adam formerly considered
the simple stuff whereof he was created: happily the haughty desire of being
like his Master had not made him Gods enemy. Behold (says Abraham) I have
taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27.

There is his humility. And he was called the friend of God, James 2. 23.

And thirdly, he left us subject unto death, even by that means to better our
condition. Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, (says the Spirit) that
they may rest from their labors, Rev. 14. 13.

And likewise that in the interim, in the time of this natural life, he might
keep our Souls in action as well as our bodies: whilst we walk by faith, and
not by sight. According to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

But where is then the benefit (you will say) of this eternal Covenant of Grace?

I answer, that (as our Lord Jesus Christ did therein, and thereby redeem us
from all manner of death, as it is a curse, or a punishment for sin, as I have
already proved) so I shall now endeavor to prove that he has therein, and
thereby purchased and procured for us every sort, or degree of life, as it is a
part of, or a passage to eternal salvation.

And first, concerning the first kind, being the natural life. This Adam
enjoyed but conditionally.

In the day that thou eatest of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
thou shall surely die (says the Covenant of works.)

But Adam eats, and must die therefore: his present farewell to this natural
life must be his welcome to eternal death. When in that very instant Christ our
Savior appears for Man: And by virtue of that precontract he stays Gods
justice, and preserves man's life. And by this means we all enjoy our lives. For
had Adam then died, according to his desert, we had all died in him as the
fruit dies in the root.

It were little wisdom to expect a posterity from him that never did beget a
Child: And it appears that he had not begotten any before that great
rebellion of his, which called for present death.

But afterward in the time of his reprive, Adam knew Eve his wife, and she
conceived, and bare Cain, Genesis 4. 1.

And she again bare his brother Abel, Genesis 4. 2.

And Adam knew his wife again, and she bare a son, and called his name Seth,
Genes. 4. 25.

And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth, were eight hundred years,
and he begat sons and daughters, Genesis 5. 4.

And whosoever has lived heretofore, do now live, or shall live hereafter:
They did, do, and shall receive their natural life originally from that old
feeble stock. And therefore his life being preserved to a posterity by Christ
in this Covenant of Grace: It follows necessarily that we do all receive our
natural lives merely by virtue of that Covenant.

The second sort, or degree is the spiritual life: This (as I said) is the
fruit of regeneration, or of the new birth. In our first birth we are born men.
In our second birth we are born Christians, good men, blessed men.

The first benefit that we received by this Covenant of Grace is our Election
in Christ before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. The second benefit
is our natural life; which we received in Adams reprive by virtue of the said
Covenant.

Yet I dare not call this a benefit absolutely, or otherwise then as it puts
us into a possibility of attaining unto this spiritual life.

And therefore the first Lesson that our Savior taught unto Nichodemus was the
necessity of Regeneration, saying, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3.

The next absolute, and undeniable benefit proceeding from this Covenant, is
the spiritual life: whereby we become the sons of God: not according to any
carnal condition, but according to the Spirit of adoptition, Romans 8. 14, 15.

By this spiritual life we likewise become sensible of the first benefit
conveyed unto us in this Covenant: being our Election? which cannot be
perceived, either in us, or by us in the state of nature, before we begin to
live this life of grace. And for this spiritual life also, if we desire to know
it, either in our selves, or others, we shall find that it consists in the
putting off the old man, and putting on the new. Ye ought so to learn Christ:
that ye put off, concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts: And be renewed in the spirit of your
mind: And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.

And to the Galatians: walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts
of the flesh, says the same Apostle, Gal. 5. 16.

In this spiritual life it pleased the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
communicate unto us his divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

His Image, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And his spirit, 1 John 4. 13.

And by this means it comes to pass that they, which live this spiritual life.

Their eyes are opened, they are turned from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God: that, they may receive forgiveness of sins, an
inheritance with them, which are sanctified by faith, which is in Christ Jesus,
Acts 26. 18.

And all this we enjoy in, and through Jesus Christ our Lord.

If Christ be in you the body is dead, because of sin: but the Spirit is life,
because of righteousness, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 10.

I have not read of any, whom I conceive to have lived this life of grace more
fruitfully then St. Paul did: Neither was he ashamed to confess how, and from
whom he received it.

I am crucified with Christ (says he) nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20.

Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin: but alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, says the same Apostle, Romans 6. 11.

Verily our Lord Jesus Christ is not only the procurer, and purchaser of this
spiritual life: but also the Author, and the essence thereof. The dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live: for as the
Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself, Joh. 5. 25. 26.

And again, I am the Resurrection, and the life (says Christ) he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, John 11. 25.

Though he were dead in sin, yet shall he live by grace: And you being dead in
your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with
Christ, having forgiven you all your trespasses, says St. Paul, Col. 2. 13.

And as this great benefit is conferred upon us, in, and by the Lord Jesus
Christ: so is it likewise confirmed unto us, in, and by this Covenant of Grace.

As for thy Nativity in the day thou wast born, thy Navel was not cut, neither
wast thou washed in water, to supple thee: thou wast not salted at all, nor
swadled at all. None eye pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, to
have compassion upon thee: but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the
loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born, says the Lord by his
Prophet, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5.

Here is the wretched estate of every Soul by nature, in regard of sin:
delivered expressly concerning Jerusalem, but is to be applied to Adam, and all
his posterity. But when I passed by thee, says the Lord, and saw thee polluted
in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I
said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Live.

I have caused thee to multiply, as the bud of the field, and thou have
increased, and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments: thy
breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and
bare, Ezekiel. 16. 6, 7.

See here the wonderful incomprehensible goodness of our God, not only in
pitying, and reviving the poor Soul miserably polluted, and even dead in the
gore, and filth of her natural sins and corruptions: But also in supplying, and
enriching her with most beautiful Ornaments, Allegorically relating to the
graces, and indowments belonging to a spiritual life.

Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time was the time
of love: and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I
swear unto thee: and entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord, verse 8.

And what Covenant can any man imagine this to be, but an express, or a
discovery of that eternal Covenant of Grace.

For, who can expect these undeserved favors, but by, and through Jesus Christ
our Lord, the only Mediator of that Covenant? And being such blessings as no
man can receive from God, but by the hand of a lively faith: according to the
condition of that Covenant.

We come now to prove that the peaceful life, or the spiritual man's peaceful
passage to eternity, is vouchsafed unto us, in, and through Jesus Christ, by
virtue of this Covenant of Grace.

Wherein I desire you to understand, that it is not an outward, or a worldly
peace, that I intend in this place. For albeit the Lord promises his people
upon their reconciliation and return.

That in that day he will make a Covenant for them with the beasts of the
field, and with the fowls of Heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground, and that he will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of
the earth, and make them to lie down safely, as Hos. 2. 18.

Yet without doubt, this promise was neither generally, nor absolutely
intended: but conditionally, even as he in his wisdom should see it to be good
and nece^^ary for his own people, and conducible to his own glory.

For our Savior tells his Disciples plainly: These things have I spoken unto
you (says he) that in me ye might have peace: in the world ye shall have
tribulation, John 16. 33.

A Child of God shall never want adversaries, so long as the Devil has any
agents, or instruments abroad: yet he is not without his several comforts, and
preventions. For when he first discovers them, he considers them to be Gods
enemies also: and therefore he leaves them wholly unto Gods ordering.

Secondly, when they begin to rouse themselves: he looks the more narrowly to
his own ways, least his indiscretion should give them the greater advantage.

And lastly, when they pursue him with violence, he makes merrily toward his
covert, his strong hold.

He trusts in the Lord for ever: for in the the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength, Isa. 26. 4. The peace of a true believer may be shaken, but not
utterly overthrown; All the world cannot beat him from his confidence in God:
for albeit he is very sensible of his own weakness: yet he is sure of a
powerful Peacemaker.

Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, says Saint Paul, Romans 5. 1.

Yea, The peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts
and minds through Jesus Christ, says the same Apostle, Phil. 4. 7.

You will say, This is by Christ: but how is it by Covenant?

I will make a Covenant of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant
with them, says the Lord, concerning his Church, Ezekiel. 37. 26. This indeed is
a Covenant of peace (you will say) and an everlasting Covenant. But what is
this to that eternal Covenant of Grace?

I answer first, had it not been for that eternal Covenant: No Creature, after
Adams rebellion had ever been capable of any other Covenant for good.

Secondly, we may be confident, that God did never make any Covenant
whatsoever, to, or with mankind since the Creation, but it has its relation
to that Original Covenant of Grace. The very Covenant of works made with Adam,
and exemplified to the Israelites as a rule of life in the Moral Law, or the
Law of the ten Commandments, discovers unto us that enmity between God and
us, together with our own infirmities and inabilities: and sends us to seek
for reconciliation by Jesus Christ: By whom we have now received the atonement,
Romans 5. 11.

And thirdly, the gift that God vouchsafed unto us in that Covenant of Grace,
was Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God: And he is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14.

The fourth, and highest degree is everlasting life in the Kingdom of glory.

This also is given unto us, in, and through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 23.

He that believes not God, has made him a liar: because he believes not the
record, that God gave of his Son. And this is the record: that God has given
us eternal life: and this life is in his Son, 1 John 5. 10, 11.

And it is assured unto us, in, and by this eternal Covenant: For it was
promised before the world began, Tit. 1. 2.

But what need we any further proof, then the express words of this Copy?

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

This is the glorious inheritance, which the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God
has purchased for the sons of men, in, and by this Covenant of Grace:
delivered unto us in this Copy under the Title of Everlasting life.

Our blessed Savior in his description of the day of judgment, calls it a
Kingdom.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand: Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world,
Mat. 25. 34.

This is that which old Jacob expected upon his deathbed: saying, I have
waited for thy salvation, O Lord, Genesis 49. 18.

And that inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven, As St. Peter sets it forth, 1 Peter 1. 4.

Seeing therefore that we have such a hopeful, and such a happy inheritance
presented unto us in this eternal Covenant: I conceive it will be very
necessary, that we search out the right Heir thereunto. Lest peradventure the
numerous, or numberless pretenders should deceive both themselves and others,
by presuming upon their unwarrantable interests, without any considerable
evidence, or assurance.

And in order unto this discovery: It will be very convenient that we do first
lay down this firm foundation.

That Faith is the only evidence, which either does, or can make good our
Title to eternal salvation: That more then most excellent inheritance, which
the Saints of God, do, and shall enjoy in the Kingdom of glory.

And this (in spite of the Devil, and all his adherents) is most manifest
throughout the whole word of God.

Faith is the evidence of things not seen, says the Apostle, Hebr. 11. 1.

And eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man, the things, which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Verily, Verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me has everlasting life,
says our Lord and Savior, Joh. 6. 47.

Ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, says St. Paul, Gal.
3. 26.

And if children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, says
the same Apostle, Romans 8. 17.

Thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and Heirs to the
Kingdom, which God has promised to them that love him, says the Apostle
James, Jam. 2. 5.

Ye are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation, says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

And to confirm us yet more perfectly in this general truth, we find Faith to
be the only condition exemplified in this Copy of that Covenant; whereby we
stand entitled to everlasting life, even from all eternity.

God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

ANd now concerning the right Heir to this inheritance: you shall very hardly
meet with any man, or woman whatsoever, but they will be ready to lay claim
thereunto. Yea, and they will enforce their Allegations, and produce their
evidences, such as they are. And therefore to avoid confusion in this case: I
shall endeavor to reduce the multitude of Pretenders amongst us that will be
called Christians, unto these few heads. As namely:

The obstinate Offender, The ignorant Infidel, The good honest Man, The zealous
Reformer: And The legal Professor.
And in them I shall briefly consider their Actions: their Allegations, and
their Evidences.

The first in this Catalogue is the obstinate Offender. And by him I intend
such a one as runs on in his sins, according to a Reprobate sense, without
contradiction, or remorse of conscience. I shall give you no other account of
his actions, then what I find recorded by the Spirit of God.

Least, by lighting accidentally upon the corruptions of some particular
persons, I be looked upon, either as envious, or injurious. In the tenth Psalm
beginning at the fourth verse: the Prophet David describes him thus. First, by
his Pride.

The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God: God
is not in all his thoughts, verse 4.

Secondly, by his Behavior.

His ways are always grievous: thy judgments are far above out of his sight:
as for all his enemies he puffs at them, verse 5.

Thirdly, by his Security.

He has said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in
adversity, ver. 6.

Fourthly, by his Subtilty.

His mouth is full of cursing and deceit: under his tongue is mischief, and
vanity, ver. 7.

Fifthly, by his Treachery.

He sits in the lurking places of the Villages, in the secret places does he
murder the innocent, his eyes are privily set against the p^or. He lies in
wait secretly, as a Lion in his Den, he lies in wait to catch the poor: he
does catch the poor, when he draws him into his Net: he crouhceth, and
humbles himself, that the poor may fall by his strong ones, verses 8, 9, and
10.

Sixthly, and lastly, by his Blasphemy.

He has said in his heart God has forgotten: he hides his face, he will
never see it, verse 11. These are his Actions.

Neither are his Allegations any thing unsuteable. For let either Magistrate,
or Minister, or any private friend reprove, or admonish him concerning the evil
of his ways, or the sad condition of his poor Soul: And they shall soon find
that he will return reproaches for reproofs, and bad language for good counsel.
What do you think he knows not what he has to do, as well; as any foolish
Hypocrite of them all?

Is there any man that does not sin? He that says to the contrary is a liar.

What are his offenses, but infirmities, or humane frailties: And he can say as
much, or more by other men, then they can say by him.

These are his best thanks: But commonly he is so thoroughly instructed by the
Devil his Master: that with lying accusations, and scornful Allegations, he is
able to silence the most confident Christian living.

But you will say: dares any wicked wretch, so odious in the sight of God and
man, lay claim unto this heavenly inheritance? Yea, verily dares he: For if
pride and contempt will afford him so much patience, as to hear, or discourse
concerning the same: he is ready presently to produce his evidence: And
commonly part of it will be this.

He believes that God is merciful, for did he not proclaim himself after this
manner?

The Lord: The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant
in goodness, and truth: keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin, Exodus 34. 6, 7.

And what can any man desire more? Why I desire that he would proceed a little
further in that seventh verse.

And that will by no means clear the guilty. But this is past his learning, and
contrary to his liking.

For by this it appears that this evidence of his is nothing worth.

For God is not so merciful as to destroy his Justice: Neither can he in
Justice pardon sin without satisfaction.

But yet he is nevertheless confident in his Title: For this is but one clause
of his evidence, he proceeds yet further, and says, he groundeth his
assurance upon that saying of Paul; where he tells Timothy: That Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, of whom he is chief, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

Who doubts of that? But he must know that the true saving Faith consists not
in believing, that Christ came into the World to save sinners: But in receiving
Christ, and applying the promise to our own particulars, whereby we get
assurance, that he is ours, and we are his.

According to that of the faithful spouse: My beloved is mine (says she) and I
am his, Can. 2. 16

And thefore the foresaid Apostle Paul: Know ye not (says he) that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

But how shall a man know whether Christ be in him, or not?

Why, If Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin: but the spirit is
life, because of righteousness, says the same Apostle, Romans 8. 10.

See how this miserable wicked wretch deceives himself to the dishonor of God,
and the destruction of his own Soul.

Not like a Christian, but a Cretian: Whilst he professes that he knows
God, but in works he denies him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every
good work reprobate: As Tit. 1. 16.

And it is impossible, that any Reprobate should inherit the Kingdom of God.

Flesh and blood cannot do it, 1 Cor. 15. 50.

Much less shall any thing enter thereinto, That defiles, or works
abomination, or makes a lie, Rev. 21. 27.

And therefore this first Pretender, this obstinate Offender has no interest
at all in this glorious inheritance.

The second Pretender thereunto, is the Ignorant Infidel.

The fool that says in his heart, there is no God, as Psalm. 14. 1.

Happily with his mouth he may acknowledge a kind of an unknown God: Yet in his
heart he conceives no otherwise of him, then a mere fancy.

But if you come to show him: how that God the Father, God the Son, and God the
holy Ghost, are but one God.

Yet nevertheless, that God the Father did make a Covenant with God the Son,
according to the Testimony of God the Holy Ghost. That this covenant was
concluded purposely to redeem the world, before the world was created: and that
by virtue of the same covenant it is as agreeable with Gods Justice to pardon
sin, as to punish it: With the like necessary principles: Why, you tell him
wonders so far above his capacity, that he is resolved not to trouble his
brains about them. Truly, all his actions do too much express his ignorance.

Whilst he walks in the vanity of his mind: having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in him: because of the blindness of his heart; who being past feeling, has
given himself over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness: According to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18, 19.

But he will allege, that if ignorance be an offense, yet God will easily
forgive it: in regard it is a thing so general among simple people, that were
never brought up to much learning.

I answer: First, he must know, that ignorance is an offense, and a great one
too. For we find that the Lord protested against it in his own Children.

Hear, O Heavens (says he) and give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken: I
have nourished, and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me. The
Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib: but Israel does not know,
my people does not consider. Ah! sinful Nation: a people laden with iniquity,
etc. Isa. 1. 2. etc.

Secondly, it shall not be forgiven.

For the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, In
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, says St. Paul, 2
These. 1. 7, 8.

And thirdly, the generality thereof shall rather hasten, then hinder the
Justice of God to punish it. We shall not need to run over the whole word of
God, for the many examples of whole Cities and Kingdoms, to prove the truth of
this particular: If we shall consider how, and wherefore God destroyed the
whole world, except 8. persons, as 1 Pet. 3. 20.

If he alleges that it was for all sorts of sins, and not for ignorance that
God did inflict those general, and universal judgments. I answer, that it is
not ignorance simply considered, which I do principally point at: but ignorance
circumstantiated; ignorance with its effects, and accessaries. Not such a kind
of ignorance as is in those, whom we call Idiots: who have no competent
understanding, either in things spiritual, or natural. Nor such an ignorance,
in things spiritual, as is in those, that never heard of the true God.

Both which I conceive to be the punishment of the first original sin, rather
then sin it self: Neither are these excusable in the day of Judgment, without
Gods incomprehensible mercy and goodness, which I dare neither question, nor
confine.

For the Apostle speaks generally, when he says: If our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3.

And so does our Savior himself, when he says, He that believes not shall be
damned, Mar. 16. 16.

But I intend such an ignorance in spiritual things, as is in them that have
the word of God amongst them, or not far from them: And yet, either through
contempt, or wilful neglect of the true light, they will rather choose to walk
in darkness, then either to seek after, or to receive instruction. And this
kind of ignorance is not only such a great sin, as shall be grievously
punished. But it is likewise the cause of all manner of sin whatsoever.

First, it is such a great sin, as shall be grievously punished.

Because I have called, and ye refused (says the wisdom of God) I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: but ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity. I
will mock when your fear comes: when your fear comes as desolation, and your
destruction comes as a whirlewinde: when distress and anguish comes upon
you: then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me: for that they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord, Prove. 1. 24. to 30.

And thus the Prophet Isaiah.

Because they have cast away the law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the
word of the holy one of Israel: therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled
against his people, and he has stretched forth his hand against them, and has
smitten them: and the Hills did tremble, and their Carcases were torn in the
midst of the streets, etc. Isaiah 5. 24, 25.

But he will allege, that it is no absolute sign of ignorance to reject the
word of God, he may be a wise man for all that.

I pray observe how the Lord answers him by his Prophet Jeremy.

How do ye say, we are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us: Lo, certainly
in vain made he it, the pen of the Scribes is in vain.

The wise men are ashamed: they are dismayed and taken: Lo, they have rejected
the word of Lord, and what wisdom is in them, Jer. 8. 8, 9.

A man may seem to be a wise man in his own opinion, and in the opinion of
other men too. But the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, says St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 19.

And oftentimes it proves destructive to the owner thereof. And therefore the
Lord by his Prophet tells the daughter of the Chaldeans: That her wisdom and
her knowledge has perverted her, Isa. 47. 10.

Verily to be carnally wise, is to be spiritually foolish. And as a wilful, or
a careless ignorance is a great sin, and shall be grievously punished: So in
the next place ignorance in general is the cause of all manner of sin.

What should cause the covetous wretch to rake, and scrape, and heap up money
upon money, and land upon land, by right, or by wrong: But because he knows
not, that, It is God only that makes poor, and makes rich: that brings
low, and lifts up, as in 1 Samuel 2. 7.

Because he knows not, that, A man's life (or the happiness of man's a life)
consists not in the abundance of the things, which he possesses, as Luke 12.
15. Which our Savior makes plain by the Parable immediately following.

Because he knows not, that, They that will be rich, fall into temptation,
and a snare, and into many foolish, and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition, as in the 1 Timothy 6. 9.

That he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days: and at his end shall be a fool, as Jer. 17. 11.

Peradventure he knows that these things are so written: but he is not so wise
as to consider, or persuade himself of the truth thereof.

Would the temporizing fool depend upon the arm of flesh, and wave still as the
blast blows, like a Reed shaken with every wind? If he did know? That the
Lord changes not, as Mal. 3, 6.

Would any profane person blaspheme the name of God: contemn his Ordinances:
corrupt his truth, or pollute his sabbaths? If he did know, that, He is an holy
God, and a jealous God, etc. Josh. 24. 19.

Durst the private Thief, the secret Adulterer, or the swinelike drunkard,
loose themselves in their base abominations: their filthy deeds of darkness?
If they knew, that Darkness hides not from God: and that darkness, and light
are both alike to him, as Psalm 139. 12. Or that nothing is secret that shall
not be manifest: neither any thing hid, that shall not be known, and come
abroad, according to that of our Savior, Luke 8. 17. Or in a word, durst any
wicked Reprobate whatsoever, delight, and live in, or by his odious, and
Soul-damning sins? If he knew, that, The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men. According to that of the
Apostle, Romans 1. 18.

But this ignorant Infidel will again allege: That there are many men, that
know as much of these things, as any man can tell them: and yet they continue
in their sins nevertheless.

Truly, of all fools they are the greatest, and most ridiculous, that will
make themselves enemies to God, and slaves to the Devil: and that knowingly,
and willingly. Yet this proves nothing to the contrary, but that ignorance is
the cause of sin. I conceive it will not be denied, but that the Jews,
especially the Scribes and Pharisees were knowing men, both in the Law, and the
Prophets, insomuch that they could not be ignorant, that the Messiah should
come into the world: Nevertheless, when he was come, they cried out
incessantly to have him Crucified.

Now, albeit the death of the Messiah was the greatest mercy that ever the
Lord vouchsafed to the sons of men: yet it was a most abominable sin in those
that practiced and procured it.

Thou could have no power at all against me (says our Savior unto Pilate)
except it were given thee from above: Therefore he that delivered me unto thee
has the greater sin, John 19. 11.

And those great sins, which were committed in order to his death, were carried
on by ignorance, as St. Peter affirms to the Jews, saying,

Ye denied the holy one, and the just: and desired a murderer to be granted
unto you: and killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised from the dead,
whereof we are witnesses, Acts 3. 14, 15.

And now brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it: as did also your
Rulers, verse 17.

And to this very purpose is that of Saint Paul, we speak the wisdom of God in
a mystery (says he) even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the
world unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this world knew: for had
they known it, they would not have Crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8.

And can any man imagine, that if Judas the Traitor had not been ignorant of
the true value of his Lord and Master: that ever he would have sold him for
thirty pieces of silver, and afterward have hanged himself upon the
consideration of his bad bargain?

But this ignorant wretch will allege yet further: That he can say the Lords
prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments; and he hops that this will be
sufficient to save the Soul of a man, that is altogether unlearned.

Truly, I cannot deny the sanctified use of the Lords prayer (as some do in
these days) for it is a very complete and compendious form, or pattern of
prayer: prescribed by the wisdom of God, and therefore not to be rejected by
the pride of man. Yet many there are that do but only say it, and that without
either benefit, or comfort: for there are many thousands that do not rightly
understand so much as why they call God their Father.

That which we call the Apostles Creed contains the substance, or History of
the Gospel: But being barely, or simply considered, without particular
application, it will furnish us, but with a bare Historical faith. The Devils
believe it, and tremble nevertheless.

And as for the ten Commandments, they may show him his transgression, and so
assure him of his damnation: But they can never bring him to Heaven, or so much
as one step toward it: unless they lead him to Christ, and there leave him.
For there is none other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved, Acts 4. 12.

But his concluding, and conquering Allegation (as he conceives) will be this.

He is confident that he shall do well enough yet: For did not Paul tell
Timothy: That he was before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious: but
he obtained mercy, because he did it ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

Now the sins that he commits are likewise ignorantly in unbelief: And why
should not he find mercy as well as Paul? Doubtless he shall, if he cease
not to follow Paul's example. But Paul obeyed Gods calling and conversion, and
was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision, Acts 26. 19. And in reference
thereunto, instead of persecuting as in time past, he preached the G^spel,
which once he destroyed, Gal. 1. 23.

Whereas this wilful wretch is still as ignorant in the truth, as ever he was,
and so he is like to continue.

For though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among Wheat with a Pestel:
yet will not his foolishness depart from him, says the wise man, Prove. 27. 22.

These with many other blind allegations he has (for ignorance will seldom,
or never be put to silence.) Neither is he without his evidence. And it is this.

He believes that he shall easily say, Lord have mercy upon me, at the last
hour. And then he doubts not, but all will he well enough.

For does not the Prophet say, That whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Land, shall be saved? Joel. 2. 32.

Yes, and so does the Apostle too, Romans 10. 13. But he proceeds in the very
next verse. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?

When he calls, he must be sure to be furnished with faith, or otherwise he
must expect the like entertainment with his sisters, the five foolish Virgins:
who, whilst they went to provide Oil for their Lamps, were shut out by the
Bridegroom. And notwithstanding that they came afterward, saying, Lord, Lord,
open unto us. Yet he answered, and said: Verily, I say unto you, I know you
not, Mat. 25. 12.

And would it not be the greatest of all his follies, if he should imagine,
that God only wise, will bestow this glorious inheritance upon them, whom he
knows not? Whom he approves not of?

Without doubt, there will be no Kingdom prepared for such, as are found
unprepared to receive it. And therefore let this ignorant infidel learn to
know, The only true God, essentially, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent,
personally. For this is eternal life, John 17. 3. Or, otherwise it may be said
unto him, as sometime Simon Peter said unto Simon the Sorcerer, upon an other
occasion. Thou have neither part, nor lot in this matter. For thy heart is not
right in the sight of God, Acts 8. 21.

The third Pretender to this inheritance, is the good honest man: Or the man
vulgarly so called, or reputed. Such a one as carries himself fairly and
pleasingly toward all men, endeavoring to get every man's good will, and his
good word, or if he cannot please all: yet he will be always sure to please
the greatest and the strongest party. This good honest man runs through all
conditions and employments with as little offense, or annoyance to any of his
Neighbors as may be. And therefore he doubts not, but he has a very good
Title to the Kingdom of Heaven: for is it not written?

Let every one of us please his Neighbor, Romans 15. 2. True: But the Apostle
proceeds in the same sentence: For his good to edification. First, it must be
for his good (not for his goods.) And secondly, it must be to edification: to
build him up in piety, religion, and godliness. For otherwise: To please men,
is not to be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

But he is confident in his evidence: wherein he sets forth. That he does,
as he would be done by. And that is both according to the intention of the Law,
and the Prophets: and likewise, according to the command of our Savior
himself, Mat. 7. 12. And he believes, that this is very fair.

It is indeed outwardly fair. But it has a very foul inside. Truly, this good
honest man; notwithstanding, this his usurped Title, is a very counterfeit, a
self-ended Sycophant: the most dangerous Member in a Commonwealth.

Yet I cannot, but subscribe to part of his partial evidence. For he sees a
Thief, and consents with him, and is partaker with the Adulterers, as Psalm
50. 18.

He endeavors to cover, countenance, or excuse all men's infirmities (as he
calls them,) and to prevent every man's misery: though it be a punishment
inflicted most justly upon a person most criminous and culpable, even the most
wicked offender that may be: And this (he says) is his love: whereas, in truth
it is his fear, lest his own misdeeds should meet the like measure. Or be it
his love: yet it is a sinful self-love. He loves the praise of men more then
the praise of God: And therefore he cannot believe, says our Savior, John 5.
44.

And he that believes not shall be damned. This is a Gospel-sentence, Mar. 16.
16.

The fourth Pretender to this heavenly inheritance is the zeal^us Reformer: By
whom I intend, not such a one as of an earnest affection to Gods glory, does
really and cordially desire a Christian reformation, either in manners, or
Religion, or in both; and does seriously endeavor the same according to his
particular calling. But such a one, as under the like specious fair pretenses,
does violently pursue his own projects, and makes his preposterous zeal the
Cloak to cover, or countenance his envy, avarice, or ambition.

This is altogether for the penal statutes, where he drives furiously, like
Jehu the son of Nimshi: who not only destroys the house of Ahab, King of
Israel (according to his Commission, but borrows a point with Ahaziah King of
Judah, together with twenty and four of his brethren. As in the ninth and tenth
Chapters of the second book of Kings. Come with me, and see my zeal for the
Lord (says he to Jonadad the son of Rechab, 2 Kings 10. 16. But Jehu took no
heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart. For he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboham, which made Israel to sin, verse 31. He
destroyed others for sinning, and yet he sinned as much, or more himself.

This is one of those, That bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and
lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of
their fingers. According to that of our Savior, Matthew. 23. 4. He will have
every man righteous but himself. He is so zealous against impiety in others,
that he not only pursues, and prosecuteth Gods open enemies: But so many of
his deer servants also, as will not walk in this Reformers own Road, be it
never so erroneous. As if he intended to disable all other men from the Kingdom
of Heaven, that he with some few of his own faction may make their forcible
entry with the less resistance.

But for all his haste he shall never come there: For albeit he may happily do
God and his Country some good service: yet is proceeds from an evil
principle, for whatsoever is not of love, is of Hypocrisy.

And the Hypocrite has no portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 24. 51. There
is no weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Yet if he could let the Mote alone in his brothers eye, until he has plucked
the Beam out of his own eye, peradventure he might see the way thither by so
much the better.

But he will allege what St. Paul says: That it is good to be zealously
affected always in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. True:

But that zeal which has the best things for its object, may be miscarried by
accident. As sometimes through ignorance.

They have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge (says Paul) and
therefore going about to establish their own righteousness, they submitted not
themselves to the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 2, 3.

A disease which himself had been formerly sick of: who was before a
blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious: but he abtained mercy, because he
did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

Yet it appears that it proceeded out of a zeal to reformation, Phil. 3. 6.

Sometimes through self ends.

They zealously affect you, but not well. Yea, they would exclude us, that you
might affect them, (says the same Apostle, Gal. 4. 17.

And sometimes through envy.

And so you see how the Scribes and Pharisees, and the chief Priests under a
fained zeal to their Law, Traditions, and Ceremonies, persecuted the savior of
the world. Insomuch that Pilate himself perceived, that for envy they had
delivered him to be Crucified, Mat. 27. 18.

But this Reformer is well assured, that his evidence will very well clear his
Title to this eternal inheritance.

For he believes that he is one of those for whom Christ died: Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. And is not
Reformation a good work?

Truly, I cannot deny, but it is a very good work. Yet as good as it is, it
may be abused.

It is most probable, that this was it, which Paul aimed at before his
conversion.

When breathing out threatenings, and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord, he went unto the High Priest, and desired of him Letters to Damascus to
the Synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men, or
women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem, Acts 9. 1, 2.

But the Lord proclaimed him a persecuter, and that of no worse a person then
himself: saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? verse 5. whereas after
his conversion, he charge the Corinthians, That all their things be done with
charity, 1 Cor. 16. 14. And to the Galatians.

Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
him with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be
tempted, Gal. 6. 1. And to the Thessalonians.

The Lord make you to increase, and abound in love one toward another: and
toward all men, 1 These. 3. 12.

But if you shall seriously peruse this Reformers evidence: you shall not find
so much as one line of love in the whole conveyance.

And that faith only is available, which works by love, says St. Paul, Gal.
5. 6.

In this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil:
wh^soever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not
his brother, says that loving, and beloved Disciple, 1. I^h. 1. 10.

And it is nothing likely, that they, which are not of God, should inherit the
Kingdom of heaven.

The fifth Pretender, that lays claim to this inheritance is the Legal
Professor.

And by him I intend such a one, as expects to be justified, and saved by his
obedience unto the Law of God, expressed, or implied in the Moral Law, or the
Law of the ten Commandments.

And truly, you shall not meet with one sensible sinner among many: But
(apprehending that he has displeased God, by doing that which is evil) he will
not be persuaded, but that the only means to be reconciled unto God, must be
by repenting him of the evil, and by doing of that which is good.

Albeit the Apostle tells us: That we are reconciled to God by the death of
his son, Romans 5. 10.

And therefore, in pursuance of that great mistake, the way which commonly a
Soul laden with sin does first light upon to be justified in the sight of God,
is the way of works. And this is sometimes called, Our own righteousness, Romans
10. 3.

As being performed, or at least attempted of our selves, and by our selves.

Sometimes it is called, The righteousness which is of the law, Romans 10. 5.

As consisting in the doing, or fulfilling of the Law. And sometimes jointly.
Our own righteousness, which is of the law, which St. Paul utterly
disclaimeth, Phil. 3. 9.

Now if a man should weary himself in this way all his days: Yet (if he
thinks by that means to be justified in his life, or glorified at his death)
he shall surely fail of his expectation. For first, our own righteousness is
worth nothing: Nay, it is worse then nothing: All our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6.

Secondly, the righteousness, which is of the Law is out of our reach. It
requires a perpetual, and a perfect obedience unto the whole Law of God, and
that under the penalty of a curse. For it is written: Cursed is every one, that
continues not in all things, that are written in the book of the Law, to do
them, Gal. 3. 10.

A yoke, which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear, says St. Peter,
Acts 15. 10. in order to the fifth verse of the same Chapter.

And thirdly, our own righteousness, which is of the Law, crosses Gods
design in the matter of our justification, and salvation. For if
righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, says St. Paul,
Gal. 2. 21.

And not by works of righteousness, which we have done, hut according to his
mercy he saved us, says the same Apostle, Tit. 3. 5.

And again, Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are
justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace, Gal. 5. 4. But this legal
professor will allege: That he believes he can do nothing without Christ:
and that it is, by, and for the power, and merits of Jesus Christ, that his
good works are made effectual, and acceptable in the sight of God.

Truly, there are many that have Christ much in their mouths. But they do not
consider rightly of Christ in their minds. For, either they will have him to
be only an assistant unto them. Or else they do verily suppose, that they
must be assistants unto him.

They that will have Christ rather for an assistant then a Savior, are such as
seek to go to heaven upon their own legs: I mean for, and by their own
righteousness; But finding an impossibility therein by reason of their
manifold defects, they will only borrow so much from Christ, as will make
their own righteousness complete. And to that purpose they weep; mourn, fast,
pray, and fall upon all the duties of piety and Religion, both toward God and
man with much earnestness and eagerness. But perceiving themselves, through
the strength of their corruptions, to fail, or miscarry, they lay hold upon
Christ to help them: otherwise they seldom, or never trouble him (more for his
ease, then his honor) however, they satisfy themselves with this persuasion,
that Christ will fulfill that, wherein they are defective: Whereby it appears
that notwithstanding they seem to call Christ to the main work, yet they take
upon them to do the most work themselves: Whereas the Apostle tells us, that,
To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 4. 5.

These are they that will have Christ to be only, an assistant unto them.

They that will be assistants unto Christ in their justification and salvation,
are such, as do yet more confidently deny, or disclaim their own legal
righteousness. And yet if you shall examine their proceedings, you shall find
that they incline so much thereunto, that they conceive they cannot be saved
without it.

They cannot be persuaded, but they must do something; though in truth to no
purpose: they must have at least a finger (as we say) in their own salvation.

They would indeed willingly follow Christ, but they cannot wholly deny
themselves. Happily they will acknowledge Christ to be all, but not all in all.
As if the blood of Jesus Christ could not cleanse us from all sin, contrary to
that of St. John, 1 John 1. 7. Or as if his righteousness were incomplete, In
whom dwells all the fullness of the godhead bodily, as says Saint Paul,
Coll. 2. 9.

Truly, this must needs be a great dishonor to the Son of God, to patch his
robe with our rags: his righteousness with our rotten corruptions. It must be
the single righteousness of one, and not the confused righteousness of two,
or more compounded together that must justify and save us.

For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they, which receive
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by
one Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 17.

But he will further allege, that if our own works have no hand at all in our
justification: To what purpose is that of Saint James? Was not Abraham our
Father justified by works (says he) when he had offered Isaac his Son upon the
Altar? James 2. 21.

I answer that there is a justification of the person; and a justification of
the Faith of the person. Now it appears plainly that the Apostle James, in
that place, intended the justification of Abraham's Faith: and not the
justification of his person. For his person was justified at least twenty years
before. For is it not said? That he believed in the Lord, and he counted it to
him for righteousness, Genesis 15. 6.

And that was before Abraham went in unto Hagar: and Ishmael, Abraham's son by
Hagar, was thirteen years old when he was circumcised, Genesis 17. 25.

And that also was performed before Isaac was begotten. And Isaac going to be
Offered, was able to carry the Wood, and to expostulate with his Father, Genesis
22. 6, 7.

So that by computation the person of A-Abraham was justified by Faith, no
less then twenty years, before his Faith was justified by Offering Isaac his
Son upon the Altar.

Legal Professor: In your actions, and allegations, a man may easily read your
Evidence: Your Faith is built (not partly as you suppose) but wholly upon the
Covenant of works: A decayed foundation. And not at all upon the Covenant of
Grace.

For you cannot relate to both Covenants, at one and the same time.

Christ's work is perfect, therefore needs no help: ours is imperfect, therefore
cannot help. And upon that account if we compound them: Christ's work will be
dishonored and blasted: and ours will look most filthy and deformed. I have
trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was none with me, says
our Lord, Isa. 63. 3.

And he that said it: Is the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.

And therefore learn by a lively Faith to lay hold upon the Lord Jesus Christ
(this Lord our righteousness) and to rely upon him wholly, and only for your
justification, and salvation: O verily, you get neither part nor portion in
this eternal inheritance.

For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God: Not of works, least any man should boast. As says that
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.

There are yet a confused company of Competitours (I know not how to call them)
who do all pretend to this heavenly inheritance. But they differ as much in
their fancies: as in their faces: and only do agree in a general disagreement.
They cry out mightily against selfishnesse: whereas there seems to be little,
or nothing else amongst them. Their actions are self-seeking; their Allegations
are self-confuting: And their Evidences are self-confounding.

Whereupon it follows, that they are more profitably seen then felt: heard,
then believed: and rejected, then justified.

They say, go to: let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach
unto Heaven: that we may make us a name. In imitation of those antike builders,
Genesis 11. 4.

But the same God, that confounded the language of the one: does likewise
confound the judgment of the other.

And therefore it is very probable, that the Country, or Kingdom, which they
shall inherit, and inhabit: will be called after the name of that City Babel:
in plain English Confusion. I dare not proceed any further in this discovery,
least I loose my self in a Wilderness, full of ways, both devious and
dangerous. I shall rather order my course directly toward the right Heir, whom
now I conceive to be within sight.

ANd this is the Loving Believer.

He that by an active faith willingly receives, and lovingly embraces the
Lord Jesus Christ: and (denying himself in all his doings and sufferings)
depends wholly upon the righteousness, intercession, and satisfaction of the
Son of God for his justification, and salvation.

According to that of the Apostle.

What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ (says he) yea,
doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ: and be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness, which is of God by faith,
Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9.

This Loving Believer is much in action: Yet he labors not for life: He
looks upon that as a gift, not as a reward.

His only care is: That he may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing,
being fruitful unto every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.
According to that prayer of St. Paul, Col. 1. 10.

And that he may abound in the work of the Lord: for as much as he knows,
that his labor is not in vain in the Lord. After the same Apostles
exhortation, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

He exceedingly admireth the light, and liberty of the Gospel: especially, when
he considers what great light and liberty, he, for his own particular, has
received thereby. For he perceives plainly.

That he was sometimes darkness: but now he is light in the Lord: and that he
is thereby enabled, to walk as a Child of light, as Ephesians. 5. 8.

And for his liberty, he finds: That the Son has made him free, and
therefore he is free indeed: As the Savior affirms, Joh. 8. 36.

Not free to sin, but free from sin: Not only from the guilt and punishment of
sin, but also from the power and predominancy of sin.

Sin shall not have dominion over him, for he is not under the Law, but under
Grace, as in Romans 6. 14.

Neither does he use his liberty for an occasion of the flesh, as Gal. 5. 13.
Nor for a Cloak of maliciousness, as 1 Pet. 2. 16. Least by any means this
liberty of his, should become a stumbling block to them that are weak. Contrary
to that Caution, in 1 Cor. 8. 9.

He seldom braggeth, or boasts of the spirit, as if he had engrossed him in a
greater measure then other men have. Yet he both lives in the spirit, and
walks in the spirit: not desirous of vain-glorie, not provoking others, not
envying others. According to St. Paul's Admonition, Gal. 5. 25, 26.

And withal he is so truly sensible of his own weakness, and so desirous of
Gods glory, that he rather chooses to glory in his infirmities: that so the
power of Jesus Christ may the more manifestly appear in him, to the praise and
glory of Almighty God.

That, which seems but a light sin to other men, lies heavy upon his heart:
Yet not for fear of damnation, that is the unbelievers terror: But for other
more Christian considerations. As first, because he knows, that all sin is
odious, and offensive to his Lord, and Master: And what wretch would by any
means displease so wise, so great, so gracious, and so good a God?

How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God, says discreet,
prosperous Joseph, Genesis 39. 9.

Secondly, because he would prevent, or avoid correction: Not that he
despises, or disliketh his heavenly fathers chastizement: But for as much as
no chastening for the present seems to be joyons, but grievous, Heb. 12. 11.

Thirdly, least he should discontinue the favor, and defense of the Lord his
Protector. Behold, (says the Prophet) the Lords hand is not shortened, that
it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy, that it cannot hear. But your
iniquities have separated between you and your God: and your sins have hid his
face from you, that he will not hear, Isa. 59. 1, 2.

Fourthly, he fears to commit sin, least by that means he should diminish his
confidence in his God: especially, when he is to present himself before the
Lord in prayer.

Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God:
and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his Commandment, and
do that which is pleasing in his sight, says that beloved Disciple, 1 John 3.
21, 22.

And fifthly, least thereby he should bring dishonor to his blessed Master.
For if while we s^ek to be justified by Christ, we our selves also are found
sinners: is therefore Christ the M^ni^^er of sin? God forbid, says the
Apostle, Gal. 2. 17.

Furthermore, this loving believer is very frequent, and fervent in the
exercise of holy duties: the duties of piety, and true devotion: As hearing,
reading, praying, praising, and thanksgiving, with the like godly employments.
Not that he expects thereby to deserve, or obtain this eternal inheritance.

But that by so doing, he may keep, and continue himself in a sweet Communion
with his God in Christ. For by hearing, and reading he finds God speaking
unto him in his own language: whereby he wonderfully increases, and improveth
his knowledge, and acquaintance both with God and his will, until the Holy
Scriptures have made him wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus, according to St. Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

By prayer and supplication he pours out his Soul into the bosom of his
heavenly father, unto whom he freely discovers all his wants: humbly
presents all his Petitions, and from whom he is always sure to receive a
gracious answer, and a comfortable return. Happily not altogether according to
his own imperfect desires: But more happily according to Gods most perfect
wisdom and bounty: Who knows to give good things to them that ask him, Mat.
7. 11.

And who gives liberally to all men, and upbraideth not, says St. James, Ja.
1. 5.

In praising God, first he presents him with that, which of right belongs
unto him. The Lord is worthy to be praised, says David, Psalm. 18. 3.

And secondly, he glorifieth God (the end for which he was created) Isa. 43. 7.

Who so offers praise, glorifieth me, says the Lord by his Prophet, Psalm.
50. 23.

And in giving thanks unto the Lord, he offers up himself unto his God in a
sweet sacrifice of retribution. I will praise the name of God with a song: and
will magnify him with thanksgiving: This also shall please the Lord better
then an Ox, or Bullock, that has horns and hoofs, says that sweet singer,
Psalm. 69. 30, 31.

Thus you see that the life of this loving believer, is neither a sluggish
life; nor a slavish life, nor a sinful life, nor a solitary life.

First, it is not a sluggish life: For he is a vessel unto honor, sanctified,
and meet for his Masters use: and prepared unto every good work, as in 2 Timothy
2. 21.

Secondly, it is not a slavish life: For he stands fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made him free, as Gal. 5. 1.

Thirdly, it is not a sinful life: For how shall he, that is dead to sin, live
any longer therein, as Romans 6. 2.

And fourthly, it is not a solitary life. For he has continual Communion with
his God: In whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore, as Psalm. 16. 11.

Now if you ask this loving believer, what he can allege for himself in order
to this title of inheritance. He will tell you, that he cannot find any thing,
either in himself, or any of his antecessours, that may promise him the least
possibility of interest therein. Neither has he so much as one pennyworth, of
any thing that is his own, to offer toward the purchase of that Land of the
living.

Indeed, he understands that Originally it was conferred upon his
Great-Grand-Father Adam, and his Heirs in general, by God, that great, and
only disposer of all things; upon condition of Adams obedience to the mind and
will of his Master. But by his rebellion he forfeited his Coppy-hold, whereupon
the Justice of God ejected him: and for ever utterly debarred, both himself and
all his whole Posterity from the capacity of a legal recovery.

But he knows that Jesus Christ the Son of God has purchased the Fee-simple
of that inheritance, at the hands of his coeternal Father: And has promised a
possession therein to every one that believes, as John 6. 47. and 1 John 5.
10, 11.

And what he has so promised, he has also sworn to perform.

For being willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise the
immutability of his Council, he confirmed it by an Oath. That by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us:
which hope we have as an anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast, and which
enters into that within the vail: whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus made an High Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec, Heb.
6. 17, 18, 19, 20.

And as for this believers evidence: It is a justifying, and a saving faith.

And this he says, is likewise the gift of God. According to that Apostles
testimony, Gal. 1. 29.

Now, if we shall apply our selves to the examination of this his evidence: It
will be necessary for us to propound, and answer these five questions.

First, what is this justifying and saving faith? Secondly, where, or in what
place has this faith its residence, or being? Thirdly, upon what foundation
must it be built? Fourthly, how is it to be obtained? And fifthly, how shall a
man know, whether he has this justifying and saving faith or not?
FIrst, therefore, if you ask what this justifying, and saving faith is? I
answer: It is that gift of God, whereby we are enabled to believe the promises
of God in Christ, according to his Gospel: to repose, and rest our selves
confidently thereupon: and willingly, and cheerfully to receive the same God in
Christ for our Savior, and our Sovereign Lord. I conceive it may be worth our
pains to consider this definition; according to six particulars therein
contained.

First, this Faith is the gift of God. It is not in the power of any man to
believe effectually, or savingly, except it be given him of God. To one is
given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the
same Spirit: To another Faith by the same Spirit, says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.
8, 9.

And in another place: I say (through the grace given unto me) to every man
that is among you, not to think more highly of himself, then he ought to think,
but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith, Romans 12. 3.

And thus the Son of God himself.

There are some of you (says he) that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning, who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. And he
said, therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were
given unto him of my Father, John 6. 64, 65.

Secondly, by Faith we are enabled to believe the promises of God.

This is proved by the Apostle Paul in the example of Abraham.

Who against hope, believed in hope, that he might become the Father of many
Nations, according to that which was spoken: So shall thy seed be. And being
not weak in Faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about
an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Saras womb. He staggered not
at the promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in Faith, giving glory
to God, Romans 4. 18, 19, 20.

And in the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, we see how the Patriarchs, and
other Saints of God, did believe, and adhere unto the promises of God by Faith,
throughout that whole Chapter.

Thirdly, faith inableth us to believe the promises of God in Christ: or, As
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, as 2 Cor. 5. 10.

If we look upon God out of Christ: upon God essentially without a Mediator:
As he is a great God: a mighty and a terrible, which regards not persons, nor
takes reward, as Deuter. 10. 17. As he is a consuming fire, even a jelous God,
as Deuteronomy. 4. 24. who shall bring every work into judgment, as Eccles. 12. 14.

And will by no means clear the gui^ty, Ex. 34. 7.

I say, If we shall think upon God according to these truths, we shall never
dare to believe any promise that he has made unto us for good: we shall rather
believe, that he holds us for his enemies, and that he writes bitter things
against us. Like patient Job in the extremity of his passions, Job 13. 24, 26.
But if we shall consider God, as he was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses.

Now we dare be bold to believe him: For we can assure our selves by Faith,
that we are upon terms of peace, and that he has received us into favor.

Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ: By whom also we have access by faith into the grace wherein we stand,
and rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 1, 2.

But happily you will say: How is it to be understood, That God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself?

Truly, this is a question well worth the asking, and answering: For it is the
great mystery of the Gospel, and that which but few do rightly understand.

God was in Christ: That is, God did take unto himself the nature of man, and
so became God in Christ personally: that so he might reconcile the world unto
himself, being still the same God essentially.

When we would meditate upon God according to his acting or working, we must
conceive of him, as one God in three persons distinctly: when we would consider
him according to his essence or being, we must conceive of him, as of three
persons in one God substantially and individually. So then, as God was
reconciling the world, he was Deus cum Deo, God with God personally. But as he
was reconciling the world unto Himself. So he was Deus in Deo: God in God
essentially.

And thus God was in Christ diverse ways, or rather according to diverse forms
or kinds of administration: For whatsoever was concluded or done, either
intentionally, virtually or actually by the Son of God: as Mediator for
mankind;

The same he did, as he was God in Christ. And therefore to pass by that
infinite essence or being, of the three Persons in the Godhead, according to
their incomprehensible co-existency, as a secret too deep and intricate for the
creature: And therefore not revealed unto us by the Creator, either in his
word, or works.

We find that God was in Christ:

In the Covenant of Grace personally,

In the Creation apparently,

In the Promise representatively,

In the ceremonial Law typically, or figuratively,

In his Incarnation perfectly and completely,

In his Life obediently,

In his death passively and patiently,

In his Resurrection victoriously,

In his Ascension triumphantly, And,

In his Kingdom gloriously.

First, I say, God was in Christ in the Covenant of Grace personally: that is
to say, in the second person of the Trinity, preparing a remedy against that
ruin, which he foresaw mankind would run into by Satan's malice, and their own
rebellion. And therefore Peter intimates, That Christ was foreordained for our
redemption before the foundation of the world: 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20.

And Paul, That we are saved and called by God, according to his grace given us
in Christ Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

This Covenant of Grace was the first original record that ever directed us to
this personal distinction.

Secondly, God was in Christ in the creation apparently. For so St. John.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God: and the Word was
God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made, that was made, John 1. 1, 2, 3.

If you ask what this Word was? I answer: The same Word that was afterward made
flesh: and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory; the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father: full of grace and truth, says the same Evangelist,
John 1. 14.

You see here that God was in Christ at all the works of the creation: but more
apparently at the creation of mankind. According to that by Moses.

And God said, Let us make man, Genesis 1. 26. And verily it was according to the
wisdom of God, that his Son should have a hand in the framing of that creature,
upon whom he should first bestow his own image, and afterward take unto
himself the others nature. That so the whole family of the faithful might be
made members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones for ever. According to
that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 30.

Thirdly, God was in Christ in the promise representatively, he was represented
in or by, the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. And in or by the seed of Abraham,
Genesis 22. 18. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made, he says not,
And to seeds as of many, but as of one; and to thy seed, which is Christ, says
St. Paul, Gal. 3. 16.

Fourthly, God was in Christ in the ceremonial Law typically.

The Lamb for the Passover, Exodus 12. 3. did signify the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sin of the world, Joh. 1. 29.

The Ark of the Covenant, Numb. 10. 33. did typifie Jesus the Mediator of the
Covenant, Heb. 12. 24. The priests, who were not suffered to continue, by
reason of death, Heb. 7. 23. did personate this God in Christ, who because he
continues ever, has an unchangeable priesthood, Hebr. 7. 24. The blood of the
sin-offering, Levit. 16. 14. did represent the blood of Jesus Christ, which
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. In a word:

All the ceremonies did set forth God in Christ, in some manner, or measure: in
whom they all ceased, as the shadow in the substance. For they were the shadow
of things to come: but the body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17.

Fifthly, God was in Christ in his incarnation perfectly and completely,
according to both natures of God and Man in one person. As it appears both by
prophecy, promise, and performance. First, by prophecy: Behold, a virgin
shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel, Isa. 7. 14.
Secondly, by promise: The angel answered and said unto Mary: The holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall overshadow thee:
therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the
Son of God, Luke 1. 35. And thirdly, by performance: Unto you is born this day
in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: says an angel unto
the shepherds: Luke 2. 11, which they presently found to be true, verse 16.

Now that this God in Christ was perfect God: it appears by that of the
Apostle.

God (says he) was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

And as he was perfect God, so was he likewise perfect Man: and that according
to his own infallible assurance. Handle me (says he) and see, for a spirit
has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24. 39.

And if so after his resurrection, without all doubt he had so before his death
and burial.

Sixthly, God was in Christ in his life obediently. I seek not mine own will
(says he) but the will of him that sent me, Joh. 5. 30.

He became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross (that execrable
death) Phil. 2. 8.

And thus the Apostle to the Hebrews.

Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered: and being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation,
unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 8, 9.

Seventhly, God was in Christ in his death passively, and patiently.

When he breathed out his last groan upon the cross: The Centurion and they
that were with him watching Jesus, said; Truly this was the Son of God, Matthew.
27. 54.

And thus the Apostle Peter.

Christ suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

And that he suffered patiently, it appears by the same Apostle. Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps: who
did no sin, neither was guil found in his mouth. Who, when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.

Eighthly, God was in Christ in his resurrection victoriously. For God raised
him up, having loosed the pains of death: because it was not possible that he
should be holden of it, Acts 2. 24. He has abolished death, and brought life
and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10,

And thus the Apostle to the Hebrews.

For as much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same: that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death: that is the devil: And delivered them, who through
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15.

Ninthly, God was in Christ in his ascension triumphantly.

When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men,
Ephesians. 4. 8.

Tenthly, and lastly, God is in Christ in his kingdom gloriously.

Where the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, etc. Ephesians. 1.
17. has set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, etc. Ephesians. 1. 20,
etc.

Now albeit these several forms or kinds of administration, conformable to the
several times and occasions, ordained by Gods unconceiveable wisdom, may
peradventure beget some thoughts of alteration, in our weak apprehensions: yet
this God in Christ, neither was, is, nor shall be, any other, than what was
concluded and agreed upon, in and by that eternal Covenant of Grace.

He is Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8.

Yesterday, before the time of man's temporal being: to day, in the time of man's
temporal being: And for ever, during the time of man's temporal being. And
whatsoever this God in Christ either purposed, promised, did, or suffered from
everlasting to everlasting; it was, and is all in pursuance of that great
design of reconciling the world unto himself.

In which he shall persist, and persevere, until the last and general
dissolution, when there shall be no more use of a Mediator: And then the Son
of God shall deliver up the kingdom of his Mediatourship to God, even the
Father: and shall cease to be God in Christ personally, that God may be all in
all essentially. According to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 28.

Thus you see (in some measure) how it may be understood: That God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself.

And now we come to prove the fourth particular contained in this definition of
faith. That this justifying faith inableth us to believe the promises of God in
Christ, according to his Gospel.

Not according to the law: For the law is not of faith, Gal. 3. 12.

For if there had been a law given, which could have given life, verily
righteousness should have been by the law. But the Scripture has concluded
all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe, Gal. 3. 21, 22.

And no man ought to doubt, but that the promise of the grace of God in Christ
is the only voice of the Gospel: whether it proceeds from the Apostles, or
from the Prophets: And therefore it is called the Gospel of the grace of God,
Acts 20. 24.

And the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1. 16.

And that this justifying, and saving faith inableth us to believe the promises
of God in Christ: According to his Gospel, it is most evident: For neither can
faith justify, or save us without the Gospel, neither can the Gospel justify,
or save us without faith: And to this purpose faith is called, The faith of the
Gospel, Phil. 1. 27.

And the Gospel is called, The word of faith, Romans 10. 8. Neither is this
Gospel restrained to any time, place, or person: but was, is, and shall be
effectual through faith to all believers in all ages for ever.

For the Scripture foreseeing, that God would justify the Heathen through
faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, Gal. 3. 8.

And it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes: to the
Jew first, and also to the Greek, Romans 1. 16.

Fifthly, Faith inableth us to rest, and repose our selves confidently upon the
said promises of God in Christ: Not only to believe them, but also to rest,
and rely upon them. Every true believer can affirm that freely, which Balaam
the wizard was enforced to testify in spite of his own teeth. God is not a
man that he should lie, neither the Son of man, that he should repent: has he
said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
Number. 23. 19. I know (says Job) that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and
mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me,
Job 19. 25. 26, 27.

Lo, we have left all, and followed thee, says Peter unto Christ, Luke 18. 28.

We have left all the possibilities of this World, and depended wholly upon
thee, and thy promises. I am not ashamed of my sufferings (says Paul) for I
know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that,
which I have committed unto him against that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12.

I am persuaded (says the same Apostle) that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 38, 39.

And very much to this purpose is that of John the Baptist, concerning faith in
Christ: He that has received his Testimony (says he) has set to his Seal
that God is true, Joh. 3. 33. That is, he that by the hand of a lively faith,
has received the Testimony of God in Christ, concerning the promises of the
Gospel: he has set to his Seal that God is true in all those promises: He has
not only witnessed it with his mouth, or subscribed unto it with his hand: But
he has set to his Seal, which is an argument of the greatest assurance that
may be.

Verily the several deportments, or behaviors of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and generally of all the faithful in all ages, even to this
present hour, will abundantly testify the truth of this particular: If we
shall look back upon their doings and sufferings, but any thing seriously, unto
all which they were wholly induced, and encouraged by the assured hope of
eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began, Tit.
1. 2. For if in this life only they had hope in Christ, they had been of all
men most miserable. According to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 19.

The sixth, and last particular belonging to this definition of faith, is this:
That it inableth us to receive the Lord Jesus Christ, or God in Christ, for our
Savior, and our Sovereign Lord: First for our Savior, when many more of the
Samaritans believed, because of Christ's own word. They said unto the woman, now
we believe, not because of thy saying, but we have heard him our selves, and
know, that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world, Joh. 4. 41, 42.

Thus when the Lord begins to incline the Soul to listen after Jesus Christ:
He first presents him as a Savior: As being the most acceptable object to a
distressed conscience: who apprehending her own cursed condition by reason of
sin, and the Justice of God against sin, armed with no gentler weapons, then
all manner of temporal calamities, together with eternal death and destruction.

The poor blind Soul sits now down in the darkness of sorrow and discomfort,
imploring relief, or direction to relief. Like blind Bartimeus, who sat at
the highways side begging, Mar. 10. 46.

In this perplexity Gods holy Spirit whispereth, and reveals, that Christ the
Savior is at hand to help her. Hereupon (with the same blind man) she
begins to cry out, Jesus thou Son of David have merry on me. And being
charged by the Devil, and despair, to hold her peace: she cries the more a
great deal. Thou Son of David have mercy on me.

To whose sad cries the Savior attends, and sends faith to call her: Faith
says unto her, be of good comfort, arise, he calls thee. At this the
cheerful Soul casts off her Garment: The rags of her own righteousness; and
rises, and comes unto Jesus, Jesus says unto her, what will thou that I
should do unto thee? The soul replieth; Lord, that I may receive my sight: So
much sight, as that I may clearly see thee to be my Savior. Jesus says unto
her, Thy faith has saved thee. And immediately she receives sight, and
denies her self, and takes up her cross, and follows him; according to her
Saviors own direction, Mark 8. 34.

By this you may perceive, that faith does first set us on work to receive
Christ for our Savior or Redeemer.

Yet this is no infallible property of a justifying and a saving faith. For
there is scarce any reprobate whatsoever (under the color of a Christian) but
is sometimes wounded by the sting of an evil conscience, and terrified with the
sense of Gods heavy wrath and indignation: And in that desperate fit, he will
be ready even to rore out upon Christ to become his Savior. But if our faith
be right, if it be effectual, it will also carry us on to receive and embrace
Christ for our only Lord and Master.

Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well: for so I am, says Christ to his
disciples, John 13. 13. So I am to every true believer.

We read that when the rest of the disciples had told Thomas (called Didimus)
that they had seen the Lord, after his resurrection; Thomas said, Except I
shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print
of the nails: and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.

After eight days Jesus appeared again unto his disciples, Thomas also being
then amongst them. Then said he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold
my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not
faithless, but believing. And no sooner had Thomas, by this means, arrived
unto the full assurance of faith; but immediately he answered, and said unto
him: My Lord, and my God, John 20. 28. He says not, Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God, according to Peter's former acknowledgement, John 6. 69. But,
Thou art my Lord, and my God. Intimating thereby, that all his service,
obedience, worship, and reverence, wholly and only unto him belonged.

And so likewise Saul, afterward Paul, at first a persecutour, and injurious
to the name of Jesus. But even in the heat of his haste and fury, the same Son
of God intercepts him, and beats him off from his barbarous enterprise, who
thereupon perceiving Christ to be far otherwise than what he had formerly
conceived: He trembling and astonished said, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? Acts 9. 6. As if he had said: Lord, the word of thy mouth, being the sword
of the Spirit, has both convinced, and converced me. Now I believe thee to be
the same, that thy blessed disciples have declared: I am overcome by thy power,
and now I desire thine employment: Lord, what will thou have to do? And what he
was afterward commanded, he most happily performed: doing and suffering for
the truth of the Gospel, more, and with more willingness and cheerfulness,
than ever any man, except his Master. Insomuch, that he triumphed in his
sufferings, saying, I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12. 10.

Thus faith, when it is effectual, draws us unto, and into Christ, enabling
us to receive him, not only for our Savior, but also for our Sovereigne; our
chief and only Lord. Not only to save our souls, but also to love, honor,
and obey him, as the only Savior of our souls: and that willingly and
cheerfully. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his
commandments are not grievous: 1 John 5. 3. Not grievous unto them that love
him.

Thus have I endeavored, in answer unto the first question, to give you (so
far forth as the Lord has vouchsafed to enable me) the true definition of a
justifying and a saving faith: And proved it according to six degrees or
properties therein considerable.

As first, that it is the gift of God. Secondly, that it inableth us to believe
the promises of God. Thirdly, that those promises must be the promises of God
in Christ. Fourthly, that they must be according to his Gospel: they must be
Gospel promises. Fifthly, that this Faith inableth us to rest, and repose our
selves confidently upon the same promises. And, Sixthly, that it inableth us
willingly and cheerfully to receive the Lord Jesus Christ, or God in Christ,
for our Savior, and our Sovereigne.
Faith is that gift of God, whereby we are enabled to believe the promises of
God in Christ, according to his Gospel: to rest, and repose our selves
confidently thereupon: and willingly and cheerfully to receive the same God in
Christ for our Savior, and our Sovereigne Lord.

The second question to be answered in this discovery of Faith, in order to the
examination of the Believers evidence is this.

Where, or in what part has this saving Faith its residence, or being?

I answer; In the heart. For so the Apostle: With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10. 10. Not in the outward profession: For the same
Apostle says concerning the defiled, and unbeleeving. They profess that they
know God: but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16.

We have two notable examples of outward profession, and inward hypocrisy in
the new Testament. The one of Judas Iscariot; we find that he was one of
Christ's Apostles, one of twelve: That his Lord sent him forth with the rest, to
preach, and to work miracles, Matthew. 10. to 9. Neither do we find any thing to
the contrary, but that he performed his duty according to his Commission.

And in matter of charity to the poor, he seemed to exceed all the rest. For
when Mary anointed the feet of her Savior with that costly ointment, John 12.
3. Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence (says this Judas)
and given to the poor? verse 5. Can any Judas now breathing counterfeit a
fairer color?

But nevertheless, the Spirit of God discovers him for a covetous hypocrite.
For this he said, not that he cared for the poor: but because he was a thief,
and had the bag, and bare what was put therein, verse 6. Of whom the Apostle
Peter further testifies. saying, He was numbered with us, and had obtained
part of this ministry: yet this man purchased a field with the reward of
iniquity, and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his
bowels gushed out. And it was known to all the dwellers at Jerusalem, etc. Acts
1. 17, 18, 19.

Thus was his treacherous heart discovered, and rewarded; who, notwithstanding
that the doctrine, miracles, and continual conversation of the Son of God
afforded him the same outward means of faith and fidelity with the rest of the
Apostles: yet in his heart he was so far from believing, loving, and obeying
his blessed Lord and Master, that he sold him for a contemptible price, Matthew.
26. 15. Betrayed him with a villainous kiss, Matthew. 26. 49. And afterward
hanged himself in a devilish despair, Matthew. 27. 5.

The other example is that of Simon the sorcerer, whom we commonly call Simon
Magus, who at first bewitched the people of Samaria with his sorceries.

But when they believed Philip, preaching the things concerning the kingdom of
God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. Then
Simon himself believed also, and when he was baptized, he continued with
Philip. and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done, Acts
8. 9, to 14.

And when Simon saw, that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the holy
Ghost was given: he offered them money, saying, Give me also this power, that
on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the holy Ghost, Acts 8. 18, 19.

Now let us lay all these together. He believed, and was baptized, and
continued with his teacher; and was so desirous of the gift of the holy Ghost,
that he would have bought it with his money (a commodity that few will part
with, upon such terms) and what can any man desire more? Yet Peter said unto
him, Thy money perish with thee: because thou have thought that the gift of God
may be purchased with money. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter. For
thy heart is not right in the sight of God, Acts 8. 20, 21.

Truly, according to the outward appearance, this Simon the sorcerer performed
as much as might be expected; and yet we see, that all was to no purpose:
because his heart was not right in the sight of God. It is like that his evil
heart propounded unto him this outward profession, for the only means to
compass his carnal designs. And this will the rather appear by Peter's ensuing
exhortation.

Repent therefore, says he, of this thy wickedness, and pray to God, if
perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee: for I perceive that
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, Acts 8. 22,
23.

Truly, these examples may serve for seasonable admonitions to such as make
use of religion only, as a fig-leafe to cover their shame: or to countenance
their covetousness, cruelties, or confederacies.

Keep thine heart with all diligence (says Solomon) for out of it are the
issues of life: Prove. 4. 23. Out of the heart are the issues of life, or the
ways of life: yea, and of death too. A good man, out of the good treasure of
the heart, brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure
brings for evil things, says the Son of God, Mat. 12. 30.

And as he knew all men's hearts, so we find that he distinguished between the
Hypocrite, and the true believer, by the heart.

Ye Hypocrites (says he) well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, This people
draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but
their heart is far from me, Mat. 15. 7, 8.

To confirm and conclude this truth, that the heart is the only receptacle, or
place of residence for an effectual faith: I pray observe, That when the Eunuch
made the motion to Philip of being baptized: Philip said, if thou believe
with all thine heart, thou may, Acts 8. 36, 37.

Happily he remembered the Sorcerers evil heart, whom he had then but lately
baptized: and fearing, least this Eunuch might be poisoned with the like
Hypocrisy, and so become liable to the like reproof: he tells him that he
may be baptized; provided, that he believes with all his heart.

And truly, this is not without great reason, that the heart should be
principally regarded in matter of faith. For first, God sends faith into the
heart to purge, and purify it, as Acts 15. 9. And faith brings Christ into
the same heart along with it. According to that prayer of Paul for the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 3. 17. which seems likewise to be most sweetly insinuated, by
the believing lovesick spouse. I found him, whom my Soul loves (says she) I
held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my mothers
house, and into the Chamber of her that conceived me, Cant. 3. 4.

And when the gracious Soul has thus brought Christ to dwell in her heart by
faith; then she begins to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory,
according to that of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

But whereupon must this faith be built? For that is the third Question.

I answer that, it must be built upon the Rock, which is Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4.

Not upon Thoughts, or Opinions,

Not upon Traditions,

Not upon Humane Inventions,

Not upon Dreams, or Fancies,

Not upon Prophesies,

Not upon Prognostications,

Not upon Wrested Expositions,

Not upon Works of Righteousness.

But upon The Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.

First, a justifying faith must not be built upon Thoughts, or Opinions.

For the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are but vain, 1 Cor.
3. 20.

I verily thought with my self (or I was directly of opinion) that I ought to
do many things contrary to the name of Jesus, says St. Paul, Acts 26. 9. But
that opinion of his made him a persecuter, and not a believer.

Secondly, not upon Traditions: Beware, least any man spoil you through
philosophy, and vain deceit, after the Traditions of men, and not after Christ,
says the same Apostle, Col. 2. 8.

And our Savior told the Scribes and Pharisees, that they transgressed the
commandment of God by their Traditions, Mat. 15. 3.

Thirdly, not upon humane inventions: They are whores (deceitful whores) as
the Prophet David insinuates, Psalm. 106. 39.

For therefore was the wrath of God kindled against his people, insomuch that
he abhorred his own inheritance, verse 40.

Cursed are they that father their own adulterous conceptions upon the Spirit
of God, or that dare forge a Gospel according to their own inventions. If we,
or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that, which we
have preached, let him be accursed, says that faithful Apostle, Gal. 1. 9.

For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
servants for Jesus sake, says the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 5.

Fourthly, this faith must not be built upon Dreams, or Fancies. For in the
multitude of Dreams, and many w^rds, there are also diverse vanities, says the
Preacher, Eccl. 5. 7. I have (says the Lord) heard, what the Prophets said,
that prophecy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed, Jer.
23. 25.

Fifthly, not upon prophesies: The Prophets prophecy falsely, says the Lord,
Jer. 5. 31. we find that for one Elijah, there were four hundred and fifty
Prophets of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 22. And for one Micaiah, about four hundred lying
Prophets, 1 Kings 22. 23. Truly, in comparison of the multitudes of lying
Prophets: there were but very few, that were approved to be true and faithful,
even then under the shadows of the Law: when prophesying was very necessary, to
declare the will of God, and to confirm the minds of men in the promised
Messiah.

But God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto
the fathers by the Prophets: has in these last days spoken unto us by his
Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2. And it may seem that Peter desired to have conference with
those great Prophets Moses, and Elias: But behold, a voice out of the Cloud,
which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear ye him,
Mat. 17. 4, 5.

Verily, they that groape after prophesies in the bright sunshine of the
Gospel: They walk after the light of their own fire, and in the sparks, that
they themselves have kindled: This shall they have of mine hand (says the
Lord) they shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 11.

Sixthly, we are not to build our faith upon Prognostications. A Diviner, an ol
server of times, a Charmer, a Wizard, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits, all
that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord, says Moses, from the
mouth of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18. 22.

It is a wonder, how they come to be of such reputation with us, that dare
profess a zeal to Gods glory? Is it not just with our God to say unto England,
as sometime he said unto Babylon? Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
monthly Prognosticatours stand up, and save thee from those things, that shall
come upon thee: Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall burn them,
they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame, Isa. 47. 13, 14.

Seventhly, not upon wrested Expositions: There are somethings in the
Scriptures hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned, and unstable,
do wrest to their own destruction, says the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

And eighthly, a justifying and saving faith cannot be built upon the works of
righteousness: For not by the works of righteousness that we have done; but
according to his mercy he saved us, Tit. 3. 5.

These works of righteousness are commonly called the works of the Law: But by
the works of the law shall no flesh be justified, Gal. 2. 16.

For if righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2. 21.

This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the
head of the corner, says Peter to the rulers of the people, and the Elders of
Israel, Acts 4. 11.

Neither is there salvation in any other, verse 12.

How often does the Son of God cry out upon us in his holy Gospel; to believe
on him, to believe in him. To believe on his name, to believe in his Merits and
Mediation.

And St. Paul to the regenerate Jailer. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 31. And in his Epistle to the Colossians: Though
I be absent in the flesh (says he) yet am I with you in the spirit, joying,
and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ, Col.
2. 5.

As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord (says he) so walk ye in
him, rooted, and built up in him, and established in the faith, abounding
therein with thanksgiving, verse 6. 7.

I pray observe, as ye have received Jesus Christ the Lord by the hand of
faith: so walk in him according to the righteousness of faith, rooted in him
by the word of faith, and built up in him by the work of faith, and established
in the faith, by him the Author, and finisher of your faith, abounding in the
fruit of faith, with thanksgiving the evidence of faith. See here how sweetly
this Apostle insinuates unto us, how we are to proceed in the degrees of
faith, and that according to the rule of faith, even the Gospel of Christ: For
it is the power of God unto salvation, unto every one that believes. For
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, says the
same Apostle, Romans 1. 16, 17.

Not from one kind of faith to another, but from one degree of faith to
another.

And to conclude this point, I am more then confident, that there did never any
precept nor principle proceed, either from the Son of God himself, or from any
of his Apostles, that may direct us to any other foundation for our faith: but
only Christ, or the Gospel of Christ, or the promises of the Gospel: all which
are the very same in substance, and do clearly hold forth unto us this God in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself. And to him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins, Acts 10. 43. And therefore most accursed is he, that shall
wilfully endeavor to subvert this groundwork, or to make it a stumbling
stone, or a Rock of offense, to any Soul, by any means, or upon any occasion
whatsoever. For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11.

We come now to the fourth general Question.

How, or by what means, is this faith obtained? It is answered, that faith is
obtained by the hearing of the word of God: For so St. Paul. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10. 17.

The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live, says that Son of God himself, John 5. 25.

The dead, such as are dead in trespasses, and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. They shall
hear the voice of the Son of God: the voice of his Gospel from the mouths of
his Ministers, his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

And they that hear shall live; live by faith: The life that I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, says the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20.

And by faith they shall live: The just shall live by faith, says the same
Apostle, Gal. 3. 11.

But you may say, that I have already proved in my definition of faith, that
faith is the gift of God: how then is it obtained by hearing? It is most true,
that faith is the gift of God. Nevertheless, he holds it forth unto us in
the means; and that is the word.

Shall God give us his word, and shall not we give him the hearing of it?

We read, that such as gladly received the word from the mouth of Peter, were
baptized: and there were added the same day unto the believers about three
thousand Souls, Acts 2. 41.

And not long after, many of them which heard the word, believed: and the
number of the men were five thousand, Acts 4. 4.

But such as believed without hearing: I do not remember; that ever I did read
of any. I will not seem to restrain the power of God: For with God all things
are possible, Mar. 10. 27. But according to man's apprehension, St. Paul seems
to make it a thing impossible for a man to believe without hearing. How shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? says he, Romans 10. 14.

But as we believe not without hearing, so neither do we believe by hearing
only without the blessing of God thereupon.

And in reference hereunto faith is most properly called the gift of God. It
was the Lord that opened the heart of Lidia: that she attended unto the things,
which were spoken by Paul, Acts 16. 14. It is man that preaches, but it is God
that teaches. It is written in the Prophets (says our Savior) And they shall
be all taught of God: Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of
the father, comes unto me, John 6. 45.

Now to come unto Christ, and to believe in Christ: do signify the same thing,
as may easily be observed out of the 64. and 65. verses of the same 6th. of
John, and likewise out of the 37. and 38. verses of the Chapter next following.

I pray observe also from hence, that if you will have faith, you must so hear
from man, that you may learn of God. And for our better direction herein, the
Son of God has left us these two Cautions. Take heed what ye hear, Mar. 4. 24.

And, Take heed how ye hear, Luke 8. 18.

First, take heed what ye hear: Be not carried away with diverse and strange
Doctrines, says the Apostle He^r. 13. 9.

For the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears:
and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto
fables, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.

Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw
Disciples after them, says the same Apostle, Ac. 20. 30.

But happily you will say: If there be such danger in what we hear, it were
better for us wholly to absent our selves, and not to hear any man at all.

O no: Do not so neither, do not utterly rob and spoil your selves of the
Truth, upon suspicion of being led into error.

This would be as if a man should put out his own eyes, least another man
should stand between him and the light.

Or, as if a man should kill himself, for fear another man should hurt him.

He that has ears to hear, let him hear. This was our Lord and Saviors cry,
Luke 8. 8.

But that you may know, how to take heed what you hear: So, as that you may
hear with the less prejudice, and the greater comfort, and assurance: we will
descend through this general rule, into some few particulars.

First, take heed what you hear, that may hasard your modesty, or good manners
in the search of Gods hidden secrets. For the secret things belong unto the
Lord our God: but those things that are revealed belong unto us, and to our
Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Secondly, take heed what you hear, that may withdraw, or discourage you from
doing the revealed will of God.

For if any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whither it be
of God, John 7. 17.

Thirdly, take heed what you hear to the dishonor of God, either in the Unity,
or Trinity, especially against the holy Ghost. For whosoever speaks against
the holy Ghost: It shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come, Mat. 12. 32.

Fourthly, take heed what you hear, that may make against your Election by the
Father, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. or against your Redemption by the Son, Col. 1. 14. Or
against your Sanctification by the holy Ghost, Romans 15. 16.

Fifthly, take heed what you hear, that may contradict the lawful use of the
Law.

For the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully, 1 Timothy 1. 8.

Sixthly, take heed what you hear, that may obstruct the liberty of the Gospel.
It is called: The perfect law of liberty, Ja. 1. 15. Provided, that it be not
used for an occasion to the flesh: According to that Caveat, Gal. 5. 13.

Seventhly, take heed what ye hear in the defense, or toleration of sin, either
Original, actual, or intentional.

For the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23.

Eighthly, take heed what you hear, that may ascribe that unto the flesh, which
is properly the work of the spirit: As freewill, universal grace, or the like
Divine operations, or indowments.

For it is God that works in you, both to will and to do, of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.

Ninthly, take heed what you hear, to the reproach or prejudice of any
particular person whatsoever, whether he be saint, or sinner, or present or
absent: or of any parcular calling ordained of God, or approved by good
authority: This savoureth of envy. And where envying and strife is, there is
confusion, and every evil work: James 3. 16. Or at least, it argues
uncharitableness: And though a man speaks with the tongues of men and
angels, and has not charity: he is but as sounding brass, or a tinckling
cymbal: 1 Cor. 13. 1. sin must be reproved, but the person may not be
reproached.

Tenthly, take heed what you hear to the rejection, or the corruption, or the
reproach, or the disparagement of the word of God, otherwise called the holy
Scriptures.

First, because this is it, by which the soul is enlightened, Psalm. 119. 130.
Isa. 8. 20. Secondly, it is the word of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Thirdly,
it is the word of salvation, Acts 13. 26. Able to make a man wise unto
salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. And fourthly, it is the good word of God, Heb. 6. 5.
And he that believes not God, has done him such infinite dishonor, as to
make him a liar, 1 John 5. 10.
But I conceive there may be many in our days, that will be ready to say; What
needs all this warning? So long as we follow the Spirit of truth, he will guide
us into all truth. True: so long as we follow the Spirit of truth. But we must
know, that besides, or contrary to the Spirit of truth, there are seducing
spirits, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and a spirit of error, 1 Ioh. 4. 6.

Now for a man to say, or boast, that he has the spirit of truth, or the
spirit of God, is no sufficient argument to prove that he has the spirit of
God.

Thou have tried them, which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found
them liars: says the Spirit to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 2.

And I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are
the synagogue of Satan: says the same Spirit, Rev. 2. 9 An outward verbal
ostentation, is no infallible sign of an inward real Christian. And therefore
that of St. John is very seasonable for these times of uncertainty: Beloved
(says he) believe not every spirit; but try the spirits whether they be of
God: 1 John 4. 1. But you will say, How shall we be able to do that?

Why, the same Apostle proceeds in the next verse to give us one singular
good direction: Hereby know we the spirit of God (says he) every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God.

But it may be objected further, that every one who pretends to the name of a
Christian, will easily confess that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: and so
by consequence, every one that pretends to the name of a Christian, is of
God, and has the spirit of God.

But this general assertion will not serve the turn: without doubt the holy
Ghost has these further intentions.

First, that this confession must proceed from an effectual faith.

For unless the heart believes unto righteousness, the mouth cannot confess
unto salvation. And therefore St. Paul has put them both together, Romans 10. 10.

And secondly, this confession must comprehend the whole mystery of Christ's
incarnation. As the Divinity of his generation, the purity of his conception,
and the perfection both of his divine and humane nature, together with his
doctrine and miracles, his sufferings and satisfaction, his resurrection and
ascension.

And every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh
(according to all these truths) is not of God, 1 John 4. 3.

If you will proceed to a further trial of the spirits, observe their fruit.

The fruit of the spirit of God is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: Gal. 5. 22. And they that
live in the spirit, do also walk in the spirit, not desirous of vainglory,
provoking one another, envying one another, Galat. 5. 25, 26.

And whomsoever we do really find walking contrary to these, or any of these,
we may say with St. Jude: Though they separate themselves, they are sensual,
having not the spirit: Jude 19.

But how shall a man behave himself, if he shall happen to be beset, or tempted
by these, or the like evil seducing spirits?

Why, I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: says St. Paul,
Romans 16. 17.

If any man consent not to wholesome words: even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness: he is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof
comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of
corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness;
from such withdraw thy self. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.

They that have the form of godliness (in profession) and deny the power
thereof (in practice) from such turn away: 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Their mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which
they ought not, for filthy lucres sake: says the same Apostle, Tit. 1. 11.

And thus that beloved disciple.

Whosoever transgress^^h, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God; he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the
Son: If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him, God speed. 2 John 9. 10.

And therefore take heed what ye hear. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees,
which is hypocrisy, says our Lord and Master, Luke 12. 1.

And so we proceed to his second Caution.

Take heed how ye hear.

Not negligently, not deceitfully: not despitefully; but attentively,
reverently, and obediently.

First, take heed how ye hear the word of God negligently. As new born babes
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, says the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 2.

We must not look upon the word of God, as a thing indifferent; but we must
desire it, as babes desire milk, their best-pleasing, and most proper food and
nourishment. I esteemed thy word more then my necessary food, says holy Job,
Job 23. 12. And thy word was unto me the joy, and the rejoicing of my heart;
says the Prophet Jeremy to the Lord God of hosts: Jer. 15. 16.

If these be things to be neglected, then may we also neglect the good word of
God.

Nevertheless, we are sensible that the hearing of the word of God is very
much damnified by the means of negligence.

And this negligence may be said to be threefold.

First, there is a negligence in coming to hear the word of God. There are many
men and women that think, if they come to hear, only when their laziness, or
leisure will give them leave; once, or twice in a month, or happily in a
quarter, is very fair. But to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, says the Apostle, Hebr. 3. 7, 8. He that will not hear the voice of
God from the mouth of his Ministers, to day, this day, every day, when it may
be heard with any convenience: It is a sore sign that his heart is either
hardened, or upon hardening. A fearful judgment. And therefore the same Apostle
in the same Chapter.

Take heed, brethren, least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God: But exhort one another daily while it is called
to day, least any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Hebr. 3.
12, 13.

Secondly, there is a negligence in hearing. If the Devil cannot hinder a man
from coming in at the Church door, then commonly he endeavors to block up
the door of his heart, that the word may find no profitable entrance. And to
further him in this his design, either he disordereth the senses, and disposes
them to slumbring, prating; gazing, or the like ungodly engagements, or else he
breeds such a mutiny in the affections, that they will by no means agree to
give the word of God the least cordial entertainment: As if the Lord had sent
the same desperate curse among these negligent hearers, which he sometime sent
by his Prophet unto the Rebellions Israelites. Go, and tell this people: hear
ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not: make the
heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: least
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart: and convert, and be healed, Isa. 6. 9, 10.

Thirdly, there is a negligence after hearing, and that appears in not
practicing the word, when, and after it is heard.

And I conceive that the parable of our Savior, concerning the Sower may (not
impertinently) be applied to this purpose. I pray observe his own exposition,
Luke 8. beginning verse 11.

The seed (says he) is the word of God. Those by the ways side, are they that
hear, then comes the Devil, and takes away the word out of their hearts,
least they should believe, and be saved. Here is the malice of the Devil.

They on the Rock, are they, which when they hear, receive the word with joy,
and these have no root; which for a while believe, and in time of temptation
fall away. There is the infirmity of the flesh. And that which fell among
Thorns, are they, which when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with
cares and riches, and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection.
Here are the cares and snares of the world.

These were all hearers, but never a practiser. The malice of the Devil, and
the infirmity of the flesh: together with the cares and snares of the world,
will not leave them so much as one word (as we say) to bless themselves
withal.

And truly much of this through negligence: When was it that the enemy came,
and sowed Tares among the Wheat? but while men slept, Mat. 13. 25. While they
were negligent, and careless. Be sober therefore, be vigilant (says St.
Peter) because your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about,
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Peter 5. 8.

And be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves,
James 1. 22.

Secondly, take heed how ye hear deceitfully. Thou son of man (says the Lord
to his Prophet Ezekiel) the Children of thy people still are talking against
thee by the walls, and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another,
every one to his brother: saying, come, I pray you, and hear what is the Word,
that comes forth from the Lord. And they come unto thee, as the people comes,
and they sit before thee as my people; and they hear thy words: but they will
not do them, for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes
after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31.

See how these Hypocrites do vilify the Prophet of the Lord in private.
Nevertheless, they seem to be very zealous for the word of the Lord in
public: and thereupon they come unto the Prophet, and they sit before him as
Gods own people, and they do hear his words. But here is the deceit, they will
not do them: for they are Hypocritical and self-ended: with their mouth they
show much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness. And may there
not be deceitful hearers in these our days? that follow the word merely, that
they may be accounted good Christians? or because they think this to be the
only prevailing way, both to make them capable of all manner of employment,
though they be never so unfit, and undeserving: And likewise to countenance all
their proceedings, though never so corrupt and unconscionable?

And therefore (if you observe it) they will seldom, or never hear the word:
though never so sincerely, plainly, and powerfully delivered: but when they
think it may conduce to their carnal profit, or preferment. The cry of their
heart is: who will show us any good, not Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us, as Psalm 4. 6. Is not this to hear the word of God
deceitfully?

Is it not a work of the Lord, to hear the word of the Lord? Truly it is such
a work, as does very well manifest, who is our Master. He that is of God,
hears Gods words: Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God,
says the Son of God, to the unbelieving Jews, John 8. 47.

And cursed is he, that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, says the
Prophet, Jer. 48. 10.

Thirdly, take heed how you hear despightfully: Whosoever despises the word, shall
be destroyed, says Solomon, Prove. 13. 13.

He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and
he that despises me: despises him that sent me, says Christ to his seventy
Disciples, Luke 10. 16.

He therefore that despises, despises not Man, but God, says that Apostle, 1
Thessa. 4. 8.

But you will say, that there is no man so ungracious, as to despise the word
of God in the mouth of his Ministers. No? What think you then of those
factions, frantic spirits, that wry the mouth at every Doctrine, which agrees
not with their own erroneous, or peradventure blasphemous opinions? Or what do
you think of those foul stomachs, that will by no means digest the sincere
milk of the word, but will rather spet it out in reproaches, unless it be
sweetened with faithless revelations, flattering Prophesies, fair promises,
false invectives, fresh intelligence, or the like frivolous extravagancies,
which taste like Sugar to their corrupted appetites? Or what do you think of
those preposterous hearers, that come to Gods Ordinances? Not with David's
resolution: To hear what God the Lord will speak, as Psalm. 85. 8.

But with an Athenian prejudice: What will this babbler say, as Acts 17. 18.

Neither shall the Son of God escape better then his servants. For some said he
is a good man: others said, Nay, but he deceives the people, John 7. 11.

Whereas in truth they deceived themselves. Is not this to despise both Christ
and his Gospel? He that despised Moses law died without mercy, under two, or
three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood
of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done
despite unto the spirit of grace, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, Hebr. 10.
28, 29.

Wherefore let the Preacher persuade you to keep your feet, when you go into
the house of God: and be more ready to hear, then to give the sacrifice of
fools, Eccl. 5. 1.

That is, keep, or see to your affections, which carry about the Soul, as the
feet do carry about the body: and be more ready to hear, then to give the
sacrifice of fools: what sacrifice is that? why you know that under the Law,
they did use to offer beasts in sacrifice.

And these, as natural brute beasts made to be taken and destroyed (do offer
themselves) to speak evil of the things, that they understand not, and shall
utterly perish in their own corruption, according to that of Peter, 2 Pet. 2.
12.

But take heed, that ye do hear the word of God attentively, reverently, and
obediently.

First, take heed, that ye hear attentively. We find that the Lord commended
Mary, for attending to his Sermon: when her sister Martha accused her for
neglecting his service, Luke 10. 39. etc.

Attention is the Lords own work: for it was the Lord that opened the heart of
Lidia, that she attended unto the things, which were spoken of Paul, Acts 16.
14.

And the Lord himself will reward it. We are all here present before God, to
hear all things, that are commanded thee of God, says that good Centurion to
St. Peter, Acts 10. 33.

Here was a Testimony of their attention. And the holy Ghost fell on all them
that heard the word, verse 44.

There was the reward of their attention. They received the gift of the holy
Ghost. A gift so precious, that it is impossible for any to value it, but only
such as have truly received it.

Secondly, take heed that ye do hear reverently. Receive with meekness the
ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls, Ja. 1. 21.

And for this cause thank we God without ceasing (says Paul) because when ye
received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it, not as the word
of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, 1 These. 2. 13.

Contrary to these are they (who proud of their own parts) do creep into the
sheepfold of Christ, to put the whole flock into a confusion: endeavoring (not
to obtain grace from Christ) but to disgrace the faithful Ministers of Christ.
And to that purpose, where they cannot take occasions of offense, they will be
sure to make occasions of offense: Neither can the most weighty, and
well-grounded arguments suffice to silence their illiterate impudence.

They have said, with our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own, who is
Lord over us, according to that of the Prophet, Psalm 12. 4.

But contrary to that of the Apostle: My brethren, be not many Masters, Ja. 1.
3.

These trouble-truths (in spite of humane learning) are gifted men: Yet it is
probable, that they take unto themselves, more then what is given them. I have
not sent these Prophets: yet they ran, I have not spoken unto them, yet they
prophesied, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 21. They say not with our Savior: who
has ears to hear, let him hear, Mat. 13. 9. But like themselves, who has a
tongue to speak, let him speak. Yet neither will they allow any thing to be
well spoken: but what they speak by themselves, or by their Disciples, who do
only speak themselves.

These are they, that say, they have gotten the pattent of the spirit wholly to
themselves, and their assigns: and that they have the only true light in their
own dark Lanthorns.

But we may choose to believe them: For we must believe God, rather then men.

And our God sends us: To the Law, and to the Testimony, and tells us:
that, if they speak not according to this word, it is, because there is no
light in them, Isa. 8. 20.

And therefore, so long as they reject this word, their pretended light is like
to do them but little good. But judge of them, say they, we may not: For they
are all spitual.

And he that is spiritual, judges all things, yet he himself is judged of
none. According to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 15.

Truly, we need not: The Spirit of God has long since judged them, and
pointed them out, as men before of old ordained unto this condemnation: And
that both by the Son of God himself, Mat. 24. 24.

And likewise by diverse of his Apostles: By Paul 2. to Tim. 3. to the 10th. By
Peter, 2. Pet. 2. By Jude, Jude 4. to the 20th.

In many other places they are lively described, but in these so exactly
discovered, both for time and manners, that they cannot hide themselves from
any: save only from those silly Souls, whom they themselves have most
miserably blinded and bewitched: whose lamentable condition is much to be
pitied.

Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth:
Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith: But they shall proceed
no further. For their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.
This is our Lords promise under the hand of one of his principal Secretaries, 2 Timothy 8, 9.

And thirdly, take heed that ye do hear obediently. Behold, to obey, is better
then sacrifice, and to hearken, then the fat of Rams, says Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.
22.

But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes,
and that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate
instruction: and castest my words behind thee: This the Lord by his anointed,
Psalm. 50. 16, 17.

And thus the wisdom of God by King Solomon. Because I have called, and ye
refused: I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. But ye have set at
naught all my council, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your
calamity, I will mo^k when your fear comes, etc. Pro. 1. 24. etc. But
whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings, and does them: I will show you
to whom he is like, he is like a man which built an house, and dug deep, and
laid the foundation on a Rock: and when the flood arose the stream beat
vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a
Rock, says Christ, that Rock and foundation of our faith, Luke 6. 47, 48.

Truly, whosoever shall take heed what he hears: And how he hears,
according to the preceding particulars. I am confident that he shall neither be
barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus have I
endeavored to show you: both, that faith is obtained by hearing: And likewise
what, and how you shall hear: so, as that you may obtain faith.

But there is yet a question, which may be demanded in this case: And it will
be this. May not faith be obtained by reading? I answer, that I doubt not, but
it may.

For as in hearing we receive the word of God by the ear: so in reading we
receive the word of God by the eye. Now the word of God is that incorruptible
seed whereby we are regenerate and born again, 1 Pet. 1. 23. And it is not
material how we do receive this seed; provided, that we do receive it into
honest hearts, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience, as Luke 8. 15.

For by this means faith is both produced and improved. Nevertheless, it is a
very rare thing to get faith by reading: And therefore reading is not to be
compared to hearing in this particular.

For first, the word of God is full of deep mysteries, very hard to be
understood without much industry, even by the strongest apprehension. Without
controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: says our Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.
16.

Is it an easy matter to conceive rightly of the Godhead, essentially and
personally?

Or of the two Covenants, the one of Works, and the other of Grace. And that
the last should be first, according to Gods contract and ordination; though
last, according to man's use and expectation?

Is it an easy thing for a man to see Christ in the promise to Adam, and the
fathers before the flood? Or in the Covenant of Grace revealed unto Abraham,
and confirmed by the seal of Circumcision to himself and his believing
posterity, till their deliverance out of the Egyptian bondage? Or afterward
in the ceremonial Law, wherein he was exhibited, or holden forth more
copiously, though yet obscurely in types and shadows, until his coming in the
flesh? Is it an easy thing for a man rightly to understand Gods Evangelical
purposes, in giving the moral Law (that exact copy of the covenant of works?)
And his several extents and limitations intended in his Gospel?

Truly, if these and the like difficulties do not require an exact industry,
and a superordinary judgment: I have no judgment at all. And therefore, Lean
not to thine own understanding: says the wise man, Prove. 3. 5.

Doubtless, it is this kind of self-confidence, that has thus obscured the
light of the Gospel with so many antichristian errors. A wise man will hear,
and will increase learning: says Solomon, Prove. 1. 5.

As the Ethiopian Eunuch was riding in his charet, and reading the Prophet
Esaias: Philip ran thither unto him, and said, Understand thou what thou
read? And he said, How can I, except some man should guide me? Acts 8. 28.

Verily, he has need of a good guide, that shall dive for faith in this deep
mystery. Even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from generations;
but now is made manifest unto the Saints of God: Col. 1. 26.

But you may say, Do we not see, that in these days many ignorant and
unlearned persons: even they that cannot, or can but very hardly read: do
nevertheless take upon them to teach the word of God publicly, and with much
confidence, whilst men of great learning, and such as have improved their
knowledge, and judgment by a long continued exercise, and industry, are
slighed, and neglected.

This indeed we find to be true by lamentable experience, neither has the
devil a more destructive engine to batter and beat down the truth: or to bring
the Gospel into contempt, and unto confusion. For does not the Apostle Peter
say?

That in his brother Paul's Epistles there are some things hard to he
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction; with this caveat: Ye
therefore, he loved, seeing ye know these things before, beware least ye also
being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness,
2 Pet. 3, 16, 17.

But they Object, that Christ did advertise his Apostles, saying: Take no
thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same
hour, what ye shall speak, Mat. 10. 19.

True: But this was in case of their own defense: where the Savior charged his
Apostles not to be careful to provide themselves of any cunning or artificial
excuse: but to commit themselves confidently to the Lord, for their protection
and assistance: who will undoubtedly stand with them, and strengthen them in
all such trialls. As Saint Paul did afterward find by experience, 2 Timothy 4.
17.

But in other cases, and places, especially in the house of God. Be not rash
with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God. Says that kingly Preacher. Eccles. 5. 1, 2.

And amongst Paul's admonitions to Timothy: Study (says he) to show thy self
approved unto God, a workman that needs not be ashamed: rightly dividing the
word of truth, 2 Timothy 2. 15.

But were not the Apostles ignorant and unlearned men?

They were so: And it was very much agreeable to Gods wisdom, to choose such,
as were neither cunning Statesmen: nor eloquent Orators: least his Gospel
should be suspected, to have been invented by policy, or maintained by
sophistry.

My speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
ademonstration of the spirit, and of power. That your Faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: Says that learned Apostle, 1 Cor.
2. 4, 5.

But those ignorant men had an incomparable master: who could as well enable,
as command them to speak or do, whatsoever was expedient or necessary to the
publication, and confirmation of his Truth and Gospel, which appeared most
manifestly in that he personally empowered them to work miracles, Mat. 10. 1.
And soon after his ascension enriched them with the gift of the holy Ghost in a
visible manner, whereby They began immediately to speak with other tongues, as
the Spirit gave them utterances, Acts 2, 3, 4.

And whosoever can make it appear, that he is truly qualified with these
extraordinary indowments: I shall easily allow him that title of an Apostle:
which many novices do now usurp merely by virtue of their ignorance. Or
otherwise, I need not fear to say unto them as our Savior some time said unto
the Sadduces.

Ye err because ye know not the Scriptures nor the power of God, Mat. 22. 29.

Secondly in obtaining faith reading is not comparable to hearing: for though a
man has never such an excellent apprehension: yet the nature of man is
generally proud, and partial to his own inclinations. Insomuch, that when he
meets with any exhortation, or reproof, that crosses, or contradicts his
beloved corruptions, he is easily inclined to pass it by: as a thing little
material to his purpose, he will not readily fasten it upon himself And by
this means he seldom or never acquainteth himself with the doctrine of
self-denial, whereas our Savior says whosoever will come after me, let him
deny himself. Mar. 8. 34. And truly till a man feels himself sinking under
the weight of his corruptions: and utterly lost in all his other expectations:
he will hardly lay hold upon the Son of God to save him.

And whosoevet does not lay hold upon him by the hand of a saving faith, he
must perish eternally. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life: and
he that believes not the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides
on him, John 3. 36.

But shall a man come to the knowledge of his own corruptions rather by hearing
then by reading?

I answer that it is the more promising way by much: for whereas a man may
favor himself in reading: yet the word of God in the mouth of his minister,
is, or ought to be powerful and impartial.

For if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ says Paul.
Gal. 1. 10.

And to this purpose it was, that the same Apostle did give that forcible
charge to his beloved Timothy. I charge thee therefore before God (says he)
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing, and his kingdom: Preach the word, be instant in season, out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering, and doctrine, 2 Timothy
4. 1, 2.

And I doubt not but I may say, of reproof, as the Apostle said of Chastening.
No reproof, for the present, seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless,
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them, that are
exercised thereby, Heb. 12. 11.

But he that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy, says Solomon, Pro. 29. 1.

Thirdly reading is not so necessary as hearing: Because we find no such
precept, or command for the one, as for the other.

The priests lips should keep knowledge: and they should seek the Law at his
mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Malac. 2. 7. And if the
church of the Jews, were to seek the Law, at the mouth of the sacrificing
Priest: How much rather are we to seek the Gospel at the mouth of the minister
of Christ? For if the ministration of condemnation be glory: much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. Says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 9.

Wherefore my beloved brethren, let every man be quick to hear, slow to speak.
Says James. Ja. 1. 19.

And the Spirit of God cries out seven times in the second and third Chapters
of the Revelation. He that has an ear let him hear, what the Spirit says unto
the Churches.

Fourthly, we find no such promise made to reading, as is made to hearing.

Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live: And I will
make an everlasting covenant with you even the sure mercies of David: says the
Lord by his Prophet, Isa. 55. 3. And thus his only Son: verily, verily, I say
unto you: he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life: and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death to life, John 5. 24.

And fifthly, we have no president, or example of any that believed by reading:
But we find that many thousands believed by hearing, Acts 2. 41. and 4, 4. and
13. 48. and 17. 12.

For it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe,
1 Cor. 1. 21.

And you know, that preaching has its relation to hearing, and not to reading.

But you will say: to what purpose then do we bring up our children to reading?
or what do we with our Bibles, and other godly books? if reading in them be so
unnecessary, as you say it is?

Good Christians: I pray mistake me not, I do not say it is unnecessary: But I
say, it is not so necessary or commodious for the getting of faith, as hearing
is.

The word which we read in the book, is not so powerful; so full of spirit and
life, as that which we hear from God, by the mouth of his ministers. The words
that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life, says our Lord
Christ, Joh. 6. 63.

Nevertheless I am so far from condemning reading (although it may be much
abused, as the best things too often are) That I commend it for a beneficial,
and a blessed exercise to all sorts of people, both unbeleevers, and
believers. For in relation to unbeleevers. First it prepares them for hearing;
by acquainting them with the history, and making them familiar with the body of
the Scriptures. And you know that a man will more freely and willingly receive
and entertain that, which is familiar unto him, then that, which is strange, or
unknown: unless he be of such an Athenian, or Atheistical spirit, as to spend
his time in nothing else: but either to tell, or to hear some new thing as Acts
17. 21.

Secondly, it inableth them to hear with the greater discretion: and the more
readily, to find out the several places of Scripture cited by the Minister,
either at the present, or at their better leisure.

The Jews to whom Paul preached at Berea were commended for the more noble: In
that they received the word with readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily whether those things were so. Acts 17. 11. Therefore many of them
believed. verse. 12. And as for the true believers (who are neither wedded to
their own understandings, nor captivated by their own corruptions: For the
Spirit of God is with them. And where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty. 2
Cor. 3. 17.

To them, I say, reading is yet more profitable and proper: For it serves to
assist their memories, to improve their meditations: and likewise to
strengthen, and confirm their Faith.

And questionless it was principally for these ends, and purposes: that the
Apostles did write their Epistles to be read in diverse churches or
congregations, which they dedicated to the Saints of God.

Such are, were in Christ Jesus by faith: whereunto they had been formerly
converted by hearing the Gospel preached unto them, either by the Authors of
the same Epistles, or by some other of the Apostles or Evangelists.

And therefore I say unto all men, women, and children concerning reading, and
hearing: as Paul some time said to the Corinthians concerning spiritual gifts,
and prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. 1.

Desire reading, but rather that ye may hear. For faith comes by hearing: and
hearing (comes) by the word of God (preached) How can they hear without a
preacher, says the same Apostle, Romans 10. 14.

Now the reason why I have thus taken upon me to answer this question
concerning reading is this.

Because many think to excuse themselves very well from attending upon God in
his public Ordinances: by pretending that they do benefit themselves as much
by reading good books at home.

But truly they do very mightily deceive themselves.

He that knows God, hears us: he that is not of God, hears not us: hereby
know we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error. Says that loving and
beloved Disciple, John 4. 6.

WE are now come to answer the fifth and last Question, completely pertinent to
the examination of this Believers evidence: which is this. How shall a man know
whether he has this saving faith, or not? That we may possess our selves of a
right understanding, in a matter of such consequence: let us exactly consider
that place of the Prophet Jeremy. Where he compares or likeneth a faithful
person to a goodly Tree, that is richly planted, well rooted, full of sap,
flourishing, fair, and fruitful.

You shall find in the seventeenth of the Prophecy of Jeremy, at the seventh
and eighth verses. In these words: Blessed is the man that trusts in the
Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

For he shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her
roots by the River, and shall not see when heat comes: but her leaf shall be
green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought: neither shall cease
from yielding fruit.

First, this Tree is richly planted: For she is planted by the waters. And Job
tells us: That though a Tree be cut down, and that the root thereof wax old
in the earth: yet through the sent of water, it will bud, and bring forth
boughs like a plant, Job 14. 7, 8, 9.

Secondly, she is well rooted: for she spreads out her roots by the River,
she spreads out her roots, and that by the River.

Not by filthy, myery, or muddy waters: but by the pure and pleasant streams.

When the Lord had planted a Garden in Eden, with every Tree, that was pleasant
to the sight, and good for food. He provided a River to water the Garden,
Genes. 2. 10.

And it was the first commendation of the land of Promise: That it was a good
land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains, and depths, that spring out of
valleys and hills, Deuteronomy. 8. 7.

Thirdly, she is full of sap: The Trees of the Lord are full of sap, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 104. 16.

And how can she be otherwise, seeing she is so richly planted, and so well
rooted: And therefore she shall not see, or be sensible when the parching heat
passes over her.

Fourthly, this Tree is flourishing, for her leaf shall be green. Her leaf
shall not wither, says the Prophet David upon the like occasion, Psalm. 1. 3.

Fifthly, she is fresh and fair, and so she shall continue: For she shall not
be careful in the year of drougth, she shall put forth beautiful buds, and
blossoms never the less.

Sixthly, and lastly, she is fruitful, very fruitful. For she shall not cease
from yielding fruits.

But you will say, what resemblance, or likeness is there between this
flourishing Tree, and a true believer?

I answer, let this be always considered, that those things, which are spoken
of this fruitful Tree are natural: and those things that are to be spoken of
the faithful man are spiritual, and then we shall find, that they agree in
all these particulars.

For, as this natural Tree is richly planted, well rooted, full of Sap,
flourishing, fair, and fruitful. So the spiritual man is likewise richly
planted, well rooted, full of sap, flourishing, fair, and fruitful. The ground
wherein he is planted is Jesus Christ: His root is faith, his sap is love, his
green leaves are gracious professions, his fair and beautiful blossoms are
blessed and holy desires, and his good fruits are godly performances, or good
works.

And whosoever shall thus resemble this flourishing Tree, according to these
six properties: I dare avouch him for a true believer.

And therefore we will now begin to examine, whether we be in the faith,
according unto these particulars.

First, we must be richly planted: That is, we must be planted into Christ.

We find that they, which are made partakers of the benefits, and blessings of
Jesus Christ, are called Trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord,
Isa. 61. 3.

Verily, we are all originally wild slips, every man and woman must say with
David: Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me,
Psalm. 51. 5.

This is a very bad ground to thrive upon. This is all the comfort, that we
have received, or may expect to receive from our earthly old man: For in Adam
all die.

And therefore it is necessary that we be removed, and planted into the
heavenly new man. For as in Adam all die: even so in Christ shall all be made
alive, as in 1 Cor. 15. 22.

Hereby we shall enjoy a double benefit. Namely, the benefit of Christ's death:
and the benefit of his resurrection.

For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death: we shall
be also in the likeness of his resurrection, says the Apostle, Romans 6. 5.

Where he teaches us: that whosoever is planted into Christ, according to the
likeness of his death: he shall be also planted into Christ, according to the
likeness of his resurrection.

For in that he died, he died unto sin: but in that he lives he lives unto
God. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin: but alive
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, says the same Apostle in the same
Chapt. at the 10. and 11. verses.

But it may be demanded, how a man may be said to be dead indeed unto sin?
seeing that so long as a man lives in the flesh, he shall never be altogether
free, from the lusts of the flesh: the snares of the world, and the assaults of
Satan, which will continually provoke unto sin, and sometimes prevail, even in
the most sanctified Soul: the best disposed, and the most retired Christian
under heaven?

Insomuch that Paul cries out.

The good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do,
Romans 7. 19.

And in the 23. verse of the same Chapter.

I see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my Members. And the
Apostle James.

In many things we offend all, James 3. 2. And likewise John the beloved. If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1
John 1. 8.

I answer, that I understand these words: dead indeed, for very near dead, or
even as good as dead: And not for totally, or absolutely dead. For so, I
conceive, a man shall never be dead, indeed, unto sin: until this corruptible
shall have put on incorrupti^n, and this mortal shall have put on immortality:
then (and not till then) shall be brought to pass the saying that is written.
Death is swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54. And therefore how the
Perfectionaries dare to give God the lie, and their own consciences the blind
baffle, is a thing beyond mine apprehension.

Nevertheless, as there are certain symptoms, or signs, or accidents, by
which we may be able to judge, when a man is naturally a dead man (as we say)
or at least so far spent, that there is no hope of his recovery: and that
before his Soul has utterly forsaken his body. So if we shall consider the
same symptoms, or signs, after a spiritual manner: we shall be able thereby
to conjecture, when a man may be said to be dead indeed unto sin, before he is
wholly freed from the corruption of nature.

There are many signs, that may confirm our judgments in this particular. I
shall instance only four: Namely, loss of appetite, loss of speech, loss of
memory, and loss of motion.

The first is loss of appetite, and that is when sin begins to be odious, or
loathsome. The Soul of the wicked desires evil, says the wise man, Prove. 21.
10.

But when a man begins to die unto sin: that which before was his desire, is
now become his disease: he loathes that most, which formerly he most longed
after.

We read that David being in a hold: and a garrison of the Philistines in
Bethlehem: David longed, and said: Oh, that one would give me to drink of the
water of the Well of Bethlehem, which is by the Gate. And three mighty men
brake through the Host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the Well of
Bethlehem, that was by the Gate, and took it and brought it to David:
Nevertheless, he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord, or
before the Lord: And he said: be it far from me, O Lord, that I should do
this: Is not this the blood of the men, that went in Jeopardy of their lives?
Therefore he would not drink it, 2 Samuel 23. 14, 15, 16, 17.

This was much in a King to deny himself in that, which even now he so
vehemently desired. But little, or nothing in comparison of that repugnancy, or
opposition, that is usually found to be in the Saints of God. For whereas,
before their effectual calling and conversion, their carnal desires may
peradventure be so pressing, and importunate upon them: that they can devour
widows houses, drink iniquity like water, and work all uncleanness with
greediness. Yet when (through the grace of God) they begin to be sensibly sick
of sin: their appetites are so strangely altered, that they do not only
dislike and distaste every thing that is unlawful: but likewise they do
utterly abhor it, as it is odious, or displeasing in the sight of God.

They abstain from all appearance of evil, according to that precept of the
Apostle, 1 These. 5. 22.

This is one sign, whereby we may discover, when a man may be said to be dead
unto sin. Another is loss of speech.

The tongue (says the Apostle) is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison, James
3. 8.

And David describing a wicked person; says, That he oasteth of his hearts
desire and blesses the covetous, whom the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10. 3.

Yet his mouth is full of cursing and deceit, and fraud: under his tongue is
mischief and vanity, verse 7. Indeed it is a rare thing to hear a wicked man
speak well. For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks, says
our Savior, Mat. 12. 34.

But when the recollected Christian becomes so speechless: That no corrupt
communication will proceed out of his mouth: but that he puts away all
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evll speaking, with all
malice: And that he cannot suffer fornication, and uncleanness, and
covetousness to be once named, neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, which are not convenient. According to the several exhortations of
the Apostle. Ephe. 4. 29. 31. and 3, 4.

I say the loss of this, and the like ungodly language, is another evident
symptom, whereby we may pronounce such a one to be dead unto sin. A third sign
is loss of memory.

It is a sad thing to consider what an everlasting memory a carnal man has
concerning those things that are evil. He can sooner forget a thousand great
benefits, then one small offense. And so in all other particulars, his memory
may be called, the ready Register, by whom all his flesh-pleasing vices are
entered upon record.

And when his opportunity will not license him to commit them, it is no little
recreation for him to remember them.

The children of Israel wept, and said: we remember the fish which we did eat
in Egypt freely; the Cucumbers and the Melons, and the Leekes, and the Onyons,
and the Garlic, Numb. 11. 4, 5. But the children of Belial laugh and say, we
remember since we could have satiated our lusts with variety of strong flesh:
commanded the tongues, and hands of so many tall fellows: purchased so many
acres by mere policy, sat so many days and nights together at gameing:
caroused so many cups to a health, and spent so many crowns at a sitting. Thus
they delight their memories in the contemplation of their own mischiefs: As
enemies to the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction: whose God is their
belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. According to that
of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 18, 19.

But when any one of these unhappy heads shall so lose his memory, as that he
shall forget those delights, which he conceived in the time of his former
lewdness: when the remembrance of all his fore-passed sins is become so
grievous and offensive unto his soul: that he can cordially and constantly cry
out with the Apostle: What fruit had I then in those things, whereof I am now
ashamed: for the end of those things is death, Romans 6. 21.

Truly we may be confident to say concerning such a man; that he is dead unto
sin.

The fourth and last is a most infallible sign, And that is loss of motion.

When a man has so utterly forsaken the love of sin, that he can by no means
be reduced, or restored thereunto.

The devil can no longer seduce him: The world cannot win him, neither can the
lusts of the flesh allure him: so far forth as to afford them any hope of his
future obedience: I will not say, but they may enforce their charming drugs
upon him, as if one should force drink into the mouth of a dead man. But his
soul does so extremely abhor all means of recovery, that nothing will stay with
him, nothing can work upon him.

Happily the loss of Appetite may be restored by a skillful Physician: so may the
loss of speech, and the loss of memory too: Provided that the patient be
willing to receive the medicine, and that his body is able to assist it. But
when the patient will not obey, or if his body cannot cooperate: we say that
such a man is absolutely a dead man. Doubtless in every spiritual conflict the
devil is very industrious to preserve his declining patient.

And to that purpose he presents him with his gilded pills, and his perfumed
potious, his cordials, and his restoratives: in expectation of a speedy cure.
But when the soul, perceiving his pretense, so sets it self against his blind
Receipts: that nothing can move it, nothing work upon it, so as to return it to
its former vomit.

Then that happy body, that is the cabinet, or companion to such a blessed
soul: may cheerfully give thanks unto the Father, which has made him meet to
be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light: having delivered him
from the power of darkness, and translated him into the kingdom of his dear
Son: In whom he has redemption through his blood, even the forgivennesse of
sins. As in Collo. 1. 12, 13, 14.

This man is undoubtedly dead indeed unto sin: And so consequently he is
planted into Christ, according to the likeness of his death.

And whosoever is planted into Christ according to the likeness of his death:
he is likewise planted into Christ according to the likeness of his
resurrection, as we have formerly observed out of those words of the Apostle,
Romans 6. 5. But it may be demanded: when a man may be said, to be planted into
Christ, according to the likeness of his resurrection?

I answer: when he is alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For as by
the virtue of Christ's death, we are dead unto sin: so by the virtue of his
resurrection, we are alive unto God. Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans 6. 4.
And whosoever walks in newness of life upon the true account of a new
creature: he only is alive unto God, in, or through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Again, it may be demanded: How a man may know, and assure himself, that he is
planted into Christ, according to the likes ness of his resurrection. To which
I answer.

That this he shall find by his resemblance, or likeness to this Tree of
righteousness, by which the Lord sets forth a true Believer.

And therefore let him first consider if he be well rooted. You know that when
a tree is removed, it may be said, to be dead, as in relation to that ground
out of which it is taken; And therefore, that it may live again, it is
necessary that it be replanted. And for that purpose, the husbandman does
commonly make choice of a better, and a more fertile soil, then that from which
it did Naturally or Originally proceed. That so it may be the more enriched,
and the better enabled to spread forth its root, and to bring forth fruit
accordingly.

And that it may appear to thrive, and prosper: the principal care to be taken
is this. That it be well rooted, For the life of the plant consists in the
root.

We are all by nature unprofitable shoots, sprung from old Adam: that
degenerate shrub: and have neither root, nor fatness, nor fruit in our selves:
And therefore it is needful that we be plucked from our corrupted stock; and
that we be planted or graffed into the good olive tree: the ground and
foundation of all our hopes, and happiness: which is Jesus Christ: as that
Apostle most excellently insinuates, Romans 11. 17. to 25.

And the root whereby we stand is Faith: says the same Apostle in the same
place, verse. 20.

And to this purpose, he likewise exhorts the Colossians: That they be rooted
and built up in Christ, and established in the faith, Col. 2. 7. We may
therefore conclude from the premises, that whosoever is desirous to assure
himself, that he is effectually planted into Christ, according to the likeness
of his resurrection: And so consequently that he is an undoubted heir to that
eternal Inheritance, as it appears, Revel. 20. 6.

He is First to examine himself: whether he be well rooted in Christ by Faith.
Secondly whether he abounds with the Sap of Love. Thirdly, whether he
flourishes with the green leaves of a gracious Profession. Fourthly, whether
he be full of the beautiful blossoms of blessed and holy desires. And fifthly,
whether he be fruitful in the good works of Godliness.
In the first place (I say) he must examine whether he be well rooted in Christ
by Faith.

But you will say: how shall we do that? Truly the Apostle Paul has left us a
very good rule for this purpose, Col. 2. 23.

Where, having certified the Colossians of some special benefits which they
were to receive by Christ: he propounds unto them this condition. If ye
continue in the faith (says he) grounded, and settled, and be not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel.

This is an excellent rule: and it is an elegant expression, called by the
Rhetoritians Climax seu gradatio: a mounting to these four degrees. First, we
must continue in the faith. Secondly, we must be grounded in the faith.
Thirdly, we must be settled in the faith, and Fourthly, not we must be moved
away from the hope of the Gospel: which in another place he calls the word
of faith: as, Romans 10. 8.

First, it is a good evidence that we are well rooted in Christ by faith, if we
continue in the faith. Our Savior speaks in his parable of the sower; of
some That receive the word with joy: but they have no root: and therefore,
though for a while they believe, yet in time of temptation they fall away, Luke
8. 13.

You see that these are said to believe for a while but they continue not in
the faith: because they have no root. But if we be rooted in Christ by faith:
we shall cortinue in the faith, we shall not be like the waves of the sea,
driven, and tossed with everystorm of temptation: with St. James his double
minded men, that are unstable in all their ways, James 1. 8.

Nor like Weather-cocks, to turn our Noses into every puff of opinion: with S.
Paul's silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. Neither
shall we be any more like Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the fleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby
they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14.

But building up our selves on our most holy faith, and praying in the holy
Ghost: we shall keep our selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, Jude 20. 21.

They that will believe according to the times, or according to the men of the
times, may sometimes happen upon the right faith: but they will hardly continue
any long time in the faith. Simon the Sorcerer believed, and was baptized also,
Acts 8. 13. Yet when he failed in his ends, his faith also failed. Indeed, who
would not be believers, or at least, who would not pretend to be believers,
being invited thereunto by such plausible fair promises: As that they shall dip
their feet in the blood of their enemies, and tread them down like the mire in
the streets.

That they shall ride on the high places of the earth, and be the only men of
command, and authority: That they shall purchase Lands and Lord-ships: And that
they shall build great and fair houses, and enjoy them peaceably, powerfully,
and plentifully.

Would not the sweet expectations of these, and the like glorious privileges,
and prerogatives transport the Souls of sinners into the bodies of Saints: And
make them believe, whenever, and whatsoever their Prophet pleases? But how
shall we continue in the faith, when these hopes fail us? Verily, these
inducements unto faith are so proper to the flesh, that I cannot imagine how
they should proceed from the Spirit: Or how they should persuade to any other
then a temporary faith, being in themselves so temporary, and uncertain. But
especially, seeing they are so extremely contrary to the lives, and Doctrine of
Christ, and his Apostles.

For first, our Lord Jesus Christ in the time of his temporal life, was so far
from the desire of revenge: that he prayed for his greatest enemies, Luke 23.
34.

So far from ambition, that he made himself of no reputation: and took upon him
the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 7.

So far from covetousness, that rather then he would once yield unto the
Devil: he refused all the Kingdoms of the world, Mat. 4. 8, 9, 10.

So far from the pleasures of a Palace: that he had not where to lay his head,
Luke 9. 58.

And so far from outward Pomp: That he was despised, and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid, as it were, our faces
from him; he was despised, etc. Isa. 53. 3.

Neither were the lives of his Apostles much less inglorious, or uncomfortable
then that of their Master.

For I think that God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were men
appointed to death, for we are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels,
and to men, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 9.

And in the same Chapt. Being defamed, we entreat: we are made the filth of the
world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day, verse 13. And
secondly, concerning their Doctrine: we find that they directed the way by
faith unto salvation, through difficulties, dangers, and distresses, and not
through flattering, and flesh-pleasing felicities.

Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and
follow me, says Christ our Lord, Mar. 8. 34.

Whosoever will come after Christ into his Kingdom of glory: he must deny
himself of all his conceited deserts, and in all his carnal desires: and he
must take up his Cross, he must willingly submit to all manner of afflictions:
And he must follow Jesus his Lord general in his Kingdom of grace: he must not
fail, or faint by the way, but, hold on his course with a constant and
continual confidence.

And in the 24. of Mat. at the 9. verse, and so forwards, he acquainteth his
Disciples with more particular engagements.

They shall deliver you up to be afflicted, (says he) and shall kill you, and
ye shall be hated of all Nations, for my name sake. And then shall many be
offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another. And many
false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many. And because iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure to the end,
the same shall be saved, verse 13.

And unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna: Fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer: behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that
ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life, Rev. 2. 10.

In like manner the Apostle Paul confirming the Souls of the Disciples, tells
them: That we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts
14. 22.

And thus the Apostle Peter: Beloved, (says he) Think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you: as though some strange thing
happened unto you. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings: that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with
exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 12. 13.

But you will say: These are sad invitations, either to persuade unto faith, or
to continue in the faith. I answer, that I wonder not if they seem so to a
common apprehension: to such a one as is led merely by sense, and the light of
nature: unto which these things are so extremely irksome and offensive.

But if we shall take the Spirit of God for our guide, and shall thereby be
enabled to judge, not according to the appearance, but to judge righteous
judgment: as our Lord advises, Joh. 7. 24.

We shall then find that these sad-seeming preparations do proceed from very
necessary principles. For afflictions and crosses of all kinds do first direct
us toward faith.

Secondly, they do bring us unto faith.

And thirdly, they do continue us in faith.

First (I say) they do direct us toward faith: and that through these three
passages: As first, through making us sensible of our sins. When the Sons of
Jacob were distressed in the Land of Egypt, they then considered the sin, that
they had many years before committed against their brother Joseph in the Land
of Canaan. And they said one to another: we are verily guilty concerning our
brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we
would not hear: therefore is this distress come upon us, Genesis 42. 21.

And thus the Church in the Lamentations: Woe unto us that we have sinned, for
this our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim, Lam. 5. 16. 17.
Secondly, through humbling us for our sins. This we see in the example of
Manasseh, who (being formerly of an abominable conversation) yet when he was in
affliction: he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before
the God of his fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.

And in that confession of his Church: We lie down in our shame, and our
confusion covers us, for we have sinned against the Lord our God, Jer. 3. 25.
And thirdly, through breaking us off from the course of our former errors and
iniquities. Bofore I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word,
says David, Psalm. 119. 62.

And the same Prophet speaking concerning the wicked, The Lord (says he) shall
hear, and afflict them: for, because they have no changes, therefore they fear
not God, Psalm. 55. 19.

Secondly, distresses, and afflictions do lead us unto faith, and that by
showing us the unhappiness of the world, and of all worldly expectations,
either inward, or outward, in our selves, or from others: And so by sending us
to the Lord for sure consolation. My flesh, and my heart fails me: but God is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever, says good David, Ps. 73. 26.

The Son dishonors the Father, the Daughther rises up against her Mother:
the Daughter in Law, against her Mother in Law, a man's enemies are the men of
his own house: Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of
my salvation, my God will hear me, says his afflicted Church, Mic. 7. 6, 7.
When the ship is covered with Waves: then the Disciples run unto Christ,
saying: Lord save us, we perish, Mat. 8. 25.

And he, whom we call the Prodigal, being pinched by the extremity of want, and
necessity, resolved to return unto his father, Luke 15. 18. And thirdly,
corrections, or afflictions do continue us in the faith: by assuring us of Gods
love, and fatherly affection:

In disposing of our afflictions,

In comforting us in our afflictions. And,

In delivering us out of our afflictions.

First, in disposing our afflictions, or in visiting us with afflictions, as
fatherly chastisements: For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every Son whom he receives: If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as
with Sons, for what Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be
without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not
Sons, Hebr. 12. 6, 7, 8. And, as many as I love, I rebuke; and chasten, says
the Son of God, Rev. 3. 19.

Secondly, afflictions do continue us in the faith, by assuring us of Gods love
in comforting us in our afflictions. In all their affliction he was afflicted,
and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love, and in his pity he
redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old, says
the Prophet, Isa. 63. 9.

And thus the Apostle: Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort: who comfort us in
all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any
trouble, by the comfort, wherewith we are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. And
thirdly, by assuring us of Gods love, in delivering us out of our afflictions.

Many are the afflictions of the right us, but the Lord delivers him out of
them all, Psalm. 34. 19.

And the same Prophet having recorded many great deliverances, which the Lord
usually works for his people in their several distresses, and extremities in
his 107. Psalm: he concludes with this Rule of direction: whosoever is wise (says
he) and will observe those things, even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord, verse 43.

And he that rightly understands the loving kindness of the Lord: will
certainly rely upon him, by faith, as an everlasting, and infallible refuge.

But you will say: Is this all the happiness that a Believer must expect in
this life? Does not the Apostle tell us: That godliness is profitable unto all
things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come? 1 Timothy 4. 8. To the first part of this question, I answer. That there is such
solid happiness in affliction well qualified: as none, but a true Believer can
rightly apprehend, and therefore I will refer the censure to such a one, as
the only competent Judge in this case. And to the second part, I answer. That
without doubt the Apostle did speak no other, then what was dictated unto him
by the Spirit of God: that holy Spirit, that never deluded nor deceived any
man. But let us take heed, that we deceive not our selves by expecting other
kinds, or degrees of profit, then the Lord in his wisdom sees to be beneficial
for us. Serve the Lord with all your heart, and turn ye not aside, for then
should ye go after vain things, which cannot profit, nor deliver, says
Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 20.

And for the promise of the life that now is, (or of the things belonging to
the life that now is) we must know, that we may not be altogether our own
carvers: But must willingly submit our selves unto the Lord: both for the time,
the quality, and the quantity. Jacob, Joseph, David, and the Church of the Jews
in general; were servants, and greatly distressed, before they came to be
Masters and men of Authority. Job, Mordecay, and Manasseh were more prosperous
in their beginning, and end: then in their middle age. Lot, Asa, and Josiah
seemed most unhappy in, and toward the end of their days. Yet these were all
approved of God: and such upon whom he bestowed very remarkable favors.

Neither do I remember any of Gods most successful servants, that suffered
not their several interruptions, or alterations in their outward happiness,
either at one time, or another: who will appoint me the time? says the Lord,
Jer. 5. 44.

And therefore every good Christian will say unto the Lord with the Prophet
David: My times are in thy hand, as Psalm. 31. 15.

Secondly, for the quality: Peradventure the dearest Child of God may
sometimes desire such things, as are very inconvenient. Hezekiah, that good
King desired to be renowned for his precious things: his Silver, and his Gold,
etc. 2 Kings 20. 13. But it threatened the ruin of his posterity, ver. 18. And
that godly King Josiah desired a victory over Necho, King of Egypt: But he
sought his own destruction: For thereupon he received his deaths wound in the
valley of Megiddo, 2 Chronicles. 35. 22. James and John, the Sons of Zebedee, and
the Disciples of Christ desired that they might sit, the one on his right hand,
and the other on his left, in his glory, Mar. 10. 37. But he answered, ye know
not what ye ask, verse 38.

And Peter the Apostle desired to know more of his Lords mind, then his Lord
was minded to reveal, and was reproved with: what is that to thee? John 21. 22.

We see here, that there are mistakes among the godly: But what may be expected
from such, as suppose that gain is godliness? Truly, it is to be suspected,
that riches, honor, and preferment, with the like outward additions have made
many seekers. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's,
Phil. 2. 21.

I will not say, but a man may desire a competency, or a sufficiency, agreeable
to his calling, or condition: but not primarily, or principally. Seek ye first
the kingdom of God, and his righteousness: and all these things shall be added
unto you, says Christ our Lord, Mat. 6. 33.

Lay hold on the substance, and then doubt not of the circumstance. For it is
the Lord that makes poor, and makes rich, 1 Samuel 2. 7.

But they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish, and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

And lastly, concerning the quantity: It is a rare thing for a man to see, when
he has enough: we say, much would have more. Yet commonly the more we have,
the less good we do with it, and the more loath we are to part from it. We
consume our days in hunting after increase: and (though we live never so long)
yet we die unsatisfied. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied mith
silver: nor he that loves abundance with increase. Says the preacher, Ecles.
5. 10.

Whereas if we could truly consider that of our Savior where he says: A man's
life (or the happiness of a man's life) consists not in the abundance of the
things: which he possesses, Luke 12. 15. Certainly our conversation would be
more without covetousness: and we should be better content with such things as
we have, seeing the Lord has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
According to that of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 5. This is a sore evil under the
sun: yea even among the saints of God.

Baruch the Scribe was faithful unto the Lord: yet he desired more then the
Lord was pleased to allow him: And therefore the Lord sent Jeremiah to say unto
him. Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not: for behold I will
bring evil upon all flesh, says the Lord, but thy life will I give unto thee
for a prey in all places whither thou go, Jer. 45. 5.

I will not say but a rich man may be a true believer. But charge them, that
are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches: but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy: That
they do good, that they be rich in good works: ready to distribute, willing to
communicate: laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they lay hold on eternal life. Says Paul to Timothy: 1 Timothy 6. 17, etc.

Thus you see, that though it is very true, that godliness is profitable unto
all things, having promise of the life that now is: yet the best of Gods people
may deceive themselves either in the time, the quality, or the quantity. And
therefore it is necessary, that we moderate our desires: or rather that we
refer them wholly to Gods all-seeing and all-searching wisdom.

And whosoever shall thus continue in the faith, by patient waiting upon the
Lord in time of Adversity: and by moderating his affections in time of
prosperity, with this confidence, that whatsoever he does or suffers, it is
all through Christ which strengthens him. It is a very good sign, that he is
well rooted in Christ by faith.

Another sign is, to be grounded in the faith: If ye continue in the faith,
grounded, etc.

And to be grounded in the faith (I conceive) is to believe upon good ground.
It is to be feared that in these last days (these perilous times) we have too
many that do build their faith upon very slight and slippery grounds.

As upon temporary promises, good success, revelation, traditions, or
self-worthiness. By which they decei^e both themselves; and generally all the
simpler self-ended sort of people. In whom the God of this world has blinded
the minds of them that believe not: least the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the image of God should shine unto them. As in the 2 Cor. 4, 4.

And well may the Apostle call it the glorious Gospel: not only in regard that
it brings us unto glory, or for that God is so much glorified thereby. But
principally because that whatsoever God purposed, or performed, In, by, or
cencerning his said Gospel: he did it altogether in relation to the advance of
his immortal glory.

And in testimony of this truth: I beseech you, let us First consider this
glorious Gospel in the Original thereof: even in this eternal covenant of
grace: concluded and agreed upon between God the Father, and his only begotten
Son, for and on the behalf of mankind, before the foundation of the world.

By virtue whereof we were elected, and predestined before the world began.

And we shall find, that in this great design: the Lord did wholly aim at his
own glory.

Bl^ssed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (says St. Paul) who
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.
According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world; that
me should be holy and without blame before him in love: Having predestined us
unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will: To the praise of the glory of his grace. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4,
5, 6.

Secondly, let us consider our redemption: and see how that relates to Gods
glory: The Son of God being about to suffer, and so complete the work of our
Redemption. Father save me from this hour (says he) but for this cause came I
unto this hour, Father glorify thy name (glorify thy name in the redemption
of sinful man even by the death of thine own sinless Son)

Then came there a voice from heaven saying: I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again, Jo. 12. 27, 28. I have both glorified it from everlasting,
and I will glorify it again to everlasting.

And excellent to this purpose is that of the Apostle. Ye are bought with a
price (says he) therefore glorify God in your body, and in your Spirit, which
are Gods, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Thirdly, he created us for his glory. Bring my Sons from far (says the Lord)
and my Daughters from the ends of the earth: even every one that is called by
my name, for I have created him for my glory, Isa. 43. 6, 7.

Fourthly, it is for his glory, that he preserves us.

For my name sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for
thee, that I cut thee not off: behold, I have refined thee, but not with
silver: I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction: for mine own sake,
even for mine own sake will I do it: for how should my name be polluted, and I
will not give my glory to another, Isa. 48. 9, 10, 11.

Fifthly, it is for his own glory that he calls us. Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priestho^d, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye
should set forth the praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into
this mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And whose offers praise, glorifieth me,
says the Lord, Psalm 50. 23.

Sixthly, he justifies us for his own glory. Thy people shall be all
righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the
work of my hands, that I may be glorified, says the same God, Isa. 50. 21.

Seventhly, he sanctifies us for his own glory. I am the true Vine (says the
Son of God) and my Father is the husbandman, every branch in me that bears
not fruit, he takes away: and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit, John 15. 1, 2. And in the 8. verse.

Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. And this I pray (says
St. Paul) that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all
judgment. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere, and without offense, till the day of Christ: being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the praise, and glory
of God, Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11.

And lastly, it is for his glory, that he saves us. Father (says our Lord
Jesus Christ) I will that they also, whom thou have given me, be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me, Joh. 17. 24. And
this shall he accomplish most completely: when he shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1. 10.

See here how infinitely the glory of God is interessed in all his Evangelical
actions, and concessions: As namely, in his Election, Redemption, Creation,
Preservation, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation of the
Sons of men.

And do thou want a sure ground for thy faith? Cast away all execrable
opinions of humane perfections, and performances. As truly as I live, all the
earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, says Almighty God, Numb. 14.
21.

Engage thy Soul therefore boldly upon this eternal design of Gods glory: with
this assurance, that it can never perish: so long as the God of all power, and
glory is able to preserve it.

This (I am confident) is the soundest, and the most substantial foundation,
that any Christian can build upon: having its Warrant from the manifold wisdom
of God. Ground thy self therefore firmly thereupon: and then doubt not, but
thou art well rooted in Christ by faith.

Thirdly, to be settled in the faith: is a very good argument, that we are well
rooted in Christ by faith. To be settled: that is, to be confirmed, or
established in the faith: according to that of this Apostle, Col. 2. 7.

And this is done chiefly by observation, and experience. Do thou desire to
be settled in the faith? Observe Gods mercy, and loving kindness toward thee:
Prospering thine honest endeavors in the works of thy lawful calling:
blessing thee in thy person, and in thy posterity, providing for thy
necessities, preserving thee from thine enemies, comforting thee in all thine
afflictions, delivering thee out of thy distresses, and graciously answering
thee in thy fervent prayers, and supplications. But especially, consider what
great things God has done to thy Soul. In weaning it from the world, redeeming
it from the bondage of sin, and Satan: Translating it from darkness unto
light, supplying it with good motions, and godly desires, fixing it firmly upon
thy Lord and Savior: And working it to the willing obedience of faith and
love. If thou shall thus apply thy self to see the good hand of God upon thee,
and to feel the sweet influence of his holy Spirit within thee. Thou shall come
to know God experimentally. Thou shall know, that thou know him. According
to that of the Apostle, 1 John 2. 3.

With Job, Thou shall know that thy Redeemer lives, Job 19. 25.

With David, thou shall know that God fav^ureth thee, Psalm. 41. 11.

With Paul, Thou shall know the Lord Jesus Christ, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death, Phil. 3. 10.

And thou shall know, that if thine earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, thou have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens: with the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

And when these, and the like observations have brought thee to this, and the
like experience. And experience has settled thee in the faith: Then thou shall
know likewise, that thou art well rooted in Christ by faith.

Fourthly, we must not be moved away from the hope of the Gospel: This is the
last sign expressed in this gradation.

The Devil has fear, but no hope: The Reprobate has hope, but no fear: I mean
no filial fear. He may sometimes in spite of his heart, fear to appear in Gods
presence, as he is a just Judge. But he cannot at any time, or by any means
fear to offend God, as he is a loving Father: for he cannot conceive him so to
be, he cannot rightly apprehend him under that notion upon any present
condition whatsoever.

And as his fear is commonly desperate, so his hope, is always doubtful and
dangerous. He is soon moved away from his hope; for his hope is not the Hope of
the Gospel.

But the true Believer cannot be moved away from the Hope of the Gospel: It is
the sure and steadfash Anchor of his Soul, Hebr. 6. 19.

I cannot say, but a ship, when she rides at Anchor, may be tumbled, and
tossed by a violent Tempest: yet so long as her Anchor continues firm and
stedy, she rides securely, be the storm never so outrageous: But if her Anchor
fails her, her danger is dreadful, especially if the Channel where she
rides be Rocky, narrow, or otherwise unsafe.

Even so the Soul, that is sustained by Hope, may peradventure be moved, or
shaken by some strong distemper. Nevertheless, so long as her hope remains
sound, settled, and steadfast: she is able to bear up in the greatest extremity.
But if she be quite moved away from the hope of the Gospel; it is dangerous that
she is lost for ever.

And the rather, for that the whole Ocean is not so full of Rocks, and showls,
and quicksands, wherewith to bulge, and break a crasie vessel, as the wild
world is full of snares, offenses, and temptations to ruin, and destroy a
silly Soul.

But you will say: what is the difference between an ordinary Hope, and this
Hope of the Gospel? I answer, that an ordinary hope is commonly carnal: but
this hope of the Gospel is altogether spiritual.

And they differ in these particulars.

First, in their Author: The carnal hope proceeds of the Devil, or Satan. It
was he, that gave hope to the woman, that she should not die in her
transgression, Genes. 3. 4.

It was he, that gave Ahab hope of good success, 1 Kings. 22. 21.

And it was Satan that filled the heart of Ananias, with hope that his
Hypocrisy should not be discovered, Acts 5. 3.

And he feeds, and fills us with these false hopes, in his malice, and emnity
to mankind: For he is our adversary, who as a roaring Lion walks about,
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Peter 5. 8.

But it is God that gives us this Gospel-hope, and that of his love, and
grace. It is our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has
loved us, and has given us everlasting cons^lation, and good hope through
grace, 2 These. 2. 16.

Secondly, they differ in their foundation: The carnal hope is commonly built
upon casualties, upon perhaps, o^ peradventures: When Balak besought B^lam to
curse the people of God. Come, I pray thee (says he) I will bring thee to
another place: peradventure it will please God, that thou may curse me them
from thence, Number. 23. 27.

But this Gospel hope is built upon Christ, that never-failing foundation.

The riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, is Christ in us
the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27.

Thirdly, they differ in their objects: The carnal hope aims altogether at
riches, honors, pleasures, long life, or the like worldly enjoyments, vanity
of vanities (says the preacher) vanity of vanities; all is vanity, Eccles. 1,
2. But the Gospel hope looks upon the Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope,
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 1. And eternal life which God, that cannot lie,
promised before the world began, Tit. 1, 2.

Or if she meets with any worldly good, as necessary to this present life: she
looks upon it, not as a reward, but as a blessing from her God in Christ.

Fourthly, they differ in their evidence For what has a carnal man to show
for all his hopes, but only his own blind conceptions and imaginations:
whereas the Gospel hope is evidenced by Gods holy word.

For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning:
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans
15. 4.

Fifthly, they differ in their effects: for the carnal hope does only serve
to harden us in sin, and so to run us up to ruin, and destruction.

But every man that has this hope in him (this Gospel hope) he purifieth
himself, even as God is pure, 1 John 3. 3.

And lastly, they differ in their alliance or society: The carnal hope
confederates it self with doubts, distrusts, and a distracted conscience. And
therefore Zophar tells Job: That the hope of the wicked shall be as the
giving up of the Ghost, Job. 11. 20. But this Gospel hope is the companion of
faith and love, and that unto the benefit of both. For as this hope supporteth
and sustaineth her mother faith in her tedious travail toward eternal
happiness. So likewise she comfort and confirms her sister love, by
assuring her that her labor is not in vain in the Lord.

And therefore the Apostle has most fitly placed her between them both, 1 Cor.
13, 13.

Having thus considered this Rule of the Apostle according to the four degrees
thereof: we find. That whosoever continues in the faith, even in the furnace
of affliction.

That groundeth his faith upon that eternal design of Gods glory. That is
settled in the faith by the constant observation, and experience of the favor
and loving kindness of God in Christ: And is not moved away from the hope of
the Gospel. He may without any doubt assure himself: That he is well rooted in
Christ by Faith.

NOw, in the second place, if we desire to know whether we beplanted into
Christ, as trees of Righteousness: we must consider whether we be full of Sap:
And this Sap is Love.

For as the Root draws fatness from the soil, and sends it through the body or
the stem, in the Sap to every Member, Bough, and Branch: supplying every part
with life and nourishment, according to its place and property.

Insomuch that in the Root it may be called life: In the Body nourishment, In
the Leaf greenness, In the blossom sweetness, and in the Fruit juice.

So faith draws virtue from the Lord Christ Jesus, and send it through the
blessed soul in love, to all the powers and faculties thereof, thereby
enriching every spiritual grace, according to its proper use and action. It
makes and preserves faith unfeigned: Hope unwearied, charity open-hearted,
Humility undisguised, Patience undistracted, Prayer delightful, Thanksgiving
cheerful, and obedience fruitful,

To every grace it gives life, luster, and sincerity, which without Love, are
dull, deceitful, and hypocritical.

I cannot well tell, where I should begin, or how to end in the just
commendations of this incomparable blessing. There are many affections, or
strong, and powerful motions of the mind, as joy: grief, Hope, Fear, Hatred,
and the like. But when affection is simply, and singularly, nominated, without
any other addition: you know we take it usually for Love. By which we may
conceive and understand that Love is the absolute affection. It is also said,
that a good thing the more common it is, the better it is: And love is common
unto every creature, that only has the benefit of sense: They do all
generally love themselves, their seed, their food, their fellows, and their
friends: or whatsoever is most precious to their instinct or inclination. Yet
Love in man is of a nobler strain, in regard that it proceeds, or should
proceed from reason, and discretion: But when this Love, extracted by true
faith from God the only substance of pure Love, is placed upon God in Christ,
and the image of God in man: The only sound and unsuspected Objects, Mat. 22.
37, 38.

Then verily it is of wondrous use.

First, it becomes the nourse of pregnant faith, to cherish; and improve her
precious fruit, strengthening, decking, and beautifying every infant grace,
which would otherwise grow crooked, deformed, and contemptible.

It Is faith that seals our interest in Christ: But such a faith as works by
Love, says Paul Gala. 5, 6. Faith if it has not works is dead, says James
Ja. 2. 17. Yet Faith with works is nothing without Love; as says believing,
working, loving Paul 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3.

True faith and Love have such a strict relation, they cannot live the one
without the other. And therefore if our Love be not sincere we have great
reason to suspect our faith.

And in the second place we find that Love is Christ his cognizance or livery,
whereby he will have his Disciples known.

By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, (says he) if ye have love one
to another, Jo. 13. 15.

And it is a most complete robe, it hides all our infirmities, and
deformities: yea all our sins, and transgressions.

Love covers all sins says Solomon, Pro. 10. 12.

And therefore blessed is the man, that wears it. Blessed is he, whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Psa. 32. 1.

This, in all likeness, is that wedding garment, for want of which, the
Intruder was cast out of the bride chamber, into utter darkness, Mat. 22. 12,
13. And it is an everlasting Ornament: It never fails, 1 Cor. 13. 8.

Our faith and Hope, will help us into heaven, and there they leave us: but our
endless Love will enter with us, where it shall surpass in strength, in
sweetness, and perfection: as much as having exceeds hopeing, or enjoying
excels believing.

But every one, that loves himself, will say: though Love be such a precious
livery, yet it is not so costly as it is common.

I hope we are not so ungracious, or so ungrateful, but we love the Lord.

Nevertheless wise Solomon informs us That he that trusts in his own heart,
is a fool, Pro. 28. 26. And therefore let not us delude our selves in matters
of such infinite concernment: by trusting to our own deceitful hearts, without
a serious examination.

We shall not find it so easy a matter to lovc God really, as most men
unadvisedly imagine.

For first our Love is as narrow as G^ds election: Gods election is the first
wheel, that moves in this great work. It is he, That has chosen us in Christ
before the foundation of the world; that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love, Ephesians. 1. 4.

And therefore, until we have given diligence to make our election sure, by
inquiring into the soundness of our faith: we have great reason to suspect our
Love.

Secondly, if we have not the Spirit of God: we have not the love of God: For
Love is a prime fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.

Thirdly, if we do not love the children of God: we do not love God, For every
one that loves him that begat: loves him also, that is begotten of him, 1
John 5. 1.

Fourthly, if we do not keep Gods words, we do not love God. For if any man
love me he will keep my words, says the Son of God, John 14. 23.

Fifthly, if we be not careful to keep Gods commandments, we do not love God:
For this is the love of God that we keep his commandments, 1 John 5. 3.

Sixthly, if our hearts be not circumcised, if our hearts be not broken, and
humbled for sin, so that our carnal corruptions are mortified, and our sinful
lusts, and affections subdued, in some good measure, we cannot love God. For
the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, to love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul, says Moses, that man of God Deuteronomy, 30. 6.

And Seaventhly, if we do love the world; we do not love God.

If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15.

Now it will be necessary for us to examine our selves in order to these seven
particulars: And if we shall then presume that we love God: we are in the next
place to consider, what manner of Love it is, wherewith we do love him.

For we must know, that there is a false Love, as well as there is a true Love:
the love of an harlot, as well as the love of a virgin. The love of an harlot,
is First mercenary: secondly hypocritical, thirdly inconstant, and fourthly
contemptible.

First, I say, the love of an harlot is mercenery, when Tamar deceived Judah by
playing the harlot she said unto him what will thou give me? Genesis 38. 16.

And probably there may be many, that do seem even unto themselves to love God
very dearly: when as yet the secret inquisition of their heart, is: what shall
we get by it? what pleasure, what profit, what preferment: They say with the
wicked, what can the almighty do for them, Job. 22. 17. Naaman the Syrian will
go to the Prophet in Samaria, 2 Kings 5. 9. But it shall be to be cleansed of
his outward leprosy: And being cleansed: he will thenceforth offer neither
burnt-offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, but to the Lord, verse. 17. But in
this thing the Lord pardon thy servant (says he) that when my master goes
into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my hand: and I bow
my self in the house of Rimmon, when I bow down my self in the house of Rimmon:
The Lord pardon thy servant in this thing, verse 18. He will be still an
idolater, rather then he will lose the countenance of the king his master. This
is the mercenary love of an harlot, for which the Devil accused Job: though
very injuriously, Job. 1. 9, 10.

Secondly, the love of an harlot is hypocritical: doubtless Sampsons harlot
Dalila did profess very much affection toward him, before she could win him to
tell her, wherewith he might certainly be bound: But if her love had been real
and sincere, she would not have delivered him into the hands of the
Philistines, As Jud. 16. 18, etc.

This was Judas his charity to the poor, Jo. 12. 4. etc.

And his love to his Lord, Mat. 26. 49.

And this is the love of all such as will serve both God and Mammon.

Thirdly, the love of an harlot is unconstant, when God complained of Judah for
her inconstancy, and apostasy: Thou have played the harlot (says he) with many
lovers, Jer. 3. 1.

And truly that love, which is mercenary, must needs be unconstant: that which
was bought, will be sold: The love of a poor passive Christ will never continue
long in a mercenary bosom. And whosoever loves God, for giving: will cease to
love, if God shall cease to give, or at least, if he shall take away that,
which he formerly did give.

This is one of the Devils surest weapons, and it is to be feared, that there
are but few Jobs to beat him at it.

And lastly the love of an harlot becomes contemptible. Thus says the Lord:
because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy wickedness discovered through
thy whordoms with thy lovers, etc. Behold therefore I will gather all thy
lovers, with wbom thou have taken pleasure: and all them which thou have loved,
with all them that thou have hated: I will even gather them round about against
thee: and will discover thy nakedness unto them, and they shall see all thy
nakedness, Ezekiel. 16. 36, 37. And I will also give thee into their hand, etc.
verse 39.

And, to conclude with this particular, observe the shameful end of Jezebel, 2
Kings 9. 30. etc.

But the virgins love is of another nature, Because of the favor of thy good
ointments, thy name is as ointment poured forth: therefore do the virgins love
thee, says the chaste spouse unto her loving Lord Chap. 1. 3.

You know that a pleasant sent or savor has nothing that is outwardly
beneficial: but being drawn in with the breath, it refreshes, and comfort
the inward parts.

And ointment, or unction, or anointing, do signify unto us the Spirit of God,
1 John 2. 20.

Wherewith their blessed Bridegroom was anointed to be their Priest, their
Prophet, and their King: And by the influence of the same Spirit, the very name
of Jesus Christ infuseth both life, and sweetness into all his Saints, and
therefore do their Virgin chaste Souls love him. Thus it appears that the
Virgins Love unto her Lord is neiher mercenary, nor carnal: but most pure, and
spiritual. And it is most excellently completed through these four passages.

First, it is improved by Contemplation. Secondly, it is manifested by
Profession. Thirdly, it is confirmed by Preparation. And fourthly, it is
perfected by Practice.
When a chaste Virgin first begins to love, her heart delights much in
Contemplation: Her thoughts are very much upon the object of her affections,
always meditating upon his amiable person, his outward greatness, and his
inward graces. In his person, she considers the beauties, or comeliness of
his countenance, and composition.

In his outward greatness, she reflecteth upon his birth, his wealth, his
power, deserts, and dignities. Concerning his inward graces, she records his
love, his goodness, his mercy, truth, Justice, and wisdom.

With these, and with the like sweet contemplations she feeds her fancies, and
augments her fires: For the coals of love are coals of fire, which has a most
vehement flame, Cant. 8. 6.

By this poor scantling you may partly aim at things that are incomprehensible.

Thus the sweet Soul, that is in love with Christ, with God in Christ, revolves
her amorous thoughts, first on the person of her Lord and Lover. Thou art
fairer then the children of men (says she) Psalm. 45. 2.

Of this you shall find a most elegant, and excellent description, Cant. 5.
10. etc.

Where she sets forth his beauty, sweetness, strength, and loveliness by
way of allusion, or similitude. My beloved (says she) is white, and ruddy, the
chiefest among ten thousand: his head is as the most fine Gold, his locks are
bushy, and black as a Raven, his eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the Rivers of
water, washed with Milk, and fitly set: His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as
sweet flowers, his lips like lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh, his hands
are as Gold rings set with the beril, his belly is as bright Ivory overlaid
with Saphires, his legs are as pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine
Gold, his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, his mouth is most
sweet; yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend,
O daughters of Jerusalem.

In the second place she surveyeth his greatness: his outward greatness,
according to our apprehension, and expression.

As first the greatness of his birth: where she finds that he is the Son of
God, Lu. 1. 35. Not an adopted Son, or younger brother: But the only begotten
Son of God, 1 John 4. 9.

Secondly, the greatness of his wealth, or estate. He is the Heir of all
things, Heb. 1. 2. The earth is his, and the fullness thereof, the world, and
they that dwell therein, Psalm. 24. 1.

Thirdly, the greatness of his power. Even the winds, and the Sea obey him,
Mat. 8. 27. Yea, all power is given to him in Heaven, and in Earth, Mat. 28. 18.

Fourthly, the greatness of his deserts, or worthiness. Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing, Rev. 5. 12.

And fifthly, the greatness of his Dignities: He is the blessed, and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15.

In the third place, she admireth his inward essential Graces. And first his
Love, that he should love her so: as to purchase her with his own blood, Acts
20. 28.

As to die for her, Romans 5. 6. Even a cursed death, Gal. 3. 13.

Next this, she wondreth at his matchless goodness: the goodness of his
Love, or his goodness in loving her, when she deserved no such thing, as love:
when no eye pitied her, to have compassion upon her, but she was cast out into
the open field, to the loathing of her person, Ezekiel. 16. 5.

Then, even then, he passed by her, and looked upon her: and behold, her time
was a time of Love, and he spread his shirt over her, and covered her
nakedness, and swear unto her, and entered into a Covenant with her, and made
her his own. Then he washed her, and anointed her, he decked her with the
richest Ornaments, both of Jewels, and Raiment: he fed her with the chief est
nourishment: And her beauty was made perfect through his comeliness, that he
had put upon her, Ezekiel. 16. 8. to the 15. verse.

And in consideration of these so great, so undeserved favors, she cries out
with that good Prophet David. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for
his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 107. 1.

And so thirdly, she falls upon his mercy, which she cannot but mightily
commend, for that so soon as she became sensible of her own lamentable
condition, he then appeard to her most merciful. For no sooner did she find
her self to be by nature the child of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. And by sin the child of
the Devil, 1 John 3. 8.

But suddenly she perceived, that he had redeemed her to God by his blood, Rev.
5. 9.

That when she was yet his enemy, he had reconciled her to God by his death,
and most assuredly saved her by his life, Romans 5. 10.

And all this without the least satisfaction, by, or from her self: For not by
works of righteousness that she had done, but according to his mercy he saved
her, Tit. 3. 5.

And she is most confident that he will continue her, in her now happy estate:
For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forfake thee, Hebr. 13. 5.

Neither can she doubt, but what he has said, he will most certainly perform.

For she finds Fourthly, That he is full of Grace, and Truth, John 1. 14.

Yea he is the very Truth it self, John 14. 6.

And therefore she sings with David. Her Lord is good, his mercy is
everlasting and his truth endures to all generations, Psalm. 100. 5.

Nor Fifthly, is she afrighted at his Justice. But rather she rejoices therein.

For albeit, The wages of sin is death. Romans 6. 23.

And every transgression, and every disobedience must receive a just recompense
of reward, As Hebr. 2. 2.

Yet the law of the Spirit of life in her Lord Christ Jesus, has freed her
from the law of sin and of death, Romans 8. 2.

And in such a case, it is not the office of Justice to condemn; but to acquit,
protect, and justify.

And sixthly she can never forget his wisdom, who is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor.
1. 24.

She apprehends, by faith, that it was he, which made the earth by his power,
which established the world by his wisdom, and stretched out the heaven by his
understanding, As Isa. 51. 15.

He knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 1. 19.

And he knows, how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve
the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9.

And she doubts not, but she may most safely, and savingly resign her self to
his direction, and disposition: For in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom,
and knowledge, Colos. 2, 3.

The soul that adds a thousand fold to these, shall yet fall short a thousand
thousand fold of his essential super-excellencies, and lose her self at last
in admiration.

Yet by these dear indearing contemplations, she acts, and strengthens, and
improves her Love; and works it to a prosperous conditon.

For as the root, by virtue of the Sap, causes the tree to put forth fair
green leaves.

So works Faith by Love, and fits the soul (the chaste soul) for a flourishing
profession.

ANd now (though somewhat bashful) yet she dares discover her affections to
her friends, the sweet companions of her virgin Love.

I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my beloved, that ye tell
him, that I am sick of love. Says she, Cant. 5. 8.

And therefore as the virgin lover first delights much to meditate upon the
rare perfections of her Paramore: So in the second place, she will be talking
of him very often, extolling and comending his person, parts, and properties:
that so he may the better come to the knowledge, and assurance of her entire
affection toward him. In like manner, the lovesick soul, that pants after
Christ, will not omit the least occasion, or opportunity of conference
concerning her dear Lord: but will evermore be magnifying his goodness,
loving kindness, and the like, and setting forth the promises due thereto.

Because thy loving kindness is better then life, therefore my lips shall
praise thee, says David, Psalm. 63. 3.

And to that purpose, she consorts her self, with his true servants, and his
trusty friends: whom she inviteth kindly to a sweet harmoneous concord, and
conversation. O come (says she) let us sing unto the Lord, let us make a
joyful noise to the rock of our salvation. Let us come before his presence
with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with Psalms, For the Lord
is a great God, etc. Psalm. 94 to the 8.

And from hence she proceeds to a more eminent, and evident Profession of her
true zeal, and pure integrity: which will appear the more infallibly, by loving
that, which he is known to love, and hating that, which he abhors, and hates.

Resolved thus: She finds he loves righteousness, and hates wickedness,
Psalm. 45. 7.

And therefore she directs her affections of love, and hatred toward the
same Objects.

In the first place she loves righteousness: whether it be the righteousness
of faith, which justifies the person: or the righteousness of the law, which
justifies the faith of the person. For she knows that as the one is the
cause of her justification: so the other is the evidence of her sanctification.

And this her Love appears very precious upon the account of these four
properties.

First, it is Cordial, secondly, it is Constant, thirdly, it is Confident, and
fourthly, it is Comprehensive. First, (I say) it is cordial, It is no
brainsick fancy begotten by imagination, brought forth by opinion, nursed by
ignorance, and maintained by impudence.

Neither is it an outward formal profession, modalled by self-seeking, and
magnified by self-conceit.

These are degenerate monsters, bastard brats: abominable to her virgin breast.

She owns no other love, but what proceeds from the assurance of a saving
faith, infused by the Spirit of her Lord into the hidden corners of her heart.

I sleep (says she) but my heart waketh Cant. 5. 2. her loving heart is
evermore in labor. Neither can any thing prevent, or hinder her amourous
desires from running out toward the righteousness of her dear Lord Because, He
is the Lord her righteousness. Jer. 23. 6.

Secondly, her love is constant: She regards not the face of the times, nor
the course of the tide: the praise of a parasite, nor the partling of a Parrat.
Neither will she take the spirit of giddiness for her guide, least by any means
she should wax wanton against Christ, and wed her self to some unworthy
creature: like the younger widows, Tim. 3. 11.

Profits, Pleasures, and preferments may happily woo her, but cannot win her, to
leave her first Love: For she finds that he reproved that lightness in the
angel of the Church of Ephesus, Reve. 2. 4.

She cannot do such desperate wickedness, and sin against her blessed Savior:
who has betrothed her unto himself in righteousness, and ratified his contract
by the sweet, and precious engagements of his Gospel.

And therefore her Love is so deeply rooted in the center of her soul, that she
cannot be tossed to and fro, and carried away with every wind of Doctrine, etc.
Ephesians. 4. 14.

But being sincere in love, she grows up into him in all things, which is her
head, verse. 15.

My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live, says Job, Job. 27. 6.

This was a notable sign, that he loved righteousness with much constancy.

Thirdly, her love to righteousness is confident: It will not be daunted nor
discouraged.

Though proud Haman despises poor Mordecay, and projecteth the destruction of
himself, and all his people. As Esther 3. 6.

Yet Mordecay will not give divine reverence to that ambitious upstart, Ester
5. 9.

Though Nebuchad-nezzar the mighty king of Babylon makes an idolatrous decree:
and threatens a burning fiery furnace, to such as shall be disobedient
thereunto, Dan. 3. 10, 11.

Yet Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, the servants of the most high God; will
not serve his gods, nor worship the golden image, that he has set up, Dan. 3.
18.

Though Darius, by the policy of his presidents, and councellers establishes a
royal statute: That whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for
thirty days, save of the King himself, he shall be cast into the den of lions,
Dan. 6, 7. Yet Daniel (though he knows, that the writing is sealed) will kneel
upon his knees three times a day, and pray, and give thanks before his God, as
he did aforetime, Dan. 6. 10. See here how confident these godly men appeared
in their love to righteousness: And read yet further, how the Lord succeeded
their confidence with strange deliverances.

Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward: for ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God,
ye might receive the promise: for yet a little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 35. 36. 27.

Fourthly, her Love is very comprehensive: It comprehends, owneth, and
imbraceth all righteousness where ever it resideth.

She is not hypocritically proud: so as to say: Stand by thy self come not near
me, for I am holier then thou: like rebellions Israel, Isa. 65. 5.

But in lowliness of mind, she esteems each other better then her self. As,
Phili. 2, 3.

Nor gainfully superstitious, to cry out Great is Diana of the Ephesians: with
Demetrius, and his fellow craftsmen. As, Acts 19. 34.

But she acknowledges, That godliness is profitable unto all things. As, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

Nor is she insolently factious, To despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities: with the Apostle Judes filthy dreamers. As, Jude 8.

But she endeavors, To keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
According to Saint Paul's preswasion, Ephesians. 4. 3.

I am a companion to all them, that fear thee. Says good David unto his God,
Psalm. 119. 63.

To all them that fear thee, without any exception, or limination. And the
Apostle Paul commends the Ephesians: for their love to all the Saints, Ephesians.
1. 15.

But you will say: it is very difficult, for us to know a sinner from a saint,
in times of tolleration: wherein profession usurps the form, and undermines
the power of godliness. Thererore we shall do wisely to consider, what David
says concerning this particular. My Lord (says he) my goodness extends not
to thee: but to the excellent, in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16. 2, 3.

Or thus according to the vulgar reading. All my delight is upon the Saints:
and upon such as excel in virtue. A moral virtue shall not miss of a
suitable reward, if it be cordial; though it be constrained.

This we may see in the example of Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 29.

But woe be unto you ye hypocrites, says Christ eight times in one, and the
same chapter, Mat. 23.

Nevertheless they that are truly godly, lest they should be or partial or
prejuditious, in their love to righteousness: do not forget to pray with our
Apostle, that The Lord would make them to increase and abound in love one
toward another, and toward all men. As in 1 Thessa. 3. 12.

And as the virgin soul does thus profess her fervent love unto her dearest
Lord: by loving righteousness, which he does love: So on the other side she
does express the like unfeigned Love by hating sin, and wickedness, because he
hates it.

But happily you will say, the very name of wickedness is harsh and odious: Is
there a man that hates not wickedness?

It Is true indeed, it is hard to find a man, so vile or graceless, but that he
would seem to be an enemy to wickedness.

But yet in practice there are very few, but do allow, commit, defend, or love
it.

And therefore, first let me demand this question: when thou art set upon by
any sin, do thou resist it by the power of faith? and fight against it under
Gods command? Can thou sincerely say with godly Joseph. How can I do this
great wickedness, and sin against God, as Genesis 39. 9.

This is a sign thou hate sin indeed: Or do thou otherwise refrain from
sin, for fear of shame, reproach, or punishment? Verily thou have thy reward.
But this is fear proceeding from self-love: No love to God, no hatred against
sin.

Ye that love the Lord hate evil, says the Prophet, Psalm. 97. 10. And
therefore secondly, let us consider the nature, and the properties of hatred.
This hatred is no giddy frantic passion; but a mature deliberate affection.
Such a notorious opposite to Love, that they can never be so reconciled, as to
embrace, or favor the same object: They are agreed ever to disagree. Yet they
are Twins, both struggling in one womb, not to be parted, not to be atoned,
consent begets, and emnity preserves them: For hatred lives by love, love
thrives by hatred: Love first gives hatred an occasion, and hatred prosecutes
loves adversaries. And therefore whosoever loves God, must hate all sin as
grievous unto God. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins: thou have wearied
me with thine iniquities, says the Lord to Israel, Isa. 43. 24.

Now we must know, that many men do much mistake themselves in this particular.
A man may be enraged against sin: and yet not hate it: Yea, he may protest, and
vow against it very seriously, and yet not hate it really and rightly. And
therefore we may do well to consider, that hatred, which is perfect and
complete, has these three properties.

First, it is impartial: Secondly, it is impetuous: And thirdly, it is
implacable.

First, if it deserves the right name of hatred, it is impartial. And
therefore he that truly hates sin: he does hate all manner of sin, and in all
manner of persons.

He must hate all manner of sin: He may not hate riotousnesse, and love
covetousness: hate swearing, and love lying; hate public profaneness, and
love private perfidiousnesse, or the contrary. I hate every false way, says
good David, Psalm. 119. 128.

And to that purpose he prays unto his God: saying, Incline not my heart to
any evil thing, Psalm. 41. 4. Doubtless, it is hard to find a man, whose heart
is not inclined to many evil things: But where is that Soul amongst us, that is
not so wedded unto some bewitching lust, some Dalila; one bosom sin or other,
of which we are inclineable to say, as Lot did sometime say concerning Zoar: Is
it not a little one? Genesis 19. 20.

Yet every sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4.

And cursed is every one, that continues not in all things, which are written
in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. And therefore the Prophet David.
Search me (O God says he) and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts. And
see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting, Psalm.
139. 23, 24.

And the Apostle Paul: Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

And likewise St. Jude exhorts: To hate even the Garment spotted by the
flesh, Jude 23.

Alluding happily to those forbidden things of the Law: whereby their very
Garments were defiled: And intimating to us under the Gospel: That we ought to
abstain, even from all appearance of evil, according to that of Paul, 1 These.
5. 22.

And as we must hate sin in general, so we must hate all sin in every person.
A man would think, there had been no great cause of offense for Jehosaphat to
assist Ahab in the recovery of Ramoth Gilead. They were both of the stock of
Abraham, joined in affinity, professed the same Religion, the cause was just,
and the enemy an idolatrous Heathen.

Nevertheless, Jehu the Seer said unto Jehosaphat the King: Should thou
help the ungodly, and love them, that hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon
thee from before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. And are there not too many amongst
us, that do profess much detestation against the miscarriages of such, as are
either averse, or unprofitable to our designs: whereas a little affinity, or
friendship, or faction, or the like carnal compliance will easily overruled us
to approve, and patronize, the most abomi^able actions?

Like wicked Ahab, who hated the saving truth in the mouth of Micaiah, because
it was contrary to his intention, and embraced a pernicious lie from the mouths
of his false Prophets; because it was agreeable to his present resolution: as
in the 2 Chronicles. 18.

Yea, such is the damnable deceitfulness of self-love, that many of us are
thereby bewitched to censure those sins most severely in others, which we our
selves are ten times more notoriously guilty of.

And think thou this, O man, that judge them, which do such things, and
do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? says Paul, Romans 2.
3.

Verily this carnal self-love must of necessity be turned into spiritual
self-hatred, either temporal, or eternal. For we are sure that the judgment of
God is according to truth against them, which commit such things, as says the
same Apostle, Romans 2. 2.

Nothing is so offensive unto God, or so destructive to our selves as sin: The
pestilence in our blood, the poison in our bowels, and the sword in our sides,
all these together can but kill the body, according to a temporary death: But
sin is of so desperate a strain, that it destroys both soul and body too, and
hurries them into eternal torments.

And therefore he that hates not all sin, and in all persons, chiefly in
himself, his seeming hatred is Hypocrisy, and his love to God, and his own
Soul is nothing bettter. Therefore be not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6.
7.

Secondly, hatred, if it is true: and perfect: it is impetuous, or violent,
nothing will satisfy it but the death, or the destruction of every thing,
whereon it rests. We find that Esau hated his brother Jacob, because of the
blessing, wherewith his father had blessed him. And Esau said in his heart, the
days of mourning for my father are at hand, then will I slay my brother Jacob,
Genes. 27. 41.

And doubtless he had done, as he intended: had not the Lord his God preserved
Jacob, according to his power, Genesis 32. 11.

We likewise find, how that the sons of Jacob did hate their brother Joseph,
Genesis 37. 4.

And they consulted together to slay him, verse 20.

And if we deal more kindly by our sins, it is a sign, we are but angry with
them, we do not hate them with a perfect hatred, like that of David, wherewith
he did hate, the haters of his God. Do not I hate them, O Lord, (says he) that
hate thee? And am I not grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate
them with a perfect hatred, Psalm. 139. 21, 22.

There are two great evils, in, and belonging unto every sin: to wit, the evil
of iniquity, Psalm. 32. 5. And the evil of punishment, Lam. 3. 39. Whereof the
first is essential, and offensive to the spirit: the second is accidental, and
offensive to the flesh. And from hence it proceeds, that the spiritual man
hates sin, for the iniquity thereof: In reference to God. But the carnal man
is angry with sin, only because of the punishment thereof, in relation to
himself. God is not in all his thoughts, says David, Psalm. 10. 4.

And therefore, because he hates not the iniquity, which he ought to hate: the
punishment which he hates, shall fall upon him, unto his confusion, Genesis 4.
13. Whilst he, which hates that, which God does hate: shall surely be
approved of by God, Rev. 2. 6.

And therefore it will be of special use unto us, to consider, with what
vehemence, the Prophet David endeavors to aggravate the violence, or the
severity of his hatred against sin, and sinners, in his 101. Psalm. Wherein he
makes diverse protestations, or promises unto this very purpose: saying,

I will see no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn
aside, it shall not cleave to me, verse 3. A froward heart shall depart from
me: I will not know a wicked person, verse 4. Who so privily slandereth his
neighbor, him will I cut off: him that has an high look, and a proud heart
will not I suffer, verse 5. He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my
h^use: he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight, verse 7. I will early
destroy all the wicked of the land: that I may cut off all wicked doers from
the city of the Lord, verse 8.

Thus David as a King, and thus do thou, according to thy power, or do not say;
that thou have any hatred against sin.

And as that hatred which is warrantable, is both impartial, and impetuous: So
in the third place it is implacable, never to be appeased, or reconciled.

This is not hatred, to fall out with sin, or quarrel with it, at some special
time, or for some extraordinary cause. For thus the most ungracious Reprobate
may sometimes hate his best-beloved sin: And yet return with the Dog to his
vomit, and the Sow, that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

If thus the unclean spirit goes out of a man, it is but only to recruit his
forces: he will return, and take unto himself seven other spirits, more wicked
then himself, and they will enter in, and dwell there: and the last state of
that man is worse then the first. According to that saying of our Savior, Luke
11. 26. But when a man in expectation of Gods eternal Love by Jesus Christ,
does dedicate his love to God in Christ: the violence and perpetuity of his
impartial hatred will be such against all sin, and every transgression: That he
will choose to suffer the afflictions of Joseph, Psalm. 105. 17, 18. Much rather
then he will be reconciled to any sin, or become serviceable unto the Prince of
darkness: though with Joseph, he be solicited thereto day by day, as Genesis 39.
10.

And thus the Soul that is in love with Christ, declares it by her Christian
profession: especially. In loving righteousness, because he loves it, and
hating wickedness, because he hates it. And having thus thoroughly endeer'd
herself, by manifesting her affections: and fixing them upon their proper
objects.

In the next place she does prepare herself, to seek and entertain her princely
lover.

For as the Tree that is planted in a fruitful soil, does not only increase
her sap in her self, and send it forth in flourishing green leaves: but
likewise by the virtue of that sap she puts forth her beautiful fair
blossoms, whereby we are induced to conceive, that she will bring forth fruit
accordingly.

Even so the Soul, that by a lively faith, is planted into Christ, does not
only improve her love by Contemplation, and manifest it by Profession: But
likewise she most earnestly endeavors to fit, and confirm it by Preparation.

ANd this her hopeful preparation sets forth it self, in seeking her beloved.

It is a principal part of Iehoshaphats commendations: That he prepared his
heart to seek God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 3.

And Hezekiah, one of his successors, both in his Kingdom, and his piety,
having proclaimed a solemn Passover: He besought the Lord, saying: The good
Lord pardon every one, that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of
his fathers; though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary, 2 Chr. 30. 19.

And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people, verse 20.

And in this search the loving Soul considers, when, where, and how she may
so seek her Lord: that she may soon, safely, and surely find him: And to that
purpose she does call to mind, that the holy Ghost sets forth a threefold
prescription in order to the time, when she is to seek him. First, early, Prove.
8. 17.

Secondly, continually, Chron. 16. 11.

And thirdly, evermore, Psalm. 105. 4. Early in regard of opportunity:
Continually in reference to constancy: And evermore in relation to perpetuity.

First, early without delaying. In the morning of her youth: Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, says that kingly Preacher, Eccles. 12. 1.

And thus good Obadiah to Elijah: I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth, 1 Timothy 18. 12.

Secondly, continually without wavering: For he that wavereth is like a wave of
the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed: Let not that man think, that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord, James 1. 6, 7.

And thirdly, evermore without revolting, or apostatizing: He that endures to
the end shall be saved, says the Son of God, Mat. 10. 22.

It is registered of Asa, That he did that, which was good and right in the eyes
of the Lord his God, 2 Chronicles. 14. 2.

Nevertheless, it is a notable blemish to his integrity, that toward his
latter end: In his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, 2
Chr. 16. 12.

And thus the lovesick Soul will seek her Lord early, least having withdrawn
himself: she seek him but cannot find him, and call him, but he gives her no
answer, as Cant. 5. 6.

She will seek him continually, least he comes in a day, when she looks not
for him, and in an hour that she is not ware of, Mat. 24. 50.

And she will seek him evermore, least she be unprovided at his last coming,
and the door be shut against her, as it fared with the foolish Virgins, Mat.
25. 10.

And in the second place she does consider, where she may safely seek for her
beloved. And is resolved that this must be in his Ordinances; and especially in
his word: which is sometimes called the Scriptures, according as he himself
has taught her: saying, Search the Scriptures, for they are they, which
testify of me, John 5. 39.

And therefore the Prophet David professes unto the Lord: That he rejoices at
his word, as one that finds great spoils, Psalm. 119. 162.

And the faithful spouse in the Canticles desires to hear the voice of her
dear Lord saying, Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken
unto thy voice: cause me to hear it Cant. 8. 13.

But I conceive it may be Objected, That we may hear several voices speaking
in the holy Scriptures: and therefore how shall we know the voice of Christ,
from other voices? I answer, it is true indeed, the Scripture do discover unto
us several voices: especially the voice of God in his law, and the voice
Christ, or of God in Christ, in his Gospel. And they are so frequently, and so
diversely mixed or intermingled the one with the other, according to the
wonderful wisdom of the Spirit, and that both in the old and new Testaments:
that it requires a good and a willing understanding, to distinguish rightly
between them.

For all that is contained in the new Testament, although we do generally call
that the Gospel, is not to be understood as the voice of the Gospel, or the
voice of Christ according to his Gospel, Every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. There is the voice of
the law in the midst of the Gospel, Mat. 12. 36. Neither may we think, that
whatsoever is found in the old Testament, which is commonly called the law, is
to be referred to the voice of the law.

For the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen by faith,
preached the Gospel before unto Abraham, Gal. 3. 8.

Saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed, Genesis 12. 3.

And the like we find many: very many times both in the old and new Testament.

Neither are these several voices divided severally into certain Books, or
Pages, or Chapters, seeing we do sometimes meet with them both in one and the
same verse. The wages of sin is death: there is the voice of the law, Romans 6.
25.

But the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. There is
the voice of the Gospel in the same verse. The like may be observed, 1 Cor. 15.
22. And in many other places, wherefore that we may arive at a right
understanding in these so necessary differences or distinctions: we will first
lay down two general rules, and afterward proceed to more particular
observations.

First, when we find any work enjoined to be done, or the contrary commanded
not to be done, under any penalty, either temporal or eternal: whether it be
curse, or captivity, famine, or pestilence: destruction, death, or damnation:
or any promise made upon doing, or not doing. This we must understand to be the
voice of God in his Law.

Secondly, wheresoever the subject matter is of Christ or his kingdom: or the
promise of grace, or the condition faith: and the reward either spiritual in
its own nature, or spirituallized by grace. This we may be sure, is the voice
of Christ in his Gospel. These we shall find to be the two general Rules,
From whence we will deduct these following particulars.

First, the voice of God in his Law, is a voice of command. These words, which
I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, Deuteronomy. 6, 6.

This thing commanded I them saying, obey my voice, and I will be your God, and
ye shall be my people, Jer. 7. 23.

But the voice of the Gospel is a voice of entreaty. As though God did beseech
you by us, we pray you in Christ stead; be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Secondly, the voice of the law is a voice of compulsion. If his Children
forsake my law and walk not in my judgments, If they break my statutes, and
keep not my commandments: Then will I visit their transgression with the rod:
and their iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32.

But the voice of the Gospel, is a voice of attraction, or invitation. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindenesse have I
drawn thee, Jer. 31. 3.

Come unto me all ye that labor, and are beavie laden, and I will give you
rest, etc. Mat. 11. 28, etc.

And him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out, says the Son of God,
Jo. 6. 37.

Thirdly, the voice of the law, is a voice of bondage, cursed is every one that
continues not in all thing, which are written in the book of the law to do
them, Gal. 3. 10.

But the voice of the Gospel, is a voice of liberty. The Spirit of the Lord God
is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
meek: he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted: to proclaim liberty to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, etc. Isa.
61. 1. etc. Stand fast therefore in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free, Gala. 5. 1. for if the Son shall make you free: ye shall be free indeed,
John 8. 36.

Fourthly, the voice of the law, is a voice of enmity. Ye adulterers and
adulteresses, know ye not, that the friendship of the world is enmity with God?
whosoever therefore will be a friend to the world, is the enemy of God, James
4. 4. And God shall wound the head of his enemies, Psalm. 68. 21.

But the voice of the Gospel is a voice of reconciliation, when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Sons Romans 5. 10.

And God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses, 2 Cor. 5. 19.

Fifthly, the voice of the law, is a voice of wrath. The law works wrath,
Romans 4. 15.

For by it, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness,
and unrighteousness of men. As, Romans 1. 18.

But the voice of the Gospel, is a voice of love. God commends his love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Rum. 5. 8.
And therefore, the lovesick soul in the Canticles. It is the voice of my
beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, My dove, my
undefiled, Cant. 5. 2.

Sixthly, the voice of the law is a voice of terror, I heard thy voice in the
garden, and was afraid, So Adam to God, Genesis 3. 10. And when the Lord gave the
law unto the Israelites. There were thunders, and lightnings, and a thick cloud
upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet, exceeding loud, so that all the
people that was in the camp, trembled, Exodus 19. 16.

And this did fore-shew the effects of the law to all such as are under the
law, for ever.

But the voice of the Gospel, is a voice of comfort. The Lord shall comfort
Zion, he will comfort all her wast places, etc. Isa. 51. 3.

And Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Says the Son of
God, Mat. 5. 4.

Seaventhly the voice of the law is, a voice of conviction. By the law is the
knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. For I had not known sin, but by the law, says
St. Paul, Romans 7. 7.

And sin by the commandment is become exceeding sinful, says the same
Apostle, Romans 7. 13.

But the voice of the Gospel, is a voice of Appeal. For the Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son, John 5. 22. And he is not
an high priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities:
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin: let us therefore
come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need, says the Apost. He. 4. 15, 16.

Eighthly, the voice of God in his law, is a voice of condemnation. The soul
that sins, it shall die. Says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18. 4.

And cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, Mat. 25. 30.

But the voice of Christ in his Gospel, is a voice of pardon, verily, verily
(says he) I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: but is
passed from death to life, John 5. 14.

And this pardon has three degrees.

First, a Reprive: Secondly, an Intercession: And Thirdly, a Satisfaction. The
first (I say) is a Reprive. And this has been general to all mankind since
the fall of Adam. He was the first that received the benefit thereof. And
merely by virtue of the said Reprive, both he and all of his posterity, have,
do, and shall enjoy their natural lives: some shorter, and some longer:
according to the blessed will and pleasure of Christ our Lord and only
Mediator. I have the Keys of hell, and of death (says he) Reve. 1. 18.
Whereby it may appear, that there is no passage that way, but when, and by whom
he pleases to appoint it. This I conceive to be the first degree, in order to
this free, and gracious pardon. The second is our Saviors Intercession: He
made intercession for the transgressors, Isa. 53. 12. And he ever lives to
make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25.

The third, and highest is his satisfaction. He was wounded for our
transgressions: he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him: and with his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53. 5.

His ownself bare our sins in his own body on the tree, says St. Peter 1 Pet.
2. 24.

Now if we shall in time of this reprive, lay hold, and rest upon his
Intercession, by an effectual embracing faith: then we are certain that we
shall enjoy the benefit of his full satisfaction. And so we may be truly
confident that this our pardon is both signed and sealed. Due satisfaction is
acknowledged: Gods justice is completely vindicated; his indignation thoroughly
pacified: And what can hinder us from being saved? For it is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us, Romans 8. 33, 34. But, if through all the time of our
reprive, we shall reject, relinquish, or neglect so great salvation, as is
offered in this intercession and satisfaction: Then, as the voice of God in his
law has passed upon us the sentence of condemnation: So the voice of Christ in
his Gospel shall pass upon us the sentence of execution. For he that believes
not shall be damned: This is part of that Gospel which the Lord Christ
commanded his Apostles to preach unto every creature, Mark 16. 16.

The Scriptures mention other voices also: As of Prophets that prophecy lies,
Jer. 23. 25. Of those that speak perverse things; to draw Disciples after them.
Acts 20. 30.

That by good words, and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16. 18.

That speaks lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4. 1.

That speaks evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 10.

That speak evil of the things they understand not, 2 Peter 2. 12.

That speak great swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 18.

That speak great things, and blasphemies, Rev. 13. 5.

These voices are remembered in the Scriptures: but they are all condemned by
the Scriptures. And these, with every other of like nature, may be referred to
the voice of Strangers, John 10. 5.

Which (though they be extolled and applauded, by giddy multitudes of
brainsick beasts of old ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4.)

This constant Lamb of Christ will by no means, incline to hear or listen after
them: Least they should drive her into mire and dirt. As, Isa. 57. 20. Or draw
her from her Shepherds tender bosom. As, Isa. 40. 11.

Such were the watchmen, that did smite and wound the searching soul: The
keepers of the walls that rifled her, and took away her vail, Cant. 5. 7.

And therefore she avoids them, day and night: their public musters, and their
private meetings. As swarms of hurtful locusts, that proceed out of the smoke
of hells infernal furnace.

As to the sacred voice of God in his law: she does believe it, as it is the
voice of such an Author, Exodus 20. 1. She learned it as a Rule to guide her
goings, Phil. 3. 16. She loves it, as an argument of Love, John 14, 15.

But looks upon it as a cancelled scroul; a dead caracter, in relation to any
Obligation, or engagement, Col. 2. 14.

And so she leaves it, with much reverence, And listens to her Lords voice in
his Gospel, Jo. 7. 37.

And being thus instructed when and where, she is to seek for her beloved Lord.

In the third place, she sets her self to learn How she may seek him so, as
that she may be sure to find him. And to that intent: She goes her way forth
by the footsteps of the flock, and feeds her Kids besides the shepherds
tents. According to her Lords direction, Cant. 1. 8.

She walks in the paths of Christ's own sheep, to feed, and fill her ears
with his pure doctrine, delivered by his faithful Ministers.

As for her mortal enemies, the Devil, the World, and Flesh, that labor to
betray, and intercept her, in her heavenly search: with these she holds a
continual combat.

As for example, when the Devil meets her, in her delightful way unto the
word: And would divert her by his lewd suggestions, as that she shall be
rebuked, and reproved for her sins, and threatened with misery, death and
destruction for her transgressions against the law of God: with such like
terrors not to be endured.

She tells him, that she has been already at mount Sinay, that might not be
touched, and that burned with fire, and with blackness, and darkness, and
tempests, etc. Heb. 12. 18.

But now the law, like a good Schole-master, leading her from thence, unto
mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God: the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of angels: to the general assembly, and Church of the
first born, which are written in heaven: and to God the judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant, etc. Heb. 12. 22, etc. And therefore, with the Prophet David: She
will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints, Psalm. 85. 8.

When, by his black mouthed execrable agents, the shame, and bane of Church,
and Commonwealth, the Devil does revile the Ministers of Jesus Christ with
base reproachful titles: of purpose to blow up the zealous blaze of his own
smoking firebrands: and to darken or quench the pure light of the glorious
Gospel. That so she may not be able to see, when the Sun of righteousness
shall arise with healing in his wings. As, Mala. 4. 2. The good soul only
renders him that answer, wherewith the angels of the Lord reproved him long
since upon the very like occasion. The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, Zech. 3. 1, 2.

And when that subtle serpent (now perceiving, that all his hellish engines
cannot hinder the soul from listening to the word of God) endeavors by all
means possible, to steal it from her, least it should prove fruitful: She
tells him plainly that she will both hear the word of God and keep it, for so
she shall be certain of a blessing, Luke 11. 28.

Next, when the world would win her from the word, by his most specious
invitations of pleasures, profits, or preferments.

She answers, That to live in pleasures on the earth, is to nourish her self,
as in a day of slaughter, James 5. 5. But the word will direct her to the Lord
her God: In whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

As for profit: although it be a lesson, that she could gladly learn: yet she
will take it only at Gods teaching. I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee
to profit, says her beloved, Isa. 48. 17. For otherwise: what is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, Mat. 16. 26.

And for worldly preferments: experience tells her they are little worth. But
the word teaches her by the mouth of her own Lord. That whosoever shall do the
will of his Father, which is in heaven; the same is his brother, and sister,
and mother, Ma. 12. 50.

And these are such perpetual preferments as all the world cannot present her
with.

And lastly, when the dull flesh would detain her from her attendance on the
holy word: persuading her that she may slumber still, and take her rest awile;
it is yet two early by an hour or two: and that the weather is foul, and wet,
and cold, with the like flatteries and indulgencies.

Nevertheless she starteth up, and says: my beloved speaks, and says unto me:
Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away: for lo, the winter is past, the
rain is over, and gone. As, Cant. 2. 10, 11. Or be it never so rainy, cold, or
foul, or full of lets and inconveniences: yet neither shall the flesh, the
World, nor Devil prevent her from the search of her beloved: till with that
Propet, she can safely say: with my whole heart have I sought thee, Psalm. 119.
10.

And thus she is resolved when, and where, and How, she is to seek her saving
Lord.

But seeing there are now such multitudes that cry up Christ: lo here, lo there
is Christ: and yet our Savior says: believe it not, Mat 24. 23. How shall the
longing soul be sure to know, when she has found the Christ her Lord indeed.

In answer to this much material question: She must consider, that this Lord
of glory, is always guarded by a glorious train of gifts, and graces infinite
for number: with which he enters into every soul; that is thus qualified, and
prepared: But least my task should be as infinite: I shall describe but only
six of them. As namely, Life, Light, Humility, Assurance, Peace: and Joy. These
always are at hand, if not in sight, to give attendance to this royal
Bridegroom: And to confirm the Soul in this her search.

FIrst, where this Prince of life is, there is life.

He that has the Son has life: and he that has not the Son, has not life,
says St. John 1 John 5. 12.

And this life is evidenced by these four particulars: namely, Sense, Motion,
Resolution, and Action. The first thing that appears in this spiritual life
is Sense; whilst we want this life of Christ we are altogether senseless: no
better then dead, dead in trespasses and sins. Verily as the body without the
Soul is dead: so the soul without Christ is dead also. She is alienated from
the life of God, and being alienated from the life of God, she is past feeling
says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.

She perceives not the things of the Spirit of God 1 Cor. 2. 14. Ye she is
altogether ignorant of her own wretched condition.

She knows not that she is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind and
naked. As, Rev. 3. 17. But when Christ, who is her life appears unto her, he
reviveth, and quickens her. For as the father raises up the dead, and
quickens them: even so the Son does quicken whom he will, John 5. 21.

And you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, says St.
Paul Ephesians. 2. 1.

He gives the soul the feeling of her sins, the sight of Gods fierce wrath and
indignation: and fearful judgments thereupon depending. And being thus made
truly sensibe of her own miseries; immediately she does begin to stir, and
move her self toward the consideration of her present dangerous condition, and
the most probable means for her recocery.

Thus the Jews when they were pricked in their hearts, at the relation of their
former impieties: they said unto Peter, And to the rest of the Apostles. Men
and brethren what shall we do? Acts 2. 37.

And thus the regenerate Jaylour, being awaked by the power of God in that
great earthquake: feeling the foundations of the prison shaken: seeing all the
doors opened, and the prisoners bands loosed: and hearing, notwithstanding all
this; that none of them were escaped: immediately he called for a light, and
sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought
them out and said, Sirs what must I do to be saved? Acts 16. 26, etc.

Nor will this motion admit of rest, until it puts on a resolution.

No sooner is the soul thus thoroughly troubled, or moved with the sense of her
own miseries, but she will carefully resolve upon some way or other to work her
release.

And in like manner this her resolution, if it be firm and constant, will
endeavor to put it self into some sudden action.

All these four signs, degrees, or passages of a spiritual life do well appear,
in that story of those four lepers, that sat at the gate of Samaria in the
time of the famine, the 2 of Kings the 7. beginning at the 3 verse.

For albeit their parley, and proceedings were merely rational, yet they may be
applied unto this our spiritual purpose.

First, it appears that they became sensible of their present distress, for
they said one to another: Why sit we hear until we die? Secondly their
thoughts were moved, and stirred to work their deliverance.

If we say, we will enter into the city (say they) then the famine is in the
city, and we shall die there, and if we sit still here, we die also.

Thirdly, they took up a Resolution.

Now therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of the Syrians: if they save
us alive, we shall live: and if they kill as we shall but die.

And what they did so purpose, and resolve: they, fourthly forthwith did
perform, and finish. They rose up in the twilight to go unto the camp of the
Syrians, etc.

And the success was rich, and admirable: For they not only relieved,
refreshed, and enriched themselves, but their whole city also.

No less remarkable to this very purpose, is that Parable of the Prodigal: by
which our blessed Savior himself intended a spiritual encouragement, Luke 15.
17, etc.

First, he came to himself: that is, he became sensible of his own calamity.

Secondly, he was moved, and troubled, that his fathers hired servants, should
fare so much better then himself. How many hired servants of my fathers have
bred enough, and to spare (says he) and I perish with hunger.

Thirdly, he resolves to cast himself upon his fathers compassion. I will
arise, and go to my father, and say unto him, father: I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, etc.

And Fourthly, he puts his resolution into action. And he arose and came to his
father. And then behold his blessed entertainment, when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him.

And the like happiness shall every soul receive. for certain, from her
heavenly Father: that has a true sense, and feeling of her transgressions:
that is really moved, and troubled for them: that resolves seriously to
forsake them: that proceeds in the right course to be delivered from them.
According to that life, which her Beloved brings along with him.

But as the resolutions and actions of the aforesaid lepers, and likewise of
the prodigal, were undertaken and carried on merely by necessity, and probably
might have been as dangerous, as they proved advantageous.

So in like case the soul that is thus newly revived, and engaged upon the like
compulsive principles, may be exceeding liable, and subject to many perilous
mistakes.

O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps, says the Prophet, Jere. 10. 23.

And therefore whenever Jesus Christ appears savingly: to such a soul he
gives light to rule and guide that life.

And thereupon the Apostle: Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead:
and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5. 14.

And thus the Lord of himself: I am the light of the world, he that follows
me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, John 8. 12.

This is not a new light: But the true light, which lights every man, that
comes into the world, John 1. 9. Not an external, but an internal light: For
God, who commands the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

Not to inlighten the eyes of the body: but to inlighten the eyes of the
understanding.

That the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, etc. Says the same
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 18.

The light of the body is the eye, says our Savior, Math. 6. 22.

And as the light of the body is the eye: so the light of the soul is the
understanding; For as the eye is that member of the body, whereby the body
receives light: so the understanding is that faculty of the soul, whereby the
soul receives light also. And this spiritual light, albeit for substance it is
always the same. Yet in regard of the several proceedings, or degrees thereof,
it may be said to be threefold.

The first degree is in Christ, or God in Christ essentially. The second is in
the Gospel exhibitively. The third is in the godly derivatively.

First (I say) this light is in God essentially and originally: God is light
says S. John, 1 John 1. 5.

And so it is infinite, perfect, and perpetual.

First it is infinite: It is said that in the Creation, God made two great
lights, the greater light to rule the day, Genesis 1. 16.

And that greater light is the Sun, Psalm 136. 8.

But there is no less difference between this light of God, or this light
which is God, and the light of the Sun, then there is between light and
darkness. The Sun cannot shine in all places at one and the same time: for we
see by experience, that the night hides us from the light thereof. But thus
the Prophet David unto the Lord: If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me,
even the night shall be light about me: yea, the darkness hides not from
thee, but the night shines as the day; the darkness and the light are both
alike unto thee, Psalm. 139. 11, 12.

And upon whom does not his light arise? says Job, Job 25. 3.

Verily this infinite light may not be limited: It shines upon all persons, in
all places, and at all times: And if any man be not enlightened thereby, it is
for that, he loves darkness rather then light, because his deeds are evil, as
John 3. 19.

Secondly, this infinite light is perfect. God is light, and in him is no
darkness, 1 John 1. 5.

Neither is he capable of any the least alteration. The Sun may be stayed in
his course, as in the days of Joshua, Josh. 10. 13. Or turned back, as in the
days of Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 8.

But in this Father of lights there is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning, Ja. 1. 17. I am the Lord, I change not, says he, Mala. 3. 6.

Thirdly, this perfect light is perpetual, or everlasting. The Sun shall be
turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the great, and the
terrible day of the Lord come, Joel. 2. 31. But the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting light, says that Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 60. 19. He shall not
only inlighten thee all thy days in this his Kingdom of grace, but he shall be
also thine only light in his Kingdom of glory, Rev. 21. 23.

The second degree of this everlasting light, is in the everlasting Gospel: as
S. John calls it, Rev. 14. 6. And here it is communicable, conformable, and
comfortable.

First it is communicable: As the Sun disperseth his light by his beams, so the
Lord communicates his light by his Gospel. That grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus, before the world began: is now made manifest by the appearing of
our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life and
immortality to light through the Gospel, says St. Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

And thereupon St. John: The darkness is past (says he) and the true light
now shines. 1 John 2. 8.

The darkness of the Law, which was veiled under types, and figures is done
away, and the true light now shines in the Gospel.

And St. Peter thus: We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we
made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his Majesty: for he received from God the Father honor and
glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory: This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice, which came from
Heaven, we heard, when we were with him in the holy Mount. We have also a more
sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed: as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in
your hearts, 2 Peter 1. 16, 17, 18, 19.

Briefly thus: The Gospel of Jesus Christ, says he, is no fable: for we were
eyewitnesses of his Majesty, and ear-witnesses of his Fathers Testimony,
altogether agreeable to the Records of the Prophets, which might serve to
convince the Soul of ignorance, and unbelief, until the Lord Jesus Christ is
pleased to reveal himself more abundantly by the light of his Gospel.

But it may be demanded, how God is said to communicate, or discover his light
by his Gospel? seeing the Apostle tells us: That the Gospel is a mystery,
which has been hid from ages, and from generations, and is now made manifest
unto the Saints only, Col. 1. 26. I answer, that the same Apostle does very
well resolve this doubt in another place. If our Gospel be hid (says he) it is
hid to them that are lost. In whom the God of this world, has blinded the
minds of them, that believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ: who is the image of God should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

It is no wonder that the most glorious light be obscured, and hidden from
those that are blinded: where the defect is not in the light, but in those that
cannot, or that will not see the light.

Secondly, this light of the Gospel is conformable, or agreeable in every
particular to whatsoever was covenanted, and concluded by, and between God the
Father, and his only begotten Son, in, and by that eternal Covenant of Grace,
for, and on the behalf of mankind. And to this purpose the Apostle Paul
intimates to the Ephesians: That into him this grace was given, that he should
preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: And to make all
men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the
world has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: To the
intent that now unto the principalities, and powers in heavenly places might be
known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God. According to the eternal
purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3. 7. to 12.

Verily, this blessed light of the Gospel is every way so conformable to the
whole will of God: and so illustrated with the bright beams of his wisdom,
grace, and goodness, That we all with open face beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord, as in 2 Cor. 3. 18.

And thirdly, the light of the Gospel is comfortable: Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted, says the Gospel, Mat. 5. 4.

This is the dayspring from on high, that has visited us: to give light to
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet
into the way of peace, Luke 1. 78. 79. It shows us the way to find rest unto
our Souls, Math. 11. 29. etc. And it assures us that Jesus Christ is made unto
us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.
30.

And let every true Christian be judge, if these be not such comforts, as he
chiefly rejoices, or delights in.

The third degree of light is in the Godly: And here it is regular, singular,
and exemplar.

First it is regular: It is guided by rule. By the rule of righteousness, the
word of God. He that is truly godly will not presume to see more then God
shows him.

Thy word have I hid in my heart: that I might not sin against thee, says
David, Psalm 119. 10. Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
paths, says the same Prophet, verse 105.

And therefore the Lord by his Prophet Isaiah: To the law and to the testomonie
(says he) If they speak not according to this word: it is, because there is no
light in them, Isa. 8. 20.

And therefore: Woe be unto them, that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, Isa. 5. 20.

Secondly, this light in the godly is singular, it looks but one way, and
that directly.

If thine eye be single, thine whole body shall be full of light: but if thine
eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness, says the Lord, Mat.
6. 22. Where he intimates that, that which is not a single eye, is an evil
eye. You know that a cross eye, that seems to look one way, when in truth,
it looks another: is a great blemish in nature, but the eye of the Soul that
is thus deceitfully affected, is a greater enemy to grace. Let thine eyes look
right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee, says the wise man,
Prove. 4. 25.

The eye of the godly looks always right forward upon Gods glory without any
self-seeing, or self-seeking: But the blear-eyed hypocrite, when he most
seemingly aymeth at Gods glory, he most deceitfully intends his own. And this
is generally the common course of the world, For all seek their own: not the
things that are Jesus Christ's, says St. Paul, Phil. 2. 21.

Thirdly, this light in the godly is exemplar. It sets forth it self to be
observed, intimated, and improved. The path of the just is as the shining
light: that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18.

And therefore Paul to the Philipians.

Brethren be f^llowers together of me, and mark them, which walk so, as ye have
us for an ensample, Phil. 3. 17. And to his beloved Timothy, Be thou an example
of the believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in
purity, 1 Timothy 4. 12. And thus our Lord Jesus Christ to his Disciples, Ye are
the light of the world (says he) A city that is set on an hill, cannot be hid,
neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house. Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good work, and glorify your father
which is in heaven, Math. 5. 14, 15, 16.

But you will say: what benefit shall the soul receive by all this light?

Truly she shall hereby receive the greatest, and compleatest of all benefits.
She shall be hereby enabled to see God.

Not according to his incomprehensible essence, and excellencies: these are
things too high for the highest apprehensions. He is high above all nations and
his glory above the heavens, Psalm. 113. 4. Higher then the highest, Eccles. 5.
8. For according to his secret council, and inconceivable wisdom: these are
too deep for the deepest understandings.

O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. For who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counceller? says St. Paul,
Romans 11. 33, 34.

But according to the good pleasure of his own will: and the small measure of
our human capacity. For as the sun it self, as touching its matter, or
substance, cannot be discerned by the eye of the body: and yet by the luster,
and bright beams thereof, we are enabled to see, whatsoever is necessary, or
convenient to be seen.

So our immortal, and invisible God, as he is of himself, in himself, and to
himself: cannot be perceived by the eye of the soul: yet by the evidence of his
works, and of his word he is pleased to reveal himself unto us, so far forth as
is abundantly sufficient for our temporal satisfaction, and our eternal
salvation.

These two large lectures of his works and words: are they wherein the Lord is
seen, and read.

The one is a lecture of Philosophy.

The other is a lecture of Divinity.

And both of these are left upon Record, by that sweet singer in his nineteen
Psalm.

The first, in the first six verses. The heavens declare the glory of God, and
the firmament shows his handiwork, etc. to the 7 verse.

This is the lesson of Philosophy.

That of Divinity is examplified from the sixth to the twelfth verse. The law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, etc.

The mighty volume of the works of God may be perused by the light of nature:
and it is so fairly, and so plainly written, that every soul, even as they run,
may read it. What is he that sees the heavens, and earth, and those innumerable
creatures contained in them: And shall consider their Original: together with
their Order, Use, and End, by which, in which, for which, and unto which, they
were made, placed, fitted, and intended: but must confess the wisdom, power
and Godhead of that great arm by which they were created. This is in brief, the
lecture of Philosophy: whereby the Lord does manifest himself to every creature
that is endued with Reason.

The second means, whereby we are enabled to see, and know God, is by the light
of his word. This is the safest, and most christian way: This is Gods lecture
of Divinity: where he presents himself unto the eye of every knowing soul. But
none can read it comfortably and effectually, but such as are Partakers of the
divine nature, as 2 Pet. 1. 4.

I know there are they, that esteem themselves great politicians, and are
indeed very worldly-wise men, who will be apt to say: do not we understand the
holy Scriptures, and see God in them? what should hinder us? Truly, I will not
say, but such as these, may read, and understand the word of God rationally,
and morally: but not spiritually, and savingly. These things are written that
ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that Believing,
ye might have life through his name, says St. John, John 20. 31.

And thus to know Christ, or God in Christ, Is not from the flesh, but from the
Father which is in heaven, Mat. 16, 17.

Again our only Savior tells us: That the words, that he speaks, they are
spirit, Jo. 6. 36.

And the Apostle Paul: That the law is spiritual, Romans 7. 14. Now the natural
man receives, or perceives, not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. But he that is spiritual judges, or discerns, all things, 1 Cor.
2. 14, 15. But peradventure it will be demanded: How much may a judicious
moral man see of God in his word, by the light of natural reason, industry,
and experience?

Truly, I conceive that he may see, even as much, as the spiritual man sees:
one thing only excepted; But without that one thing, he had as good or better
see nothing.

He is able to see God, as he is the creator of all things, Genesis 1. 1. etc. As
he is the almighty God, as, Genesis 17. 1. As he is a consuming fire, as, Deuteronomy. 4.
24. A God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible,
which regards not persons, nor takes rewards, as, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. The King
eternal immortal, invisible, and the only wise God, as, 1 Timothy 1. 17. Yea he
may see him in a nearer relation: so near as to say, The Lord our God, as,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Thou art our Father: our Redeemer, as, Isa. 63. 16. Our Savior,
as, Jude 25. But happily you will say that this is much for a natural man to see
and know, by the light of Reason: what would you have him know more? Truly let
me tell you, all this is nothing worth: unless he can see so far, as to say
with good David: O Lord of hosts, My King, and My God, Psalm. 84. 3.

And with the penitent Prodigal. I will arise, and go unto my Father, Luke 15.
18.

And with righteous Job: I know that My Redeemer lives, Job 19. 25. And with
the blessed mother of our Lord: My soul rejoices in God, My Savior, Luke 1.
47.

And with believing Paul, I live by the faith of the Son of God: who loved Me,
and gave himself for Me, Gala. 2. 20.

These are such proper and peculiar interests, as are discovered by the light
of God: and none can see or know them savingly, but such a one as is the child
of God.

And as this saving light directs us unto the knowledge our Sovereign Lord:
So it instructs us to know our selves, in reference to God: and by this
means, it teaches us to entertain Humility.

This the third obedient courtier, which still attends upon that King of kings:
And whom Christ seems to send before his face, as to prepare, and usher in his
way into the new illuminated soul: Nor did there ever any soul enjoy the saving
presence of her loving Lord, but by the conduct of this favorite. For God
resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble, James 4. 6.

And therefore Peter does advise us, saying: Be ye clothed with humility, 1
Pet. 5. 5.

But forasmuch as he is much abused, by some that do usurp his name, and
office although in nature, they are nothing like him: I therefore shall
endeavor to set forth four sorts that do, and do pretend, to march under his
colors, and assume his titles.

And of these, the first is a treacherous Humility. The second is a cowardly
humility: The third is a constrained-humility: And the fourth is the true, and
the sound humility.

The first, I say is a treacherous humility,

And under this fair-seeming Cloak does lurk many a foul perfidious design. The
Prophet David in his description of a wicked person, Psalm. 10. says: That he
croucheth, and humbles himself, that the poor may fall by his strong ones,
verse 10.

It Is strange to any honest heart to see, how some will counterfeit humility:
and cast themselves beneath their prouder thoughts, to gain the reputation of
good men, good lowly men: but though they gull the world, the blear-eyed world:
yet he that knows their hearts does see for truth, that they are nothing so.
And whosoever shall believe their forgeries, shall find at length that they
are inside Wolves, though outside Sheep: Wolves in Sheeps clothing: Ye shall
know them by their fruits, says our Savior, Mat. 7. 16.

Proud Absolon conspiring to depose his tender father David from his Kingdom,
that he might wickedly usurp the same: When any man came nigh to him, to do him
obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him. And on this
manner did Absalon to all Israel, that came to the King for judgment, so
Absalon stole the hearts of the men of Israel, 2 Samuel 15. 5, 6.

See here how this ambitious rebel humbles himself, even to the lowest, and
worst of the people; thereby promoting his conspiracy, that so he might
advance himself above the greatest, and the best of Kings.

And is it not a common thing with many, to complement us with: your humble
servant, when really and truly they esteem it too little honor to be but our
Masters, unless they may command us as their slaves.

This is a treacherous humility.

The second is a cowardly humility.

And that is, when a man through fear of death, or bonds, or damage, or some
such like danger, humbles himself so far, as to submit to the unworthy, or
unjust commands of men in opposition to God, and a good conscience: I do not
say contrary to his own unhappy conscience; for he that is a coward in Gods
cause: is commonly as great a Tyrant over his own conscience, he will not
suffer it so much as to mind him of any of his vile abominations. He has
seared it (or burnt it as a slave) with a hot Iron. As the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4. 2. We read that the Persian Monarch Ahasuerus promoted Haman, etc. And
all the Kings servants that were in the Kings Gate, bowed, and reverenced
Haman, for the King had so commanded, Esth. 3. 1, 2.

But Mordecay (Gods true and faithful servant) he bowed not, nor did him
reverence.

He only humbled himself to God: and God preserved, and rewarded him.

Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God: that he may exalt
you in due time, says St. Peter, 1 Peter 5. 6. But who art thou, that thou
should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of Man, which
shall be made as grass: and forgettest the Lord thy maker, etc. says the Lord
by his Prophet, Isa. 51. 12, 13.

The third is a constrained humility.

Not constrained by the power, or compulsion of Man, or by any other outward
violence. But by the terrors of an accusing conscience. As when a Man is
humbled, or dejected through the sense, or apprehension, or expectation of
Divine Justice discharging it self of some grievous plague, or punishment,
either temporal, or eternal; present, or impendent: And this, of it self is
neither absolutely hurtful nor helpful: but according to the fellowship, or
society that it lights upon. If it meets with self ends, then it becomes
unfruitful: If it meets with Hypocrisy, it proves contemptible: If with
despair it is damnable: But if it meets with faith, then it becomes sound
and effectual.

First I say, if it lights upon self ends, it proves unfruitful. This we
see in the example of Ahab: For Elijah having denounced most fearful
judgments against Ahab, his wife, and family: It came to pass, when Ahab
heard those words, that he rent his Clothes, and put sackcloth upon his
flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly, 1 Kings 21. 27.

Insomuch that the Lord himself took great notice thereof, verse 29.
Nevertheless not long after Ahab set his heart upon the recovery of Ramoth
Gilead, 1 Kings 22. 3. And in pursuance thereof, he expressed his hatred to
Micaiah the true Prophet verse 8. He despised the word of the Lord, verse 18.
He puts Gods Prophet into prison. ver. 27. And proceeds in his design, to
his own destruction. Thus through his own self ends, his constrained humility
became unfruitful.

Secondly, if this constrained humility be carried on by Hypocrisy, then it
proves contemptible. This appears in the words of the Lord by his Prophet
Isaiah, to the dissembling Jews: Wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou
see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our Soul, and thou take no knowledge?
Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all your labors.
Behold, ye fast for strife, and debate, etc. Isa. 58. 3, 4, 5.

Here are all the signs of a solemn humiliation: but because it was performed
in Hypocrisy, the Lord pours contempt upon it.

And therefore the Lord Christ in his Sermon on the Mount, exhorts his
Disciples: saying: when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites of a sad countenance:
for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast, etc.
Math. 6. 16. etc.

And this fasting is a principal part of humiliation: as it appears by that
of the Prophet David: I humbled my Soul with fasting, says he, Psalm. 35. 13.

And by the deportments of the Jews in the time of Esther, and Mordecay,
Esther, 4. 3.

Thirdly, when this constrained humility incountreth with despair, it becomes
deadly and damnable. As in the example of Saul, who in his sore distress
humbled himself even unto the Devil, in the likeness of Samuel, 1 Samuel 28. 14.

And of Judas the Traitor, who repented, confessed, restored, and departed,
and went and hanged himself, Math. 27. 3, 4, 5.

But this humility, if it finds out faith: then it proves sound, and
effectual. Like that of Manasseh, who when he was in affliction besought the
Lord his God: and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, and
prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication; and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the
Lord he was God, 2 Chr. 33. 12, 13.

Neither was this kind of humility less remarkable in Saul the persecuter,
afterward Paul the Apostle, who being upon the height of his tyrannical
intentions: Jesus, whom he persecuted, dismounted him, and laid him on the
earth, until his cruel heart was so abased and humbled, that he trembling, and
astonished said: Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. to the 7th. verse.

Then upon whom, the mercy of God was never more freely bestowed: Then by whom,
the free grace of God in Christ, was never more excellently magnified.

Yet I am the least of the Apostles (says he) that am not meet to be called an
Apostle: because I persecuted the Church of Christ. But by the grace of God, I
am what I am, 1 Cor. 15. 9. 10. This is the work of a sound humility: And it
well deserves our serious consideration. And therefore I shall endeavor to
propound, and answer these four questions.

First, what is this sound humility? Secondly, by whom is it wrought? Thirdly,
how, or after what manner is it wrought? And fourthly, what does it work?
To the first question it is answered: That humility is that work of
regeneration, through which, our connsciences being convicted, and afflicted by
the sense of our sins, and the consideration of our own wants, and
unworthiness: we do unfainedly confess the same unto God, devoutly imploring
his pardon for sin, together with a supply of spiritual grace.

That this humility is a work of regeneration, and thus qualified (I conceive)
will not be denied nor contradicted. For so soon as that eternal goodness of
God appears unto his otherwise lost creature: In begetting him, of his own
will, with the word of truth, as Ja. 1. 18.

Immediately by the light of the same word, he begins to survey himself: and
to weigh all his thoughts, words, actions, and abilities, according to this
balance of the sanctuary. And finding them utterly void of all grace, and
goodness: and stuffed with nothing but sin, and corruption. He bursteth out
with the Prophet David in his 51. Psalm.

Sometimes by way of confession: saying, I acknowledge my transgressions, and
my sin is ever before me, verse 3.

Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, verse
5.

Sometimes by way of petition for the remission of his sins: Purge me with
Hysope, and I shall be clean: Wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow: Make me
to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice: hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities, verses
7. 8, 9.

Sometimes by way of supplication for supplies of spiritual grace.

Create in me a clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast
me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Restore
unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit, verse 10.
11, 12.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise, verse 15.

And thus with David, the poor humble Soul bemoans her self after a mournful
manner: yet in the midst of all her passions, she is confident to say with the
same Prophet: A broken, and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise,
verse 17.

For the Lord has pronounced her blessed, and promised her comfort: saying,

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Math. 5. 4.

The second question is this:

By whom is this humility wrought? To which I answer: By the Lord our God.

God makes my heart soft, says Job, Job 23. 16. Thou shall remember all the
way, which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness to
humble thee, and to prove thee, says Moses to the Congregation of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 8. 2. It was the Lord of heaven, that humbled the proud heart of
Nebuchadnezzar King of all the earth, and made him a companion unto beasts:
whereby he perceived, that he was no better then a beast in comparison of the
living God: Insomuch, That he blessed the most high, and praised, and honored
him that lives for ever, etc. Dan. 4. 33. 34.

And because his son, and successor Belshazzar humbled not himself, though he
knew all this, but lifted up himself against the Lord of heaven, the same Lord
did put him into a condition worse then of a beast: As appears by his
desperate agony, and his unexpected end, Dan. 5. 22, 23.

Now albeit, this abasing, or humbling did work upon these mighty heathens, no
otherwise then to manifest Gods more mighty power and Majesty. Yet where it
becomes effectual through faith: it fitteth and prepares the heart, toward
the attaining of everlasting salvation.

And the preparations of the heart are from the Lord, says Solom^n, Prove. 16.
1.

But how is this humility wrought? Or by what means does our God work it in us?
For this is the third question.

Verily it appears unto me, that the ordinary means whereby the Lord begins
to break, and soften, and humble our rebellious hard hearts, is by affliction,
which being sanctified unto us by the sweet influence and operation of his holy
Spirit: it directs us unto the Agent, the Cause, and the Cure of all our
miseries, both outward, and inward, temporal, and eternal.

Insomuch that every one, who is become poor in spirit, will freely confess
with the Prophet David. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that
thou in faithfulness have afflicted me, Psalm 119. 75.

For our better satisfaction in this particular: we must consider, that we are
all by nature proud, insolent, disobedient, and obstinate. No man repents him
of his wickedness: saying, what have I done? Every one turns to his course,
as the horse rusheth into the battle, says the Prophet, Jer. 8. 6.

And that is fiercely, furiously, and dangerously: until the Lord, in pity of
our Souls, claps his restraining bridles in our jaws: And to abate us of our
desperate speed, lays burdens of afflictions on our backs, on some more heavy,
and on some more light, according to his wisdom and our temper: For he knows
our frame, he remembers that we are dust, says David, Psalm 103. 14.

And when the Lord, with his afflicting hand, has filled her with occasions of
complaint, the Soul begins to cast down her pride, her stout behavior, and
her haughty looks: and to devise from whence those woes proceed. And being now
in this perplexity, it is ten to one, but some of her acquaintance, some
miserable carnal comforters, are ready to persuade her, that her distresses
come by accident: by chance, by fortune, or by evil tongues, or by the
disposition of the Stars, or by the malice of her enemies, or treachery of some
deceitful friends.

And hereupon they will prescribe her remedies suitable to these devilish
suggestions: To turn her eyes from looking toward God: and so to drown her in
a Sea of sorrows.

But, having now begun his work of grace, her God strikes in, and sends her to
his word: where she finds: That affliction comes not forth of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground, Job 5. 6.

But the Lord kills, and makes alive: he brings down to the grave, and
brings up: The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, etc. 1 Samuel 2. 6; 7. And
being thus instructed, and confirmed in these, and the like godly principles,
she cries out with mournful Naomie: The Lord has testified against me, and
the Almighty has afflicted me, Ruth. 1. 21.

And having found the Agent to be God, she knows the action must be just and
right: For the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works,
Psalm. 145. 17.

And going forward in her heavenly search: She finds that God does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the Children of men, Lam. 3. 33.

And therefore there is some impulsive cause, which does constrain him to these
sad proceedings. Well, what is the cause for which the Lord afflicts: why
this his Church confesses to be sin. We roar all like Bears (says she) and
mourn sore like Doves: we look for judgment, but there is none: for salvation,
but it is far from us: For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and
our sins testify against us, etc. Isai 59. 11, 12. etc. And thus by the
Prophet Jeremie. We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covers us: for
we have sinned against the Lord our God, Jerem. 3. 25. And this the Scriptures
every where affirm.

And what is sin? why, sin is the transgression of the law, 1 John 3. 4.

Resolved thus: the Soul draws forth her life, and lays it to the level of the
law, and finds it so repugnant to the rule: so crooked, cross, deformed, and
destructive: That now she feels not, what she has received, but fears to think
of what she has deserved. Her sorrow now is turned into anger: Anger against
her self, her sinful self, she wonders how the Justice of the Almighty has
spared her so long, and not inflicted the penalty that is due to her
transgressions, eternal death in everlasting torments.

And being thus affrighted at her sins, the only cause of her afflictions: the
Soul bestirs her self about the Cure. And to that end, she sighs, weeps, vows,
resolves, and fasts, and prays, and cries unto the Lord. Behold, O Lord, for I
am in distress: my bowels are troubled, mine heart is turned within me: for I
have grievously rebelled, Lament. 1. 20.

Bowels of grief beg bowels of compassion, and all to little purpose: For now
the more she mourns, the more she may, her spirit is engaged in the conflict.
And a wounded spirit, who can bear, says Solomon, Prove. 18. 14. Poor Soul for
life she labors; does, undoes: she spends her spirits, and torments her self;
and all to satisfy incensed Justice. Which she is never able to perform by her
own passions, were they strong as death, and deep as hell. The Law is broken,
and it is Gods Law: her suit is entered; and her case reported, one day of
hearing craveth for another, night unto night does utter lamentations: Justice
must be appeased, or no discharge, every hour fresh summons to the bar: she
gives attendance, but receives no comfort: her time runs on, her task is but
begun: her work is always doing, never ended: And so her case seems to be
desperate: Because she seeks not the cure by Christ: by God in Christ. Oh!
there is heavenly music! That very name revives her: and commands her ears and
heart to dwell upon that sound, which they suck in with a delitious relish. For
now that God and man: that Mediator (not won by tears) but of his own free
grace, turns over the mighty volume of his book: the glorious records of
free-election, and finds her name written in that Book of life, Revela. 3. 5.

And now though happily he may forbear for some short time to utter his
affections, until her heart be thoroughly mollified, and well prepared to
receive impression: yet he forgets not to compassionate the pining wretch, but
in the best of times: his own good time, he says concerning her, like as he did
concerning Ephraim. Is this my dear daughter? is she a pleasant child? for
since I spoke against her I do earnestly remember her still, therefore my
bowels are troubled for ber, I will surely have mercy on her, says the Lord,
Jer. 31. 20.

And to her self, as to his spouse, he says. O my dove! that art in the clefts
of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance,
let me hear thy voice: for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely,
Cant. 2. 14.

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, etc. Isa. 54. 8, 9, 10.

And thus her Lord bemoanes, and greets, and cheers her, till being big with
Christ her comforter, she sings with the blessed virgin Mary: My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. For he has
regarded the low estate of his handmaiden, etc. Luke 1. 46, etc.

This is a happy progress, you may say: But where appears this humility?
Truly she meets with it in every passage.

First, she survayes her sorrows, and she says, Remembering mine affection, and
my misery, the wormwood and the gall: my soul has them still in rememberance,
and is humbled in me, Lament. 3. 19, 20.

And secondly, she sees the work of God in her afflictions: and therefore, She
humbles her self under the mighty hand of God. According as St. Peter teaches
her, 1 Pet. 5. 6.

Thirdly, perceiving sin to be the cause of all her miseries; she humbly begs
to have it done away. Have mercy upon me, O God (says she) according to thy
loving kindness: according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my
transgressions: wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my
sin, as, Psalm. 51. 1, 2.

And with like meekness promises amendment. I have born chastisement, (says
she) I will not offend any more, as, Job 34. 31. But Justice pleads for
satisfaction, The soul (says he) that sins, it must die. At this the poor
soul seems as dead indeed: she is utterly dejected, quite cast down. She Is not
so stiff in her opinion, to bring in writs of error, or false-judgement. All
that she desires, is to obtain the mercy of the Book: where she is taught to
read. The wages, indeed, of sin is death: But the gift of God is eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 23.

And here she breathes: for here is the breath of life. And thus restored she
humbly thanks the law, her schole-master for bringing her to Christ. She hangs
upon this promise: claims this gift, and by this Jesus Christ her Surty, she
tenders satisfaction unto Justice; and is dismissed without cost, or damage.
And not so only: But she is made an heir, an heir of God, and a joynt-heir with
Christ, Romans 8. 17.

And is she proud of this preferment now? No verily: Till now she never felt
the kindly force of sound humility. All her humilty unto this present, was
merely legal, troublesome, and slavish: but now it is evangelicall and free, or
if it be constrained any way: It is constrained by the love of Christ, Indeed.
The love of Christ constrains her, because she thus judges, that if one died
for all: then were all dead, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

If all were dead, then she amongst the rest, And that she now lives, or begins
to live, it is only by the purchase of his grace, He died the death, that she
deserved to die, that she may live with him eternally. And where is boasting
then? it is excluded, By what law? of works? Nay, but by the law of faith, Romans
3. 27.

Now she believes, and loves, and hence proceeds a modest, willing, sweet
humility. She Is not dejected through a servile fear: but she is humbled by
attractive love, Because her Lord requires to have it so.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart,
says her beloved Lord, Math. 11. 29.

Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in the
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, says his learned
Apostle, Phil. 2. 5. to the 9.

Thus council wooes her, and example wins her: And she walks humbly with her
God in Christ. According to that of the Prophet, Micah 6. 8. And thus
effectual humility is brought, and wrought into the sinful soul.

But what does this humility perform? what does it work? For that is the fourth
Question. I answer, that this true humility, being empowered, and improved by
Faith: has principally these five operations, It instructs, disposes,
removes, renews, and receives.

First, it instructs the new-inlightened soul in those hereditary
imperfections, which pride would never suffer her to look on: so as to own them
with a free consent, as the only offspring of her cursed nature. But being
humbled, she can plainly see sin, and corruption in every corner, defiling all
her thoughts, and words, and deeds. And thereupon she willingly confesses,
That every imagination of the thoughts of her heart, is only evil
continually, as, Genesis 6. 5.

That her tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison, as, James 3. 8.

Insomuch, that she has wearied the Lord with her words, as, Mala. 2. 17.

And that she loves darkness rather then light, because her deeds are evil,
as, John 3. 19.

And looking back upon her sinful courses, she feelingly complains with St.
Paul, what fruit had I then in those things, whereof I am now ashamed: for the
end of those things is death, Romans 6. 21.

Again, humility instructs her in her own wants, her spiritual poverty, for
whereas pride endeavors to persuade her: That she is rich and increased in
goods, and has need of nothing: humility informs her, That she is wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, as, Revel. 3. 17. So that in
her there dwells no good thing, Romans 7. 18.

And having shown her that she is full of evil, and void or empty of all grace,
and goodness: humility proceeds to instruct her in her own weakness; which is
so extreme: that she has neither power to suppress her wickedness, nor to
supply her wants, we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of
our selves: but our sufficiency is of God, says Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 5.

Thus the poor soul learns to be sensible, of her own wickedness, and wants,
and weakness.

And from this feeling sense humility Disposes her to seek relief, whereby her
sins may be suppressed: her wants supplied, and her much weakness pitied, and
supported. O how she struggles in this threefold snare! how she endeavous to
release her self! But all in vain until a voice from heaven directs her to
take the little book out of the great and mighty angels hand, Rev. 10. The
Gospel in the hand of Jesus Christ, wherein, by his directon, she finds. That
he is that Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world, John 1. 19. That
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. And that, He
has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, Revel. 1. 5. Here
she sees how her sins are washed away: and how she is so clearly cleansed from
them, that she is freed for ever from that bondage.

Again she reads, That in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
Colo. 2. 9. And, that of his fullness we have all received, and grace for
grace, John 1. 16.

Here she perceives her wants are all supplied, and that in him she is fully
furnished, And to sustain her in her present weakness, she hears him say to
her, as to St. Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made
perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

Until she comes experimentally to triumph with that mighty man of God. I can
do all things through Christ, which strengheneth me, Phil. 4. 13.

And having tasted of these heavenly comforts, she ruminates upon this little
book, from whence she sucketh such exceeding sweetness, that now she sings
with the Prophet David: How sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea sweeter then
honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119. 103.

But yet before she fully can digest this book, she finds it bitter in her
belly. For looking back upon her sinful ways, she sees how ill she has
requited these incomparable favors: How she has grieved the Spirit of her
Lord, and crucified the Son of God a fresh. And looking upon him, whom she has
pierced, she mourns for him, as one mourns for his only son, and as is
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first born.
According to that of the Prophet, Zechar. 12. 10. Now sin appears in its
proper colors, foul, filthy, beastly, and abominable. So that the soul begins
to hate her self, for loving such a base deformed monster, so spightfull,
treacherous, and damnable, that nothing can be more pernicious. And being thus
incensed against sin: there is nothing can content her, but her Savior. She does
not cry with Rachel, give me children, but give ne Jesus Christ, or else I die.
She is extremely sick of her corruptions, and none but Jesus must be her
Physician: she seeks no other Physic, but his favor; no antidote, but his
affection: no balsom, but his blood: and therefore she will entertain him upon
any terms though never so offensive to the flesh: for she has found, that
There is none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12.

And now by virtue of humility, that most obedient child of Faith and Love, the
careful soul endeavors to remove all such impediments as may obstruct, the
sweet approach of her beloved Lord. And knowing sin to be the only thing that
causes their unhappy separation, as, Isa. 59. 2. She cries unto her strength,
and her Redeemer for help against that false infernal foe: that seeks to keep
her still in his displeasure. And being aided by her Savior, and armed with
his well approved armor, Ephesians. 6. 13, etc.

She sets first upon those crying sins, that are of greatest obloquie, and
scandal: and having routed those prodigions rebels, she ransacks every corner
of her conscience and haling forth her more concealed crimes, she sends them
packing: she condemns her self of sloth, self-saving and hypocrisy: she
crucifies her own corrupted nature, and mortifies her most beloved lusts: she
suffers not a peevish thought to pass without a serious examination, and a
severe impartial reproof. For the weapons of her warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds: casting down
imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God: and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
According to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

But for as much as pride, rebellious pride, is evermore her mortal enemy. The
child of ignorance: the Devils darling, the soul of schism, the strength of
heresy, the food of spite, the fuel of contention, the fools affiance, and
the wise man's fear, the bane of godliness, the death of grace, hateful to
Christ: and hurtful to his members. Therefore this humble soul constrains her
self to cast out this destructive adversary: and hold him in perpetual
defiance. And thus, that she may gain her gracious Lord, she labors mightily
to take away the evil of her doings from his eyes: To which she cannot yet
conceive her self to be a pleasing Object. For though she could cleanse her
self from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; according to Saint Paul's
encouragement, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Yet she must likewise perfect holiness in the fear
of God. And be renewed in the spirit of her mind, And put on that new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, as, Ephesians. 4.
23, 24. Or she esteems her self unfit for Christ.

These are the beauties, that her Lord delights in: And therefore now she seeks
to deck her self with these new ornaments.

Not with broyded hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array, as good St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 9.

And yet much less will she deform her self, according to the fashions of this
world.

But she endeavors to adorn her self, in the hidden man of the heart, in that,
which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which
in the sight of God is of great price. According to St. Peter's exhortation, 1
Peter 3, 4.

And being thus arrayed, and adorned with precious robes instead of specious
rags: beyond the power or police of nature, and past the industry of humane
art, She seeks the good hand of her God upon her, for which she humbly
magnifies his grace, saying as in Isaiahs Prophecy, I will greatly rejoice in
the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the
garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness as a
bridegroom decketh him self with Ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self
with her jewels Isa. 61. 10. And thus attired with all humility she waits to
receive her sovereign Lord, and panting for his most desired presence: she
sings, as in the song of Solomon: stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples:
for I am sick of love, Cant. 2. 5. Set me as a seal upon thy heart: as a seal
upon thine arm, for love is strong as death, Cant. 8. 6.

Make haste my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young heart upon the
mountains of spices, Cant. 8. 14.

And now her blessed Lord, who all this while: from the first in stant of her
new creation, wrought secretly upon her sinful heart, melting it in the furnace
of affliction: discovering the Agent, cause; and cure of all her miseries:
instructing her in her own sinfulness, and wants, and weakness: disposing her
to seek and find relief, removing all occasions of offense: and renovating her
to his own likeness, And all this by the level of humility, the first, and
fairest fruit of faith, and love. Now he appears to her more visibly.

For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, shines in her
heart to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, as in 2 Cor. 4. 6.

At which the poor Soul fares as one transported: Not by the spirit of
illusion, of pride, vain glory, or Hypocrisy: like those that labor to
dishonor Christ in his eternal Mediatorship by their conditional Election,
that magnify the broken arm of flesh by their free will, and carnal confidence,
that wrest the word of God to overthrow Scripture by reason, that will make the
Law of none effect by their traditions, that do despise, rule, order,
government, and lift themselves above Gods Ordinances, that make their
Christian liberty the Cloak for their ambition, avarice and envy, that dare
with shameless impudence proclaim themselves for Saints, whereas their
practice proves, that they are altogether otherwise: That say, stand by thy
self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou: These are a smoke in my
nose, etc. says the Lord, Isa. 65. 5.

But in the spirit of a meek sound mind, with upright Job she says unto the
Lord I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye sees
thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42. 5. 6.
And with that Evangelical Isaiah: woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man
of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine
eyes have seen the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6. 5.

And with that good Centurion, she says: Lord I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof, Math. 8. 8.

And thus the nearer that her Lord approaches, with his pure, spotless,
glorious perfections: the more unworthy she esteems her self: until she seems
unto her self as nothing: Yea, worse then nothing. All her braveries, her
beauties, honors, pleasures, wit, and wealth are lying Witches, all her fair
professions are painted Vizards of Hypocrisy: her moral virtues, and most
precious parts, are filthy garments spotted by the flesh. For so she values
them, and casts them from her: And having stripped her self of all such rags, she
humbly lays her self at her Lords feet: saying, as Ruth did sometime say to
Boaz, I am thine handmaid, spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid,
Ruth. 3. 9.

And wheresoever this Humility has wrought this work: No doubt but Christ is
there, and brings assurance as his next attendant.

And so it follows in the fourth place: That wheresoever Christ is there is
Assurance.

In him we have boldness, and access with confidence, by the faith of him,
says St. Paul, Ephesians. 3. 12.

And that strong fortress wherein this Assurance is to be lodged, and
established, is the free promises of God in Christ, according to the Covenant
of Grace.

There are too many that do seek for this Assurance in their own sanctification.

And that in order to their victories over their sins, and their abilities to
serve their God according to the rule of his Commandments. And this, I must
confess, is a fair building, but yet exceeding subject to the blasted in time
of trial and temptation: when every filching undermining sin shall catch
occasion to break in, and shake, or shatter all, or part of their Assurance:
But that Assurance, which is fortified by the sure promises of God in Christ,
is much more safe, secure, and satisfying. Wherefore if thine Assurance steps
aside, and seems to slight thee, fly unto the promises, where thou shall hear
thy Lord returning him, with this, or the like comfortable language: Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Math. 11.
28. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6. 37. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting life, John 6.
47. He has it already.

First, he has it of Christ by promise. Secondly, he has it from Christ by
purchase. And thirdly, he has it in Christ by posession.
I say that every true believer has eternal life: And first of Christ by
promise.

My sheep hear my voice (says he) and I know them, and they follow me, and I
give unto them eternal life, etc. John 10. 27, 28, 29.

And therefore fear not little flock (says he) for it is your fathers good
pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12. 32.

Secondly, he has it from Christ by purchase, by Christ his purchase, and that
under seal, and in the earnest thereof.

After that ye believed in Christ (says Paul) ye were sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1.
13, 14.

And thirdly, he has it in Christ by possession, Christ has taken possession
of it, and prepared it for all believers.

I go to prepare a place for you (says he) And if I go and prepare a place for
you: I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye
may be also, Joh. 14. 2, 3. And whither I go, ye know, says he, verse 4.

For that Kingdom, which was prepared for you, from the foundation of the
world, upon promise of satisfaction: I go to prepare for you after performance
of satisfaction.

Where it shall be said unto you: Come ye blessed of my father, inher^t the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, as Math. 25. 34.

What Soul can wish a more complete assurance?

But happily you will say, we do not doubt, but every true believer is sure
enough to have eternal life by Jesus Christ: But what assurance have we of
those good things, that do concern this life?

Indeed the Prophet David tells us: There be many that say, who will show us
any good, Psalm. 4. 6.

But in this case also, we have both promise, example, and experience for our
assurance. For matter of promise: God has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee; Heb. 13. 5.

But what is it, poor Soul, thou art afraid of? Art thou afraid of poverty, or
want?

Why, a little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of many
wicked. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the
righteous. The Lord knows the days of the upright, and their inheritance
shall be for ever: They shall not be ashamed in the evil time, and in the days
of famine they shall be satisfied, Ps. 37. 16, 17. 18, 19.

Trust therefore in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

Art thou afraid of discredit? afraid to lose thy good name and reputation?

Why, the Lord is able to make thee a name, and a praise among all people of
the earth, as Zepha. 3. 20.

Admit that thy good name be reproched, by the mouth of a scorner here upon the
earth: yet thou have cause to rejoice, for that thy name is registered in
heaven, as Luke 10. 20.

Art thou afraid of thine enemies?

Consider that of the Prophet David: The Lord (says he) is my light; and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even mine enemies, and my foes came upon me
to eat up my flesh, they stumbled, and fell, Psalm. 27. 1, 2. And the Lord thy
God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee fear not, I will help thee, as
in Isa. 41. 13.

Art thou afraid of death? Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear
him, that hope in his mercy: to deliver their Soul from death, and to keep
them alive in famine, Psalm. 33. 18, 19.

But why should any man be such a coward, as to fear an enemy that is already
conquered: Yea, abolished, or destroyed, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Swallowed up in victory,
1 Cor. 15. 54.

Truly, dear Christian, thou have cause to triumph over these enemies after
this manner. O death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? The
sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law: But thanks be to
God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ, as at 1 Cor.
15. 55, 56; 57.

In a word, whatsoever thou fear, or whatsoever thou feel: Thou shall
find God thy refuge; and strength, a very present help in trouble; as well as
David did, Psalm 46. 1.

Only be careful, That thou suffer not as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an
evil doer, or as a busie-bodie in other men's matters. And then assure thy self:
That the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish thee, and keep thee from evil.
According unto St. Paul's confidence, 2 These. 3. 3.

Again, consider: What do thou desire? Do thou desire safety,
preservation, deliverance, victory, wealth, honor, long-life, or salvation
(after a moderate, and godly manner) Acquaint thy self with the substance of
the 91 Psalm.

And with the 3 first verses of the 112 Psalm. In these words: Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments, his
seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the upright shall be
blessed, wealth and riches shall be in his house, and his righteousness
endures for ever. And to confirm thee in thy confidence, peruse the 6. 7. and
8. verses of the same Psalm. Surely he shall not be moved for ever, the
righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. His heart is established, he
shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies.

Thus of the promises, If thou desire yet further to establish thine
assurance; In the next place see and observe the stories of Abraham: Isaac,
Jacob, of Joseph, Moses, Mordecay, David, and Hezekiah, And consider how the
Lord guided and governed: preserved, and prospered, exalted, and encouraged
them; together with all his Prophets, and Apostles: and all the godly every
where and in all ages. And verily thou shall find sufficient cause to say with
that discerning Prophet David: The Lord has pleasure in the prosperity of his
servants, Psalm. 35. 27.

And lastly, recollect thine own experience, and meditate how graciously the
Lord thy God has dealt by thee in his outwad blessings, and inward
consolations: his tender mercies, and fatherly loving-kindnesses: his patience,
and long-sufferings: supplying thy several necessities with suitable comforts,
preservations, and deliverances: wherein he has prevented not only thy
deserts, but often times thy desires also.

And when thou shall thus walk with thy God in wisdom and singleness of heart:
Thou shall find sufficient in him, and from him to say with that holy Prophet.
Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee,
Psalm. 116. 7.

And furthermore to make thee confident, That he shall deliver thee in six
troubles: yea in seven there shall no evil touch thee. In famine he shall
redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the sword, etc. Job 5. 19.
to 27.

Thus through ou^ own discreet experience, the saints exemplary prosperity: And
our dear Saviors never-failing promises, as well spiritual as temporal, we
shall be sure to meet the full assurance of all, or every kind of happiness
Provided still, that Christ be with, or in us. For where the true Christ is
there is assurance. And this assurance always brings in peace.

This is the fifth attendant, that still waits upon the person of our royal
Bridegroom, And where Christ is, you cannot want for Peace. He is The mighty
God, the everlasting Father: The Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6.

But as there is scarce any kingdom, where there are not three self-ended
sichophants, for one true-hearted, faithful, loyal subject. So there are four
sorts or kinds of peace: yet only one that is secure; or safe.

The first sort of peace, is a sluggish peace. The second is a slavish peace.
The third is a deceitful peace.. And The fourth is the safe peace.
The first (I tell you) is a sluggish peace. And this is when a man lies
snorting in the filthy bosom of a sinful, corrupt conversation, without any
feeling of Gods fierce wrath, or of his own desperate condition; as being
subject even that very instant, to be swallowed up of that most horrible and
dreadful gulf of everlasting death, and endless torments.

This kind of sluggish peace is very much illustrated by Jonah his example, in
the first Chapter of his history* where the Lord commands Jonah to go and cry
against Nineveh. But Jonah disobeyeth Gods command, and goes down to Joppa:
where finding a ship bound for Tarshish, he pays the fare thereof, and goes
down thereinto, to fly unto Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord. And in the
midst of that mighty tempest, whereby the ship is likely to be broken: Jonah
is laid fast a sleep in the sides of the ship, until the Ship-master rouzeth
him up, and soon after casts him overboard into the raging Ocean. So the
Lord commands all men every where to repent, Acts 17. 30. He exhorts us to
watch, and to stand fast in the faith, 1 Cor. 16. 13.

And to examine our selves, whether we be in the faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Nevertheless we wilfully rebel against the Lord our God: we do despise his
Precepts, and his exhortations: and slighting his Ordinances, we betake our
selves unto the sloathfull cabin of security, we say in our hearts, God has
forgotten: he hides his face he will never see it. As David speaks of a
wicked person, Psalm. 10, 11. And to deceive our selves the more sincerely: we
keep at a distance with our own hearts, and make our selves great strangers
even at home, in our own consciences, we do evil, and hate the light, neither
come we to the light, least our deeds should be reproved. According to that
saying of our Savior, John 3. 20. From whence it proceeds, that like fools,
we go laughing to the correction of the stocks: and never fear the rod, until
we feel it.

And thus, with Jonah, we sleep peaceably even in the jaws of danger and
distress, and never dream of our approaching ruin. Or if at any time the
terrors of conscience do hap do seize upon us, and afright us: yet they are
but as so many troublesome dreams, we soon forget, and fall a sleep again,
until the day of the Lord comes, as a thief in the night: And when we say
peace, and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon us, as travail upon a
woman with child, and we shall not escape, as in the 1 These. 5. 2, 3. This is
the sluggish peace.

The second is a slavish peace; when a man is contented to submit unto the
slavery of sin and Satan without endeavoring, or desiring to recover himself
out of the snare of the Devil, but is taken captive by him at his will, as, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

To instance in one only particular. Is it not a sad thing to see how most men
and women do more willingly and cheerfully serve the Devil every hour in the
day; then they will serve God one day in the week? yea and in that day (I mean
the Sabbath day, which God has set apart for his own public worship) if we
shall consider, how few will afford him their presence for one hour, and how
many of those few do employ that hour in wandering thoughts or worse behavior,
rather then in sincere, and pure devotion: verily we shall find that of the
Apostle to be too too true. That even the whole world lives in wickedness, 1
John 5. 19. Lies in wickedness: not so much as attempting to stir out of it,
on to strive against it. And is not this to serve God despightfully: and the
Devil obsequiously. Indeed this may seem to be a kind of present peace: but it
is very dishonorable, and no less dangerous, to hold the Devil in friendship,
and God at defiance.

For whilst we do thus promise unto our selves comfort, and security, by
siding with Satan, and complying with our own corcuptions: we do betray our
most hopeful expectations to all manner of temporal distraction: and our poor
souls to eternal destruction. According to that of the Lord by this Prophet
Isaiah, Because ye have said, we have made a covenant with death, and with hell
are we at agreement: when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall
not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood we have
hid our selves, Isa. 28. 15.

Therefore thus says the Lord: Your covenant with death shall be disanulled,
and your agreement with hell shall not stand: when the everflowing scourge
shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it. From the time that it
goes forth, it shall take you: for morning by morning shall it pass over by
day and by night: and it shall be a vexation only to understand the report,
Isa. 28. at the 18 and 19 verses.

The third is a deceitful peace: And this is, when a man builds his peace
upon false foudations: And that either through ignorance, or through error.
First through ignorance: as when we either know no danger at all, or else when
we do not know our danger to be so great, as in truth it is. When a man knows
no danger, he fears no danger: and therefore he is as confident of his own
security, as he that is altogether free from danger. And likewise he that
conceives not his danger to be so great, as in truth it is: albeit he has not
so much peace, as he that is altogether ignorant, yet he imagines that his
danger is not so great, as that it requires much trouble, or travail to
prevent or avoid it. But all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword,
which say; the evil shall not overtake, nor prevent us, says the Lord, Amos 9.
10.

And in the sixth Chapter of the same prophecy, at the third verse, etc. to
the eighth: Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence
to come near, that lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their
Couches, and eat the Lambs of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the
stall: that chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves
instruments of Music, like David: that drunk Wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. Therefore now shall they go captive, with the first that
go captive, etc.

The second sort of these deluded Souls are such, as ground their peace upon
mistakes: persuading themselves that God is, as it were, engaged to defend, and
preserve them: And why? Because, say they, he is merciful: It is true indeed,
the Lord is very merciful: For so he proclaims himself, Exodus 34. 6, 7.

But what is all that to thee! He will by no means clear the guilty, as in the
same 7th. verse. God cannot be so merciful as to be unjust: his justice must be
fully satisfied; which thou art never able to perform. And therefore, unless
the guilt of thy sins be washed away by the blood of Jesus Christ: thou have no
present interest in Gods mercy. Thou art still in thy wickedness. And the
wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt. There is no peace (says my God) to the wicked, Isa. 57. 20, 21.

Now every one of these three sorts of peace is such a judgment, as exposes
us to Gods just wrath, and indignation.

For he that blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though
I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. The Lord
will not spare him: but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.

But the fourth sort of peace, is a safe peace. And this is that, which does
inseparably attend upon the person of our Lord. And for our better
understanding, and satisfaction in this particular, we must know, that this
true peace must be grounded upon the assurance of that reconciliation, which
God in Christ has concluded between himself and us. For it pleased the father
that in him should all fullness dwell: And (having made peace through the blood
of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself: by him (I say)
whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. And you that were
sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, Colos. 1. 19, 20, 21, 22.

Now, whosoever has been formerly sensible of that great emnity, that was
between God on the one part: And his own corrupt sinful nature, and
conversation on the other part. And is now fully satisfied, and assured by a
lively faith: That God was thus in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,
not imputing their trespasses unto them. As likewise the same Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 5. 19. That Soul, I say, may confidently boast: that she injoyes a
safe and solid peace: For that she is joined unto the Lord of Hosts in an
offensive, and defensive league. And is thereby empowered, both to fight the
good fight of faith, and so to lay hold on eternal life, as at 1 Timothy 6. 12.

And also to resist the Devil, and to make him flee, as James 4. 7. By which we
may perceive that this true peace consists not in an absolute freedom from
war: but in the assurance of Gods Almighty favor and protection. Thou will
keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee; because he trusts
in thee, says that Prophet unto the Lord, Isa. 26. 3.

Not such a perfect peace, as feels no interruption: but such a perfect
peace, as fears no dissolution. He shall not be moved for ever, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 112. 6.

He may be moved by some violent encounter: But it will not be long, before he
returns unto his resting place. Doubtless, it makes much for Gods glory to
exercise his Soldiers in a continual warfare: That so he may make bare his own
holy arm in the eyes of all the Nations: and that all the ends of the earth may
see the salvation of our God, as Isa. 52. 10. Verily the godly, nor are, nor
ever shall be without adversaries.

Neither do they wrestle only against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places: wherefore they take unto
them the whole armor of God, that they may be able to withstand in the evil
day, according to Saint Paul's direction, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13.

And in truth, the servant of Jesus Christ is still more doubtful of some
intestine treachery, then of any foreign invasion: And therefore he keeps
his heart with all diligence, according to that word of command, Prove. 4. 23.
He places a strong century in that center. And for his outworks: He walks
righteously, and speaks uprightly, he despises the gain of oppressions, and
shakes his hands from holding of bribes, he stops his ears from hearing of
blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil: according to those safe
postures, Isa. 33. 15.

And therefore he shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the
munitions of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. His eye
shall see the King in his beauty, they shall behold the land that is very far
off, verse 16. 17.

Briefly thus: He shall rest securely, and fare sufficiently: He shall see the
King in his Majesty, and travail safely under his protection.

And in every conflict he is sure of conquest: I can do all things through
Christ, which strenghteneth me, says he with St. Paul, Phil. 4. 13.

And therefore with the Prophet David he likewise concludes: saying, I will
love the Lord my strength: The Lord is my Rock, and my fortress, and my
deliverer; my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my buckler, and the horn
of my salvation, and my high Tower, etc. Psalm. 18. 1. etc.

This is the godly man's garrison, and it is invincible: And in this confidence.
I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, (says he) for thou Lord only
make me dwell in safety, as in Psalm. 4. 8.

This indeed is a safe peace: Such a peace, as passes all understanding: And
he belongs to our Saviors guard: For he shall keep our hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus, Philip. 4. 7. And where this peace is quartered, he
provides to entertain his pleasant partner joy: This is a complete Courtier,
whose office most properly proclaims his Prince his presence, Psalm. 16. 11.

But being of that frolic disposition, he is much mistaken, and as much
abused, by some that seem to be his fellow servants: For you shall hardly meet
with one in forty, but is deceived in this particular; which we shall very
easily maintain, when we shall find, there are five sorts of joy, whereof the
first is a cursed joy: The second is a counterfeit joy: The third is a
careless joy: The fourth is a carnal joy: And the fifth is a complete joy. The
first, I say, is a cursed joy. And this is when a man rejoices in any evil,
either against God, or his Neighbor: Their Soul delights in their
abominations, says the Lord, Isa. 66. 3. Every sin has some sweetness,
wherewith it delights the Souls of the wicked: And the Devil, who is a strict
observer of all our actions, is thereby so well acquainted with our several
inclinations, that he will hardly lose his opportunity, to present us with such
sensual objects, and such suitable assistants, as will most easily allure us,
and as easily carry us on to a cursed conclusion.

If Absalom delights in ambition, and will ascend thereunto by an unnatural
conspiracy: he shall neither want for councellers, nor confederates, 2 Samuel 15.

If Ahab delights in the commodiousnesse of his Neighbors inheritance: he
shall not want for the furtherance of a bloody wife, of false witnesses, or of
corrupt Magistrates, as 1 King. 21.

If Judas delights in covetousness, he shall have a bribe to betray his
Master, and the malicious chief Priests, and Captains shall be as glad to give
him money, as he is to receive it, Luke 22. 4, 5.

Or if Herod delights in vainglory, he shall have enough to cry him up, Acts
12. 22.

All these, together with many others, attained unto their several purposes and
pleasures: I cannot say that they enjoyed them (though they rejoiced in them)
For therewithal they verified Zophars proverb: The triumphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the Hypocrite, but for a moment, Job 20. 5. Verily it is
a cursed joy, that ends in damnation: and such is the reward of all those,
that have pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 12.

And therefore, let those idolatrous Israelites sit down to eat, and to drink,
and rise up to play, Exodus 32. 6. unto their shame, verse 25.

And let those insulting Philistines, when their hearts are merry, call for
Sampson out of the prisonhouse, to make them sport, Jud. 16. 25. unto their
destruction, verse 30.

Yet Moses will chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, as Hebr. 11. 25.

And Job will protest against rejoicing at the destruction of them that hated
him, Job 31. 29.

It is a hard matter to persuade scorners, not to delight in scorning, as Prove.
1. 22.

And evil men, not to rejoice to do evil, as Prove. 2. 14.

And fools, not to make it their sport to do mischief, as Prove. 10. 23.

But these are infallible signs: That they do not joy in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement: According to the practice
of the Saints, Romans 5. 11.

And so consequently they do not love the Lord Jesus Christ: And if any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. Let him be
accursed, or had in execration, even unto the death, says the holy Ghost by
St. Paul, 1 Corinthians. 16. 22.

The second is a counterfeit joy: And this is, when a man seems outwardly to
be merry: whereas inwardly, and in truth his heart is sorrowful. This is to
put a good face upon a bad case. To sing songs to a heavy heart, says Solomon,
Prove. 25. 20.

And in another place, he compares the fained laughter of a fool, to the
crackling of thorns under a pot: where the noise is more offensive, then the
heat is beneficial, Eccles. 7. 6.

Sometimes this counterfeit mirth is very hurtful, and injurious unto others:
For as a mad man, who casts firebrarnds, arrows, and death. So is the man
that deceives his Neighbor, and says, Am not I in sport? Prove. 26. 18, 19.
Sometimes it is more hurtful unto our selves: For it contradicts the cry of
an accusing conscience, which otherwise might happily persuade us to a godly
sorrow, working repentance unto salvation not to be repented of, like that in
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

But at the best, it is both preposterous in the use, and uncomfortable in the
end. For even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is
heaviness, Pro. 14. 13. The third is a careless joy, when a man will rejoice
at every trifle: when a man rejoices in a thing of naught, as the Prophet
speaks, Amos 6. 13. Yea, folly is joy to him, that is destitute of wisdom,
says the wise man, Prove. 15. 21. Of this sort are they, that will be merry
merely for company sake: but nothing according to St. Paul's exhortation, Romans
12. 15. For albeit, they will rejoice, with all that rejoice: yet they will not
weep with any that weep. Neither will they rejoice, either with godly men, or
in a godly matter, or after a godly manner: according unto Paul's intention. And
therefore we may say with St. James: All such rejoicing is evil, Ja. 4. 16.

And as it is evil, so it is also unsafe. They take the Timbril and Harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the Organ: They spend their days in mirth, and in a
moment go down to the grave, Job 21. 12, 13. They die in the midst of their
jollity: And whither then? Verily to judgment: Rejoice, O young man, in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for
all these things, God will bring thee into judgment, Eccles. 11. 9.

Yet this is but the beginning of sorrows. The Harp, and Viol, the Tabret, and
Pipe, and wine are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord,
neither consider the operation of his hands, says the Prophet, Isa. 5. 12.

There is their careless mirth. Therefore Hell has enlarged her self, and
opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and
their pomp, and he that rejoices shall descend into it, verse 14.

There is their endless misery.

The fourth is a carnal joy: As when a man rejoices, or takes delight in such
things, as are merely carnal: such things as are altogether pleasing to the
flesh, and no less displeasing unto God. Such are all impure, lustful, idle,
envious, malicious, ambitious, treacherous, covetous, proud, or blasphemous
thoughts. All flattering, foolish, filthy, lewd, lying, profane, prejuditious,
or provoking words. Together with all ungodly, unjust, injurious, uncharitable
and dishonest actions.

And whosoever delights in these, or in any one of these: it is evident that
his joy is carnal, sensual, and sinful.

Secondly, this carnal joy does manifest it self by rejoicing carnally, and
sensually in things that are otherwise indifferent, as being useful, and
beneficial for the managing or carrying on the affairs of this life. As when
the wise man glories or rejoices in his wisdom, the mighty man in his might:
or the rich man in his riches, or the like, which God forbids, Jer. 9. 23.
Thus great Goliath boasted in his strength, 1 Samuel 17. 10. Benhadad of his
forces, 1 Kings 20. 10. Rabshakeh of his victories, 2 Kings 18. 35. Hanan of
his advancement, Esther 5. 11. The Pharisee of his works, Luke 18. 22. And
Pilate of his power, John 19. 10. And in all these the words of James were
verified: They rejoiced in their boastings, all such rejoicing is evil, James
4. 16.

And thirdly it is by this carnal joy that we rejoice in spiritual things
after a carnal manner: or to the satisfying of the flesh by any present of
future commodity or enjoyment whatsoever.

As for example, when we do delight to profess religion: to hear Gods holy
word; or to partake in any other of his Ordinances, either for custom,
curiosity, lucre, or pride, preferment or vainglory.

Doubtless it was in reference to these, or some of these: or the like
indirect intents, or purposes: That Herod heard John gladly, Mar. 6. 20. And
soon after commanded him to be beheaded, verse 27.

And that the Jews were willing for a season to rejoice in his light, John 5.
35.

And yet walked in darkness, and ignorance, and unbelief nevertheless, verse
37. 28.

That Simon the sorcerer would have purchased the gift of the holy Ghost, Acts
8. 13.

And was therefore reproved for an hypocrite, verse 21. And that such hearers,
as our Lord resembles to the seed that fell upon the rock: receive the word
with joy, and in time of temptation do fall away, Luke 8. 13.

Verily, it were much to be desired, that all such false time-servers, and
self-servers were separated now from Gods true saints: that so we might
discover, love, and honor the Lords true Members with a safer conscience.

Christians: let us not deceive our selves, whosoever delights in any such
thoughts, words, or works, as are merely carnal, or rejoices in common, or
indifferent good things sensually, or carnally, or in spiritual things in order
unto these, or any of these, foresaid, or any the like carnal ends, or
purposes: I say his joy is carnal, or hypocritical, For these are the
abortives, the unseasonable, and unsanctified conceptions of a carnal mind:
And therefore contrary to the Spirit of God.

For to be carnally minded is death, Because the carnal mind is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the law of God neither indeed can be,
says our Apostle, Romans 8. 6. 7.

But the fifth is a complete joy.

And this is always in our Saviors presence. In his presence is fullness of
joy, etc. Psalm. 16. 11. And truly this most happy kind of joy, is not so much
external or extreme; as it is both internal, and eternal.

For albeit, A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance, as says the wise
man, Pro. 15. 13.

And the Prophet David exhorts all lands, To make a joyful noise unto the
Lord, to serve him with gladness, and to come before his presence with
singing, as Psalm. 100. 1. 2.

Yet these joyful expressions are but the indices or evidences of a more joyful
heart, For this true christian joy is mainly spiritual, and effectual: very
answerable unto the fountain from whence it proceeds, and the Object upon
which it is placed, and both these are the same God in Christ.

For whosoever can derive his joy from God in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself: he is likewise able to place his joy upon God in Christ: and rateably
upon all those Gospel mercies, which as mediator he has procured, and
purchased for the sons of men.

And these Gospel mercies are of two sorts; first, such as are spiritual in
nature; and secondly, such as are spirituallized by grace.

Those Gospel mercies which are spiritual in their own nature: are such, as
are offered, and evidenced, and sealed unto us by the Spirit of God: And which
we do apprehend, embrace, and apply, and rely upon spiritually by Faith.

Those that are spirituallized by grace; are such as are common to all
mankind, upon the account of a general dispensation, or distribution: But are
received, enjoyed, and employed, only by the children of God after a spiritual
manner. And all these mercies, whether they be spiritual, or spirituallized,
are to be rejoiced in spiritually: According to the exhortations, examples, and
encouragements of our blessed Savior, and his dear saints, by the Testimony of
his most holy Spirit.

The first spiritual mercy, which is also the first Object of a christians joy,
is our Election. This our Lord Jesus Christ exhorts us to rejoice in: Rejoice
not (says he) that the spirits are subject unto you: but rather rejoice
because your names are written in heaven, Luke 10. 20.

The second is our Redemption: Look up, and lift up your heads: for your
redemption draws nigh, says our Redeemer himself, Luke 21. 28.

This is celebrated with a new song by all Gods elect, both under the old, and
new Testaments, as Reve. 5. 8, 9. The third is our effectual calling and
conversion, manifested by our true Repentance: For which, If there be joy in
heaven, as, Luke 15. 7.

How much more ought we also to rejoice on earth, who do continually enjoy the
benefit thereof. The fourth is our Justification, Be of good cheer, thy sins be
forgiven thee, says our Savior to the man sick of the palsy, Mat. 9. 2. This
was the matter of Saint Paul's triumph, who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect (says he) it is God that justifies who is he that condemns, it
is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, etc. Romans 8. 33, 34.

And in another place, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy
victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But
thanks be to God, who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,
1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. Who has given us the victory: by justifying us both
against sin, and the law. The fifth Object of our joy is our sanctification,
Let thy saints rejoice in goodness, This was part of Solomon's prayer. And it
was Paul's profession: our rejoicing (says he) is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.
12.

The sixth is our Salvation, This was the matter of good Hannas joy. And Hanna
prayed and said, my heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the
Lord: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies: because I rejoice in thy
salvation, 1 Samuel 2. 1.

And of David's rejoicing, I will rejoice in thy salvation, says he, Psalm. 9.
14.

And thus do all the godly in all ages, with joy draw water out of the wels of
salvation, Isa. 12. 3. The seventh Gospel mercy that we are to rejoice in is
Gods Ordinances: I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of
the Lord, says holy David, Psalm. 12* 2. 1. And wherefore should David go into
the house of the Lord, but to partake of his Ordinances? But principally we are
to rejoice in the word of God: the voice of Christ in his Gospel. These things
have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy
might be full, says the Son of God, John 15. 11. The eighth is the faithful
ministry, together with the lawful portions thereunto belonging.

For thus the Jews whom God had made to rejoice with great joy, etc. Nehe. 12.
43. At that time were some appointed over the chambers for the treasures, for
the offerings, for the first fruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them
out of the fields of the cities, the portions of the law (or appointed by the
law) for the Priests, and Levites: For Judah rejoiced for the Priests, and for
the Levites that waited, verse 44.

But especially the Ministry of the Gospel is to be rejoiced in, As it is
written: How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace,
and bring glad tidings of good things, Romans 10. 15.

And the ninth spiritual blessing is faith, by which we are enabled to believe,
that these, And all other Gospel mercies are treasured up for us, and given out
unto us, in, and by our Lord Jesus Christ: whom having not seen, ye love, in
whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable
and full of glory, says that Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

And St. Paul prays. Now the God of all hope (says he) fill you with all joy
and peace in believing, Romans 15. 13. These are such Gospel mercies as are
principally spiritual. For they are either the assistants, or the assurance or
the substance of our spiritual and eternal happiness: And therefore much to
be rejoiced in. Those that are spirituallized, are such things, as are common
in their own nature, and do more eminently concern, the pilgrimage of this our
present life, as being the providence, and provisions pertaining thereunto.
And they may all be referred unto these two general heads: Namely Prosperity,
and Adversity.

These are the two large arms of providence: with our God stretches over all
his creatures. And in both these the righteous man rejoices.

First, his joy is more general: As when the Object thereof is the prosperity
of Gods Church, according to that sweet encouragement. Rejoice ye with
Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her, rejoice for joy with her
all ye that mourn for her: that ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts
of her consolation: that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance
of her glory, Isa. 66. 10, 11.

Secondly, the joy of the godly is more particular, as when it reflecteth upon
those things, that do more properly conduce to their own private prosperity.
Such are their preservations and deliverances: I will be glad, and rejoice in
thy mercy; for thou have considered my trouble, thou have known my soul in
adversities: Thou have not shut me up in the hand of the enemy: thou have set
my feet in a large room, says the Prophet David unto the Lord, Psalm. 31. 7, 8.

And in the 32 Psalm verse 7. Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me
from trouble: thou shall compass me about with songs of deliverance, says the
same sweet singer of Israel. Secondly the succesfull return of their prayers is
the cause of their joy or rejoicing. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy
may be full, says our Lord and Savior, John 16. 24.

But we have yet more particular, and present Objects of our joy.

As first our wives, live joyfully with the wife, whom thou love, all the
days of the life of thy vanity, says the Preacher, Eccl. 9. 9. Secondly, our
children: Thus Sara rejoiced in the child, that God had given her, Genesis 21. 6.
Thirly, our families, and friends, and all the good gifts of God.
Thou shult rejoice in every good thing, which the Lord thy God has given unto
thee, and unto thine house, thou and the Levite, and the stranger that is among
you, Deuteronomy. 26. 11.

But you will say, do not all men rejoice in these necessary, and convenient
comforts of this life? The Reprobate as well as the Righteous? They do indeed,
but their affections differ, as much as their profession, or their practice.
The natural man's joy spends it self upon some supposed excellency in the
Creatures: As their usefulness, their beauty, their bravery, their pleasure,
profit, preferment, or the like carnal cause of commendations. Is not this
great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my Majesty, says King Nebuchad-nezzar, Dan.
4. 30. But they do not rejoice in them as they are Gospel mercies, gifts of
grace, for they scorn to own them as another purchase: and they will have,
and hold them, and desire no favor.

But the spiritual man rejoices not so much in the goodness of the Creature,
as in the goodness of the Creator: Not in the gift, but in the giver. He
deriveth his interest in all good things, from the just purchase of his Lord,
and Master: He owns them as the blessings of his God, and pledges of more large
and lasting favors. And he is careful to dispose them to the glory of his
Patron, and Protector.

He sees his God in all that he injoyes, and so commends them to his grateful
Soul, as Gospel mercies spiritualliz'd by grace. But yet this spiritual joy is
not complete, unless it smiles upon adversity.

What (says Job) shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? Job 2. 10. Or shall we rejoice in prosperity only, and shall we
not rejoice in adversity also? Shall we bewayl Gods fatherly corrections? Then
surely it is for want of exercise. No chastening for the present seems to be
joyons, but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit
of righteousness to them that are exercised thereby, Hebr. 12. 11.

Verily, it is Gods good pleasure to keep his Saints in the continual exercise
of afflictions, that so they may be able to run, and not be weary, and walk,
and not faint, as Isa. 40. 31. Thus he dealt with Paul, and the rest of his
Apostles: Till Paul was able to take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12. 10.

And other of the Apostles to rejoice: That they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for the name of Christ, Acts 5. 41.

Wherefore, my brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse
temptations, etc. Ja. 1. 2. etc.

And the Apostle Peter. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery
trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: But
rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings: that when his
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 12,
13. And thus the Saints afflictions become the objects of their joy, as Gospel
mercies. And through these passages their joy becomes a joy unspeakable, and
full of glory, as 1 Pet. 1. 8. And not a complete, or a full joy only: but
fullness of joy, as Psalm. 16. 11. These six attendants ordinarily live in the
presence of our Lord Christ Jesus: New Life, true Light, and sound Humility,
Gospel Assurance, safe Peace, complete Joy. Which, when the Soul deliberately
finds, she is confirmed, she has found her Lord.

ANd now the chiefest thing that she desires, is to be sure of his affection.

And to that purpose she indeavoureth to satisfy her self in these three
Queries: whereof the first is this: whether the Lord, who is of purer eyes,
then to see evil, and cannot look upon iniquity, Habak. 1. 13. Can
notwithstanding set his love upon such simple Creatures, as the sons of men?
Seeing we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags, as Isa. 64. 6. Therefore, to be resolved in this point: she turns
her self toward the word of God, and sets her self to search the holy
Scriptures, where her dear Lord directs her to these, and many the like
precious promises. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed: but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee,
Isa. 54. 10.

Can a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, says
the same loving Lord, Isa. 49. 15.

But I (says the Soul) am very sinful, exceeding subject to transgress.

True (says the Lord) thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have
wearied me with thine iniquities: But I, even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43. 24,
25. I knew that thou would deal very treacherously, and wast called a
trunsgressour from the womb: but for my name sake will I defer mine anger, etc.
Isa. 48. 8, 9.

Again, the Soul objects against her self. But I have felt the goodness of my
God; and sometimes tasted, something like his favor; whereby I have been
seriously resolved to give my self for ever to his service. And yet, as one
forsaking her first love, I have returned to my former courses; and lost the
hold of all my precions hopes. Why, I will heal thy backsliding, and will love
thee freely, says her good Lord, Hos. 14. 4. Thus comforted, the weary Soul
proceeds to ruminate upon her Lords performances. The wonderful works that he
has done for the Children of men.

The glory, which thou gave me, I have given them: that they may be one,
even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them,
as thou have loved me, says our Lord in his prayer to his father, on the
behalf of his Apostles, together with all other believers, John 17. 22, 23.

I lay down my life for the sheep, says our good shepherd, John 10. 15. No
man takes it from me: but I lay it down of my self, says he again, verse 18.

And greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends, Jo. 15. 13.

Most true it is, no man has greater love: But our dear Lord, both God and Man
has greater; for he did lay down his life for his enemies: when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, Romans 5. 10.

These are excellent arguments of his more excellent affection. Yet to confirm
her faith beyond all scruple, she will examine some of his chief witnesses. And
first St. Paul, who testifies, that our Lord has purchased his spouse with
his own blood.

Take heed therefore unto your selves (says he) and unto the whole flock, over
the which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood, Acts 20. 28.

Again, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us, Gal. 3. 13. And ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, etc. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
lamb without blemish, and without spot, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 18. etc. his
own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree, that we being dead to sin,
should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes we are healed, says the same
Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Now hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid
down his life for us, says that beloved Disciple, 1 John 3. 16.

And therefore unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his father, to him
be glory and dominion for ever and ever, amen, Rev. 1. 5, 6.

Scarcely for a righteous man will one die, says our Apostle, Romans 5. 7.

But that the only begotten Son of God, whom he has made Heir of all things
should die a cursed death, to redeem the foul Souls of filthy despicable
sinners. Hear, O Heavens! and be astonished, O earth! This is an unconceiveable
love, a bottomless affection.

But now the Soul, having perused his promises, considered his performances,
and examined his witnesses, till she is well resolved in this truth. In the
next place, she asks to what intent did Christ redeem us at so deer a rate? And
learned Paul informs her, Ephesians. 5. Husbands love your wives (says he) even as
Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. That he might present it
to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that it should be holy, and without blemish, etc. Ephesians. 5. 25, etc.

But can so great a Lord vouchsafe such grace, as to betroth, or marry to
himself such wretched, weak, and undeserving creatures? As Paul in that place
seems to intimate. This is the second question, in which the Soul desires to
be satisfied.

And thereupon she runs to his Records, and there, by his assistance, finds it
written. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, Hosea 2. 19. And by his Prophet
Jeremy. Turn, O backsliding Children, for I am married unto you, Jer. 3. 14.
Having considered these testimonies: Then from his word she frames such
arguments as may confirm her in this blessed truth.

First, it appears, that the Lord does marry his Church unto himself: In that
he ealleth her his spouse, Cant. 4. 8. Come with me from Lebanon my spouse. And
in the four next ensuing verses of that Chapter, he extolleth her beauty, her
affection, her profession, and her ehastity: four several times under the title
of his spouse, his sister, his spouse.

His sister, in regard that he had taken unto himself her flesh: And his
spouse, in regard that he had joined her unto himself in the spirit.

Secondly, it is evident that the Lord marries his church unto himself. For
that he will have her call him husband, Thou shall call me Ishi: that is in the
Original my husband, and shall call me no more Baali: that is my Lord, says
he to his church of the Jews, Hos. 2. 16.

Thirdly, it is plain that the Lord marries his church unto himself. In regard
that he calls himself her husband, and her his wife, Thy maker is thy husband
(the Lord of hosts is his name) and thy Redeemer the holy one of Israel, the
God of the whole earth shall he be called. For the Lord has called thee as a
woman forsaken, and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, Isa. 54. 5. 6.

And fourthly, it is manifest that he marries his church unto himself: In
respect that he will have her called after his own name, we find, that his
holy Spirit directs us to call him by the name of: The Lord our
righteousness, Jere. 23. 6. And this is the name wherewith she shall be
called: The Lord our righteousness, says the same Spirit by the same Prophet,
Jer. 33. 16.

And in that it is said, this is the name wherewith she shall be called: it is
evident, that she was not so called formerly. And we know, that there is no
engagement, no relation whatsoever, that can make a woman capable of any other
name, then what she formerly had, but that of marriage only.

Again the soul demands this question, How is it, that our gracious Lord
vouchsafes so great an honor to his church, to own her according to that high
degree of marriage? And after some expostulation, she thus resolves her self.
Surely it is to evidence unto us that entire Union, that exceeding nearness,
that is between the Spirit of our Savior, and the dear souls of his beloved
saints. There is a near relation among countrymen and kindred.

Insomuch that Paul professed, he could wish himself accursed for his kinsmen
according to the flesh, Romans 9. 3.

Yet we see they little deserved it at his hands, Acts 24. 1, etc. Some what
more near then that is the relation among brethren.

Behold how good and how pleasant it is brethren to dwell together in Unity,
says David, Psalm. 133. 1. Yet we find that Cain killed his brother Abel, Genesis
4. 8. And Esau intended the like to his brother Jacob, Genesis 27. 41.

There is also a near engagement among friends, A friend sticks closer then a
brother, says Solomon Prove. 18. 24.

Yet, we know, that there is falsehood in friendship, Joab slew his great friend
Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 14.

And Judas abused that sweet attribute most basely, Mat. 26. 50.

But very strict and very binding are those Obligations between the parents and
their children, lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the
womb is his reward. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so are children
of the youth, Happy is the man, that has his quiver full of them, they shall
not be ashamed: but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate, Psalm. 127.
3, 4, 5. And therefore St. Paul, Honor thy father, and thy mother (which is
the first commandment with promise) says he Ephesians. 6. 2. Nevertheless our
Lord acquainteth us, That the brother shall deliver up the brother to death,
and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents,
and cause them to be put to death, Mat. 10. 21.

And have not we seen, or credibly heard of the like unnatural actions
performed in our days? But so ought men to love their wives as their own
bodies: he that loves his wife, loves himself: No man ever yet hated his own
flesh: but nourishes, and cherishes it, even as Christ the Church, says
Paul, Ephesians. 5. 28, 29.

Here indeed is the right cordial relation, that strict and strong Obligation,
that nothing should cancel but death.

He is not worthy of the name of man, that forsakes, or abuses his own wife.

No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes, and cherishes it. There
is the lovely shadow of a tender compassion, even as the Lord the church.
There is the true substance of a dear and dureable affection.

And therefore the main reason (as the soul conceives) why the Lord
vouchsafes this most acceptable expression of marriage, is to show us that
integrity; that exact and absolute Union and communion that is betwixt himself
and his church. He that is joined unto an harlot, is one body, says the
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 16. Where Paul insinuates that marriage is so strict a
tie, that the very abuse thereof is of an uniting quality. But he that is
joined unto the Lord is one Spirit, says he, verse 17.

Now whatsoever is carnal is mortal, and dubious: but that which is spiritual,
is eternal and glorious.

O! says that sweet and amorous soul, that I were sure my Lord had such a love
to me; as that he would espouse me to himself, I am persuaded now, that he has
such a love unto his church in general.

But how shall I appropriate the same unto my self: or how may I be sure, that
I shall thus in joy my gracious Lord?

For this is the circumstance wherein the soul desires satisfaction. And
thereupon she listens to St. Paul, The life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the Son of God: who loved me, and gave himself for me,
Gala. 2. 20.

True, says the tender soul, if I were such a chosen vessel as was good St.
Paul, I might triumph with the like confidence, yet after some debate within
her self, she thus replies: why what had Paul, but what he did receive? Or what
made him to differ? was it not my Lord? with whom there is no respect of
persons, as, Paul himself says, Romans 2. 11.

Doubtless my God, who only can fit me for this preferment, he looks not
upon the man, but his Mediator: he regards not the metal, but the stamp:
the image and superscription, whose is that? Surly if the image of Christ be
graven in me, it makes no matter, either what I am, or how I am called. For
there is neither Jew, nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female: for we are all one in Christ Jesus, Gala. 3. 28. And
as neither nation, nor sex, nor any outward state or condition, nor any other
earthly distinction can make a difference in the sight of God: so neither can
sin exclude me from his favor. For God commends his love toward us in that
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, says St. Paul Romans 3. 8.

These things considered; the Soul begins to be persuaded, that her Lord both
may, and will love her, as well as any other. For now she sees there is no
impediment that can destroy, or contradict her hopes.

Yet still she is sick of love, nor can her mind receive or cure, or comfort
till she meets with such an argument of his affection toward her self in every
degree, as is both certain, and infallible. Therefore she cries, and gives her
Lord no rest, until he opens her understanding, that she may learn this
mystery of love. That never any soul did love the Lord; but the same soul was
first beloved by him. And this must needs be so for many Reasons.

First, because God is the only perfect substance of true love, God is love,
says St. John, 1 Jo. 4. 16. And therefore we cannot love God but by virtue of
that love which is essentially in God: For otherwise we offer him but a shadow
instead of a substance.

Secondly, because God is the only Author and giver of love: love is of God,
1 John 4. 8. And therefore unless God does first, in love to us, bestow his
love upon us: we can have no love at all to dispose of, as in relation unto him.

Thirdly, because every one that loves is born of God, 1 John 4. 7. And it
would be a preposterous thing, for the child to love before the father. Behold
what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God, 1 John 3. 1.

And as it is a far greater argument of love, that we should be made the sons
of God, then that we should be called the sons of God.

And Fourthly, because Gods love to us is the cause of our love to God, we love
him, because he first loved us. Says the same loving and beloved Disciple, 1
John 4. 19. Now the cause must of necessity, be before the effect. And
therefore unless God does first love us efficiently: it is impossible that we
should love God effectually. And altogether to this purpose is that in the
Prophet Jeremy. I have loved thee (says the Lord) with an everlasting love,
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee, Jer. 31. 3.

Because the Lord did love his Church with an everlasting love, therefore with
loving kindness he did draw her to love him again. For this I humbly conceive
to be the most proper, and suitable end of this attraction. It being likewise
the most principal, or only duty, which the Lord requires, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. and
Math. 22. 37.

And being thus confirmed in this truth, the willing Soul has nothing else to
do, to fatisfie her fully in this case, but to examine the sincerity, and
goodness of her own love to her Lord. And thereupon she brings it to the trial.

And first she finds it eager to enjoy. She sings with that melodious Prophet
David. As the heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my Soul after
thee, O God! My Soul thirsts for God: for the living God, when shall I come
to appear before God? Psalm. 42. 1, 2. And in the 48. Psalm. 1. 2. How amiable
are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs; yea, even faints for
the Courts of the Lord: my heart, and my flesh cries out for the living God.

Secondly, it is fervent, or ardent in the act of enjoying: it is no Laodicean
lukewarm love. It makes the Soul say with the blessed spouse. Set me as a Seal
upon thine heart, as a Seal upon thine arm: for love is strong as death. Many
waters cannot quench love: neither can the floods drown it, Cant. 8. 6, 7.

Thirdly, she finds it very generous: It soorneth to be base, or trivial. Too
generous to be so mercenary, as with those fools to say unto the Lord: Depart
from us, and what can the Almighty do for us, as Job 22. 17. It makes her scorn
to stand for any wages: That she refers to her beloved's goodness. She knows
her wages will be better far, then all her works can any way deserve. She
remembers the words of her Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give,
then to receive, as Acts 20. 35. And thereupon her love will not be bought at
any rate. If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would
utterly be contemned, Cant. 8. 7. Neither will this loving Soul be bribed, but
will rather say with Peter. Thy money perish with thee, because thou have
thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money, Acts 8. 20.

And secondly, it is so generous, that it will not be overcome by any base, or
lewd, or carnal lust. It will say with Joseph: How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God, Genesis 39. 9.

And with Moses it will choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, as Hebr. 11. 25.

Thirdly, it is so generous, that it will not be daunted, either for fear of
loss, or displeasure, or death it self. According to the example of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3. And of Daniel himself, Dan. 6.

Fourthly, it is so generous, that it scorneth to be nigardly in prosperity: It
will buy the truth, and not sell it, as Prove. 23. 23.

It says with David: What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? Psalm. 116. 12. And therefore he will not offer burnt-offerings unto
the Lord his God of that which does cost him nothing, as 2 Samuel 24. 24. Yea,
with the people of Israel it will give more then is necessary to the work, as
Exodus 35. 22. etc. and Exodus 36. 5.

Fifthly, it is so generous, that it will not be dismayed in adversity. In case
of derision, or reproach it will say with David: I will yet be more vile then
thus, as 2 Samuel 9. 22. In case of danger it will say with Peter: Though I
should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee, as Mat. 26. 35. And in case of
extremity it will say with Job. Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked
shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be
the name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. And with Paul: None of these things move me,
neither count I my life deer unto my self, so that I might finish my course
with joy, and the Ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God, Acts 20. 24.

Sixthly, it is so generous that it will not spare for any expressions, nor any
opportunities. It will strive to outstrip the sinful woman, who when she knew
that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisees house, brought an Alabaster box of
ointment: And stood at his feet behind him, weeping, and began to wash his
feet with tears, and wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet,
and anointed them with the oytment, Luke 7. 37, 38. Or what it cannot do to him
in his person, it will do to him in his Members: when he is an hungry, it will
give him meat, when he is thirsty, it will give him drink, when he is a
stranger, it will take him in: Naked, it will cloth him, Sick, it will visit
him, in Prison, it will come unto him. For which the Lord shall say unto this
Soul: Verily, in as much as thou have done it to one of the least of these my
brethren, thou have done it unto me, as Math. 25. 40.

ANd thus the Soul, having examined her love by these, and the like properties,
and finding it to be sincere and sound, her joyful heart is fully satisfied,
that now the match between her Lord and her, is absolutely made and finished.

For as she apprehends his love by faith, so she returns her love by resolution.

She hears him sing: That he is overcome, and ravished with her beauties, and
her love, Cant. 4. 9, 10.

And in consideration thereof, she gives consent, and so confirms the contract.
My beloved is mine, and I am his, says she, Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine,
or I know that my beloved is mine: There is the consideration. And I am his, or
I do freely give my self to be his: There is the consent. And from these deer
conclusions they proceed to solemnize their heavenly nuptials. He brings her
unto the banqueting house, and his banner over her is love, Cant. 2. 4. And she
holds him, and will not let him go, until she has brought him into her
mothers house; and into the Chamber of her, that conceived her, Cant. 3. 4.

And now he weds, and beds her. For as the Bridegroom rejoices over the
Bride: so her Lord rejoiceth over her, as Isa. 62. 5.

And the sweet Soul is made so sensible of her deer Lords embraces, that she
breaks forth into these, and the like sacred raptures. A bundle of Myrrh is my
well-beloved unto me: he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. As Cant. 1.
13. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me, Cant.
2. 6.

And being thus become a married wife, she studies, how she best may please her
husband. And to that purpose she consulteth not with flesh and blood, but with
his holy Spirit: By whom, she begs, that she may be directed unto the knowledge
of his blessed will, according to the tenor of his word.

And first, she finds this exhortation, under the hand of his Apostle Paul.
Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 22.
Here is both a rule, and an example. She submits her self therefore unto
God: According to Saint James his exhortation, James 4. 7.

Yea, she submits her self to every ordinance of man for her Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto governors, as unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well: According to that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Peter 2. 13, 14.

Secondly, she finds by St. Peter: That wives ought to obey their husbands,
even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, 1 Peter 3. 6.

And thereupon she says unto her Lord, as the people of Israel sometimes said
in the presence of Moses. All that the Lord has said, I will do, and be
obedient, as Exodus 24. 7.

Yea, she says with the Propher David: I delight to do thy will, O my God:
Yea, thy law is within my heart, Psalm. 40. 8.

Yet, lest she should mistake in her accounts: she oftentimes does pray with
the same Prophet: Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy statues, Psalm. 119.
12. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, etc. verse 26. And teach me
to do thy will, for thou art my God, Psalm. 143. 10. She prays that she may do,
as well as understand. And as she prays, so she resolves to practice. That so
she may prove what is that good, that acceptable will of God: According to St.
Paul his mild request, Romans 12. 2. From whom she likewise meets with this
instruction.

This is the will of God, even your sanctification, etc. 1 These. 4. 3. etc. And
from St. Peter thus: As he, which has called you, is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of conversation: because it is written. Be ye holy, for I am holy, 1
Pet. 15. 16.

And therefore in obedience to his will: She endeavors to cleanse her self
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit: perfecting holiness in the fear of
God, as in the 2 Cor. 7. 1.

And for as much as she conceives, that she cannot attain to that perfection of
holiness, that will be requisite: she calls upon her husband for supplies: Who
of God is made unto her wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So that though she be a poor Soul: yet she has a
very rich husband.

Thirdly, she finds, that the wife must see, that she reverence her husband,
Ephesians. 5. 33.

And therefore this new-married Soul does strive to raise her thoughts above
the common rate, and fix them on such venerable objects as may provoke to
reverence and honor.

Does Majesty require a reverence? Why with her Lord is terrible Majesty:
Touching the Almighty we cannot find him out, he is excellent in power, and in
judgment, and in plenty of justice, Job 37. 22. 23.

Is wisdom to be had in reverence? Why in him are hid all the Treasures of
wisdom, and knowledge, Col. 2. 3.

Is it required that we reverence Age: Why he is the ancient of days, Dan. 7.
9. The eternal God, Deuteronomy. 33. 27.

Or do we reverence and honor goodness? Surely we ought so to do.

Why there is none good but he, Matthew. 10. 17. If these, or any other
excellencies, are to be reverenced in the Creature, according to their limits,
or degrees. By how much more must they be honored, and reverenced in the great
Creator, where they are matchless, perfect, infinite. Therefore the Soul
that is married unto Christ, considers his might, his Majesty, his wisdom,
goodness, and eternity: with all his fullness, and perfections; that so she
may have grace, whereby she may serve him acceptably, with reverence, and godly
fear, as Hebr. 12. 28.

And though she is not superstitious, to place the strength of her devotions in
outward forms, and bodily performances: knowing, That bodily exercise profits
little, as 1 Timothy 4. 8.

And that God, being a Spirit, must be worshipped in Spirit, and in truth, as
John 4. 24.

Yet neither is she barbarous, or rude, to exercise such incivilities, in the
partaking of Gods Ordinances, as she would fear to practice in the presence of
civil persons, or societies. We know, there is a reverence belonging to
husbands, fathers, masters, Magistrates, chiefly as they are subordinate to
God, whom they do personate, or represent: according to their weak proportions.
And shall we honor these imperfect shadows, more then we honor that most
perfect substance, for, and by whom, they are made honorable? Do we conceive
both cap, and knee too little, wherewith to reverence our superiors, when we
do meet them in their several stations? And think we one of these to be too
much to reverence the great King of Kings withal, when we attend him in his
Ordinances? There are many in this time of pretended, or enforced, or desired
famine of the word: that will go as far to a Sermon; (if they like the
Sermoners) as to a Sias, or Sessions. I do not discommend them for that. Yet
they will not allow the least reverence to the word of God in the Sermon, that
they will afford to the word of Man in the Sessions. I do not commend them for
this.

Let all things be done decently, and in order, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

We do all strive to seem very spiritual: But glorify God in your body, and
in your spirit, which are Gods, says the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Glorify God in your body, as well as in your spirit: if you will acknowledge,
that your body belongs unto God. It is a fault amongst us, that in matters of
religion we do commonly endeavor to make our outsides seem better, then our
insides really are. But if our insides be not much better then our outsides in
this particular: we are in nothing so good, as we ought to be.

Let the wife see, that she reverence her husband, says this third rule.

But if she do not reverence him in her outward actions, as well as in her
inward affections: who can see that she reverenceth him at all, besides her
self?

We proceed to the fourth rule.

Let every woman have her own husband, 1 Cor. 7. 2.

The Soul that is married unto Christ, must have none other husband, but Christ:
wherefore she will not suffer her affections to run out toward her old
acquaintance, her old suter sin. For she reckons her self to be dead indeed
unto sin: being alive unto God, through Jesus Christ her Lord, as Romans 6. 11.

And therefore she will love her Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, as Ephesians. 6. 24.

That so in every case of dread, or danger: She may indear him with good
Hezekiah, I beseech thee O Lord, remember, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, 1 Kings 20. 3.

The fifth Rule is this, let not the wife depart from her husband, 1 Cor. 7. 10.

And therefore when the Soul is truly wedded to her dear husband Christ: the
flesh, the Devil, the world, with all their provocations, assaults,
allurements, and temptations can neither draw nor drive her, to depart, or flee
away from her beloved Lord: they cannot make her such a wicked harlot, as to
forsake the guide of her youth: and to forget the covenant of her God, like
that strange woman, Prove. 2. 17.

They peradventure may so overpower her, that they may force her accidentally
to slip aside, or slide a little back. But she remembereth immediately that
gracious invitation of her Lord, Turn O backsliding children: for I am married
unto you, Jer. 3. 14.

Together with that excellent assurance, I will heal thy backslidings, and
will love thee freely, Hosea 14. 4. And thereupon she makes a quick return, she
humbly sues unto her Lord for pardon: which she through faith obtains, and by
love renews her covenant, and so resolves to walk more wisely for the time to
come.

She bears in mind that wholesome caveat, Take heed brethren, least there be in
any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God, Heb. 3.
12.

And she forgets not that woeful curse, which does attend on such
Apostasy, cursed be the man whose heart departs from the Lord, for he shall
be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see, when good comes, but shall
inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land, and not
inhabited, Jer. 17. 5, 6.

There is a fixth Rule yet: And that she finds: employed by St. Paul, Tit. 2.
4. Whereby it does appear, that women ought to love their husbands.

And this, in truth, compleateth all the rest.

For first, if the wife submits her self unto her husband, and not in love
all her submission is but constrained. Secondly without love, her obedience is
but slavish. Thirdly, her reverence without love is hypocritical. Fourthly, if
she keeps her self to her own husband, and not in the way of love, it is but
to avoid reproach or scandal, or shame, or some such inconvenience. And
Fifthly, if it be not for loves sake, that she departs not from her own
husband, it is in reference to some self ends: some carnal, or sinister by
respects.
Wherefore the Soul that is married unto Christ, will be exceeding careful,
that this rule of love be well and faithfully observed,

ANd now the spouse (being resolved to please her husband after these and the
like Rules) desires to conceive a godly seed. That she may be filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise
of God, as, Phil. 1. 11.

For as the foresaid tree, that is richly planted, well rooted, full of
vegitable Sap, will bring forth fruit, as well as leaves, and blossoms. Even so
the Soul that is by faith and love united unto Christ, not only will profess
her pure zeal, and prepare her self to entertain, and please her heavenly
husband.

But likewife she is evermore in labor, to bring forth fruit after her Lords
own likeness, such as deserves the name of godliness. And therefore she does
constantly endeavor, to walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful unto every good work, as, Col. 1. 10.

If you demand, how our imperfect works can gain the title of true godliness?

I answer thus: every work or thing, will pass before our God for godliness,
that is performed by a true believer, according to these three ensuing Rules,
set forth unto us by the Apostle Paul where he implies the power of godliness.
Remembering (says he) your work of faith: and labor of love, and patience of
hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1. 3.

First, our work must be undertaken by faith. Secondly, it must be labored in
by love. And Thirdly, it must be continued by Patience: by Patience of Hope in
our Lord Jesus Christ.
First, (I say) it must be undertaken by faith: Not only such a faith as makes
a man, a true believer in the common sense.

A justifying, and a saving faith: For this is always to be presupposed.

But we must undertake, what we intend: in order unto such a special faith as
only minds that very thing it self.

For in this sense we are to understand that place of our Apostle Paul,
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23.

And this faith must be established, either by precept or by president, By the
word precept, I intend not only an absolute command: but every word of
exhortation, or encouragement, and every necessary consequence, provided they
be clear, and unsuspected: proceeding freely from the word of Truth: not
forced, fained, doubted, or desired: nor flattering, nor favoring the flesh:
but answering the dictates of the Spirit in the design of Gods eternal glory.
By the word president, I understand the pure example of our Savior: and of the
penmen of his holy Spirit, there, where their words, and works are paralels.
But where the word of God is not the Rule; the surest Saints may prove no safe
examples.

And he that shall examine all his actions, and square them to this principle.
I doubt not, but he is one step in the way to godliness: For this is that
obedience of faith, for which Gods holy Gospel is made known, as, Romans 16. 25,
26.

And as we must begin our works by faith: So we must labor in those works by
love, Not that, whereby we love pleasures: for that is the part of a mad man,
Eccles. 2. 1, 2.

Nor that, whereby we love riches: for that is the property of a fool, Jer. 17.
11.

Not that, whereby we love them, that hate the Lord: for that is dangerous, 2
Chro. 19. 2.

Nor that, whereby we love lies: for that is damnable, Revel. 22. 15.

Not that, whereby we love the world: for that will make us Gods enemies. James
4. 4.

Nor that, whereby we love pride: for that will make God our enemy, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Not that, whereby we love sin: for that is Satan-like, 1 John 3. 8.

But that, whereby we love the Lord: for that is Saint-like, Psalm. 31. 23.

And therefore such a love, as will be proper, and fit to carry on a godly
work, must have God for its object, and Gods glory for its end. More plainly
thus: If we will labor in a work by love, so as to bring it to a godly frame:
Our love must be sincere to God in Christ, firm to his will, and zealous of his
glory. And verily it must be qualified, in reference both to God, and man: like
that which Paul sets forth in his Epistles. Namely, in the thirteenth Chapter
of his first to the Corinthians, beginning at the fourth verse. Love suffers
long (says he) and is kind: it envieth not, it vaunteth not it self, is not
puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth, it bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things.

And he that shall according to this love: (or to a love not much unlike to
this) proceed in those designs, which he has first begun by faith: he may be
confident, that (if his patience be answerable) he has attained to the power
of godliness.

And therefore it remains, that we consider: what kind of patience will be
suitable, and proper to continue our engagements.

For we do find four kinds of patience: Namely, a patience of falsehood.

A patience of folly. A patience of force. And a patience of hope.

The first (I say) is a patience of falsehood, or a false pernicious patience.
And this is, when a man dissembleth his anger, till he can find a fitting
opportunity, to do the greater mischief. Thus hateful Esau did conceal his
anger, that he conceived against his brother Jacob. And he said in his heart,
the days of mourning for my father are at hand: then will I slay my brother
Jacob, Genesis 27. 41.

And thus proud Haman did dissemble his, against good Mordecay for near twelve
months: For he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecay alone, etc. Esther 3. 6,
7.

Until he falls upon that cursed decree, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to
perish all Jews, both young and old, little Children, and women in one day, as
verse 13.

This is a false treacherous patience, or a patience with a mischief.

The second is a patience of folly: A foolish, and a partial patience. And this
is, when a man can hear, or see Gods glory vilified, or abused, or in his name,
or truth, or Ordinances, and not to be moved, or offended at it. Alas, how hot,
and furious we are, in the defense of our own reputation: although it scarce be
worth the speaking of. But in Gods case, we are as calm and cool, as if we had
nor spleen, nor spirit in us.

We read that Jehu the son of Nimshi was very zealous in destroying the
posterity of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and in removing all obstructions,
and impediments, that might hinder, or molest his possession in the Kingdom of
Israel. Nevertheless, he was so patient in reference to the sins of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin; that he departed not from after them.
To wit, the golden Calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan, 2 Kings
10. 26. For these he supposed to be as supporters to establish him in his
Throne: According to Jeroboams first intention, 1 Kings 12. 26.

And may there not be some in these our days, that are very zealous to root
out Monarchy, Magistracy, and Ministry: which zeal they (Jehu like) proclaim
to be for the Lord. Notwithstanding, they continue their Golden Calves of
covetousness and ambition: whilst un^er the color of liberty of conscience,
every one that is factious may do that, which is right in his own eyes.

We find likewise that Eli was so zealous for the Ark of God, that when he
heard it was taken by the Philistines, he fell down and died, 1 Samuel 4. 14. But
he was so patient in relation to the sins of his own sons, that he thereby
provoked the Lord to denounce a fearful curse upon his whole posterity, 1 Samuel
3. 13. etc. And are there not amongst us that will rage, and inveigh very
bitterly against the least mistakes of their opposers, as scandalous, and
therefore execrable: whereas they can with much patience pass by the lewd
proceedings of their friends, and followers, as humane frailties, therefore
tolerable. I cannot say but this kind of patience may be of credit with
Apostates: But I conceive, it was not so with the Apostles: I am sure it was
otherwise with impartial Paul: when Peter came to Antioch, I withstood him to
the face, because he was to be blamed, (says he) Gal. 2. 11. Be angry, but sin
not: says the same Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 26.

Assuredly this purblinde patience is opposite to the right Christian zeal;
neither complying with the work of faith, nor with the labor of a godly love.
And is not this a foolish patience, or a patience of folly? The third kind is
a patience of force.

And this appears, when a man conceives, that he has just occasion of
offense. And no less will to execute his anger, had he not some restraint
imposed on him. This we may see was verified in Laban, when he pursued hotly
after Jacob: It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt (says he) but the
God of your father spoke unto me yesternight, saying, take thou heed, that thou
speak not to Jacob, either good, or bad, Genesis 31. 29.

How often would the High Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, have seized upon
Christ before the time, but that they feared the people.

And thus the Lord does oftentimes suppress the fury of his Churches
adversaries, either by their confusion: As he dealt with Pharaoh, and his
Egyptians, Exodus 13. 23. etc.

Or he restrains them to their conversion: For thus he dealt with persecuting
Saul, who afterward was also called Paul, Act. 13. 9.

And he that was made patient by force, now teaches us the Patience of Hope.
This is the fourth, and last kind of patience: A hopeful, and a happy
patience.

This is the right way to possess our souls in matter of desertion, or death,
Luke 21. 19.

By this we wait upon the Lord our God without repining, murmuring, or offense,
even in the greatest trials, or distresses. Ye have heard of the patience of
Job (says Saint James) and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is
very pitiful, and of tender mercy, Jam. 5. 11.

This patience expects no reward, but what the Lord is pleased to allow, and
she as willingly will wait his leisure, for the performance of his gracious
favor.

If we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it, says
St. Paul, Romans 8. 25. Be of good courage therefore, and he shall strengthen
your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord, as Psalm. 31. 24.

I will not say but patience may miscarry: And hope deferred, may make the
heart sick. But this Patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ: who is the God
of patience, and of hope, Romans 15. 5, 13.

This verily is such a threefold cord, as never can be broken. And thus,
according to this patience, we must continue, and conclude the work, begun by
faith, and labored in by love.

For let this patience have her perfect work, and ye shall be perfect, and
entire, wanting nothing: According to that of the Apostle, Ja. 1. 4.

And when our actions shall be undertaken by such a faith, as only respects
Gods Commands: and labored in by such a love, as only affects Gods glory:
and continued by such a patience, as only expects Gods favor,

Then we may certainly assure our Souls, they have brought forth the fruit of
godliness.

And to confirm you further in this Rule, I shall present you with some few
examples.

Behold it first, in father Abraham. In that great work of offering up his son:
He undertakes it first by Gods command, Genesis 22. 1, 2. And therefore in the
obedience of faith.

And Secondly, his labor is of love: of love to God, For in comparison of that
his love to God, he loved not his Son, his only Son.

Thirdly, his willingness did manifest his patience: his patience of hope, who
against hope believed in hope, says the Apostle, Romans 4. 18.

See it again in Joseph's abstinence, His Mistress courts him to commit a sin,
odious to God, injurious to his Master, and thereupon he could not but believe,
it was the mind of God he should refuse her, Genesis 39. 7. 8. And here his love
to God was evident: How can I do this great wickedness (says he) and sin
against God, verse 9.

And was it not a sign of Patience, that he would rather suffer then accuse his
lustful Mistress, or excuse his own abused innocence, as, verse 20.

We likewise find this power of godliness in the three children (as we use to
call them) In Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

The king injoyns them to fall down, and worship his golden image, Dan. 3. 14,
15.

A thing quite opposite to Gods command, Exodus 20. 4, 5.

And therefore in obedience to faith, they disobey his heathenish injunction:
For they answered and said. O Nebuchad-nezzar we are not careful to answer
thee in this matter: our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King. But if
not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship thy golden image which thou have set up, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18.

In which reply it likewise may appear, they loved God more deerly then their
lives. Nor is their patience less observable, in that they went to their
intended torture, without recanting, murmuring, or repining. As verse 21. Yet
one example more, and that from Paul: The author of this Rule, this Golden
Chain, and in relation to his Ministry, unto the which he was commissionated
by God in Christ, Acts 9. 15, 16. Which is yet more exactly set forth, Act. 26.
15, etc. And set his matchless love unto his Lord, in his undaunted
resolution, Act. 20. 22. to 26.

And with what patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, he suffered the
afflictions of the Gospel, it may most perfectly appear unto us: in that he
gloried in such tribulation.

We glory in tribulation also (says he) knowing that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, etc. Romans 5. 3, 4, 5.

Now these, and every work of the like nature; whether it be: of doing, or of
suffering, of speech, of action, or of abstinence, begotten by God in the womb
of faith, and born unto God by the hand of love, and nursed for God at the
breast of patience.

This is the sweet fruit, which the teeming Soul does usually bring forth unto
her husband: to God in Christ her husband. And therefore it may very well be
called, according unto Gods name, Godliness, or after Christ's name,
Christianity.

I will not say, that ever any man (except the Son of God, both God and Man)
did fully, and exactly steer his course according unto these points. But, I
say, that he which fails in any one of these: so far he falls short of
godliness. And yet it is not denied, but he may be a godly man that oftentimes
does miss to shape his actions to these principles: Provided, that his heart
be well disposed; that his desires be orderly, and good, and his endeavors
vigorous and constant.

A Ship at Sea may sometimes be becalmed, and sometimes weather-beaten by a
storm, so as she cannot keep a steady course: Sometimes the wind may set so
sore against her, that you would think her sailing to a Coast, far distant from
the Port, that she intends.

And yet the Pilot is a skillful man, and brings his Vessel to his wished Haven
in a good hour.

Even so the precious Soul may sometimes want Divine assistance: sometimes such
a storm of strong temptations may circumvent her, as may enforce her from her
good desires, or Satan in his malice, may beset her, with some such
difficulties, as may drive her far distant from the course of her endeavors.
And yet the body joined with this Soul, is a good godly person, and so full,
both of the seed and fruit of godliness: That he may lay a warrantable claim,
unto the title of eternal life, as a joint Heir with Jesus Christ his Lord:
through the obedience of faith, and love, by virtue of that Covenant of Grace.

For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

FINIS.
The chief Heads contained, in, and pertaining unto this Copy of the Covenant
of Grace.
Page. Page. THe Covenanters. 1. to 25. The Consideration. 25. to 29. The Gift.
29. to 38. The Provisoe. 38. to 55. The Prevention. 55. to 65. The Inheritance.
65. to 93. Several Pretenders to the said Inheritance, together with their
Actions, their Allegations, and their Evidences. 93. to 125. The right Heir
discovered. 125. to 133. His Evidence examined. 133. to 200. His rich
Plantation. 200. to 243. His Souls affection. 243. to 258. Her Profession. 258.
to 270. Her Inquisition. 270. to 288. Her Confirmation. 288. to 371. Her
Satisfaction. 371. to 388. Her gracious marriage. 388. to 397. Her godly seed.
397. ad finem.

Errata.
PAge 23. l. 3. r. in the ways, p. 54. l. 3. r. and of the gift. p. 103. l. 6.
r. of the Lord, p. 14. l. 15. r. yet it, p. 152. l. 11. r. me to do, 193. l. 6.
r. but in de: p. 199. l. 16. r. such as, p. 201. l. 4. r. find it in, p. 204.
l. 6 r. yet this, p. 210. l. 4. r. strange flesh, p. 206. l. 5. r. must not be,
p. 251. l. 13. r. Cant. ^ 3. p. 298. l. 24. r. the praises due, p. 270. l. 27.
r. his prayer, p. 271. l. 28. r. 1 King. p. 277. l. 19. r. Son. p. 281. l. 28.
and 29. r. speak, p. 283. l. 3. r. learns, p. 284. l. 14. r. is leading, p.
298. l. 4. r. if the. p. 301. l. 14. for intimated, r* imitated, p. 302. l. 14.
r. nor according, p. 307. l. 6. r. this is p. 328. l. 13. r. Jo. 1. 29. p. 329.
l. 21. r. and is in, p. 346. l. 26. r. world, lies in, p. 349. l. 2. r. drink
wine, p. 360. l. 8. r. Haman. l. 17. r. or future, p. 373. l. 15. r. wary Soul,
p. 381. l. 8. r. is the third, p. 383. l. 19. r. and it is, p. 408. l. 17. r.
and see his.


