TWO LETTERS OF Mr. JOHN BIDDLE, Late Prisoner in NEVVGATE, But now hurried
away to some remote ISLAND. One to the Lord Protector. The other to the Lord
President Laurence. WHEREIN You have an account of his Judgment concerning
those Opinions whereof he is accused.

London, Printed in the Year. 1655.

Two Letters from Mr. John Biddle, late Prisoner in Newgate.
May it please your Highness,
I Should have esteemed it no small favor, had I bin admitted to speech with
your Highness, before your ears had been preoccupated with the various
Reproaches and calumnies, that have been cast upon me by mine Adversaries; for
I am so assured, both of your Highness wisdom and judgment, and also of mine
own innocence and integrity, that I should have prevented any evil surmizings
concerning me. But since it has pleased God, to suffer it to come to pass
otherwise, give me leave (in all humility) to put your Highness in remembrance
of that just and wise demand, proposed by Nicodemus to the Jewish Council; Does
our Law judge a man until it hear from him first, and know what he does?
Wherefore my request is, That your Highness would be pleased to lay aside all
prejudice, and either admit my justification, tendered in this letter, and which
my adversaries are not able to disprove, or else vouchsafe me an hearing; and
if it be found that I practice unrighteousness, and have done any thing worthy
of death, I refuse not to die: My life for these many years is not unknown to
sundry in London, who can, and are accordingly ready, to testify that I have
made it my study, to meditate on the word of God day and night; and have not
only exercised my self to have a conscience void of offense toward God and
men, but also used diligence to draw others to all manner of holy conversation,
putting them continually in mind to walk worthy of the calling wherewith God
has called us in Christ Jesus. And indeed, the sum of my Doctrine has bin
constantly this, That as Almighty God has by the exceeding greatness of his
power, exalted his Son, Jesus Christ, to be a Prince and Savior, so is he
become the Author of eternal Salvation to none, but such as obey him; and
consequently, That the power of Religion consists in yiedling obedience to
the commands of Christ Jesus. Neither do I desire any longer to be protected by
your Highness, then whilst I walk in the way of peace, godliness, and honesty:
of which protection I conceived a great hope, upon the sight of the Instrument
of the Government, which was published by your Highness special command, where
full liberty is granted unto all that profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, (as
I do, who by Jesus Christ believe in God that raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory, that my faith and hope might be in God:) provided that they
neither disturb the public peace on their parts, nor be either popish,
prelaticall, or licentious, whether in Doctrine or practice, all which cannot
with any color, be by my greatest adversaries objected unto me; wherefore I
beseech your Highness, that you would be pleased to make good what you have
published unto the world, and engaged your self by solemn oath to perform, and
restore me to my liberty, that as other religious persons, so I also, may have
a special Obligation to pray for the prosperity and continuance of your
Highness Government amongst us.

July 27. 1655. JOHN BIDDLE.

My Lord,
THough there be sundry considerations inviting me to address my self unto you,
yet none does more encourage me than the information I have received concerning
that spirit of Freedom which dwells in you, joined with an insight into those
various questions that are wont to be agitated amongst dissenting Christians; I
make no doubt but I have been represented to you in very hideous colors,
whilst mine Adversaries one while attribute unto me such opinions, as never
came into my thoughts, and which I utterly abhor; another while describe the
Opinions which I own, with strange additions and alterations, purposely
devised, to make both me and my Opinions odious: But your Lorship is not
ignorant that these are old sleights of Satan, employed by him in all ages, to
scare men from enquiring into the truth, which he hides from them under the
frightfull Vizards of heresy and blasphemy; wherefore in treating with you, so
wise and intelligent a man, who not only use your liberty in examining things
commonly received, but dare, after examination, to reject some of them,
(notwithstanding their commonness) because they were not delivered to the
Saints from the beginning; I persuade my self that I may use freedom without
offense, and disclose my judgment, touching points, even of the highest
importance.

As to my belief (therefore) concerning Jesus Christ (for in this matter I am
chiefly traduced) I herein proceed as in other matters of Religion; which is,
to keep close to the Holy Scripture, without turning either to the right hand
or to the left: I find then in the Scripture, and believe accordingly, that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, whom he begot by his Spirit of a pure Virgin:
And this is the cause which the Angel Gabriel assigns why Jesus should be
called the Son of God, Luke 1. 35, 36. as for his being eternally begotten out
of the substance of God: this is neither any where delivered in the Scripture,
nor consistent with reason, so that no man (unless he will be wise above what is
written, and above what is reasonable) can accuse me for not acknowledging such
a Mystery. I believe also that God anointed Jesus with the Holy spirit, and
with power, and that after he had dyed for the confirmation of the
New Covenant, God raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand
in the Heavens, making him both Lord and Christ; Act. 2. 33, 35, 36. I likewise
believe with Thomas, that he is not only my Lord, but also my God, John 20. 28.
and with Paul, That he is God over all, blessed for evermore, Romans 9. 5. I
believe further that he is to be honored as the Father, John 5. 23. But the
reason why (notwithstanding all these glorious elogies) I believe him not to be
the most high God; is, First, because it is contradictious to say the Son of
the most high God, is the very most high God, for then He will of necessity be
the Son of himself. Secondly, Because Christ himself says to Mary Magdalen,
John 20. 17. Go unto my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father
and your Father, and unto my God and your God. Thirdly, Because the Divine
Author to the Hebrews, does, in the words of the Psalmist, speak thus, chap. 1.
8, 9. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a Scepter of uprightness is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom; Thou have loved righteousness and hated iniqity;
therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness
about thy Fellows. Does not this Scripture speak of Christ as God, by which
means the usual evasion of the adversaries is quite excluded, who, when other
places of the Scripture are alleged, either that the Father is greater than
the Son, John 14. 28. or that God is the head of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 3. or that
neither the Angels, not the Son, but the Father, and he only sometimes knew the
day and hour of JUDGMENT, Mark 13. 32. Mat. 24. 3. or that the SON Himself,
having delivered up the KINGDOM to God even the Father, shall become subject
to him that subdued all things unto him, that God may be all in all; 1 Cor. 25.
24. 28. think they can easily put off all these passages, by telling us (though
without warrant of the Scripture) that all these things are spoken of Christ
only as man, for the fore-quoted passage of the Hebrews, speaking of Christ,
says, O God, thy God has anointed thee with Oil of gladness above thy
fellows, thereby plainly giving us to understand that it speaks of Christ as
God.

As for the efficacy of the death of Christ, I believe with the holy penmen of
the Scripture, that we have remission of sins by it: Neither does any Christian
attribute greater force and virtue thereunto; only the way (whereby it
procures remission of sins unto us) comes into controversy. I believe
therefore, that the death of Christ gives us a right to remission of sins,
either as it was the death of the Testator of the New Testament, (for according
to the reasoning of the Divine Author to the Hebrews, where a Testament is,
there must of necessity be also the death of the Testator; for a Testament is
firm after men be dead, otherwise it is of no force whilst the Testator
lives, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. and therefore if remission of sins was bequeathed
to us in the New Testament, we could not claim it unless the Testator had
dyed;) or if (which I take to be the truer notion) as it was the death of the
Mediator of the New Covenant, it is, because it did confirm and ratify the
same, and the promises therein contained, amongst which remission of sins is a
principal one. For Covenants were anciently wont to be confirmed or dedicated
with blood, see Exodus: 24. To this sense Christ himself alludeth, Mat. 24. 28.
if the word Diatheke be, as is else where, (see Heb. 8. 8, 9. Gal. 3. 15. and
Chap. 4 verse. 24.) rendered Covenant; for so it ought to be, else there will be
an Old Testament, of which you shall no where read throughout the whole Volume
commonly (but erroniously) called the Old Testament. Now what relation has the
blood of a Testament or Covenant to satisfaction of justice? And how dare men
to wave that efficacy which the Scripture intimates to be in Christ's death to
procure remission of sins, and substitute another that has no footing there?

The last thing which I shall propose to your Lordship, is the omnipresence of
God, which I never denied, for I acknowledge him to be every where by his
knowledge, power and providence. But because I will not (contrary to Scripture,
Reason, and Sense it self) say, that the person, shape, or glory of God, (the
two first of which expressions are as well used of God in the Scripture, as the
last, see Heb. 1. 3. Ioh. 5. 37.) is elsewhere resident than in the heaven
only, therefore mine adversaries have maliciously imposed upon me, as if I
should hold, that God is confined to a certain place, whereas to be confined,
is a kind of imprisonment, when a person is so limited to a certain place, as
that he ought not to go out of it. But what impiety would it be to say that God
is imprisoned, or limited to a certain place, out of which he may not stir? Now
that the person, shape or glory of God, is in the highest heaven, and not
elsewhere resident, is not only evident from the Dictate of Nature, observed
by Aristotle in his Book, De Mundo, who says, That all Nations whatsoever give
attestation thereunto, in as much as when they pray, they lift up their face
and hands toward heaven; but is to be found every where in the holy Scripture.
Thus is it said, Psalm. 33. God looks down from heaven, the place of his
habitation. And Psalm. 8. He has set his glory above the heavens. And our
Savior Christ does almost perpetually use this description of God, that He is
in heaven. And lest any man should doubt whether God's being in heaven only, as
to his person and glory, and Christ's being at his right hand, is to be plainly
and properly understood, and not in a figure; the thing has been brought down
to the very sense, for it is Recorded of Stephen, Act. 7. 55. that Being full of
the Holy Spirit, he looked steadfastly up into Heaven, and saw the glory of God,
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God: And he said, Behold, I see the
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. Why
should the heavens here be opened to Stephen, if the person and glory of God
are as much in other places as there? How could it be said of him that he
looked up steadfastly into heaven (an expression elsewhere used of the Apostles,
and taken literally, see Act. 1. 10.) and saw Jesus at the right hand of God,
if he saw it only by faith? (which very evasion (so incident it is to error to
ensnare it self) does show that the thing was indeed so, for can a man see by
faith that which is not so?) and there was indeed no such thing, as a right and
left hand of God; Now if we shall not credit the sight of Stephen, filled with
the Holy Spirit, how shall we believe what the Apostles deliver to us as most
certain, upon the authority of their sight? See 1 Ioh. 1. 1, 2, 3 and Ioh. 19.
34, 35.

Thus, my Lord, you have my persuasion concerning these sublime points of
Religion, the last whereof is of so great consequence that the ignorance
thereof has proved an inlet to sundry of those truly blasphemous assertions
of the Ranters, which I forbear to name, partly out of detestation toward
them, and partly because I know your Lordship is not ignorant of them.

As for my persecutors, they are well known to be of that party which never
wished well to the present Government, as for other reasons, so also because it
does in the constitution thereof, hold forth liberty to all that profess faith
in God by Jesus Christ, (and I could wish that this glory wherewith it has
hitherto shined, were not in any case somewhat stained, but I trust in God that
this stain will ere long be done away, by restoring me to my liberty;) these are
the men, my Lord, that formerly prosecuted Mr. Kiff^n (as he himself will tell
you) and other godly persons; wherefore I beseech your Lordship: that if there
be any consolation in Christ, any comfort of love, any Communion of the Spirit,
any bowels and mercies, you would be pleased to employ your interest, in
rescuing me out of the hands of these bloodthirsty men, whose malice, if it
prevail against me, will not stop there, but extend it self to all other
dissenters whatsoever, and consequently even to your Lordship it self. In so
doing, you shall exceedingly oblige one, whose rejoicing is this, even the
testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not in
Carnal wisdom, but in the Grace of God he has conversed in the world, and
who will ever remain,

July 29. 1655. Your Honors Servant in the Lord. I. Biddle.

FINIS.

