THE Birth, Life and Death OF JOHN FRANK, depiction of a scene from the life of
John Frank depiction of a scene from the life of John Frank depiction of a
scene from the life of John Frank depiction of a scene from the life of John
Frank depiction of a scene from the life of John Frank

Printed by I. M. for I. Deacon at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street without
Newgate.

THE Birth, Life and Death OF JOHN FRANK, And of the Pranks and Jests he
played, though a mere Natural Fool.

READERS,

These pretty Jests you here will read,
Where from an Innocent indeed:
Such pretty Pranks were never known,
As oftentimes Jack Frank has shown.
Some Men are fools only in show,
But this (a fool) all men did know:
Beloved he was of every one,
And when he died there was great moan.
Poor Jack is dead, but he has left behind.
A Character which will be borne in mind.
Licensed according to Order.

Prnted by I. M. for I. Deacon at the Angel in Guilt-spur-street without
Newgate.

The Epistle to the READER.
JOhn Frank, the reputed Son of John Ward, was Born in Much Easton Parish in
Essex, within three miles of Dunmow: He had no Friends to take care of him his
being a fool was the cause of his well being; for every one was in love with
the sport which he made, and the unexpected answers which he would give, did
much amaze all people. When he was grown to be of Man's stature, there was a
worthy Knight who took him to keep, where he did many pretty and strange
pranks, he was a comely person, and had a good Complexion; his Hair of a dark
flaxen: He was of a middle stature, and good countenance; if his Tongue had not
betrayed his foolery; no one would ever think, but that he had been a Wise man.

Here follows now some very pleasant Stories of him.
THE Caterer, or Servant who bought the Provision into the House, went one day
to the Market, to buy some choice Fish for his Masters Dinner, and took Jack
the Fool with him to bring it home; and having bought it, he put it into a
Basket, and gave it to the Fool, saying, Go home, Jack, quickly with the fish;
Ay, says Jack, I will: so parting with the Fool, he went about some other
business: Poor Jack inarched toward home, but by the way he meets with a Bay
who had a Mag-pye upon his Fist, the Boy perceiving by his Habit he was a Fool,
asked him what he had in his Basket: Fisth, says Jack? What Bird is that you
have not, will you give it to me, says Jack? It is a Parrot, says the Boy; and
if you will give me your Basket with Fish, I will give you my Parrot; The Fool
soon agreed to this motion, and took the Mag-pye, and home very joyfully he
went, but not come there till four of the C^ock in the Afternoon, the Cook (who
had fretted sufficiently for want of the Fish for his Masters Dinner) met him
in the back yard: You Rogue, says he, where is the fish? O, says Jack, I have
a fine Parrot here; is not this a fine Parrot: Sirrah, says the Cook,
(smilingly) where is the fish? I gave it to the Boy, says Jack, for this
Parrot, was not that well done Mr. Cook? The Cook and the rest of the Company
could not forbear laughing, and said no more to Him.

How Jack and the Tailor lay together, and how Jack one morning was found set
on stride a great high beam in the Chamber, and the Tailor found dead in his
Bed, with his Neck broke.
THis Knight where Jack lived kept a poor Tailor in the house, with whom they
lodged the Fool.

One morning they wondered that the Tailor nor Jack did not come down, one of
the Servants went up, and finding the Chamber Door fast, he called to them, but
Jack only answered him; and not coming to the door the servant ran down stairs
again and called others of his fellows to go with him to see what the matter
was, who breaking open the door, they found the Tailor dead in his Bed, with
his neck broke, and the fool set astride upon a high beam where he could not
come without help; they were much surprised, and asked Jack how this came to
pass? The D^vil, says Jack, did come up stairs, Clink, Clink, Clink, and opened
our Chamber door, and came to my side; and I cry d, good Devil don't take me,
take the Tailor, so the Devil went to the Tailor, and broke his Neck, and set
me upon the beam. This was strictly examined by several Justices, and
afterward by the Bench at Chelmsford, but adding or diminishing; and so
continued till his dying day, and was never concerned at his Examination.

How Jack was accused by a Wench to be the father of her Bastard.
A Winch being got with Child and not well knowing who was the Father of it,
she being had before a Justice of Peace and Examined, she said it to John
Frank, so poor Jack was sent for, the Justice asking him if he was the Father
of that Wenches Child? The fool was so innocent that he knew not the meaning
thereof, but stood staring and laughing, shaking one or other by the Hand that
stood by.

The Justice then said unto him, Are you Guilty or not Guilty Jack? I gu^lded
says Jack; gilded all the Country over: the Justice perceiving the poor Soul
did not understand his Examination, said to the Wench, Hosewife, you must seek
another father for your Child; So taking order for her punishment, Jack was
freed and went laughing away; and also all the Company.

HOw Jack deceived a sexton, and got into a Church to Preach.
EVery one was willing to humor this Fool, and one day Jack had a mind, to be
fine, and he desired a Servant who had a Suit to spare, to lend him a black
Suit and Cloak; the man smiling, said unto him, what would you do with it,
Sirrah? I must go and preach says Jack. The servant having a great mind to see
what the Fool would do, consented to it: So Jack's Calve skin Suit was plucked
off and the black one put on, with Stockings, Shoes, Band, Hat, Cloak and
Gloves, all very suitable, his Hands and Face being washed clean, and his Head
c^mb^d he looked not like a Fool at all: when he was thus accoutred, the
Servants asked him what he would do? I will go to Preach, says he; they not
believing that the Fool would attempt such a thing, but that it was some idle
fancy, which he had many, gave him leave to go alone into the Park, and would
not go with him for fear of spoiling the sport, imagining that they should hear
by one or other some pretty Jest of him: But Jack was too cunning for them all,
and got him indeed to a Village about six miles off, and enquired for the
Sextons House, which when he had found, he knocked at the door, the Sexton
himself chancing to come to open the door, and seeing as he thought a Minister,
did make him a low reverence: Art thou the Sexton; says Jack? Yes, Sir, says
the Sexton, prithee open the Church door said Jack, and toll the Bell, for I
must preach here this afternoon; I will, Sir, said the Sexton: so the poor man
not perceiving who he was, went presently and opened the Church door (Jack
sollowing him) the people haring the Bell toll, came to the Sexton to know what
the matter was, Jack sitting soberly in the Desk, with the great books before
him: That Gentleman, said the Sexton, is to preach this afternoon. With that
the people made have to the Church, and when Jack saw a good number of them, he
plucked, off his Hat, and turned over the Leaves first of one book, and then the
other, for a little space, and then gets him up into the Pulpit very devoutly,
and kneels down as though he would pray, the people wondering all this while
that the Parson did not read nor pray while he was in the Desk, they fixed
their eyes upon him, and gave attention to him, what they should hear from the
Pulpit. Jack as he kneeled, mumbled to himself, and lifted up his eyes, still
waiting to hear the Hrayer: Jack rises up, and having a Common Prayer Book in
his hand, he opens it, and turning over the leads, he speaks thus to them:
Beloved, says he, my Text is in the four and fortieth Chapter of St. John and
the hundred Verse: then shutting the book again, he begins to preach, as he
called it, speaking such gibberish and nonsense as did amaze the people: some
turned over the leaves of their books backward and forward to find the Cext,
others listened to hear what he said, some thought that he had spoken Latin and
Greek, that they could not understand; thus for a little time they expected,
but at length they found themselves deceived, and that it was the Fool, which
all had known but for his black Clothes. So they went all home much ashamed to
see themselves beguiled by a Fool: Jack was very proud that he had preached,
and went to his Masters House, where every one was joy'd, for they wondered what
was become of him, but when they heard what he had done, they laughed heartily.

How Jack deceived Mr. Sorrel, a Rich Yeoman of Pudings and Links, which hung
up in the Chimney.
JACK was often upon the ramble, and one day he went to this Yeomans House, who
loved much to make sport with him: the Servants being all busy, some in the
Barn, and some abroad among the Cattle, there was none but he and the Fool all
alone. Mr. Sorrel says Jack, shall us play at Blindmans-buff; ay says he, with
all my heart, Jack, you shall be blinded, says Jack, that I will, Jack, says
he; so pinning a Napkin about his Head and Eyes, now turn about says Jack; but
you see Mr. Sorrel, you see no good faith Jack, says he, I do not see: Jack
shuffled up and down the Ritchin also for to catch him, and still cried, you
see Mr. Sorrel, you see; but when the Fool perceived indeed that he did not
see, he went to the Chimney, and whipped down some of the Puddings into his
Pockets, and so he did full as he came to that end of the room, till he had
filled both his Pockets and Breeches with them, which was soon done, though
they were large, for he was very quick. The doors being open, Jack runs away so
fast as he could, leaving the good man blinded, who wondering that he did not
hear the Fool, cried out, Jack, Jack, but finding no answer, he pulled off the
Napkin, and saw the Fool was gone, and that he had taken many of his Links and
Puddings with him, he was so enraged, that he sent his Blood-Hound after him,
which when Jack did perceive that the Dog came after him, he took a Pudding and
flung to the Dog: the Dog smelling to the Pudding, Jack gained ground the while
and still as the Dog followed him he threw a pudding back, and so he did till
he had got into a House.

This was soon spread abroad to the great shame and vexation of the honest man,
that he could not endure to hear of it.

It fortuned long time after that Mr. Sorrel among other Tenants did go to pay
his duty and respects to the Lord where Jack then lived: Jack espying him, went
up and told his Lady, that Mr. Sorrel was come: the Lady being afraid that the
Fool should offend him by speaking of the Puddings, threatening him saying,
Sirrah, if you speak one word of the Pudding, you shall be Whipped: No says Jack,
I will not.

But when the Lord and Lady was at Dinner; and Mr. Sorrel and the rest with
them, Jack goes to Mr. Sorrel, and shakes him by the hand, saying, how do you
do Mr. Sorrel, how do you? then whispering as it were to him, but so loud that
all the company did hear him; Mr. Sorrel, says Jack, not a word of the Pudding,
Mr. Sorrel; at which they all could not forbear laughing, but the good man was
so much ashamed, that the company were sorry to see, and never came there no
more. Ever since it is a by word to say (not a word of the Pudding.)

How Jack served a Gentleman who had a great Nose.
THere was a Gentleman who came often to this Lords Table, who had a very great
Nose, which every one took notice of, and in his absence would speak of him:
Jack hearing them he would also be talking of the great nose.

Now fearing lest he should speak of it at any time to the Gentleman, he was
soundly chidden for prating, so that they thought he would not dare to mention
it any more. But one day this Gentleman being there at Dinuer, Jack stands by
him (and peeping in his face) calls to the Lord and Lady, saying, do you hear
my Lord? do you hear Madam? do you see this Gentleman here, he has no nose at
all: at which every one laughed heartily, but the Gentleman was much ashamed.

How Jack hired a Servant to dwell with him.
JACK having borrowed a Scarlet Cloak, a fine laced Band, and a good Hat, he
puts them on, throwing his Cloak over one shoulder, so that it quite hid his
Calve-skins, and goes into the Park, where many people passed through upon
sufferance, and there Jack walks up and down very proudly. There comes a poor
man to him begging (thinking he had been some brave Gentleman) I will give you
nothing, says Jack, why don't you go to work; so I would, Sir, says the poor
man, if I could get any; why do you not go to Service, says Jack? If it please
you, Sir, I cannot tell where to get a Service, what can you do, says Jack? I
can do any thing, answered the man, can you pump Water, and carry Wood, and
wash Bucks, says Jack: Yes, Sir, says the beggar, that is well, says Jack, what
Wages must I give you? what you please Sir, said the beggar: then said Jack,
I Will give you three pound a year, I thank your Worship, said he; Come home with
me, said the Fool; so Jack, comes home to his Lords house, the Man follows him,
and there he sets him down in the Porch, and asks the Man diverse Questions; at
last comes the Lords steward, and hearing Jack call to the Man, and ordering
him his business stands a while to hear, then steps to Jack, saying, What now
Jack, have you hired a servant this Morning? yes, says the Fool, shaking his
Ears and laughing; the poor man then perceiving that he was deceived, he did
not know which way to look; but however, though he were mistaken in his Master,
yet he obtained a bountiful Alms from the Lord, who with the rest of the Family
were dery much pleased with the conceit of the Fool.

How Jack complained of Mary Dover, she would not make him clean, when having
taken Physic, he had bewrayed himself.
THere was also in this Lords House a Woman Fool, whose name was Mary Dover,
and she was employed by every one to do all the meanest Offices. Jack had
always a delinght to take all or any kind of Physic he could get; one of the
Family had one day given him a Purge to take, his Wife (as he did call her)
being the Landry Maid, called him to his usual work to beat the buck, poor Jack
pulled off his Doublet, as at other times, and stood beating the Linen till he
bewrayed himself, so that it ran down to his Heels: the Fool finding his
breeches ad stackings in such a case, fell a crying aloud, and stamping for
Mary Dover, to make him clean, but she refusing to do it, he comes crying into
the Parlor, in this shitten condition, where his Lady sat at Supper,
complaining to her, that he had taken Physic, and Mary Dover would not make
him clean; the Lady with the rest of the company could not sit at the Table for
the stink, yet could not forbear laughing to see him so furprized, and crying
so grievously, but his presence at that time not to be endured, she commanded
one of the Servants to le^d him forth the room, and to cause Mary Dover to do
that office, for none else would clean him; and then he came in again and made
very good sport. The poor Fool being very hungry after his physic, every one
gave him some meat, which he d d eat so greedily as though he would choke
himself: they ever and anon would ask him questions, and his mouth was so full
he could not speak, and his Chaps so greasy, as if they had been in a dripping
pan: When he had eaten pretty well, he wanted so^e drink, which was given him,
good Ale; and t^en Jack's tongue began to run freely, making many pr^tty Jests
by chance, for he could not do it otherwise.

How Jack in his rambles went into an Inn at Witsford-Bridge, and ^ow he served
the people of the House.
JAck having rambled about till he was very hungry, went into an Inn at
Witsford-Bridge, and asked his host what he should have for his Supper? the
Hust knew that he was such a Lords Fool, thought he had money, offered him a
good. Breast of Mutton, which was then ready roasted, of which Jack was very
glad, for he loved fat meat very well, so a Napkin being laid, and bread and
drink brought, he sat down soverly, to cat and drink. And when he had eaten
all, he asked what was to pay: they told him two and twenty pence for meat
bread and drink: well, said he (pulling out two b^ass farthings) here, says
he, pay your self, and give me the rest again, they laughing asking him for
more money, but he told them he had no more; nor indeed he had not, nor did he
know brass from gold or silver, so they let him go quietly.

How Jack served a Justice of Peace that jested with him.
A Justice of Peace being one day at this Lords Table, who loved to jest with
every one; Jack being in the room to make sport and having then a new Calves
skin suit on, red and white spotted, and a young puppy in his arms, much of the
same color of his suit, said to the Justice, jogging him; is not this puppy
like me; the Justice turns him aside to Jack, saying, Jack, it is very li^e
thee; now there is, puppies Jack, ha, ha, ha, says Jack, and so he goes with
his puppy diwn stairs, for he could not eat while that was under his arm;
presently after he came again inbto the dining room, and knocking the Justice
on the back with his fist, the Justice turning him about to Jack, looked a
little angry? how is it Justice, says Jack, are you angry? shake hands and be
friends, the Justice gave him his hand, which Jack shaked with both his hands,
saying aloud and laughing. now thee is two fools, Justice two fools, two fools,
at which they all laughed heartily, to fee this great wit affronted by a fool,
especially one Gentleman of quality, who but a few minutes before this Justice
had abused by Jesting; for he was of that temper that he would Jest, but never
take none.

It is not good to play with edged tools,
Neither is it good to jest too much with fools
Here follows many pretty Sayings and Jests of Jack, which are very witty and
worth observing.
JAck's Lord and Lady going forth one day in the Coach, Jack had obtained the
favor to run by the Coach side, and upon the way they met another Lords Coach,
whose Gentleman riding by the Coach, and seeing Jack, puts off his Hat in
derision, and bows himself, saying, I pray whose Fool are you? The
Fool-presently pulls off his Calve-skin Cap, and shakes his Ears, saying, I am
my Lord M's Fool: pray whose Fool are you: The Gentleman being thus answered
was much ashamed, and rode away, and Jack went his way.

Jack standing by one time where some Gentlemen were talking, and hearing 'em
talk of Roundheads, Roundheads said Jack to himself, ay, Jack, said one of
them, what is a roundhead? (now this Gentleman who asked him was a roundhead,
bat would not be thought one) what is a roundhead, says Jack a roundhead is one
that has no with at all; give me your hand, Sir, says Jack; the Gentleman did
so, ha, ha, ha, and shaked it, saying, there I mumpt you: the rest laughed, he
laughed, though he were vexed.

One Night his Lady being at Supper, Jack came into the room, bawling aloud,
that he could not get the Coachman to buy him a Chamber Pot: Madam, says he,
the Coachman wont buy me a pot, and I am tain to rise in the night, to make
water in the yard, In my shirt, and I have got a Cough must I not have some
Sugar Candy Madam: the Lady laughed to think how seasonable he was in his
request, but gave order to the Coachman to buy him what he wanted.

In the time of the Ladies Lying-Inn, Jack found that he carried up more wood
than at other times to the Chamber door, he having his Arms full of wood,
throws it down, making a great noise therewith, saying to himself aloud, Pox
take my Lady, I think she burns more wood then her body is worth.

One time Jack coming late to dinner in the Hall, and seein there was no room
for him at the table, he runs forth, and comes presently in again, saying, do
you hear sirs, the King is come into the back yard, with his Coach and six
Horses, and a great many men; they not knowing what to think, ran all out to
see; in the mean time Jack sets him down and carves for himself, they coming
into the yard could see no body there, but laughed to think how the Fool had
outwitted them.

He being asked one day what would become of him when he was dead, I shall lie
in the ground, says he, till Gods Trumpet sounds, and then shall I rise again
and go into Heaven. I, but what will you say said one to him, when Gods Trumpet
sounds to call you before him? he answered, God will not require more then he
has given me: which words so unexpected, did much ameze all that heard him.

He was duly morning and evening at prayers in the Chapel, though he had no
understa^d^ng, and every night in his Chamber, he would pray thus by himself.

Lord, said he, thou knawest I can do nothing of my self, Lord thou know I
can do nothing; Lord have mercy upon me, and help me.

He lived till about foursco^e years, and died in a K^ights house in
E^field-Parish swhere he was handsomely buried, and that knew him being very
sorry for his death (poor innocent soul) who did no evil, than by evil examples.

There might be more said of him, but that may serve for a second part (...)
these Stories I hope will be the more pleaing, because they are true.

The Contents.
1. How Jack went to market with his Masters Caterer, and how he sold a Basket
of Fish for a Mag-Pye. 2. How Jack and the Tailor lay together and how Jack one
morning was found set on stride a great high beam in the Chamber, and the
Tailor found dead in his bead, with his neck broke. 3. How Jack was accused by
a Wench t^ be the father of her Child. 4. How Jack deceived a Sexton, and got
into a Church to preach. 5. How Jack deceived Mr. Sorrel a rich Yeoman, of
Puddings and Links which hung up in his Chimney. 6. How Jack served a Gentleman
who had a great Nose. 7. How Jack hired a Servant to dwell wit^ him. 8. How
Jack complained of Mary Dover she would not make him clean, when he had
bewrayed himself. 9. How Jack in his rembles went to Witsford-Bridge, and how
he served the people of the House. 10. How Jack served a Justice of the Pea^^
who jested with him.
FINIS.

