THE CASE OF Capt. John Blackvvell, Concerning several matters objected against
him.

THE CASE OF Capt. John Blackvvell,
Concerning building the Court and Scaffold etc.
THat it is true there was an order appointing him Surveyor of the Court, but
(he excusing himself to the Committee who were to take care of that business)
they themselves viewed and particularly ordered the place, the form and manner
of the Court, as they did also afterward of the Scaffold, They also appointed
a Master Carpenter for the buying of the materials, providing and oversight of
the other workmen, the account whereof was kept by a Clerk apppointed by the
Committee for that service: And the said John Blackwell was ordered to see
there was no wrong done in expending the money with which he was entrusted on
that occasion; and to issue forth the same by warrant from the Court.

Concerning lending of money to build the Court, etc.
That the thousand pounds paid for the service of the Court, was not advanced
or lent by him out of his own estate, but was the States money in his hands
(who was then Deputy Treasurer at war) ordered to be disposed to this occasion,
for a season; and to be repaid to him out of the public Revenue. Which was an
ordinary course in those times, wherein almost all the Treasure of the Nation
was paid in to the Treasurers for the use of the Army.

Concerning wainscotting or flooring a room with the boards whereon His
Majesty's blood was, and boasting thereof.
That he never had or meddled with one board, or the least piece of any of the
materials used about the Scaffold, much less wainscotted or floored any room,
or any part of a room therewith. And he utterly detests and abhors the
inhumanity and barbarousness of such an action.

Concerning his raising a Regiment for the Committee of Safety at his own
charge.
That he never raised or Commanded any Forces by any Commission from the
Committee of Safety. It Is true he received a Commission from Lieutenant General
Fleetwood for a Regiment to be added to, and paid with the Army, whereof there
were four Companies Raised by four of the Captains, and no more: And he
supposes this is the ground of that suggestion; for he knows no other.

Concerning his Estate.
That all his present Estate in England is public Title, and is under three
hundred pounds per annum, but will be about two hundred pounds per annum more
upon improvement.

That his Estate in Ireland is under nine hundred pounds per annum, and was set
out to him for his Adventure in pursuance of the Acts of Parliament, past by
His late Majesty in the seventeenth and eighteenth years of his Reign.

That he is really indebted to several persons above six thousand Pounds
principal money, which he can no otherwise satisfy, than out of the said
Estate: which is not worth above six thousand pound more: and which is all the
Estate he has in the world, either by his own purchase, or by descent from his
Father, whose heir he was, to a considerable Estate.

That he has a wife and six small children, with two brothers, two sisters and
diverse poor kindred to be provided for by him, and who otherwise have not bread.

Concerning his Accounts.
That he has a vast Account of diverse Millions of money to make up, which will
also be very chargeable to him; and which he must personally attend.

That the said accounts are of very great Concernment to the three Kingdoms,
and all the Soldiery.

That he was never charged, or can be, with the least unfaithfulness in the
mannagement of that great trust; nor has he raised to himself any considerable
Estate, during his fifteen years employment therein, as appears above.


