News from SMITH THE OXFORD JAILER. WITH THE Arraignment of Mercurius Aulicus,
who is sentenced to stand in the Pillory three Market daves, for his notorious
Libelling against State and Kingdom.

a king stands in the pillory, surrounded by men with pikes

London, Printed for J. B. 1645.

News from SMITH the OXFORD Iaylor.
GENTLEMAN: Captain Smith what news is this that is stiring now in Court?


Smith. News said you, I hear of none to day.


Gent. I heard an inkling the last night, which makes me bold to inquire of you
if there were any that is certain, you would hear it, I hope you are not
offended.


Smith. Sir you are mistaken in me, I am not so soon offended unless it be
with those Roundheads I have in custody, when they never leave bawling at me
for bread and water, or to have a peeping hole, whereby to have the benefit of
our Oxford air yet Heaven knows I have been so much used to it, as I have
stopped my ears with a little hard hear ^ednesse and let them call til their
Souls fly to another World: I think I do them a better deed then to releeve
them with some small pittance to keep them alive til they have gained their own
Liberty. But by this means I have gained a divilish many of curses, both of
the Fatherless and Widows. And now I talk of women it brings into my mind
some news I heard last night, which is the worst that ever came to Oxford,
(unless the bumbasting news which came from York, where we were beaten black
and blew) but I will not tell it you unless you will swear damnably you will
not report it again, as from me for it is keept mighty secret as yet it is
concerning Mercurius Aulicus that renowned Oxonian (though a blasphemous and
lying Pamphileteer) certainly you know him, it is he that writ of the Victories,
that were obtained against the Roundheads at Edghill, Lands-downe, and
Taghill, Arundell-Castle, Charington-downe and York, I will whisper this in
his behalf That at neither of these pieces we did not lose above one hundred
men for their one man. Wherefore I conceive they were very remarkable
victories, and be chose the most remarkable day in all the week for the
studying of his rewes (by reason he could not so aptly study untruths of no
other day then that whereon he should be doing God better service) But alas,
poor Aulicus is utterly ruinated, although he had a very significant title of
the winged God and Court Messenger, for dispersing lies with such winged speed
through the kingdom; yet for his ambition, in aspiring above his reach, he is
now with Icarus fallen, silenc't by Britanicus, his body seized, and estate and
Library sequestered, to be disposed for charitable uses, to the two foreign
Princes, Rupert and Maurice, toward the maintenance of our blood-thirstie
plundering Religion, to the new Lord Iermyn, the Lo: Cottington and the Lo:
Digby, and our valiant welsh and sore oppressed Cornish soldiers, to the end
they may stoutly withstand his Majesty's faithful subjects who stand for his
Parliament sitting at Westminster, and not endure that our cursed Hierarchy be
brought to predestined and deserved shame and ignominy. Prince Ruperts share
in this benevolence, shall be paid to his Doctor for the Antidote he gave him
to purge his luxurious body, and comfort his drooping spirit on the day of York
b ttell, and two of the pamphlets (for him and his brother Maurice) which
Aulicus writ in praise of their victories, to carry with them to Venus shrine
in Venice, to show their Ladies of pleasure when they are banished this
Kingdom: The very abstracted quintessence of all his Mercuries, to that
politic Head and Hisoaniolized Lord Don Diego Cottington, whose c^st-downe
looks tell us there is some fine Spanish trick hatching, to which the whore of
Babylon shall be Mother. For the new-made Lord. Iermyn, here is no game for such
Cock-Sparrowes in England, he shall have share in the two Crowns on the
Frontispiece of Aulicus his Pasquill, to bear his charges till he comes to his
old Lodging in the Queens Arms at Paris. To the Lo: Digby (a bird of the same
feather) all the seditious scandalous matter that ever Aulicus headpiece
hammered in the Anvill of his own Coxcombe; that he, being a great Soldier,
may act what the others little Head has invented: To the valiant Welsh, and
oppressed Cornish souldlers, all the annual profits which can be made of his
estate and Library, shall be equally shared among them, to the end they may
have some satisfaction, for that Aulicus has not (according to his wonted
course) in his spurious Libels made their names infamous (famous I would have
said) for the glorious and most renowned Victory lately obtained against
Colonel Brown at Abbington: For which negligence, the Cornish women have
Articled against him, and reckoned, up all his old Scores, arraigning him
publicly at their Tribunal at Brazen-Nose, alias Brazen-fac't Hall in
Oxford. And truly, I cannot much blame the poor women for so doing, they
having been much abused in this business. For first, their Hu^bands are
drawn from them by fair pretenses and sugared words, that they shall go no
further then their own Country, and yet have been drilled to all the places
before mentioned: and as for those great Victories they have gained near their
own Country, especially that which our demy-God Greenvile obtained the other
day against Plymouth, and yet never a day of Triumph for it, nor ever set forth
by Aulicus, to their never-dying honor, and the comfort of their Wives and
Children: wherefore they will no longer be thus fooled (as they have been) but
make Aulicus exemplarie, by bringing him to such condign punishment, as by the
definitive sentence and verdict of thiteen Women shall be thought fit, feven of
which shall be Cornish women, and the other six shall come from over the
Mountains in Wales, whose 13. husbands were reported by Aulicus (in his lying
pamphlets) to be dead and alive 26 times during the siege of Gloucester, where we
gained another world for almost 2000. of our men we brought thither, and many
witnesses are now come against him from several parts of this Kingdom, namly
from Cornwall, Somerset, and Oxfordshire. For that in Cornwall (it is true) we
had an extraordinary Victory where we got Ordnance and some Ammunition, (but it
was by treachery) which made Aulicus lie lowdly, for that he set forth it was
gained with the loss of not above 100. men. Now here comes 200. women into the
Court against him that lost their Hu bands in that fight, and demanded account
of the overplus according to their reckoning.


Author. (But Courtious Reader) what great miss will there be of all the
Widows and Batchelers that were lost in the fight, (for doubtless they were
not all married men) for procreation of male Children, to searue the King in
this uncivil Civil War against his best Subjects.


Smith. in Sumerset-sheir and Mendisse we had a great victory there in
compelling Colonel Carry to march out of Wels, we did but retreat so fall as we
could run, Sir William Waller persuing us nine mile in the rear, yet then
Aulicus in his pasquill set forth that we had not lost above 10. men, and now
there is come above 60. Maids that lost their best beloveds in that fight, and
demanded account of their overplus as before mentioned.

In Oxfordshire we gained another great victory against Sir William Waller
with the loss of not above six or seven men: and two horses, as Aulicus set
forth in his lying pamphlet at most, and hear's 12 of his own kindred and 20
others, who hearing of his arraignment having lost in that fight their kindred
and servants are all come to demand an account for the remainer being all
generally resolved to witness against him, and make examplary for his
notorious abusing of al their Sex, which have caused them thus to proceed in
judgment against him.

1 For that his lying Libels stuffed with nothing but deceitful glozings, have
tended to naught else, but to animate and encourage their Husbands, and Friends
to persist in this unnatural war; They have therefore sentenced him as
follows.

1 To stand in the Pillory three Market days in Oxford.

2 To have a Writing over his head in great Characters, in these words, Woe be
unto you Oxonian Libellers take warning by this President here before you, who
has so long walked in Egyptian darkness, til at last he is brought here to
loose his ears in this Wood of shame and reproach.

3 That he shall beg forgiveness (with all humility) for his so great and
heinous offenses against Mercurius Britanicus, and all others that have
prosecuted againsthim.

4 That he shall be utterly disabled from writing in darkness, and
publishing in the light any more Libellous books for one year, during which
term he is to be in custody of those thirteen Women, who are to inflict fuch
corporal punishment on him, as they in their womenly discretion shall think
fit.

5 That before two months expiration he be cut of the simples, and his brains
be taken out, washed in white wine, and put in again.

6 That for every morning during the said time he have one mess of stewd
broth made of the interlinings of four Court Parazites, and the brains of 26.
Oxford VVidgins boiled in the water of forgetfulness.

7 That he may never hereafter have so much as one graiue of wit left him in
his empty Hogshead (his brains being taken out and washed, as before is ordered)
to scandalize those, whom, if he had any grace he is bound to honor.


Smith. Alas poor Aulicus, that ever any one man should so misdemean himself,
as to come under the heavy censure of so many women; were it my case I would
choose rather to be hanged out of the way, then thus be tormented at the
discretion of women, they will plague him shrewdly.


Author. Reader it had been better for him to have followed his old trade to
blow the Organ bellows of Christ Col^edge) then thus aspyring to be a Court
Pleaser, with pharisaicall stratagems, pleasing the itching ears of those who
were instrusted with great honts in the Court and field, so to come to great
preferment; in stead of which he is come to public shame and infamy, his study
was to publish very dangerous, and pestilent doctrine; and to no other end,
then to augment the misunderstanding between the King and his Parliament: when
as it is the duty of every faithful subject to labor to bring them rightly to
understand each other, that so there might be an end of this unhappy divisions.
Let Aulicus know that is not the last censure he must undergo (perhaps not in
this life) but J am sure there is a day will come wherein he must tender a
strict account for every life that has been lost. By reason of that
encouragement he has given in his seditious Libels for the furtheranse of this
unnatural war: there is no way for him to escape further censure, but by
disclaiming al his former evil acts, and making public recantation answerable
to the hainousnes of his several, and unparaleld offenses, wherein he has
notoriously abused both King and State, Prince and people, no good men have
escaped the lashes of his scurrilous pen, especially for that insolent and
audacious expression of his, which I fear ere long will procure him a
shameful, and sudden dispatch of a long errand to another world: Namely, that
both the hanourable Houses of Parliament were but a pretended Parliament: but
now I hope by that time his 13. months dieting be expired, and his body
brought down by his aforesaid physic, He will be glad to acknowledge them,
what indeed they are, the true, lawful, and absolute Parliament of this
Kingdom: and it is my hearty prayers, that who ever are found guilty of such
unheard of insolency, to spurn at the authority and power of this supreme and
Highest Court, as He has done, may have the same reward at last, which by the
known Laws of the Land is appointed for such capital offenders: who prefer
their base and mercenary ends before the welfare of three Kingdoms.


FINIS.

