THE Speech without doors defended without reason. OR, A Vindication of the
Parliaments honor: IN A Rejoinder to three Pamphlets published in Defense of
M. Chaloners Speech.
(...)

Aeschines Epist. 11. Senatui Populoque Atheniensi. For I hear that some
incite you to new things Alexander being dead: but I would advise you those
things which are fit for the future.
I Did before give a sufficient account of my self, and of my faithfulness to
the Parliament; and I must now say, that the Authors of these Pamphlets have
been extremely mistaken, and very unhappy in their Auguries concerning me. The
Scripture which was prefixed in the Title of my Animadversions, For the
transgrassion of a Land, many are the Princes thereof, Prove. 28.2. was not
intended against the Parliament, and the Pamphlet which has put this notion in
the heads of people, has done but a disservice to the Parliament: For my part,
I am no such Guifted Brother, as to draw from (...) what is not in it, neither
did I make any other use of my Text (as he calls it) then any Minister of H. M.
his Ordination may do: But it was intended against change of Government, which
the Speech without Doors did (and the defenses of it do) too too much drive
at. Amongst other Judgments which came upon a Land for the transgression
thereof, one and a chief one is the change of Government, or Governors in a
State, (...), said Xenophon, All changes of Governvernment are mortiferous. And
what more dangerous or deadly, then an alteration of the fundamental
Government of this Kingdom by the King, and both Houses of Parliament? Nor
does it want its own danger, to have many voided places in Parliament, and so
a frequent succession of many new Members, or to have the chief Officers
Civil and Military put into many new hands, if the persons entrusted be not
extraordinary well principled.

The state of the Question between the Speech without Doors, and my
Animadversions upon it, does not concern the maintaining of the Law of the
Land, which one of the Pamphlets would now draw into the Dispute. I will
(according to my power) maintain the Law of the Land as much as any, and am
obliged so to do, though not upon the reason given in that Pamphlet, because We
are by Covenant obliged to maintain as well the Law of the Land, as the Person
of the King. It seems this man is not well acquainted with the Covenant, read
it again, find this in it, Et Phyllida solus habeto. Neither yet is our
Question, whethet His Majesty's Person is to be disposed of solely and singly
by the Houses of Parliament; I said not a word against M. Chaloners result or
conclusion, (which his defenders chiefly speak to) or in defense of the Scotch
Papers, of which I say still, let them speak for themselves. My Dispute was
and is against that Speech, for arguing against the Scotch Papers, from such
principles as are inconsistent with, and destructive to the honor of the
Parliament, and interest of England. When M. Challoner shall bring convincing
reasons to prove his conclusion, I shall therein join with him, mean while my
exceptions against his Speech ought not to be challenged as exception against
the Votes of Parliament, concerning their right to dispose of the Kings Person.
And whereas it is pleaded in the justification of the Speech, page 13. That
since the Gentleman does but assert their (the Parliaments) Votos, they would
be very forgetful of their own interest, if they should be offendod thereat.
This is a most presumptuous and unsufferably injurious imputation to the
Parliament, as if their Interest did engage them to approve of every Speech or
Pamphlet which undertaketh to assert their Votes, without examining the
principles and arguments of such an Assertion, whether they be good or bad,
true or false, consistent or inconsistent with their Honors. He that will tell
a notorious lie, if so be he do it to assert the Votes of Parliament, may by
this rule have an easy excuse.

But the Speech without Doors holds forth to the world not only a ridiculous
Assertion, but a ridiculous sense of those Votes of Parliament: For the
Kingdoms are contending (said M. Challoner) about the Kings Person, not who
shall have it, but who shall not have it; which infers by consequence, that
the Parliament either did not wisely, or not uprightly in that Vote, that the
Person of the King is to be disposed of as both Houses shall think fit. He
that writes the justification of M. Challoners Speech (pardon me if this
expression be Identicall) does indeed confute M. Challoner, while he goes
about to prove, that the Parliament did both uprightly and wisely in that Vote:
Sure, if the Parliament voted wisely, M. Challoner spoke not wisely; when he
did upon the matter deliver (I will not say, he did intend) this sense of the
Vote, That both Houses are to dispose, as they shall think fit, of a Person
whom they desire not to have in their Power, nor in the Kingdom.

If therefore, any hurt has or shall come to that Vote of the Honorable
Houses, it comes by the dangerous Arguments for it, and the ridiculous sense
of it, first delivered, and now defended in M. Challoners Speech; for my part,
I have said nothing against their Vote, but vindicated their Honor. This
premised, and the Question stated, as before, I will speak so much the more
freely what I think, because none of these Pamphlets have dared to avouch
against me that M. Challoners Speech was printed as it was spoken in the House,
(which was before pretended in the Title Page) yea the Justification of his
Speech tells me, that the Gentleman neither ownes the printing, nor the
Title Page, whereby he has so far justified me, as that I have not presumed to
examine any thing spoken within Doors; neither did I in professing this at
first, contradict my self (as I am now charged) by reporting somewhat spoken
by M. Challoner in the House, but not printed. It Is one thing to intermeddle by
examining, another thing to make a simple Narration; I hope all words spoken
within those walls are not unlawful to be uttered again. Well, the Speech
which was out, is not yet in; we are still without Doors, and now also without
the Lines of Communication: where at the first view I find him who dug for
me the ditch of selfe-contradiction, fallen into it himself; For page 9. he
holds, that the King of one Kingdom being in another Kingdom, is still a
King, Rex though not in Regno. Yet page 10. he will not admit the King of
Scotland being in England, to be any more then a Subject.

Now if I were resolved to defend the Scotch Papers (as I am not) there is no
need of it; for there is not so much as one of our Brethrens Arguments
repeated, touched, or answered, either in the Speech, or in the Defenses of it:
So that whereas the Author of one of the Pamphlets observes, that my Answer
did but catch at parts, and instances of the Speech, the Reader may observe,
that my Answer catched at much more of the Speech, then either that Pamphlet
catched of my Answer, or the Speech catched of the Scotch Papers: but we shall
see anon whether he and his fellows have not catched M. Challonor instead of
me. The Penman of that Pamphlet, which I mentioned last, is a pretender to be
one of the State Wits, but he accounts it a pedantike confinement for wisemen
in discourses of State to speak properly, and his own language is suitable to
his rule, when he calls his Defense of M. Challoners Speech A indiffexent
Censure of it. He would gladly have the Author of Lex Rex (by him much
mistaken to my best information) to speak as improperly as M. Challonor, and
another of these Pamphlets strikes upon the same string, although the Author
of that Book without maintaining the propriety of the terms of that
distinction, does only open the sense and meaning of it in other and better
expressions; neither will all this quibling of the Adiaphorist (for so his
Title of A indifferent Censure pretends) make Persona to be Vox Concreta, or
if it be, prithee what is Personatus?

In the next place, he would take off my exception against that most certain
truth (as he calls it) in the Speech, that the Person either of Prince or
private man, being in a Foreign State, is at the sole dispose of that State,
where he resides, and to be ruled by their Laws: Look you here what a
fallacious diversion this is, he knew well that the Commissioners from both
Houses of Parliament are neither Princes nor private men, and so he would be
sure to exempt the Commissioners of Parliament from subjection to the Laws and
Jurisdiction of another State. Concerning which, I find a strange descrepance
between the wit and the will of him that wrote the last and largest
Justification of M. Challoners Speech, page 7.8. his will is to decline that
inference, that the Commissioners of Parliament being in Scotland must be at
the sole dispose of that State, and subject to their Laws, and Jurisdiction:
yet this wit is such, as does upon the matter yield the same thing which he
declineth, leaving more Authority to the Parliament over their Commissioners
being in Scotland, then a Master dwelling in Scotland, has over his servants,
(which cannot sure exempt them from being ruled by the Law of that Land) and at
most no more then is provided by Treaty or Contract between the Kingdoms,
which will amount to as much as nothing; For I dare say, there never was nor
never will be any such Treaty or Contract between these Kingdoms, that the
Ambassadors or Commissioners sent from the one Kingdom, shall not be subject
to the Laws, nor at the sole dispose of the other Kingdom: The Law of Nations
was never yet so far doubted of, as to Minister the least occasion for such a
Proviso. But good now, how shall M. Challonors principles be made good, unless
the Commissioners of Parliament being in Scotland, be at the sole dispose of
that State, and be ruled by their Laws, not by the Orders or Commands of both
Houses? For his Speech, page 6, 7. says, That the local subjection for the
time, does totally obstruct the operation of the other subjection: and that any
Subject coming from another Kingdom, is to be disposed of by the sole Authority
of that Supreme Power where he makes his residence.

Hence chiefly grow mistakes in these debates, because men would give unto
others such measure as they will not be content to receive to themselves.

I do not know how happy the man that wrote the Indifferent censure may be in
defending M. Challoner; But I am sure he is no good defender of the Authority
of King and Parliament. He thinks no sober man will deny that Prince Charles is
solely at the dispose of the State of France, and that he cannot be recalled by
King and Parliament. If he mean de facto, he is as wide from the thing in
dispute as none-sense is from sense: But if he mean de jure (which was the only
thing in debate) or that King and Parliament have not an (...) or lawful and
just Authority to recall Prince Charles, but that by right and good reason he
is at the sole dispose of the State of France, then he has spoken high
Treason, let him answer it as he can. Sure his words do more then lean this
way, when he adds; That Princes who by misfortune, have been cast upon other
Princes Countries, may be detained without imputation of Tyranny for taking
that advantage. Where (by the way) he had done as well for the honor of the
Nation to have spared the two Instances of that King in England, and to have
sought his instances somewhere else, the Law of God provided better
entertainment for afflicted strangers, then to add grief to their sorrow. If
it must fare so ill with strangers (whether Princes or Parliament men) me
thinks it were a good motion to revive the Law of the old Aedui, that it be not
lawful for the Magistrate to go without his own territories.

As for my instance of Ambassadors which I brought against M. Challoner, all
three pamphlets say somewhat of the Protection and safety which Ambassadors
ought to have, but nothing to the defense of M. Challoners principles,
admitting of no protection to Ambassadors in England, without their subjection
to the Laws of England.

Here, Here is a (...), yea a new light, which cannot be found amongst all the
Books of the learned Politicians, who are by these more learned Pamphleters put
in a mavelous great mistake for holding that Ambassadors, however subject
unto and obliged by the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, (against which when
they do grossly trespass, the Prince or State where they are resident does
usually make Remonstrance thereof to the Prince or State that sent them, and so
demanded Justice in such cases from those to whom it properly belongs to
judge or punish them) yet they are not subjected to the Government,
Jurisdiction or municipall Laws of that State, unto which they were sent.
Surely he that holds the contrary leaves the safety of Ambassadors in a most
lubricous posture, by subjecting them to two Princes or States, whose ends,
Counsels, opinions, interests and Laws are usually different and not seldom
inconsistent. So that Jus Legatorum, which the Nations have accounted sacred
and inviolable, shall be more exposed to danger then Jus Subditorum, and an
Ambassador qui incolumis vel inter hostium tela versari possit (as Tully
says) shall be of all other men in least safety. And if it be true which the
Justifier of M. Challoners Speech says, That it is not the Law of Nations
(which by the way he confounds with the Law of Nature infused into all men,
and will acknowledge no Law by the consent of Nations; until it be ratified
forsooth by an Occumenicall Parliament.) But only the particular Contract,
confideracy and Agreement betwixt his (the Ambassadors) Master, and that
Prince or State, unto whom he is sent that can protect and defend him; Then we
must bid farewell to that of Livius (generally approved by Politicians)
concerning the Ambassadors of King Tarquinius, inviolable with the Romans by
the Law of Nations, even when they were upon designs and practices against
that State, having corrupted many of their young Nobility against them.
Quanquam visisunt (Legati) comisisse ut hostium loco essent, jus tamen Gentium
valuit.

The instance of King John who was also Duke of Normandy I must still laugh at,
For M. Challenor and his Defenders take hold of the resolution of the Lawyers
in France; This peradventure might have seemed somewhat against the Scotch
Papers; If M. Challenor had not told withal, what the State of England at that
time pleaded against the State of France. The English pleaded that although the
Duke of Normandy be a Subject of France, yet the French ought not so much as
dispose of the person of that Subject of theirs, because in so doing they
should dispose of the person of the King of England, which they held to be a
great indignity to the Kingdom of England, just so do our Brethren of Scotland
plead (I am now but stating matter of Fact) that it were an indignity to that
free Kingdom, if the Parliament here should singly and without the advice and
consent of the Parliament of Scotland, dispose of the person of this
Individual King of England, because in so doing they should dispose of the
person of the King of Scotland. If M. Challenor will say that in the debate
about King John, the French were in the right and the English in the wrong, let
him speak out, I have another Answer for him: But if he hold that the English
were in the right against the French; Then how will he make the very same
Argument, (in point of right or wrong) to be good in the mouths of the
English, and bad in the mouths of the Scotch.

Whereas I touched as to the mutual interest of two Kingdoms, and in reference
to that resolution of the Lawyers in France concerning the Duke of Normandy,
the vast disproportion between him who is a King of one Kingdom, and Subject
of another, and him who is King of more Kingdoms then one, this is yielded to
me; But withal I am told that I am out in another kind; For there is also a
vast disproportion between a King of two Kingdoms ruling in peace and Justice,
and one who has been in war against his Kingdoms. Now see him that makes this
Objection here put out by himself; For I shall only answer him in his own
words, the debate is not come so far yet, as to question how the Kings Person
shall be disposed of, but by whom. If the question were how to dispose of him,
I admit that disproportion which is objected: But it is neither here nor there,
when the debate is by whom, by both Kingdoms, or by England singly.

The Close of the indifferent censure says, That the effects of the Kings
shelter in the Scotch Army have been already very sad, as by Jealousies here to
keep so many Armies at a needless charge, and hinder the relief of poor
Ireland: But since the effect could not be without the Cause, say truth now;
Whether had the Armies been yet kept up, although his Majesty had come to
London, when he went to the Scotch Army? If they had, and you Sir know they
had, then you dealt not fairly nor faithfully in this Observation.

However (if you will) let the King and the Scotch be put to it, and offer made
that the Parliaments Army in this Kingdom shall be forthwith disbanded or sent
into Ireland, upon his Majesty's returning to his great Council the
Parliament, and upon our Brethrens rendering of the Garrisons, and marching away
with their Army. See whether upon such an offer or assurance his Majesty will
not give a satisfactory Answer to the Propositions of peace, and he return to
London, and our Brethren home again, and then the Author of the Pamphlet who
begins to doubt whether Newcastle be in Scotland, (for I never heard it doubted
by another) will be soon put out of doubt, or if he will he may desire to have
it presently resolved upon the Question, that Newcastle is in England.

I have yet somewhat to add concerning that Pamphlet which ends with the
bleating of sheepish Logic, but begins in the Title page with a pretense to
answer all moderate men: It Is well that he makes not himself (...), but (...),
yet as violent and injurious as he is, he has said more for me then against
me. (If there be any thing material in him it is already touched, I shall only
take hold of his acknowledgments) I had said that M. Challoners Speech without
Doors presented him Goliah-like, coming forth for the Parliament, but
stumbling woefully. My Replier tells me that God did not permit me in this to
lie, I thank him for his observation: He acknowledges page 3. That the Scots
are bound to maintain the Kings person, if the Parliament should wrong his
person; And is not Mr. Challoners Speech here well defended? much good may this
defense do him.

Amongst other inferences I had drawn this from Mr. Challenors Speech, That the
person of the King of England if he were in Scotland, must be disposed of by
the Supreme power of that Country, without the advice and consent of the
Parliament of England, which I presume was far from M. Challenors meaning to
admit: for speaking of the Scots, he said, I conceive they will not take upon
them any Authority to dispose of the Person of a King of England, yet my
inference is yielded by the Replier in M. Challenors name, who also in the
Close says, That if the Scots shall get the King into Scotland, as they have
no right in him, in England we could pertain as little to him he being in
Scotland. My Inference is also confessed to be true, by the Author of the
largest Pamphlet page 4. And who is the Malignant now, he that maintains or
they that yield up the Privilege of Parliament and interest of England.

No man can be said to be Rex, but in Regno, said M. Challenor, Then by just
Analogy (said I) The Parliament of England cannot be acknowledged a Parliament,
but in England only. The Replyer tells me that M. Challenor only denies a
foreign King the Title of that Country he shall happen to come unto, and not
the Title of his own that he brought with him. And that although in England we
would not admit of Marie as Queen of England, yet was she acknowledged Queen
of Scotch at her being here. I confess this is more then had been acknowledged
in Scotland if she had been there at that time: But however I do not see how it
agrees with M. Challoners Speech without doors, admitting of no regality in
the person of a King of Scotland coming into England before the Union, and
affirming that he must be taken as a Subject, not as a King: and I know as
little, who have ever affirmed or were to be contradicted for affirming, That
the King of one Kingdom coming by some accident into another Kingdom, does
thereby become King of that Kingdom, which he happens to come into. But to
pass that, I shall be glad to have this riddle opened, how these two things
(which the Replier holds in Mr. Challenors name) can hang together, that a King
of England being in Scotland does not lose his interest in England, but is
still King of England, and yet his Subjects of England during his being in
Scotland do not pertain to him, but lose their interest and right in him. I
shall at last observe that one part of the Speech without doors is disclaimed
(peradventure it shall fare so with other parts of it:) It Is alleged that the
Gentleman said not that England is as distinct in Interests from Scotland as
Spain, but that England is as distinct a Kingdom from Scotland as Spain. Yet
I find in that part of the Speech, the words as distinst repeated, and referred
not to the Kingdoms, but to Laws, Privileges, Interests; It was this latter
clause which I animadverted, but since he passes from it so do I; And now to
conclude, I acknowledge one Error in my Animadversions, which none of the three
Repliers have Animadverted, and that was the putting of (...) for (...) by the
Printers mistake. I am not yet convinced by my Antagonists, and if I had been
as apt to take fire as they were to give it, my discourse had broken forth in a
hot flame. But I intend not oleum camino. What ever some men drive at, I trust
the honorable Houses, and all true hearted Englishmen (and none more then my
self) shall endeavor the preservation of Union between the Kingdoms,
together with a sincere, constant and real pursuance of all the other ends
expressed in the solemn League and Covenant.

FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1646.


