THE GRAND TRIAL OF TRVE Conversion. OR, Sanctifying Grace appearing and
acting first and chiefly in the THOUGHTS.

A TREATISE Wherein these two Mysteries are opened.

I. The Mystery of Iniquity Working in Man's Thoughts by corrupt Nature.

II. The Mystery of Holiness Working in the Thoughts of Sanctified persons.

Together with Precious Preservatives against Evil Thoughts.

By JOHN BISCO, Minister of the Gospel in Thomas Southwarke

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for G. Eversden at the Maidenhead in Paul's Church
yard. 1655.

THOUGHTS are the Firstborn of the soul, the Beginning of its strength, for
the bringing forth either of good or evil. Our Thoughts are first made up into
affections and purposes, and then they are made out into works and actions. The
sinfullnesse of Nature appears most in the disorder of our Thoughts, and the
power of Grace in the due Government of them The Apostle James says, He that
offends not inw^rd, I may say much more, He that offends not in Thought,
the same is a perfect man, and able to rule the whole body. He is a Saint
indeed, that is so in Thought.

The ensuing Discourse contains a learned, clear and spiritual Revelation of
the Mystery of man's Thoughts. Showing both how the Mystery of Iniquity works
in the Natural man's Thoughts; as also how the Mystery of Holiness works in
the Thoughts of men Regenerate: And therefore (having perused this Book) I
judge the Publishing of it in Print very profitable for the help of All, who
desire to study and know their own hearts, and there to Sanctify God both in
shutting them (with a holy indignation) against all evil Thoughts, and in
opening them (with a holy delight) for the entertaining and lodging of those
that are Good

JOSEPH CARYL.
July 7th, 1655.
To the Honorable THOMAS ANDREVVS Alderman of the City of LONDON, and
President of Thomas Hospital. An overflowing fulness of all heavenly Graces,
and all watchful preparation for the Glory that shall be revealed.
Much Honored Sir;
IT is the promise of the All-Glorious God to honor those that honor him. We
honor God when we confess him to be as he is in himself, and in his glorious
actings to us: All the glory that we are able to give to God, stands in
cordial, verbal, and real acknowledgments: The most High is infinitely above
^ur highest praises and perfor^ances.

2 There be 4 special ways whereby God honors men.

1 When he raises them out of nothing, worse then nothing* yea, from the very
depth of hell, to a height of heavenly honor, happiness, and holiness in Christ
Jesus, whereby he makes them more excellent then their neighbors: Prove. 12. 26.
for all true Christians are right honorable and truly royal; they are loyal
subjects, and a Royal Priesthood; they are really the 1 Peter 2. 9. Exodus 19.
6. Rev. 1. 6. and 5. 10.
lowest, yet the highest people; lowest in their own sense, highest in Gods
sight.

2 God honors men when he gives them hearts to serve him in a faithful and
fruitful subjection to his will. The service of God is not only our duty, but
also our privilege and preferment.

3 When he raises men to places of eminency above others, and makes them
faithful in employing their power for God, and piously prudent in their
public deportment.

4 But the highest honor shall be hereafter in heaven, when all the Saints
shall be filled brim full with grace and glory.

We cannot honor God until he has honored us; we cannot give glory to God,
until we have received glory from him. We honor him, because he first honors
us: grace is glory. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Romans 8. 30.


Sir, God has honored you with the truest honor in Christ, and given you a
heart to honor him again. I cannot forget your holy zeal, and Christian
courage that you have openly manifested in standing up for Jesus Christ, in
owning and pleading his cause against such as endeavored to pervert and
subvert the purity of Gospel Ordinances, and the power of Religion. And I am
confident that the righteous God will not forget your zeal for his cause, and
love to his servants.

God has his Book of remembrance, Malachi 3. 16.
and Hand of reward: There shall not a good thought, word, or work in his
people pass without secret record, and open reward. Mat. 6.


Your special bounty and favor to my self, ingageth me to apprehend any
opportunity of due and deserved acknowledgement: But that which is the
strongest and most predominant Motive to quicken me to this Dedication, is your
constant holy affection to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, his pure worship, and
most precious ways.

Sir, My hearts desire is that all the thoughts of God may be mercy and peace
unto you; that he would be pleased to add many happy years to your days, and
when you have served God your complete time, advance you to a Heaven of
eternal glory, a Haven of perfect rest, a Paradise of all possible
perfections, through the free grace of God in Jesus Christ: Which shall be the
prayer of him who is

Your Servant in the Work of the Gospel. JOHN BISCO.

The mystery of Man's thoughts opened.
2. Cor. 10. 4, 5. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty,
through God, (or to God) to the pulling down of strong holds,

Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.


IN the spiritual appearing of the King of glory to the soul, the mighty
power and work of the Spirit of grace does chiefly appear in these two things.

1. In discovering the defilement and disorder of man's natural thoughts. 2. In
setting and settling the thoughts in a holy order and spiritual frame of
obedience.

The thoughts of every man as they act in corrupt nature, are the great enemies
of King Jesus; they do strongly oppose his Ruling in and over man's soul; they
sit in the throne commanding and carrying our affections and actions, until
the thoughts be cast down, changed and brought under the command of Christ,
there cannot be that constant conformity in our affections and ways that the
Royal Law requires.

In the second verse of this Chapter as though he walked according to the
flesh. The false Teachers charged this upon the Apostle that he preached in a
low earnall way, making use of fleshly frail helps, as humane learning, Arts,
Tongues, and enticing words of man's wisdom, setting out himself more then
Christ: they cry down the Apostle, that themselves might appear to the
Churches as the only Spiritual Preachers. That this was their design is
evident, by comparing Gal. 4. 17. They zealously affect you, but not well; yea,
they would exclude you that you might affect them. Thus our last translation
reads it. Piscator and Paraeus read it [us] they would exclude us, that is, out
of your affections and esteems. (...). Vt vos excludant nempe a me, hoc est a
doctrina mea avellant, Paraeus. metapbora a procis quibus comparat
pseudo-Apostolos, Piscator. (...). variant tamen codices and in quibusdam est
(...).
Beza first read it (...), us, and yet himself confesses, that in all Books it
is written (...), you. The old Latin has it you, and so the Syriack version,
and like wise the Arabic: they would exclude you, and then the meanning is
this: the false Apostles pretend very great love to you, and zeal for your
souls good, but it is that they may exclude you from us; that is, draw you from
our doctrine and ministry. But learned Erasmus says, that in the Greek it is
(...), and the Syriack thus reads it, for it renders the words thus: (...)
which Tremelius translates very well; (...) Includere concludere.
but they would include you: these words then (as I conceive) are thus to be
read. They zealously affect you not well: but they would include you, that you
might Buxt. Nunqua^ aliud significat (...) quam includere concludere
constringere sicut captivus Carceri includitur, ut Gal. 3. 22. Syrus vide^ur
leg^sse (...) vel (...) id est, includere vel concludere vos. Piscator. Arabs
eadem voce usus est qua Syrus (...) ligavit Constrinxit Raphelengius. (...)
Heb. (...) Chald. (...) Sir. (...) Arab. Ligavit alligavit Constrinxit
inclusit, conclusit. Schindler. (...) Conclusit, and incarceravit, in vincula
carceremve conjecit and in us de^inuit. Golii Lexicon.
zealously affect them.

The plain sense whereof is this, they make show of the highest affection to
your souls, but faignedly for self ends; for this they do, that they may
include and shut you up in themselves in their own doctrines and opinions, as
in a Prison: they would loosen you from us (says Paul) that they might tie you
fast to themselves. Corrupt Teachers promise liberty, but they imprison men's
judgments in their own unsound Tenants.

And this the Arabic version also imports (...) They would imprison you, or
tie you to themselves in opinion and affection.

In the third verse Paul clears himself and his ministry from this
imputation, For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh:
that is, though we be clothed with a mortal body, and do carry about us a
body of death, relics of corruption, from which we cannot be freed, until
this earthly body be filled with death.

We do not war after the flesh: we do not exercise our Ministry in a carnal
corrupt way: though we act in a fleshly feeble outside, yet not in a fleshly
feeble manner in the work of our Ministry. We do not manage the war of the
flesh, as the Syriack reads it: all our warring is against the flesh.

For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, (or to
(...).
God) to the pulling down of strong holds Now in the fourth verse he
demonstrates the negation proposed in his defense.

1. From the Isntrumental cause, We do not war after the flesh, says Paul,
for the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly. Such as the weapons are, such
is the warfare; the weapons that we use in our preaching are spiritual, those
spiritual Truths of Gods word inspired from the Spirit of Truth, therefore our
warfare is not carnal.

2. Our weapons are not weak, but mighty through God, overthrowing all that is
fleshly in men, they are powerful, therefore spiritual, the more spirituality,
the more strength.

3. They are weapons of Gods power (as (...)
the Syriack renders it) weapons whereby God puts forth the highest greatness
of his power.

4. They are mighty, through Gods might working with, and by them; their power
in acting is wholly from God.

5. They are mighty to God, as the (...). Potentia Deo, vel secundum Deum, vel
ex Deo. Calvin.
marginall Note has it, the weapons that we use in our Ministry do exalt God
his glory, as the first and last in all our preaching.

3. He proves his Ministry to be spiritual, and not carnal from the spiritual
efficacy and effects thereof. God makes it effectual for the pulling down of
strong Ad subversionem munitionum.
holds, conquering and casting down the imaginations and thoughts of men's
spirits, for the subduing of all that is carnal, and corrupt in them, for the
framing their hearts, and thoughts to a conformity unto Christ. Carnal
preaching can never make carnal hearts spiritual; the spirits of darkness
cannot be conquered, but by spiritual weapons.

What are those spiritual weapons?

That divine Doctrine discovered in Gods Spirit in the faithful and fervent
dispensation thereof.

To the pulling down of strong holds, or fortifications, rebellious strong
holds (as (...).
the Syriack reads it) the divine weapons wherewith we fight, do prevail to
the storming, taking, and overthrowing those strong holds in sinners, which
stand out rebelliously against King Jesus.

What are these strong holds?

Some by these forts understand whatsoever Metaphorice sic appellat quicquid
Christo ejusque Evangelio sese opponit Dr. Sclater
his Gospel; but I conceive here is a further meaning according to the Metaphor.

Every wicked thought and worldly lust in sinners does oppose Christ as enemies
to his government; but they cannot properly be called a strong hold. A single
man rising up is easier subdued and taken than a strong hold, that may cost
much time and blood.

A strong hold is that special sin whereby the strong man Satan holds
possession of men's fouls, and that which mainly keeps them from giving up their
hearts to the King of glory.

1. It Is evident Math. 12. 43, 44. that the heart of every man naturally is the
Devils house, wherein he rules and keeps possession till he be dispossessed by
a stronger power.

All unregenerate men and women are spiritually possessed by the Devil; Mat. 12.
44. (...).
therefore when a temporary faith comes in, the unclean spirit is said to go
out, and sinners are called his house.

2. Satan has his strong holds in sinners, whereby he holds them with a strong
hand, and wherein his chiefest Trust is.

3. These fortifications are 1. Man's mountainous thoughts and imaginations,
which I shall demonstrate in its proper place. 2. That particular darling
defilement which is predominant in the sinners affections, that bosom Dalilah
sin which of all other they are most unwilling to part with. Many a man may be
drawn to leave some sins, yea all, except some one sin of profit or pleasure;
this is that strong hold wherein Satan rests securely, and enslaves sinners
under his power. Now the first and great work of Gods spirit in the Ministry
is to lay siege to these strong holds, to take and demolish them, and thereby
Satan is quite disposest and driven out of his house: this is called a
preparing the way of the Lord, the making a people ready and prepared for the
Lord.

Casting down imaginations (or thoughts) (...) Chald and Sir. Cogitatio.
as the Syriack renders it, and every height (thus it is in the original, and
thus the Syriack and Beza also renders it) that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God. (...), and omnem altitudinem, Syrus.

When the word of God comes with a divine power upon men's souls, it casts down
their corrupt thoughts and imaginations. 1. As they are the Devils strong holds
whereby he holds men as his bondslaves. 2. As they are the great enemies of
the Lord Christ and his Kingdom, which cannot be set up in man's soul, unless
these thoughts be first cast down. 3. They are thrown down from that
principality, predominancy and power which they usurp in and over sinners.
Their thoughts do command and carry their affections and corrupt their speeches
and actions.

And every height that exalts it self; there is a casting down of every height
of thoughts and affections that lifts up it self against the knowledge of God.
1. against that knowledge and manifestation of God that is given to every man
in those common principles of light at Romans 1. 18, 19, 20. Joh. 1. 9.
their coming into the world.

2. Against that discovery of God in Christ that is given in the Holy
Scriptures. It Is the highest aggravation of sin when it is acted, not only against
the Law of God, but also against the light and knowledge of God. (...).


And bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. We make
them Captives to the obedience of Christ. Thus the Syriack. Where the Ministry
of the Gospel comes in power, it does not only conquer and cast down these
thoughts which rise up against the Lord Christ, but also captivates and
conformes every thought to the Laws of Christ.

This expression (leading captive) imports three things. 1. A taking and
overpowring man's natural thoughts by taking away the power of that Corruption
which raises them continually against King Jesus.

2. A holding them under a continued captivity, that they never break loose,
and get power again in us: Man's natural thoughts neither are, nor can be
subject to the law of God, they will always be rising, though under chains.

3. A putting in a new power into the mind, whereby our thoughts are, strongly
sweetly and freely brought into subjection to Christ. Our natural corrupt
thoughts are the Captives, our new spiritual thoughts are the free subjects of
Christ.

Here are three eminent degrees whereby the Ministry of the Gospel proceeds
and works upon the thoughts, in bringing in sinners to Christ.

1. It conquers their carnal and corrupt thoughts.

2. It takes and holds them Captives:

3. Frames their thoughts into a holy order and obedience.

The Weapons of our warfare.

The Ministry of the Gospel is here compared to a warfare, and so in Tim.
(...).
1. 18. War a good warfare; that is, discharge the duties of the Ministry as
thou ought: The Hebrew word Saba is rendered sometimes warfare, sometimes
Ministry.

The life of every Christian is a continual warfare: but Ministers of the
Gospel are more eminently men of war, not only in respect of their Saintship,
but chiefly in relation to their Ministerial service: they fight not only
against Principalities and Powers of darkness, but principally against that
principality and power which these have in men's souls. The Devils will draw up
all their strength to disturb those who would disthrone them to pull down that
office which is erected for the pulling down of their strong holds.

2. They war against men's lusts, which are as near and dear to the sinner as
his right hand and right eye, yea as himself, yea, as his own soul; the work
of the Ministry cannot be done but by warring: the word spoken in the
Ministry is the sweetest peace, but the work performed therein is the sharpest
warfare.

In the words of the Text we have these three things mainly observable.

1. Here is an evident expression and description of sinners, as they stand in
their old estate, by the depravation, disobedience, and defilement of their
thoughts.

2. The first and grand evils that are cast out and cured by the word of Truth
coming with power upon men's souls are evil exorbitant thoughts.

3. The power of Renewing grace that comes into the soul by the preaching of
the Gospel does primarily and principally manifest it self in casting down,
changing, crucifying, and captivating men's thoughts.

The first and great work of the Spirit of Grace in the conversion of sinners
by the Ministry of the Gospel is upon their thoughts. Here are four
expressions in the text that do mainly and primarily hold forth the thoughts:
these strong holds and heights are chiefly in men's thoughts. If once the
thoughts be subdued, sanctified, and set in frame, the affections, and all the
actings of the visible conversation will be in a holy heavenly order of
obedience.

In handling this doctrine of the thoughts, there are three mysteries which I
will endeavor to open. 1. The mystery of iniquity, which works in man's
thoughts before renewing. 2. The mystery of sanctity, which acts in man's
thoughts after the renewing of the heart: both these are held forth in this
Text.

3. The mystery of Satanicall injected thoughts wherewith the Saints are much
buffeted: these black blasphemous thoughts are as so many Darts which Satan*
casts into the holiest hearts: many precious souls walk sadly and
sorrowfully, not being acquainted with the rise of these wicked thoughts, and
the grounds of support that the Scripture discovers.

For the clearer understanding of thoughts in their mysterious qualities we
must first know what thoughts are in their proper entity and being.

1. Thoughts (as Augustine observes) Cogitatio est respectus animi ad
evagationem pronus. Cogitare dicitur tripliciter, sc. actualis consideratio
intellectus, discursus ejus, and operatio potentiae cogitativae. Aquinas. 22.
9. 2.
are sometimes taken for any actual operation of the understanding. Job 20. 2,
3. Thoughts are confined to the spirit of understanding.

2. Thoughts more properly are the movings, and actings of the thinking,
considering, meditating power of the soul, which is in man's understanding, or
spirit.

Aquinas calls a thought the actual consideration of the understanding, and
operation of the thinking power. Thus thoughts are made distinct acts from
purposes and intents, Heb 4 10.

3. Yet most properly thoughts are those musings of the mind which are acted
in the Speculative part of man's understanding.

My purpose is to speak of Thoughts, as they are taken in this last and strict
sense; for the distinct understanding whereof I will draw up what I conceive
from the Scriptures in this description.

Thoughts are those musings and meditations, conceits and considerations,
apprehensions, and imaginations, heart-speakings with, and speculations of
things which the mind of man frames and forms within it self, by the help
of fancy.

Thoughts are properly the actings and agitations of the mind: therefore the
(...) cogitatio mentis agitatio, men's. Passor. 2 Pet. 3. 1. Ephesians. 2. 3. Hebr.
10. 16. Cogitatio est actio mentis, Zanch.
Greek word Dianoia, which is used for Thoughts, signifies also the mind and
agitation of the mind.

There are three things that must concur to make up a thought which is truly
ours.

Thoughts are those first more simple motions and actings of man's mind which
the Scripture calls musings, meditations, considerations, ponderings,
heart-talkings; they are those porings and parleys of our mind with objects
presented to it.

A thought is 1. an Internal viewing, or looking upon things let into the
mind. 2. a Soul-conception. 3. a Speaking with our selves. 4. the Acting of
the mind in meditation.

1. It is a Contemplation, a beholding things in the mind: there are mental
eyes as well as bodily, Ephesians. 1. 18. the Apostle speaks there of the eyes of the
mind. (...).
Now when these internal eyes do actually look upon an object; This is called
a Thought.

2. Thoughts are soul-conceptions, as lusts are conceived in the hearts of men,
so are thoughts, Isay 59. 4. they conceive mischief upon all objects presented
the mind of man begets some thoughts.

3. Thoughts are commonly called the speakings of the heart, and in the heart,
when the mind talks with the things that come into the soul, with the (...)
things that we desire and delight in, fear or favor, therefore in Deuteronomy. 15.
9. a Thought is called a word in man's heart, or with his heart. Keep thy self
least there be a wicked word in thy heart: thus it is in the Hebrew; the Greek
says Math. 9. 3, 4. (...).
a hidden word, Deuteronomy. 9. 4. Speak not thou in thy heart, saying. Psalm. 14. 1.
The fool has said in his heart. It is man's speaking in, or within himself,
Mat. 9. 3, 4. Psalm. 119. 15. Psalm. 120. 1. Genesis 24. 62. (...) cum puncto
sinistro, locutus est ore aut Cord, cogitavit, meditatus est, (...) cogito:
Colloqui sermocinari intrase, id est apud se in animis suis, Luc. 5. 21. Mat.
21. 25.


It is observable that the Hebrew word (...) suach, which is used for
meditation, or thinking, Psalm. 77. 47. 13. signifies both to think and to speak
in the mind.

And the Greek word Dialogizomai, which is often used in the New Testament,
signifies, both to think and to talk within our selves, that is in our minds
with our selves: the mind is the mouth of man's soul, thoughts are the
language and speeches of the heart. The objects presented to the mind are the
companions with whom Hebraeis Dicere est cogitare.
our hearts converse, and our thoughts hold discourse continually: for he that
thinks of any thing with himself, sustaines as it were a double person: the
thinking musing power is the common room or receptacle, wherein all objects
that come to speak with our thoughts or wills or affections, do make their
abode, and walk up and down till the judgment can pass upon them.

4. Thoughts are the actings and agitations of the mind in meditations.

1. Thoughts are those conceits and Prove. 6. 14.
meditations that the mind of man forms and frames within it self; their
rise is from within, though the things presented to us be from without:
Thoughts are the forgings of man's (...) Prove. 6. 14.
heart.

2. The fictions and formings of the mind, Genesis 8 21.

3. They are Webs, spun and woven out of man's heart, Eggs of the minds
laying, Esaias 59. 4. They conceive mischief, and hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and
Verse. 7.
weave Spiders webs, which are their thoughts of iniquity.

4. Thoughts are creatures of the Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. (...) 1. Chron. 28. 9
and 29. 18.
minds making. How many thousand creatures does man's heart frame within it
self every day? hence they are expressly called, the formings of the thoughts
of man's heart. the figments of man's heart: that is, thoughts are the creatures
which the heart of man forms and makes continually out of the objects
presented to the mind; as the Potter does his vessels out of the clay that is
before him: this is the propriety of the Hebrew word jetzer, and it has much
fulness and elegancy in it.

This is a clear character whereby we may discern our own thoughts from those
that are merely the Devils.

1. There are evil thoughts which are altogether ours.

2. Others which are Satan's and ours together. 3. There are wicked thoughts
that are cast into our hearts; only from without, namely, Satan's blasphemous
thoughts which are presently cast out with abundance of abhorring and
indignation. Such thoughts being formed by the Devil, and coming only from
without, and no way from within, they fasten no defilement upon us, for it is
that which comes from within us that defiles us. Mat. 15. ^9, 20


3. The mind of man forms and conceives thoughts in and by it self, or by
the help of the fancy.

Quest. What is this fancy?

Answ. It is an inferior power of the soul, which is placed in the middle of
Sensus interiores sunt tres: sensus communis, phantasia and memoria.
the interior senses, and bordereth between the senses and the understanding.
This fancy is the former of many strange notions and conceits.

2. The office of the fancy, in relation Phantasia 2 est sensus interior
gignens novas imagines.
to thoughts, is to offer and present the appearances, or likenesses of things
to the understanding, out of which the mind of man begets thoughts, and
meditations: Phantasia menti offert phantasmata. Piccolomineus.
the office of imagination is to minister matter to our understanding to work
upon.

Whatsoever species, representation, or image of things appears at any time in
our fancies, is at the same time imprinted in our understanding. Imaginations
are as the matter out of which our thoughts are formed.

Genesis 6. 5, 6, 7. And Jehovah saw, that the wickedness of man was much on the
earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil every
day.

And it repented Jehovah that he had made Man on the earth, and it grieved him
at his heart.

And Jehovah said, I will blot out Man whom I have created, from the face of
the earth, from man unto beast, unto the creeping thing, and unto the foul of
the heavens: for it repents me that I have made them.


IN these words we have three things presented to our view.

1. The Bill of Indictment which is brought in against the men of the old world.

2. The evidence which is given in.

3. The dreadful sentence that passes upon them.

1. The Indictment stands still upon record in the first verse, The wickedness
of men was much and great on the earth. Their iniquity was now filled up and
come to be intolerable. Here are four circumstances that do extremely
aggravate their wickedness.

1. It was Universal, both in respect 2. Pet. 2. 5.
of persons and places: It was not a few men that were guilty, but all, except
a very few: neither was it committed in some one part or corner of the earth,
but in all places; it was much on the earth.

2. This wickedness of the old world (...) in terra.
was Superlative and transcendent, it was now grown up to a full height.

3. It was an Inveterate wickedness, along time continued, seven hundred years
at least.

This impiety of the old world began to rise at the birth of Enos, for then
began men profanely to call on the name of Genesis 4. 26.
Jehovah.

Enos was borne when Seth was 105 Genesis 5. 8. anno mundi 235.
years old, and the world 235. as a learned man observes.

2. About the time of Henochs translation it began to be of much strength.

4. This wickedness of the old world was now incurable and incorrigible:
diverse means had been used to restrain and reclaim them, but they hated to be
reformed, and desperately hardened themselves against all.

2. The grand capital condemning wickedness which is alleged against the
sinners of the old world, is the evil of their thoughts: all their thoughts
were evil continually. They were filled with Idolatries, adulteries, murders,
blasphemies, and sundry other notorious sins; yet we find not these
particularly alleged in the Bill of indictment, but their thoughts rather;
these are the chief evils for which they stand here indicted.

2. The evidence is the highest that can be, the great Judge himself was an
eyewitness against them: Jehovah saw the wickedness of men.

3. The sentence it self speaks the most dreadful and dismal desolation
that has been seen since the world began: the Lord denounces a universal
cutting off of Man and Beast from the face of the earth.

In the beginning of the Chapter God had declared against the wickedness of
men, and prefixed a certain term of years, wherein he would wait for their
repentance: he had also predicted the time of their excision, except they
repented; but these Gigantive fighters against God are so far from repenting
for sins past, that they go on daily to fill up the measure of their sins.
Therefore at length God prepares to take revenge upon these Rebels: this is the
sum and scope of these words.

And Jehovah saw: Thus it is in the (...) pro (...) and vidit.
Hebrew, when Jehovah saw: Thus some read it.

But was he ignorant what would be the event? was he deceived in his
expectation? Oh no: this is spoken after the manner of men, and it imports
these four things.

1. Gods most accurate inspection and attention to all the actings of men, even
the most secret thoughts of their hearts.

2. it shows us what are the Epicurean Atheistical imagination of sinners;
they think that God does not see or take notice what men act upon the earth,
Psalm. 10. 11. They say in their hearts God has forgotten, he hides his face
Job 22. 13.
that he may not see for ever.

3. It signifies Gods gentleness and long sufferance beyond what can be in man,
in that being so long and greatly provoked by these Giants, yet does not hasten
down his judgments.

4. It speaks to us his great justice and wisdom, that he does not pronounce
sentence against the most desperate sinners, till matters are exactly weighed
and looked into. God from eternity foreknew the impenitency of men, and
immutably decreed his judgments.

And that every imagination of the Act. 15. 18.
thoughts of man's heart was only evil continually.

In these words the Spirit of God discovers, 1. what was the great provoking
wickedness of those notorious sinners of the old world. 2. The fountain of all
that superfluity of sin which brake forth in their lives, it was their evil
thoughts: the whole fiction of their thoughts: Tremelius and Junius render
thus, and every (...) Omne figmentu^ Cogitationum.
figment and thought of man's heart was only evil at all times. But acording to
the Hebrew, it is thus to be read, every fiction of the thoughts of his heart;
that is,

1. Whatsoever man's heart forms and thinks, or forms by thinking: thus
Piscator very expressly.

2. The whole frame of the thoughts of their hearts was evil, wicked, only
evil, every day, and all the day long.

Every word in the text has its weight, to aggravate the wickedness of these
men.

The heart of man according to Philosophers is the seat of life; but in the
Scriptures it is the seat of the soul, and principal of the understanding
mind, will, affections, and motions: it is put here chiefly for the mind and
thinking power in man's soul; his heart is the shop wherein all his thoughts are
formed and forged, and they are called the fictions of man's heart; and all
these are said to be evil in natural men, not one excepted.

Now that thoughts are here to be taken properly for the musings and
imaginations of men's hearts, is evident by comparing Genesis 8. 21. which answers
to this Text.

Where God in mercy gives us this promise, saying, I will from henceforth curse
the earth no more for man's (...)
cause: though the imagination of man's heart be evil from his childhood.

By imagination here is meant that which the mind and understanding by thinking
frames and devises: as chap. 6. 5. thus Mr. Perkins and others Quamvis
figmentum cordis, id est cogitationes cordis. Piscator.
expound it.

Piscator says, that this figment or imagination of man's heart is the thoughts
of the heart.

We have the like expression of man's thoughts in 1. Chron. 28. 9. Jehovah (...)
searches all hearts, and understands every imagination or fiction of the
thoughts: that is, the whole frame, and framing of the thoughts. The Hebrew
word jetzer signifies any thing that the heart first imagins, forms, etc.

And in this sense Mr. Perkins takes thoughts in any text, for the framings and
devisings of man's thinking power, as is evident by his own words.

By thoughts or imaginations in Genesis 6. 5. (says he) can nothing else be
meant, but that which is devised and plotted in the thoughts of man's heart: so
Solomon speaking of an heart which God hates, (...) Finxit formavit, finxit
mente cogitavit imaginatus est, Vn^e (...) fictio aut figmentum and cogitatio,
Munster.
says, it is framing or thinking thoughts of wickedness, Prove. 6. 18.

Whereby it is evident, that the meaning of this Text is plainly this: The whole
frame and fabric of men's thoughts, every thought framed and formed by their
hearts was evil.

2. They were altogether wicked; there was no good in any of their thoughts:
these Giants of the old world had not one good thought in their minds, like
those in Psalm. 10. 4.

3. All their thoughts were altogether wicked every day, col-haiom, all day
long, (...)
and all the days of their life; that is, perpetually without ceasing: and it
repented Jehovah that he had made man, etc.

God has no passions nor contrary affections, for he is unchangeable: but this
grieving and repenting are spoken after the manner of men; and the intent of
these speeches is to hold forth these two things.

1. That man's evil thoughts are exceedingly offensive and provoking to God.

2. That God would now destroy his creatures that he had made. This is clearly
expressed in verse. 7.

And the Lord said, I will destroy Man whom I have created, from the face of
the earth, botb Men and Beasts: For as the Genesis 1. 26. Genesis 3. 17. Romans 8. 20.
Beasts were made for man, so they became subject to vanity and destruction
through man's iniquity.

The sense and intendment of the words being thus cleared, I will now endeavor
through the light and assistance of the great searcher of the thoughts to open
the mysterious qualities of the Thoughts, and 1. the mystery of iniquity which
works in every man's thoughts until they are really renewed.

This Scripture that I have opened does clearly discover the horrid hat^full
iniquity and impiety of man's natural corrupt thoughts, and the deadly effects
and fruits thereof.

In the opening of this first mystery I will discover and demonstrate the
iniquity of man's natural thoughts.

1. In certain general positions.

2. In sundry particular actings, whereby the manifold mysterious ways of sin
working in men's thoughts will more evidently appear.

1. Position
The thoughts of every man and woman by corrupt nature are exceeding sinful
and profane.

For the full understanding of this position, there be two things that I must
demonstrate.

1. That there are thought-transgressions.

2. That the thoughts of all unregenerate men are full of wickedness and vanity.

1. There are thought-sins: much sin is acted in our thoughts: carnal thoughts
are sinful evils. The Scripture tells us expressly, that the thoughts of man's
heart Gen 6. 5. and 8. 21. Jer. 4. 14.
are evil, vain, and wicked: That there is sin enough in man's thoughts to
provoke God to destroy a whole world, and to curse the earth.

We have a full Text, Prove. 24. 9. the thought of foolishness (or of a foolish
(...)
thing) is sin. 1. The thought of the fool is sin. Thus Piscator reads it: that
is, all the thoughts of ignorant unsanctified men are sin.

2. The thought of a foolish thing, that is, of that which is vain, empty,
unprofitable, is sin: thus things that are vain and unprofitable are said to be
foolish, Ephesians. (...).
5. 4. foolish speaking (which is there condemned) is vain, unprofitable talk.
So Titus 3. 9. foolish questions are such as are unprofitable and vain.

The law of God is broken not only by vile filthy thoughts, but also by vain
foolish idle thoughts. It is an Hebraism, as (...) vir iniquitatis.


3. A thought of foolishness; that is, a foolish thought, a vain empty
thought: thus the Scripture calls a wicked man a man of iniquity, Esaias 55. 7.

4. A foolish vain thought is sin, that is, a great sin: thus in the Scripture
phrase sin is often put for a most sinful and damnable act: as Deuteronomy. 15. 9.
Joh. 15. 24. If I had not done among them the works that none other man did,
they had not had sin. that is, so great sin; and James 4. 17. To him that
knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, a very great sin.

Now because men usually think that they may take more liberty in their
thoughts then in their visible works, I will therefore give in Reasons from
Scripture whereby it will more evidently appear that all irregular thoughts are
sinful evils.

1. Evil thoughts are transgressions Mat. 22. 37. Jesus said unto him, thou
shall love the Lord thy God (...) Marc. 12. 30. Luke 10. 27.
withal thy heart and with all thy thoughts: thus the words are in the
original, and thus learned Passor. reads them If God must be loved with our
whole mind, then certainly he must be honored and served with all our
thoughts, which are the actings of the mind. The Royal Law is spiritual
binding our thoughts to obedience Romans 7. 14.
as strictly as our words and works.

2. Man's thoughts are censured and the word of God, Heb. 4. 12. (...).
1. It is a Judge of the thoughts of the heart, it passes sentence upon them
as a Judge.

2. The word rebukes and sentenceth the sinner for his thoughts, 1. Cor. 14.
24, 25. The Unbeliever is rebuked and judged of all that prophecy; for what?
for the secret thoughts of his heart, which are made manifest by the searching
Ministry of the Word. The Law reproving man's thoughts, clearly proves that
thoughts are transgressions of the Law. yea, the Lord Christ who first gave the
Law, and best knew the true intent and extent of his own law, does sharply
rebuke the Scribes for their evil thoughts, Mat. 9. 3.

3. Evil thoughts are abominations Prove. 13. 26. it is expressly said, that the
thoughts of an evil man are abomination unto Jehovah. He hates them with a
(...)
height of hatred, as the word properly imports.

Nothing is the object of Gods hatred but sin. Solomon speaking of a heart
which God hates, says it is framing or (...) aversari abominari, significat
omnibus sensibus ab aliqua re. Mollerus.
thinking thoughts of wickedness, Prove. 6. 18.

Reason 4. Man's own thoughts are defiling evils: They make him guilty and
filthy in the sight of God. Every vain thought arising out of our hearts
fastens filth upon our minds, and guilt upon our Consciences: this the great
Lawgiver himself declares in Marc. 7. 22. from within out of the heart of men
proceed evil thoughts; these are evils that defile Man, Mat. 15. 19. 20. Now
nothing can defile men but sin, as is evident by the words of Christ.

Reason 5. Man's own thoughts are a special part of those sinful evils which
must be forsaken in the practice of Repentance, and returning to God, Esaias 55.
7. Let the unrighteous man forsake his own thoughts, and let him return to
Jehovah. The sins which are forsaken by real Repentants, are reduced to these
two heads, thoughts and ways. Sin has its beginning and rise in our thoughts;
these are the next and immediate productions and actings of the heart, Marc. 7.
21 Ways are thoughts brought forth into Act. Repentance must begin where sin
begins.

Reason 6. That plenary pardon that God promises to penitent sinners, extends
as well to their thoughts as ways, yea more abundantly to their thoughts. See
Esaias 55. 7.
The thoughts of our hearts are the first and fullest part of that deep debt
for which we must beg forgiveness from the God of mercy: as is evident, Act. 8.
22. Pray unto God if in deed the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

2. The thoughts of all unsanctified men are full of wickedness and vanity. Now
all states of unregeneracy (that is of such who were never yet savingly
sanctified) may be drawn into four different degrees: 1. notorious sinners. 2.
mere moralists. 3. gross hypocrites. 4. formal hypocrites. All these are full
of iniquity and vanity in their thoughts:

1. By notorious sinners, I mean all such as live in notorious crimes and open
pollutions, who carry the mark of Satan in their hands, foreheads, and tongues.
Now the thoughts of such men are all continually and resolvedly sin, and that
in a high and horrible degree. Wickedness has so enwoven it self into their
hearts, that in their inward thoughts, they are very corruption. And whereas
sleep does most sweetly feed and refresh nature, yet evil thoughts are far more
natural to them, then desire of sheep. The wicked do imagine mischief upon
their beds. Psalm. 36. 4. Mica. ^. 3.


When the mind is retired from earthly affairs and distractions, when it is most
active and powerful, and now the fittest season for Divine contemplation, even
then are their thoughts as black as hell, and deepest in the works of darkness
then are they plotting and contriving wickedness, how to compass their
pleasures and profits, and to accomplish the lusts of their hearts; where to
crown themselves with fresh rose buds of sensual delights; how to over reach
their brethren, oppress their Neighbors, vex and vilify the Saints: these are
the daily thoughts of notorious sinners, who do not only greedily entertain
what wickedness does ordinarily spring from their corrupt hearts, and is
suggested by others, but being past all sense both of shame and sin, they set
their thoughts to invent strange villainies, new forms, fashions, and
circumstances of acting old sin.

2. The thoughts of the gross hypocrite another kind of sinner, are fully as
black and abominable, as those of open Belials, though his outward life be fair
and plausible.

What is gross hypocrisy?

When men profess that which is not Stage Player, who sometimes (...).
puts on the Robes and Majesty of a Prince, himself being of a base and
neglected state; or the gravity and wisdom of a Counselor, himself being of
roguish and dissolute conditions; sometimes he represents a virtuous man, his
own life being vicious. Such are all gross hypocrites upon the stage of this
World, very painted Sepulchers, and whited walls, glorious in outward forms,
shows, and representations to the eye of the world, but in the hidden passages
of their hearts they are very wickedness; many swarms of filthy thoughts do
settle there continually, they are full of black and bloody projects for the
flesh.

Gross hypocrites do sin against the light of their own conscience, professing
that holiness outwardly, that they hate in their hearts; they account it their
greatest glory, and make it their deepest design to appear Saints to others,
but within their hearts are a bloody slaughter house of cruel malicious
thoughts; a hateful stew of impure imaginations and filthy thoughts; a forge
of mischievous and monstrous thoughts; a very Cage of all unclean and ravenous
birds.

The ordinary thoughts of gross hypocrites are as vile and hellish as the
thoughts of notorious sinners.

3. The thoughts of mere moral men are carnal and corrupt earthly, and
exorbitant, their goodness consists chiefly in an abstinence from outward
notorious offenses, and the acting of some external duties of righteousness:
therefore though their visible conversation be ordered civilly and smoothly
before men, yet their inward thoughts are altogether vain and profane, wanton,
wordly, and ungodly: they do in their judgments and practice approve that
pestilent proverb, thoughts are free. They are free indeed in respect of
obnoxiousness to men's Courts, and penal censures, in respect of discovery by
any creatures; but the eye and vengeance of heaven takes first and special
notice of them, and the justice of God will punish man's evil thoughts as the
principals, as the chief plotters, and first actors of all transgression.

4. The thoughts of formal hypocrites, though they be not so black as the
thoughts of the three former sorts now mentioned, yet they are vain, earthly
and unsanctified.

What is formal hypocrisy?

It is that hypocrisy by which men form of Religion; but also their own hearts
with a false conceit and confidence that they are in a state of life and
happiness, when as in truth their souls were never yet possessed of the
glorious life of Christ. These formal temporary professors do attain to the
highest perfections that can be found in men that are not savingly sanctified;
for they have a taste of the general graces of Gods spirit, and in some sort
of the powers Hebr. 6.
of the world to come: and therefore their hearts will be affrighted with
suggestions of infamous consequence, and horrid nature: as thoughts of Atheism,
blaspheming cruelty, heresy, and such like. But because their hearts are not
fastened and sanctified by special grace (...) God first made them, but both
have (...) inquit Heiron quod omnes voce Consona (...) transtulerunt. Secundu^
Ebraei sermonis ambiguitatem and numerum possumus et rationem and cogitationem
dicere. (...) Drusius.
strangely gone away from the straitness of their Creation. This I have found
by the wisdom given me from the Lord, that God created men upright and straight
in their understanding, mind, and will: there was not, neither could be the
least wry thought rising from any thing within Man, so long as he kept close to
God and his will.

Eccles. 7. 30. Ipsos autem quaerere Cogitationes multas. Thus Piscator.

But they both Adam and Eve and also their posterity, have sought out (of their
Et ipsi inquisierunt cogitationes multas. Thus the Interlin.
own accord) many thoughts, that is crooked and corrupt thoughts and devices,
whereby they are fearfully fallen from the first righteousness wherein they were
formed. These crooked thoughts were cast into our first Parents by that crooked
Serpent Satan; and being by them entertained, they were the bitter root of that
dreadful disobedience.

What were those thoughts out of

The first was a Thought of Pride, a fruit, which they could not enjoy by their
yielding obedience to Gods Commandment.

The Devil had injected this thought into the Woman that by eating of that
prohibited Tree, they should presently have their eyes opened, which the Woman
Genesis 3. 4. 5.
did apprehend to be meant of a further degree of wisdom, as the like (...)
phrase imports, Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 1. 18. and they should be as Gods: this
the Woman understood of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as appears by the
words of God in verse. 22.

Thus through the Devils suggestion and seducements, the Woman began to have
such thoughts in her mind as these, surely there is some great perfection in
that fruit which is restrained from us, and by eating thereof we shall attain
to a God-like wisdom, a kind of omniscience: this great ambitious thought was
the main root out of which that great transgression took its rise.

2. A thought of Infidelity; our first Parents did not really conceive and
apprehend that there was an All Sufficiency in God enjoyed, to fill them with
all desirable perfections; and this was the ground of their aversion from God
unto the Creature. This vile thought of A thought of distrust made entrance
unto the fall of our first Parents. Perkins.
Distrust entered into the heart of Eve, it may be that it is not true that God
has spoken to us concerning this fruit, and it may be God regards us not as we
think he does, in that he denies us this pleasant fruit; hereupon her will and
affections were drawn out to actual disobedience and departure from God.

3. The opinion of a conceived excellency. The Woman was possessed with a strong
conceit and opinion of the great wisdom and sagacity of the Tempter, when she
saw the spirit that talked with her to have taken upon him the shape of the
most sagacious beast of the field, she began to think thus with her self, that
though he were one of the abased spirits, yet by the shape he had taken
resembling his nature, he must needs be most crafty and sagacious, and so might
pry further into Gods meaning then he was aware of, and for this end the Devil
(of all other beasts of the field) took the shape of a Serpent, thereby to gain
this conceit and opinion of sagacity and subtilty with the Woman; and this
conceit occasioned Eves fall.

4. Our first Parents were possessed with a thought of iniquity against their
gracious God: They did wickedly think and imagine that there was not the
reality of love in God that he pretended to them, but that he rather envied
their perfection, according to that calumniating thought which the Devil had
cast into their minds, that of ill will he had forbidden them this Tree: for
God knows that in the day ye eat thereof ye shall Genesis 3. 5.
be as Gods.

5. A thought of impunity, that they should not surely dye, though they did
transgress that command of God, who Genesis 2. 17.
had threatened assured death: the Devil had filled their hearts with this
presumptuous thought, ye shall not dying dye; that is, not dye the death, as
the Greek Genesis 3. 4.
Translates.

Oh what infinite cause have we to hate evil thoughts! even for this, in that
they were the root of that first Apostasy whereby we were all undone in Adam.

2. Evil thoughts are the root of all the evil which is in our judgments and
affections, words and works.

1. Our thoughts do corrupt our judgments; James 2. 4. men are said to become
Judges of evil thoughts.

For the clear understanding of this mysterious Text, it must be considered in
its aspect and connection with the two former verses, wherein the Apostle
declares how guilty the Hebrews (to whom he writes) were of that great great
evil from whence he disswades them, namely, an extra judicial acception of
persons by an usual practice of theirs in their Church Assemblies: he
convinces them by a notorious example, that they gave special reverence and
honor to rich men, though wicked and unworthy, merely for their worldly wealth
and splendour: but they disrespected and despised the poor brethren, though rich
in faith, because of their poverty; this is a vile prosopolepsia condemned by
the Royal Law, and inconsistent with Christian faith and charity, in that they
scorned a godly man, because poor in comparison of a wicked man that was rich.

In the fourth verse the Apostle declares the true root and rise of this
perverse judgment* in respect of persons: they became Judges of evil
thoughts; that Jam. 2. 4 (...).
is, they did judge perversely according to the crooked Rule of their own
corrupt thoughts: ye are become discerners, or distinguishers of evil
thoughts: thus the Syriack reads it; that is, they made an unjust difference
and distinction (...)
between the rich and the poor by their crooked thoughts; they judged between
them by evil opinions or imaginations, as the Arabic version does clearly and
rightly express it, (...) Genitivus hic non objecti sed attributi Grot.
They judged between the Rich and the poor by evil thoughts: they were possessed
with such evil thoughts as these; that gold is to be preferred before grace,
outward pomp and glory, before spiritual excellencies; and these wicked
thoughts were the root of their From the thoughts of men proceed all bad
desires, corrupt affections, evil words and actions: the mind must first
conceive before the will can desire, or the affections be delighted, or the
members of the body practice any thing. Mr. Perkins.
unjust judging; they valued and esteemed men according to their earthly
excellencies, and external apearances.

The pollution which is in our affections coms originally from our thoughts:
inordinate affections are begotten by exorbitant thoughts. 1. Affections are
properly the motions and actings of man's will.

2. All the affections are stird up and raised by the thoughts, they are bred
and fed by them, no one thought passes from the mind, but it stirs some
affection of desire, delight, fear, sorrow, joy, etc.

3. Therefore it follows, that such as our thoughts are such must be our
affections: if our affections be full of earth and earthliness; lust and
looseness, it is from the overflowing of all these in and from our thoughts: the
root and reason of worldly affections, is some vile thought that is hidden in
the heart, Psalm. 49. 11. Their inward thought is that their houses shall
continue for ever.

3. Corrupt thoughts are the fountain Vitiosi sermones non nisi ex perversis
Cogitationibus promanare possunt. Cartwright in Proverb.
of corrupt speeches: it is a principle proceeding from Truth it self, that out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Out of the abundance of vanity
and impiety which is in their thoughts men bring forth vain ungodly speeches
continually: whatsoever evil is spoken with their mouths, is first spoken in
and by their hearts.

When men are rebuked and convinced of their foolish filthy speeches, they will
excuse and extenuate their sin with this plea, that they thought no evil:
whereas corrupt vicious speeches cannot flow but from corrupt impure thoughts:
as is evident Psalm. 10. 7. where it is said of the wicked man, that his mouth is
full of execration and deceits and fraud, under his tongue is perverseness and
iniquity: but the spring from whence all this evil-speaking ouerflows, is the
impiety prophanes and presumption of his thoughts as is most apparent, verse. 4.
God is not in Psalm. 10. 4.
all his thoughts, or all his thoughts are that there is no God.

4. Evil thoughts are the root out of which springs an evil eye, and
uncharitable Cogitationes malificiorum parents and semen sunt. Carthwright.
hand, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Keep thy self lest there be a wicked thought in thine
heart, and thine eye be evil toward thy poor brother, and thou give not unto
him. whereby it is evident that all the unmercifulness that is in the eyes and
hands of men, proceeds from unmercifull thoughts; there is the first rise: it
is their thoughts that corrupts their eyes, harden their hearts, and shuts up
their hands against the poor.

5. The iniquity of men's visible actings proceeds from the ilness of their
thoughts. This I shall evidence from diverse Scriptures: as Psalm. 14. 1. The
fool Look what men do practice, that first of all they think; for the thought
is the beginning of every action. Mr. Perkins.
has said in his heart, there is no God. they have corrupted themselves; they
have done an abominable work: there is none that does good. The wicked man, who
is the greatest fool says in his heart, that is, thinks and conceives in
secret: (thoughts are the speakings of the mind, the language of the heart: so
Psalm. 10. 4. and 5. 3. 2.) his usual thoughts are, that there is no God, no
omniscient sin-revenging God, no power or dominion of God on the earth, as the
Chaldee expounds it.

Observe how these abominable Atheistical This word is used for Corruption
both of Religion and manners by Idolatry and other vices, Exodus 32: 7. Deuteronomy. 32.
29.
thoughts lodging in men's hearts are the root of all corrupt Courses, and
casting off the thing that is good, for it follows, they have corrupted
themselves, they have corrupted their works (as the Chaldee says) and all
their ways, by vile vicious practices.

And that which he spoke before as of one sinner, he now applies to all, They
Therefore in Psalm. 52. 2. it is guavel, ovil, which here is gualilah, action
Psalm. 10.
have done an abominable practice, meaning their evil actions, not one of them
does any good work.

We have also a full text, Psalm. 10. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The Wicked
through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God; God is not in
all his thoughts: his ways are always grievous, Thy judgments are far above out
of his sight, as for all his enemies he puffs at them, he has said in his
heart I shall not be moved, for I shall never be in adversity, etc.

The wicked man stands here accused of very great crimes, and crying
abominations against God and man; as 1. Slighing Whosoever is of base life, it
comes from the profaneness of his heart in evil thoughts. Perkins.
and contempt of God, his ways and judgments. He seeckth not, nothing
regards: or cares for God, or his will; he desires no Communion with him: or
it may be translated, The wicked inquireth not into the height of his anger;
that His ways are always grievous to the poor whom he persecuteth. 3. Laying
Snares verse 9. The fifth sin is his malicious murdering the Innocent, verse 8.

Now the root from whence all these wicked Acts do rise, are those abominable
thoughts which the wicked man harbors in his heart.

God is not in all his thoughts; that is, (...)
he does not once think of God, whilst he plotteth and acts against the poor:
or, His thoughts are there is no God. Thus, it is in the Margin of our Bibles,
and the Hebrew words may be rendered both these ways: The sinner studies
Atheism, he strives to six these thoughts in his mind, that there is no
all-seeing, all-searching God. The Chalde expounds it, He says in his heart
that his thoughts are not made manifest before the Lord. He has said in his
heart; That is, these are his daily thoughts, I shall not be moved, from
Generation to Generation I shall not be in evil. That is, I who am not now in
trouble and misery, shall never be: The Chalde gives (...)
this sense; I will not be moved from Generation to Generation from doing
evil. Wicked men do in their own thoughts promise a kind of Eternity in
sinning, and worldly prosperity to themselves.

The wicked man speaks thus, in his heart; That is, he thinks God has
forgotten, he has hidden his face, he will not see to Eternity: and verse 13.
He has said, thou will not require it.

God has forgotten what I have done, therefore he cannot call me to a reckoning
for it: yea he will never see or take notice of any thing that I do, or if he
see it, yet he will not require any account of me, therefore I shall escape well
enough; whereby it is apparent.

1. That wicked thoughts are the beginning and bottom of all those abominable
evils that sinners do act, verse 4.

2. They are at the end and close of their wicked deeds, verse 11.

This atheistical thought (that God does not behold and observe their ways)
raigns in the hearts of wicked ones; and this conceit is the chief root from
which all their cursed fruits do proceed, and that which encourages their
hearts in doing evil: this is evident from diverse places of Scripture, as
Psalm. 94. 7. see what complaints are put up against the wicked.

1. They triumph over the people of God.

2. They speak hard things against

3. They break them in pieces with

4. They murder the widows, fatherless, and strangers.

Now the Root of all these cruel words and deeds is that cursed Thought which
possesses their hearts; Yea they say, the Lord shall not see: Where do they
say it? In their hearts; their tongues do not express it, but these are their
inward thoughts.

Compare Psalm. 10. 6. 11. 13. and 14. This Hellish thought is predominant in
all the workers of iniquity, verse 4. so Psa. 73. 3. We find sundry actual
Impieties laid to the charge of wicked men.

They are full of pride and violence, they are corrupt. That is, in their
speakings and actings: They speak wickedly and loftily; they speak oppression.
They set their mouths against the Heavens. That Against God and his Saints,
whom Revel. 13. Heavens are put for God. Dan: 4. 23. Luke 15. 18.
greatly afflict the people of God, verse 10. Waters of a full Cup are wrung
out by them, at the hearing of those blasphemies. Tears as many waters flow
from them, as the Chaldee expounds it.

Now the Root of all these Evils is in their thoughts, verse 11. And they say;
That is, in their hearts. How does God know? And is their knowledge in the most
High? Behold these are the ungodly.

Psalm. 50. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Diverse acts of iniquity are brought in against
the wicked mam, but the Rise of all these is in his thoughts, verse 21. These
things have thou done, and I was silent. Thou thoughtst that I was surely like
unto thee. Hebr: I being had been, or was.
All the wickedness which men bring forth daily in their words and visible ways,
is the revelation and manifestation of the thoughts of their hearts; words, and
works, are evident Characters wherein we may read every man's thoughts, Luke 2.
34. 35. Symeon said to Mary, Behold this Jesus is set for a sign to be spoken
against. (...). Pendent a participio. (...) says Piscator.
That the thoughts of many hearts, (or from the hearts of many) may be
revealed. These words have dependence on the last words of the former verse (A
sign to be spoken against.) And they hold forth the root and rise of all that
contradiction, reproach and scoffs that the people cast upon Christ (which were
as a sharp Dart, or Sword in Mary's heart, or soul, peircing it with bitter
grief) when they fell off from the Lord Jesus, and cried, Crucify him, and
scoffed at Luk: 2. 35. and tuam ipsius animam pertransibit (...) vul. and Beza
gladius Syrus (...); Et eadem voce Arabs hasta vel lancea est Heb^aeorum (...)
Quod David. de pomis vertit. (...) Hasta lancea sed addit quosdam pugiouem
gladiolum interpretari.
him hanging upon the Cross. All this did originally proceed from the thoughts
of their hearts; and did evidently discover and reveal the wickedness and
perverseness of their thoughts: They had thoughts of giving earthly honor and
happiness by Christ, thoughts of adhering to Christ, if he should advance them
to a Terrene Felicity in an earthly Kingdom. Prou 29. 11. A fool utters all
his mind. That is, his thoughts; a fools speeches are but goings forth of his
thoughts. Thus, it is evident that wicked thoughts are the root and beginning of
all evil in affections, judgment, gesture, word, and deed: There cannot be an
Action before there be a Thought; for this is the order wherein our Actions LXX.
(...) hastam. (...) lauceam etc. interpretantur.
are produced. First, The mind thinks then that thought takes and delights
the affections, and from that comes consent of will, after this comes
execution of the Action etc. therefore trace every corrupt affection and
exorbitant practice, till you come up to some inward and hidden thought. There
is evil enough in a corrupt thought to turn Angels of light into Devils, and
men into the Devils Image; Evil thoughts were the root of the Apostasy both of
1 Timothy 3. 6. (...).
Angels and men; the sin of the Angels was first in thought; they were lifted
up with the thoughts of their own Excellency, and this threw them down from a
height of Glory, into Chains of darkness.

Third Position.
3. The thoughts of men are leading evils, they have the pre-eminence and
priority in sinning, they are the Ringleaders in wicked ways; they are first
in all our evils: all sin begins in our (...)
thoughts, as is evident, Micah 2. 1. Woe unto them that imagine iniquity and
work wickedness upon their beds, when the morning is light, they practice it,
because their hand has power, and they covet fields and take them by violence,
and houses, and take them away, so they oppress a man and his house, even a man
and his heritage.

1. Here observe, 1. That all iniquity which is acted in men's visible
conversations is twice wrought; first, In their thoughts: They think iniquity
and work wickedness upon their beds. That is, They work, forge, and frame in
their thoughts and imaginations upon their beds.

2. In their affections and visible courses: They work and practice it when the
morning is light. That is, in the day time, because their hand has power.
Wickedness is first wrought by their hearts, and then by their hands.

2. Wicked affections and the worst of actions, as coveting of other men's
fields and houses, and violent taking them away, these have their beginning in
men's thoughts: These are the Leaders that cause their whole man to err and go
astray Esa. 3. 12. and 9. 16.
from Gods ways; and therefore when the Lord Christ declares what are those
Capital sins of defilement which proceed out of the hearts of men, he names
evil thoughts in the first place: They are set as leaders of that black
Regiment, they are in the front of that Matthew: 15. 19. 20. 21.
black Roll, Mark 7. 21. 22: Out of the heart of men proceed evil thoughts,
adultries, fornications, murders, etc.

1. Evil thoughts are the first begotten of the old Adam, the first fruits of
the flesh, the first born of the old man, the eldest Sons of corrupt nature,
and therefore sins of strength. No wonder then that vain thoughts do so strongly
charge and captivate our Souls: the strength of that body of sin is brought
forth in them. Rom: 7, 24.


2. Evil thoughts are the begetters of all other sins whatsoever: Sins of
affection, and sins of action, are originally in the loins of our mind (as all
sinners were originally in the loins of Adam 1 Pet: 1. 13.
sinning); They are the natural seed and offspring of our thoughts.

3. The thoughts of men are the beginners and first movers in all evil, they
make the first motion between sin and the Soul: In all the sins that they do
act, their thoughts are the first movers: they propose the Object, they procure
a Conference between the heart and the object, they bring them together, and so
bring forth sin into act: they present alluring Objects, as profits, pleasures,
preferments, beauties, etc. till the hearts of sinners be drawn away from the
sight of God and his Law, and their affections taken and this in the absence of
the things themselves.

Position 4.
4. Corrupt thoughts are Lording evils; the thoughts of all carnal men do
exercise a Lordly power over them: they rule as strange Lords in them, Ephesians: 2.
3. The Apostle declaring the state of all men before renewing, says expressly,
That the time was when we all had our (...). Facientes quae carni and
cogitationibus libebant. Passor.
conversatlon in the lusts of our flesh, doing the wills of the flesh, and of
the thoughts. So it is in the Original Text, and thus Passor reads it; The
flesh Lordeth it over man's thoughts, and the thoughts over his affections and
actions.

Position 5.
Man's carnal Thoughts are hostile Evils; they are Enemies, yea enmity against
God.

1. They are Enemies up in arms against the Lord of Hosts: they war against
him continually. When the Lord comes to subdue our Iniquities in us, the chief
Capital Enemies that are cast down and conquered by the Sword of the Spirit,
are our thoughts and imaginations, 2 Cor: 10. 4, 5.
Luke 1. 31. He has showed strength with his Arm, he has scattered the proud
in the thoughts of their hearts. The thoughts of proud sinners do as it were
pitch the field and set themselves in battle against the Almighty: And it is a
mighty work wherein the Lord of Host declares the exceeding greatness of his
power, to scatter and cast down the proud in these high thoughts that rise up
against him.

This hostility of man's thoughts is clearly held forth, Col: 1. 21. And you
(...).
that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works (or by
your mind in wicked works) yet now has he reconciled. Unregenerate men are
here expressly said to be Enemies in their mind: That is, their thoughts which
are properly the actings and agitations of the mind; the Original word here
used (...) Cogitatio, mentis agitatio.
for the mind in the propriety of it, signifies the thought of the mind.

In this Text we have these four discoveries: Col: 12. 1.
1. All carnal men are the declared Enemies of the great God.

2. The main thing wherein God looks upon them as Enemies to him, are their
thoughts: Sinners are Enemies in affections and actions, but chiefly in
thoughts.

3. The sins that do especially alienate and estrange men from the blessed God,
and all fellowship with him, are their thoughts, every reigning sin alienates
men from God, and builds a wall of separation Esa: 59. 2.
between God and them: but man's crooked thoughts made that first alienation in
Paradise, that great partition wall that extends from one end of Eccles: 7. 30.
the earth to the other, and reaches up to Heaven; and our thoughts still
continue the great Dividers that keep us and our affections at such a distance
from God; and thus they are our grand Enemies which fight against our Souls.

4. Wicked works are the natural issue and offspring of men's thoughts: those
works of wickedness acted by the Colossians did proceed out of the loins of 1
Pet 1. 13.
their minds.

2. Man's carnal thoughts are enmity against God. This I take to be the
principal scope and intent of the Text, Rom: 8. 7. The wisdom of the flesh.
That is, the wisest thoughts, motions, and actions of a carnal mind are enmity
against God. The Greek word that is translated Wisdom, signifies the act of a
carnal mind (...).
comprehending thoughts, discourse, etc. The wisdom of the flesh is the
imaginaon and conceit of every man naturally; says Mr. Perkins, the minds of
natural men and women, their most prudentiall thoughts and purest imaginations
in their carnal corrupted estate are sensual, Iam. 3. 15.
earthly, fleshly, yea enmity against God.

This extreme enmity which is in men's carnal thoughts stands in these two
things.

1. They do not yield subjection and service to the Law of God.

2. They cannot possibly submit to the Romans 8. 7. (...).
Law in its spirituality: Enemies may be reconciled and become good Subjects,
but enmity it self can never put on love and subjection; this enmity must be
abolished, and the Royal Law put into our minds, before our thoughts can be
brought into obedience to Christ.

Position 6.
6. The thoughts of men are the Formers and Framers of all the evil and error
wherewith they corrupt themselves and others whatsoever treason sinners do
commit against the God of Glory, it is prepared and plotted in the privy
Chamber of their thoughts, their affections, are the treacherous Absoloms that
do rise up and conspire against King Jesus: but their thoughts are the crafty
Achitophels that contrive and carry on the design; these are the Shops wherein
Pro: 6. 14.
all mischief is forged and hammered out, if men bring forth iniquity, it is
conceived in their thoughts, and hatched in their imaginations; the platform
according Esa: 59. 4.
to which men do act, the work of iniquity is formed in their thoughts; these
are the principalls and the chief Plotters of all transgressions, evil words
and works are as it were sins at the second hand, the very first life and
freshest vigor of all ill, is immediately received and inspired by the flesh
into our thoughts.

The seventh Position.
7. Man's own corrupt thoughts are grand evils, they are of a high and heinous
nature, they are sins out of measure sinful: Thought-sins are the worst (...)
of sins; it is a remarkable speech of the learned Hebrews, that sinful
thoughts are more heavy then the sin it self. That is, then sinful works
flowing from man's thoughts, it is manifest by the Scriptures that the sins of
men's thoughts are more sinful then the sins of their words and visible works.
If the evil of their thoughts were put into one scale, and the evil of their
speeches and outward actions put together in the other, their thoughts would be
found the heaviest.

1. I grant that the evil and demerit which is in the smallest sin is great,
because in man's least and lowest swerving from the Rule; there is a violation
of an Infinite Justice and holiness, and a turning from an infinite good, and
therefore the guilt that springs from thence is after a sort infinite.

2. Yet it is clear by the Scriptures, that there are degrees of sin, that some
sins have a greater height and latitude of evil then others.

3. I grant that wicked words and deeds in respect of that scandalizing
property which attends them are worse then thoughts, because open impieties do
sadden the hearts of the righteous and strengthen the hands of the wicked and
infect many.

4. It is a real truth that evil thoughts in their own nature have an excess
of malignity beyond words and works; which is evident by these arguments.

1. Evil thoughts are precedents in all the evils that come from us, they are
the leading evils, as has been demonstrated: now it is a very great aggravation
of sin to be first in sinning; this added to Eves sin, she was first in the
trangression; this heightened the guilt of Jeroboam, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
he made Israel to sin: by his precedence he led on the people to the pollution
of Idols, the thoughts of men are the Jeroboams, the Leaders that cause their
speeches to sin, and conversations Esa: 9. 16.
to err, and therefore most justly do bear the greatest blame, their thoughts
first break the commandments of God, and then draw their affections and
actions to do the same.

2. The thoughts of men are the productors of all iniquity, the common parents
of all profaneness. The Plotters of all treasonable practices against the Lord
God: now the Contrivers and Hatchers of Treason have the greatest guilt and
suffer most.

3. Evil thoughts are most provoking sins, they exceedingly grieve and provoke
God against us, the perdition of sinners is chiefly caused by their thoughts,
this is most evident by that Indictment that God brings in against the old
world, which is purposely recorded as a warning to all men even to the worlds
end. Gen: 6. 5.


2. By that dreadful sentence that passes Lord declares them guilty o^ great
wickedness; and then he shows what this And every imagination of the thoughts
of man's heart was only evil. That is, the whole fixion and frame of man's
thoughts was wicked.

3. Now upon the declaration of their great provoking pollutions immediately
follows the sentence of death.

And it repented Jehovah that he had made man on the earth, etc. That is, And
the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the
earth, both man and beast; for it repents me that I have made them. Whereby it
appears, that evil thoughts were the highest and most horrid sins, whereby God
was most grieved and provoked by the old world: it is abundantly manifest in
the Scriptures, that the men of the old world were guilty of many actual
impieties, open pollutions and abominations. As 1. Profanation of Gods holy
Ordinances, in that the Members of the visible Church mingled themselves with
the corrupt seed of Cain in the enjoyment of Church Ordinances, Genesis 6. 1, 2.
it is said that when men began to multiply Genesis 6. 1, 2.
on the face of the earth, then the Sons of God saw the Daughters of men that
they were fair, and they took them wives of all which they chose.

By Sons of God are here meant the members of the visible Church, Deuteronomy: 14. 1.
for unto such Moses says, Ye are the Sons of Jehovah your God. They were the
Sons of Seth, and the other Patriarks.

These Daughters of men were of Cains Genesis 4. 14. (...)
Seed who were without the Church. From thy face shall I be hid or absent. (as
Gen: 4. 14.) says Cain unto Jehovah: That is, I shall be shut out from the
presence of God in his Church, as it follows verse 16. And Cain went out from
the presenoe of Jehovah, or from before the face of Jehovah. That is, from the
place of Gods word and public worship in Adams Family, who being a Prophet had
taught his Children to Sacrifice and serve the Lord; from the face of Gods
al-seeing Psalm. 556. Psalm. 139. 7. 12. Jer 23, 24.
providence none can be hidden: therefore it must needs be meant of Gods
presence in his Church, of which Cain was now deprived.

The Sons of God mingled themselves with the Daughters of men: That is, of
carnal men, 1 Cor: 3. 3. in their Church Fellowship, whereby the Law of
Church Communion was violated.

Ob. How does this appear, the Text seems to speak only of mingling in marriage?

Answ. In those days and many Generations after, the Church was only in
particular families; First in Adams, then in Seths, etc. The Sons of God by
joining in marriage with profane women, thereby took them to fellowship, to a
common participation of all Church Ordinances, whereby the holy things were
profaned. We have a full Text to this purpose, Genesis 4. 26. And to Seth, to him
also there was born a Son, (...)
and he called his name Enos: then began men profanely to call; or profaneness
began in calling on the name of Jehovah. That these words ought thus to be
read, Enoschum, id est, infestum aerumvis doloribusque. 235. years before men
began to call upon God. Seth would not as a Prophet call his son sorrowful,
Enosh if men had then began to call upon the name of God; Thus Mr: Broughton.
Tunc caeptum est invocari nomen vel pollui. Thus the Interline in the margin,
The learned Hebrews with much consent do record the first Apostasy to he at
Enosh his birth. Also Kimchi brings in this opinion as chief Then was corrupted
the calling upon the name of God.
is clear.

1. From the name Seth, gives to his Son Enos, by interpretation, sorrowful,
miserable, so named (as it seems) for the sorrowful state of those days
wherein great corruption began to appear in the Church, Gen: 6. 2. 3.

2. The Invocation of Gods name began not now, but in faithful Abels days.

3. Though the Hebrew word may be read, men began, or men profaned; yet it is
commonly understood here of the learned Hebrews to mean profaneness, and some
translating it began, take it thus, men began to call (their Idols) by the name
of the Lord; the sorrows and miseries of that age were very great, as the name
of Enos testifies, and the History following in Gen: 6. confirms, for impiety
crept into the church by unlawful marriages with Cains Seed Another great sin
whereof the old world was guilty, was Rebellion against the voice of God calling
them to repentance by Noah Preacher of Righteousness.

3. They were Resisters of Gods Spirit who strove with them by his heavenly
motions.

4. They were drowned in sensuality, 1 Pet: 1. 3. 19. 20. Genesis 6. 3. Matthew: 24.
37, 38, 39. They gave themselves to eating as bruit beasts: as the word
signifies. (...).
eathliness, and epicurisme.

5. They were abominable Apostates, Ge: 6. 4. There were Giants upon the earth
in those days: The Hebrew word Nephilim, which is read (Giants) has the
signification from falling, as being Apostate fallen from God.

6. They were Idolaters, Gen: 6. 11. The earth was corrupt: That is, the
Inhabitants of the earth, Gen: 11. 1. Corrupting (...) Nomen Hebraeum discendit
a verbo (...) Cadere and sic appellantur vel quia a vero Dei cultu deciderunt,
etc. Piscator.
is in special applied to Idolatry and depraving of the true Service of God,
Exodus: 32. 7. Deuteronomy: 32. 5. Judge: 2. 19. as the people are said to do corruptly.
2 Chronicles: 27. 2. when they Sacrificed and burnt Incense in the high places, 2
King: 15. 35.

7. They were Tyrannical Oppressors, falling upon men, and making them by fear
and force to fall before them.

8. The men of the old world broke out into cruel Robberies and Murders, for
which Calvin will have them called Giants; and this seems to be the opinion of
Chrysostom, Philo, and Josephus, Genesis 6. 13.
Gen: 6. 11. The earth was filled with violence, violent wrong, injurious and
cruel dealing, Rapines, or Robberies, as the Chaldee terms it.

9. They were full of gross infidelity and impenitency, not beleiving Gods
threats; yea they hardened they hearts against all reproofs, warnings, waitings,
1 Pet. 3. 20. Genesis 6. 3. Gigantes promiscuo concubitu polluebant faeminas
puellus mulieres. Pareus in Genes. 6.
and long-suffering of God.

10. They abounded in abominable adultries and bodily pollutions.

11. All Discipline lay trodden down publicly and privately: there was no
humanity left amongst men but beastiall barbarism in all places. These and
many more were the sins of the old world; yet when God comes to pass sentence
upon them, he does not allege these open defilements as the chiefest cause
of their destruction, but their evil thoughts rather: The greatest wickedness
which was alleged against them, Genesis 6. 5.
was the thoughts of their hearts: Because their thoughts were so many, and so
continually evil, they provoked God more then all their other sins.

Simon Magus had many foul sins, but the thought of his heart was his most
provoking sin. Hence it is that Peter advises him to pray God if it were
possible, Act. 8. 22.
that the thoughts of his heart might be forgiven him; as though there lay the
greatest guilt, and deepest stain before God.

4. The sins of men's thoughts are past all number, they are as the sand of the
Sea innumerable: How many thoughts do pass from them every hour, yea every
minute? What man can possibly understand how often he offends in his Psalm. 19.
thoughts every day.

This does exceedingly heighten the evil of our thoughts, and adds to their
weight. What is heavier then a Mountain Job. 6. 7.
of sand? There be four aggravations which do make the wickedness of man's
thoughts to rise up to a kind of Infiniteness; the thoughts of carnal men and
women are evil.

1. From their Childhood, yea from Genesis 8. 21.
their birth; as the great heart-searcher declares: the Hebrew word includes
not Exodus 2. 6. (...) A pueritia ejus. Ab eo momento quo fuit in lucem editus,
Schindler ex quo excussus est ex utero: We are al transgressors from the Womb:
Esa: 48. 8. Psalm. 51. 7. and 58. 4.
only man's age, but Infancy, or Child's age: A Jewish Rabbin confesses, that
the evil imagination is in man from the hour that he is formed.

2. The thoughts of natural men are evil continually every day and all the
day long, Gen: 6. 5. as the Hebrew word imports, the thoughts of man are
always acting, even when the body sleeps, the mind never lies still day nor
night, Psalm: 140. 3. wicked men are said to think (or imagne evils in their
heart all the day.

3. They are altogether evil, only evil. Genesis 6. 5. (...)


4. Every thought that carnal men think, is evil, and therefore their evil
thoughts must needs amount to a numberless sum: the sins of man's thoughts are
far more in number then all his other sins whatsoever.

2. Vain loose corrupt thoughts do make up the greatest part of that treasure
of sin, that sinners are heaping up against the day of wrath. O what a vast
treasure of wickedness is laid up in their thoughts? All wicked men have their
fullness of sin, which they fill up before Genesis 15.
they are cut off; the greatest fullness of sin is in their thoughts.

Position 8.
8. Corrupt thoughts are disturbing evils; Interrupters and Undoers of those
good things that we do: they exceedingly hurt and hinder us in all our
performances: loose worldly wandering thoughts do spoil us of two precious
things in our Prayers and Services:

1. Of our hearts, by drawing them another way, and causing us to bring empty
Oblations to God; that whereas we should draw nigh to God with our hearts, and
keep them close to him in every performance: our hearts by reason of our
wandering and impertinent thoughts, are far off from God. The Lord Esa. 29 16.
complains against the old Jews, That their hearts were going after their
covetousness, when they should have been intent and attent to the word: their
thoughts were then upon this present world, their earthly Possessions, Profits,
etc.

2. Wandering and earthly thoughts do spoil us of the acceptance of our holy
things; they are like a dead Fly in the Apothecaries Ointment.

Position 9.
9. Corrupt thoughts are deadly destroying evils.

1. They lead to the height of wrath and misery in this world. Evil thoughts
are the great leading begetting sins, and therefore in way of justice must needs
bring forth the greatest punishments; the greatest miseries that befall a
people or Nation in this world, as Sword, Famine, etc. are said to be the
fruits of their evil thoughts; as is evident Jer: 6. 19. Behold I bring evil
upon this people, In the drowning of the old World, the Lord had great respect
in that judgment to their wicked thoughts which were the root of all; and
therefore he mentions them as the cause of the Flood. Genesis 6. 5. 7. Thus Mr.
Perkins.
even the fruit of their thoughts.

The principal sin which brought that dreadful deluge and desolation upon the
old world was the wickedness of their thoughts. The thoughts of man's heart
were evil, and therefore God would destroy man and beast from the earth. Of all
visible Judgments that ever were on the face of the earth; this upon the old
world was the greatest, it is not to be paralleled by any judgment or vengeance
on earth, but that second deluge of fire at the last judgment, for the waters
cut off all mankind, except Noah and his (...) Di luvium lic dictum quod omnia
secerit concidere.
Family, and made all things fade and die on earth; as the Hebrew word Mabbul
(which is a peculiar name to Noah's Flood) imports.

2. Evil thoughts do lead to eternal punishments: They drown men's Souls in
perdition; the curse of the Law, even the flames of eternal Vengeance are due
to men for their wicked thoughts. cursed Deuteronomy 27. 26. Gal. 3.
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the Law to
do them. The man that breaks the Law but once, and that in thought only, is
accursed by the sentence of the Law, because he has not done all things that
are written therein: the least wry crooked thought makes men liable to endless
woe and wrath, Micha 2. 1. Woe unto those that think iniquity, says the Prophet.

If our minds be filled with carnal earthly thoughts, it is a sure sign that
we are in a state of damnation. Rom: 8. 6. (...) Chal. and Sir. Cogitatio
Buxtorf. (...) Alii Reddunt prudentiam, alii cogitationem. (...) Idem est Paulo
quod Mosi figmentum cordis humani, etc. Gen: 6. 5. Pareus Phil: 3. 19. (...)
declarat animi ad aliquid adjicere, and de re quapiam serio cogitare Beza.
To be carnally minded is death. It manifests dead Souls estranged from the
glorious life of Christ. The Syriack reads the words thus, The thought of the
flesh is death: and so others read it; that is, carnal corrupt thoughts
lodging in men's hearts leads to eternal death. And this reading (I conceive)
comes nearest to the Greek, and to the intent and scope of the Text; as is
evident by comparing Phil: 3. 19 Whose end is perdition, who mind earthly
things. That is, damnation will be the end of those whose minds are
delightfully taken up with the thoughts of earthly profits, pleasures, honors,
who think upon the vain things of this present world, more then the truths of
Gods word. Evil thoughts was that great wickedness that principally condemned
the old world, and cast their Souls into the prison of Hell, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.
The Spirits of those ungodly men (to whom Christ once preached by Noah's
ministry) are now in prison: there is evil enough in vain, unclean, sensual,
worldly thoughts, to condemn and cast a whole world of men into the torments
Prove: 21. 16. (...) in Caetu Gigantum. Thus Mr. Mede reads it. (...) Gigas
plur. (...) Gigantes ^tem mortui, Buxtorf. (...) sunt (...) Gigantes fortes,
and mortui infernales. Munsterus (...) Gigantes, Schindler Manes, or mortui.
of Hell for ever. Hence it is that Hell it self has its name from these
wicked Giants of the old world, Prove: 21. 16. The man that wandreth out of the
way of understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of the Giants; according
to the Original, it is, In the Congregation of the Rephaim. Which word properly
signifies Giants; and in that sense is always rendered by the Seventy, (...);
or (...): though we and the latter Interpreters both in this and some other
places take it for the dead, and the spirits of dead men.

Quest. What is this Congregation of the Giants?

Answ: It is the place of the damned, that infernal Prison wherinto those
Giants are cast, who rebelled against God in the days of Noah, of whom we read
in Gen: 6. Those mighty men of the old world, whose wickedness was so great on
the earth, and the thoughts of their hearts so evil continually, that it
repented and grieved God that he had made man. Sinners that wander out of the
way of understanding, shall be added to the Congregation of those damned Gyans
in Hell; they shall go to that accursed place in which they are, and abide with
them in endless pains. Thus Rabbi Solomon expounds this Text. In coetu Rephalm.
That is, says Rabbi Solomon in his Gloss upon this Text. (...) Id caetu
Gehennae. (...) ad Gigantes. (...). Prove. 9: 18. (...)


2. That these words ought thus to be interpreted, is evident by comparing
other places of Scripture, where the like expression is used, as twice more in
this book of Proverbs. as Prove: 2. 18. where according to the Vulgar Reading
the words run thus: For her house inclines to death, and her paths unto the
dead. But in the Heb. it is, And her paths to the Giants: which the 70. render
thus by way of interpretation, She has set her path in Hell with the Giants:
and Pro: 9. 18. Stolen waters are sweeter -- and he knows not (namely he that
goes to a strange woman) that the Giants are there, and her Guests in the
depths of Hell. This is the proper reading of the words according to the
Hebrew: Hence observe, that the Giants place is the depths of Hell. The meaning
of both these places is evidently this, that Adulterers shall have their portion
with those Apostate Giants in Hell torments.

So in Job 26. 5. Hell is there elegantly expressed by the wailing of those
Rephaim, or dead Giants.

The Giants do sorrow or wail under the (...)
waters (or from under the waters) and they that dwell with them. Hell is naked
before him (that is before God) and perdition has no covering. The 5. v: is
read otherwise by our English and other Translat: but I conceive this reading
is most agreeable to the Original, and the true scope and intent of the Text
it self; it is thus translated by the vulgar Latin: The Giants wail under the
waters etc. The meaning hereof says judicious Mr. Mede seems to be this: The
place where the old Giants mourn or wail under the waters, and their fellow
Inhabitants, the rest of the damned with them, even Hell and the place of
perdition it self is naked and open to the eyes of God, from whom nothing is
hid: Which is agreeable to that in Prove: 15. 11. Hell and destruction are
before the Lord, etc. In this place the Jews take the word Abaddon which we
render destruction for Gehenna, that is, The house of destruction. For the
further clearing of this mystery, I shall present these 2. things to be duly
weighed. 1 That the word Rephaim which is used in these 4. Prove. 21. 16. and 9.
18. and 2. 18. Job 26. 5.
places, does naturaly and properly signify Giants, and is so translated in our
English Bibles in other places. 2. That Hell or the place of the damned, is
very fitly called the Congregation, or place of the Giants.

1. This word Rephaim does primarily Torg. (...) Gigantes in Asteroth. LXX.
(...).
and properly signify Giants, as is generally confessed by those that
understand the Hebrew, it signifies Giants and mighty men

Hence it is used to express those mighty Gigantive people in Genesis 14. 5.
Chedorlaomer smote the Rephaim in Ashteroth, Genesis 15. 20.
etc. That is, the Giants, as they are called by the Greek and Chaldee
Paraphrast, and the Hebrew word is used expressly for Giants, Deuteronomy: 2. 11. Rapha
Deuteronomy: 2 11. (...) Verse. 20. (...) Josh: 15: 8. (...) Genesis 6. 4. (...)
was the name of a Giant in Nob, who had four Sons Giants in David's days, 2 Samuel: 21. 16. 22. But these Rephaims were now a people in Canaan: Ashteroth was
a City in Basan, where Ogg the Giant after Reigned, Josh: 13. 31.

2. This word Rephaim is by our English Translators rendered Giants, Deuteronomy. 2.
11. 20. Which also were accounted Giants as the Anakims that also was accounted
a Land of Giants (of Rephaims Giants.) Rephaims dwelt there in the old time,
Josh: 1. 58. The valley of the Giants Northward. Thus our English Bible
renders the word Rephaim.

3. Hell, or the place of the damned is Rabbi Bech. scribit, Deuteronomy: 2 (...) etc.
Id est vocantur (...) propterea quod quicunque eos aspiceret manus ejus
remissae si erent metu se. unde and (...) Vocantur nec est Incredibile homines
in mundo primaevo plerosque grandioris staturae fuisse Pareus Gigantes
monstrosae magnitudinis isti (...) declarantur fuisse potentes and viri nominis
Pareus.
very fitly called the Congregation, or place of the Giants, or Rephaims.

1. Because those Giants of the old world were sinners of the greatest Eminency
in those days; They were men of name.

1. For height of stature, they were men of vast bodies, terrible to all
Beholders: Such as Goliath is described to be, and the Sons of the Anakims;
Their stature was so horrid, that the hearts and hands of those that beheld
them, did fall with fear, therefore they are called Rephaim and Emims: Yea,
there is that Enormous talness ascribed to Giants, Number: 13. verse. last, That
the Spies of Israel looked on themselves as Grasshoppers in comparison of them.

It is credible that most men in those days of old were of a very grand
stature for many ages. After the Flood we read of whole Nations, People and
Lands that were Giants, tall as the Anakims, Genesis 14. 5. Deuteronomy: 2. verse. 11. 20.
People great and many, tall as the Anakims.

2. These Giants of the old world were men of name and fame for height of all
impiety and cruelty; for they trusting in their Gigantive strength and hugeness
of stature, trod down all things under their feet: They were a monstrous cruel
Cyclopicall kind of men, fearing neither God nor man: They were full of
violence and Villainies in their works, filled with vanity and vileness in their
thoughts, which was the root and top of all their wickedness.

2. These impious Giants would be accounted men of name for Religion and Piety,
as the Pope, Cardinals and his Bishops, being really Antichristian, cruel and
unholy, yet will be called most holy, reverend, and men of Clemency, as Luther
observes.

3. The multitude of those Giants and their wickedness was so great, that the
Flood was sent purposely and principally to destroy these Monsters, though the
corruption and calamity were universal.

4. There was such a world of these cursed Giants that went down to Hell in one
day, that Hell it self may fitly receive its denomination from them: The
Hellish prison was almost empty, till these Rephaims came in, the companies of
Giants that were gathered at once into Hell, and there met together, were so
many, that the place of damned sinners is properly called the Congregation of
the Giants. Prove. 21. 16.


These had the pre-eminence in naming the place of eternal suffering, as they
had pre-eminence in sinning. They that are cast into that prison since the
Flood, are their fellow Inhabitants, such as are daily added to the
Congregation of infernal Giants. Now it is remarkable, Job 26 5:
that the chief capital sins which were laid to the charge of these damned
Giants were their evil thoughts, and therefore for their thoughts chiefly were
they cast into the flames of eternal vengeance.

10. Man's evil thoughts are the strong holds of the evil one; all unrenewed
Position 10. Matthew. 12 43, 44. Act. 26. 18.
men are under the power and possession of the Devil. This strong man has his
strong holds whereby he holds men under his power, 2 Cor. 10. 4. In these Forts
is Satan's greatest trust and triumph, these strong holds are mainly man's
mountainous thoughts; as 1. High thoughts of self-righteousness. 2. Strong
conceits of self ways.

1. Many poor Souls are strongly possessed with thoughts of their own
righteousness; this is the great strong hold whereby Satan possesses their
Souls: we are apt to think that there is something in our prayers and
performances that may be our righteousness, life, acceptance, and atonement
before God. These raised thoughts are those Mountains that must be brought low,
before we can see the Lord to be our Salvation. A Fort is a Mountain raised up,
or a Luk: 3. 4, 5.
Castle raised upon a Mountain or Hill.

1. These self-exalting thoughts are that strong hold wherein men do shelter
themselves against the storms of wrath; they are much in duties, and far from
open defilements therefore wrath shall not come near them at the great day of
wrath, and revenge as they conceive.

2. These high thoughts that men have of their own righteousness, are that
strong hold which keeps them from submitting to the righteousness of God. Rom:
10.


3. Men naturally have strong conceits of their own ways, of the goodness of
their own spiritual Estates; They are alive in their own apprehensions, and
this is another strong hold of Satan, Prove: 14. 12. There is a way that is
right in the sight of man, but the last (...)
end thereof are the ways of death So Prove: 16. 23. All the ways of a man are
clean in his own eyes: Every way of a man is right in his own eyes. There be
thousands Prove. 11. 21. 2.
of Souls that think their ways are right in Gods sight, and themselves in the
right way to Heaven, yet at last it appears to be the way of Hell; mere
moralists, legal and formal Professors do frame presumptions, principles, and
premises in their own thoughts to build conclusion of Salvation upon. This was
Paul's case before the Law came in power and spirit unto him; he thought Phil. 3.
himself blameless, and in a state of light and life, that if any living went
to Heaven, it should be Paul a Pharisee: See what himself speaks, Rom: 7. 9. I
once was alive without the Law, but when the Commandment came, sin revived,
but I dyed. That is, when the Law came to me in its spirituality; I now had
experience of the falseness and folly of my former thoughts, I now saw my self
a dead undone man: thus that Pharisee in Luk: 18. and the foolish Virgins, had
such strong conceits that their ways were right, that he gives thanks for it,
Luke 18. 10. 11. 12. Matthew. 25. 11, 12.
and they came knocking at Heaven Gates for admission: Yea the worst of sinners
do conceive a propriety in God; this is evident, Hos: 8. 2. Israel will cry
unto me, my God, we know thee. Yet this Israel had cast off the thing that is
good. verse 3. and Micha 3. 11. The heads thereof judge for Rewards, and the
Priests thereof teach for hire. Their Priests and Prophets did mind their own
gain more then the gaining of Souls: Their Judges looked to Rewards more then
Righteousness, Yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say (that is in their
hearts) Is not Jehovah in the mids of us? By a most intimate presence, as the
Hebrew word imports; No evil can come upon us. Men that are strangers to the
light and life of grace, and full of self-love, are apt to think well of their
spiritual Estate, upon presumptions and principles formed in their own
imaginations. The Philosopher tells us of a Sea, wherein by Aristot Problem.
the hollowness of the earth under it, or some whirling and attractive property
that draws the Vessel into it, Ships use to be cast away in the mids of a
Calm; even so a number of Souls do gently perish in mids of their own secure
conceits and presumptuous imaginations: As the Fish Polypus changes himself
into the color of the Rock, and then devours those that come thither for
shelter: So men do shape their misthoughts and mis-apprehensions into a form of
Christ and Faith in him, and so destroy themselves.

This strong hold that sin and Satan has in the sinners thoughts must be
overturned, before they can be turned to God.

The Mystery of Iniquity working in man's Thoughts.
MARK 7. 21, 22, 23. From within out of the heart of men proceed evil
Thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Wickedness, Lasciviousness,
Blasphemy, Pride, foolishness, etc. All these evil things come from within and
defile the man.
IN these words there are three things clearly presented to our consideration.

1. That all kind of evil thoughts do proceed out of the heart of men by
corrupt nature.

2. Evil thoughts are the great leading and misleading sins, therefore they are
set in the first place, and placed in the forefront.

3. Evil thoughts are grand defiling sins.

I have showed you the pernicious pestilentious properties of man's thoughts; I
will now give you some general discoveries of the diverse kinds of evil
thoughts which proceed out of the hearts of all men and women, and do work
efficaciously in them, so long as they stand in their natural corrupt estate,
whereby the Mystery of Iniquity working in the thoughts will evidently appear.

To make a punctual discovery of the iniquity and ilness of man's thoughts in
all prticularities of actings is a work that the wisest man is not able to
perform. I shall only present unto you a general survey of that world of
wickedness which is acted in the thoughts of men.

1. The first evil thought which proceeds out of the heart of men, is a
thought of Atheism, a thought that there is no God: which as it is first in
order of working, so it is of all other the most detestable and damnable
thought which yet exceedingly prevails in these evil days, this Atheistical
thought by corrupt nature possesses the heart of every man, as appears by the
express testimony of him who is the Thought-searcher, Psalm: 14. 1. The fool
has said in his heart there is no God. Thoughts are the speakings of the heart
so Psalm: 10. 4. it is said of the wicked man, That all his thoughts are, there is
no God. Thus it is in the Margin of our Bibles, and it fitly answers the Hebrew
Text.

Quest: Who is this wicked fool that Psalm. 10. 4. (...)
thinks there is no God.

Answ: Not only some feared sinners, but every unregenerate man and woman, even
those that are otherwise of a civil converse; their depraved minds do incline
to this Atheistical thought, though they are ashamed to speak it with their
tongues; therefore St. Paul in Rom: 3. Setting forth the sinful estate of all
men by corrupt nature, he alleges the authority of those two Psalms
forecited, as expressly speaking of every man as he is in his natural folly.

Obj: It is a principle implanted in man's Romans 1. 18, 19, 20, 21.
nature that there is a God, how then can this unnatural thought of Atheism
be natural to any man.

Ans. 1. The light of nature that comes John 1.
from the second Adam, enlightening every man that comes into the world:
Enclines men to think and believe that there is a God; but the darkness and
defilement of nature (which comes from the first Adams fall) makes men proud to
think that there is no God.

2. Carnal men are apt to think that there is no such holy Righteous
All-knowing Sin-revenging God, as the Scripture declares, Psalm. 10. verse 4.
and 11. compared Psalm: 50. 21.

Ob: But we never discovered or discerned any such Atheistical thought in our
selves.

Ans: Unregenerate men cannot always know the thoughts of their own deceitful
hearts.

2. This reflexive Cogitation whereby we discern and know what we think, is
properly Conscience: Now in man's lapsed Estate Conscience is corrupted and
carnal, sleepy and secure, blind and polluted; whence it is that it cannot
faithfully Titus 1. 15.
perform its Office, in giving in true testimony what man's corrupt mind
thinks.

3. Thoughts are called the secrets of the heart, hidden thoughts, therefore
they are not so easily discerned as the affections and outward actions.

Quest: How may we certainly know that we are guilty of this abominable
Atheistical thought.

Answ: There be three infallible signs set down in Psalm. 14.; as

1. A corrupt conversation, verse 2, 3. They have corrupted themselves, they
that walk on in wicked ways against the clear light of Gods word and the Law
of nature, are those that think that there is no God.

2. Slighting and neglect of Prayer,

3. They that scoff and jeer at the

4. They that are afraid to commit sin in the presence of man, and yet in the
presence of Gods all-searching eye do secretly work iniquity: they that use
deceit, lying, and falsehood in their dealings with men, these do think that
there is no all-knowing God to take notice of their ways and to call them to a
reckoning.

2. The second grand evil thought which proceeds out of man's heart, is an
Idolatrous thought: What a world of Idolatry, spiritual Idolatry is committed
in our thoughts, and yet few of us take notice thereof? There be two ways
whereby we are guilty of high Idolatry by thinking.

1. By turning the true God into an Idol of our own fancy.

2. By exalting the Creature into the place of God.

1: It is a common thing for man's carnal imagination to turn the true God into
an Idol; therefore the Ephesians before their convertion are said to be Ephesians. 2.
12.
without God in the world: For though the wisest of the Gentiles did acknowledge
one Infinite Being, Creator of Heaven and Earth; yet because they did not in
their minds rightly conceive of God, suitable to his spiritual Excellencies,
they had no God, but mere Psalm. 96. 5.
Idols.

Quest: What are those Idolatrous thoughts whereby the mind of man turns the
Infinite God into an Idol?

Answ: There be six gross thoughts which do notoriously possess the heart of
every man by corrupt nature.

1. Carnal men conceive there is no all-present Being, they think that God is
confined to a certain place, shut up in Heaven, and not present in all places:
Thus by denying the Omni-presence of God, the mind of man imagines God to be
such a one as he is not, and so turns him into an Idol.

2. That sinners are guilty of this Idolatrous thought is evident by the
Scriptures, as Job. 22. 12. 13. Eliphaz does personate wicked men, and brings
them in speaking of God in their hearts, as if he were confined to the highest
Heaven: Is not God on high in the Heaven? Behold the height of the Stars; how
high they are. How should God know? Can he Judge it? Omnipresence is an
essential property Jer 23, 24. 1 King. 8. 27. Psalm. 139.
of God, and therefore they that conceive of God as included in any place, or
excluded from any place, as circumscribed, defined, or contained in the Heaven
of Heavens, as personally fixed to any one place, as present in near and not in
remote places, they do hereby turn God into an Idol of their own brains.

2. Carnal men conceive there is no all-ruling providence of God, whereby he
observes and orders all things in the world particularly; they imagine that
God walks in the circuit of the Heaven, not minding or regarding what is done
here on Earth, either to reward the righteous or to punish the wicked: sinners
settled on their Lees, say in their hearts, The Lord will neither do good nor
Psalm. 10, 11.
evil.

2. They conceive that the great God does not look upon small matters done on
Earth, whereas it is his Glory to behold small low things and things on Earth.
Psalm. 113. 5. 6.


3. Carnal persons think that there is no all knowing power, who does see and
take notice of all their actings: that these are their common thoughts is
manifest by diverse Texts, as Psalm: 10: 13. The wicked man's says in his heart.
(That is, he thinks) God has forgotten, he hides away his face, he will not
see, or, not at all respect for ever. If he do see our ways, yet he quickly
forgets them, and Psalm: 94. 7. The wicked say, The Lord shall not see, neither
shall the God of Jacob Job 22. 12, 13. Ezekiel 8. 12. Esa. 29. 15.
regard it. How should God know? Can he discern through dark Clouds? These are
the Hellish thoughts of men in their actings of sin, whereby they conceive God
to be like themselves, and turn him into an Idol, yea a Heathenish Idol, that
have has eyes and see not.

4. Men by corrupt nature are apt to think that there is not an All-powerful
Being, they have low slight thoughts of Gods power, they think he has but
little strength, or can do but little with it, Job: 22. 17. What can the
Almighty do against them, or for them. Esa: 5. 19. Let us see what God can do,
let him make speed, let him hasten his work that we may see it. We have heard
much talk by our Preachers of the power of his anger, let him do his utmost, he
can do us no great hurt; these are the presumptuous thoughts of evil men.

2. Poor Souls at their first looking toward Christ, are apt to limit the
power of God, and to think thus in their hearts if our sins were of a lighter
and lower nature, we could then conceive they might be pardoned: but can God
pardon such black bloody sins, crying capital Crimes, prevarications and
proclamations as we are guilty of? Can he subdue these Anakims, our predominate
lusts? can he soften our stony hearts, and quiet our turbulent affections?
which we cannot think how it can be done: So when we are brought into the
Mount, and all outward means fail, we are ready to think, can God deliver us?
can he provide for us? etc.

By this limiting the power of God in our thoughts, we conceive him like to our
selves in a finite perfection, and thereby we turn him into an Idol of our own
fancy.

5. Ungodly ones conceive God to be all mercy, and no justice: They think to
find life in the way of death; they continue in a course of sinning, and yet
they imagine that no evil can come unto Amos 6. 3. and 9. 10.
them, they say in their heart we shall have peace though we walk on in the
stubborness Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.
of our hearts, etc. By these presumptuous men's thoughts take away the Justice
and Truth of God, and make him all mercy, one who will not punish sin, nor
perform his threatenings, and so they make him an Image of man's imagination.

6. Carnal men do think that God is like to themselves, they have low carnal
conceits of his glorious spiritual perfections. This the Thought-searcher
declares against those wicked ones, Psalm: 50. 21. Thou thoughtest surely that I
was like unto thee; that I was and would be as thou art. There is a strange
proness in men's corrupt minds to think that God is like to man: they do frame
conceits of the essential and personal properties and operations of God,
according to those imperfect perfections, properties and actings, that they see
in themselves: Hence it is that the Scripture tells us that God is not a man,
nor as a man. Whereunto Numb. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 25.
will ye liken me, says Jehovah. Which speeches do import that there is a
pronesse in our carnal imaginations to change the Infinite God into the
likeness of man: Yea, what sin is there to which we are more inclined, then to
these Idolatrous thoughts: If we take notice of our daily thoughts, we shall
find sad experience hereof; we bless our selves that we are no Idolaters, whereas
the heart of every man by corrupt nature frames a thousand false Gods in its
thoughts: every undue unsuitable thought and imagination that we have of God, is
a framing of a false God in our minds: we must think nothing of God, but what
he declares of himself in the Scripture; whatsoever we think and conceive of
God either contrary or otherwise then he has revealed of himself, is the
turning the true God into an Idol; as there is a changing the Glory of the
Incorruptible God, into the external likeness of men and other Creatures, by
Ethnic Idolaters, that great sin for Romans 1. 23.
which the Gentiles stand Indicted: so there is a changing the glory of God into
the internal likeness of men's fancies, by mis-conceivings and wrong
apprehensions of God in their minds; this is spiritual Idolatry whereof we are
exceeding guilty in our thoughts; as

1. When we conceive God to be like to man in any of those glorious
perfections, virtues, or affections that are attributed to him.

2. When we measure the Infinite power of God in our thoughts, by that limited
weak power that is in man: as because men cannot forgive great trespasses done
against them, we are apt to think that God cannot pardon our great
transgressions, Isa. 55. 8, 9.

3. When we conceive God to be that which he is not, this is thought-Idolatry.

4. When we imagine any thing of God that imports the least imperfection or
deficiency; as

1. When we think that God is changed by our Actings, Prayers, Humiliations,
etc.

2. Or that he is a gainer by our Services, whereas the Scripture declares, that
strong man Geber, man in his highest strength of acting cannot be profitable
Job 22. 2: (...)
to God, Job 35. Psalm. 162. Luk 17. 9, 10. (...) Geber, the name of man in
respect of his strength.

3. If we think that we can oblige God as a Debtor to us; or

4. That there can be the least addition to his Essential Glory by all that
glory that we give unto him in our acknowledgments, these are Idolatrous
thoughts which do change the glory of God into the likeness of our selves, and
so make him an Idol.

It is a provoking sin to conceive amiss of God in any of his glorious
Attributes; when we do not speak that is right of him in our thoughts. It was
the great sin of Eliphaz and his two friends, that they did not speak that,
that Job 42.
was right of God: Their mis-speakings of God did proceed from their
mis-conceivings of him.

Qu. If every undue thought and mis-apprehension of God in our minds be horrid
hateful and Idolatry, O then how may we conceive and think of God aright
according to Scripture Discoveries?

Answ. There be diverse divine Principles and Rules that I shall present unto
you for the rectifying of your thoughts and apprehensions in conceiving of God
and his glorious Attributes.

1. The Properties or Attributes of Proprietates divinae naturae seu essentiae
sunt attributa Dei essentialia quibus essentiae divinae veritas ac Majestas
nobis innotescit and ab ali^s distinguitur. Wedclivus.
God (whereby the Majesty and Glory of the divine Essence is manifested to us)
are essential Perfections in God; for whatsoever is in God the same is God:
these Attributes differ not from the divine Essence; Gods power is himself, his
mercy is himself, and not different from his Essence.

2. These Attributes in God are one most pure simple Act.

3. They are all absolute Properties in God, and so distinguished from those
Relative Properties, whereby every person, in the glorious Trinity has his own
subsistence.

4. These Essential Attributes, Omniscience, Omnipotency, Mercy, Eternity,
etc. are all equally in all the three Persons as equally possessing the Divine
Being.

5. They are the peculiar properties of Rom: 16. 27. Matthew. 19. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 15.
God possessed by him alone, God is only wise: He alone is God and King of
Kings.

6. All these Attributes are affirmed and spoken of God as truly in the
abstract, as in the Concrete, God is not only merciful, but Mercy it self; he
is Attributa Dei sunt ipsissima Dei essentia. 1 John 1. 5. and 4 18. Joh 8. 12.
7.
wisdom it self, light, life, and glory it self: this cannot be spoken of any
Creature whatsoever. God is goodness and truth it self, he is so light that in
him there is no darkness.

7. Those Attributes that are in some respect communicable to the Creatures,
they are in God principally and originally; in the Creatures secondarily and by
participation, as wisdom, mercy, and holiness, etc. whatsoever is good in the
Creatures, it is first in God as the Fountain, it is in the Creatures, but as in
the Cistern.

2. This Excellency is in God most eminently, Infinitely above all degree and
measure.

8. The Attributes of God are all Eternal, Psalm. 105. 8. Jam. 1. 17. Psalm.
136. 1. and 100. 5. Psalm. 117: 2: Number. 23. 10.
Infinite, Unchangable, and Immeasurable, his Attributes are not mutable
Accidents, but his very Essence; they are Infinitely in God at one time as well
as another, his love and mercy are like himself Infinite and Immutable.

9. The Attributes and Excellencies of God admit no intrinsecall intention or
extention, augmentation, or diminunition in themselves; though God may Non
recipient magis and minus
manifest more of his power, grace, and mercy in one external work, then in
another, more to one Creature then to another.

10. There is no priority in the divine Attributes themselves, but only in
regard In seipsis non admittunt prius aut posterius. In Gods external works
some one attribute may have the pre-eminence as power in creation. Romans 1. 19,
20. Mercy in the glorious work of redemption.
of us, for all these Attributes are one divine Essence.

11. The Attributes of God are not contrary one to another, but have the
sweetest harmony among themselves, yet in their effects and operations Justice
and Mercy are contrary, Mercy pardons and spares; Justice punishes, and
condemns sinners.

12: In the attribution of any essential perfection or property to God; there
must be an abstraction and removing of all imperfection that accompanies such
like properties in the Creatures, and the perfection thereof must be conceived
with the greatest height of Eminency and Excellency in him: All wisdom and
power, all grace and holiness, all sweetness of affections they are in God, and
from him, and the way whereby we come to conceive these glorious properties
which be in God, is,

1. By feeling the power and comfort thereof in our selves.

2. By observing those Excellencies in their measure to be in the best of
Creatures, whence we arise to apprehend and take notice of what grace and love,
what wisdom and strength, what mercy and goodness, etc. is in God by the beams
of these that we see in the Creatures; for whatsoever is excellent in the
Creatures, is first in God, it is in the Creatures by participation and
derivation.

3. By Gods manifestation of himself to us by those properties in the
Scriptures, and this is the surest, nearest, and cleerest way whereby we attain
to right conceptions and apprehensions of Gods glorious Being. But now in the
attributing of any of those perfections or affections to God, that are in any
sort communicable to the Creatures, we must carefully mind these two Rules.

1. There must be in our thoughts an abstracting of all imperfections that are
incident to the Creatures, as for example. Mercy is in God and it is in men;
now in conceiving mercy to be in God, we must abstract all the Imperfections
which accompany mercy as it is in us, mercy as it is found in man cannot be
ascribed unto God: There are certain acts of mercy in man that cannot be
affirmed to God; mercy as it is in man has these three eminent internal acts.

1. The first is Condolency, when a man has an inward sense of another misery
and is afflicted in the sense thereof, this is called Compassion.

2. The second act is a Velleity, to relieve those that are in misery, though
men may want power to do it, neither of these acts can agree to the mercy of
God.

1. Condolency cannot be in God, for where there is no passion there can be no
compassion properly: this affection is inconsistent with men, glorified in
Heaven.

2. God is able to help whom soever he will; mercy is in men with deliberation,
not so in God.

3. A third act of mercy is an absolute will, of releiving the miserable, and
this is granted to be in God: we do highly dishonor God, and make him an Idol,
if we conceive any affection or virtue to be in God as it is in the Creatures.

2. Whatsoever virtue or excellency we ascribe unto God, we must conceive Rule
2.
it to be in him in the Superlative transcendency of perfection and plenitude
that is peculiar to a God; for those Excellencies are in God Immediately and
Infinitely, the sparks whereof only appears in us.

13. The essential properties of God are not really distingu^shed among Esa.
43. 25. Non distinguntur re, sed ratione.
themselves, nor from his Essence: Gods mercy is himself, and not different
from his Essence. All the Attributes of God are one Act in God.

14. Those Attributes that do formally include any thing peculiarly proper to
the Divine Essence, are altogether Incommunicable, as Omniscience,
Omni-potency, Omni-presence, Immensity and such like.

The Image of Gods wisdom, holiness, mercy is communicable, and is implanted in
the Saints: but there is no similitude of Gods Omni*potency, Immensity,
Omni-presence that can be communicated to Angels or men; these are
Incommunicable Properties, and agree to God alone.

2. All the Attributes of God considered in themselves, and as they are in God,
are altogether Incommunicable, for they are his Essence it self, thus God is
only wise; yet they are rightly divided into Incommunicable and Communicable,
because some of them do imprint their Image on the Creature, as wisdom,
goodness, righteousness, etc. in which respect only (as I conceive) they are
called Communicable.

15. Those divine Attributes that are said to be communicated to the Creatures,
they agree to them by way of analogy or likeness, and yet these attributes as
they are in God, differ infinitely from those properties that are given to
Angels and men: those properties as they are in God are most perfect, infinite,
unchangable, they are the Divine Essence it self, and therefore in reality are
all one: but in Angels and men these properties are finite; imperfect and
changable, mere qualities and diverse, they receiving them by participation only.

16. The Divine Attributes are not multiplied in the persons of the glorious
Trinity, for as there is one Essence of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, so
there is also one Eternity, one Omnipotency, one Omniscience, Immutability,
etc. The Father is Eternal, Almighty, most Holy, merciful omniscient, so is
the Son and the Holy Spirit: therefore though the Father be Omnipotent, and the
Son Omnipotent, and the Holy Spirit Omnipotent, yet there are not three
Omnipotents, but these three are One Almighty God.

17. God in himself is an Essence Spiritual, invisible, most simple, infinite,
immutable, incorporeall, self-sufficient, etc. to us he is all-sufficient,
gracious, merciful, abundant in goodness and truth, righteous, long-suffering,
etc. Thus we must conceive of him.

1 Some Attributes declare Gods own sufficiency, thus he is said to be
all-powerfull, infinite, eternal, unchangable.

2. Others declare his Efficiency, as the working of his power, Justice,
Goodness in, and upon the creatures; thus he is said to be righteous,
merciful, and patient.

Object.

The Scriptures declare and speak God to be a Spiritual Incorporeall Essence,
and not as man, and yet they attribute to God members, and humane senses and
affections, as hands, arms, eyes, ears, etc. Now the greatest difficulty is to
have right thoughts and conceptions of God in respect of these Attributes* that
we may not by any undue thought turn him into an Idol.

Answ. For the regulating and rectifying of our thoughts and apprehensions
about these Tropicall Attributes that are spoken of God in Scriptures, we must
know, 1. That there are diverse Attributes that are ascribed unto God Tropically
by way of Figure, not properly, these are called figurative Attributes. 2. In
these figurative Attributes Metaphoricae attributa Dei sunt quae proprie quidem
sunt rerum creatarum, at Deo per metaphoram seu similitudinem tribuuntur.
(...), vel (...) Est metaphora, qua, ea quae hominum sunt, Deo per
similitudinem tribuuntur.
we must especial mind and study those that are Metaphorical.

Quest. What are these Metaphorical Attributes of God.

Answ. They are those that belong to things created properly, but they are
spoken of God by a Metaphor or Similitude; for the Scriptures often speaks of
God according to our capacity: of these some are taken from men, some from
other Creatures. Those Attributes that are taken from men, are said to be
ascribed to God, by Anthropomorphosis, or Anthropopatheia, which is a Metaphor
whereby those things that are proper to men, are attributed unto God by
similitude; for properly God (being a Spirit Infinite and Incomprehensible)
has neither face, nor eyes, nor hands, nor any such thing, but these things
are spoken of God after the manner of men: and thus the parts of man, his
members, senses, affections, actions, Levit. 26. 11. Esa. 1. 14. Jer. 5. 29.
Amos 6. 8. Psalm. 11. 5. (...) Job 23.
subjects and adjuncts are attributed to God.

1. A Soul, which is an essential part of man, is ascribed to God, Job 23. 13.
We must not conceive that God is like unto man, as if he had a Soul and Body as
man has; for God is one simple spiritual Being:

1. The Soul of God is put for God himself, Jer. 6. 8. When Gods Soul departs
from men, he forsakes them fully and for ever; a man may depart from his friend
in respect of bodily presence, and yet his soul may be still with him, but when
he departs from him in his soul, he forsakes him totally and finally.

2. The Soul of God signifies height and intensiveness of affections, as when
Gods Soul hates wicked men and their performances, it signifies his rejection
Psalm. 11. 5. Esa. 1. 14.
of them with the highest hatred, and abhorrency.

3. Gods rejoicing to do good to his people with all his Soul, is his showing
mercy to them with the greatest height, fullness and freeness of Fatherly love
and complacency.

2. The members of the body are attributed to God, as Head, Face, Heart, etc.

1. By the Head of God, the Scripture understands the Essence of the Deity it
self which is above all things, and whereunto all things are subject, 1 Cor. 11.
3. Dan. 7. 9. 1 Cor. 11. 7. (...) Pater scilicet. Phil. 2. 6. 7. 8.
God is said to be the Head of Christ, whereby we may conceive this Mystery,
that Christ was subject to God, so far as in our flesh, he subjected himself to
God the Father: For as the Son of God is of one Essence with the Father, he is
equal with him.

God the Father is the Head of Christ.

1. In respect of his humane nature, in (...) Pater Christi (...) mediatorisque
personam sustinentis caput est.
which regard the Father is said to be greater then he, Joh. 14. 28.

2. In respect of his Office, as sustaining the person of a Mediator.

2. The Face of God signifies that Divine strength, grace, and mercy whereby
Psalm. 27. 8.
Gods manifests himself and is known by his people, as we by the face are
known to others; the face is that whereby one man is known from another in
respect of his person, Gal. 1. 21. I was unknown by face unto the Churches.

2. Gods face is his favor and good will in the manifestation thereof, Dan. 9.
Psalm. 4 6.
17. this is called the shining of Gods face upon his people, Psalm. 80. 3. 19.
Psalm. 31. 16.

3. The face of God signifies his presence in his Church and public
Ordinances, wherein the faithful have the Vision and Communication of God, 1 Samuel 29. 19. Jonas 1. 3. Psalm. 51. 11.
Genesis 4. 14. 16. From thy face shall I be absent, or banished.

4. It signifies Comfort flowing from the manifestation of Gods favor, Psalm.
69. 17. Hide not thy face from thy Servant, for I am in trouble, shine upon me
and comfort me, Psalm. 31. 16.

5. The face of the Lord signifies open Levit. 17. 10. and 26. Genesis 32. 20.
Lam. 4 16. Jer. 3. 13. Psalm. 21. 10. (...)
anger; the face shows forth favor or wrath, pleasure or displeasure, 1 Pet.
3. 12. The face of the Lord is upon them that do evil. Psalm. 34. Psalm. 21. 10.
In the time of thy face, that is, of thine anger, as the Chaldee Paraphrast
explains it, Ezekiel. 15. 7.

6. Gods face is his glory, as it is in the perfection of it, Exodus 33. 20. 23.
It is the Glory and Majesty of the Divine Essence as it is in it self, which
cannot be seen by the eye of man's understanding, because the mind of m^n cannot
comprehend God who is Incomprehensible, Job 11. 7. 1 Timothy 6. 16.

R. Menachem well interprets that Exodus 33. (...)
Text, says he, Observe how he says not, my face thou shall not see, but
shall not be seen, as if he should say, There is no power in any Creature to
comprehend it.

3. Eyes are attributed to God, whereby we must conceive. 1. His merciful,
mighty, and watchful providence, Psalm, 34. 15. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Gods eying of
his Children is not a bare intuition, but a putting forth of his strength to
help and assist them, and to resist their Enemies. 2. The knowledge of God is
Omniscience, Prove. 15. 3. Gods eye is in every 2 Chronicles. 36. 12 Psalm. 11. 4.
place to behold good and evil. He knows all things most clearly as if he
beheld them with eyes.

4. The Apple of his Eye signifies that, that is most dear and precious to God,
Psalm. 17. 8. Zach. 2. 8. every part of a man's Eye is most tender, and is kept
Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Apple of his eye or the black (the sight) of his eye.
most diligently, but the apple of the eye, or the sight of the eye which is the
eye and light of the eye its self, is kept with the chiefest care: Hereby we
must conceive the tender love of God, and his exceeding great care of his
people.

5. The Ear of God signifies 1. His infinite knowledge of all things, as if
heard all things with the Ear. 2. His Psalm. 34: 16. Psalm. 1 16. 2. and 94 9.
Psalm. 31. 3.
readiness to heat and grant the request of his people.

6. The Mouth of God, is God himself revealing and opening his will to men,
Isa. 40. 5. 2. The Lord Christ the glorious Thus August. Gen: 45. 12. compare
with Genesis 4^. 23. Josh. 9: 14 Jer. 39. 17.
Son of God, who reveals and manifests God and his mind, and will to us, Joh.
1. 18. Matthew. 11. 26. 27. The mouth is the Declarer and Interpreter of man's
mind. Interpreter is opposed to mouth, for an Interpreter is another man's mouth
Exodus 4. 16. by mouth there the Chaldee understands an Interpreter. The mouth,
of Jehovah is the Oracle, or answer of God.

7. His Nose signifies fury kindled.

8. By the hand of God we must conceive,

1. His eternal and effectual purpose concerning all things to be done, Act
4. 28. Whatsoever thine hand and thy council determined to be done. Psalm. 10.
12. Psalm. 118. 16. Dan. 4. 3. 5. (...) Psalm. 32 4


2. Gods mighty power working all things according to his purpose, Act. 4. 30.
Mark 6. 2. the hand is a type of strength.

3. Divine Judgments inflicted on men, as Act: 13. 11. Paul speaking to Elymas,
says, The hand of the Lord shall be upon thee and thou shall be blind. Jug. 2.
15. God has protecting and blessing hands. 2. Correcting hands. 13. Revenging
hands, to fall into these is fearful.

4. The spirit and gift of Prophecy. Ezekiel. 1. 3. The hand of the Lord was
there upon Ezekiel. 37. 1.
me. When God comes upon the Sons of men by the power of his Spirit,
over-powring them, and stirring up their Spirits to Prophecy, raising their
Spirits to see Divine Mysteries, and removing all Impediments that might hinder
them in Gods Work.

5. The Spirit of strength and fortitude: The hand of the Lord was upon Elias:
1 King. 18. 46.

9. By the Arm of God we must conceive the greatness of his power, manifested
Luk: 1. 51. Exodus 6. 6.
either for the saving of his people, or destroying of his Enemies, Psalm. 93.
13. Mighty is thine Arm, 1 King. 8. 42.

^. His mighty power working in the Gospel, Isa. 53. 1.

10. The Right hand of God signifies, 1. His Glory, Might, and Majesty. 2.
Psalm. 110. 1. Psalm. 118. 15, 16.
His Power working graciously.

11. The Finger of God is the Holy Spirit, who is the finger and power whereby
all great works are wrought, Luk, 1. 33.
Luke 11. 20. compared with Matthew. 12. 28.

12. By the Heart of God is understood, 1. The Decree of God, Jer. 19. 5. 2.
His good pleasure and approbation. David was a man according to Gods heart.

13. His Feet signifies power and Psalm. 110. 1. Exodus 33. 23. (...)
strength, or the presence of God.

14. By the Back-parts, or after-parts of God may be understood an imperfect
Image of the Glory of God, such as man is able to behold in this life, where we
see through a Glass darkly. It Is opposed to the state which is to come, when we
shall see face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Isa. 52. 8.
And it is spoken of God after the manner of men; for properly (he being a Spirit
and incomprehensible) has neither Face, nor Back-parts.

2. Senses are attributed to God, these Humane Senses.
are internal, or external.

1. Internal as Memory, or Remembrance, Psalm. 25. 6. Genesis 8. 1. By this
remembering which is spoken of God, we must conceive; 1. His gracious
acceptance, Psalm. 20. 4. Let him remember all Levit. 9. 24. 1 King. 18. 28.
thy Offerings, and turn thy burnt Offerings into ashes: That is, accept of
them. 2. His performing mercy promised, Levit. 26. 42. I will remember my
Covenant, Exodus 6. 5. 6. Luke 17. 2. Gods remembering his holy Covenant, is his
performing the mercy of the Covenant: So our remembering of Gods Precepts is
expounded, to do them, Psalm. 103. 18.

3. His special Acts of Grace and Mercy. God is said to remember us, when he
hears, helps, strengthens, saves, and delivers us, Psalm. 106. 4. Remember me
Psalm. 136. 23. Genesis 8. 1. and 30. 22.
with the favor thou bear to thy people, visit me with thy Salvation. Judge.
16. 28. S^mson said. O Lord God I pray thee remember me: -- strengthen me, etc.

4 Gods remembering imports his Judiciary Acts in punishing sinners, Psalm.
Revel. 18. 5. 1 Samuel 15. 2. Psalm. 9. 13. Esa. 49. 14.
137. 7. Remember O Lord the Children of Edom, and punish them.

2. Forgetting is spoken of God, this signifies, 1. His long deferring to hear
and help us in our Calamities, Psalm. 13. 2. Psalm. 10. 12. and 42. 10. 2. God is
said to forget our Iniquities, when he does Jer. 31. 34.
not impute them to us, or bring forth judgment against us, but surely forgive
(...) Hos: 4. 6. Expellam filios tuos Tharg: Jonathae.
us. 3. Gods forgetting signifies his Rejection of men: Thus, he threatens to
forget the Priests Sons in Israel; that is, to cast them off from succeeding
their Fathers in the Priesthood, and from common mercies.

2. God cannot forget his elect people, so as to cast them out of his Fatherly
love.

2. External Senses are attributed to God, as seeing, hearing, smelling.

1. Seeing is properly an Act of the bodily eye, and therefore cannot properly
be attributed to God: for as he cannot be seen with a bodily eye, so he sees
not with a bodily eye.

1. The sight of God is put for his most perfect plenary knowledge of all
things; It is a spiritual intellectual sight, it is Gen: 31. 12. Prove: 15 3.
Psalm. 139. 15, 16. Act. 15. 18.
knowledge of men and their actings.

2. It signifies his foreknowledge: Gods sight is an eternal sight; he did
never begin to see, for he had the vision and knowledge of all things from
Eternity. 2. He never cease to see what he has once seen. 3. God beholds all
things by one act of knowledge. Simul and semel Exodus 3. 7. Psalm: 25: 18 Psalm:
106. 44, 45. Genesis 29. 32. Psalm. 31. 8. and 119. 153. (...)


3. His Seeing implies a merciful Regard pitying and helping us in our
misery, Deuteronomy. 26. 7. He saw our affliction: This seeing is a regarding with
compassion, and so a Redress and help, Exodus 3. 7. Some of the Hebrews (as the
Zohar upon Exodus 3. expound that place thus: 1. Seeing for the good of Israel,
I have seen for vengeance upon those that oppress them. In this sense Zachary
said at his death, The Lord see it and require it. 2 Chronicles. 24. 22.


2. Gods hearing is his granting and fulfilling our desires, Joh. 9. 31. Psalm.
5. 2.

3. By his smelling we must conceive his gracious approbation and acceptance
Genesis 8. 21.
of his peoples Sacrifices and Services in Christ.

3. Humane affections are attributed to Humane affections.
God, as joy, grief, anger, zeal, and jealousy etc. The Scripture gives to God
joy, grief, anger, etc. not as any passions or contrary affections, they are
not motions and perturbations in God as in men, for he is Immutable, there is
not the least shadow of turning or trouble in God: but by a kind of similitude,
because of his unchangeable Nature and Will, he does such things as men do with
these passions and changes of affections. Omnes affectus qui Deo tribuuntur
sunt effectus
These affections are actions of God, which in some respect are like those
actions of men which they do from these affections: all the affections that are
attributed to God, we must conceive of them as Effects.

1. God is said to Rejoice with his Esa. 65. 19. Joszeph 7. 17. Jer 32, 41. R.
Mosseh Alchech and R: Moseh Albelia, etc: dicunt laetitiam in Deo vscari quod
spiritum suum hominibus communicate: tristitia^ quando private eos hoc bono: In
laetitia omnes spiritus vitales a co^de exiliunt ut objectum bonum percipiant;
in tristitia introrsus se recipient, praesens malum fugientes.
people, and over them with joy. To rejoice to do good to them, when he gives
them the graces and joys of his Spirit, when he conveys more of his holy
Spirit to them, for that is called Gods rejoicing, when he communicates his
Spirit: As when men rejoice greatly, all the vital Spirits go forth from the
heart, that they may entertain the good Object presented.

2. God is said to be grieved in his heart, when he depriveth men of the holy
breathings, strivings, and operations of his Spirit, Genes. 6. verse. 3. and 6.
compared, as when men do grieve much, the vital Spirits return inwardly,
flying from the present evil.

3. Anger, if it be taken properly for a passion, so there is none with God.
Fury is not with me, Isa: 27. 1. He is no where called an angry God, but slow
to anger: Yet anger and fury are attributed to God, Ezekiel: 5. 13. and 16. 42. We
may thus conceive of them.

1. Anger, as it is in man, either for the material or formal part of it,
cannot be given to God, who is free from Some say Ira is taken from Irae.
all such passions and perturbations as man's anger imports: when a man is
angry, he goes out of himself and when he is pacified, he returns to himself,
but God is unchangeable.

2. Yet in a sense it is true, that anger is in God, that is an inclination and
will to punish sin arising from his hatred of sin as his great Enemy: anger and
fury are given to God as becomes a God, he is not as man to be angry and
furious with perturbation or distemper; but he does such Acts as do entitle him
to fury and anger, yet without any change or imperfection.

1. Anger is a will and desire in men to punish that which has wronged them.

2. Fury is the height of anger, when anger is boiled up to the height, it is
called the Fury of anger.

3. Anger and fury are given to God Esa: 22. 25. Deo furor and ira tribuitur
cum ostendit factis, aliquid sibi displicere. River. Esa: ^7. 1.
when he manifests by his Actions that something displeases him, and
especially when he punishes men: they are effects from God, not affections in
God.

1. The anger of God is his decree of inflicting punishment upon sinners.

2, Wrath is punishment it self inflicted Irasci dicitur cum paenam infligit.
River. Ezekiel: 5. 13. In my zeal. (...), Thus the Septuagint render it, the
Hebrew word signifies sometimes Zeal, sometimes Icalousie. Esa. 97.
or to be inflicted upon Offenders, Romans 1. 18. and 2. 5. Matthew. 3. 7. Ephesians.
5. 6.

4. Zeal is often ascribed to God in Scripture, as Esa 9. 7. Zeal is the
intention and strength of all holy affections: the Zeal of God is the ardent
love of God, and great care that he manifests for his own Glory and the good of
his Church, 2 King. 19. 31.

5. Jealousy is ascribed to God, Psalm. 79. 5. And Jehovah has declared
himself (...)
to be a jealous God, Exodus: 20 5. Deuteronomy. 5. 9. Jealousy, is hot wrath, burning
smoking anger, Psalm: 79 47. Ezekiel: 36. 5. Deuteronomy: 29. 19. it is the flame of Jah.
Song. 8. it is Gods fiery indignation; Jealousy is with great indignation and
grief, Psalm. 975. Jealousy is the rage of a man.
Numb: 25. 11. such as amounts to hatred and enmity, Isa: 59. 17.

1. Gods Jealousy imports his taking men into Covenant to be his people:

2. Their Revolt by Idolatry and other sins, violating their faith given to God.

3. The jealousy of God upon it, who being greatly displeased, speaks and
acts Prove. 6. 34. Jer. 6. 15. and 10. 15.
dreadful Judgments, Gods Indignation against Idolatry, is called Jealousy.

2. The jealousy of God is his servent love to his people, and fiery
Indignation Ezekiel. 38.
against their Enemies, as the Husband has love to his wife, and hot anger
against those that offer violence to her; this is a Jealousy.

6. Gods ha^red of men is, 1. A Negation of electing love: A decree of
non-election to life, or an inferior kind of love, which is hatred in
comparison of his electing love, Mal: 1* 23. Rom: 9. 13.

2. It is a displacency, detestation, abomination, and aversation of things.
Esa. 1. 14.


3. It is the execution of the decree of punishing and destroying wicked men.
Psalm. 5. 6.


7. Whence Repentance is spoken of Gen, 6. 6.
in Scripture.

1. We must not conceive that Gods (...) Post sapere, mutare mentem in melius.
repenting is like to man's repenting, 1. Sam: 15: 25. The strength of Israel
will not repent, for he is not a man that he should repent, Numb: 23. 19:
Repenting as it is in men, does properly import a change of their mind and will
from evil to better, upon an after-wisdom, an after-understanding. 2. It
implies a perturbation and grief in their hearts, arising from the
acknowledgment of their errors: this is man's repentance, but none of these Acts
can be in God, who Jam. 1. 17. Mal. 36.
is Omniscient and unchangable, with whom there is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning.

2. Repentance is spoken of God Metaphorically, Gen: 6. 6. Amos 7. 3. Jer. 18.
8. Out of the abundance of his mercy Humanae capacitati aptiora quam divinae
sublimitati, St. Aug. R. Mosseh and Doctus Aben. Ezra in similibus casibus
semper utuntur his verbis. (...)
to help the weakness of our apprehensions; God condescends to the manner of
humane expressions, retaining still the steadfastness of his own working which
receives no variation nor difference from the contingencies of second causes:
God speaks according to our capacity, but he works according to his own
Council, Ephesians: 1. 11.

The Learned Rabbis have an excellent Rule, that they always use in such like
cases: the Law that is the Scripture speaks after the manner of men: That is,
it accommodates its speeches to things corporeal and sensible, that so it may
more clearly be understood.

3. God is then said to repent, when Vbi legitur quod paeniteat Deum mutatio
rerum significatur, immutabili manente praescientia divina, Aug. de Civit. Dei
lib. 17. cap. 7.
what he once willed to be, he after by the counsel of the same will, causes
not to be, therein not changing his own counsel, but only willing the change of
the things, that the same thing for this period of time shall be, and then
shall cease, so that the same will and counsel of God stand constant and
unmovable in the several mutations of those things that are wrought or
removed by it, for nothing can possibly fall out in Gods ordering and observing
all things that can make him more wise, more righteous, more powerful then he
was before: he is unchangable in his wisdom, and in the Council of his will.

4. Gods repenting is a change of the Work, his Decree abiding unchangable,
Gen: 6. 6. It it repented Jehovah that he he had made man on the earth. That
is, He determined to destroy man whom ^e had formerly made: So 1 Samuel: 15. 11.
It repents me that I have made Saul Ier: 18 8. Psalm: 135: 14:
King. That is, I will un King Saul, whom I have made King formerly.

5. The causes of this change are eitheir men's sins or repentance, yet this
change is decreed by God from Eternity, for God has decreed both these to do a
work, and then to change it again, or to undo it, according to the sins or
repentance of men.

This change of the work is called his Quando dicitur Deum paenitentia duci
accipiendum est de effectu: Quemadmodum nos, quando alicujus rei paenitet
abolemus id quod antea feceramus Menasseh Ben Israel:
repenting: for when God changes his former works, and acts in a contrary
dispensation, he does as men do, when it repents them of any thing they destroy
what before they have built up, and undo what before they have done: Thus God
repenting pulls down what before he has done, he dis-thrones Saul, and
destroys the old World.

6. God never changes his mind though it be his mind to work many changes, he
wills a change in the Creatures, but never changes his own will.

4. Humane Actions are ascribed to Humane Actions.
God, and these are both internal and external; as 1. Thinking of thoughts is
attributed to God, Jer: 4. 28. and 29. 11. hereby is signified his decree,
counsel, Esa. 14. 24.
and purpose, Psalm: 33. 11. The thoughts of Jehovahs heart shall stand for (...)
ever: That is, his Counsels as it is there interpreted.

2. God is said to lift up the light of his face, Psalm: 4. 7. when he manifests
his favor and goodness to his people in Christ, who is both the light, face,
or Exodus: 33. 14.
presence of God, Luke 2: 32. and the Angel of his face, Esa: 63. 9. according
to this phrase it is said, Psalm: 16. 15. In the light of the Kings face is life,
and his favor is as a Cloud of the latter Rain.

3. When God is said to have respect Gen: 4. 4. (...) Aspexit, Respexit
intuitus est cum delectatione significat gestum, applicantis se ad rem gratam.
to the Faithful and their Offering, we may thus conceive that he approves,
favors and accepts of them. Jehovah had respect to Abel, and to his
Offering, 1. with delight, as the Hebrew word implies (and so one of the Greek
Versions translates it) 2. With favorable acceptance, as the Chaldee
Paraphrast explains it, Levit: 1. 3.

4. God is said to hide his face: 1. When he declares his anger, Psalm: 30. 8.
2. When he seems not to be affected with our miseries, Psalm: 13. 2. 3. When
he withdraws his favorable countenance and comfort, which the Chaldee
expounds, the brightness of his face: When we have not the comfortable sight
and sense of Gods favor, it imports trouble and grief, Deuteronomy: 31. 17. Ezekiel: 39.
23, 24 29.

5. God is at the right hand of his Psalm. 59. 2. Act: 2. 25.
people, Psalm: 16. 8. whereby we must conceive his powerful assistance and
comfort, when his help and protection is present in all dangers and distress.

6. He turns himself to us, or returns, Zach: 1. 5. Psalm: 6. 5. when he
manifests himself favorable to us, removing the signs of his anger, diseases,
war, etc. and restores a prosperous Estate.

2. When he pardons and subdues our Iniquities, Micha 7. 19.

7. God is said to come to us, when he gives us a further manifestation of his
favor and presence, and enlargement of grace and Heavenly comfort, Ioh. 14:
23. and verse. 18. I will not leave you comfortless, (...).
I will come to you. I will not leave you Orphans. Thus it is in the Original,
which condition is usually comfortable, when God manifests himself as a Father,
and fills our Spirits with the diffusions of his love and comforts of his
Spirit, he then comes to us.

2. He makes his abode with us, when he confirms us in the perpetual
confidence of his favor, Ioh: 14. 23.

8. God is said to descend and ascend, Gen: 11. 7. and 18. 20. 21. These
Phrases may seem to imply that God was not there before, that he is in Heaven
and not on Earth. That we may have right apprehensions of God, we must know,

1. That he does not move from place to place, or change his place, who fills
Heaven and Earth.

2 These Scriptures speak of God after the manner of men, and do assure us,
that God had a certain knowledge of these things, and of all that men do on
Earth.

3. God descends when he works some new thing on Earth that he had not done
before: Thus the Son of God descends from Heaven, not by mutation of place, but
by assumption of flesh and manifestation of himself therein.

4. When God manifests that things done on Earth are not unknown to him.

5. When he brings forth his power indeed, and shows himself to be near unto
us, Ezod: 3. 8.

9. God Returns to the high place, or to the height, when he does as it were go
up to the Throne of Judgment, Psalm: 7. 8. for Thrones were set on high, when 1
King. 10. 19.
he executes Judgment from Heaven upon sinners:

10. Laughing is ascribed to God, Psalm: 2. 4. Prove. 1. 26. When he is said to
laugh at wicked men, it is to show these four things.

1. How far he is from helping them.

2. How easy it is to destroy them. Psalm. 59. 9. and Prove. 1. 26 28. compared
Psalm: 2: 4, 5. verses compared.


3. It signifies his furious anger against them, even to the rooting of them
out.

4. That he whuld no more pity them in their greatest miseries, then men are
wont to pity those at whose death they laugh and jest; Thus when God is said to
laugh and deride his Enemies: it implies their dreadful punishment; it is
spoken of God after the manner of men that he laugheth and is angry with
sinners, and the like expressions; not that he has such passions as men, O no,
but because he does such things as men use to do, when they are moved with such
passions or affections, and as the Hebrew Doctors say, The Law speaks of God
according to the language of the Sons of Adam.

5. Humane Subjects are attributed to Humane Subjects.
God; as

1: A Throne, Psalm: 9. 48. Esa: 6. 1. A Throne is a high Seat full of Majesty
and Glory, fit for Kings and Judges to Revel. 4. 10.
sit in, 1 King. 10 13. 19.

2. It signifies Kingdoms and Dominions, Dan. 9: 7. By the Throne of God we may
conceive these three things.

1. Divine Majesty and the Kingly power of God, who is King of Kings.

2. Triumphant glory.

3. Judiciary power, Psalm. 9. 4. Thou satest in the Throne judging right. Gods
Revel. 20. 11, 12.
sitting upon a Throne is a representation of his imperial Glory, Power and
Judiciary Majesty, 2 Chronicles. 18. 18. Thrones are not for standing, but sitting,
1 King. 2. 12. and Chapter 22. 10.

2. A Footstool is attributed to God, Psalm. 110. 1. This holds forth the
absolute power and dominion that he has over his Creatures.

2. Things are under the feet of the Lord Christ as a Footstool two ways:

1. By way of subjection as Servants unto him, and thus Angels and Authorities
and Powers are made subject to him, Ephesians: 1. 21, 22, 1 Pet: 5. 22.

2. By way of Victory and insultation, and so all the Enemies of Christ are put
under his feet, which is the most proper way; for the Members of Christ are
indeed under the Head, the Sheep of Christ are in his Hands, and the Lambs Joh.
1. 10. 28:
of Christ are in his arms and bosom, but the Enemies of Christ are under his
Esa. 40. 11.
feet to be trampled upon, till their blood be squeezed out.

6. Humane Adjuncts are attributed to 6. Humane Adjuncts.
God, he is said to rest and to be wearyed, to sit, to be exalted and
sanctified, etc.

Now we must be wise and wary how we conceive of these Metaphorical
Attributes, for if we frame any conception of God, that is not suitable to his
Spiritual Being, we are guilty of the highest Idolatry in our thoughts.

1. God is said to rest the seventh day, (...) Quievit cessavit.
Genesis 2. 2. He Sabathised, that is kept Sabath, for of this Hebrew Shabath, it
is called the Sabath, or Rest-day.

We must not conceive that God was wearied with any labor, for he works
without labor, but that from that (...) Sabbathum cessatio, requies, Buxtorf.
Quies non est vera motus privatio, sed finis seu pe^fectio persecti.
day, God rested or ceased from making more kind of creatures; and that besides
those that he had made on the six days, he did not create any new kinds, Exodus
20. 7. Heb. 4. 5 though as touching the preserving, ordering and governing of
the world, the Father works hitherto and Christ works, Ioh. 5, 17.

1. This resting is spoken of God after the manner of men, and implies not any
weariness in him, for the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not,
neither is weary, Isa. 40. 28.

2. Gods Sabbath was also his rejoicing in his glorious works, and this the
Psalm. 104. 31.
Chaldee Paraphrast observes here, saying, and God delighted the seventh day in
his works that he had made, and rested.

2. God is said to be exalted, when his height of glorious excellency, might
Exodus 15 2. Psalm. 34 3. Psalm. 30. 2. and 118. 28. Psalm. 145 1. Isa. 25. 1: and
30. 18.
and Majesty is manifested to us.

2. When God is in our thoughts, inclinations, and affections, as he is in
himself most high.

We must not think that God can receive any exaltation from his creatures; he
is infinitely above all our exaltings and extollings, men are then said to be
exalted, when they are lifted up from a low degree to a height of honor, power
and authority, but the Lord God has 2 Samuel 5. 12. Psalm. 89: 19.
the highest height of all honor, power and excellency, of, and from, and in
himself: but now when we set up the will of God, as the only Rule of all our
actings; his honor as the only end of all we do; the power of his might, as
our only strength, then are we said to exalt God.

3. God is said to sanctify himself, and to be sanctified by men, he does
sanctify Ezech. 38 23. Levit. 10: 3. 1 Pet. 3: 15: Isa. 8. 13, 14. Ezekiel: 28:
^2.
himself, when he manifests his omniscience, power, righteousness and
holiness in the eyes of men, and thereby freeth himself from those blasphemous
aspersions and imputations that are cast upon him by evil men, sinners do
conceive that God is like to themselves, that he sees not Psalm. 10. that he
has Psalm. 50. 21. Ezekiel. 8 12. Psalm. 10. 13.
forsaken the earth, that he will require no account of them, they think that
he cannot do much for them, or against them, that it is in vain to serve him.

Now when God graciously accepts, Mal 3.
and openly rewards his own servants, and when he punishes them Ezekiel. 20. 41.
that transgress with visible judgments Jehovah then declares that he is a
Ezech: 20. 41.
powerful, all knowing, righteous, Holy, God, and thereby takes off all those
reproachful imputations, which sinners blasphemously cast upon him, Ezekiel. 28.
22. They shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall have executed judgments in
her, and shall be sanctified in her, Ezekiel. 38. 16. 23. our God is known to be
Jehovah, a God who gives being to his threats and promises in his executing
jugdment, men Psalm. 9.
are thereby drawn to confess, that Jehovah is a holy God, as those did, 1 Samuel 6. 20.

2. The Holy God is sanctified of men, when they acknowledge his infinite
holiness, by fearing him in their hearts, and framing all their thoughts and 1
Pet. 3. 4. 15.
ways by divine Rules, as in his sight.

4. Gods holy name is said to be polluted or profaned by men. Ezekiel. 36. 20.
21. when they speak any thing that strikes through any of Gods glorious
excellencies, as that he takes no notice of men's works, that he regards not his
people, that there is no ruling providence in the world, etc.

2. When men do that which may occasion the enemies to blaspheme Gods name,
truth, and ways.

5. God is said to be justified by men, Math. 11. 19.
Luke 7. 29. When he is acknowledged to be righteous, gracious, merciful,
abundant in goodness and truth.

6: Gods sitting in the heavens, And on a Psalm. 2: 4. Ps. 15. 2. 11: 12 2 Chr.
18. 18. Esa. 6. 1. Dan. 7. 1. Rev. 20. 11.
Throne, Ps. 9. 5. 8. signifies both Kingly authority; and the acting or
executing thereof.

2. His high exaltation and reigning over all creatures.

7. The all glorious God is said to be glorified by men, John 15. 8. Psalm 50.
Math. 5. 1 Pet. 4. 11. when they acknowledge his glorious excellencies in their
hearts, words, and ways: we must not conceive that men or Angels are able to
make the least addition or augmentation of Gods essential glory, by all their
services, all the glory that we can give unto God, is to acknowledge him to be,
as he is in himself, and in his actings of grace, and mercy toward us.

8 God is said to be comforted, Ezekiel. 5. 13. when judgments are fully
executed, and his own justice satisfied.

9. God is said to be wearied when he hates and rejects any thing, as a man who
is weary with bearing a burden, casts it off.

10. He is said to sleep, Psalm. 44. 24. when according to the sense and
apprehension Esa. 1, 14. (...) ^^^^ssus fuit (...) test Kimchi, ad fa^g^tionem
cog^^^^^onum in ^^^us quas quis ^a^^^dit.
of the fleshly part in men, he comes slowly to relieve those that are in
extremity of sufferings: these things are spoken of God after the manner of
men, for properly, he that keeps Israel slumbreth not nor sleeps, Psalm
124, 4.

11. God is said to be silent, when he seems to us not to hear our Prayers,
Psalm. 28. 1.
when he cease to speak to us and answer us:

These attributes are taken from man: there are others that are taken from
other creatures; As I wings are attributed to God; whereby we must conceive his
protection and defense of his people whom he gathers and hides under the wings
of salvation (as a bird does cherish Deuteronomy. 32. 11. R^^h ^. 12 Psalm. 17. 8.
Psalm. 9^. 4 Exodus 19. 4. Thus the Greek and Chaldee here translates it.
and shelter her young ones under her wings) and protects them from the snares
of the devil and evil men.

He bears them, as upon eagles wings Exodus 19. 4. the eagle flying high, her
young ones being on her wings, are safe from all danger.

2. The protecting, refreshing mercy Psalm. 91. 10: 1. (...)
of God, is compared to a shadow, the Saints do lodge in the shadow of the
Almighty in the shadow of the clouds, of the glory of the Almighty. as the
Chaldee (...)
explain it, in his protection, as the Greek says: shadow is often used for
defense, and protection, as Psalm. 121. 5. Jehovah is thy keeper, Jehovah is thy
shadow, Isa. 51. 16. and 49. 2. as the shadow of a great tree, protects from
the beams and smiting heat of the Sun: so does the Omnipotent protect his
people from the fiery assaules of the devil, and hurting power of outward
evils.

2 Jehovah is their shadow of strength, (...)
shadow is sometimes taken for streng^h, as Numb. 14. 9. Their shadow is
departed from them, that is, their strength, as the Chaldee expounds it, so in
Isa. 30. 2.

3. By the way and paths of God, we must conceive the acts of his providence
Psalm. 77. 20. Psalm. 103. 7. Job 40. 14. Psalm 25 10.
whereby he orders, governs, and disposes all things: these are the ways
wherein God walks, ways of mercy and ways of judgment, works of justice,
and works of grace.

4. Diverse names are given to God by Psalm. 31. 3. Psalm. 41. 2.
a Metaphor or similitude,

1. He is called a tower, a fortress, or munition, a strong hold to flee unto,
when a man is chased and in danger: a high Defense, a refuge, Ps. 18. 3. for as
in high fortified towers, men are in safety above the reach of their enemies:
so in the powerful protection of God, we are safe and secure from the hurting
power of all enemies and evils.

2. He is called the Horn of our salvation. 2 Samuel 23. 3. that is, the power
that defends and saves us, as horns are a Psalm. 18. 3. Amos 6. 13. Hab. 3 4.
Luke 1. 69. (...)
defense to wild beasts, a horn signifies power and glory, Psalm. 92. 11.

3. A Rock. Psalm. 18. 3. Jehovah my rock my rock, God is often called a rock, a
rock of habitation, a rock whereto his people may fly, and there dwell safe.

4. A shield, Psalm. 3. 4. a shield about me, or for me, that is, a protector, a
defender to us, a shield round about us. Psalm. 144. 2. Genesis 15. 1. Deuteronomy. 33.
29. Psalm. 84. 12.


5. God is called a strong habitation, Psa. 71. 3. a dwelling place to his
people, Psalm. 90. 1. so that as a man's house is a place of safety, security and
rest, wherein he rests, and refreshes himself after his travels and labors:
so God is the safety and resting place of his people, in his love and mercy,
they do sweetly solace, satiate and secure themselves continually.

Thus I have given you diverse directions how to conceive rightly and
Spiritually of God. 1. In his proper attributes that are essential to him. 2.
In his Metaphorical attributes, which are spoken of God by way of similitude,
and after the manner of men, that so we may not fall into thought-Idolatry, by
undue thoughts and misconceivings of God, whereby we turn him into an idol of
our own fancy.

2. Men do act idolatry in their thoughts, by setting up in their thoughts an
idol of their own brain, in the place of the true God: this is done two ways.

1 When they think and imagine some other thing besides the true God to be
their chiefest good: thus voluptuous men imagine sensual carnal pleasures to
be the best thing, Phil. 3. 19. Covetous men apprehend earthly riches to be the
best good, as is evident, Psalm. 4. 7 Their desires are most strangely carried
after Covetousness is called idolatry. Col 3. 9. Affection follows opinion,
and that which a man affects most, he must needs think best of, Perkins.
earthly goods: whatsoever men do chiefly desire: that they conceive to be the
chiefest good, that which is chiefest in their affections, is chiefest in their
apprehensions.

2. When the stream of men's thoughts runs freely and fully into this present
world, and the maine things thereof, when they spend the strength of their
thoughts more upon the creature, than upon the Creator, more upon earth than
heaven, they are hereby guilty of idolatry, by setting up the creature in the
place of God in their thoughts, whatsoever it is, upon which we commonly bestow
our first waking thoughts, and the chief of ^ur day thoughts, especially in our
vacant hours, that is our god.

3. The third evil thought, which proceeds out of the heart of men, is a
blaspheming thought: now the blaspemies which run through man's corrupt mind,
are exceeding many and monstrous; but there are four special thoughts of
blasphemy, which do possess the hearts of carnal men.

1. They think the Gospel of Christ to be foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 21. 23. the
Gospel in it self is divine Wisdom; but in the thoughts of the unbelieving
Grecians and other Gentiles, it was foolishness.

1. That salvation is preached by Christ crucified, life by his death, this the
world conceives to be a foolish thing.

2: That salvation is communicated by preaching, this they think is more
foolish.

3. That faith is dispersed by so simple and low a way of preaching, this they
conceive to be most foolish. Natural men have vile thoughts of the spiritual
mysteries of the Gospel, as that the eternal God should become man in time;
that Christ by death should free men from death, and by his poverty make them
rich that men must accuse, abhor and condemn themselves, and look for all life,
righteousness and acceptance from Christ; that they must be nothing in
themselves, and all in another: that when they are weak in themselves, then
they are strong: that men should be as having nothing, and yet possess all
things, that they must be fools, that they may be wise, that men of years must
be born again, etc. carnal men conceive John 3 4.
these to be foolish notions, yea they are foolishness unto them, Cor. 2: 14.

2. A second blaspemous thought which possesses corrupt minds, is this, that
the law of God is falsehood, the truths of the Gospel which do contradict their
carnal reason, men conceive to be foolishness and the threat of the Law that
do cross and curse their corrupt affections they imagine to be untruths, words
that shall never take hold upon them:

That sinners are possessed with such wicked thoughts against the Law is evident.

1. Because they are apt to bless themselves in their thoughts, against the
threats and terrors of the Law, saying in their hearts, that they shall have
peace, notwithstanding they continue in their evil ways, that no evil shall
come upon Deu. 29. 19. 20 Micah 3. 11.
them.

2. They deride and mock at the judgments denounced in the Law, as those
presumptuous scoffers did, Isa. 5. 19. men that walk after their own lusts, do
in their thoughts mock at Scripture promises 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4:
and threatenings, they think they are mere notions, that God intends no such
matter, etc.

3. Men come to the places where the word of God is opened, there they hear
their personal pollutions discovered, and dreadful woes declared against them
for their sins, punishment without end and beyond imagination but how few be
there that tremble at Gods word, and do turn from their iniquities, most men
walk on in those ways, which the Scripture says, do lead to all miseries and
woes. Now what is the reason that men are not affected and wrought upon at the
hearing of the reproofs and threats of Gods word; it is because their minds are
filled with this blasphemous thought that there is no truth in these terrible
threatenings.

3. A third blasphemous thought which prevails with sinners, is, that religion
is nothing but State policy, that it is a politic device and design of prudent
men to keep people in awe, to take up their studies, and thereby to keep them
from sedition.

4. Carnal men are possessed with this blasphemous thought, that the worship
and service of God is vain and unprofitable, Job 21. 15. the wicked man is
brought in, saying thus in his heart, what profit shall I have if I pray unto
God? this also was the cursed conceit of the Jews, in the prophet Malachies
time, Mal. 3. 14.
they are indicted for thus saying, It is a vain thing to serve God, and what
profit is it that we have kept his Commandments?

2. Yea this blasphemous thought may sometimes assault and captivate the
servants of God: we find that precious man Asaph overtaken with this black
thought, when he said, Certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed
mine hands in innocence, Psalm. 73. 13. this wicked thought prevailed too much
with Job in his passion, as appears by the charge that Elihu brings against Job
35. 3^ and 34. 7. 9.
him, thou have said, what profits it thee, and what avails it me to purge
me from my sin; hereby it is manifest that there is in every man by corrupt
nature a pronenesse to this thought of blasphemy:

This abominable thought is apt to rise in the hearts of righteous men
occasionally.

As 1. In the prevailing of passion, and temptation.

2. When they meet with great troubles, crosses, and discouragements in the
world; for then they are apt to think of the prosperous estate of profane men,
who perform no service to God, and yet in outward appearance may seem to be in
better case than themselves at present, hereupon they begin to think what
avails it us to walk precisely; but now there is a vast difference between the
Saints and the sinner, in the manner of thinking and matter of the thought.

1. Profane men speak it in their hearts proudly, purposely and
presumptuously: but Asaph speaks it in a passion, and it is not his renewed
part speaks it, but sin dwelling in him. Romans 7. 17.

2. Wicked men have base vile thoughts of Gods service, they say it is a lying
vanity, or vain falsehood, to serve God, as the Hebrew word Shau properly (...)
Psai 73. (...)
signifies, Mal. 3. 14.

But Asaph says in vain, without profit, in respect of my outward condition,
have I ^ollowed after holiness and innocence.

2. When the Saints are themselves, they have the highest thoughts of Gods
service, that it is most gainful and glorious.

3. Godly men would serve God upon his command, though there were no gain, but
godliness it self.

If they can exalt God, this they think to be great gain, and carnal men have
mercenary spirits, they cannot serve God without present profit.

Who are those that do think the ser-service

1. Those that constantly neglect personal

2. They have no care to teach their children and servants in the ways of God.

3. Slightness and superficialnesse, coldness and carnality of affections in
prayer, hearing Gods word, etc. does plainly declare, that men think it a vain
thing to serve God, why do men labor so hard in their Trades and Callings,
rising early, neglecting no opportunity, they apprehend that it is for their
profit, therefore the neglect of holy duties, or carnal careless performance
thereof, must needs proceed from this base thought, that there is no profit in
the service of God. Job ^1: 15:


4. A fourth grand evil thought, which proceeds out of the hearts of men, is a
thought of diffidence and infidelity, there be diverse thoughts of distrust
wherewith believers are often overtaken.

As 1. Unbelieving thoughts, in respect of Gods forgiving mercy, we are apt to
think with our selves, can God pardon Rebels, such scarlet sinners as we are?
can he accept of so unworthy wretches?

2. In respect of giving, if God do not presently give in mercy upon our
prayers, we are ready to think thus, God regards not our petitions, he has
forgotten to be merciful, he has forsaken Psalm. 77. 8, 9.
us, he will not help us, etc.

3. In respect of delivering mercy, when we are in the mount, and the sentence
of death seems to be passed upon the means, how are our minds filled with
thoughts of unbelief, can God deliver? can he prepare a table in the
wilderness? Psalm. 78: 19, 20
can he give water out of the Rock? Carnal Reason says it will not be, sense
says it shall not be, distrust says it cannot be. These thoughts of unbelief,
d^d sometimes overpower faithful David, as when he said in his 1 Samuel 27. 1.
heart, I shall perish one day by the hand of Saul, and Psalm 116. 11. and
Peter also, Matthew. 14. 30. 31.

4. In respect of Gods owning, accepting mercy, what thoughts of unbelief do
often captivate the Saints, they are apt to think, surely, God is our enemy, we
are not his children, we are hypocrites, castawayes, we have no faith, no
grace, etc this unbelieving thought took hold upon David Psalm 31. 23. I said in
my hastening away, I am cut down before (...)
thine eyes. I am cut down like a dry tree, for the fire, I am cut off from thy
favor: this is the import of the Hebrew text, the Greek translates it, I am
cast away, these were the thoughts of Jonas, Jonah 2. 5.
in his affliction, I said I am expelled, driven away from before thy face, I
am cast out of thy favor. (...)


5. In respect of continuing mercy, what thoughts of unbelief do overtake weak
believers, they are apt to think, surely we shall not hold out to the end,
(...) Expulit.
we shall one day fall by the hand of such a lust or temptation, we shall faint
in the day of trial.

6. In respect of temporal mercies, what distrustful thoughts do rise in our
hearts, as how shall we and ours be provided for, if trading, strength, friends
should fail, what would become of us? we shall want ere we dye, the disciples
had these, or such like thoughts, we have left all, Parents, Trades, present
Possessions to follow our Lord Jesus, and he is in a poor low estate and how
shall we we be fed and clothed, we may come to lack necessaries: See how
Christ reproves them for their distrustful doubting Thoughts, Matthew 6. Why
are ye thoughtfull, be not thoughfull Mat. 6. 25. 28. 31. (...)
saying in your hearts, what shall we eat, etc.

Take nothought, so one of our Translations reads it, but not properly for food
and raiment, cannot be provided Luke 12. 11. (...). Christian care.
without some thoughts.

There is first, the thought of diligence, which puts us upon our duty.

2. The thought of diffidence, which draws back our hearts from resting upon
(...) a doubtful carking care. (...). Solicit and anxie.
the promise.

This thought of distrust concerning temporals has two ill properties, which
the Greek word (...), so often used, here does plainly import it is is
distracting thought which divides man's mind into diverse parts, casting this
way, and that way, and the other way. Faith unites our thoughts. Cogito
solicitudo est agritudo cum cogitatione, says Tully. Anxie, and cum su^^^a
animi soll^^^tudine cogitare, Zanch.


2. It is a disturbing anxious Thought which tears and tortures our hearts
up-the rack of discontent.

Quest.

When do these unbelieving thoughts mainly assault the Saints, that so we
knowing the hour of their coming, may watch and not be overtaken.

Answer. There be four special times, wherein they are apt to assault us.

1. In times of spiritual desertion when God withdraws the sensible sweet
assurance of h^s favor, we are apt then to say in our hearts, as Asaph did,
will the Psalm. 77. 8, 9.
Lord forsake for ever, and will he show favor no more? does his mercy cease
to Eternity, etc.

2. In times of danger and passionate fears,, Psalm. 31. 23. I said in my
hastening away namely through amazement (...) Deuteronomy. 20. 3. Psalm. 48. 6.
or fear, as the word commonly intends in my trembling have, the Greek calls
it an ecstasy or trance, so Psalm. 116. 11 (...).

3. In times of deep affliction, temptation and trial: Job in his sufferings
had a sharp confl^ct, with these thoughts of unbelief, when he complains that
God Job 16. 9. 12.
did hate him and gnash upon him, and as his enemy sharpen his eyes against
him, etc.

4 When pangs of death are upon men, Satan's last assaults are commonly the most
violent.

These thoughts of unbelief and doubting do greatly dishonor the glorious
truth and mercy of God.

2. They fill men's hearts with terror and trouble, discontent and
discouragement.

3. They lead to desperation, which is the height and depth of these thoughts
of distrust, they are contrary and contradictory to a spirit of faith, which
says to us, Christ is thine, he will never leave thee, etc. Gal 2. 20. ^ob 19
25.


5. Out of the hearts of men proceed thoughts of disobedience against God.

There is in all men by corrupt nature this rebellious thought, I will not
acquaint my self with the ways of holiness, I will not walk in the path that
is called holy, Job 21. 14, 15. sinners, are brought in speaking thus to God,
depart from us, we will not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the Almighty
that we should serve him? this is yet more evident, in Jer. 6. 16. where
Jehovah speaks thus to the Jews, si and in the ways and behold and ask for the
old way, which is the good way and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your souls, but they said we will not walk in thy ways, surely, they durst not
answer God thus obstinately with open mouths, but their thoughts speak it,
impenitent sinners, say in their hearts, the Lord Christ shall Luke 19. 14.
not reign over us, we will not walk in those precise paths that preachers
press upon us. Men do manifest this disobedient thought in their practice, in
that they sin against the light of Gods word, and cast off those duties, that
are so clearly commanded.

6. Out of the heart of men proceed thoughts of injustice: these tend directly
to the damage or hurt of our neighbor, in his name, body, estate, etc.

1. Justice is a virtue whereby we are inclined to perform our duty to our
neighbor, in thought, word and deed,

2. The formal act of Justice, is to give every man his due, that which belongs
unto him.

3. The object of Justice, is our Neighbor, that is, every one that is, or
possibly may be partakers of the same blessedness with us. Luke 10. 36, 37.

4. This Justice is the sum and substance of the second Table.

5. The Royal Law being spiritual, forbids and condemns not only unjust
speeches, works and gestures, but also unjust thoughts of man against man,
Zach, 7. 10. Let none of you think evil against his brother in your heart.

Quest. What are those thoughts of unjustice, that men conceive against their
neighbors?

Answer. They are of five sorts.

As first dishonouring thoughts.

2. Murdering.

3. Adulterous.

4. Thievish.

5. False accusing thoughts.

1. The hearts of men by corrupt nature are full of dishonouring thoughts
against those who are set over them, these are sins against the Fifth
Commandment, the least contemptible unworthy Mat. 5. 22. (...) Raka legi
semper ita scriptum (...) Reka vel Rika and sona^ vacuum, subaudi judicio,
ratione and cerehro, veuitque a (...) quod etiam Hebraice significal evacuare,
Tremel Raka Sir. (...) id est interpret Hesychio, and Hyeronime, (...) vacuus
vanus, and absque cerebro. (...) Hebr vacuus, inanis, binc voxilla convi. ii
Syrerum, (...) vanus cerebro, vacuus, levis, Buxtorf. Juni^^.
thought against those that are in place over us, whether Magistrates, or
Teachers or Parents, or Masters, or Husbands, is a breach of the Law of God,
and a striking at the image of his authority.

2. Vile reproachful thoughts against their neighbors, these are of three
sorts.

1. when we think despicably of them in respect of their outward state or
stature.

2. In respect of their gifts.

3. In respect of their spiritual estate.

1. *When we shall think thus with our selves, such a man is a poor sneake a
worm, a base contemptible fellow, in regard of me, a mere shrub, etc.

2. When we have these or such like thoughts, such a man is far inferior to me
in gifts and parts, he is no body, he is Raca an empty fellow; these are
dishonouring thoughts condemned by the Law. Matthew. 5. 22. Whosoever shall say
to his brother Raca, shall be obnoxious to the Council, Raca is a Syriack word,
a word of Reproach, it signifies a man that is empty of Judgment, wit and
reason. Mat. 5. 22.

By this Reproachful speech men draw great guilt upon themselves before the
judgment seat of God, as any capital crime did in the Sanhedrim or great
Council of the Jews.

There were principally two kinds of Capital Judgments among the Jews, the
first was called (...) Judgment, wherein 23 Judges did judge of the greater
Capital causes, especially man slaughters.

2. The other was the highest judgment of 71 Elders, called the Sanhedrim,
Numb. 11, 16.
who judged of the greatest causes only, and it was wont to inflict four kinds
of punishments on men condemned, Strangulation, Sword, Burning, Stoning.
Maimony in Sanhedrim c. 1. s. 3. 4. 5. explaineth it thus there was in Israel,
First a great Court (or Judgement-Hall) in the Sanctuary, and that was The
Hebrews in their commonwealth continued their chiefest Senate in Jerusalem of
71 Elders, as Numb. 11 16. there were 70 and Moses the Prince.
called the great Synedrion, and their number was 71 as it is written, Gather
to me 70 men, etc. And Moses was chief over them, as it is said, and let them
stand there with thee, Numb. 11. 16. Lo here are 71. the greatest in wisdom
among them all, they set him for head over them, and he was called the Prince
in every place, and he stood in stead of Moses, moreover they set two judgment
Halls, each of So they record in Talmud Bab. in sanhedrim. chapter 1. and Maimony
in sanhedrim. c. 1. s. 3: 4, 5.
23 Judges, the one at the door of the Court (of the Sanctuary) the other at
the door of the mountain of the Temple, and in every City of Israel, wherein
were 120 Fathers of Families or more, they set a lesser Synedrion which sat in
the gate of the City, as it is written, and establish judgment in the gate,
Amos 5. 15. and their number was twenty three Judges, if it were a City which
had not 120 men in it, they set therein three Judges, for there is no judgment
Hall of less than three, etc.

By this Text thus opened it is evident, that to think basely and reproachfully
of our brethren, is a great sin, which makes us liable to the dreadful
judgment of God, men first speak this Raca of their brother in their thoughts,
before they speak it to their brother with their mouths.

3. We are guilty of these dishonouring thoughts, in relation to men's
spiritual estates, when we think thus, I am more holy and righteous than
others, that these were the common thoughts of that Pharisee, Luke 18. is
evident by his speeches; I am not as other Luke 18. 11.
men are, or as this Publican. I exceed all others in righteousness and strict
walking, this Publican is a base fellow, far below me, he is a superlative
sinner, he is thus and thus -- this proud Pharisee thinks himself the chief
Saint, more righteous than any man living, as his own words clearly import; I
am not as the rest of men be, therefore Luke 18. 11.
he stands apart by himself praying, yea, every man by corrupt nature is apt
to have low undervaluing Thoughts of others in comparison of themselves,
therefore it is Gods command, that eveman in humility should think others more
Phl. 2. 3, (...).
excellent than themselves, hereby giving us to understand, that we are apt
through pride, to think our selves more excellent than others.

2. The hearts of men naturally are possessed with murdering thoughts against
their Neighbors, either directly or by way of tendency, whereby they violate
the sixth precept, these are,

1. Unmerciful thoughts, when the object of mercy is before them, and a
present opportunity of doing good, and yet they think thus in their hearts, I
will not look upon this object, I will not distribute to him, I have many
occasions of expenses, etc. Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Beware that there be not a wicked
thought in thine heart and thine eye be evil toward thy poor brother, and thou
give not unto him, etc.

What wicked murdering thought is this, that is here condemned? some such
thought as this, I will not pity the poor, I will not give to him, I must
provide for mine own, etc.

This unmercifull thought shows it self in these two effects.

1. An evil eye, when men turn away their face from their poor brethren, and
will not cast a compassionate look on them.

2. A niggardly hand, when they shut up their bounty, not distributing
according to ability and opportunity, to such as are fit objects of mercy.

2. Men's hearts are full of cruel oppressing thoughts against the poor, which
do produce oppressive overreaching dealings, and grinding the face of the
poor, etc. the spoil of the poor is in their houses. Isa. 3. 14, 15.


2. The second murdering thought, which fills the hearts of sinners, are
spightfull, hateful thoughts against the Saints: Carnal men being the seed of
the old serpent are possessed with Cain-like Psalm. 74.
thoughts of enmity against the holy seed of Christ.

3. Men naturally are full of revengefull thoughts, which make their hearts a
very slaughterhouse: upon any real or imaginary wrong done to them, they are
apt to think thus, I will be even with such an one, if ever occasion serve, I
will do to him as he has done to me: these thoughts of retaliation are
expressly forbidden, Prove. 24: 28. 29. do not say, (in thine heart) as he has
done unto me, so will I do unto him, I will return unto the man according to
his work.

3 The hearts of carnal men are full of adulerous thoughts, whereby they
transgress the seventh Commandment. The Law is spiritual and condemns all
thought-defilements, the Pharisees Rom 7. 14
restrained this precept to the outward act only, but the great Lawgiver
expounds it more spiritually, and shows us, that there is a mental heart
adultery, which men commit in their thoughts every unchaste inordinate thinking
of a Mat. 5. 27, 28.
woman makes men guilty of adultery: therefore Job resolves that he would not
Job 31.
think of a maid, men are apt to bless themselves with the Pharisee, that they
Luke 18.
are no adulterers in their bodies, but they do not consider what a world of
adultery 2 Cor. 7. 1.
they commit in their thoughts.

This thought filthiness does exceedingly pollute men's spirits, and provoke
God against them, Genesis 65, 6.

2. These unclean thoughts are incendiaries, and bellows of adulterous
affections, the begetters of unclean speeches, and actions: David's eyes first
filled his heart with adulterous thoughts, 2 Samuel 13. 2.
his thoughts fired his affections and brought forth the external act, which
cost him broken bones. Psalm: 51:


3. These wanton, unclean thoughts, being lodged, do make the hearts of men a
filthy Stews, a very hell upon earth, a house furnished and fitted for all
unclean spirits to enter in, and dwell there.

4. The minds of men by corrupt nature are possessed with thievish defrauding
thoughts against their neighbors, which are sins against the eighth precept,
they think and devise how they may overreach and beguil those with whom they
trade, and go beyond them in bargaining; how they may make the Ephah small, and
the shekel great, how they may raise the price of their commodities, and lessen
their measures, and use deceit in weights, let such remember. Amos 8 5.


1. That God is the avenger of such rhoughts and practices.

2. That these defrauding thoughts make men's hearts a den of thieves.

5. The hearts of men naturally are exceeding prone to false accusing thoughts,
concerning the persons and practices of their neighbor, whereby they are
offenders against the Ninth Commandment. Men are guilty of these false
accusing thoughts two ways.

1. When they think and conceive persons to be ungodly and hypocritical, who
are indeed true hearted Saints, which is a condemning the righteous in their
thoughts. Thus Eli had false thoughts of praying-perplexed Hannah, when the
Apostl^^ were filled with the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and spoke 1 Samuel 1. 13,
14, 15.
strange tongues, the ill affected Jews thought them to be full of new wine.

2. We are guilty of this wicked Acts 2. 13.
thought, when we conceive that our brethren act and walk contrary to the light
of their own consciences, because they do not walk up to the light that we
think our selves to have attained; this is to intrude into Gods Throne, and to
take upon us to search and judge the heart, which is Gods Prerogative Royal.

2. When men think evil of those practices that are good: thus when David stood
up for the Lord of Hosts, and declared his readiness and resolution to fight
with Goliath, he being moved thereto by Gods spirit, and filled with a spirit of
faith, Eliab thinks that David did it out of the pride and malice of his 1 Samuel
17. 28.
heart. when carnal men hear their sins laid open by the power of the word,
they presently think that the Minister aims at them in particular, that he does
this out of malice to disgrace them, etc.

When Christ spoke precious words of pardon and peace to the palsy man, Mat.
9. 2. the wicked Scribes thought thus in Matthew. 9. 3, 4.
their hellish hearts, this man blasphemeth.

Men of corrupt hearts are apt to think evil of the best speeches and actions;
so that all these thoughts of unrighteousness do swarm and settle in all
carnal hearts, as evidently appears by the abounding of malice, oppression,
deceit, uncleanness, falsehood, etc. in men's actions and speeches, which have
their first rise and root, in their thoughts.

7. Out of the heart of men proceeds price of thoughts, which is a high and
haughty conceit of our own excellency: pride is properly in men's thoughts,
these are the palace where it resides and the Throne where it raigns, Luke 1
57. He Col. 2. (...). 1 Cor. 5. 2. 1 Cor. 4 6. 4nd 8. 1. and 13. 4. (...).
Inflo or est superbire and turgere, instar follis vento distenti Cornel. a lap.
(...) Job 38. 8. 11. Psalm. 124. 5. (...) and (...) Ferbuit, ebullivit, per
Metaphoram superbivit, intumuit.
has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts, whereby it is
evident, that men are proud in their thoughts.

2. Pride is a tumor and rising up of our thoughts beyond their due bounds: we
have four elegant expressions thereof in Scripture.

1. Pride is called a swelling and puffing up of man's fleshly mind, Col. 2. 18.
it is a heart swollen and blown up with lofty windy thoughts, as bellows and
bladders are stretched out with wind, so the Hebrew words which are used to
express man's pride signify swelling, as Deuteronomy. 18. 22. the false Prophet is
said to speak in the swe^^ing of his mind: in swelling pride: the Hebrew word
Zudh signifies to be lift up with swelling pride: it is applied to the swelling
waves of the sea, which are called proud waves, proud waters, pride is like
leaven cast into men's hearts, which swells and sowreth their thoughts.

2. Pride is expressed by largeness and latitude of mind, Prove. 28. 25. He
that is of a proud heart, stirs up strife, according to the Hebrew it is, he
that is large in heart, etc. when men's hearts are (...) Intumuit superbiit,
Schin. pro 28. (...) Est Metaph. a dimensionibus rerum corporearum translata ad
animi ^astum quo quasi dilatatur, Cartio. Prove. 18. Sublimis suit per
Metaphoram superbivit. (...). 2 Timothy 6. 17.
so dilated, diffused and enlarged in the thoughts of their own exceliencies,
that they will not be contained in their due bounds, nor confined within their
own place, condition and compass.

3. Pride is expressed by a heart lifted up, Deuteronomy. 8. 14. and 17. 20. 2 Chronicles.
25. 19. and 26. 16. Prove. 18. 12. when men are exalted above measure in their
thoughts, and do conceive a height and superlative eminency of glory and worth,
in themselves, this lifting up is only imaginary, as that which has its
beginning and existence from the false apprehensions and opinion of empty men.

4 Pride is called high mindedness, Romans 11. 20. it is properly a high thought
of our selves; a conc^^^ of some eminent good in our selves, whereby trusting
in our selves, we think more highly of our selves than is meet.

3. Pride of thoughts consists in two things.

1. When we imagine that excellency in our selves, which is not.

2. When we conceive that excellency that is really in us, to be greater than
it is.

1. The first and vilest Act of pride is Gal. 6. 3.
to think our selves something, when as we are nothing. Thus the Laodicean
angel and Church think themselves rich, and needing nothing, when as they were
poor, miserable, etc. Rev. 3. 17.


2. We are apt to think our gifts, knowledge and perfections greater, than in
truth they are.

Hence it is, that pride is called arrogance, because it is an arrogating and
attributing more to our selves than is Jer. 48 9.
meet, when as the Scripture says, that no man should understand above that
Romans 12. 3. (...).
which is meet to understand, no man must be overwise: the Greek word signifies
to have an overweening opinion or conceit, as though one knew more than indeed
he knows.

4. Pride of Tho^^^ts does always fix and feed upon some excellency that is in
(...) Excellentia supe^bia, Buxt. Munster us (...) eminuit, excelluit,
superbiit, Schindl. Levit. 26. (...)
us, either real or imaginary: as humility fixes our thoughts upon our own
vileness and nothingnesse: Hence it is, that the Hebrew words Gaon and Gaanah,
which are put for Pride, do also signify excellency and magnificence, Levit.
26. 19. I will break the excellency, or the pomp, pride, haughtiness of your
strength, called elsewhere the excellency or pomp, the pride of the strong
ones, Ezekiel. 7. 24. and Job 6: 18. 36. 618. and 33. 28. Hos. 5. 5. to show us
that Pride is a vicious elevation and greatness of Thoughts Materia, superbiae,
divitiae, dignit^s gloria saecularis originis. Isa. 3. (...) Insantiam notat.
from the apprehension of our own excellency.

5. Pride makes men conceive a superexcellency in themselves beyond all others,
such is the arrogance of man's Thoughts, that they who are empty of all
excellency, are apt to think themselves more excellent, than they that are
filled with the greatest excellencies, this is plainly employed in Isa. 3. 5.
where the Prophet makes this a forerunner of a Nations ruin; the child will
be proud against the ancient, and the vile against the honorable: that is*
they that are Infants in knowledge (...) judgment, will think themselves wiser
and more knowing than the ancient that are men in understanding, and vile,
worthless persons will think themselves more excellent than those that are
truly honorable.

6. As Pride makes men some body in their own apprehensions, so it makes all
Luke 18. 9, 10, 11. (...).
others to be no body in their thoughts: it is the property of all proud,
Pharisaicall men, they vilify and nullify all others in their thoughts, they
think them (...). Pro nihilo habeo, nullifico, etc. Tertul.
to be nothing, to have no worth in them, they climb above others in their own
Thoughts, and then trample upon them.

7. There be diverse steps and degrees, whereby this pride of thoughts ascends,
and rises to the height, As 1. When men have high and lofty Thoughts of their
natural gifts, and external excellencies, as wisdom, learning, strength,
riches, honors, beauty, etc. this is 1 John 2. 16.
called pride of life: when they are raised in their Thoughts, because raised
in the things of this life, Psalm. 90. 10. the strength of creatures is there
called their pride, Rohbam: because men's hearts are apt to swell in the
apprehension of their (...)
strength of bod^ ^^ strength of parts, gifts, etc.

David was puffed up in the thought of his heart, his great successes, and
strength of people, when he numbered the people.

So Vzziah, when his name spread far 2 Samuel 24, 1, 2, 4. 2 Chr. 26. 14, 15.
abroad, and when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction,
when men begin to have a name and fame for wisdom, strength, gifts of
preaching, prayer, or elocution, warlike successes, etc. and then are they in
greatest danger of being lifted up in their own thoughts; to be captivated by
pride

Vzziahs high thoughts did rise from the conceit of his high strength, and self
sufficiency: he now thinks himself sufficient for the work and Ministry of the
Priesthood, he being a Magistrate intrudes into the Priests Office, and this is
the great transgression which is laid to his charge, this was the fruit of his
pride, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. When men are puffed up in their own conceits, they
think themselves sufficient for any work Evangelical or angelical.

So Hezekiahs heart was lifted up, when 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. 27, 29: 1 Timothy 6. 17:
(...).
he had exceeding much riches, and honor and substance, these were the
occasions of his swelling Thoughts, therefore men rich in this world, ^ust be
strictly charged that they be not high minded.

To show 1. How rich men, even the best of them, are inclined to think highly
of themselves.

2. That it is no easy thing to have low thoughts in a high estate.

2. The second degree of pride is when The second degree of pride.
our minds are lifted up with high conceits of our supernatural excellencies,
as Spiritual Privileges, gifts and enlargements, knowledge puffs up, that 1
Cor. 8. 1.
is knowledge made up of gifts of understanding, and notionall apprehensions;
such windy knowledge swells up men's thoughts* light severed from the love of
the Truth is the matter and occasion of swelling Thoughts, the Corinthians were
eminent in the gift of Knowledge, and this was the occasion that they were so
puffed up.

3. The third degree of pride, is when 1 Cor. 5. 2. 3. The third degree.
men have high thoughts of their own low Thoughts; it is a loftiness of
Thoughts, arising from the apprehension of their own foolishness, when they
begin to be something in their own conceits, from the sense that they are
nothing in midst of all their excellencies: this is the cursed nature of pride,
that it will make not only the gifts, but also the gifts that we receive,
matter whereon to work, as when people that sat in darkness are filled with
appearances of Christ in their spirits, pride will take occasion from that
Divine Discovery to puff up their thoughts.

2. Which is nore strange, pride will take occasion to work in our Thoughts
from that self abasing grace of humility.

For when in true humility of heart we shall abhor and renounce all Thoughts of
pride, and strive to be nothing in our selves for ever; yet even then will
pride be working, and fill us with high admiring thoughts of our own low
abasements. It is an effect and act of pride, to think highly of our selves,
because we are not proud, it is one of the Devils depths whereby he works
most secretly and subtly, if he cannot prevail to puff us up in the conceit
of our gifts, privileges and high enjoyments: then his next policy is to fill
our minds with high apprehensions and admirations of our self annihilations: so
that now we begin to think thus with our selves. I see how others are puffed up
with their excellent gifts and seize. I have these and these parts,
privileges, and much esteem among the Saints, and yet I find my Thoughts low
and lowly in midst of all these; hereuppon we begin to be high conceited of our
selves, because we are not high-minded.

4. The fourth degree of pride is to conceive and imagine a height of power
Fourth degree.
principality and possession to our selves, to think our selves possessed of
those excellencies, that we are far from ever enjoying, how much pride do men
act in their Thoughts upon mere imaginary suppositions they conceive and
contrive to themselves.

1. What they would be for earthly excellencies, and then what they would do.
Men frame a fools Paradise of dignity and delight, power and possession to
themselves, and then bring themselves into it, and there walk up and down in
their Thoughts. They speak in their Thought, as aspiring Absolon once to 2 Samuel
15. 4.
the people, oh if they were Judges in the Land; they would do this or that,
they would surpass others in prudent, righteous administrations, self denial,
etc. like children or frantic persons, they imagine themselves, Princes,
Nobles, Statesmen, Rulers, Rich men, etc. They think if they had as great
Estates as some have, in what a height of pomp and pleasure they would live for
gorgeous apparel delicate diet, etc. men fancy to themselves high places and
possessions, and in the thoughts thereof they pride and felicitate themselves,
almost as much as those that really enjoy the things themselves.

5. The fifth and highest degree of Fifth degree.
Pride is when men imagine a kind of Deity in themselves: now there be two
self Deifying Thoughts, whereby they are guilty of devilish Pride. 1. When men
think themselves equal with God. 2. When they conceive themselves to be as gods.

1. This is the most abominable height of pride, when men think themselves
equal with the most high, yet some have risen up to this height of arrogance,
as the King of Babel, when he said in his heart, I will ascend above the height
of the Isa. 14. 14.
Clouds, and will be like the most high, such also was the pride of Ninive, who
Zeph: 2. 15.
speaks thus in her heart, I am and there is none beside me.

Men are guilty of these self Deifying-thoughts two ways.

1. When they imagine a power in, and of themselves, equal with Gods power,
this was the pride of Nebuchadnezzar, when he said, Who is that God, that can
deliver you out of my hand?

2. When men do arrogate and assume to themselves that honor and power, that
is proper to God alone. this was the cursed pride of Herod, when he assented to
that blasphemous speech of the people, and spoke that in his thoughts, which
they spoke with their tongues, crying, the voice of God and not of man. this is
that abominable arrogance Acts 12. 21, 22
of Antichrist, who sitting in the Temple of God, exalts himself above 2. These.
2 4. Dan. 11. 36.
all that is called God, or worshipped.

That man of sin is evidently the Pope of Rome, as appears by his self
goddifying Acts and Attributes: for though under a politic pretense of self
abasing, he calls himself the servant of servants, yet in the height of his
arrogant thoughts, he sits as God; for he takes to himself that honor and
power that is, Gods Royal Prerogative.

1. He claims a power to forgive sins past, present and to come.

2. To prescribe new Rules of worship.

3. To make laws to bind the Conscience properly.

4. To open and shut heaven.

5. To dispose of earthly Kingdoms at his pleasure.

6. To dispense with the Moral Law, and with Apostolical Constitutions.

2. Men are guilty of these self goddifying thoughts, when they think
themselves to be as gods. The Devil in the beginning made an impression of this
Genesis 3. 4, 5. 1 John 9. 7.
proud thought upon our first Parents, ye shall be as gods, and we being in
their loins when they sinned and descending from them by ordinary generation,
do receive that corruption from them whereby we are inclined to think thus
proudly of our selves, that we have a kind of Deity in our selves.

This I take to be the meaning of that place. The Lord God said, behold, man is
become as one of us three, the Father, 1 John 5. 7.
the Son, and the holy spirit. Man is not become as God really and indeed: for
we are by our fall come to be as the Devil, but men are as gods in their own
proud imaginations: hereby Jehovah would discover to Adam and all his posterity
what thoughts of devilish pride are now rooted and revealed in their depraved
natures, by believing the Serpents deceitful promises.

8. This Pride of Thoughts is predominant in all unregenerate men, predominant
sins are of two sorts, particular or universal.

1. Every man in his carnal estate has his particular master sin, which is
predominant in his affections, and whereunto he is most strongly carried. this
we call the sinners bosome-beloved-sinne, in some it is avarice, in others
ambition, etc, but Pride is an universal predominant sin, which raigns and
revels in all unsanctified men, as their great Goliath.

Ob. Some will say, we find not this pride of thoughts working in our hearts.

Answ. 1. They that are most filled with this pride, do least feel it in
themselves; the less we discern it in our selves, the more it domineers in us.

2. The deeper sight and sense we have of this sin, the more we are delivered
from it.

9. This pride of thoughts is a Capital and Radical sin, it produces many
damnable evils, and dangerous Superbia est caput atque causa omnium delictorum,
scriptum est enim, initium peccati omnis superbia, Augustinus prior est in
vitus superbia, non enim invidia parit superbiam, sed superbia parit invidiam,
Aug.
fruits, as

1. Discontent with our present condition, pride makes men think themselves
greater than the greatest outward mercy.

2. Ambition, whereby men seek great things for themselves, Jer. 45. 4, 5.

3. Vain boasting, whereby they speak of themselves, their gifts and
eminencies, more than is comely.

4. Hypocrisy whereby men make profession of those gifts and graces that really
they have not, or of a higher measure than indeed they have.

5. Obstinacy, and persisting in error against clear light, when men are
engaged in a corrupt opinion, they will not be convinced; their error may daily
be overthrown, but their pride will not yield to the truth.

Quest. How shall we know whether our differing in opinion from brethren
proceed from pride or from conscience, and want of convincing light?

Answer, When men behave themselves humbly and meekly, when they cannot see
what their brethren do, this argues it is from conscience, not from Pride and
Obstinacy, but when they appear haughty lofty and censorious, and think that
those that dissent from them are wilful, and will not see the truth, or else do
act against their light, this shows that such are acted by a spirit of pride,
and not by Conscience: humility thinks no evil.

6. Pride of Thoughts is the cause of Division, Contention, and striving one
against another in word or deed, Prove. 13. 10. only by pride comes
contention, all contention is imputed to pride, that is indianded for the
common disturber of peace.

1. Pride makes men prove to be injurious to others.

2. Out of these injuries arise strifes and brawlings.

3. Out of contentions murder often breaks forth. Hamans pride filled his heart
with an insatiable thirst after the blood of the Jews. The wicked Hest. 3.
Psalm: 10. 2. Micah 18. 1, 2, 3. (...) Judge. 8. 1. c. 12 1, 2. 3.
man's persecuting the afflicted proceeds from his pride, this was the cause of
those contentions among the Apostles, we may judge of the cause by the cure.

It is an elegant speech of the learned Hebrews, Men whose spirits are lifted
up are made turbulent by the least wind, by the least occasion.

Only or merely by pride comes Contention, the meaning is, that pride of it
self without the concurrence of any other corruption does kindle strife, proud
men are apt to be contentious when no occasion is offered, this is manifest in
the Ephraimites, who being puffed up in their multitudes, contend with Gedeon
about that for which they ought to be grateful, and being called to battle
they came not, and yet contend with Jephta, because they were not called, pride
breaks out into strife, when there is no provocation, and in midst of peace
prepares for war.

This pride of Thoughts is the chief dividing Principle, the great Incendiary
and Master of misrule, it is the root of contention diverse ways.

1. Proud persons, they cannot endure to be crossed or contradicted, they think
themselves too great to be crossed and the least cross too great for them to
bear.

2. they vilify others, and are vilified by others.

3. Pride makes men seekafter eminency, and if they cannot be eminent one way
they will strive to be eminent another way, if they cannot be the only men in
the world, yet they will be some body, pride always affects pre-eminence, and
contends for primacy.

4. Pride makes every man highly conceited of his own way and opinion, because
it is his own, this prevents all yielding to each others, and so begets
endless wrangling.

5. One proud man thinks himself the only man, and therefore worthy of respect
from all men.

6. One proud man hates the apparitions of pride in another, and one hates
another.

7. Through pride men set up their own wills, and opinions, as the rule of
other men's actions and opinions.

8. Proud men never search into their own defects aand defil^ments, but they
study their gifts and perfections hence they are severe censurers of other men's
failings and sle^ghters of their gifts and virtues.

9. If proud men be but touched in their name and state, they presently take up
arms of revenge.

7. This pride of Thoughts makes men the greatest contenders and fighters
against God, he looks upon haughty persons, as his highest enem^es.

1. Proud men do exalt themselves above God, they lift up their will above his
will, they speak thus in their thoughts and works, my will shall be followed
rather than Gods will.

2. They will have their own wills, Exaltatio and and inslatio arrogans atque
superba jactatio. De Antichristi spiritu nascitur etc. Cyprian. Cornelio.
whether just or unjust.

3. Proud men have the spirit of Antichrist, pride and self exalting is born of
the spirit of Antichrist.

2. Proud men go from God, they leave God and his ways, as if they could live
without him, they say in their hearts, as once those proud people of Israel, we
are Lords, we will come no more unto thee. Jer. 2. 25.


2. There is much Pride in all Propter superbi^m dedignan^ur homines subdere
colla jugo Christi, ohligati arctius jugo peccati, Augustine.
Disobedience, and all Disobedience is a departing from God, in every act of
Disobedience men lift up themselves above God, and go from him; for sin is
properly an aversion from God to the creature; therefore Disobedience is called
Rebellion.

3. Proud men go against God, as if they were able to resist and stand against
him, they work and walk contrary to Gods will and ways.

4. Proud persons go beyond God, they set up themselves as the end of all that
they do.

8. Pride of thoughts corrupts men's judgments; it is the grand productor of
all error and heresy, as is evident, 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine that is according to godliness; he is proud, blown
up in his own Thoughts: here is the true (...).
cause why men come not up to the truth in their judgments, they are proud,
high conceited of their own wisdom, they think they know more than any others,
they fancy a kind of Papal infallibility to themselves, that what they imagine
to be truth, must needs be so: they make Scripture speak what themselves first
fancy.

2. These high thoughts produce an affection of singularity, and ambitious
affection to appear some body in the world, this end they conceive cannot be
attained in going in the old way of sound doctrine, they must teach another
doctrine, or in another way, and put upon it the name of new light, and higher
discovery, thereby to draw disciples after them. Acts 20.


2. Pride begets a pernicious persisting in erroneous opinions, which men have
once taken up; they think it a dishonor to recant and lay folly to themselves.

9. Pride is a Sodomitical sin, Ezech. 16. 49. the Prophet shows what were
Sodomiticum peccatum est superbiae iniquitas Origenis. Hof. 5. 5:
the sins of Sodom, and the first was Pride.

10. Pride testifies that there is much evil in men's hearts. The pride of
Israel testifies to his face, that is, the inward pride of their thoughts,
manifesting it self outwardly in their speeches and actions testifies the great
wickedness that is in their hearts: it is a grand accusing sin, a loud
witness against sinners.

2. It is a most dishonoring sin, no sin disgraceth and reproacheth men
more than pride; because it testifies abundance of Ignorance, error and
obstinacy in their hearts, as humility witnesses, that we know much of God,
his mind and will, With the lowly is Prove. 2. 11.
wisdom.

11. These swelling Thoughts of pride, lodging and lording in men's hearts are a
sure sign of an hypocrite, in the midst of the highest forms: thus the
Scripture testifies, behold the soul that is lifted up, Hab. 2. 4.
that is, with high thoughts, is not upright in him, it is one character of
those that 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5. (...)
have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, they are puffed up with
high thoughts.

12. Pride of thoughts begets monstrous shapes, and strange forms of apparel
and attire, an affectation to be singular in fashions, and surpassing in rich
apparel.

13. The Omnipotent God has proclaimed open war and hostility against (...). 1
Pet. 5. 5.
all proud persons, James 4. 6. God resists the proud, he stands in battle
array, in direct defiance and open opposition against them: it is a Military
word, which is used in the Original, and It is very Emphaticall it signifies to
raise Oppono me, importat instructa acie, atque ^eluti ex adverso praelio
obsistere, Lorinus.
an Army, and to make warlike resistan^e, it shows that there is a mutual
opposition between God and proud persons, they set themselves as it were in
battle against God, and God sets against them.

Proud men are as it were Invaders of the glory of God.

They assume that Honor that is proper to God, now it is usual to resist
Invaders with streng^h of Arms, Wherefore he says, God resists the proud,
but where does God speak this? Answ. the Prove. 3. (...). ^hus the LXX. reads it
Scripture says it in Prove. 3. 34. according to the Hebrew, it is thus, He
scorneth the Scorners.

James and Peter do allege the version of the seventy Interpreters, vulgarly
known in the Church, which agrees sufficiently in sense, the meaning is* that
those proud scorners who do proudly cast off Gods Laws and despise his
Admon^tions, (they are scorned by God again, He resists proud Scorners, such
as do think of themselves above that which they are, and thereupon do proudly
scorn all others: This scorning is the proper Fruit of man's high thoughts.

Pride shows it self principally in contemning and slighting of God, his word,
promises Threats, Ordinances and works in self admiration and desp^sing of
others, scorning of others comes from overvaluing thoughts of our selves, God
has made every man an object of Respect, or Pity: It is man's Pride, which
makes men objects of sleighting and contempt, and in them, Prove: 7. 5. 1 Pet.
5. 5. Quod (...) dicitur. See Isa. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 17 Isa 57. Luke 1.
51. Psalm. 138. 6.
their Maker.

The Lord of Hosts fights against all sinners, but against proud men and women
in a peculiar manner, against them, He whets his sword, bends his bow and fits
all the arrows of vengeance.

14. Those thoughts of pride make men utterly incapable of communion with God,
who dwells with none but humble persons, he scatters the proud from him: --
the proud be knows afar off, Jehovah looks upon proud men afar off, or aloof,
at a great distance from (...)
him, not near or familiarly, but in wrath to punish them; the Chaldee
paraphraseth the proud from the heavens far off he will depresse. They that are
high in their own Thoughts are removed and separated far from God, as the
Hebrew word imports.

1. They are far off from any vision Longanimitas and remotio. 1 Cor. 8. 2.
of God and his glory, if any man think, that is proudly conceited, that he
knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, he is proud,
knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6. 4. proud souls are ignorant souls.

2. They are far off from any enjoyment of God: the higher we lift up our
selves in our own thoughts, the further off we are from the most High, who
flies Magnum miraculum; altus est Deus erigis te. and fugit a te. Aug.
from us: but the lower we throw down our selves in our own apprehensions, the
nearer we are to the high God, which is a miracle of admiration, it is an
eminent saying of the Hebrew writers, God says of every man whose spirit is
lifted up, I and he cannot dwell together in the world.

3. Proud men are far from grace and (...)
mercy, they lift up themselves above God, and therefore they can receive no
grace from God who is the fountain of all grace: streams flowing from a
fountain ascend no higher than the fountain it self.

15. Men that are high in their own Thoughts, are far off from salvation, but
they are very near to a dreadful downfall, Pr. 16* 18. Pride goes before
destruction Hos. 5. 5.
or breaking, and a haughty spipit before Est. 3. 6. and 7. 10.
a fall. Pride struts before and ruin follows at the heels, Haman was haughty,
and this was his ruin: before the worms did eat Herod, his heart was Act. 12.
23. Dan. 4. 30. 31.
swollen with pride. Absolon and Adonijah aspired, but destruction was their end.
Pride affects to go before, but it is before a fall: if you find pride in the
premises you shall certainly find destruction in the Conclusion: pride did
precede Genesis 5. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 6.
the fall of our first Parents, and the fall of the Angels: it was so from the
beginning, and will be a truth to the end, Luke 14. 11. Whosoever exalts
himself shall be abased, be they particular persons, Cities or Kingdoms, if
they exalt themselves through pride, God will throw them down, Babylon has
been proud against the Lord, and against the Jer. 50. 29.
Holy one of Israel, and therefore she shall be ruined.

See how God threatened the men and women of Judah for their pride, Jer. 13. 9.
Isa. 3. 24. the Lord of Hosts has purposed to stain the pride of all glory,
(that is, ear^hy glory) and to bring into contempt the honorable of the earth.
Isa. 23. 9.

This fall which follows the pride of thoughts is exceeding dreadful.

1. It is a shameful fall: when pride comes, then comes shame, the person of
runners is here attributed to pride Prove. 11. 2.
and shame, which strives to outrun each other: though pride set out first, yet
shame following after runs so swiftly that it overtakes and lays hold upon it.
The great God delights to cast down the haughty that fly so high in their
thoughts; Thine eyes are upon the lofty that thou may bring them low, thou will throw down the lofty eyes of men. A 2 Samuel 22. 28. Psalm. 18 28. Isa. 2.
11. Hos. 7. 12. Micah 2. 3. (...) Post accentum darga sequitur Tebhir, hoc est
post elationem venit ruina.
lofty thought makes so^ty looks, men may be low in their own thoughts, though
high in their outward estate and place, and lofty in their outward thoughts,
though low in outward estate.

It is a proverb among the Hebrews, every man whose spirit is lifted up, shall
at length be diminished and destroyed, the Heathen Philosopher could say, that
Gods work in heaven is to bring down the proud on earth, and to raise up the
humble,

This pride of Thoughts of it self is sufficient to cast men down into the
lowest flame, Prove. 29 23. a man's pride shall cast him down, this form of
speaking is very emphatical, for pride is here compared to a man armed with a
beetle or a pared butchers ax, to knock down all proud Persons.

2. It is a falling very low, they that exalt themselves in their proud
thoughts Luke 14. 11. Christ often used this proverb.
shall be be brought low, even as low, as the lowest hell, except they repent
Proud men falling must needs fall low, because they lift up themselves so high
in their own Thoughts. Things falling from a great height fall deeply and
desperately, as the angels who fell from heaven into the depth of of hell.
Prove. 16. 18. and 18. 12. (...) ante confractionem, etc.


3. it is a ruining fall that befalls proud men, Prove. 18. 12. Before breaking,
the heart of man will lift up it self, thus it is in the original, it is a
Metaphor taken from earthen vessels, which being broken all to pieces are
destroyed without remedy, it holds forth the remediless ruin which lies at
the door of proud men and women, who shall be thrown down like an earthen
pitcher by the hand of God, and so they shall perish 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. Isa. 13.
Isa. 16. Hos. 5. 5. Isa. 2.
for ever by this fall, Vzziahs heart was lifted up to his destruction, pride
was the great sin that destroyed Babylon, Moab, and the people of Israel and
Judah.

4. Proud men fall into the Devils condemnation, 1 Timothy 3. 6. It is said, that
a Bishop that is a minister of the Gospel must not be a novice, that is, not
one (...), Paul says not (...), but (...): it is not meant of young in years
but in faith. Superbia dejecit angelos and ex angelis fecit diabolos, eisque in
aeternum interclusit Regnum caelorum, Augu- 1 Timothy 6, 4. (...), etc. (...)
insaniens, Beza, Stephan-Erasmus (...) non modo inflatum sed in genere
dementatum and fanaticum-significat. Victorin. Strigelius.
newly converted to the faith, not a young plant in Christianity, lest being
lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil, that is, lest
he being swelled up with a conceit of his high office and opinion of his parts
and gifts do fall into the same condemnation with the Devil. Pride of thoughts
was the great sin that brought the Devils under condemnation.

All proud men are frantic and fanaticall fools, 1 Timothy 64. All corrupt
Teachers are said to be proud and mad (as Beza and others render it) doting,
they are sick of a spiritual frenzy, the word in the original used for Pride,
1 Timothy 3. signifies one puffed up with pride, and possessed with madness and
frenzy.

Use 1. Let us entreat God to give us a spiritual sight and sense of that deep
mystery of Satanical pride, which naturally works in our thoughts: oh what
devilish proud natures do we carry about us: the heart of every man in its
corrupt frame, is a palace of all pride and presumption; it is like the Table
of Adonibezek at which he sat in a chair of State, and made others, even Kings
to eat meat like dogs under his feet with their thumbs cut off: such are all
men by corrupt nature, advancing themselves to a throne of State in their own
Thoughtss saying in their hearts, I am the man, and treading their brethren
under feet as inconsiderable no bodies to them, hence the Psalmist speaks of
the foot of pride, that is of the proud man, (as the Chaldee translates it)
pride being Judge. 1. 7. Psalm. 36. 12. (...)
put for the man in whom it is, as deceit is put for a deceitful man, Prove.
12. 27. and sin for sinner, Prove. 13. 6. to show us how ready proud men are
to set their feet upon others, and to trample on them with great contempt: thus
did the proud Pharisee trample upon the Publican: thus did those arrogant Jews
set up themselves and tread down others in their Thoughts; saying, stand Isa.
65. 5.
apart, touch me not, I am more holy than thou.

Let us strongly resist and repel the first risings and strivings of pride in
our: though the predominancy of pride be taken away in sanctified men, yet
there is still much pride remaining in their natures, which rises and rebels
upon all occasions, and often captivates their thoughts.

The grand enemy which does assault and annoy gracious souls, is spiritual
Pride; whereby they are puffed up in the thoughts of their spiritual
excellencies, and with a conceit that they have attained a higher measure of
grace, than indeed they have This spiritual Pride does many times mix it self
with the fairest and most sanctified actions of the dearest children of God,
and does soonest insinuate into a heart stored with the rich Treasures of true
godliness; for if Satan cannot detain men in notorious sinfulness, in mere
civil honesty or formality, but that by the merciful hand of God, they are
pulled out of the mouth of hell, from the slavery of sin and courses of
darkness, into the glorious light and liberty of Christ's Kingdom; hereupon
the Devil is enraged with fierce and implacable fury, and does most eagerly
pursue those precious souls with all possible malice; and if he cannot procure
a scandalous relapse into gross sins, yet that he may in some measure work
the dishonor of God, and the discomfort of the noblest creatures, the two main
ends of all his policyes of hell, he does labor to distain the pure streams of
divine grace in the soul puddle of their corrupted nature, and at least to
fasten the spots of spiritual pride upon their best actions, and the very face
of piety; for when godly men by the great work of Regeneration are, become more
excellent than their neighbors, Prove. 12. 26.
as indeed they incomparably are howsoever the worlds estimation be otherwise;
because they are already the blessed members of Christ's mystical body, clothed
with the rich and royal robes of Christ his righteousness, and quickened with the
glorious life of grace, and by the immortal seeed of the powerful word of God,
they are made partakers of the holy Image of the Divine nature, 2 Pet 1. 4.
guarded with an invincible Troop of heavenly Angels, they are the sons of God,
and heirs to a Kingdom of unconceivable glory, and entitled to heavenly
pleasures, more than the stars of the Firmament in number.

The Saints perceiving their own Prerogative, and glorious excellencies, are
filled with a strange and joyful amazement and admiration of their own honor
and happiness which the Devil seeing, who is perfectly experienced in all
advantages and opportunities for spiritual assaults, and working upon the
Relics of man's proud nature, he does craftily draw them to think highly of
themselves, and fills them with swelling thoughts from the apprehension of
their spiritual excellencies, and to advances above that which is meet in their
own conceits, the measure of their own graces and virtues.

Yea after this fiery dart is broken upon the shield of faith, yet Satan
labors with might and main to fasten some splinter or other, even in souls
sincerely humbled for sin, thus through that old Serpents subtilty, they are
insensibly infected with spiritual pride: but when by afflictions or
disgraces, by some extraordinary tentations or particular checks, from the
Ministry of the word, the ugliness of this sin is discovered to their souls,
they for ever abhor it, as a consuming Canker that would fret out the very
heart of syncerity; therefore with much humility and fervency of spirit, they
pray against this secret sin, strive against it, and by the grace of God
prevail against it.

Now seeing this spiritual Pride is so apt to creep into our hearts, and to
puff up our Thoughts in the apprehension of our Spiritual excellencies and
performances, we shall strongly fence our hearts with humility against privy
pride, as against a close undermining and most dangerous enemy, and the more
carefully and watchfully for those Reasons.

1. Other sins grow from pestilent pernicious roots, as earthly mindedness,
from unbelief, oppression, from avarice, murder, from malice, adultery, from
idleness, etc. but Spiritual Pride springs from a fair and unsuspected
fountain, even from the Contemplation and Consideration of the largeness of
our spiritual discoveries, our enlargements in good duties and Eminencies in
grace.

2. This sin does secretly wind it self into the hearts of godly men with a
sly and peculiar kind of insinuation, for when upon the apprehension of their
inlargements in grace and good actions they seem to disclaim pride of thoughts,
they may be proud that they are not proud, and that they are more sensible of
their pride and corruptions than others are, so endless are the mazes of
Satan's circular temptations: this is the last and most subtle encounter,
whereby he surpriseth the Saints.

3. There is no height of grace, no depth of discoveries, no eminency of
holiness attainable in this life, that can secure us from the assaults of
privy pride, and hazard of surprizall, Paul that great Apostle, in whom there
was a matchless concurrence of divine graces, who labored more abundantly
than others in the work of Christ, and was exceeding sensible of his own
nothingnesse in all these, and was exercised with variety of all manner of
afflictions, notable means to keep the heart of man in an humble frame; yet
lest he should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of Revelations,
he was buffeted with the messenger of Satan, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

4. Pride is the most pestilent incompatible opposite that grace has, and
therefore, he that is most sanctified fights most against it.

5 This Pride of Thoughts is the greatest enemy to the glory of God, it does as
it were, take the Crown from the head of the King of glory. God has declared
that he will not give his glory to any other, he is willing to give us his
mercy, grace and strength, his Son and his Spirit, heaven and happiness yea
any thing except his Glory: The comfort and benefit of all the good we do,
shall be ours, but the praise thereof must be wholly and solely given to God.

6. This pride of thoughts brings temporal wrath even upon the Servants of
God. We have a remarkable place, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25, 26. Hezekiahs heart was
lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem,
until they humbled themselves.

7. Let us take heed how we harbor and nourish this V^pe^ of spiritual pride
in the bosom of our Souls, least it persuade us to embrace some groundless
singularity of unwarrantable opinions and dangerous errors, or else it may (by
Gods judgment) draw upon us deadness of heart, dullness of zeal, spiritual
desertion, etc. which the Servants of God do infinitely more fear, then any
affliction that profane men can possibly inflict upon their bodies, or states,
or good name.

These reasons may justly move us to keep a strict watch over our hearts
continually, and when we feel our thoughts begin to swell by looking upon our
spiritual excellencies, gifts, or enjoyments, let us presently crush and
crucify them, and sharply check our selves in these words, What have thou,
that thou have not received?

2. When pride begins to give the least part of the praise of our good actings
and enlargements to our selves, let us with indignation repel and reject it,
and say, Not unto us, not unto us, but to thy name, O Lord, be all the praise:
Of thine own have we given unto thee, in our holy and highest services:

Quest: What must we do to subdue and keep down these swelling thoughts of
pride.

Answ. 1. Let us strive to keep the thoughts of our own nothingness, vileness,
and unworthines always present with us; learn to say with Jacob, I am less
Genes. 31. 10. Job 40.
then the least of mercies: and as Job did after he had been afflicted, and
came to see his ignorance and arrogance, behold I am vile, and as Abraham I am
but dust and ashes, and with David, I am a worm Genesis 18. 27. Psalm. 22. 6.
and no man, yea, with Paul, O wretched man that I am, Romans 7. 24. To keep down
the pride of men's thoughts, the (...) Sanhedr fol. 38. Col. 1.
Hebrew Writers present this consideration, that the Fly and the Worm did
precede man in the work of Creation. That is, the most contemptible creatures,
the Fly and the Worm are our elder brothers at the first Creation.

2. Consider that we our selves are vile worms, Job 25. 6. Man is a worm, and
the son of man is a worm. It Is twice spoken to make the deeper impression upon
our hearts, a Worm is one of the vilest of Creatures, and the Hebrew word here
used (as one observes) signifies the least and meanest of worms, such as breed
in Cheese and Flesh, Exodus 16. 34. the worst sort of worms, as Lice and
Vermin: every man is a worm, the greatest, wisest, and best of men are worms;
worms they are and to worms they must shortly return. How unsuitable are lofty
thoughts to Isa. 41. 14.
poor low worms.

3. Men are compared to the basest and worst of things to the least and lowest
things; as

1. To the dust which is trodden on both by men and beasts.

2. To the dust of a balance.

3. To the drop of a Bucket. Isa. 40.


4. To a shadow which flies away, which has no entity or subsistence.

5. To vanity which is worse then a Psalm. 39. and 62.
shadow.

6. Men are compared to nothing. Isa. 40.


2. Let the best and most mortified men turn the eye of their conscience from
the fruitless and dangerous speculation of their own worthiness, and fasten it
a while upon their corruptions and infirmities, upon their neglects of duties,
and many defects in godly exercises, and executions of their calling, wants and
weakness in prayer and inward devotion, their dullness and deadness in good
performances, their Omissions of opportunities of doing good, and occasions for
the enlarging of the Kingdom of Christ; Their cold and sometimes cowardly
prosecution of good causes, etc. and out of this consideration, they will be so
far from selfconceitedness and high thoughts of their own gifts and virtues
that they will find just cause to continue and increase their humiliation, and
to stand upon their guard against spiritual pride.

3. Let all godly Christians consider that whatsoever they enjoy in spiritual
Excellencies beyond others, is from the free favor and mere mercy of God not
from any thing in themselves, yea, whatsoever gift they have, whether of body
or mind, of honors or outward possessions of nature of grace, they are given
unto them by the liberal hand of God out of the bottomless depth of his own
bounty.

4. consider that we are all by nature equally under sin and wrath, therefore
Ephesians. 2.
there is no cause of swelling one against another.

5. Let us cry mightily unto God to arise and scatter these proud enemies that
rise up against him, and to preserve us from the prevailings of these haughty
thoughts: Thus did David, Psalm. 19. 14. Keep back thy servant from prides, that
is, from al proud insolent thoughts (...)
that is that they have not dominion in me, then shall I be upright and I shall
be clean from the great prevarication. From hence it is evident,

1. That the best men are much inclined to thoughts of pride. hold back thy
servant from prides, our natures are exceeding apt to rush into this sin, if we
be not bridled and held back by a divine power.

2. The reign and dominancy of pride in men's thoughts is most contrary and
inconsistent with uprightness. Then shall I be upright, when I am kept from
pride that it do not domineer in me.

3. Pride of thoughts is great Rebellion against God; the Hebrew word that is
(...) Kimchi in Psalm. 25. explicat per (...)
translated offense or transgression, Psalm. 19. 14. signifies Rebellion,
Defection, and prevarication.

6. Let us suspect our own hearts upon all occasions, and with the watchfullest
eye of our spiritual wisdom, be always jealous and fea^full of the subtleties
and windings of this insinuating sin of privy pride.

7. Let us be much ashamed, abased, and afflicted in our spirits, for the daily
elevations and risings of our thoughts. Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride
I am tandem ^ruhescat homo esse superbus propter quem factus est humilis Deus.
Augustine.
of his heart, both he and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of
the Lord came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles 36. 26.

8. Out of the heart of men proceeds a self justifying thought; There be three
special thoughts of self-righteousne^s which do strongly prevail in the hearts
of natural men.

1. They fancy and conceive a righteousness made up of their own works, keeping
of the Law, Prayers, and good meanings; that there is a proness to this thought
in every man, appears by that strict command that God gives to the people of
Israel to take heed of this evil thought, when they were placed in the
promised Land, Deuteronomy. 9. 4. speak not thou in thine heart, Saying; for my
righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess this Land.

Thoughts are properly the speakings of man's heart: hereby God shows us what
are the thoughts of men by corrupt nature, yea, what thoughts will be ready to
rise in his own people. Luke 18, 9, 10, 11, 12.


This self-justifying thought was predominant in the Pharisees who trusted in
themselves, that they were righteous: the Pharisee prayed thus, O God I thank
thee that I am not as other men are, unrighteous, nor as this Publican. I do
this and that good, etc. I fast twice in the Thus Drusius.
week, upon the first day of the week, because Moses on that day went up to
Mount Sinah, on the second day, because he then came down, he pleads his own
righteousness before God.

1. Negative, he is no extortioner nor unjust, etc.

2. His positive righteousness of both Tables, he was much in prayer and
fasting, duties of the first Table, he paid Tithes, gave Alms, duties of the
2d. Table.

3. His Comparative Justice, he was far more righteous then all other men in
the Church it self that were not of his form: This Pharisee thinks himself
sufficiently righteous even to stand before God: These Pharisees as they
justified themselves in their own thoughts, so they sought to be justified in
the thoughts of all others.

2. Men are apt to conceive a kind of Luke 16. 15.
Innocence in themselves, and that they need no repentance. Of these Christ
speaks, Matthew. 9. 13. when he says, That he came not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance.

Quest. Who are these righteous ones?

An. Such as were so pure and spotless in their own presumptuous conceits, that
they thought that they did not need repentance. They are opposed to sinners,
such as are exceeding guilty and filthy in their own sense, that this is the
meaning; is clear, Luke 15. 7. I say unto you, that joy shall be in Heaven over
one sinner that repents, more then over ninety nine just persons that need no
repentance.

Quest. Are there indeed any so just that they need no repentance, no amendment?

Answ. O no, that cannot be the meaning for the best men are taught by Christ
to confess their daily Trespasses to God, and to ask forgiveness: but this is
spoken according to that opinion Matthew. 6.
and conceit which some have of themselves, who think themselves righteous, and
therefore not to have use or need of repentance, such were the Pharisees who
could charge sin enough upon others, but no sin upon themselves: Luke 18, 10.
11, 12.
Paul in his Pharisaical Estate thought himself to be without blame in respect
of the righteousness that is in the Law, Phil. 3. 6 When Jeremiah rebuked the
people for their sins, they said, they were innocent and guiltless; they had
not Jer; 2: 35.
sinned.

3. Men are apt to think that there is some worthiness in their own
righteousness, whereby they may gain eternal Romans 10. 2.
life, Phil. 3. 6, 7. they thi^^ ^o ascend into Heaven by their own good works,
to attain life in the old way, do and live: Thus do the present Romanists and
all legal Professors and Pharisaical Moralists amongst us.

This Popish pestilent self-justifying thought prevails exceedingly in these
times.

1. For ignorant persons, they conceive that they are able to keep the Law,
they think to be saved by their good meanings, prayers, and serving God.

2. Some others that profess more light, do think to make their peace, and to
procure acceptance with God by their humiliations, prayers, tears, etc. whereas
Christ Jesus is our All in respect of righteousness, peace, and acceptance, He
is our Peace and Peace maker. We grant that prayer, humiliation, and works of
holy obedience, are necessary duties and precious fruits, if flowing from
justifying faith in Christ, but they cannot be our righteousness, peace, or
acceptance with God.

9. Out of the hearts of men proceed thoughts of carnal security in days of
worldly prosperity, so long as they enjoy outward peace and freedom from
troubles, they are full of secure thoughts, speaking thus in their hearts, I am
in a good Estate free from all the Judgments of God, and so shall ever be: I am
in no danger of death or hell, but have hope of Heaven, etc-Psal. 10. 6. Esa.
28. 15. Sinners are brought in speaking this in their thoughts, We have made a
covenant with death and with hell are we at agreement, when the overflowing
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us.

We must not conceive that death or hell can or will really make a league with
any sinner: but these are their own presumptuous thoughts, and secure
imaginations, that they are in no danger of death or hell, that though wrath
should overthrow the whole Land, yet themselves should have an Ark of
Preservation: the Covenant is only in their own thoughts, yea men are apt to
cry peace, peace in their own Thoughts, when destruction is even at door.

These Thoughts of security do exceedingly prevail in these last days, as they
did in the old world, this we find foretold by Christ Matthew. 24. 37. As it was
in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the coming of the Son of
man, they did eat and drink and marry wives, and give in marriage, until the
day that Noah entered into the Ark, and they knew nothing until the flood came
and took them all away.

Objection,

Noah had preached to them of the flood many years, and prepared the Ark in
their sight, how then is it possible that they should know nothing of it?

Answer, It was in the apprehensions and affections of those secure men of the
old world, as if they had known nothing, they believed nothing, they were not
affected with it.

2. They were as secure in their own Thoughts, as if they had known nothing;
they thought themselves free from all danger till the flood appeared. Yea the
best men are apt to be overtaken with secure Thoughts, when outward blessings
overflow, David confesses this sin against himself, Psalm. 30. 6. I said, that
is, in my heart, in my safe quietness or tranquillity, I shall not be moved (...)
to eternity. David being set upon the mountain of prosperity does think
himself above all trouble and adversity, he fancies and frames to himself a
kind of Eternity in his outward tranquillity, that he should never see any more
changes, thus much the Hebrew words import. This was Jobs infirmity in his
prosperity and glory, he said in his heart I shall die in my nest, and I shall
multiply my days as the sand, my root was spread out by the waters, etc. and
my glory was fresh in me, Job 29. 18. 19, 20. if these secure Thoughts so
overpower righteous men; what prevailing power have they over those that are
still under the power of sin and Satan. Worldlings bless themselves in their
riches, they imagine themselves in safety, as persons beloved and blessed of
God, because they prosper in the world, Psalm. 10. Luke 12. 19. This cursed
thought of security is the chief Zeph. 3. 5.
cause of sinners impenitency and induration. God has sent his Prophets and
Ministers in all ages to cry against men's sins, and to call them to
Repentance, Jer 48. 11. Zeph. 1. 12.
and yet the wicked will not learn to be ashamed, they refuse to return, they
are settled on their lees, frozen in their dregs. Where is the man that stirs
up Jer 8. 6. Acts 2. 37. Matthew. 24: 39:
himself to say, what have I done? what shall I do? though judgments be
threatened, sinners will know nothing, till the beesome of wrath sweep them
away: they think themselves free from all danger of deathand destruction, even
when they are nearest to it: and so while they imagine that they are sailing
toward heaven, they suddenly sink into hell.

10. Out of the hearts of men proceed overheightning Thoughts of their
sufferings: in the day of distress they think their troubles are greater, and
their crosses heavier than indeed they are: men are apt to lessen the evil of
their sins, and to greaten the evil of their sufferings, little afflictions
they conceive to be great, and great afflictions Jonah 4. 8, 9.
to be incomparable, and insupportable.

Job in his manifold trialls was overtaken with these overheightning thoughts
his deep complaints speak out his thoughts, Job 6. 1. 2. 13. Job answered and
said. Oh that my griefs were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the
balance together: for now it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea, etc.
what is heavier than a mountain of sand? yet Job conceives his calamity
heavier, so the Church, Lam. 1. 12. thinks her great sufferings to be
superlative and surpassing all others: Behold and see if there be any sorrow
like unto my sorrow which is done unto me: yea what man living can clear
himself from these Thoughts?

1. In case of inward Sufferings we are apt to think thus; never any so
overwhelmed with troubles and terrors as we are.

None ever so tempted and buffeted by Satan, as we, none ever tormented with
such horrid blasphemous injections as we are; never any waited so long for
comfort and assurance as we.

2. In outward sufferings we are full of such Thoughts as these, was there ever
any man that had such crosses, losses, pains, pressures, and distresses as we,
behold and see if any misery be like to ours. Now the reason why men do
overgreaten their sufferings in their thoughts, is,

1. Their looking upon their sufferings more than their sins.

2. Their judging of afflictions by sense more than by faith.

3. Their eying the fleshly dark outside of affliction, more than their
spiritual inside.

4. The smallness of their strength and Prove. 24. 10.
unfitness of their spirits to suffer the will of God.

Quest. What must we do to cure and crucify these sinful Thoughts which are
so apt to beset us in afflictions.

1. Learn to conceive rightly of our Heb. 12. Psalm. 25. Romans 8. 20.
sufferings in their divine causes, fruits and effects: the afflictions of the
Saints do come from the highest love, are ordered by the highest wisdom, and
end in the greatest mercy. When our apprehensions are rectified, the cure is
half wrought.

2. Duly weigh in our thought the demerit of our sins; for which we are
worthy to be destroyed.

3. Consider that the worst that befalls the Saints here, is to prevent the
worst, namely eternal condemnation, 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32. that they might not be
condemned with the world.

11. There is a spiritual barrenness, and emptiness of good Thoughts in all
carnal minds; it is expressly said of evil men, that their Thoughts are only
evil continually from their childhood, Genesis 6. 5. and 8 21. Now where there is
nothing but evil, there good is wanting altogether, spiritual good Thoughts
are totally wanting in natural men.

The spiritual mysteries of the Gospel enter not into our Thoughts, until 2
Cor. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
we become spiritual: if we duly observe the daily frame of our Thoughts we
may find, an apparent want of good Thoughts in our selves. This defect will
appear in four things specially.

1 We are extremely defective in the serious Thoughts of the presence of Gods
all searching eye: how few there be that set God always before them in their
Thoughts, and think with themselves that God beholds all their thoughts and
ways, that he remembers them, and will certainly bring them to judgment,
examine your hearts, are these your constant Thoughts, I am now in Gods
presence, he beholds every thought that I think, hears every word that I
speak; and takes notice of all that I do, may not God take up that complaint
against us, that he does against Ephraim and Samaria, They have dealt falsely,
and they say not in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness, Hos. 7.
2. all that falsehood and profaneness that flames out in men's lips and lives, is
radically and chiefly from hence, they do not seriously think and consider that
God looks upon all their ways. When our hearts are filled with the apprehension
of Gods presence, and so we walk with God in our thoughts, this is a sure
evidence of uprightness.

2. Men are strangers to the serious Thoughts of their last end Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their last end: This shows how averse (...)
we are to apply our minds to the Thoughts of our last end, how unapt are we of
our selves to think of death, Lam. 1. 9.
which is the end of all flesh, what will be our end after death, what will
become of our Souls to Eternity.

3. Carnal men are empty of all spiritual repentant Thoughts of sin.

1. They never think of their manifold guilt by a serious reflection upon their
own ways, this is evident by the Lords complaint against the Jews, Jer. 8. 6.
not one of them would say, in his heart, What have I done?

2. They do not consider the incomparable illness and ugliness of sin, that
there is more evil in the least sin that men commit, than in all penal
sufferings of this life, and of hell it self.

3. They think not of their extreme folly in sinning, how they prefer empty
creatures before an all sufficient God, earth before heaven, Moment any
pleasures before, Rivers of purest pleasures, and joys that never end.

4. Sinners never think of the emptiness of their sinful ways, nor of the
absurdness and unreasonablenesse of their courses, the Prophet sets out the
sottishness of idolaters, in making an Idol god of one part of a Tree, with
the other part whereof they had roasted their Isa. 44 16, 17. 19, 20.
meat and warmed themselves, yet they considered not this in their hearts, --
to say, I have baked bread upon the coals thereof, etc. and shall I make the
residue thereof an abomination?

5. They think not of the deadly end of their sins, sorrows without end.

4. Carnal persons are strangers to the Thoughts of their own duty.

1. They do not think of improving their Talents. Matthew. 25. 18.


2. Nor of the end of their being, and the great business for which they came
into this world which is to advance God by doing his will.

3. They think not of their many obligations* and engagements to love and fear
the Lord. It is Gods complaint against the Jews, they say not in their Jer: 5.
24.
hearts let us fear the Lord our God. Now the true cause why we are so barren
in godly discourse, so empty of heavenly speeches, so unfruitful in good
works, is, because we are so empty of holy thoughts, and heavenly meditations;
our thoughts have a strong influence upon our whole conversation.

12. There is a spiritual madness and folly which runs through our thoughts,
when they are like to the thoughts of mad men and fools, unsettled, incoherent,
full of non sense; this is one of those great defiling evils, which proceed out
of the heart of men, and possesses their thoughts, foolishness and madness,
Mark (...).
7. 22. madness is in the hearts of men while they live, from thence it
overflows into their Thoughts. This madness of Eccles. 9 3.
the Thoughts shows it self in three things especially.

1. They are full of inconsistency and inconstancy: our minds are full of
slipperinesse and unstablenesse in good Thoughts, the thoughts of fools and mad
men dance up and down, and settle upon nothing. There is a foolish wantonness
and roving in man's mind, an unsetlednesse in meditating, that it cannot fix
upon a good object; but as Solomon says, A fools eyes are in the ends Prove.
17. 24. (...)
of the earth: their thoughts rove and run up and down from one end of the
earth to the other, to the first and last parts thereof, as the Hebrew words
import. Their bodily eyes are terminated; therefore it must ^e meant of their
mental Ephesians. 1, 18.
eyes: there is a strange unsteadiness and unstayednesse in man's mind before
renewing, if it fall upon a good object, it is presently off again, and runs
out into other Thoughts.

2. It is apt to let out the Thoughts after every object that comes before it.
The mind of man being deprived of that glorious presence of God that it once
enjoyed in Paradise perfection; it is now in Cains condition the greatest
vagabond and runnagate on the earth, it runs up and down the world, and
cannot rest or settle upon any thing, but what is sinful and sensual.

2 This madness of our Thoughts appears in their Incoherence and incongruity,
they are like the speeches of mad men, which have as little dependence one upon
another, as right reason in them, they speak two or three words, and then fly
off to another thing, which has no agreement with their former words, how
incongruously and absurdly do our hearts speak? if we would seriously reflect
upon our own Thoughts, take notice of them one day, and write down every
thought as the heart speaks them, and then at night read over our notes: and
strictly examine them we should find so much incoherence, disagreement and
nonsense in our thoughts, such jarring and jangling, roving and rambling,
running backward and forward, that we might have cause enough to look upon our
selves as Bedlam fools.

3. Our thoughts are full of extravagancy and digressions: how many thoughts
have we every day whereof we can give no account how they came in, whence they
came, nor whither they would; they are extravagant vagabonds.

13. Our thoughts are commonly unprofitable, because so unsettled, incoherent
and extravagant.

2. For 1. Many good motions do vanish and come to nothing.

3. We often begin good Meditations, and bring them to no perfection, they
miscarry in the conception.

There is abundance of vanity in man's mind, wasting and wearying it self in
childish, impertinent and unprofitable Thoughts and Notions, Tossings and
Tumblings, so that we woefully wast and mispend precious time in thinking Ephesians.
4. 17.
of nothing, as idle persons do in doing nothing, and thus we become altogether
unprofitable in our Thoughts, words and works, and vain in our affections.
Psalm. 14. 3.


14. Man's corruptmind is exceeding fixed and intensive in thinking upon vain,
worldly, and sinful objects, when we set our selves most seriously to meditate
upon holy spiritual things, we shall find our Thoughts as unstable as water,
apt to fly off presently, but our thoughts are apt to fix and feed upon earthly
sensual things, with much stability and greediness: such Thoughts as are
suitable to man's corrupt nature, the heart dwells upon them with the greatest
attention and intention: it is the greatest difficulty to keep in our thoughts
to any holy, heavenly object; and it is no less difficulty to take off our
Thoughts from worldly things, if once fastened thereto by inordinate
affections; our Thoughts first stir up our affections, which being once raised
and fixed upon sensual objects, do fasten our thoughts so storngly to those
objects that we cannot loosen them again, this we have sad experience of
continually.

1. If vain slavish fears se^^e upon us, our minds are filled with foolish,
fearful thoughts, which follow us restlesly where ever we are, what ever we
are doing.

2. In raising of worldly grief, what black Thoughts do haunt us continually:
how do our Thoughts dwell upon our present crosses and losses.

3. When our love and desires are inflamed, and take hold upon the things of
this present world, as riches pleasures, etc. how are our Thoughts drowned in
these vanities, and chained to these objects day and night? excessive
affections do swallow up all our Thoughts, and our thoughts often swallow up
our s^ep, abundance of riches will not suffer a covetous man to sleep for the
multitude of thoughts in his head, Eccles. 5. 12:

15. Out of the heart of men proceeds Curiosity, rash unprofitable enquiries,
foolish, unlearned questions, which are the fruits of rotten, corrupt minds,
this curiosity consists chiefly in these two things.

1. We are apt to be thinking of mysterious things which are above us, and do
not at all concern us, man's mind strongly covets the forbidden knowledge of
mysteries that are beyond its reach, and without the pale of written
revelations.

2. It is strangely delighted with curious conceits and new notions, the
figments of man's fancy.

The glorious heights of Scripture-mysteries cannot content carnal minds, they
will be soaring aloft after unheard of curiosities, and prying into things that
they have not seen, neither can be seen in the word or works of God, this
curiosity of knowledge and speculation, the Scripture often condemns, as 1 Timothy
6. 4. 20. Col. 2. 2. Tim. 4. 3. where the Apostle foretells of a time, when men
will heap up teachers to themselves, according to their own lusts, that is,

1. They will seek after Teachers with ardent desires, running to and fro.

2. They will make choice of their teachers rashly, without judgment and
discerning.

3. Without order, they will not be confined to a Pastor and teacher according
to Gospel Order, but they will have heaps of teachers which imports a confused
multitude, these three things are employed in the Original word here used, 2 Timothy 4. how apparently is this Scripture fulfilled in these our days? Now what
is the ground of all this? (...).
they have itching ears, their minds are possessed with an itching desire after
curiosities; therefore they go after diverse teachers, that so they may hear
something which may feed their curious minds, this itching after curiosity of
knowledge was the ruin of our first Parents; and it is an hereditary disease,
which they have conveyed to all their posterity: men love to be poring upon
strange notions, and musing on hidden mysteries.

2. A second Act of Curiosity is when the thoughts of men are delightfully
taken up with news and common reports which fly up and down in the world, how
greedily do they hearken after all news foreign and domestic, merely to feed
their curious fancies, Act. 17. 21.
and to fill up their thoughts.

I grant, that we may desire to hear how matters go in respect of the Church
and cause of Christ, that we may be sutably and spiritually affected with
providentiall acts, but to listen after the news of the times, State
transactions, and private actings of others, that so we may have matter for our
thoughts to feed upon in our solitary seasons, this argues a mind sick of
curiosity, and a stranger to Gospel news: This Curiosity is properly the
corruption of the thinking faculty.

2. It is a vanity which is exceeding pleasing to man's corrupt fancy which is
taken with novelties.

3. It is exceeding displeasing to God, when our thoughts are spent upon those
things that do not concern us, nor belong unto us.

16. Out of the hearts of men proceed projecting thoughts how to satisfy their
own carnal desires and corrupt designs, the thoughts of carnal persons are
mainly taken up in projecting and providing for the flesh, how they may fill up
and feed the lusts thereof.

1. Licentious men take thought how to find out fittest opportunities and
places for acting sin.

2. Vainglorious Hypocrites take thought how they may raise their own names,
appear in their gifts and parts, and so come to be some body.

3. Greedy Worldlings take thought how to raise their estates and grow rich in
this world, their thoughts do project and plot all the crafty ways of getting,
how they may come to be Masters of Isa. 32. 7.
this black Art, in over reaching, oppressing, and going beyond their brethren
in bargaining, etc. This artificial iniquity of man's thoughts is of all other
most abominable, it is a great evil when sin takes our thoughts, but when we
shall take thoughts to satisfy sinful flesh and worldly lusts, this is the
height of wickedness, the ^ore study and thoughtfulness is in sinning, the more
sinful and satanicall is man's sin. This made David's sin out of measure
sinful, his taking thoughts and projects to cover his unclean Act, and to cut
off Vriah; these projecting thoughts for the flesh are condemned, Romans 13. 14.

17. Out of the hearts of men proceeds a speculative acting of sin in their
thoughts.

1. It is a making present those sensual pleasures in their imaginations, which
are not actually present:

2. It is a secret acting those wicked works in men's thoughts, which they have
not opportunity to bring forth into visible actions, there is a strong
inclination in their corrupt imaginations to this speculative wickedness.

This acting of sin in the thoughts is an easy way of sinning, when men can
set up a stage in their own fancies, and act over all sins within themselves,
in their own secret imaginations, and not go forth to any object with their
outward man, when their lusts want outward objects to work upon, yet they can
inwardly in their thoughts act their own filthy froathy desires and affections.

2. It is a pleasant way of sinning wherewith men's fleshly affections are much
delighted, they take much pleasure in the bare thoughts of sensual pleasures.

3. It Is an empty way of sinning, these sinful speculative delights cannot give
the least real satisfaction to the Soul, for all the pleasures of sin when
actually enjoyed in their greatest fullness, freeness, and reality, they are but
vain shadows, vanishing shows, empty appearances, they are but a mere fancy:
Thus the great pomp of Agrippa and Bernice is called a fancy, they came with
great phantasy or vain show, as the word Act. 25. 23. (...).
in the Original properly signifies.

But this speculative feeding upon carnal contentments in thoughts only, is
but a fancy of these fancies, a shadow of shadows, it is vanity of vanities,
when men can take pleasure in the shadow of empty shadows.

4. This acting of sin in the thoughts, by way of speculation, is a most
sinful wicked way of sinning; for

1. It argues that the hearts of men are possessed with a greedy desire after
sinful pleasures, and a desperate delight in sinning, in that, when they want
opportunities and means of committing sin actually, yet they will act it in
their own thoughts, when they cannot enjoy sensual pleasures in their outward
objects, they will enjoy them in their imaginations, when they cannot possess
earthly riches in reality, yet they will imagine themselves rich, and therein
solace themselves: it is a sign that their hearts do impatiently thirst after
the fulfilling of their lusts.

2. This delighting our selves in the thoughts of sinful pleasures, is an
incestuous defilement which is the most hateful adultery; this speculative
feeding upon sensual contentments in men's thoughts is a committing adultery
with their own children.

Thoughts are the issues coming out of the loins of their own minds, they are
Mark 7. 21, 22
begotten and conceived by their own hearts.

5. This thought pollution is a prevailing way of sinning, ir does exceedingly
take and overtake men's corrupt hearts, and over-abounds in their minds. There
be four ways whereby this speculative wickedness is commonly acted in the
thoughts of men.

1. They delight to be musing and thinking of those creature comforts, worldly
excellencies, and preheminencies which they have in present possession; they
think with themselves, what riches, honors, earthly possessions and
privileges they enjoy, how eminent they are in gifts and name, in wisdom,
learning, and esteems of others, and how happy they are in all these: Thus
Haman felicitates and fills himself with the thoughts of all the glory of his
riches, and all the Hester 5. 11.
things wherein the King had promoted him: Nebuchadnezar solaceth himself Dan.
4. 30.
in the thoughts of the glory of his Majesty, and his great Babell. Dives
blessed himself in the thoughts of his goods laid up for many years.

These sensual earthly thoughts do fill men's hearts with pride and vanity.

2. They exceedingly provoke God against them, as is evident in his Judgments
upon the forenamed worldlings; for Dives was sentenced for a fool, and struck
dead that night, Nebuchadnezar was struck with madness and brutishness, whiles
the word was in his mouth, and the thought in his heart: and Hamans high honor
did quickly end in the highest shame.

Quest. But may not we think of creature comforts, inward endowments, and
outward enjoyments.

Answ. We may if we observe these three Rules:

1. These thoughts must arise from a spiritual sense of Gods goodness and
bounty, and our own unworthiness.

2. We must propose this spiritual end to our selves, that by these thoughts
our hearts may be raised to humble acknowledgments, and praisefull admirations
of the glorious Giver.

3. They must quicken us to serve God with all chearfulnes and faithfulness for
these good things we receive from him. Deuteronomy. 28.


2. Men are guilty of acting sin in their thoughts, in respect of things to
come. How do they delight themselves with the fore-thoughts of those profits,
pleasures and Creature-enjoyments which they expect hereafter; as namely, that
such a time they shall have such a pleasant journey, such a merry meeting of
friends, such a gainful bargain, hear such and such news, etc. these things
they think off withmuch affection, these thoughts wake with them in the
morning, and walk with them in the day; upon these they feed much: thus those
worldlings in Jam. 4. 13. do delight themselves in the thoughts of their future
Profits, of going to such a City, and there getting gain. So those wicked ones
in Isa. 56. 14. do feed upon the thoughts of those sensual pleasures which
they promised themselves the next day: yea, worldlings do solace themselves
with the thoughts of that honor which they promise to their houses and
posterity to the worlds end: Their inward thoughts are their houses shall
continue for ever. The^e earthly Psalm. 49. 11.
thoughts sit nearest to their hearts, as the Hebrew word import^: They
proclaim (...)
their names on lands, or they call their lands (as the Greek explain^ it) by
their own names: Thus thinking to make their names and memory everlasting. 2 Samuel 18. 18.


Carnal men fill and feed their hearts with the thoughts of those earthly
comforts, profits, and pleasures which they hope to enjoy, even whilst they are
a far off: this is their wickedness and folly, for when they come to the actual
enjoyment of these things which their fancies fed upon before hand, they find
them to be stale, empty, lying, vanities, Isa. 29. 6.
no way answering their thoughts and large desires, and this fills them with
vexation of spirit:

3. Men are guilty of this speculative acting of sin in their thoughts, in
respect of things past, they are apt to sport themselves in the thoughts of
those sinful and sensual pleasures, which they have formerly enjoyed in
actions long since past: they recall and revive their former dead works, and
they think upon the Circumstances of their old defilements with a new delight.
Those sins which sinners have long since committed they act over again in
their thoughts every day: thus adulterers delight to be calling over their
former unclean acts, and feeding in their thoughts upon the froth and filth of
their former sensualities: vain glorious persons take pleasure to be musing
upon speeches of applause, and admiration given them by others.

So that whereas sinners should think upon their former pollutions and vanities
with sorrow, self abhorrency and hatred, they rather run over them in their
thoughts with a fresh delight, and herby they continually commit the same sins
again with the same pleasure, and extract a new sweetness out of old vanities.

This delightful acting over sin in the thoughts, is the height of
wickedness.

1. It is a sign of a heart deeply hardened, and desperately wicked, it is an
argument that men are greatly in love with their sins, and inseparably wedded
to them, when they commit adultery with their own sinful Acts formerly acted.
It is impossible for contrite Converts to act this speculative wickedness
ordinarily, though they may be overtaken through infirmity; they are filled
with bitter sorrowful thoughts, sighs and shame, in the review of their old
sinful pleasures and vanities, as is evident in the repenting Romans, who were
now ashamed of their former filthy ways, Romans 6. 21. so when Ephraim thought
of his sin, he was ashamed and repented.

2. It declares men to be far from repentance, when they can think upon sins
past with new sweetness and delight;

For first, real repentance is a turning from all practical and speculative
wickedness from inward and outward actings of sin.

2. True penitents, think upon former sins with far greater grief and
bitterness than ever they had pleasure and sweetness in the committing of
them.

3. They hate all appearances of old sins, and fly from all occasions,
allurements, and tendencies thereunto.

3. This speculative acting of sin in the thoughts of men, does highly
provoke God against them:

For 1. As often, as they think of their former sins with delight, they are
guilty of committing the same sins again, and do justify their first wicked
works.

2. They hereby make themselves guilty of piercing and wounding the Lord Christ
afresh:

3. They provoke God to remember their old sins by inflicting new wrath upon
them, when they recall them in their Thoughts with new pleasure.

4. This delightful musing on sins past, is more abominable than the first
committing of them.

4. Men do act this speculative wickedness in their thoughts by way of mere
supposals, they frame and feign suppositions to themselves of sensual
satisfactions: thus sinners that are frighted by the power of the word, from
the outward actuating of their bosome-lust, yet their hearts do wallow in
wicked speculations and wanton suppositions, they suppose themselves to be
acting their fleshly desires, they imagine themselves enjoying such and such
sensual pleasures and delights: thus men are partakers with adulterers,
drunkards, and sensualists in their thoughts and fancies: sinners that have
spent their former years in acting their lusts Psalm. 50.
of uncleanness, and now their bodies through age, are like a dry tree; yet
they will act their filthiness in their imaginary suppositions; and their
hearts shall act what their bodies cannot actuate.

18. Out of the hearts of men proceed thoughts of childish vanity, they act the
part of children in their thoughts, they have foolish, childish imaginations:
children will suppose themselves Kings, Queens, Nobles, etc. they will act the
parts of mothers and nurses, they sport themselves with babies and toyish
vanities, this is their childish folly. They that are men in years, are
children in thoughts; they act as vainly in their thoughts as children: thus
men of ambitious affections will imagine themselves in the highest places of
honor and preferment, they will suppose themselves great persons, Nobles,
Statesmen, Judges of the Land, 2 Samuel 15. 4.

Men of covetous spirits will suppose themselves rich, raised to great estates,
Lands, possessions, etc. whatsoever carnal contentment has chief room in men's
affections, though there be not the least appearance of probability, of ever
attaining the same, yet they will with much delight imagine themselves enjoying
what they would have: their thoughts shall draw up a platform of State Station
and Condition of life, which is most suitable to their carnal affections.

This is the surest sign whereby we may know what is that particular sin
whereto we are most inclined: observe which way our fancies and thoughts do
stream out most. This fancying and supposing our selves in a height of earthly
enjoyments.

1. Is the height of Childishness: it is absurd for men to solace themselves
in these Childish thoughts and fancies: it is time for men to put away
Childishness, 1 Cor. 13.

2. It is the height of vanity, because in these imaginary suppositions we feed
our thoughts with that which is not: earthly things themselves in their fullest
enjoyment have no reality in them, they are but empty nothings, painted
shadows, they are not whiles they are; but to solace our selves with mere
suppositions, this is vanity of vanities, worse than vanity.

3. It is the height of foolishness, to feed upon ayry, windy imaginations,
Prove. 15. 14. The mouth of fools feeds on foolishness; The mouth of unconstant
fools (...)
feeds upon foolish things; thus the words are in the Hebrew: the mind of man
is the mouth of the soul; Thoughts are the speeches thereof: it is a sure sign
of foolish wicked men, to spend their thoughts upon empty notions.

4. It manifests the height of dangerous discontent with our present condition,
when we shall imagine and suppose great things to our selves in this world, 1 Timothy 6, 7, 6, 8, 9. 10, etc. whereas we ought to be contented with our present
estate and station, Heb. 13. 3, 4.

Thus I have opened the mystery of man's carnal corrupt thoughts, by way of
explication and demonstration; I will now make some useful application to our
selves.

Seeing this is a most clear truth, that Use 1.
thoughts proceeding from man's corrupt nature, are such polluting, provoking,
damning evils.

This may convince us, that thoughts are not free: it is a pestilent principle
of atheism, which by the deep delusion of the devil prevails strongly in the
hearts of men and women, that thoughts are free; it is the common conceit of
carnal profane persons.

1. That thoughts are of an indifferent nature, neither good nor evil in
themselves, but as they are approved and consented to by man's will.

2. That it is impossible for any man to order, overruled and regulate his
thoughts, by reason of their infiniteness, varieties and wandering nature, in
which respect they claim a privilege of invincible freedom.

3. Carnal men do imagine that they have a licentious liberty to think what
they please, and that they need not make conscience of their thoughts.

4. They apprehend that thoughts are free from pollution and punishment, and
free from the reach of Gods glorious eye; and that they shall not be
accountable for them.

This is a strong and dangerous delusion whereby the Devil draws multitudes of
souls into hell continually.

1. It is an universal delusion, it takes and prevails with the whole world,
which lies wallowing in wicked thoughts: this cursed Principle, that (thoughts
are free) is rooted in the hearts of all those who are strangers to the power
of grace: for though moral persons, and formal Professors may abhor
blasphemous thoughts, and those grosser thoughts, which have an intrinsecal,
inseparable blackness and malignity in them; yet they are far from hating all
kind of evil thoughts; as for vain, idle, worldly, impertinent, unprofitable,
and roving thoughts they look upon them as no sins, or small venial scapes,
which carry their pardon with them, and do not bind men over to condemnation.

This was the cursed conceit of the Pharisees and their followers; for it is
manifest by the Sermon of Christ in Matthew. 5. that the Pharisees were wont to
interpret the Law of an outward discipline only, and mere external duties;
and that they did not reckon the inward impurities and exorbitancies of man's
heart, and thoughts, and inordinacy of desires for sins: their care was for
the outside only; but within they were full of thought-uncleannesse. See
Matthew. 23, 25. 26, 27. Yea, Paul in his Pharisaicall condition was possessed
with this Pharisaical error, as appears by his own confession. Romans 7. 7.
therefore he once thought himself able to live without blame in a legal
Righteousness, Phil. 3. 6 and to keep the Law, till the Commandment came unto
him in its spirituality at his conversion, Romans 7. 9.

2. This hellish conceit (that thoughts are free) produces most dangerous
damning effects in men's conversations.

1. It causes them to bless themselves in their external negatives, in their
freedom from open offenses, and outward abominations, as that Pharisee did,
Luke 18. 10, 11, 12.

This is the practice of mere civil persons and formalists, who make no
conscience to be holy in their thoughts, but only they take care with the
harlot to wipe the lips, with Pilate to wash the hands, and with the Pharisees
to cleanse the outside, as for their thoughts, they suffer them to run riot, to
have their full swinge, especially in matters of pleasure, profit, and carnal
contentments.

2. This false opinion of thought-freedome, draws men to place Religion in
outward services, and bodily exercises, without giving to God a
thought-worship: hence it is, that they rest in the work done without the
concurrence of the heart and thoughts; they draw near to God with their lips,
and bring the outward man, when their Thoughts are far from him, Isa. 29. 16.
their chiefest care is to appear to men, and to be appproved by men, and not by
God who sees and searches the heart, and so they vanish in bodily service and
outward devotion of lip-labor and lost labor.

3. When men upon this conceit, that thoughts are free, do give up the rains to
their own Imaginations, and take liberty in vain vile and profane thoughts, it
is just with God to give them up to vile affections, abominable actings, and a
Reprobate sense: so that as they cast off the yoke of Christ in their thoughts,
and will not have him to rule in their hearts, so the Lord gives up them to
walk as sons of Belial, as men without yoke, after the vanity of their minds,
and lusts of their own hearts, and so these that make no conscience of
internal thoughts, are come up now to this height of iniquity, as to make no
conscience of abstaining from external abominations, they can swallow camels
without fear or remorse.

2. Or else they are given up to efficacy of error, to believe the lying
doctrines of corrupt Teachers, that so they might be damned, who do not receive
and obey the truth in their minds, but take pleasure in acting unrighteousness
and uncleanness, speculative filth and folly in their thoughts.

They that partake with adulterers by a spiritual thought-pollution, will at
last come to partake with them in bodily defilements.

This is most evident in the men of the old world, Genesis 6. 1. 2, 5. they
professed themselves sons of God, and joined themselves to the visible
Church, yet being possessed with this cursed conceit of thought-freedome, they
lodged evil thoughts in their hearts continually, till at length they were
given up to the open committing of all manner of sin with greediness and
great delight, until the Flood came and swept them altogether into Hell, 1
Pet. 3. 19. 20.

And this is the case of diverse Professors in this present licentious world,
who are fallen into error of judgment and practices, if they would seriously
search and survey their own hearts, they should find that looseness of
thoughts is the chief cause of their giving up to looseness in opinion and
conversation.

This corrupt conceit of liberty of thoughts in the tendency thereof, opens a
gappe to all wicked licentiousness; and makes way for incurable obcecation and
obduration of heart, for men being once possessed with this pestilent
persuasion, they now take their fill of all inward filth, as being invisible to
man, and in the end they let loose the bridle to all external wickedness:
because this being presupposed that thoughts are free, it will easily be
inferred, that works are free also: if men take liberty of conscience to think
any thing, they will in time pretend liberty of conscience to act any thing.

2. Upon this licentious life follows the height of hardness of heart; their
Conscience being now seared as with an hot iron, and past feeling, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
Ephesians. 4. 19.

3. All light and sense being totally lost, they now come to justify any sin,
to take light for darkness, and darkness for light, to put good for evil, and
evil for good, truth for error, and error for truth, Isa. 5.

4. Hereupon follows the height of impenitency, an impossibility of repenting;
so that these sinners are now sealed up under condemnation without remedy: all
this mischief and woeful misery flows originally from this wicked conceit that
possesses their hearts, that thoughts are free.

4. This vile opinion of thought-freedome does exceedingly exalt and idolize
man's corrupt nature, by ascribing that privilege, power and perfection to man,
which is inconsistent with rational creatures; for if thoughts be free, then
our affections which are acted by them, are free, and our words and visible
works which are streams flowing from our thoughts, are also free, and hence it
will follow that intelligent creatures are free from subjection to any Law, and
so their own wills must be the rule of their own actings, which is a deifying
of mortal worms, and setting up man's will in the place of God, which is
Idolatry.

5. This pernicious Principle of thought-freedome does abolish and take away
all internal piety, heart-purity and thought-worship; and so turns all piety
and divine worship into a mere outward form of Pharisaisme, and a dead carcass
of devotion, whereby men rob God of his chiefest service.

Quere, What is the true ground and root of this Atheistical conceit, that
thoughts are free?

Answer 1. Speculative vanity and uncleanness is suitable and sweet to carnal
hearts, they love to solace and sport themselves in the thoughts of their
sensual pleasures, riches, and creature-contentments: hereupon men willingly
come to this conclusion that thoughts are free, because themselves so willingly
give way to their own Thoughts: we are very apt to close with any Principle
which tends to the allowance of those actings that we allow in our selves.

2. Carnal men and women are ignorant of Gods Law in the spirituality and
latitude thereof: they measure and judge of the compass of the Commandments
by the outward letter only, fancying to themselves a Law which reaches only
to the outward man, as did the Pharisees; from these false premises thy
conclude liberty of thoughts.

3. They discern not the spirituality of Religion and repentance, which is
primarily and principally acted in the heart and thoughts.

4: The ungospel general way of preaching of diverse men, tends very much to the
settling and fixing of this pestilent opinion in carnal hearts, that thoughts
are free:

For 1. Some there be who strive to please the itching ears and fancies of
their hearers, with notionall Doctrines, and empty enticing Discourses.

2. Others crying peace, peace, do altogether publish the pardons of free
grace, but they never press the power of renewing grace upon the heart and
thoughts of men: whereas the aim and principal work of Gospel-preaching is, to
cast down the imaginations and heights of man's heart, and to captivate every
thought to the obedience of Christ, as the Apostle clearly shows, 2 Cor. 10* 4,
5. all our Declarations of Gods grace and mercy, must tend first and chiefly to
the subduing and sanctifying the thoughts of men's hearts.

3. A third sort of Teachers make it their whole work to cry down visible
exorbitances and scandalous sins; and to persuade to external duties of
Religion and a moral conversation; this was the way of the Pharisees preaching.

4. Some soar aloft in Seraphical notions, high speculations, and strange
expressions which serve only to feed the fancy, and to fill men's heads with
whimsies.

So that the heart and thoughts of men being altogether neglected by a great
number of Teachers, and the wickedness of man's natural imaginations, not being
faithfully and effectually laid open; What wonder is it, if men do flatter
themselves with a groundless conceit of the goodness of their heart, and so
give credit to this deluding Principle, that thoughts are free: because
preachers do not strike at their thoughts, nor discover any danger in them.

Query 2. How does it appear from Scripture that thoughts are not free.

Answer, Evil thoughts are expressly forbidden and condemned by a threefold Law
of God.

1. By the common Law of nature. 2. By the Royal Law of Love. 3. By the
Evangelical Law of grace.
1. It is evident by the Scriptures, that evil thoughts are condemned by the
Law of nature written in every man's heart; for the clearing of this truth three
things must be demonstrated.

1. That there is a Law of Nature. 2. That the Law of Nature is. 3. What evil
thoughts are directly against this Law of Nature.
1. That there is a Law of nature, the Scripture testifies, Romans 2. 14, 15. for
when the Gentiles who have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in
the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, who show the work
of the Law written in their hearts, etc.

In these words the Apostle proves the being of this natural Law by two
effects flowing from thence, even in the Gentiles themselves.

1. Their doing of the things contained and commanded in the law of Moses,
verse 14. Rom 2. v. 15.


2. The testimony and inward conflict of Conscience; the natural accusing, and
excusing of their thoughts, verse 15. Their Conscience also bearing witness,
(or conscience witnessing with them, and their Thoughts the mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another, so far as their actions were evil,
their conscience accused; and so far as they were well done, it excused.

These fruits do plainly demonstrate, that there is a law of nature, and a
natural knowledge of this Law bubling up in man's nature: the Gentiles who knew
nothing of the letter of Moses Law, yet they carry the work of the Law written
in their hearts, that is a Law agreeable to the moral Law.

Observe here 1. The Gentiles had not the written Law of Moses; and yet they
did the things prescribed and contained in the written Law, as the Apostle Paul
testifies.

Here is their practice, and the Principle of their practice.

1. Diverse things prescribed in the Law, they knew and practiced: some worship
they performed unto God.

2. Diverse of the Heathen abhorred the making and adoration of Images.

3. They were strict observers of Civil Justice and honesty as appears, both by
the Laws enacted for observance of both, and by histories recording the
excellent virtues of many Heathens.

2. There must necessarily be some inward divine Principle in the Gentiles, to
discover the things of the Law unto them; and to move them to the doing
thereof, this principle of their fact is expressly called nature, they do by
nature the things of the Law, Romans 2. 14. by (...), i. e. Naturali judicio,
naturali instinctu atque impul^u naturali ratione eis dictante quid honestum,
quid ^urposit, Piscator.
nature, that is, by the light and Law of nature implanted in their hearts.

Nature is here opposed either to Scripture or to grace, and may thus be
understood.

1. that the things that they did, that were materially good, they did them by
the dictate, instinct, and impulse of natural principles, natural Reason
making known what is good, and what is evil, and that without any direction
from Scripture or special revelation.

2. Or else thus by nature, that is, by the power of nature, or natural
principles, without any assistance of renewing grace. But the first sense I
conceive is chiefly intended in the Text, therefore the Syriack by way of
explanation Romans 2. 14.
renders it thus: the Gentiles who had not the Law they did the Law from their
own (...) Gal. 2. 5. (...).
nature that is, from those natural principles they carried in their own
hearts.

3. The Scripture declares the Gentiles to be sinners, under sin and wrath,
Gal. 2. 15. they are called sinners of the Gentiles, and sinners by way of
notoriousnesse.

4. There is wrath threatened to be poured out upon the heathens that know not
God, and it was actually poured out upon diverse of them in the Prophets days.

5. Their own Conscience is said to accuse them of sin, Romans 2. 15.

These Reasons prove undeniably that there is a Divine Law written in the
hearts of the Gentiles, which is fitly called the Law of nature for punishment
is properly the fruit of sin, and sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.

Quest. What is th^s Law of nature?

Ans. 1. Nature imports two things.

1. An essential being, it is being it self.

2. the actings and operations of a being.

2. A Law is a righteous Rule and immovable measure of mo^all Acts ordained
for the g^od and welfare of rational creatures sufficiently made known by the
Lawgiver. Lex est regula and men^ura actuum again(...) omittendorum, Aquinas.


3. The Law of nature is a Radical light shining from the Candle of the Lord
powerfully making known certain practical principles agreeable to the eternal
Rule of Truth and Righteousness which God has planted in the mind of man, to
be a testimony to man, that there is a God who rules over all, and judges the
actings of all men.

1. The Law of nature is internal and essential to the nature of an
intelligent creature; it is a Law that is as necessary as the being of such a
creature; it is connaturall to a rational creature, so that as such a
creature, it cannot be imagined to be without a Law: for rational beings, as
creatures have a supreme Lord to whose will they must be subject, and by whose
Laws they must be regulated.

2. It is such a knowledge of good and evil, as is intrinsecally and indelibly
(...) etc.
rooted in man's nature * Chrysostom tell us that this natural Law is a
radical fundamental knowledge planted in the being of man.

3. The Law of nature is a comprehension of certain first principles belonging
to the right ordering and regulating of man's thoughts and works; for the
principal scope of this natural dictate and direction, is for action, and not
for speculation.

There are certain undeniable principles that a rational being will freely
grant, and presently yield unto: they are drawn up in some short Axioms or
propositions such as these.

That which is good and honest, must be embraced and acted.

That which is evil must be avoided, what thou would not have done to thy
self, do not thou that to another.

Happiness is to be sought after.

2. Then there follow certain particular principles, as

God is to be worshipped. Parents must be honored. Justice is to be done. Men
must live temperately, etc.
3. From these clear, and unquestionable premises, Reason draws several
Conclusions, that have the impression of natures seal upon them, and so are
undeniable, asnamely, blasphemy murder, adultery, theft, lying, and such like
are evil, and therefore must be abhorred and avoided.

The Law of nature is the birth of that original, eternal Law: God is the
Archetype, Primitive, supreme, eternal Law, the perfect Rule of all
Righteousness.

1. The Law of nature is a stream flowing forth in time into the natures of the
sons of men, from that original fountain of all Law: it is a Copy transcribed
from that eternal Law, and implanted upon the heart of a rational being.

2. It is the first born of this eternal Law, having the pre-eminence of
primogeniture, and so claiming a double portion.

The Law of nature was in being long before Moses received the two Tables,
before there was any Prophet or Judge in Israel, yea before Noah preached, or
Enoch prophesied. It was contemporary with Adam. This was the Scripture that
God gave men in the infant age of the world; they carried this Bible in their
hearts continually.

5. The Law of nature is the sum and substance of the written moral Law,
there is a sweet agreement and consent between these two Royal Laws; they
differ not in substance, but in circumstance, and in respect of the manner of
delivery: the natural Law is the summary abridgement of the moral Law of Moses.

6. God has written this Law in the Quam Deus omnium creator singn^orum
hominum pecto, ribus infudit.
heart of every man, Ambrose thus defines this natural Law, it is that which
God the Creator infused into every man's breast: it is written with the finger
of God in the heart of man, as Philo says: an eternal Deity graved this Law of
nature in man's immortal mind, that is, the Pillar that holds forth th^s
natural truth. This Royal Law of nature is a sacred Manuscript written by a
Deity; it is the Scripture of God in man's heart, it is a Bible of Gods own
printing, the Apostle calls it the work of the Law written in men's hearts, Romans
2. 15.

Question, What is this work of the (...).
Law, which is written in the hearts of the Gentiles?

Answer, It is the sentence and sum of the Royal Law, which is to love God
above all, and our neighbor as our selves: though the Heathens have not the
law of Moses written in letters and Sillables, yet they have the thing it self
comprehended in the Law; they have a writing within that discovers not only
external actions prescribed in the law, but also internal acts.

1. Because the internal acts of obedience are the principal work of the Law

2. It is evident that the Gentiles had the knowledge of diverse internal,
essential duties contained in the Law.

3. They are condemned for the vanity of their Thoughts, and vileness of their
affections, which are inward violations of the law, Ephesians. 4. 17. Romans 1.

Ob. It may be objected, that it is the peculiar privilege of Gods elect
people who are in Covenant with him, to have the law written in their hearts,
and engraven in their minds, Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. ^, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 10.

Whereunto I answer, 1. There is a natural writing of the Royal law in man's
heart, Romans 2. 14, 15. the light and law of nature is implanted in every man's
heart at their natural birth, or coming into the world, John 1: 9.

2. There is a supernatural, evangelicall writing of the Royal law in the
hearts of the Elect people, of Christ at their new birth by the spirit of grace
coming into their hearts; This Evangelical writing is the fruit of the promise,
and the privilege of regenerate persons only.

2. There is a very great difference between the writing of the work of the
moral Law in the hearts of Heathens; and the writing of the law it self in the
hearts of holy men.

Gods gracious writing of his Laws in the hearts and minds of his people in
the work of regeneration, imports an opening of their understanding by Christ
to discern the spiritualnesse, penetration, compass and mysteriousnesse of the
holy law, Luke 24. 45. Romans 7. 14 Heb. 4. 12. Psalm. 119. 96.

2. A creating and implanting new holy principles and propensions agreeable to
the Royal law, whereby they are enabled to perform a spiritual Evangelical
obedience unto God.

But the natural writing that heathens and all natural men have in their
hearts gives them only a general knowledge of certain practical principles,
and a natural strength to do many duties of the law in a moral way; but they
are still strangers to those new principles of spiritual knowledge and Gospel
obedience that are in renewed men.

Question,

what are those good things that mere natural men may do by the principles of
nature implanted in their hearts; because it is said expressly that the Gentiles
do by nature the things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14.

Answer, they may do things that are morally and materially good, but they
cannot do those things that are Theologically and spiritually good; they cannot
do those things that are essentially and intrinsecally good.

1. A work is morally good, when it is good in relation to manners, and in
order unto men, when it is good in the sight of men, good unto humane purposes,
and by way of example or edification to others who judge as they see.

2. A work is divinely and spiritually good, when it is good in relation to
Religion, and in order unto God; a good work is then done divinely and
spiritually, when it is acted.

1. From a divine principle, from the spirit of life, from Christ living in us,
from a new Principle of life and holiness Gal. 2. 20. (...). Clem. Alex.
put into us by the spirit of regeneration.

2. When it proceeds from a living faith, purifying our hearts from dead works.

2. In a divine manner with holy and spiritual affection.

As 1. When it is performed with the affection of a child, and filial
respects, not from a spirit of bondage, but from a spirit of love. 2 Timothy 1. 7.

2. In a free and voluntary subjection to God the Lawgiver, and a sincere
respect to all his Commandments, Psalm. 119, 6. 128. for men never obey God and
his Law, even when they do the works therein prescribed; but when they do them
with all submissive and loyal affections toward him who commands those
duties, James 2. 10, 11. and that by virtue of his authority and command: this
is to do all in the name of Christ, Col. 3.

3. A work that is Theologically and spiritually good, must be directed unto a
divine holy end, the glory of God, we must bring forth fruits of holiness, and
finish our works that God gives us to do, and do all the good that we have to
do with a single respect unto God, as Quicquid homo veluti recte fecerit, nisi
ad pietatem, quae in Deum est, referatur, rectum dici non oportet.
our end, that in all things God may be glorified, John 15 8. and 17. 4. 1 Cor.
10. 31. this only is to live unto God, and to bring forth fruit unto him, and
not unto our selves, Romans 7.

4. Every good work must be done with a pure heart, with fervency of spirit,
Chearfulnes and delight: our hearts must be given unto God in every service:

All the Circumstances that accompany Augustine. de fide and operi^^s.
an holy action must be right; for an excellent work may be so misplaced or
attended with such incongruous and unsuitable circumstances, as that it may
rather be a snare of Satan, than a fruit of the Spirit in us.

5. Lastly all our services must be presented and offered up to God upon that
divine Altar Jesus Christ, to make a good work completely acceptable, it must
pass through the incense and intercession of Christ, who as he does by his
blood take away the guilt of sin from our persons: so by his intercession he
covers and hides the pollution and adherency of sin, that is, in our
services, Ephesians. 2: 18. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Christ Jesus Matthew. 23. 19.
is the Altar that sanctifies all our spiritual sacrifices, Isa. 56. 7. and
60. 7. Their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar; and, they shall come
up with acceptance on mine Altar.

3. A work is materially good, when the materials of it are the things that God
requires, as prayer, almsgiving, etc. Now though the matter of these duties,
be things that God commands to be done; yet because the doing of them does not
necessarily and intrinsecally take in a sincere aim and respect to God, but is
only reducible unto God, and that so, as that the same thing may be done with
other respects, for carnal men do all things with carnal self respects:
therefore the goodness of such works is not in the things themselves, barely
and abstractly considered in the work done, but in the right spiritual manner
of performing them, such were the Pharisees praying, and the sacrifices and
services of those wicked Jews in Isa. 1.

4. There be some works that are so essentially and intrinsecally good in
themselves, that if they be done they must needs be spiritually and divinely
done, because they have relation to God in their very acting, and do
intrinsecally and in the substance of the work respect God, as namely, a
sincere love and fear of God, a trusting in God, and waiting upon God.

These actions are so inherently good that though they may be imperfectly done
by us, because not done with all that strength and height of spirituality and
sincerity that the Law requires yet they can never be done profanely and
selfishly, and so displeasing unto God.

Now it is evident that carnal men by the principles of nature acted and
improved may do things morally good, such works as have relation to men, are
good in the sight of men, and tend to the good of men.

2. They may do works materially good such works whose goodness does not
necessarily consist in the doing of them, but in the spiritual manner of doing
them: but then they perform them only, in a carnal selfish manner, not
divinely and spiritually.

Natural men cannot do a good work spiritually and obedientially, they cannot
do it with a fil^ all submissive affection unto God.

1. Because they are not quickened and acted by the spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9.
Gal. 4 6.

2. Every good work that is spiritual, is vital, for the spirit quickneth: But
now both the persons and performances of carnal men are dead, Heb. 9. 14.

Therefore though the works of natural men in respect of the substance or
matter thereof seem very specious, and glorious unto men, who judge according
to the sight of their eyes, and do measure the intention and affection by the
work that they see, and not the work by the intention and affection, which they
cannot see; yet to God who sees not as man sees, such works are abomination,
because they are di^ected to their own corrupt ends and done with carnal
affections, Luke 16. 15.

3. Natural men by the strength of Principles of nature cannot do those works
that are essentially and inherently good: They cannot sincerely and spiritually
love God, nor fear him, nor trust in him, because they are living actions
coming from the spirit of life.

7. The Law of nature is of divine authority, the omnipotent God is the author
thereof, he is the giver and graver, the contriver, commander and publisher of
it.

Hence it is, that 1. It has an efficacious influence, and the highest binding
virtue upon men's consciences: no created power in heaven or earth can absolve
them from their obedience thereunto.

2. This Law is an indelible and immutable rule, yesterday and to day, the same
for ever, it ties all people and persons with an impartial hand; it shines
upon all Nations and times with a perpetual light, none can claim exemption
from this natural Law, unless they can cease from their rational being.

This divine writing cannot totally be defaced or blotted out in the worst of
men.

8. This Law of nature, as it is in its latitude, does bind men in the Court of
Conscience Natural Conscience is the Center of natural Principles, it dictates
what the law of nature requires, applies it, and so incites and ingageth men to
the observation thereof, yet sometimes Conscience erroniously incites men to
those Acts which were never dictated by any divine Law.

2. Conscience reflects upon what is done, and so calls men to a strict account
for every violation of natures Law, accusing them when they act contrary to it,
and excusing them when they walk up to it, Romans 2. 15.

9. Every violation of the Law of nature is exceeding injurious to God, and to
man's own being.

1. It is a secret contempt of that supreme Lord and Lawgiver, who in so much
wisdom and goodness did put this Law into men's hearts, and oblige them to
observe it for their own good.

2. So far as men decline and depart from this Law, so far they run into
misery, and expose themselves to punishment and perdition, this is most
ev^dent, Romans 2. 12. for as many as have sinned (...).
without ^aw shall also perish without law, and as many as have sinned in the
law, shall be judged by the Law.

Ob. They that have sinned without the law, etc. this seems a Paradox no law,
and yet transgression, Romans 4. 15. every sin is an anomie, the breach of some
law, 1 John 3. 4

Answer, It is true, where there is no Law at all, neither written nor
unwritten, neither natural nor positive there can be no transgression: but of
the laws of God, we may thus distinguish according to the different manner of
their delivery.

There is a Law written unto man in the Scriptures; and there is a law written
in man's nature by his maker: there is the law published to man by Moses and the
law proclaimed in man by the voice of reason: these agree in substance, but
differ in circumstance in manner of delivery, every man has a law written in
his heart.

The meaning of the words is this, they that sin without the written Sine
lege scilicet scripta quae dicitur lex Mosis, Piscator.
Law of Moses, shall perish without the written Law of Moses, that is, without
imputation of the writing of that Law: that shall not add to the weight of
their sins; nor lay a greater guilt or aggravation on their consciences, in as
much, that God did not vouchsafe that mercy to them: he requires no more of any
than he committed to them.

Quer. By what Law then shall the Heathens perish who have sinned without the
Scripture Law.

Answer, They shall be condemned, by that Law which they have transgressed,
namely, the Law of nature, or that Law written in their hearts.

10. The Law of nature is so exact, that it obliges the whole man: it binds
men to do service to their Creator with their whole mind, will and affections,
with all possible freeness and fervency, cheerfulness and complacency,
intensivenesse and integrity.

Natures Law is not content with a visible bodily exercise, but calls for
obedience in our most inward thoughts and affections.

2. It binds men to do good, and to do it well, all the strength and binding
virtue of this Law depends upon the Sovereign power and authority of the
Lawgiver.

11. This Law of nature is so equal that it is not capable of any abatement,
mitigation or alteration in the least Tittle.

1. Because there is not the least rigor in the principles, and precepts of
this Law, they are pure equity.

2. Natures Law is conversant about such Acts as are most intrinsecally and
inseparably such.

1. There is such a natural beauty and intrinsecall loveliness in some good
Acts and Objects, as must needs assure and attract a rational being.

2. There is such an inherent deformity and inseparable malignity in some
evils, that the light of reason must needs Quae^am sunt mala quia prohibentur,
sed alia prohibentur quia sunt mala, say the Shcool-men.
loath and abhor them, insomuch, as if there were no external written Law, yet
a rational being that walks up to the light of reason, would abhor and fly
from sundry evils, and close with dives good Acts.

Quer. How is this Law of nature made known to men?

Answer, God has set up an intellectual lamp in their souls, by the light
whereof they can read the Law written in their hearts, there is the light of
reason implanted in men's mind, which manifests certain practical principles,
and is to warn them in the name of their maker to fly from such irregular,
inordina^e Acts, which have an inseparable blackness and illness in them, and
to close with those Acts and objects that have an internal beauty and native
loveliness.

For this end God has lighted up his Prove 20. (...) Septuagint. (...). Aqu
s^m. Theod. (...) sic ali^. (...) usurpatur de homine tantum and animam hujus
ratione ^^aeditam denotat. Schindler. The Hebrew Doctors dostill look upon this
word, (...) as that that does express (...) animam rationis participem.
Candle in the soul, Prove. 20. 27. The understanding of a man is the Candle of
the Lord: the p^oper meaning of this place, I take to be this, that God has
bre^thed into all men reasonable souls, which are as so many Candles and Lamps
of light to discover their Creator and his Royal Law of Nature to them.

Question, When are these Principlss of natural light put into men?

Answer, At their coming into this world; as is evident, John 1. 9. Christ is
the true light that lightens every man that comes into the world: that is,
every man who is born into this world.

This cannot be be meant of the spiritual light of grace, that light of life,
that has eternal life in it, John 17 3. for the elect only receive that new
light at their new birth, that is a light from the Lord, and in the Lord,
Ephesians. 5. flowing from their union with Christ.

But this Text, John 1. 9. speaks of the light of nature, which is a common
benefit that men receive by and from Christ: thus Cyril took this light for the
light of nature and natural reason, because of the universal Enunciation; and
so do many of our Reformers following him: it is universally and necessarily of
true the light of nature which is in infants radically.

Christ lightens every man, Jew and Gentile, without respect of persons, with
natural light which shines upon both with an impartial beam.

I grant that the great things of Gods written Law, and the divine light
flowing from thence, was the peculiar privilege Rom 9.
of the Jews.

2. That by means of those beams of of heavenly truth that shined more
peculiarly upon them, the Jews had even those natural notions much clarified
and refined from those clouds and mists which man's original corruption casts
upon them: but yet they have no greater portion of the light of Nature, than
all men have: so that Jew and Grecian, Barbarian, Scythian, bond and free men,
all these are one, in respect of nature and natures Law, and natures light.

There are three things, wherein Jews and Gentiles are one.

1. In the darkness of corrupted nature. Romans 3.

2. In the light of natural principles, John 1. 9.

3. They are one, so far as they partake of a new nature in Christ.

3. It is evident that this natural light, is a common gift that every man
receives, by and for Jesus Christ, though none but believers have eternal life
and salvation by him, John 3. 16.

3. The third thing to be demonstrated, is this, that evil thoughts are
directly against the Law of nature, they are transgressions of that natural
Law that is written in every man's heart: this appears most clearly.

1. In the men of the old world, the great sin which is laid to their charge,
and that chiefly for which they were destroyed, was, their evil thoughts, as
you may read in Genesis 6. 5. 6. 7. and Genesis 8. 21. The thoughts of their hearts
were evil continually from their childhood.

Quer.

But what Law of God did these men violate in their thoughts? What Law was
there then that did forbid and condemn evil thoughts, every sin is a
transgression of some divine Law: by what Law did they perish? there was no
positive written Law in the days of the old world, the written Law was given
by Moses many ages after the flood.

Answer, that Law which those giants of the old world did transgress in their
thoughts, was the Law of nature implanted in their hearts: there was no Law
then in being, but what was written in men's nature, there was no divine
Scripture in the days of Noah but that which was written in every man's heart
by the finger of God, so that the first Law that was broken by man's thoughts,
was natures Law, therefore evil thoughts are transgressions of the Law of
nature,

2. It appears as clearly in the sinners of the Gentiles: vanity of thoughts is
the Capital crime for which they are indicted and condemned by the
heart-searcher, Ephesians. 4. 17. This I say, and testify in the Lord, that ye
henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind: this
vanity of mind in which the Heathens walk is the vanity of their Thoughts, and
thus the Syriack version reads it, (...); Ye walk not as the rest of the
Gentiles, Ephesians. 4. 17. Quae ambulant in van^tate cogitatiouis suae, Tremellius.
(...); Cogitatio.
who walk in the vanity of their thoughts, thus Tremellius and Trostius render
the Syriack.

2. As Thoughts are the actings of the mind, so the vanity of the mind is the
impiety, impurity, childishness and emptiness of man's thoughts, so that the
Gentiles walked after their own vain thoughts, they were acted by the
imagination of their own evil hearts, this is that great sin which is laid to
the charge of those wicked ones, in Jer. 31. 10. They walked after the evil
thoughts and imaginations of their own hearts, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Jer. 16. 12.

2. The Heathens are more expressly indicted for their vain thoughts, Romans (...).
1. 21. They became vain in their imaginations or thoughts, the scope of this
21. v. is to prove that which was affirmed in the last clause of the former
verse, namely, that the Gentiles were left without excuse, and could have no
cloak for their sin, because they sinned against the light and Law of nature,
this the Apostle demonstrates.

1. Negatively.

2. Affirmatively.

1. The Gentiles did not worship and glorify God, according to that natural
light and knowledge that was implanted in their minds, Romans 1. 27. they knowing
God did not glorify him as God.

2. They became vain in their thoughts: thus the Syriack reads it, (...)

The Infidel Gentiles were full of vain ungodly thoughts.

1. In their worshipping of God they turned the true God into an image of their
own fancy, conceiving God to be like to the creatures, verse 23.

2. They were full of vile, unclean, foolish, filthy thoughts in their common
conversation.

Hereby it is manifest that vain thoughts were the radical leading sin in the
Heathens.

But what Law of God did they transgress in their thoughts? it is evident by
the Scriptures, that the Infidel Gentiles knew nothing of Moses Law in the
letter of it, Psalm. 147. 19. 20. He he has declared his words to Jacob, his
Psalm. 147 19. His words, that is, the Ten Commandments or Moral Law Exodus 20.
1. called the Ten words, Deuteronomy. 10. 4. 2. His statutes, that is, Decrees and
constitutions of Gods worship. 3. Judgments, that is the Judicial Laws for
punishing offenders. Exodus 21. 1. Psalm. 79. 10.
statutes and Judgments to Israel, he has not done thus to any Nation, that
is, to the Gentile-Nations (as the words imports) and they have not known his
laws, the Gentiles had not the knowledge of any of Gods written Laws, either
moral, ceremonial, or Judicial.

Romans 2. 12. 14. it is expressly said, that the Gentiles have not the law, that
is, the Law of Moses and the Prophets, but they had a Law written in their
hearts, and this is that Law which they transgressed, now when the Apostle
would demonstrate that the Gentiles sinned against the light of Nature, he
mentions their vain thoughts, as their grand sin, Romans 1. 21.

So then it is most apparent that vain thoughts are transgressions and
violations of the Common Law of nature, therefore thoughts are not free.

Secondly evil thoughts are expressly condemned by the Royal Law of love,
published in the holy Scriptures.

1. The written law is spiritual, extending to the inward thoughts of men
intending a heart service and sanctity, and binding every thought and
imagination to obedience, as is most evident by the exposition of the great
Lawgiver himself, Matthew. 5. and by the certain knowledge and experience of all
his people, Romans 7. 14. Saint Paul speaks in the person of all regenerate
men, we know that the law is spiritual, requiring a spiritual, angelical
obedience, a doing the will of God with our spirits and internal thoughts, as
it is done by those angelical spirits in heaven.

It is the glory and excellency of Gods Law to be spiritual, reaching to the
inmost thoughts and imaginations, and binding the whole inward and outward man
with all its actings.

The Law is spiritual in its nature, office and end.

1. It lays bonds upon the internal thoughts of men, as well as upon their
external works: it gives rules to the heart, and overrules the thoughts,
which no earthly powers can do.

2. The holy Law forbids and condemns all evil thoughts arising in and out of
man's heart, in all the kinds and degrees thereof.

The motions of sinful corruption in man's mind, or thinking faculty are of two
sorts.

The first motions or the second motions.

1. The first vicious motions are those stirrings of corruption in men, whereby
their minds are first instigated and moved to think evil, but these have not
deliberate consent of their wills, these the Schoolmen call Concupiscence
unformed. Concupiscentia informis.


2. The second corrupt imotions that arise from the hearts of men, are those
evil thoughts which gain lodging in their minds and consent in their wills,
these they call formed and perfect concupiscence. Concupiscentia formata:


Now both these are condemned by the Royal Law, it forbids the first movings
of sin in the thoughts of men coming from within, from their natural
corruption, though never accepted, or allowed by them.

2. Evil thoughts against our neighbor, are either thoughts with consent or
without consent.

1. Evil thoughts with consent of will, are such as men conceive in their minds
against their neighbor, and do also really desire and purpose in their hearts
to practice, these are directly forbidden in the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth
and ninth commandments.

2. Thoughts without consent are the evil motions of man's heart against first
his neighbor, to which his will never gives consent; these are condemned in
the tenth Commandment; the whole Law is spiritual in every branch thereof;
but this last precept has a height of spirituality.

There be two special sins which are directly forbidden in the tenth
Commandment, Thou shall not covet.

1. All thoughts of mind, wishes and desires of heart after that that is
another, contrary to contentation: it condemns the very first risings of our
desires after any thing that God has given to another, though we would have it
without fraud or violence, as by giving him the full worth of it in money or
otherwise, 1 Kings 21. 2. The former Commandments do forbid together with the
outward Act, the inward desire of another man's goods to his hurt or damage:
for as desire after another man's wife is adultery, Matthew. 5 28. so the desire
of any others house or beast wrongfully is stealth.

2. This tenth precept condemns the first motions of concupiscence arising in
and from our hearts, though not consented to, and it is purposely set in the
last place, as conducing to the exposit on of the former precepts, which do
condemn the outward facts and inward motions of Concupiscence rising with
consent, whereby they are really distinct from the last Commandment, which
must forbid something not directly forbidden in the other Commandments.

Thirdly, evil thoughts are condemned by the Evangelical law of grace and
faith; as may evidently appear by these seven arguments.

1. The Gospel commands sinners to forsake their own thoughts, and to turn to
Jehovah in their Thoughts and works, Isa. 55. 7. this Repentance is a Gospel
duty, it is often joined with Remission of sins, which is a Gospel benefit.

2. The Gospel Word being accompanied with the holy spirit, convinces men of
their evil thoughts, 1 Cor. 14. 24. 25.

3. It censures and condemns man's thoughts as a judge, Heb. 4. 12. This Word of
God, that is so full of power and life, that works so efficaciously Heb. 4
12. (...). The word of God is quick, convenit hoc vorbo Dei, sed praecipue
evangelico. Dicebantur critici nomine etiam a latinis usurpato homines acris
judicii, etc, Estius*
on men's hearts and thoughts, which judges the thoughts of the heart, must
needs be the glorious Gospel of Christ.

1 Because it is the Gospel, that is the. Ministry of life, and the
ministration of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 8. It is called the Law of the spirit
of life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 2. it is a quickening word, John. 6. 63. the
Savor of Life.

This gospel word of God, is living efficiently, it has a soul-reviving,
soule-raising virtue instrumentally, it is the outward means, whereby the
Spirit of Life infuseth life into our dead souls James 1 18. Joh. 17. 17. The
Law of Works cannot make alive dead men. Gal. 3. 21.

3. It Is the Gospel that discovers and directs in the way to eternal life.

This Evangelicall Word is said to be (...) a Critic, a curious Judge and
observer of the Thoughts of man's heart, it censures very sharply.

4. The Gospel of Christ conquers and casts down the thoughts from their Throne
in man's heart, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

5. True Gospel faith casts out all evil thoughts, as enemies to King Jesus: it
purifieth our hearts from the power and pollution of vain thoughts, Acts 15. 9.

6. It captivates the Thoughts of men to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5.

7. In the Gospel Covenant there is a giving of Laws to the thoughts of
sanctified persons, Heb. 8. 10. I will give my laws to their thoughts, says
the Lord (...).
thus the words are in the original.

4. Evil thoughts are condemned by the concurrent consent of the whole
Scripture.

1. They are condemned by Moses and the Prophets, Genesis 6. 5. and chap. 8. 21.
Deuteronomy. 15. 9. Psalm. 10. 4. and 14. 1. Psalm. 94. 11. Psalm. 119, 113. 118. Prove.
12. 20. and 15. 26. Prove. 24. 9. Eccles 4. 8. Isa. 55. 7. Isa. 57. 11. Jer. 4.
14. and 18. 18. Eezch. 11. 2. Hos. 7, 15. Micah 2. 1.

2. Evil thoughts are condemned by our Lord Jesus and his holy apostles, Matthew.
9. 4. and chap, 15. 19, 20. Matthew. 16 7. Mark 7. 21. and 8. 17. Luke 1. 51.
Mar. 16.
1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. James 2. 5.

Fifthly it will appear that thoughts are not free, if mankind be considered in
a threefold estate.

1. In the estate of original purity. 2. In the state of original pravity. 3.
In the apparition of grace.
1. If we look on men in their paradise perfections.

1. As creatures, they ow all possible service and subjection to their gracious
Creator in their spirits, as well as in their bodies, both being framed by his
omnipotent hand for himself.

2. As good creatures made after the Image of Gods wisdom and righteousness;
at first in Adam: they were filled with glorious power and perfection in their
spirits, and fitted to perform a spiritual obedience to the Law by a complete
conformity of all their thoughts and works.

2. If men be considered in their original guilt and filth, it will appear
that their thoughts are bond slaves and captives to sin and Satan, they are not
sufficient to think a good thought of themselves, 2 Cor. 3. 5.

2. All the thoughts of natural men are altogether evil from their childhood,
Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21.

3. These evil thoughts do bind them over to condemnation for the violation of
the holy spiritual Law: so that the thoughts of carnal men are so far from
being free from sin, that they are free to nothing but sin, 1 Cor. 3. 20.

3. If mankind be considered in the apparition of grace in Christ, it will be
evident that thoughts are not free.

1. The Lord Christ suffered for us in soul and body, yea his greatest
sufferings were inward and invisible, that thereby he might satisfy divine
justice for our soul sins, and thought-transgressions, the iniquities of our
thoughts and works were laid upon him, Isa. 53.

2. As our Thought sins had the greatest hand in the death of Christ; so the
death of these grand radical sins was chiefly intended in the death of
Christ: he dyed to redeem us from our vain thoughts, which are the chiefest
part of our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.

3. As we desire that our whole man should be glorified by Christ, we must give
up the whole inward and outward man, with all its actings to be governed by
Christ.

4. In the restoring and renewing of our nature, by the spirit of Christ, the
change and cleansing of our thoughts, is the first and great work, wherein the
exceeding greatness of Gods power puts forth it self, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. Romans
12, 2.

2. There is an universal newness put into our souls, by the new Creation, all
old things pass away, and all things become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. which
necessarily imports a real Reformation, and reducement of our thoughts to the
service of God, as well as our affections and actions.

3. In this new Creation, the Royal spiritual Law is given and engraven in
our minds, whereby we are inclined and enabled to serve and love God with our
thoughts, Heb. 8. 10.

Use second.

2. Seeing there is so much sin and iniquity acted in our thoughts
continually, we should strive to be deeply humbled for all the evils and
vanities of our thoughts: we must humble our selves for our thoughts, as well
as our words, and works, yea chiefly for these leading radical sins: this is
pressed upon us in Prove. 30. 32. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy
self, or if thou have thought evil, lay thine ^and upon thy mouth.

The thinking of evil is here joined with self exalting, which is the greatest
folly and fighting against God when we have thought evil, we must lay our hands
upon our mouths, that is, our hearts must be filled with sorrow and shame for
the same, from a clear conviction of our guiltiness.

This laying the hand upon the mouth argues and signifies these two things.

1. A spiritual and plenary conviction of the extreme sinfulness of evil
thoughts in their aggravations and of the great wickedness that men have acted
in their thoughts; so that their mouths are now stopped, and they have Rom 3.
19.
nothing to say by way of excuse, extenuation or self exoneration, they dare
not say that thoughts are free, nor that themselves are free from the highest
thought pollution, but now they will freely join with the Law, in charging and
condemning themselves.

2. It argues a height of shame and depth of self abasement and soul
humiliation in the sight and remembrance of the great evil of their thoughts;
that they are vile in their own apprehensions, and very much ashamed and
afflicted in their spirits for their thought-defilements, Ezech. 16. 65. Job
39. 27, 28.

Now there is great reason and cause why we should be deeply humbled for our
thought-sinnes.

1. Evil thoughts are sins against all divine Laws, they are violations of
the Law of nature, of the law of love and grace.

2. They are grand enemies of God, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5 Romans 8. 7. and the great
disturbers and defilers of all the good that we do.

3. Man's own evil thoughts are the first begotten of the old man, the first
born of the Devil, the begetters of all other sins the beginners and first
movers in all evil, they are leading and misleading evils.

4. The sins of our thoughts are in number like the sands of the sea in their
nature, out of measure sinful: how great a cause then have we to be greatly
humbled, and to sorrow bitterly for the evil thoughts of our hearts, oh
therefore let us look much into our Thought-sinnes, and consider them in their
hateful nature, and numberless numbers, that we may be thoroughly abased and
ashamed, and may loath and abhor our selves for the same, let us duly and daily
search our hearts, and survey our thoughts in their several kinds.

1. Examine what Thoughts of atheism, blasphemy, spiritual idolatry, pride,
unbelief, security and sensuality, speculative filth and folly, vanity and
vileness, what thoughts of impierity and iniquity against God and man do rise
out of our hearts daily, and how far they have prevailed over our hearts.

Let us remember that all those evil thoughts before mentioned: yea, the worst
of them all are in all of us by corrupt nature, and if we be left to our
selves, when occasion is offered our corrupt hearts will presently conceive
them, and give them a complete being and birth.

2. We must examine our thoughts by the word of God, this straight righteous
Rule will manifest the obliquity and iniquity of our thoughts, Heb 4. 12. the
word of God is mighty in operation -- and is a discerner of the thoughts of the
heart: at the preaching of this word, the secret thoughts of an Infidel are
made manifest 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. oh therefore, let us exactly and thoroughly
search our thoughts by the light of Gods word, and strive to find out the
manifold exorbitances, vanities, and defilements of our thoughts.

2 We must freely and faithfully confess our thought-transgressions to God,
and thereby give glory to the great heart-searcher.

3. We must be deeply displeased with our selves, for displeasing God by our
thought-sinnes: it must be the greatest grief of our souls, that we have
grieved Genesis 6, 5, 6.
God by our thoughts.

4. We must judge and sentence our selves for our loose, profane, proud,
ungodly, impertinent, and unprofitable thoughts, acknowledging that we are most
worthy to be destroyed for the sins of our thoughts.

2. We must condemn our selves for secret evil thoughts which never came forth
into action, there is a world of sin acted in men's thoughts, which does not
break out into their visible conversations.

3. For those evil thoughts that proceed out of our hearts, whreunto our wills
never give consent:

4. We must pass sentence upon our selves, for the want of holy, heavenly,
spiritual thoughts: the Law of Christ commands us to be free from all evil
thoughts, and to be filled with all good thoughts, Mark 12. 30. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy thought, so that the want of good thoughts in us,
is a breach of the Royal Law, and makes us liable to that heavy curse, in
Deuteronomy. 27. 29.

5. We must be humbled for the evil that cleaves to our good thoughts. Our best
thoughts as they come from us are not without some mixture and adhesion of
sinful corruption, which is sufficient without Gods covering mercy to cast and
condemn us.

5. We must seek unto God for the pardon of our evil thoughts, this duty Peter
presses upon Simon Magus, Act. 8. 21. pray to God, (says he) that the
thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee, Simon Magus had many foul crimes
to be pardoned, but yet the first and great sin for which he was to beg
forgivenes, was the thought of his heart see how earnestly David petitioneth
for the pardon of his thought-sinnes, Psalm. 19. 13. Who can understand his
errors? cleanse me, make me guiltless from my secrets, thus the words are in
the Hebrew and in the Syriack. (...) (...) Psalm. 19. 13. (...) Signifies to
cleanse or make innocent, guiltless, empty, to absolve.


The Arabic thus explains it, cleanse me O my Lord from my secrets which are
hidden from men.

The meaning I take to be this, the errors, wanderings, and vanities of my
thoughts are more then I can take notice of or sum up, they are above my
knowledge, from the guilt of these secret hidden sins, those swarms of vain
thoughts which break into my heart, I pray thee O Lord, cleanse me.

David did not harbor any secret lusts or wicked purposes in his heart, but
these secret sins from which he desires cleansing, were his inward thoughts
which are most properly the secrets of man's heart, and of all other sins most
innumerable.

Object. But now some poor perplexed soul will be ready to object and say, if
evil thoughts be so immeasurably sinful, so full of provocation, and these so
innumerable in us, how can I then hope to obtain mercy from God? when I
consider what swarms of loose, idle, earthly, impure and impertinent thoughts
proceed out of my heart every day, and fly up and down in my soul, and too
often lodge within me, I am at a stand and begin to think, can God pardon my
thought-sinnes.

To this I answer.

We must seriously consider the hateful mercy to pardon the thoughts of
repenting souls, notwithstanding all their black and bloody aggravations.

There be seven excellent considerations that may exceedingly quicken and
strengthen our faith in believing the pardon of our thought-sinnes.

First Consideration.
1. God has multitudes of mercies, to blot out the manifold sins of our
thoughts, Psalm. 51. 1.

David having multiplied his sins in Psalm. 51. 3.
the matter of Vriah, he petitions for multitudes of tender mercies, so Psalm.
5. 7. I in the multitude of thy mercies (...)
will come into thy house, etc.

So in Nehem. 9. 19. 27. God is said to have manifold mercies, the Scripture
expresses the mercy of God in the (...) Misericordie, viscera, Singular non
invenitur, qui^ multa sunt opera misericordiae. Piscator.
plural number, to set forth the multitude of his mercies.

The second Consideration.
2. God has abundance of mercy an overflowing fumes of mercy, enough, and more
than enough, to cover all the sins of our thoughts; hence it is, that Gods
mercy and pardoning grace is said to be abundant, Exodus 34. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 3. and
the faithful are said to receive a redundancy of grace, Romans 5. 17. (...).


Now a man cannot be said to have abundance of riches, unless his cup
overflow, unless he have an overplus more than enough: we say there is
abundance of water in the sea but we cannot speak so of a Pond or Cistern, the
sea has an overfulnesse, which is inexhaustible.

The third Consideration.
God has a superabundancy of mercy, Romans 5. 20. his pardoning grace is said
Romans 5. (...). ^ Tim. 1. 14. (...). Superabundo.
to superabound, 1 Timothy 1. 14. the grace of our Lord was superabundant.

The glorious mercy of God over abounds in three respects.

1. It abounds above all created Understandings, it is above all our knowledge,
it is in it self incomprehensible.

2. There is a plenitude in Gods mercy, far beyond all that mercy that all
faithful men and women receive in this world, Psalm. 31. 20. Oh how great is
thy goodness that thou have laid up for them that fear thee, and wrought for
them that trust in thee before the sons of men? when the Prophet comes to speak
of this mercy he is at a stand as not able to express it in its
superabundancy: Oh, how great, how manifold is thy goodness! It is far above
all that we can (...)
speak or conceive.

2. That goodness and mercy that God works for the faithful here in this
world, is exceeding abundant; but that which is laid up and hidden with God for
them, is incomparably more abundant.

3. This pardoning mercy is far above all the sin that can be in men's thoughts,
Romans 5. 20. where sin has abounded, grace superabounds, in forgiving
believing penitents, there is an overflowing fullness of evil in man's thoughts,
James 1. 21. but there is an exceeding abundant, overabundant, overfulnesse of
mercy in God.

The fourth Consideration.
4. God has plenty and variety of pardons, multitudes of pardons, as we have
multiplied our thought-pollutions, he will multiply his pardons upon our
repenting and returning, as is plainly declared, Isa. 55. 7. the Prophet
exhorts the unrighteous man to forsake his own thoughts, and then Jehovah will
have mercy on him.

Now because this objection of the multitudes of their thought-provocations,
the numberless multiplyings of their evil Thoughts might come in to discourage
poor souls in seeking mercy, therefore he purposely adds, that the Lord will
multiply to pardon (for so the (...)
words are according to the original) he will multiply his pardons answerable
to the multiplyings of their thought-pollutions.

1 The God of mercy has an inexhaustible Treasury of pardons that can never be
spent, he is a God of pardons as he is called, Neh. 9. 17. Thou art a God of
pardons, gracious and merciful, (...)
that is, God has variety of pardons for all sorts of sins, for all kind of
evil thoughts and ways, that men are or can be guilty of.

2. God has abundant Riches of mercies, (...) condonatio.
the Scripture speaking of the riches of mercy and grace, rises high in
expressions.

1. God is said to have Riches of grace, and glorious mercy, Ephesians 2. 4 Romans 2.
4. Romans 9. 23. by Riches of glory is meant his Riches of mercy, which is his
glory.

2. A depth of Riches, Romans 11. 33. oh the depth of the Riches, etc. oh the
bottomless depth of the riches of Gods mercy; by comparing this place with
Romans 12. 1, it is evident the Apostle speaks of the Depth of Mercy.

3. God has the highest Riches of grace (...). summas opes.
Ephesians. 2. 7. a supereminency, magnificence and superlative sublimity of
pardoning grace.

These expressions do clearly import these two things.

1. That God has an over sufficiency of mercy.

2. variety of all kind of mercies, both forgiving and giving mercies, Jehovah
gives and forgives according to his manifold mercies, Neh. 9. 19. 27.

1. God is called the Father of mercies, he begets mercies for his people every
day.

2. Jehovah is the God of mercies, he creates new mercies every morning Lam.
3. 22. 23. he has variety of healing mercies suitable to the variety of our
miseries, he has variety of pardoning mercies, suitable to the variety of our
sins.

1. Oh, what multitudes and variety of pardons do we receive at our first
coming to Christ, when God forgives ten thousand Talents to us?

2. What variety of mercies do concur in the pardoning of our daily trespasses?

3. There is a multitude of mercies that meet in the pardoning of every sin
that we commit, Psalm 51. 1.

The fifth Consideration.
5. The pardoning mercies of God are past all number: there are such multitudes
of mercies in God for repenting souls, as are beyond number and numbering. The
greatest Arithmetician is not able to calculate and sum them up: this is
elegantly expressed in Psalm. 40. 5. Many O Lord, my God, are thy wonderful
works that thou have done, and thy thoughts that are to us ward, they cannot be
reckoned up in order unto thee, if I would declare and speak of them, they are
more then can be numbered, they mightily increase above telling or numbering.

Quest. What are these Thoughts of God toward us?

Answer, They are Thoughts of mercy and forgiveness: his works of mercy that
he does in and for his people, are many and mavelous, but his thoughts of
mercy are innumerable: that this: the real meaning of the words, evident.

1. If we compare them with Isa. 55. 8, 9. my thoughts (says Jehovah,) are not
your thoughts, etc. but as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my
thoughts, etc. See Ier. 29. 11.

2. This Psalm is a prophetical declaration Compare Heb, 10. 5. with Psalm. 40.
7, 8:
of Gods sending his son into the world, to save lost man by the oblation of
himself: in this manifestation of Christ there was a world of mercy manifested;
all mercies meeting and concenterating in this one mercy.

2. All Gods thoughts and intentions of mercy toward us are in Christ, Ephesians. 1.
3. 4. all his works and ways of mercy come to to us in Christ.

Gods thoughts of mercy that he thinks toward believing souls, are so
innumerable that they cannot be numbered, yea says the Prophet, if I would
number them, they increase so mightily in number, they are so strong in number
that they are more than I or any can number:

2. Gods thoughts of pardoning mercy, are (...)
far more innumerable than man's thoughts of iniquity can be: there are
incomparably more thoughts of mercy and forgiveness with God than can be
thoughts of vanity and wickedness with us, we are but as it were of yesterday;
it is not many years ago since we began to think thoughts of iniquity against
God, but his thoughts of mercy have been from everlasting, and reach to
everlasting, Psalm. 25. 6. Remember thy tender mercies Jehovah, and thy kind
mercies, for they are from eternity.

In effectual calling, we actually obtain mercy; but Gods mercy has been
toward us in respect of his own thoughts and purposes from everlasting, he
has been thinking thoughts of mercy from eternity, Psalm. 103. 17.

The sixth Consideration.
6. The mercies of God are transcendently great: surpassing greatness is a
glorious property, often ascribed to the mercy of God in Scriptures, as Number.
14. 18, 19 The Lord is of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression, --
pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according to the greatness
of thy mercy; So Ps. 57. 9. 10. I will praise thee O Lord, -- for thy mercy is
great, etc. Neh. 13. 22. O my God spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy.

Yea Gods mercy is called greatness, 1 Chr. 17 19. O Jehovah according to
thin* own heart, thou have done all this greatness for thy servant, in making
known all these greatnesses, thus the words are in the Hebrew and in the
margin, when poor contrite souls consider the transcendent (...) Magnitudo,
magnificentia.
greatness of pollution and provocation which is in their thoughts, and that
beyond all their other sins, they are apt to be disheartened, and to think can
God pardon? but let such remember that the greatness of Gods pardoning mercy
is infinitely above all the greatnesses of evil and guilt, that can be in their
thoughts.

There be two things wherein the greatness of Gods mercy does most ominently
consist.

1. His mercy is greatly extended.

2. It is greatly powerful, and both these are grounds of unspeakable comfort.

1. The mercy of God is of greatest extension: all the extensions and
dimensions that make up greatness, do meet in the mercy of God.

1. Mercy is said to be extended, Ezra 9. 10. we were bondmen, yet our God
(...), pro (...) a (...) extendit.
has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended mercy to us, etc.

2. It is greatly extended; Magnitude, (according to the Metaphysics) is the
extension of a thing according to length, latitude and depth: they make
greatness to consist in three dimensions, but according to the Scriptures,
there be four Quantitas continua est secundum quam res est extensa secundum
magnitudinem, hoc est, I ongitudinem latitudinem, profunditatem, Scheibler,
Metaphys. l. 2. c. 6.
extensions or dimensions concurring in that greatness that is ascribed to the
mercy of God, Ephesians. 3. 18. height, depth, length and breadth.

1. There is a surpassing superlative height in the pardoning mercy of God far
above all that height of sin and wickedness that can be in men's thoughts,
this will appear most clearly in four things.

1. The mercy of God is as high as the heavens: the heavens are the greatest
visible height, Psalm. 36. 5. Thy mercy O Lord, is unto the heavens, and thy
faithfulness reaches unto the clouds, so Psalm. 57. 10. Thy mercy is great
unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds, Psalm. 103. 11.

In both these places the mercy and truth of God are raised high, but mercy is
set higher than truth, his truth reaches unto the clouds, but mercy unto the
heavens, the reasons may be these.

1. Because God extends his mercy beyond his promises: there was mercy to lost
man, before there was any Gospel promise: it was mercy to give us the first
promise, Genesis 3. it is mercy to give us any promise: it is mercy to continue
promises after so many forfeitures and failings on our part.

2. Mercy is Gods exalted attribute, he accounts his mercy his chiefest glory
now under the Gospel, Romans 9. 23. Ephesians. 3. 16.

2. The mercy of God is higher than the heavens, Psalm. 108. 4. Thy mercy is
great above the heavens, and thy truth reaches to the clouds or skies: mercy
is Gods Royal Throne. Now suppose that the sins of our thoughts appear like
high mountains reaching up to the clouds, yea that we have heaped up mountain
upon mountain, till they reach unto the heavens, yet the mercy of God is far
higher, for that is above the heavens: this Consideration may exceedingly raise
the faith of humbled souls in believing the pardon of their thought-pollutions.

3. Gods thoughts of mercy to repenting sinners are as far above their highest
thoughts and apprehensions that they have of Gods mercy, as the heavens are
above the earth, this is evident by the testimony of the God of mercy, Isa. 55.
8, 9. as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than yur
ways, and my thoughts higher than your thoughts. It is spoken of Gods thoughts
and ways of pardoning mercy to returning sinners, as is apparent by verse 7.
there Jehovah promises to show mercy and to multiply pardons, answerable to
the multitudes of their thoughts and evil ways.

Now there be two grand objections that some sorrowful souls are apt to make
against their closing with mercy offered.

1. Their Thoughts have such an height of malignity and sinfulness by reason
of their horrid nature, and numberless swarms that they cannot think how God
should pardon them.

2. That their ways have been so highly injurious and offensive to God, that
if any man should do but the thousand part of that trespass to them that they
have done against God, they could not forgive them: how hard is it for us to
pass by small injuries? etc-

To both these objections, God answers my thoughts of pardoning mercy, (says
he) are as far above all your apprehensions thereof, and my ways of mercy are
as far above all your ways of forgiveness to men, as the heavens are above
the earth.

When ye think thus with your selves we could not possibly forgive any man, in
case of so great wrong, and ye cannot conceive any reason why I should forgive
you; yet know that my thoughts and ways of mercy, are as infinitely above all
yours as the heaven is above the earth.

Men are revengefull in their dispositions, and will not forgive, but Jehovah
is a God of mercies, and ready to forgive; he has the mercies and power of a
God, an infinite, incomprehensible mercy and power, and therefore he can pardon
where men cannot, yea beyond what they can possibly think and conceive, Jer. 3.
1. The heart of man being enlarged and raised by divine grace is able to think
of high and admirable mercies, yet when the most enlarged hearts have gone as
high as is possible for a created heart to rise in conceiving of Gods mercies;
yet even then Gods thoughts of mercy to Repentants, are infinitely above and
beyond their largesthoughts.

It is very observable that God says not that his ways and thoughts of
knowledge and wisdom, but his ways and thoughts of mercy are as far above
man's, as the heavens are above the earth, indeed as God is above men which is
infinitely.

The great God argues from the immense height of his mercy, purposely to
heighten and streng^hen the faith of bruised souls who cannot think how God
should pardon such a world of wickedness as they have acted in their thoughts,
oh therefore, when our thoughts are at a stand in apprehending and conceiving
mercy, let us learn to believe above all our own thoughts.

4. The mercies of God have a height above all that is, or can be written of
them, exceeding high and glorious things are spoken of Gods mercies in the holy
Scriptures, but the height thereof is above all that tongue or pen can
possibly express: as there are Curses written and not written for disobedient
sinners, Deuteronomy. 28. that is, the curses and miseries prepared for wicked men,
are far greater than are written in the Scriptures, so there be mercies
written and not written: the Scriptures cannot hold and contain all that mercy
that is in God for his people, because his mercy is infinite and
incomprehensible.

Secondly, there is an unsearchable depth in the pardoning mercy of God beneath
the deepest guilt that can be found in man's thoughts, Psalm. 86. 13. Thy mercy
is great toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell (...)
says David.

The heavy weight of our thought-wickednesse sinks our souls as deep as the
lowest hell, in respect of demerit: but the great depth of Gods mercy, raises
believing souls out of the deepest hell to the highest heavens.

The judgments of God are a great deep, Psalm. 36. 7. but his mercies are a
greater depth, they are a bottomless sea sufficient to swallow up mountains of
thought-pollutions, as well as mole hills, Micah 7. 19. Gods pardoning mercy is
compared to the depths of the sea, he will turn again, he will have compassion
upon us, he will subdue our iniquities and thou will cast all their sins into
the depths of the sea.

1. Observe, There are many depths in this sea of mercy: if we fear that one
depth will not be enought, let us consider that there are manifold depths.

2. God promises to bury all the sins (...) In profunda maris.
of his people in the depths of mercy, which must needs include all the sins
of their thoughts and ways, though never so many and great.

Thirdly, there is a boundless breadth in the mercy of God, a latitude beyond
all limits, Psalm. 103 12. as far as the East is from the West, so far has he
removed our Transgressions from us by his pardoning mercy. What a vast distance
is there betwixt the East and the West; of all visible latitudes this is the
greatest: now suppose that there be an exceeding great breadth of evil in our
Thoughts, yet there is a breadth in the mercy of God beyond it; there is a
latitude and largeness of power in his mercies, to remove all this evil far
from us.

Fourthly, the mercy of God has an immeasurable length beyond all times, mercy
is extended and stretched out at length, Psalm. 36. 10. extend thy mercy to them
that know thee, draw out thy mercy at length, as the word in the original
(...) Extraxit, protraxit, protendit.
signifies; and as it is in the margin, in this sense the word is used, Psalm.
85. 6. Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou draw out thine anger to
generation and generation?

1: God extends and draws out his mercy toward his people, unto thousands of
generations, as is evident, Exodus 20. 5. 6. compared with Exodus 34. 7. Doing
mercy unto thousands of them that love me, etc. that is to the thousand
generation, yea to many thousand generations, the Hebrew word is plural. (...)

Generation is not in the Hebrew, neither Exodus 20. 5. (...), etc.
in the fifth or sixth verse, but is supplied in the Greek and Chaldee version

There is the like phrase in Exodus 34. 7. keeping mercy for thousands, that is,
as Thargum Jerusalemy explains it, for a thousand generations, Luke 1. 50. his
mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation. Here generation
is expressly mentioned. This world shall not continue to thousands of
generations; we are now in the last days of this world. The time shall be when
this world and time shall be no more* but the mercy of God to his people has
no end, no interruption.

2. Mercy is drawn out to eternity, this is confirmed by six and twenty
everlasting that are spoken of the mercy of God in one Psalm to make the deeper
and stronger impression upon the hearts Psalm. 136.
of the faithful, the mercy of Jehovah is to everlasting. (...)


3. The length of this divine mercy is, from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear God, Psalm. 103. 17. he had thoughts of mercy from eternity in
his Electing love in Christ.

Oh what strength of comfort may be drawn out of this immense length of mercy:
that which greatly troubles poor souls, is the lengthening of the iniquity of
their thoughts. Oh say they, we have lived in thought-pollutions, in the inward
acting of speculative filth and folly, in vain, wanton, wicked thoughts, these
forty, yea threescore years we have drawn out the sins of our thoughts to a
very great length, therefore how can we believe that there is any mercy for us.

This Consideration should lengthen our sorrows, and heighten our self
abhorrency, yet know that there is an incomparable greater length in divine
mercy then can be in man's thought defilements: the length of Gods mercy is from
eve^lasting to everlasting: now what is the length of threescore years to
eternity?

Secondly, as the mercy of God is greatly extended in all the dimensions
thereof, so it is greatly powerful.

As there is a power in the wrath of God that passes our knowledge, Psalm. 90.
11. so there is a power in his pardoning mercy passing all created
understanding, this mighty power of Gods mercy appears herein, that he is able
by a word speaking to pardon the greatest height of sin.

Now for the clear understanding of this glorious mystery, we must know, that
in the justification of a sinner, remission of sins and righteousness is
given by an act of Royal Prerogative and power in God; he speaks, and
pronounces a sinner pardoned, he says unto him, live, Ezech. 16. 6.

It is an act of omnipotency to pardon sin, the superlative greatness of Gods
power is manifested in forgiving his people, as is most evident, Numb. 14. 17,
18, 19. And now I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as
thou have spoken, saying, the Lord is long suffering and of great mercy,
forgiving iniquity and transgression: pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of
this people according to the greatness of thy mercy, in showing great,
pardoning mercy, God shows great power.

This is the exceeding greatness of Gods Prerogative, and transcendent power
of his mercy, that he can take men, that are most ungodly in themselves, and
speak them the most righteous men in the world, if he do but reckon and declare
a sinner pardoned and just^fied, he is really pardoned and justified from all
his sins.

Th^s does infinitely manifest and magnify the power of Gods free grace and
mercy in Christ, that if he do pronounce a sinner forgiven, he is fully and for
ever acquitted from the guilt of all his sins; if God be pleased to account
and reckon a man righteous, by the righteousness of Christ Jesus imputed, he
stands completely righteous in Gods sight: this is the highest declaration of
the omnipotency of Gods mercy, that he is able to pardon the greatest sinner by
a word: in the word of this King of Kings, there is power, Infinite power.

Oh therefore let repenting souls consider, that though the sins of their
thoughts be exceeding great and innumerable, heightened with all the
aggravations that Satan and their own distrustful hearts can put upon them:
yet there is that infiniteness of power in Gods mercy, that if he be pleased
but to speak the word only, they shall be fully cleansed from the guilt of all
their thought-sinnes.

The seventh Consideration.
Seventhly, There is an All Sufficiency in the blood of Jesus Christ to cleanse
the foulest sinners from all the iniquities of their thoughts, 1 John 1. 7, 9.
with him there is plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130. 7.

1. Consider, that all the iniquities of our thoughts and ways were laid upon
Christ our surety, Isa. 53.

2. He has suffered all that wrath and punishment which was due to the sins
of all his people, and thereby he has made a plenary satisfaction to divine
justice for the same: he has paid all their debts to the utmost farthing.

3. God the Father has accepted of this satisfaction of Christ for his people,
and manifested this acceptance in that he raised him again from the dead, let
him out of prison, took off the bonds of death, and received him into glory.
Romans 8 33, 34


4. Christ Jesus by his sufferings, has obtained a plenary redemption and
remission of sins for all believing sinners, Heb. 9. Ephesians. 17.

5. If our hearts be really broken for and from our evil thoughts, the God of
mercy will multiply his washings of us in the blood of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 51.
2. David prays for a multiplied washing Psalm. 51. v. 4. according to the
Hebrew. (...)
from his iniquity, multiply, wash me much, wash me, that is, thoroughly wash me
again and again in the blood of Christ, Rev. 7. 14. 1 John 17 9. Jer. 4. 14.
the Hebrew Hereb (or Harbeth) signifies properly to multiply, and does most
fitly suit David's present case, who had so multiplied his iniquities in the
matter of Vriah.

Objection, but now some perplexed: but we are most vile wretches, not worthy
of the least crumb of mercy: we can do nothing that can please God, that can
move him to show mercy, we have not a broken frame of spirit we cannot be so
bitterly affected and afflicted in spirit for all the wickedness of our
Thoughts as we desire: had we but that depth of humiliation and height of
spiritual qualifications, that we see in some Saints, we could then believe
the forgiveness of all our evil thoughts: were our hearts so enlarged in
duties, and carried with that overpowring strength against the the corruption
of our thoughts and works, as they should be, we might then have some hopes of
pardoning mercy, but when our spiritual wants are so great, our humiliation so
little, our strength against sin so weak; how dare we think that any mercy
belongs to us, how can we venture upon these precious mercies?

Whereunto I answer.

1. Who made this a condition of the etc. before they may lay hold upon
pardoning mercy: surely, this condition is not of Gods making.

2. The Gospel tells us, that poverty of spirit is the richest qualification.

They that are poorest in their own sense are best qualified for the riches of
mercy: Our Savior requires no portion of those that come to him, but mere
poverty and emptiness. We have an excellent place, Math. 5. 3. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. They that are truly
sensible of their own spiritual poverty, nothingnesse, vileness and
wretchedness, have a real title to all the treasures of mercy, and pardons
revealed in the Gospel: Theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. They are actually
blessed, and (...). Graeca dictio (...) prop^ie mendicos significat. Jansen.
have a present propriety in the Kingdom of heaven, and therefore the
pardoning mercy of God, is theirs.

It is observable, that the first promise is made to the poor in spirit, to
beggars in spirit; for that is the proper signification of the Greek word (...)
that is, such as have a spiritual sense of their own extreme emptiness,
baseness and misery, and are willing to receive life and pardon upon mere gift
and free favor of God, as the poorest beggar receives an alms: Augustine and
Chrysostom, expound it of inward humality: so that poverty of spirit is the
first fundamental qualification.

3. A spiritual sense of our own great unworthiness and vileness, is our
greatest inherent worthiness. The greatest worthies, such of whom the Heb. 11:
world is not worthy, have no worthiness, but only in Christ Jesus.

4. God is pleased to show mercy to those that can do nothing of themselves, to
please God, Micah. 7. 18.

5. The great God extends mercy to believing penitens, not according to the
largeness of their qualification; but according to the largeness of his own
free grace, this is excellently held forth, 1 Chronicles. 17. 19. in that
thanksgiving speech of David. O Jehovah, according to thine own heart thou have
done all this greatness for thy servant, that is, al 1 Chronicles. 17. 11, 12.
this great mercy, as is evident by the preceding words: God promises great
mercies and blessings to David's seed: he would build up David's house, and his
son should build up an house for him.

Three eminent mercies are here promised to David's seed that should be raised
up after him in his Kingdom.

1. God promises to be his father, and to take him to be his son, a mercy of
mercies, verse 12.

2. Though he fell scandalously, yet he would still continue his mercy to him,
I will not take away my mercy from him, etc. verse 13.

3. God would establish his Throne for ever, verse 12. 14.

Now in verse 16. David falls into admiration of this great mercy of God
toward him and his house, David the King said, what am TO Lord God, and what
is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto.

Thou have done very much for me, and spoken great mercies concerning my house;
What can David speak more to thee for the honor of thy servant, for the great
honor thou have put upon him, for thou know thy servant, verse 18. thou
ownest him in way of peculiar love and mercy. O Jehovah, according to thine own
heart have thou done all this greatness of mercy, as if David had said, it is
not according to the largeness-of my heart in serving thee, it is not according
to the largeness of my love toward thee, nor according to the largnesse of my
qualifications, but according to the largeness of thine own love, bounty and
good pleasure, thou have done all this mercy for me.

This is a precious ground of comfort to consider that the great God shows
mercy to repenting souls according to the infinite largeness and freeness of
his own heart, as great Kings do give as Kings, not as other men, but like
themselves, answerable to the greatness of their persons, and largeness of
their treasures: so the Lord God shows mercy as an infinite God, he pardons his
people according to the infinite greatness of his own goodness and largeness
of his treasures.

We sin as men, as finite creatures, but Jehovah forgives and gives as a God,
his mercies are infinite.

2. Our spiritual qualifications at our first believing are small and weak,
our humiliation but as a drop of a bucket, our faith but as a grain of mustard
seed; all our service but as a poor mite, and therefore if God should pardon
us according to the narrowness and weakness of our qualifications: how little
mercy should we receive, not enough to cover the least of our sins, but when
God forgives us according to the largeness of his own heart, what exceeding
riches? what overflowing fullness of mercy do we receive, enough to pardon all
the sins of our thoughts and ways, though exceeding great and manifold.

6. God pardons us freely for his own names sake, and not for any thing we have
or can do, this is evident by Gods own Declaration to Israel, Isa. 43. 24. 25.
Thou have wearied me with thine iniquities, yet I, I am he, who blotteth out
thy transgressions, defections, revoltings for mine own sake, (says the (...)
Lord God) and will not remember thy sins. Let us consider the extreme
vileness and unworthiness of these men to whom the promise of mercy is here
given.

1. They had brought no offerings to God, verse 23. they had performed no
worship to him.

2. They were weary of God, and they wearied God with their iniquities; they
were burdened with Gods service, Verse 22. 24.
and did burden God with their sins, yet God will freely and fully pardon
these great sinners, he will not remember their iniquities against them upon
their returning to him, but it is merely for himself, for his own sake, it is
his own good pleasure that moves God to forgive them, for the manifestation of
his abundant goodness and mercy.

Yea, God will have his people to know it, that when he pardons them, it is not
for their sakes, it is not out of respect to any qualification in them by way
of merit or motive, but merely for his own sake, Ezekiel. 36. 22. Say unto the
house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your sake O house
of Israel, but for my boly names sake.

In verse 21. God says that he spared them, and showed mercy to them for his
holy Name, whereas he might justly have (...)
destroyed them for their sins (as the Hebrew word here used imports) chamal
signifies to show mercy to those who by all right might justly be destroyed,
Ezekiel. 5. 11. 1 Samuel 15. 3.

This consideration may mightily strengthen our faith in that our God extends
pardoning mercy to us, according to the infinite largeness of his own heart,
and from the incomparable freeness of his own grace, not according to the
enlargement of our qualifications, nor for any thing we do or can perform.

Oh therefore if our Thought-transgressions be a burden to us, if we do really
loath, these sins and our selves for them; if there be a sincere striving to
mortify every evil thought, know assuredly that we ought to cast our selves
upon the greatness and freeness of Gods mercy, and believe the pardon of all
our thought-pollutions.

3. Seeing there are the seeds of all kind of wicked and abominable thoughts
Jobs Covenant, Job 31. 1. without David's bridle: the mind of man is the mouth
of the soul, thoughts are the speakings of the mind, Psalm. 14. 1. let us keep
this mouth of our souls, as with a bridle.

The great God gives us a very strict command to look to our thoughts, Prove. 4.
23. above all keeping keep thy heart, that is, above all strive and study to
keep thy thoughts pure, in a holy, heavenly frame, without spot and defilement.

These words do clearly import that there are many things given us in charge to
be kept, but above all our hearts and thoughts, we are commanded to keep our
selves unspotted of the world.

2. To keep the words of Christ's patience.

3. To keep a good conscience.

4. To keep holy the Lords day.

5. To keep our brethren.

6. To keep the works of Christ to the end.

7. To keep that which is committed Revel. 2. 26.
to us.

8. To keep the door of our lips.

9. To keep all the commandments of God, but above all keeping, keep thy
heart, and in it thy thoughts above all: this is the true import of the Hebrew
text.

1. Keep thy thoughts more than all things that are to be kept, our chiefest
care and greatest caution must be spent in keeping our thoughts, we must guard
them night and day, and that (...) Heb. prae omni custodia, plus quam omnia
custodienda, Piscator.
with a fourfold watch and ward.

We must keep our thoughts as a City, or strong Castle is kept with all kind of
fortifications, and as rich men keep their treasures with looks and bars.

The word in the original (as one Servavit, observavit, custodivit, munivit,
curavit: Significat etiam seris, vectibus qu^ claudere.
observes) is borrowed from the affairs of war. Let us imagine a City not
only begirt with a straight and dangerous siege of vigilant and blood thirsty
enemies; but also within full of secret commotioners that are ready to betray
the City. How greatly would it concern that City with all vigilant policy to
stand upon its guard day and night for prevention of danger: thus it is with
our hearts.

1. Satan is ever waiting opportunity to throw in his fiery darts.

2. Worldly sensual objects from abroad are ready to insinuate themselves and
to ensnare our thoughts.

3. There is the flesh from within which raises many inward commotions and
rebellious stirrings in our own hearts: Now godly, wisemen are sensible of all
this danger, and by their own experimental knowledge are acquainted with the
many wounds and breaches made in the soul, both by these open enemies, and
secret Rebels which rise up within their own bowels, and therefore they have
daily need of much heavenly wisdom, holy care and conscience in guarding and
keeping their hearts.

Thus we are expressly commanded to observe and fortify our thoughts against all
assaults, and to keep them from all pollution, with all possible diligece: now
to quicken us to this duty, let us seriously consider.

1. That this is the great commandment of God, it is the fundamental
comprehensive command: the keeping of our thoughts is a keeping all the
commandments fundamentally: all purity and true piety begins in the thoughts.

2. This keeping of our thoughts is a keeping all the Commandments virtually,
because every divine precept requires a thought obedience.

2. If our thoughts be holy our affections and actions will be holy also.

2. A holy frame of thoughts sends forth actions of life, that do manifest the
glorious life of Christ in us, Prove. 4. 23. out of it are the issues of life,
the actions and outgoings of lives, of that new heavenly life which is
eternal, living words and works are issues of gracious thoughts, but dead
defiled actions and speeches are the outgoings (...)
of evil thoughts.

Thoughts are spring actions, and streams, as our thoughts are, so are the
actings of our affections, so are our prayers and all our performances:
therefore it concerns us above all keeping to keep our thoughts.

Thirdly consider that man's heart of it self is sufficient to bring forth all
kind of evil thoughts, and that without any injection from Satan, and
instigation from outward objects, the Devil may cast in any thought into our
heart, but all the powers of darkness cannot fasten the guilt and spot of any
one sin upon our thoughts without our entertainment and closing with the
sugestion, but the corrupt heart of men has a sufficiency to beget and
conceive any wicked, blasphemous thoughts, and to corrupt the whole man with
all kind of sinful thoughts and works, as having in it self the ground and
spawn thereof,

2. Man's cursed heart is exceeding prone to think evil continually.

3. It invites and inticeth Satan to suggest and greedily entertains whatsoever
he injecteth.

4. All outward objects serve as occasions to stir up evil thoughts in us,
therefore our chiefest care must be to look to our thoughts.

4. God is the only Lord, and Ruler of our Thoughts, he lays claim to them as
his sole right and peculiar Royalty, and he has a Sovereignty over the whole
soul, and all its powers.

Earthly powers take upon them to govern our tongues, hands and visible
actings, but God only challenges a power and principality over our thoughts:
therefore by turning Libertines in our thoughts, we turn God into an Idol of
our own fancy, denying his Sovereign dominion over our thoughrs and knowledge
of them, and so we rob him of his chiefest Royalty.

5. The observing ordering and keeping our thoughts within due bounds, is the
glory and strictness, difficulty and singularity of the true Religion above
all others in the world. If we look to our speeches and actions, what singular
thing do we? did not the Pharisees do as much? mere mortal men do the same.

Wherein stands the difference between true hearted Israelites and all
hypocrites? it is mainly in the purity and piety of the Thoughts.

Phariseees and formalists may mumble over their prayers morning and evening
and keep from open notorious evils, they may be blameless in their visible
conversations, Phil. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Hypocrites may appear in glorious outsides, talk strictly, pray and discourse
to admiration, but their thoughts are overrun with vanity and earthlinesse.

That which makes the practice of Christianity so full of difficulty is the
well ordering of our thoughts, this is true godliness to keep our thoughts in
a holy, heavenly frame, without this all Religion is but bodily exercise a mere
form and a name to live.

6. This is the surest evidence of the sincerity of our hearts, when it is our
greatest endeavor to keep our thoughts free from defilement: it is the glory
and peculiar privilege of heart, uprightness to make conscience of eying and
ordering the thoughts, which man's eyes and Laws cannot reach, this indeed
testifies the truth of our obedience, when it is spiritual, and in the heart,
as in the sight of the heart-searching eye of God; by a sanctified frame of
thoughts, we chiefly sanctify God in our hearts, and walk with him.

7. Every gracious heart is the Temple of God, the house wherein the King of
glory, and the spirit of glory dwell continually; therefore we must keep a
continual watch over our hearts, that they be not a through fair for evil
thoughts, a den of thieves: every vain thought that we lodge in our hearts
defiles this Temple, and robs God of his glory.

8. The Lording and lodging of evil thoughts in men's hearts, does plainly show
that they have no portion of God, nor in God.

If vain thoughts have possession of our hearts, it is a sure sign that we have
no possession of God: this is clearly employed in that self-purging speech of
Job: I have made a Covenant with mine Job. 31. 1. 2.
eyes, why then should I think on a maid? for what portion of God is there from
above? and what inheritance or possession of the Almighty from on high?

Now the first particular wherein Job clears himself, is in respect of his
thoughts, he durst not yield to sinful thoughts; he looks upon them as the
grand defiling sins, therefore he names them in the first place, his meaning
I conceive to be this: if I should give entertainment to impure wanton
thoughts, I could expect no portion of that goodness and mercy that God has
laid up for his people, I should thereby declare my self to have no possession
or enjoyment of God, nor portion in that glorious inheritance prepared by him
for his children.

Oh Consider this all you that entertain filthy, foolish, and unclean thoughts,
that do delight in the speculative acting of sin in your thoughts; you that
spend your thoughts upon sensual pleasures and earthly profits and
preferments: you that suffer your thoughts to range up and down idly and
profanely: ye have no portion of God, nor part in that inheritance of God.

Where then will your portion be? if your portion be not in the Father of
lights, in the highest heaven, it will be with the Prince of darkness in the
lowest hell, the Scripture says expressly, that they who mind earthly things,
their end is damnation, Phil. 3. 18, 19.

9. Consider that all the ways of our thoughts are before God, Psalm. 119, 168.
he beholds all our heart-wayes, even the most hidden thoughts of the mind, he
knows the thoughts afar off, 1 Chronicles. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. 12. Psalm, 139, 2.
28. 9. Jehovah searches all hearts and understands every imagination of the
Ier. 10. 17.
thoughts, that is, the whole frame of our thoughts.

When we shall firmly apprehend there is an all-seeing eye in heaven, to which
the blackest midnight, is as the brightest noontide, that sees our most Psalm.
139. 12.
secret thoughts; this persuasion will be an effectual means to keep us from
loose licentious thoughts, and to bring in our thoughts to a sincere subjection
to Christ.

David was full of holy meditations, and precious thoughts: this was one spring
from whence they had their rise, he looks upon God, as always present with
him, and beholding all his thoughts, Psalm. 139. 1. 2. 3. 7. sanctified souls
are filled with the apprehension and thoughts of Gods all knowing eye, the curb
of the tenth Commandment, and check of a tender conscience, and this is a
special means to bring their thoughts into order, and to confine them and keep
them within a holy compass, from their vain impertinent vagaries.

10. We must be strictly accountable, and answerable for our idle, wandering,
and wicked thoughts at the great day of judgment, Matthew, 12. 36. Men must give
account for every vain word, both of heart and mouth, thoughts are the speeches
of the mind, Psalm. 14. 1.

It is evident by the Scriptures.

1. That there shall be a strict inquisition and search into our thoughts at
that great day of inquest.

2, God will manifest and lay open the secret thoughts of our hearts. 1 Cor. 4
5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come (that is, to judgment)
who will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will manifest the
counsels of the hearts, that is the most hidden thoughts of men's hearts,
Eccles. 12. 14. God will bring every work to judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, all the works of our hearts
shall be brought to judgment.

So that the great work of God at the great day will be to manifest and bring
to judgment men's secret thoughts: the good thoughts of good men shall be
brought to light for their praise: 1 Cor. 4.
and the filthy wicked thoughts of evil men shall be laid open before Angels
and men to their everlasting shame.

God will judge the secrets of men at the last day, Romans 2. 16. that is their
thoughts, which are most properly their secrets: Sinners must then answer for
every vain thought, which now lodges in their hearts, their evil thoughts
being their greatest evils, shall bring upon them the greatest condemnation.

Now consider what swarms of imaginations and thoughts do proceed out of your
hearts every day: and therefore if ye be not extraordinarily, and exactly
vigilant and eyefull over your hearts; ye may justly fear that upon the opening
and inlightening of the book of your consciences, at those two dreadful days
of death, and the last judgment, innumerable armies of wicked and exorbitant
thoughts which have lain in ambush, as it were in the secret corners of your
deceitful hearts, will then break forth with unspeakable fury and fierceness,
and charge upon you with a heavy account, and so condemn your souls to eternal
wrath.

The serious and frequent Consideration of this strict accountablenesse, for
all our thoughts has a great efficacy to control, check and curb our unruly
thoughts, to call them in again, when they begin to wander, and to run riot
after vanity, and to bring them into an orderly frame. Eccles. 11. 9.


Lastly, consider that those evil thoughts which carnal men and women do lodge
in their hearts, shall be their tormentors in hell for ever and ever, their own
thoughts shall be turned into so many never dying scorpions, and fiery serpents
to sting and torment their souls.

2. The Thoughts of sinners shall be their greatest terror and torment in that
siery lake, thoughts accusing shall be their executioners, filling their souls
with sorrows beyond imagination.

1. Wicked men shall then study over their sins, and every sin shall be as
a fiery dart at their hearts.

Oh that sinners would seriously consider this, that though in this world it be
a delight unto them to look back and survey their old sins; yet in hell nothing
will be more bitter and tormenting to them, than the thoughts and remembrance
of them. Every passage and circumstance in every sin which they have
committed, will then be as so many sharp swords at their hearts.

This setting of men's sins in order, before their thoughts shall fill their
consciences with innumerable stings of terror and torture: their thoughts will
be all hell and horror at the sight of their sins.

2. Impenitent sinners shall then think of the glorious bliss of the Saints in
heaven, and of their own woeful wretched estate in hell.

3. They will think of their own wilful neglect and rejection of mercy offered
in the Gospel.

How they have turned their backs upon the blessed and bleeding entreatings of
the Lord Christ, and this very Thought will be a continual hell to their
souls, yea the very Hell of Hells

Oh what unconceivable Torture, Tribulation and anguish will fall upon wicked
men when they shall still be thinking of that beatificall enjoyment, height of
honor and glorious salvation that they have wilfully and eternally lost.

The Mystery of Holiness working in the thoughts of all sanctified persons.
2 COR. 10. 4, 5. For the weapons of our warefare are not carnal, but mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds.

Casting down imaginations, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.


I Have opened the Mystery of iniquity, which works efficaciously in the
thoughts of all those that are not Regenerate.

The second great point that now follows to be handled, is the Mystery of
Sanctity that works in the thoughts of all those who are truly Sanctified.

In this Text, this is chiefly observeable; That the power of sanctifying
Grace, which comes into the soul by the preaching of the Gospel, does first
and principally show it self in casting down, changing, crucifying, and
captivating men's thoughts: The first and great work of the spirit of Grace in
the conversion of sinners is upon their Thoughts.

I will draw up what I intend to insist upon, into this doctrinall Truth. That,

Sanctifying soule-quickning Grace, Doctrine.
which is conveyed by the ministry of the word of life does primarily and
principally put forth it self upon men's thoughts.

For the clear understanding this Truth, three things must be premised.

First, That there is no self-sufficiency in man's corrupt mind to think one
holy spiritual thought; this the Scripture clearly witnesses, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
That we are not sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, to think any thing;
that is, any good thing, according to divine rules; we have not the least
aptness, or ability, by corrupt nature to think a good thought; when we think
a divine spiritual good thought, it is by the Grace of 1 Cor. 15. 10.
God.

1. We are by corrupt nature all over flesh, we have rotten corrupt minds full
of fleshly principles, full of pride and contradiction against the Spirit and 2
Cor. 10. 5. Ephesians. 4. 21.
Truth that is in Jesus.

We have fleshly wills and affections; sinful corruption is as a chain upon
all our faculties, as an iron gate that keeps out any good thought, or
corrupts it when it comes in.

The thoughts of carnal men are altogether fleshly. Romans 8. 5. The frame of
man's heart must be sanctified, before it can frame one sanctified thought: as a
man is, so he thinks and imagins: as the tree is, so is the fruit: as the
treasure of the heart is, such is that that Mat. 12. 15.
comes from it; an evil heart cannot think well; impure minds will not admit
of pure holy thoughts to enter.

Wickedness comes from the wicked; as the proverb is, 1 Samuel 24. 13 What can
be expected from vain men, whiles they are altogether vanity, but vain
thoughts? Their hearts are always either weaving spiders webs, or hatching
Isa. 59. ^^
Cockatrices eggs; they are thinking vanity or mischief.

2. If the bent and relish of our wills and affections be not changed, they
will set our imagination on work to devise satisfaction to themselves; for
there is a mutual reflux and working betwixt the imagination and affections.
Man's imagination stirs up his affections, and as the bent of the affections
stands, so imagination works.

Secondly, in our new birth there is healing, quickening, renewing Grace infused
into our souls, whereby we are freely inclined to spiritual good thoughts and
works.

This infused implanted Grace is called in the Scriptures, the life of Christ,
or Christ living in us; the image of Gal. 2. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ezekiel 11.
Christ, the image or impression of his Graces. The new creature: a new heart
and spirit, a new frame of heart and spirit put into us; it is the implanting
of holy principles, inclinations, and dispositions, whereby our natures are
made conformable to the sweet pure holy nature of Christ, and agreeable to all
divine rules in some measure.

Thirdly, this regenerating Grace, or new divine life put into our souls, is
the immediate principle of all our holy thoughts and works. Actions come from
powers, and are suitable thereunto; holy spiritual Acts cannot come from
unsanctified powers and faculties; living thoughts cannot proceed out of dead
minds.

In man's natural life, there is

1. The soul, which is the principle of life.

2. Life it self.

3. Acts of life: These three are inseparable.

So in the spiritual life, there is

1. The quickening spirit.

2. The vital being.

3. Living Acts: and these are inseparable. This new life is an active power,
whereby the soul is enabled to Act and move toward God.

All our holy thoughts and works are the fruits and actings of this divine life
in us: there must be a power and principle of holiness put into man's heart
before it can think holy thoughts: every thing acts according to its being:
an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Carnal minds cannot thing
spiritual thoughts.

These things being premised I now come to the Doctrine it self; in the
opening whereof, I must

First, demonstrate that renewing converting Grace does primarily and
principally put forth it self upon man's thoughts.

Secondly, I will declare what are the powerful, precious, operations of
sanctifying Grace upon the thoughts.

First, that sanctifying Grace, after the change of the frame of our hearts,
does first and chiefly work upon our thoughts; I thus demonstrate.

1. Evil thoughts are the radical seminall sins which corrupt our
judgments, affections, and all our actions; therefore it is necessary that our
thoughts should be first cleansed cured and changed by Grace.

Sin entered into our first parents by their thoughts; crooked thoughts were
the root of their cursed apostasy.

2. All our actual sins have their beginning and rise in our thoughts: evil
thoughts are the begetters of all other sins, the first movers and leaders in
all evil, the plotters of all iniquity against God and man; Till these radical
evils be rooted up, our words and works will be the fruits of sin: therefore
after the crucifying of the habitual corruption of men's nature, the principal
work of Grace is to mortify and purify their thoughts.

Hence it is that the first Act of repentance and mortification pressed upon
sinners, is to wash their hearts from wickedness; that is, from vain thoughts
Jer. 4. 14.
which lodge within them: True repentance begins whence sin begins; that is, in
the thoughts.

Secondly, the strong hold whereby the Devil holds possession of men's souls,
is chiefly in their thoughts; Till the thoughts be cast down and changed by
converting Grace, the Devil cannot 2 Cor. 10 4, 5.
be castout.

Thirdly, all actual holiness begins in the thoughts; habitual holiness is
properly in the new frame of our hearts; actual holiness is that which is
acted in our affections and conversations: holy works and words have their rise
from holy thoughts: as the spirits are in the body, so are thoughts in the
soul, they run through all, move all, and Act all in us.

Fourthly, the new spiritual mind is put for the whole new man, for all that
is regenerate in us, in our minds, wills, affections, and all the powers of
the soul. Romans 7. 25. Where Paul speaking in the person of all reverend ones
says, I my self in my mind serve the Law of God. Romans 7. 25. (...).


It is evident that the Saints do serve the Law of God with all their soul
withal within them so far as it is sanctified.

Why then is the mind only named here?

Answ 1. Because the work of renovation begins in the mind, or thinking
power: this is clearly held forth in Romans 12. 2. Be ye transformed by the
(...).
renewing of your mind. That great metamorphosis, or transforming change,
which is wrought by the new birth, has its first beginning in our minds; for
if we are transformed by the renewing of our mind; then it must needs follow,
that the mind is first renewed; and by the change of the frame of the mind
and thoughts, the whole man is changed, and all things made new in us.

2. Holy thoughts, which are the actings of the renewed mind, do act and
command our judgments, affections, eyes, tongues, etc. in a holy heavenly
order. For as a man thinks, so is he, Prove. 23. 6, 7. If a man think
graciously, he affects graciously speaks and acts graciously.

Secondly, I will now show you what are the powerful and precious operations
and workings of sanctifying Grace upon man's thoughts; whereby we may easily
discern whether we are truly possessed of the glorious state of Grace: And I
beseech you mark this searching truth, for a holy gracious frame of thoughts
does far more clearly and infallibly distinguish the power of sanctification
from the state of formallity and highest temporary perfections, then words and
works, and all outwardness of carriage, though never so glorious in appearance:
for in these (many times) is much fraud and fallacy, forced feigned
behaviors, artificial and counterfeit acting, and hidden hypocrisies. Outward
actions and speeches are liable to the Laws of men, open and obvious to the
eye and judgments of all; therefore fear of reproach, shame, and punishment;
desire of gaining a good opinion for honesty and Religion, and the name of
Saintship; hope of raising their outward estates, are of great power to
restrain men, and to keep them within good compass and moderation, and to put
them upon the profession of piety, outward performance of duties, and joining
to Churches: Men's words and works may be seemingly holy, honest and honorable,
whose thoughts are base, profane, and abominable.

But thoughts are the free immediate invisible productions of the heart, by
their natural secrecy exempted from man's most privy search and censures: No
eye sees these secrets, but that which is ten thousand times brighter then the
Sun. And therefore millions of thoughts, many thousand forms of imagination
do spring out of the hearts of men, which without any mask, restraint, or
reservation, do really represent the true estate and disposition of the heart:
so that from them we may be ever sure to take infallible notice, whether our
hearts as yet only work naturally, in a delightful framing of vain earthly
ungodly thoughts; or else be taught and guided by a supernatural power to
compose our thoughts, according to the light of Gods word, and holy motions of
his sanctifying spirit.

Prove. 12. 5. Righteous men are discerned and distinguished from wicked men by
their Thoughts. The Thoughts of the just are right Judgment, or Justice, (so
the Hebrew signifies) but (...)
the subtle devices of the wicked are deceit. So in Romans 8. 5. Carnal men are
differenced from spiritual, by the inward frame of their thoughts, They that
are according to the flesh, do think of the things of the flesh; but they
that Romans 8. ^. (...).
are according to the spirit, the things of the spirit. This reading is
agreeable to the Original, and comes nearest to the scope and intent of the
Text.

Thus the Syrick renders the words, They that are in the flesh do think of
(...) De re quapiam serio cogita c. Beza.
that which is of the flesh, etc. Thus Tremellius, and Trostius do read this
place, according to the Syrick.

That is, they that are still in a carnal corrupt estate, they fix and spend
their thoughts upon fleshly earthly sensual things, and thus Theophyl: and
Chrysostom expound this place, The mind in carnal men is carnal, they do in
their mind think of carnal things: But they that are spiritual, that are
renewed and acted by the spirit of grace, their thoughts are chiefly spent and
drawn out upon spiritual heavenly Divine things.

If we would take certain knowledge of our selves, whether we are good or evil
men, sanctified or unsanctified, we must look into the frame of our thoughts.
Every man is compared to a Tree, our thoughts are the most distinguishing
fruits whereby we may discern what manner of Trees we are. The only way for
other men to know what kind of Trees we are, is by our visible fruits,
external works and speeches: But if we our selves would judge of our selves,
we must try our selves first and chiefly by our internal thoughts. The surest
and most infallible way to judge of our spiritual estate, is by the constant
acting of our thoughts.

2 Thoughts and imaginations do ordinarily follow the frame and temper of the
heart wherein they are formed, and so they are the truest discovery of the
nature and constitution of the heart: As streams do resemble and express the
quality and property of those fountains whence they spring. We may truly judge
of the frame and fabric of our hearts, by the ordinary working of our thoughts.

But now we are not to take measure of our thoughts by some particular
stirrings and extraordinary motions we sometimes feel in them; but according
to the common current and general actings of our thoughts; For sometimes evil
men may have good motions, and workings in their thoughts toward that which is
good; but good thoughts in carnal men do glide and pass away presently
without any fruit to their own souls.

So on the other side, good men may sometimes be over-powred and captivated by
evil thoughts, either by the sudden breaking out of remaining corruption from
within, or by violent invasion of some entising object from without; or by the
impetuous and immediate injections of Satan: But such thoughts as these are
contrary to the general and settled purpose of their hearts.

2 The New man in them does repel and resist them.

3 The Saints know how to repent of them, and pray against them.

4 They walk more humbly, and set a strong guard and more narrow watch over
their hearts for afterward, least they should be unawares surprised the second
time.

Thirdly, The whole conversation follows the frame and temper of the thoughts:
Such as a man's heart is, such are his thoughts ordinarily; and such as his
thoughts are, such is the frame of his conversation. Prove. 23. 7. As a man
tbinketh in his heart, so is he. The thoughts of men are the spring from whence
issues a good or bad conversation, they are the master-wheele which acts and
turns about the whole course Prove. 4. 23.
and carriage of their lives; they have a strong influence upon all their ways.

The sweetning of this spring sweetens the whole conversation: If waters be
corrupt, the fountain must first be cleansed and sweetened, and then the
streams will be sweet. The Prophet healed the waters by casting salt into the
spring, 2 Kings 2. 20. If our thoughts be full of holiness, they will overflow
into our affections, and actions, and fill our speeches.

What are the powerful operations

They are these especially.

First, It Discovers a world of wickedness up a new light in the mind, which
manifests the Atheism, Idolatry, Infidelity, Unrighteousness, Vanity, Pride,
and Profaneness of their thoughts. Carnal men may see the gross
irregularities, and open defilements of their works and speeches; but they see
not the first rise of corruption in their thoughts. Sinners are possessed with
this pestilent conceit, that thoughts are free: but when the word of God falls
with converting power upon their souls, the secret thoughts of their hearts
are made manifest in their natural filth and 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.
folly, so that now they begin to see that the sins of their thoughts are out
of measure sinful and innumerable.

Secondly, Sanctifying Grace Condemns the vanity and vileness of men's
thoughts; it draws them to sentence, and condemn the evil of their thoughts,
and themselves for their evil thoughts. Carnal men do feed upon the forth of
their filthy thoughts with delight, but regenerate men do with much
bitterness of spirit judge themselves for their thought-transgressions; yea,
many humble souls, sensible of their secret provocations, are more grieved and
troubled (setting aside the ill of example, and scandal, ordinary attendants
upon open and visible miscartiages) for the rebelliousnesse of their thoughts,
then the exorbitancy and iniquity of their works: It wounds them to the very
heart that they are not as well able to preserve their inward thoughts pure and
holy toward the all-searching eye of God, as their words and visible actions
plausible and orderly toward men.

Thirdly, Sanctifying Grace begets a sincere and deadly Hatred of all evil
thoughts. Psalm. 119. 113. Says David, I hate vain thoughts. Renewed persons
do not only dislike evil thoughts, but they also hate them, as the grand
Enemies of God, they desire to have them crucified.

2 They hate not only those thoughts which are most black and bloody, but vain
thoughts also; they hate all wandering and unprofitable thoughts.

Fourthly, Renewing Grace Sanctifies the thoughts, and puts them into a holy
frame: The natural frame of man's heart is evil, therefore all that it frames
is altogether evil. A corrupt Genesis 6. 5.
fountain cannot send forth pure waters; but sanctifying grace coming into
man's heart, implants a new holy principle, which is the spring of holy living
thoughts; it makes the mind ready and prepared to every good thought. A
sanctified heart is full of sanctified thoughts, it is continually exercised in
godly, useful, and profitable meditations: It can have no rest but in
spiritual converses with God. Grace coming from heaven, does carry up the
thoughts into heaven.

Fifthly, Sanctifying Grace Purifies the thoughts, it mortifies that Lording
power which sin exercises in men's thoughts before their renewing. The hearts
of all men in their corrupt frame are as a boiling Sea, or as a Sepulcher of
corruption, evapourating and sending up continually wicked, wanton, and
profane thoughts.

How does grace cleanse and cure our

By a twofold act.

1 By mortifying the root of all evil flesh, or corruption of man's nature,
that root of bitterness which embitters and corrupts our thoughts continually.
Grace purifies Acts 15. Mark 7. 21.
our hearts, which are the fountain out of which our thoughts do flow; this
fountain must be cleansed, and sweetened before our thoughts can be clean: Can
any clean thing come forth of that which is unclean?

That sinful corruption which reigns Job 14. 5.
and rages in the hearts of natural men, must be crucified before the strength
of sin can be broken in their thoughts. If carnal men by the power of the word
should be so affrighted and terrified from the committing of that sin which
they most love, that they durst never actually return again to it; yet then
their natural corruption would fill their hearts with speculative
uncleanness, and thought-pollutions; their thoughts would still be running
after sin. When the worldly man dies, his thoughts perish; so when the old man
is mortified in us, evil thoughts dye, in respect of their predominant power.

2 Grace purifies our thoughts by filling the mind with the pure and precious
word of God, which is a powerful means to keep out and cast out evil thoughts
I have hid thy word in my heart (in my thoughts, says David) that I might not
sin against thee, Psalm. 119. 11. There is a mavelous power in Gods word to
drive away and scatter ungodly thoughts; they can no more stand before it, then
the Clouds before a strong North Wind. If the word of Christ dwell in our
hearts plenteously, it is impossible that vain thoughts should lodge there. If
our minds be filled with the word, there will be no room for loose profane
thoughts: When rebellious thoughts do rise within us, we shall have this
mighty weapon in readiness to resist and repel them.

When we feel thoughts of unbelief, pride, disobedience, earthlinesse, etc.
begin to stir in us, and to offer themselves, let us try them by the word of
Christ, see how contrary they are to it, and we shall feel them vanish away,
they will not stand to a Trial. This powerful word applied, will shame and
silence them.

But here some precious souls will Oh therefore how can we conclude that we
are truly sanctified, when we feel such swarms of unsanctified thoughts?

For answer whereunto, we must know,

1 Regenerating Grace does not totally abolish sinful corruption, so that it
cease to be in us, while we be in this world; for so long as we have a being
in this earthly body, the body of Romans 7. 23, 24.
sin will have a being in our souls.

2 But grace mortifies sin in respect of that overpowering prevailing operation
which it once had in us, while we were under sin: So that grace does not so
take away evil thoughts that they cease to rise and stir in us; but it casts
them down from their commanding power and prevalency, they do not work with
that impetus strength and efficacy as formerly.

There is in all sanctified persons a new Principle, which always acts
against corrupt thoughts, and never complies with them. Vain impure thoughts
will assault and break into gracious hearts, but they do not lodge there; they
repel them in the very entrance. Their coming in they cannot hinder, but their
lodging they may and must hinder. If thoughts of anger and revenge do break in
upon them, they presently turn them out of doors.

It is the cursed property of profane persons, to give lodging to vain
thoughts, Jerem. 4, 14. Oh Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that
thou may be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?
Hence it is evident,

1 That they who give lodging to vain thoughts, were never yet purged from
their filthiness.

2 That the lodging of vain thoughts in men's hearts, takes away all hope of
salvation.

3 The first work of grace is to purge our hearts from vain thoughts.

What is this lodging of vain thoughts,

It imports these three things.

1 A freeness and opennesse of heart all comers, all kind of guests have
admission and lodging: So the heart of carnal men stands open continually unto
all loose, lawless, wanton, worldly, dissolute and disorderly thoughts, which
have free access, but they are shut against holy motions.

2 Vain thoughts are said to lodge in men's hearts, when they find willing
reception, and welcome entertainment, when there is a closing and complying
with corrupt thoughts.

3 When vain thoughts have quiet resting without reluctance, when they take up
their lodging in men's hearts, and settle there from day to day, there being no
real resistance raised against them.

How may we certainly know that

There be three evident Signs whereby

1 A resolute shutting of the door of our hearts against them; when there is a
sincere settled purpose of heart through the strength of Christ, that we will
not give way to any wicked wandering thoughts, though they offer themselves, we
will not give the least consent to them; and thereupon we set a strong guard at
the door of our hearts to keep out these enemies from entering in. Vain
thoughts do creep into the hearts of sanctified men by the windows of the
soul; sometimes they break open the door upon them through violence of
temptation, but they have no free entrance and admission. When we are made
willing to open to Christ, and entertain him into our hearts, we presently
cast out all vain ungodly thoughts with indignation, and shut the door
against them for ever: And when our darling thoughts shall begin to plead for
themselves, We have been household guests, yea, constant dwellers with you so
many years, and ye have often solaced your selves in us; Oh therefore do not
turn us out without some warning, give us a little longer time, etc. Not an
hour, not a moment, says the sanctified soul, ye have lodged here long
enough, too long within me, ye shall not lodge one moment longer

2 It is a sure sign that evil thoughts do not lodge in us, when there is a
strong resistance raised up, and a continual war maintained against them.
When vain profane thoughts are dispossessed and cast out, they will strive to
re-enter, they will raise war against our souls, to re-gaine their first
power: We must therefore resist them with a steadfast faith, and repel them
with the Sword of the Spirit.

3 It is a clear evidence that vain thoughts do not lodge in us, when their
rising and stirring in our hearts is troublesome and tormenting to us; and the
daily disorder and disobedience of our thoughts is the matter of our grief and
humiliation. Renewed men have a fore-vigilancy, and an after-grief, when they
are overtaken with evil thoughts; their hearts are of another temper and frame
then other men's; they are more resolute about good, and tender about evil.
Carnal men can wallow in open notorious offenses, without remorse or inward
trouble: whereas sanctified souls do sorrow, sigh, and groan under the burden
of vain, irregular thoughts; they are more troubled for a loose thought, then
others are for wicked works.

Regenerate persons do daily wash their hearts from the guilt and filth of
vain thoughts.

1 They do by faith apply the precious blood of Christ Jesus for the cleansing
of their consciences from the guilt of their daily thought-defilements. There
is nothing that more moves godly men every day to fly to the perfect
righteousness of their Savior, then these sinful stirrings of their hearts;
when they feel vain thoughts rising, and find something in themselves always
intising them to sin, and intermingling it self with their best performances.

2 They labor by the power of Gods Spirit to purify their hearts from the
filth of evil thoughts: They do not only sweep their hearts, but they wash
and thoroughly cleanse them continually, Jer. 4. 14.

The house whereinto the unclean spirit Matthew. 12. 43, 44.
reenters, is said to be swept; some grosser evils are swept out; but this
house whereinto the King of Glory enters, and takes up his dwelling, must be
washed.

1 From those darling thought-defilements which stick so close to our
affections.

2 From all unprofitable loose wandering thoughts.

3 From every thought that may any way defile our minds.

The hearts of Moralists and Formal Professors, are only swept, not washed;
they may sweep out thoughts of Atheism, Blasphemy, and such like black and
bloody thoughts, but they take no care to wash their hearts from vain, roving
and earthly thoughts.

So then, it is evident that evil thoughts may rise in the hearts of good men,
but they do not rest there; they will come in, but they are not welcome; they
enter in, but are not entertained; they will break into their hearts, but their
hearts are for ever broken off from them.

There are two corrupt Fountains from whence evil thoughts have their
original rise: That old adversary Satan from without; and the old man Sin
within; both which have a continual influence upon the best men living.

1 The Devil delights to suggest and inject evil into the Saints rather then
others; he knows how torturing and terrifying unholy thoughts are to holy men.

2 There are in renewed men remainders of corruption, which sends out Armies of
vain corrupt thoughts, which war against the new man. Now whiles the cause
remains, the effect cannot totally cease. So that the purest souls cannot be
free from the rising of impure thoughts: Yea, multitudes of vain impertinent
thoughts may violently enter into the hearts of good men, and much disturb and
distract them in prayer, and holy performances, by their eruptions,
interruptions, knockings, and breakings in; but they do not lodge in their
souls, they cast them out of doors with horror and hatred, as Thieves that
come to rob their souls.

There be three special Considerations that may support the Saints in their
continual conflict and combat against evil thoughts.

First, That it is not the coming in of vain thoughts, and their passing through
the heart, but their lodging and Jer. 4. 14.
resting there which is inconsistent with sanctifying grace.

Secondly, Evil thoughts rising up, and breaking into the hearts of the
Saints, if they do not consent to them, but abhor and repel them with hatred
and humiliation, and faith in Christ, they shall not be laid to their charge,
neither should they hinder their cheerful and comfortable walking.

I grant the first stirrings of evil in the mind, proceeding from within out
of our hearts, though not lodged nor allowed of, yet they are our sins, and
must be our sorrows, because they are the fruits and actings of sinful
corruptions remaining in us: But when we are careful to crush these evil
motions at their first rising, and to confess them to God in our daily
prayers, and do fly to the righteousness of Christ for covering, they shall
not be imputed to us, neither should they interrupt our spiritual joy and
peace.

Thirdly, Though evil thoughts may break into the hearts of good men, and
often overpower them, yet there is a vast difference between the evil thoughts
of men regenerate, and men unregenerate: There are three maine Differences.

1 Evil thoughts in carnal men come from natural corruption acting in its
full strength, vigor and violence. They spring from a superfluity, or
overflowing fulness of sin within them: James 1. 21.
As a Fountain casts out her waters. so a corrupt heart casts out wickedness.
Jer. 6. 7.
A Fountain being over-full must have a vent: so the over-abounding fullness
of sin, which is in the hearts of carnal men, will break out into their
thoughts Genesis 6. 5. Psalm. 14. 2.
continually, filling and defiling all their imaginations.

But evil thoughts in renewed men are the issuings forth and stirrings of
corruption, conquered, and crucified, and in a dying condition; this corrupt
fountain dryes up more and more.

2 Evil thoughts proceeding out of 2d Difference.
the hearts of carnal men are not resisted and rejected with detestation, but
received with delight. But gracious souls maintain a continual combat, and
fight against all corrupt thoughts.

I grant there may be some kind of resistance of wicked thoughts in men
unsanctified: But it is

1 Either a mere natural resistance, proceeding from natural conscience,
which abhors and fears some kind of black thoughts; as thoughts of Blasphemy,
Atheism, Self-murder, and such like; or else it is the mere fruit of common
grace, and temporary perfections, such as is found in formal Hypocrites.

2 It is a particular resistance: Unregenerate men may resist some particular
thoughts, some gross notorious thoughts, but they harbor sundry carnal
sensual thoughts, which they feed upon with delight.

3 Their resistance of sinful thoughts is selfish and servile, it is because
of some external misery and dishonorable issue whereunto they lead; they know
that the strength of wicked thoughts may produce wicked works, and wicked works
may produce shame and suffering in the world.

But in all sanctified persons there is a strong, constant, spiritual, and
radical resisiance of all unsanctified Thoughts

1 It Is Universal; they resist every Thought that resists the law of God;
their heart rises up against every imagination that rises up against God.

2 It is radical; the frame and bent of every sanctified heart is strongly set
against all evil, both in thought and affection.

3 It is spiritual: The Saints resist all evil thoughts.

1 Because they dishonor God, and hinder the shining of his glory in their
Thoughts.

2 Because they hinder and hurt them in his glorious service.

3 They fight against their souls.

4 Their spiritual love to God and his Law, moves them to hate vain Thoughts,
Psalm 119. 113.

3 Corrupt Thoughts acting in carnal men, add more strength to their 3d
Difference.
corruption, they increase the strength and activity of sin: But evil thoughts
rising in good men, do tend to the further subduing and weakening of corruption
in them: The more they feel themselves assaulted by sinful thoughts, the more
they seek unto God in the 2 Cor. 12.
use of all holy means for the further mortifying of their sinful corruption:
They pray more fervently, their cries and groans are heightened and increased;
and when they have been overtaken with vain thoughts, they double their
after-vigilancy.

Sixthly, Sanctifying grace inables and inclines us to that spiritual
obedience and service that God requires in our thoughts; it forms and
conformeth our thoughts and imaginations to Gods will, and keeps them in
continual subjection thereunto. This conformity and captivation of the
thoughts of our hearts to the Sovereignty and rules of Grace, is of special
and precious consequence. Men will grant that their words and works must be in
subjection to God, but how few do rightly understand and really practice
thought-obedience?

^f we search the Scriptures, we shall find that God requires the obedience of
our thoughts, as well as of our speeches, and visible actions: We must labor
to bring every thought into a sincere subjection to God. Our thoughts must be
guided by the written Counsel of God, Prove. 20. 18. Establish thy thoughts by
counsel. That is, we must take counsel at the word of God how (...)
to dispose and order our thoughts. We should not conceive a thought in our
minds, unless we have counsel and direction from Gods word.

Renewing Grace that comes into the soul by the preaching of the Gospel, is
effectual to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10. 4, 5. Grace first brings in our thoughts to Christ, and then our words
and works. Every thought of the heart must bow the knee to King Jesus; he must
have his Throne in our thoughts; then he is said to rule in our hearts, when
our aim and endeavor is to order all our thoughts according to the rule of
his word.

The spiritual law of God commands and calls for the love and service of our
thoughts. Matthew. 22. 37. Thou shall M^rk. 12. 30. Luke 10. 27. (...).
love the Lord thy God with all thy thoughts: he must be served with all our
mind; that is, with our thoughts, the actings of our mind.

It was the earnest desire, and endeavor, of David to order his thoughts as
well as his words according to Gods will as in his sight, Psalm. 19. 15. The
words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart shall be to thy will in thy
sight, O Jehovah! This reading I take to be nearest the Hebrew. And so the
Syrick Ad voluntatem thus the interlinear.
reads it, The meditation of my heart shall be according to thy will O Lord.
And so the Arabic, The thought of my heart shall be according to thy will. God
will (...)
accept of nothing but what is according to his revealed will.

But now though Grace do in some measure subdue and subject our thoughts to
Gods will, yet there is still a stiffness and inflexibility remaining in our
minds, so far as they are carnal, they are unwilling to bow to the Scepter of
Christ; and they are apt to rebel against his royal Law, and to go astray
continually; but when our thoughts begin to stray and wander, Grace brings them
in again to the paths of Christ, it lays a solemn charge upon them, not to
wander any more, and binds them to subjection: if ever we will prove our
selves to be savingly sanctified, it must be our chief and continual care to
serve and glorify God in our thoughts, as well as in our words and works; God
must be sanctified in our hearts, and glorified with our Isa. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
21.
souls, by giving up all our thoughts and affections to his will.

There is a thought-service that Jehovah expects and exacts of his people, as
well as a tongue-honour, and worke-service: Oh therefore let us labor to
render withal reverence and zeal unto the Father of spirits, a continual
cheerful thought-service most purely and abundantly, and the rather because it
is so exceeding precious and pleasing to God. There be four things that do
commend and declare the surpassing excellency and preciousnesse of this
thought-worship and service.

1. It flows more immediately from the heart, that that God chiefly desires,
and wherein he principally delights: he calls for our heart as that which
carries the whole man with it: thoughts are the free and immediate productions
of man's heart.

2. No created power can hinder our thoughts from serving God and converses
with him: opportunities, abilities, and means may fail for outward
performances, but the heart is always at leisure and liberty to think
graciously and spiritually. 1. All the powers of this world, yea all the powers
of Hell, cannot hinder a sanctified heart from an invisible fellowship and
fruition of God, with thoughts of sweetest rapture and reverence, of love and
lowliest adoration. 2. They cannot restrain it from bathing it self in that
open fountain the precious blood of Jesus Christ, with thoughts of unspeakable
peace joy and triumph. 3. Nor from closing and clasping about the precious
promises of life, or diving into the unsearchable depths of Grace and mercy,
with thoughts of faith and highest admiration. 4. They cannot hinder a gracious
heart from being as a mountain of incense sending up a spiritual sacrifice of
praisefull admiring thoughts to the God of mercy.

3. This thought-service is the most spiritual service, it is ordinarily full
of spirituallnesse intention and life, because it is nearest the object of
adoration. The streams which are next the wellhead are purest and strongest;
the more spirit and life is in our service, the more precious it is. The best
men, though they may strive to do their best every way, yet they shall find
different degrees in their abilities to perform, and in the actual discharge
of their duties to God: their works do not always answer exactly to their
words; their words cannot fully express the thoughts of their hearts; the
thoughts of their hearts come infinitely short in conceiving of the excellency
of Gods majesty, mercy, might, and glorious perfections.

The thoughts of sanctified souls laying hold with immediate and nearest
embracements upon that al-glorious object, the Lord God, and his sweetest
attributes, give him the glory of his infinite excellencies with more life,
heartinesse, and heavenlinesse, then their words or actions can do.

4. A constant thought-service is the surest sign of heart-sincerity, John 4.
24. That worship that is most spiritual has most truth of heart in it: If
men's change in words and works and all visible carriage were angelical; yet if
their thoughts were not brought into subjection to Gods will, they were still
limbs of Satan. A constant striving to subject all our thoughts to Christ is
the most sound and undeceiving evidence of our uprightness: this inward
thought-service being secret and invisible, is clothed with more certain
sincerity, and has a more special acceptance with God.

Seventhly, Sanctifying Grace fits man's heart for divine meditations, and fills
it with holy heavenly thoughts; it begets an inward fitness and freeness to
entertain sanctified thoughts, and brings in fullness of good thoughts; by
corrupt nature our minds have not only an emptiness of all holy thoughts, but
also an unfitness and averseness to take in holy thoughts: carnal men are
unfit, and unwilling, to set themselves to think of God and divine mysteries,
to enter into serious thoughts of their sins, of their last end, of the last
judgment: they have no mind to think what they have done, what they are
doing, or what they shall do: they would have God depart from their thoughts,
and all Job 21.
thoughts of a holy God and his ways depart from them.

But when sanctifying Grace falls upon us, it implants a freeness and aptness
in our hearts, so far as they are renewed, to holy spiritual meditations; it
brings in heavenly principles which are the seeds of heavenly thoughts, and
thereby the mind is actuated and inclined to godly meditations.

2. Grace fills our hearts with sanctified thoughts. Every good man has a good
Treasure in his heart: that is, a Mat. 13. 35.
Treasure of Grace to supply his thoughts, a stock of precious Truth to fill
and furnish his thoughts continually. Psalm. 1. 2. It is made the property of a
godly man, That his will is in the law of Jehovah, and in his Law he does
meditate, Psalm. ^.
or shall meditate; that is, usually meditateth day and night, or by day and by
night; that is, continually. The Hebrew word here (for meditate) imports (...)
study and exercise of the mind in musing.

1. A gracious man's will is in the Law of God by way of conformity and holy
affection. 2. His mind is upon Gods Law and Doctrine by continual meditations:
he spends much time, day and night, in thinking upon the precious precepts and
promises of God, the purity and excellency of his word, and the mavelous
mysteries manifested therein. The thoughts of sanctified men are of a far
more heavenly temper and higher nature, then the largest heart of the best
unregenerate man does or can possibly comprehend: formal professors may have
their minds busied in the highest considerations which nature, art, morality,
or temporary perfections can attain unto; they may sometimes with joy think
upon the promises of life, the happiness of the Saints, salvation that is in
Christ, the glory of Heaven, and the like; though these thoughts never have any
root or long residence in their hearts, they quickly glide away; the word of
God is not rooted and implanted in their thoughts, they are far from making it
their exercise, to meditate upon the Law of God day and night.

The thoughts of formal hypocrites do feed most upon the comforts of this
present world and the sweetness of their darling sin: they have a full taste
and present feeling of the pleasures of their sweet sin, and present posession
of earthly contentments; but no real and sound assurance by saving faith, and
universality of spiritual obedience, of the joys and glorious things of
Heaven: and therefore they do greedily follow and fix upon the present things
of this life, with consent of their erring judgment, delight of heart, and
most of their thoughts: but as for spiritual affairs, the glory of God, that
one necessary thing, the state of their souls, etc. These things take up the
thoughts of hypocrites, but at reversion, by accident and very seldom: and when
they they come into their hearts, their entertainment is very cold and strange,
their abode short, and while they stay they are apprehended and enjoyed with
much weariness and weakness.

It is the special prerogative of sanctified men to have their hearts filled
with holy meditations: the thoughts are never so well and welcome to their
hearts, as when they are taken up with the deep mysteries of Gods word, and
with a holy wisdom studying how they may exalt Christ, and enlarge his
kingdom in themselves and others. That this is no idea or idle abstraction
that I now propose, appears pregnantly and plentifully in David's practice, who
notwithstanding the strong allurements ordinarily incident to Princes Courts,
though the cares and government of a large kingdom laiy upon him, and that he
was still followed with troubles and vexations which might much have disturbed
and distracted his thoughts, yet the Law of God did still principally take up
his thoughts, and that day and night, as himself professes, Psalm. 119. 97. Oh
how love I thy Law, it is my meditation continually. His thoughts did (...)
feast and fill themselves all the day long upon the glorious truths of Gods
word with sweetest satisfaction: this is the practice of all sanctified men and
women, they meditate upon the word of Christ most contentedly and continually
because they love it far before and above all earthly excellencies.

1. They think upon the glorious precepts of the royal Law because therein
Gods holy will is manifested.

2. Their thoughts do feed upon the exceeding great and precious promises of
the Gospel, because in them with special security are conveyed to them all the
rich treasures of mercy and forgiveness, of spiritual joy and peace, light and
life, Grace and glory.

3. They spend their choycest thoughts upon that rich and royal pearl Jesus
Christ, their daily thoughts with greatest joyfulnes and oftenest meditation
run after it and sweetly refresh themselves with the glory and comfort of it.

If a poor man upon the way should find a precious orient pearl, with what
greediness would his eyes gaze upon it? his excess of joy would easily command
and confine his sight to such a rare enriching object, how would his eyes and
thoughts be taken therewith? Even so after a man by the hand of saving faith
has laid sure hold upon the pearl of great price, Christ, with all his
fulness of Grace and glory; the heart is presently so filled with holy
affection and admiration, that for ever after it spends the most, the dearest,
and the noblest thoughts upon this heavenly pearl: and the thoughts once one
the winge are so cheared raised and taken with the spiritual beauty thereof,
that they follow and fly up with continual increase of fervency and longing,
until they come unto the clear vision, and plenary possession of it in
heavenly glory, and those endless joys of the life to come.

4. The Saints do solace and satiate their hearts with thinking on that
surpassing great love and superabundant Grace of God appearing to their souls
in Jesus Christ: they are never so sweetly satisfied, as when they are
meditating upon the excellent beauty of Gods glorious being, his infinite
goodness, and immeasurable greatness, and those bottomless treasures that
are hidden in Christ.

5. They are much in the fore-thoughts of the glorious things to come. That
honor, holiness, and happiness that the Saints shall have with Christ in the
world to come; those rivers of heavenly pleasures, and plenitude of joy, that
they shall enjoy in Gods presence for evermore.

But the thoughts of all unregenerate men are earthly sensual and sinful;
they are commonly either rooting in the earth, or drowned in pleasures, or
running after preferment, or ranging up and down idly and prophanly, or
fruitlesly melancholy.

Wherein do the good thoughts of

It is evident that unsound professors

Men may begin to have better thoughts of the Saints, and of the holy path then
formerly; and worse thoughts of themselves and their own ways, yea thoughts
against their old ways; yet there is a vast difference between the good
thoughts of renewed men, and of the best kind of unrenewed men.

1. They differ in the principle from whence they rise. The good thoughts of
formal hypocrites proceed either from outward principles, as

1 From the convincing power of Gods word which may fall upon them with that
conviction and terror, that it may somewhat alter their thoughts and
affections, and produce thoughts of humiliation, of reforming their ways etc.
Their thoughts may taste of the good word, though they cannot feed upon it.

2 From the strength of afflictions, which may work in them thoughts of
seeking God, and returning to him.

3 The spirit of God casts in many Psalm. 78. Hos. 5. ult, and Chap. 6. 1, 2, 4.
good thoughts into their hearts. Or 2. The good thoughts of formalists and
temporaries proceed from principles of nature improved assisted and raised by
the addition of common gifts and graces Heb. 6.
of the holy spirit.

But the good thoughts of sanctified men proceed from a new living principle
implanted in their hearts from the holy Law put into their minds. Heb. 8. 2d
Difference.


2. Good thoughts do not lodge with any settled abode in the hearts of
hypocrites; they pass as strangers through their minds, they are as a burden
to them. If their thoughts do sometimes glance upon divine objects, they are
quickly off again; good thoughts in such men do spend their life in their
birth, as they arise, so they glide and pass away without any spiritual fruit
or profit to their own souls.

But holy thoughts in holy men have their constant abode, they are their daily
exercise and delight; the word of God dwells in their thoughts.

Eighthly, Sanctifying grace settles, fastens and keeps the mind upon good
thoughts: there is a strange unsteadinesse and unsetlednesse in our hearts so
far as they are fleshly: when they have taken in and entertained good thoughts,
yet they will not be long intent on them, unless they be fixed and established
by an Act of Grace. There is the greatest reason that divine spiritual things
should attract and draw out the attention and intention of our minds. God is a
most glorious soule-satisfying object, the thoughts of whose excellencies
should swallow up all other thoughts: yet we may find by sad experience that
our minds are apt to be most unsteady in our thoughts of God.

2. Our thoughts are apt to be unstable and unsettled in all Religious
performances: As

1 In prayer, when all earthly impertinent thoughts should stand furthest off,
yet how often do they creep in, and carry away our minds from God, and from
attending the present service.

2 When we are hearing Gods word how unfixed are our thoughts? how often do
they run out to worldly unsuitable objects? But so far as renewing Grace
prevails and possesses our hearts, it heals and mortifies this
unsteadinesse, and keeps our thoughts close to divine objects.

2. Grace puts us upon the careful and constant use of all holy means and
helps for the settling and fixing of our thoughts upon good things.

What means must we use to fix and

1. Cry unto the God of all Grace,

2. In our daily meditations let us present variety of good objects to our
thoughts, that so our minds may walk from truth to truth, from promise to
promise, from one precious object to another. Variety of fresh objects do much
refresh the mind.

3. We must carefully guard our outward senses, that they wander not after
vanities: our eyes and ears are often the occasions of our thought-wandrings.

Ninthly, Sanctifying Grace sets up a holy Regiment in our thoughts and
imaginations, it sets bounds to them, and implants a heavenly wisdom to rule
and overruled them: this is the peculiar prerogative of sanctified me and
special character of sincerehearts For,

1. They alone do hate and abhor idle loose wandering thoughts, of which
formal professors either take no notice at all, or not much to heart.

2. Regenerate men do establish (as it were) a gracious Government amongst
their thoughts, to keep out confusion, disorder, loosnesse, and rebellion: they
set bounds and limits to the multitudes of thoughts and imaginations that daily
arise: they labor to keep them within the compass of divine rules by erecting
a holy order of rule and Government amongst them: They confine their Thoughts
to a reverent and feeling meditation upon Gods word and works; to a care of
conscionable managing the affairs of their calling.

Only sometimes, but sparingly, with many Cautions, exceptions, and
seasonablenesse, they let them out to honest Recreation.

Whatsoever Thought is wandering without this compass, or within it unsincere
and selfish, is sinful and exorbitant. If the Saints take any Thought
straggling without these limits, or any inticers to vanities and impertinencies,
any obtruders and disturbers of the holy order and peace of their Thoughts,
they presently apprehend them by the vigilant eye of their spiritual wisdom;
they examine them by the Law of God, and condemn them in the Court of an
enlightened conscience, and so cut them off in time by the power of Grace, and
the sword of the spirit, by repelling and crushing them at their first rising
in their hearts.

Many flatter themselves from a conceit of an impossibility of ruling their
Thoughts and imaginations, and are ready to lay all upon natural weakness,
etc. They think it impossible to order and overpower their Thoughts, being so
diverse in kind, sudden in their motion, and so innumerable in themselves.

But such must know, That if we be truly sanctified, we have a new light, life,
and might from Christ, whereby we are enabled to do all that God Commands,
evangelically. Sanctified persons have

1 Such a light as discovers not only dunghills, but motes themselves, even
the least flying imaginations, and abaseth their souls for them.

2 They have a new Divine strength whereby they are able by degrees to subdue
and subject their Thoughts to Gods will: And if vain loose Thoughts press in
upon them (as they are as busy as little Flies in summer) yet they will not
lodge them, but they cast them out with hatred and horror.

Tenthly, Sanctifying Grace implants ability and aptness in the mind to gather
and extract holy profitable Thoughts out of all objects that are presented to
it from all things that we see or hear. We are by nature barren and empty of
heavenly Thoughts; but Grace coming in does spiritualize our minds, and the
mind so far as it is spiritual spiritualizeth all objects, ordinary occasions,
and occurencies, turning them into heavenly, spiritual Thoughts, and useful
Meditations.

1 A renewed heart is ready to raise holy Thoughts out of all providentiall
Acts of God. It is the property of godly wise men to Observe the wonderful
Psalm. 107. last.
works that God does for the sons of men, and to draw forth Divine meditations
out of all Divine dispensations. The mercies of God do raise and occasion
thankful obedient Thoughts in their hearts.

2 Gracious hearts do extract humble meek submitting Thoughts out of 2 Samuel
16. 11.
all sufferings, crosses, losses, and reproaches that befall them. What
precious, praisefull, and contented Thoughts did Job raise out of his
sufferings? But Job, Chap. 1. and 2.
carnal men extract Thoughts of discontent, murmuring, and complaint out of
their sufferings.

3 Grace teaches the Saints to draw forth and distill holy, spiritual, and
profitable Thoughts out of all Creatures that are presented to their eyes. When
they look up to the Heavens, their hearts are raised to think of the infinite
glory, wisdom, and power of God.

2 When they see the Sun, they think of the Sun of righteousness, and his
plenitude.

3 When they behold fruitful Trees, they think of the Trees of righteousness
that bring forth their fruit in due Psalm. 1.
season.

4 When they see springs of water, they are drawn to think of the well of
lives, and water of life.

5 When they look upon their daily bread, they think of the bread of life.

6 When they behold the grass, and flowers of the field, they take occasion to
consider the brevity and uncertainty of man's life.

4 Sanctified persons do strive to spiritualize all earthly sensible things in
their Thoughts. They make their fancy serviceable to them in spiritualls. When
fancy shall present earthly honors, pleasures, profits to their Thoughts, they
take advantage thereby to raise their hearts higher, and to think thus with
themselves, What is this to the true honor, to those enduring riches of glory,
and those Rivers of purest pleasures prepared in heaven? A sanctified heart
will make every Creature a ladder to heaven, by extracting heavenly Thoughts:
It turns earthly things into heavenly Meditations: Here is a large field for
our imagination to walk in, with much spiritual gain.

If a feast be so refreshing, what is the continual feast of a good
conscience? Pro. 15. 15. What are the spiritual revivements of the Gospel? If
the meeting of friends be so comfortable, what will the meeting together of the
Saints in heaven be? If a dark Dungeon be so loathsome, what is the eternal
Dungeon of darkness? While we are in the body, the soul has not only a
necessary, but a holy use of the fancy, and of sensible things whereupon our
imagination works. What is the use of the Sacraments, but to help our souls
by our senses, and our faith by imagination? Sometimes the ministering of some
excellent Thought from what we hear or see, proves a great advantage of
spiritual good to our souls.

Herein the power of sanctifying grace appears, it makes our hearts fruitful
in these heavenly extractions: All objects, accidents, ordinary occurencies and
opportunities, do occasion holy useful thoughts in sanctified souls.

11 Renewing Grace inables us to discern the various times and seasons of holy
Thoughts, and wisely to suite them thereunto. Good Thoughts are then the fruits
of Grace, when they are seasonable, and suitable to all occasions offered by
God. The dew of sanctifying Grace falling upon us, does sweetly season and
soften our hearts, and puts them into a true spiritual temper; and then our
Thoughts are active and addressed with holy affections to apply themselves to the
condition of the times, and variety of occasions offered for the advancement of
Gods glory, and the advantage of our own souls. As

1 In sad sorrowful Times, if Gods judgments be threatened out of the word, or
executed from heaven upon the Nation or place where we dwell. When the Church
wears her mourning Garment, when iniquity, blasphemy, errors, and damnable
doctrines do overflow throughout the Nation, in such black and dismal days,
the thoughts of sanctified hearts are suited and sorted answerably, they then
willingly entertain Thoughts of sorrow and sadness, trouble and trembling,
horror and humiliation.

2 In good and gladsome times, when mercy and salvation are wisely and
seasonably proclaimed out of the word of life, when Divine truth has a free
passage, spreads and prospers, when the Churches of Christ are in peace and
purity, etc. they are then full of lightsome joyful, and thankful Thoughts.

But the Thoughts of formal Professors, though they are filled with gladness,
or sadness, according to the increase or decrease of their earthly comforts;
yet they are not much wrought upon by spiritual occurrences and occasions,
either by National mercies or judgments; either by the prospering of the
Churches Cause, and truth of Christ, or by the abounding of error and iniquity
in the places where they dwell, so they may be free from suffering in their
own persons and outward comforts, and their private temporal felicity be not
endangered by public judgments, their Thoughts continue dull and formal,
without any extraordinary impression.

3 Grace forms and frames our thoughts suitable to that holy spiritual rest
that we keep upon the Lords Day, which is our Christian Sabbath. This is a
maine trial of the sanctification of our hearts, and sincerity of our
thoughts, when we do carefully and cheerfully entertain and observe the holy
Sabbath with a seasonable suitable frame of sanctified Thoughts

1 The Sabbath Day is as it were the Fayre-day of the soul, wherein it should
furnish it self with new spiritual strength, with more knowledge, grace, and
comfort in Gods Ordinances.

2 It is the spiritual Feast Day wherein our thoughts should feed and feast
upon those glorious joys, heavenly pleasures, and happy rest which never shall
end, upon the precious Promises of the Gospel. Upon this holy resting day our
Thoughts should be raised up to that rest of eternity that our souls and
bodies shall enter into, when we shall fully rest from all our labors,
troubles, temptations, and turmoiles, when we shall sin no more, and sorrow no
more. This is to spiritualize the Sabbath, when our Thoughts do solace and
satiate themselves in God our Resting Place, and in the Resting Place promised
by God.

Sanctified persons do not only cease from doing their own ways, and Isa.
58. 13.
seeking their own wills, and speaking a vain word on that day: but also in
some good measure they make it the very delight of their hearts, and the
constant work of their thoughts, to consecrate the Christian Sabbath as
glorious to the Lord. They do not only give rest to their bodies, from
worldly business and servile works of their calling; but also they empty their
hearts, and disburden their Thoughts of all earthly cares, that so they may
wholly attend and entertain the holy motions of Gods spirit, and spend their
Thoughts in holy extraordinary meditations, suiting the holy Feast Day of their
souls.

I grant, that the holiest men living come short of that height of
thought-holinesse, and uprightness, that the Royal Law requires: But

1 It is the purpose, bent, and longing desire of their hearts to keep the
Lords day holy in all their Thoughts; their aim is to order every Thought
according to the Law of the Christian Sabbath.

2 They cry unto God to fill and sanctify their Thoughts.

3 They do earnestly endeavor after that holy heavenly frame of Thoughts that
is suitable to the Lords holy day.

4 They have a fore-vigilancy, and an after sorrow; if at any time they be
turned awry from this Thought-holinesse, by company, or their own corruption,
they are much grieved for it, they repent, and seek unto God to pardon their
sins past, and to possess their hearts with more conscience, care and
circumspection for time to come. But formal Professors though they may on the
Lords day abstain from their servile labors, from their ordinary sins and
vanities, and may outwardly and customarily perform Religious duties, and may
have some good thoughts suitable to the bare solemnity of the time, yet they
cannot possibly make the Sabbath the delight of their hearts, as is required;
they cannot keep a Sabbath in Isa. 58. 13.
their thoughts, by holy heavenly meditations suitable to the spiritual rest of
that day; they cannot separate their thoughts from earthly affairs and
sensual contentments; they cannot keep them off from week-dayes businesses,
nor keep them in to Divine meditations on the Lords day. The best of
unregenerate men cannot endure an entire and exact keeping of the Sabbath, it
is not a Jubilee to their hearts, and the joy of their Thoughts.

12 Grace teaches us to fill up the vacuities or empty places of our Time with
holy thoughts and heavenly meditations.

For the clearing up of this truth, take knowledge of these four things.

1 The whole time of a Christians life is a time of doing the will of God.
There is no time for idle irregular thoughts or actions; there is no time for
sinning, no time for the mind to stand idle.

2 There be certain pauses and cessation times wherein we sit down and are not
employed in body or mind, as at other times. We have our vacations, our
leisure-times, wherein we are not busied in the work of our Calling, or in
Religious duties, as prayer, reading, etc.

3 At such times commonly we have our worst Thoughts: Our minds are never wors
employed, then when we are out of employment: Our vacant times are our most
dangerous times; for then vain earthly exorbitant Thoughts do most break in
upon us, and most strongly prevail. These are the times wherein sinful
thoughts, and Satanicall injections do most intrude and throng in upon us.

4 Grace coming into our souls begets a holy care and constant endeavor to
fill up these empty times with heavenly and profitable Thoughts. It is a maine
duty in our exact walking, and a special act of true wisdom, to redeem these
vacant times from vanity, and iniquity, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. See that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because the
days are evil.

These empty spare times are opportunities Col 4 5.
for holy spiritual Thoughts; Therefore it must be our wisdom

1 To redeem these vacant Times from sin, Satan, and the world, that have so
often enslaved them, and have filled them, up with loose profane Thoughts.

2 It must be our continual care to fill up our leisure spare times with
sanctified meditations. Spiritual things that really conduce to the service of
God, and most nearly concern us in respect of our eternal estates, are enough
to fill up all our Thoughts in our vacant seasons, if every hour had the
length of a day. They that do not wisely redeem their leisure times, and spend
them in Divine profitable meditations, are the greatest spentriffs and wasters
in the world; for time once past can never be recalled; opportunity being lost
can never be regained.

13 Sanctifying Grace teaches us to spend our solitary times in holy precious
and profitable Thoughts.

1 In our solitary seasons, when we are alone by our selves, withdrawn from
all company, we have the fittest freest opportunities for Divine meditations,
and thought-conversings with God.

2 At such times we are in greatest danger to be beset and assaulted with vain
foolish noisome Thoughts from the flesh within us, and with Satanicall
injections from without; therefore Grace being implanted in our souls, does
quicken us to a constant practice of these three Rules, which are of precious
consequence.

1 It teaches us to single out some special Divine profitable matter whereon
to fix our Thoughts all the while we are alone, that thereby

1 We may prevent and avoid the ordinary intrusion of idle impure Thoughts, and
impertinent wanderings.

2 That we may not be guilty of woeful trifling out and wasting our precious
time.

3 That we may keep our minds and all the powers of the soul in holy action
and employment, that our Thoughts may not grate and grind one another, and so
wast themselves in a barren melancholy. Whenever we are alone, we have a fit
opportunity to reflect upon our selves, to commune with our own hearts, to
enter into serious Thoughts of expostulation and examination concerning our
spiritual estates, Oh my soul! how stands the case with thee in respect of
thine eternal estate? What assurance have thou of propriety in Christ Jesus,
of thy pardon by his blood, of thy new birth by his Spirit? What growth do
thou find in grace? What weakening of sin, what strengthening of graces do
thou find since the receiving of the Lords Supper? What have thou gained by
such a Sermon? What victory have thou obtained over that particular sin which
most assaulteth thee? How have thou served God in and with thy house?

2 In our alone times we must consider what special sins do most fight
against our souls, and interrupt our peace, and cry unto God with
extraordinary intention of spirit, for mortifying Grace.

3 We have now fit opportunity to fall into praisefull admiring Thoughts of
God, his superabundant grace and mercy, wisdom and all sufficiency, etc. or
into some other holy meditation.

4 After we have spent some time in heavenly meditation, we may busy our
Thoughts about some lawful affairs of our Calling.

2 Grace teaches us to withstand 2d Rule.
and repel with all godly jealousy and care two dangerous evils.

1 Thoughts of pleasures from our youthful sins, and unregenerate time, which
at such solitary seasons are ready to make re-entry and return into our souls,
and do strive with much eagerness, being assisted with the Devils craft, to
re-insnare and pollute us with sensual filth and folly, and renewed
guiltiness. It is a provoking sin to Ne redeamus in cord in Aegyptum hoc enim
monet Apostolas, Romans 6. 21. quem ergo fructum, etc. Augustine.
think of old defilements with new delight; this is to return into Egypt in
our hearts.

In this case Grace makes us exceeding fearful and vigilant, least the Devil
transforming himself should delude us in the glory of an Angel; and by the
flashes of his counterfeit light, cast into our hearts some secret sparks of
lust; for in our solitary musings we may recall and think of the abominations
of our former ways, especially of that sin that was our darling delight, upon
purpose to lament, bewail, and abhor our selves for them, thinking to be more
seriously humbled for them; and yet without a very watchful eye, the Devil
casting in some secret Thoughts of wonted sinful sweetness; That which was
intended by us for a renewing and re-acting of repentance, Recordari volo
transactas foed^tates meas, and carnales cor ruptiones anin a meae, non quo ^
eas amem, sed ut amem Te Deus meus. Aug. Conses. lib. 2.
may cursedly end in the re-acting of old sins, and re-injoyment of filthy
pleasures in our Thoughts Grace coming into men's souls breaks the very heart
of that sweet sin of their carnal estate, and their hearts from all
delightful Thoughts thereof. And as in a besieged City, where the greatest and
most dangerous breach is made, there the Inhabitants concur with chiefest care
and highest resolution to fortify and make resistance: Even so, since the
Saints know that before their calling, their delightful darling sin did most
fearfully wast their souls, and wound their consciences: they set their
thoughts with strongest resolution, and much indignation to resist and repel,
abominate and abandon all delightful thoughts of that sin.

2 Grace makes men careful at such solitary times that they do not act any
new sin in their thoughts and imaginations, as sins of speculative wantonness,
worldliness, ambition, revenge, discontent, dishonouring Gods providence, by
unnecessary mistrustfull forecastings of fearful accidents upon themselves,
families, posterity, goods, and Nation, etc. Some Sons of Belial there are, who
make no conscience of acting all manner of uncleanness, and horrible
pollutions in their hearts, by the mere work of imagination: Yea, many who
carry a counterfeit heaven in their outward behavior, do harbor execrable
hells in their thoughts.

3 Sanctifying Grace teaches us to 3d Rule.
make use of these solitary times as golden opportunities for Divine conference
and comfortable converse with our God in secret. It draws up our thoughts to a
summary view, and serious consideration of those great mercies that God
multiplies upon us; and fills our hearts with many joyful, lowly, and most
thankful thoughts. Grace seasons some part of our solitary time with holy
musings and soule-talkings with God; and this is a clear character whereby the
Saints are differenced from the best of carnal men.

Moral persons and formal professors cannot thus fill up their solitary times
with holy Meditations; yea, of all things they love not to be alone for
thought-speakings with God, and with their own hearts. They may affect
solitariness upon some private business, for the more profound contriving of
worldly matters, for a more free, but filthy acting of heart-adulteries, and
thought-fornication: to feed upon dull and fruitless melancholy, to let their
thoughts range and run riot into a world of vain imaginations: But to be alone
only for this purpose, that the mind may more freely fix upon Divine objects,
and impartially enquire into the spiritual estate of their souls, they cannot
they will not endure it: But godly men delight to be alone, that they may be
more with God, and have more freedom for godly thoughts.

14 Sanctifying Grace teaches us to watch over our thoughts continually, with
holy wisdom and godly jealousy. Our hearts are like to a besieged City,
liable every moment, both to inward commotions and risings, and outward
assaults.

1 The fountain of Original corruption, though the main stream and bloody
issue be stayed and stopped by the sanctifying power of Christ's death, yet it
does still bubble up rebelliously, into vain loose impure thoughts.

2 The Devil watches all opportunities to cast in his fiery darts to set our
thoughts all in combustion, and to fill them with fiery lusts; therefore we
ought to set a watchful Guard over our thoughts, and Keep our hearts above
Prove. 4. 23.
all keeping, as we are commanded. We must Guard and keep our thoughts more
then any thing that is watched or guarded, whether City, house, or treasure:
The eye of vigilance should never be off from our hearts. The thoughts are the
entry of man's heart, and therefore must be kept with a strong guard. As they
that would keep out Thieves, do strongly guard the entry of their house, so
they that would preserve their hearts from theevish lusts, must carefully keep
their thoughts. If this entry be unguarded, there is a free passage for Devils
and all defiling sins to enter into men's souls.

The hearts of moral men and formal professors lies commonly open without
special guard and settled government: Though their words may be watched over,
and their outward actions reformed, yet they cannot endure the restraint and
regulation of their inward thoughts and imaginations. The continual
confinement and keeping in their thoughts by a narrow watch, is a yoke that
they cannot bear. It may be out of Principles of natural light, and some
general apprehensions of the powers of the world to come, they may be so far
careful about their thoughts, that if some kind of black and monstrous
thoughts do rise up, enticing them to gross and infamous sins, which would
bring an odious blot upon their names, or danger in the world, or breed much
terror and torture in their consciences, they presently set against them,
abandon and expel them.

Thus formalists may have a slight superficial mis-guided care, and oversight
of their thoughts at some times, but they cannot make it their chief and
continual care to watch over all their thoughts at all times, because the
Mystery of iniquity working in their thoughts, was never yet opened to them by
the power and light of saving grace. The keeping of their hearts is to them the
last and least of a thousand cares.

But all sanctified persons make it the greatest care, and one of their
chiefest Christian labors, to guard their hearts, and guide their thoughts,
and to keep them always in a holy humble heavenly frame. Our hearts will not
keep in order and frame one moment, without a strict watch and guard. The
hearts of careless men are like a River that has no bounds nor banks, which
runs out every way. We may take a view of this sanctified watch that grace sets
over the thoughts, in these five Points.

Grace teaches us to keep a continual watch over our thoughts.

1 That we may timely discover, and wisely defeat the Devils stratagems and
policies, whereby he labors to take and corrupt our thoughts.

1 Sometimes he assaults us by suggestions raised from the occasions and
advantage of

1 Our natural Constitution and temper.

2 Of our outward temporal condition, either prosperity or poverty, honor or
contempt.

3 Of our infancy or growth, weakness or strength in Christianity

4 Of our particular calling, company, place where we dwell, or the like.

2 Sometimes Satan sets upon us with his own more fearful immediate
injections, which are diverse. Sometimes he comes add rest in his own
likeness, and hellish blackness, as when he casts into man's mind thoughts of
distrust, and doubting about the truth of heaven, and of the heavenly word of
God, concerning the certainty of the Divine Being, of Gods providence and
omniscience. For such hellish horrible thoughts as these against God and his
glorious truth, are sometimes offered to the most sanctified souls: But they
do not wrestle or dispute with these hell-bred thoughts; they do not muse
upon them, they do not reason and parley with them, nor pore upon them; for
thence perhaps would follow some inclinations to Atheism, profaneness, and
other fearful consequences. But at the very first approach and appearing of
those monstrous thoughts, they abandon and abominate them to the very pit of
hell, whence they came: They cry unto God against them, and are much humbled by
them, and thence clearly see they are none of theirs, but the Devils

2 If the Devil prevail not in this ugly black shape, he at other times puts
on the glory of an Angel, and perhaps may bring into our minds good things, but
unseasonably, that thereby he may deprive us of some greater good; as at the
Preaching of the word, he will cast into our minds good meditations, that so he
may take off our attention, and take away the precious seed from us. With these
and a thousand more such like vexations and sore troubles in their thoughts,
Satan pursues and perplexeth the people of Christ.

2 Sanctifying Grace sets a strong watch over our hearts to resist and repel
all delightful thoughts of old sins, that our souls be not re-infected with
the remembrance of former sinful pleasures; for as often as we think upon the
passages and circumstances of sins past, with a new delight, our souls are
defiled with a new stain, and filled with more guiltiness. The sensual
sweetness of men's bosom sins has taken such plenary possession of their
affections in the time of their ignorance, that it will be tempting and
soliciting of the Saints with continual baits and allurements, that if it
cannot draw them to the re-committing of the outward act, yet it will strongly
entice to the enjoyment of it in their thoughts: And if they be not exceeding
watchful continually, it will presently ensnare and take their thoughts.

Here then is the difficult act of holy wisdom, and watchfullnesse over the
thoughts, that we have learned to abhor and repel all allurements of old
sinful pleasures, and to smother the very first motions that would draw us to
delightful thoughts thereof, by considering of the many wounds those sins have
formerly given to Christ, and to our own souls. This is a sure evidence of
much growth in grace, when we are able to think of old sins without new
delight, when we can represent them to our minds only for renewing of
repentance, and deeper humiliation, and then dismiss them with loathing and
hatred. It is one of the Devils deepest deceits and designs, whereby sometimes
he is too hard for the wisest Saints, he labors to corrupt their affections
with the thoughts of the bosom sin of their carnal estate.

3 Grace sets a continual watch over the thoughts, to discover the first
stirrings of sin in our hearts, and so to crush and crucify all evil thoughts
in their first rising: It teaches us to hold a waking jealous eye over those
many baits and lures which come from remaining corruption; and to repel and
suppress every exorbitant thought which draws to sin at the first moving
thereof.

Sanctified persons do labor by all means to stop and stifle the first
sinful sensual thought, and to crush these young Cockatrices while they are
in hatching, to mortify sin at its first appearing in their thoughts. They
know full well, that if they do not smother and surprise evil thoughts at
their first stirring in their minds, they will presently corrupt their
understanding, the understanding their wills, the will the affections, and
their affections once enraged, and having the reins (like wild Horses) will
carry them headlong into abundance of sins. Oh what a world of mischief and
misery do men bring upon themselves by giving way to the first wicked thought?
Sin is like Eliah his cloud, at the first small, but afterward it covers the
whole heaven: Deeply then does it concern us with jealousy and trembling,
narrowly and continually to watch and take notice of the first motions of our
hearts, to tread down evil thoughts as soon as they arise, not suffering them
to stay or take any place in our minds. We must shut the door against vain
thoughts, and not give them the least entrance: We must not admit them, and
then dispute with them.

Sinful thoughts are the forerunners of much sin coming after: Men had never
come to such a height of sin, if evil thoughts had not led the way; they
prepare the way, they open the door and let in all other sins. Corrupt thoughts
are of a most contagious nature, they are men's sins, snares, and scourges, in
that their hearts are affected and infected with them: All the evil which is
in their affections, actions, and speeches, begins in their thoughts: That
which is last in their work, is first in their thought. Sin is conceived (...)
vel (...) Joma. Col. 1.
in their minds, before it is brought forth into practice. The Devil cannot
work his will upon men's affections, or prevail over the will but by the
thoughts.

1 A sinful thought is cast into their mind.

2 This evil thought begins to draw the heart aside from the consideration of
Gods all-searching eye, to the sight and survey of the pleasures and profits of
sin.

3 It having the heart now by it self, allures, inticeth, and persuades it to
consent, holding a conference with the will about the sensual sweetness and
contentment which is to be found in earthly pleasures, riches, honors.

4 Then the will entertaines the evil motion, consents and complies; and now
sin is completed and finished in their hearts, though it never break forth
outwardly.

5 Their affections add heat and strength, their heart travels with iniquity,
and so by the help of opportunity sin is brought forth in their visible
conversations: Then follows the often acting the same sin with delight, whence
the heart of man is woefully hardened, and totally turned into sin, and so the
sinner now fitted for destruction. If we do not stop and stifle sin when it
first stirs in our thoughts, we are in danger of falling by degrees into the
depth of sin, and we know not whether ever we shall stop or stay until we come
to the depth of hell.

Therefore we must watch to discover and suppress every evil thought at its
first moving, especially those which are most fundamental, which are the
principal roots out of which others do rise, as doubting, questioning
thoughts of Gods providence, and care of his children, of his omniscience,
omnipresence, justice, etc. Thoughts of deferring duties, slighting Ordinances:
Thoughts against the necessity of circumspect walking, etc. When these Ephesians.
5. 15.
and such like Atheistical thoughts and principles of Satan's, do take place
in men's hearts, they keep out good thoughts, and block up their souls against
the entrance of soule-saving truths, and do corrupt all their thoughts and
ways.

4 Sanctifying Grace sets a watch over our thoughts in the performance of all
holy duties.

1 To keep out all loose wandering wicked thoughts that they do not enter into
distract and disturb us in Gods work; therefore we are commanded to watch unto
prayer, and in prayer, to watch and pray. We must watch in hearing Gods word,
set a strong Guard at the door of our hearts, and the windows of the soul,
that no worldly distracting thoughts come into take off the attention and
intention of our minds in good performances.

2 To keep out unseasonable impertinent good thoughts in religious
performances. Thoughts materially good, when they break their ranks, and come
into the mind disorderly, out of their due season and place, are sinful. We
are apt to think of good things unseasonably, and unsuitably to the present
service; as when we are in the act of hearing Gods word, or prayer, some good
thing that we had heard or read formerly, some good note that we had forgotten,
will now readily offer it self to our thoughts, whereby our minds are
distracted, diverted, and carried away from the present performance, and our
good works weakened and corrupted.

2 This mis-placing of good thoughts proceeds from our corrupt Natures, whereby
we are apt to fix our thoughts upon any thing rather then what God at present
calls unto.

3 It is the grand policy of our adversary the Devil to cast in good things
into our minds unseasonably in hearing the word, or prayer, thereby to take off
the attention of our minds from the present duty, and so to lame our sacrifice.
He knows that wicked thoughts will be abhorred and rejected by godly men, but
good things injected may more easily have admission and reception with them.

5 Grace teaches us to watch over our hearts continually, that we may be ready
to give a wise and humble entertainment to the holy motions of Gods blessed
spirit. There be good hours and good messengers of Gods sending, golden
opportunities, wherein he uses to give a meeting to his Children, and breaths
good thoughts into them, these we must embrace and cherish; for as carnal men
do freely admit and embrace earthly corrupt thoughts; but they reject and
suppress good motions and stirrings that tend to repentance, and
mortification: so renewed men strive to shut out vain thoughts; but they
sincerely desire with special reverence and all holy greediness to entertain
all good motions put into their hearts by Gods Spirit, howsoever occasioned,
whether by the Ministry of the word, reading the Scriptures, Christian
admonition, or by some extraordinary mercy or affliction any way at any time
they highly esteem all good motions grounded on the word of God; they feed and
improve them to the utmost, with meditation, prayer, practice. If men begin
once to neglect godly motions, by degrees they grieve the blessed Spirit, at
length they quench the Spirit. God does often punish men's slighting of these
heavenly motions, by leaving them to the vanity of their own thoughts, and to
Satan's horrid injections.

15 Grace begets a holy jealousy and suspicion of our own hearts and
thoughts; and this does exceedingly quicken and strengthen our spiritual
vigilance. There is still much deceit in Jer. 17. 9.
our hearts, so far as they are carnal, and though we have taken up
resolutions to watch over our thoughts, yet sin is apt to break in and
captivate our thoughts, if we be selfe-confident. They that are most suspicious
of their own hearts, are least overtaken with evil thoughts, because such are
much in prayer unto God, and resting upon God, from whom they receive strength
to stand and withstand sinful thoughts, and Satanicall injections.

16 Sanctifying Grace raises high and holy thoughts for the advancement of
Gods glory, and the spiritual advantage of our own and others souls. The
thoughts of gracious persons are ordinarily working for the promoting of Gods
service, and good causes, for the procuring of true good to their brethren,
especially in spiritualls, for the increasing of Grace in themselves, and
spiritual assurance and comfort against the day of trial; for the keeping of
a good conscience in all things, and the acting of self-denial.

But the Thoughts of carnal men are all for self ends, and
selfe-satisfactions, how to get great things for themselves in this world, and
to be great in the opinion of others, and to fulfill their fleshly lusts. They
that spend their Romans 13. 14.
thoughts and studies for self, how they may satisfy their own sinful
affections, and attain their carnal ends, are superlative sinners, they are
Masters of the Art of sinning. We have an elegant expression in Prove. 24. 8.
The man that thinks to do evil, they Prove. 24. 8. (...)
shall call him a Lord of wickedness (so the words are in the Hebrew.) That
is, the man that bends his thoughts to fulfill his own sinful desires and
corrupt affections, shall be called a Lord, that is, the chief and greatest of
sinners. 2 A Possessor of all wickedness; a most wiced man in whom is a
confluence of all sin.

Lastly, Sanctifying Grace puts us upon a careful constant use of all holy
means that God has appointed for the preserving of us from the prevalency and
pollution of all evil thoughts. Prove. 4. 23. God commands men to keep their
hearts above all keeping. That is, in the diligent use of all good means to
strive to keep their hearts from entertaining and lodging evil thoughts, to
keep them from all thought-defilement. Thus David Resolves to use all holy
helps and means for the ordering of his thoughts, according to Gods will. Psalm.
19. 15.


What special means has God in his word directed us to use for the preserving

There be diverse precious Preservatives

The First Preservative.
1 Labor to settle a holy Government in our fancy, and to keep our
imaginations within the compass of Divine Rules. Man's imagination must be cast
down, before his thoughts can be brought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Imaginations are properly the operations of the fancy,
which is a power of the soul placed between the senses, and the understanding.
The fantasy is the imagining power, as the mind is the thinking power in man.
Fancy is that which the learned call Imagination and opinion. Phantasia (...)
Aliter dicitur imaginativa. Alstedius.
Man's imagination of it self, if ungoverned, is a wild ranging thing, it
mis-leads his thoughts, and fills them with vanity and sensuality, and his life
with unnecessary troubles; it is the great troubler of Israel.

1 Imagination is a shallow superficial apprehension of outward good or evil
things taken from the senses.

2 The fancy does greatly prize and value sensible good things, which are
present and suitable to man's corrupt nature.

3 Man's imagination overrules his judgment, until it be filled with a new
light and strength. Hence it is that the best things if accompanied with
sensible inconveniences, as sufferings, losses, reproaches in the world, etc.
are by carnal men mis-judged for evil things. 2 The worst things, if they be
attended with pleasure, profit, and sensible contentments, are by corrupt men
mis-judged for the greatest good.

4 Man's fancy presents to his mind earthly riches, honors, outward enjoyment,
as glorious things, wherein is much happiness and contentment to be had. The
thoughts and life of many men is almost nothing else but a vain fancy; that
which mainly-sets their thoughts on work, is how to please their own fancy,
which forms and imagins an excellency and happiness in earthly enjoyments;
and in comparison of which it contemnes all true excellency and happiness:
Hence arise those earthly covetous ambitious Thoughts which are predominant in
men's hearts.

5 Imagination works upon man's affections, and affections upon his thoughts.
The reason why sinful imagination works so strongly upon the mind, is, because
it raises the affections answerable to the good or evil which it apprehends,
and the affections stir the thoughts.

Things work upon the mind in this order.

1 Some object is presented.

2 Then it is apprehended by imagination as good or as evil.

3 Our affections are stirred up suitably to our apprehensions of the object.

4 The affections work upon our mind, filling it with suitable thoughts.
Imagination is the first wheel of the soul, it stirs it self, and other
powers of the soul are stirred by its motion; if that move amiss, it moves
the other wheels amiss with it; And therefore the well ordering of this is of
the greater consequence; for usually as man's imagination conceives, so the
mind thinks, the judgment concludes, the will chooses, the affections are
carried, and the outward man acts

6 This Imagination does exceedingly corrupt our thoughts.

1 By false representations of things to the mind, which begets thoughts by the
help of the fancy.

2 By forging matter out of it self without ground, and so offering it to the
mind to work upon in its thoughts.

3 As our imagination is an ill instrument of the understanding to devise
vanity and mischief.

7 Man's corrupt imagination frames and shapeth every thing as it self
pleases; it makes evil good, if it please the senses, and good evil, if it
be displeasing to the outward man. Whereupon the thoughts of man's heart are
full of unsettlednesse and unquietness, vanity and falsehood.

So then, man's natural imagination must be cured, rectified, and sanctified,
before his thoughts can be holy and gracious.

1 Therefore we must pray that God would be pleased to erect a holy Government
in our hearts to order, regulate, and restrain this licentious faculty, our
fancy.

2 Labor to keep down these disorderly Risings of our fancy, and to bring our
imaginations into the obedience of Gods truth.

3 For the well ordering and bounding of fancy, consider the principal use
thereof; sense and imagination is properly to judge what is comfortable, or
uncomfortable, good or evil to the outward man, not what is morally or
spiritually good, or ill.

The Second Preservative.
2 WE must present all things to our minds, as the Scripture presents them to
us: This will be a good means to keep our thoughts from feeding upon empty
windy fancies.

1 Present to our minds the Reality of spiritual Riches, Pleasures, Honors,
and Enjoyments.

2 The Emptiness of earthly riches, pleasures and honors, which are but
shadows in comparison of those true reallities that the Gospel discovers. The
Spirit of God sets forth these earthly things as empty and dangerous things,
calling them vanity, uncertain riches, Eccles. 1 2. Luke 15. 9. Prove. 23. 5.
unrighteous Mammon, Thorns, yea, Nothing.

The Third Preservative.
3 WE must propound True objects for the mind to work upon in its thoughts.
Our fancy is prone to raise false objects, and thereby false conceits and
foolish thoughts in us. Our best way to take off our thoughts from false
objects, is to fix them upon true objects: As

1 To think of the infinite greatness and goodness of God, and his peculiar
perpetual love to us in Christ.

2 The plenitude of Grace and Glory that is in Jesus Christ.

3 The high and heavenly Mysteries revealed in the Scriptures; the exceeding
great and precious promises of the Gospel.

4 The real possessions, preferment, and Royal privileges of the Saints.

5 The great day of judgment that we must all appear before the Lord Christ,
and be made manifest what we are, and what we have done, and be strictly
accountable for all our thoughts, words, and works.

6 Let us think of Heaven, that Paradise of all glorious perfections, plenitude
of blisfull joys, and Rives of purest pleasures, flowing from the immediate
vision and enjoyment of God for evermore.

The feeding and fixing of our minds upon these high and heavenly objects will
be a means

1 To preserve us from vain sensual thoughts.

2 To produce thoughts of true holiness, it will draw us to think thus with
our selves, If these things be so indeed, then must we frame our thoughts and
ways suitable to these holy Principles.

The Fourth Preservative.
4 WE must labor to Set bounds to our fancies, and put bonds upon our
thoughts. There is still some remainder of wildness in our fancy, and
unsettlednesse in our minds after renewing; therefore we must confine our
thoughts and imaginations within the compass of Scripture Rules. Lay a strict
command upon them not to stray, or turn aside from the straight path; and if
they begin to wander, and run out, it must be our wisdom and endeavor,

1 To restrain and reduce them presently, to stop these waters at their first
breaking out, and not to give the least way to the inordinate irregular risings
of our thoughts, and rovings of our fancy.

2 To fasten our thoughts to the Cross of Christ. Consider how cruelly we have
pierced the Lord of Life, by our thought-sins, and that he died to redeem us
from our vain thoughts.

3 To confine our thoughts to some heavenly, precious, and profitable objects,
as the appearing of Gods Grace, the Glorious appearing of Christ, and our
appearing before him.

2 If our imagination break loose and defile our minds, and memories, yet let
it not defile our wills: Give not the least consent to these sinful motions,
but tread them down at their first rising, before they move to the practice of
any thing.

3 We must never entertain groundless imaginations: Let us cross and crush
those imaginations which cross the grounds both of Religion and Reason. How
often does imagination deceive us in sensible things, much more then will it
deceive us in spiritualls? The imaginary grievances of our lives are more then
the real. Such is the incoherence, absurdnesse, and unreasonablenesse of men's
imaginations, that often times they are ashamed and vexed for giving the least
way to them.

The Fifth Preservative.
5 IT must be our wisdom to fear and fly the occasions of evil Thoughts. As
we must make use of the best helps and outward advantages of time, place,
objects, that may have a kind working upon our fancy and thoughts: So we must
avoid the contraries that may be occasions of ensnaring and corrupting our
Thoughts. The wisest men living cannot keep their Thoughts from pollution,
unless they be careful to fly such objects and occasions as minister matter
of evil to their minds.

1 There is in man's mind not only an active power, whereby it is able to Act,
but also a passive and receptive disposition whereby it may be wrought upon.

2 Outward occasions have a great efficacy and operation upon this passive
power of man's mind for the production of evil thoughts; as we see in David.

3 The efficacy and strength of outward occasions stands in these two things.

1 In an impression of that evil in the minds of men which before was not
thought of by them.

2 Occasions do awaken and stir up the corruption of their hearts, and draw it
out into corrupt thoughts.

There be four special occasions which we must avoid if we would keep our
thoughts from defilement.

1 Vain alluring objects: We must not please our fancies with vanities and
curious sights

2 Shun the company of vain profane persons, which has an insnaring
influence upon man's thoughts.

3 Beware of curious enquiries into unwritten unrevealed mysteries, which does
occasion cursed thoughts.

4 Idleness is a grand occasion of idle impure thoughts: It is the Devils
hour in which he takes advantage to fill and defile men's thoughts.

The Sixth Preservative.
6 THat we may with more success keep our thoughts, we must keep a continual
watch over the windows of the soul, our senses, as the Worthies of old did
Job would not trust his eyes without a Covenant, Job 31. 1. David is an earnest
Petitioner to God to be the keeper of his eyes. Turn away mine eyes from
seeing vanity. Psalm. 119. 37.
Oh! what a world of wickedness does the Devil convey insensibly through
these fl^od-gates of sin, into the thoughts of those men who are careless and
watchlesse this way? As to instance in the ears and eyes.

1 What abundance of pollution and ill is thrown into the hearts of men
through their ears, by the filthy tongues of wicked wretches, set on fire of
hell, and breaking out into rotten ribald speeches, which afterward beget much
speculative wantonness in their thoughts.

The slanderous tongue drops into the ears many false reports, which are the
cursed seeds of wrathful revengefull thoughts in men.

A Talebearer comes and tells thee, that such a one spoke of thee so and so,
whereas in truth it was neither so, nor so; hereupon thy heart is filled with
hard conceits and thoughts of fury against thy innocent brother, whereby thou
art guilty of mental murder; Therefore it concerns us to watch over our
ears, to stop them against corrupt speeches, and to drive away a backbiting
tongue with an angry countenance, Prove. 15. 23.
etc.

2 The eyes of men (if they be not guarded with a most eyefull wisdom) are a
means to let into their hearts swarms of vain filthy thoughts. David's
dreadful example may teach all the Saints to the worlds end to watch over this
wandering sense with extraordinary care and restless jealousy. An idle cast of
the eye upon Bathsheba filled his heart with adulterous thoughts, which brought
forth such a Hellish brood of lust and looseness, which wounded his soul as
deeply and dangerously, as perhaps any of the Saints ever since.

If the wisest men shall suffer their souls to be led by their fancies, and
their eyes to run after vanities, their thoughts will be so filled with vanity
and vexation, that at last they will cry out with grief and shame, Vanity of
vanity, etc. The eyes will quickly betray Eccles. 1. 2.
the heart; therefore we must make a Covenant with our outward senses,
resolving in the strength of Christ, that none of them shall be instruments or
occasions of letting in sin into our thoughts. If our eyes and ears be not
kept with a continual watch, the Devil will enter in by these windows, and
fill our thoughts with all vanity and profaneness.

The Seventh Preservative.
7 WE must treasure up the precious word of God in our minds, laboring to
abound in the sanctified knowledge of Divine truths, that so the mind may feed
upon spiritual truths, and turn them into sanctified thoughts. A good man out
of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things. That is, golden
precious thoughts and speeches. If there be not a treasure of golden truths in
men's hearts, their thoughts will be drossie, vain, therefore we are commanded
to lay up the words of God in our hearts; and to Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.
speak of them, not only to our children in our houses, but also to and with
our own hearts, when we are walking, or riding on the way, etc. wherein we are
often alone, and our time is spent in thinking.

That this speaking of Gods word to our selves by holy meditation, is here also
intended, will clearly appear by comparing Prove. 6. 21, 22. where Solomon
exhorting us to bind the word of God upon our hearts, gives this encouragement,
When thou awakest it shall talk with thee: That is, the word of Christ
dwelling in our hearts, will talk with us in our thoughts, and administer
matter of heavenly thoughts continually.

The Eighth Preservative.
8 WE must labor to purge our hearts from earthly, carnal, and inordinate
affections; and to keep our love, fear, joy, and grief in a holy heavenly
frame: This will be an excellent means to keep our thoughts in a pure holy
frame. The thoughts first stir the affections, and the affections being raised,
work strongly upon the thoughts; they draw the thoughts to fix upon objects
that are suitable and sweet to themselves. Whatsoever we love, desire, or fear,
will be much in our thoughts. If our love and delight be sincerely set upon
Gods word, our thoughts will feed upon it continually; as appears in David's
example: How do I love thy Law? it is my meditation day and night. If our
fear be Psalm. 119. 97.
given up to God, our thoughts will be much upon his glorious Name, Mal. 3. 16.

The Ninth Preservative.
9 WE must strive to fill our minds with a strong apprehension of Gods
Omnipresence and omniscience, that all our thoughts are open and naked before
the great God; there is No Creature hidden from his all-searching Heb 4. 12,
13. Jer. 17. 10. 1 Samuel 2. 3.
eye. He sees and knows all the Creatures that we make in our hearts, our
thoughts and imaginations. When vain ungodly thoughts do assault us, we
should think thus with our selves, God is present, he stands by, and look on,
he sees my thoughts. This apprehehension will be a powerful means to fence
our thoughts against evil. We have an excellent place for this, Job 31. if we
compare verse. 1. and v. 4. together, it is one continued speech. I have made a
Covenant with mine eyes, why then should I think of a Job 31. 4. (...)
Maid? Does not he see my ways, and number all my steps? What was the reason
that Job durst not yield to a vain impure thought? Because God sees it,
(says he) he beholds my ways: That is, the secret ways of my heart, my
thoughts. God takes notice how many thoughts I think, and what they are: So
that Job's eye was fixed upon Gods eye, and this fixed and overpowred his
thoughts, that he durst not take liberty in his thoughts.

1 Let this impression be always upon our hearts, that God stands by and takes
a strict view of our thoughts, and will call us to a reckoning for them. This
will be an excellent means to keep us from the prevalency of those evil
thoughts that assault us.

2 Consider that God does not stand by as a mere looker on, but he takes such
notice of all the thoughts that pass through men's hearts, that he ponders and
weighs them, as it were, to give them the fruit of their thoughts. Men's sinful
thoughts are laid in one balance, and the righteous judgments of God in the
other: To his Children he gives correction, but he weighs out punishment,
wrath, and damnation to wicked ones.

3 Let us consider who it is that knows our thoughts; it is the all-knowing,
all-powerfull God, whose eyes are as flaming fire, and his feet like brass.

There is no man but needs an increase of faith in this truth; for if the
infiniteness of Gods presence and knowledge were firmly believed, it could not
be, but that we should be more careful and eyefull of our thoughts, and ways,
then we be: Therefore for a clearer conviction and plenary persuasion of this
truth, I will present two eminent places, one is in Ephesians. 4. 6. One God, who
is above all, and in you all, and through all.

1 God is above all; he looks down and beholds all that men think and do on
earth; as a man that stands above in a high place, can see all that is done
below.

But it may be objected, though a corners, dens, and caves, wherein men may
hide themselves from the eyes of him who is above them.

God is said to be above all, and through all, and in you all; he is in us, in
our hearts and spirits, by his all-knowing eye, and all-searching presence; God
(...).
sees every corner of our hearts, every thought and secret of our hearts: He
looks through us, through our hearts, as a man looks through a clear glass.
This is more plainly held forth, Psalm. 139. 1, 2. O Jehovah! thou have searched
me, and known me, thou know my downe-sitting, and mine up-rising; thou
understandest my thoughts afar off. (...)
My familiar thoughts, my nearest and most inmost thoughts, as the Hebrew
imports.

Jehovah knows the thoughts of men afar off, because he knows the Principles
that are within their hearts, and what they would act if occasion were offered:
As a man that knows what roots are in his Garden, he can say, this and this
will come up in the spring, though no Flower appear for the present. Oh
therefore let us labor to keep this apprehension always present with us, that
God beholds and takes notice of all our thoughts.

The Tenth Preservative.
10 WE must be mainly careful to give up our first thoughts to God, at our
awaking in the morning: This will be a good means to keep our thoughts close to
God all the day following. This was David's constant practice, as appears, Psalm.
139. 17. When I awake, I am still with thee. That is, in my thoughts, I am
still meditating of thee. When we awake, we should first fill our minds with
the thoughts of God.

1 Of his greatness and goodness; of his mercy that is renewed every morning.

2 Of his presence with us, his all-searching eye that is over us, and his
mighty hand that is with us to assist us in doing his work, and to resist all
evils and enemies for us.

3 We should fix our first thoughts every day upon that great and glorious end
for which we have our life and being, and how every thing we do, and that
befalls us, may be reduced, ordered, and made serviceable to this high end,
Gods glory. The setting of our thoughts in a holy order every morning, will
much conduce to the right ordering of our thoughts; it will prevent and keep
out those earthly sensual vanities which do attend at the door of our hearts
to make the first entry, and to take up our thoughts for all the day. Those
objects that do first take possession of our thoughts in the morning, do much
prevail with our thoughts the day after. The perfuming of our spirits with
some gracious meditations at our first awaking, will much sweeten our thoughts
all the day.

It is a thing much to be lamented and laid to heart, that Christians who
profess themselves Heirs of Heaven, having matters of that weight and
excellency to exercise their hearts upon, should spend their thoughts upon
trifles, vanity, and nothing, as all earthly things will ere long appear. Now
one chief cause why men's hearts and heads are so filled with earthly sensual
thoughts, is, because they do not season and strengthen their minds with
thoughts of God, and heavenly things, at their first awaking.

The Eleventh Preservative.
11 IT will be a precious means to keep us from evil thoughts, if we be
constant in holy fore-thoughts and after-thoughts every day.

1 In the morning fore-thinking and resolving in the strength of Christ Jesus
to watch over our thoughts all the day, and to keep our hearts above all
keeping, that we offend not in our thoughts.

2 We must keep a strict watch over our hearts the day following; and though
vain vagrant thoughts do crowd in, yet take notice of them, abhor and repel
them, complain to God against them.

3 At night we must try and examine our thoughts, call them to account what
they have acted, how they have carried themselves the day past: Take that
course with our thoughts, that men do with idle Servants, they set them their
task in the morning, and at the end of the day they call them to a reckoning;
this makes them careful to do their work.

The Twelfth Preservative.
12 IF we would be kept from idle impure thoughts, we must keep our bodies and
minds close to the work of our calling. As we must walk faithfully in a lawful
calling, so our minds must be fixedly intent on the business of our calling; a
diligent hand and intensive mind must go together. This I take to be the
meaning of that Scripture, Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do,
do it with thy might. That is, all that we have a calling to do, and all that
we do in our callings, we (...)
must do it with our strength; that is, with strength of wisdom and
knowledge, with strength of thoughts. That this is the meaning, is evident from
the latter part of the verse, For there is no work, or thought, or knowledge,
or wisdom in the grave whither thou go. There is no thought in the grave.
So the Hebrew Eccles. 9. 10. (...) LXX.
word signifies, and so the Greek Interpreters render it, and others also.

When we act in our particular callings according to Divine Rules, we serve God
therein, therefore we must put forth the intention and strength of the mind, in
the works thereof: The stream of our thoughts must run along with the works of
our hands, and be confined within the compass of our Callings, whiles we are
acting therein: This will be an excellent means to keep in our thoughts from
running out into vanity and vileness. It Is impossible for idle men and women
to be free from idle, foolish, and filthy thoughts. An idle life is a burden to
it self, and it burdens man's mind with abundance of vain ungodly thoughts. If
the body be not employed in labor as it should be, the mind will be intent on
things that it should not, and perplexed with those troubles that it would not.

Idleness is the hour of Temptation, wherein Satan joins with our
imagination, and sets it about his own work, to grind his Greese; For the mind
of man is as a Mill, it either grinds that which is put into it, or else works
upon it self, wearing and wearying it self in foolish and fruitless
thoughts. When David was idle, how did his thoughts run out into folly and
filth? They that live without a Calling, or walk idly and inordinately in
their Callings, do always lie open to all kind of wicked thoughts; therefore
it is Gods appointment, that every man should make choice of an honest
vocation, and labor faithfully therein.

1 To set our thoughts on work, and to hold them doing in the works and
concernments of our Callings: The spirits of men are active and restless, and
will be busied some way or other; therefore it must be our care to find them
work, to keep our thoughts always acting, either in the duties of piety, or
works of our Calling, or in Divine meditations.

2 God has appointed our vocations to set bounds to our thoughts, to confine
them to their walk, that they may not run out to impurities or impertinencies.
If the thoughts of men were left at liberty, they would run out on every side
like a River that has no bounds nor banks: But now we must take heed that we
do not burden our minds with many things: Overmuch business fills men's
hearts with dividing disturbing thoughts, and torturing cares.

2 Distracting care fills men with vain earthly and wandering thoughts.

3. It wastes and weakens the mind, and so unfits it for any spiritual duty.

4 These thought-full cares are needless and unprofitable, they hinder and
hurt us in our business.

Lastly, We must be much in prayer to God, that he would be pleased to purify
and sanctify our thoughts, to settle them in a holy frame, and keep them free
from defilement. The keeping and right ordering of man's thoughts, is above man's
strength. We are not sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, to think one
good thought, nor to keep out one wicked thought: We must commit our thoughts
to Gods keeping and ordering, he is the only King over them, and Keeper of
them: Let us believe and plead that precious Promise, Prove. 16. 3. Roll thy
works unto Jehovah, and thy thoughts shall be established and ordered by him;
he will fix them upon Divine objects, and thereby free them from that disorder,
distraction, and confusions which are apt to assault and annoy us. Oh
therefore! when vain proud profane thoughts begin to rise in us, and to war
against us, we must cry mightily to God, and say, We have no power to stand and
withstand these Armies of sinful thoughts that come against us; but our eyes
are unto thee O Lord God for strength to resist them, and victory over them.

Remember;

1 Where our strength is, it is in the Lord Christ our head, and in the power of
his might, Ephesians. 6. In his own might shall no man be strong.

2 That we have the Promise of present help, and future victory.

3 We must pray, and act faith, believe Gods power and Promise, and it shall be
to us according to our faith.

4 As it must be our constant care to crush and suppress every vain thought at
its first rising; so it must be our daily prayer that God would Cast down our
imaginations, and bring into captivity all our thoughts to the obedience of
Christ.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. read (...). p. 17. r. (...). p. 21. line 5. for first r. fifth. p.
25. l. 10. r. Principle. p. 26. l. 15. for any, r. my. p. 37. l. last, r.
softened. p. 40. l. 5. r. man. p. 41. r (...). l. 23. r. out of. p. 42. l. 22.
for he, r. she. p. 45. l. 2. for and, r. an. p. 53. r. (...). l. 19. for
giving, r. gaining. p. 65. r. (...). p. 69. l. 3. for they, r. their. p. 75. r.
(...). p. 76. r. (...). p. 78. r. (...) p. 83. l. 7. r. presumptuous principles
p. 89. l. 8. for proud r. prone. p. 94. l. 23. for proclamations, r.
provocations. p. 95. l. 16. r. presumptuous thoughts men. p. 98. l. 25. dele
and. p. 99. l. 27. r. alone good. p. 100. l. 10. r. primarily. p. 103. l. 3.
for to, r. of. p. 104 l. 3. for immediately, r. immenfly. p. 111. l. 10. for is,
r. his. p. 115. r. (...). l. 20 for surely, r. freely p. 117. l. 22 for with,
r. in. p. 118. marg. for ira. r. ire. p. 126. l. 3. r. comfortless. p. 130. l.
25. for inclinations r. valuations. p. 137. l. 26. for main, r. vain. p. 138.
l. 29. r. dispensed. p. 143. l. 20. for and, r. but. l. 28. r. they that. p.
147. l. 11. for is, r. a. p. 164. l. 22. r. with his great. p. 166. l. 14. for
foolishness, r. lowliness. l. 20 for gifts, r. graces. p 171. l. 17. r.
reveted. p. 173. l. 4. for daily, r. easily. l. 30. r. prone. p. 178. l. 5. r.
affectation p. 179. r. (...). p. 180. 1, (...). p. 181. r. (...). p. 182. r.
(...) p. 184. l. 17. r. inward. l. 29. r. shame. p. 199 l. 19. for first, r.
fifth. p. 203. l. 10 r. overflow. p. 240. l. 3. r. they. p. 257. l. 5. for of,
r. and. p. 263. l. 23. r. true of. p. 171. l. 13. dele first. p. 272. l. 13. r.
last place. p. 318. l. 1. r. as the spring, actions and speeches as streams. p.
319. l. 23. r. moral. p. 343. l. 9. r. where. p. 344. l. 2. r. renewed. p.
369. r. (...). p. 375. r. (...). p. 411. r. (...).

Mr Bisco Of the Mystery of Free Grace.

Mr Bisco's Treatise of the Thoughts.



The Man in the MOON Discovering A Word of Knavery under the SVNNE.

Knaves here is amongst you.

Stand honest men and you shall hear,
How many Knaves will soon appear,
Their passage and their chief deceit,
I am intended to repeat:


London, Printed for Charles Tyus, at the three Cups on London Bridge 1657.

The Man in the MOON
WHoop sir, who comes here? O it is my fat bellyed Host, with his Furkin o^ foul
Kitchinstuff, now called my Landlady; O what a bulk of Tallow do they carry
about them? enough to serve all the Kitchinstuff-Tubs about London: My Hostess
(forsooth) should have been a Scrivener, for she wrights a very fair hand,
after a large account; those that are her guests had better pay them ready
money, then to let pale-faced chalk stand as a witness at the Bar, For my
Landlady has taught her score the Art of Perjury, that whosoever deals with
chalk shall prove him to be a Knight of the post, and it is because he is a sworn
servant to Guts and Garbidge.

Stand off Master Horsecourser, what do you mean to ride over me* The nim^le
Ia^e that you ride on has been ^ good Hackney, and now to cozen your Chap-men
you have let him blood, gave him a drinch, And put a live Eale in his belly;
this makes him pr^^^ce and leap as if the D^vell were in him. But if the Horse
^new my mind, and would toss you out of the Saddle, and break your neck,
intr^th I would pay for your supper, and ^i^ a farewell to misfortune, but by
such an Accident she Hangman would loose both money and a good suit of clothes,
and the Gallows want her due. O you are very well guifted for the order of your
Trade you will swear and lie with ere a whore in England, before you will bait one
penny of the price. And will avouch one of your new molded spittles to be as
fashionable a horse as any is in England.

What I hear Master Confidence, O he is a Student at Law. for when fools fall
out then Knaves prosper; the good cash out of some troublesome Curmudgions
pockets makes the Lawyers laugh like a Carpenters dog with a rule in his mouth:
whosoever feeds the crafty Lawyer fat; shall besure to go with an empty belly:
and if you starve your cause, you shall not have one jot of Law to help you: if
you sue under form of paperous, your desperate case will be thrown over the
Bar, like a perjerd Lawyer then may ye come home by weeping cross, and sing
the Lamentation of a bad Market.

O the Baker beware of the Pillory, I promise you you were something near the
matter, O men of uneven size, Whose consciences are seard as hot as a new baked
twelve penny loaf you must have the Governers of the City to look to your light
weights, and light bread, you teach so fair an example for lightness, that some
of your wives cannot choose but be light, and make your horns too heavy for your
heads, I Would wish you mend your hand, else the poor prentices (whose guts cries
Cubert) will curse you for the small hapeny Loaves as they have for their
breakfast.

Stand square sir, what does your brains turn round like a Windmill? Thou
seamest to be a kind of an upright man, but I fear thou art a white Devil. O
thievish Rascal, thou have never a true finger on thy hand, (except it be thy
thumb) nay this is not all, for thy T^le-dish of it self is conscionable, but
when a handsome girl comes to the Mill to have her gryst ground, stra^t your
man Thomas (as you call it) is ready mounted and with your fair words and
promising her gryst tole-free, you lay her down upon a bawdy sack, and enter
into her con, cupisence: She as merry as the Maids runs home and tells her
mother how the Miller had took no tole, but in half a year after she is
queasie-stomackt, like a Greensicknesse Girl newly come to a big belly, then
her mother (forsooth) must carry her daughters water to ye Doctor, for she
complains of a Tympany, which makes her so swell about the middle, but the
conclusion of all brings the Millers knavery to light, by the help of a Midwife.

Hey toss what is here? the picture of ill Luck, one that looks as if he had
sucked his dam through a hurdle, O it is a Saint of the times, called Porridge
John, a great consputer, always carring a Bible under his Arm, but never makes
no use on it, unless it be to vamp his own Opinion, And though it be never so
false, it must stand for possitive truth, this fellow is a Divellish Cormorant,
for at one breakfast in conciet he is able to swallow the greatest Church in
England, the minister, Clerk, Bells, steeple and all: his maw is the similitude
of hell, nay for an ordinary colation he must have a twelve penny Loaf, a dozen
of sheeps heads, And four Gallons of Porridge to stop his ungodly guts, The
Butch^rs dogs of Smithfield-bars have cause to curse him for devouring their
panches, O he is a filthy swinyard, and if such fellows as these are the only
Saints, sure enough the Devil has brought his hags to a fair Market.

Hey day, what more knaves still? have a care sir of your trappanning, lest
you are clapped in a wooden pound for it, and so is forced to take a view of the
pictures at the Exchange, and to be a Surveyer of Leaden hall Market. when your
face will be daubed with rotten Eggs: to make you look like a shitten clout or a
sodden sheeps head. This Trappan is an errant pollitick Rascal, let al men
defy him, as they do the Devil. for if he catches you in his clutches, he will
have no more mercy of you, then a dog of a Bear, or a Devil of a damned soul,
his deceit, cunning and craft is so much, that it is not easily to be reckoned
if Morbus Gallicus do not sease upon his bones, I do much marvel, for he keeps
company with none but common whores and to be sure before he will leave off his
trade he will take up a worse where in time he may wear the Threecorner-cap at
Tyborn, and smell the hot cakes at p^^ddington.

O Master broaker, that has removed two times without a Habies Corpius, from
Long-lane to Hounds-ditch, And from Hounsditch into Charterhouse lain, this
fellow bites the poor to death for whereas the good Act of Parliament, alows
them six in the hundred, these Milaters of the Law, raises it to forty pound in
the hundred Racking of their Debtors intollerably; Making no more conscience of
his ways, then a prick eared Saint does to lie with his sister, O this fellow
is a public enemy to the State, And whereas thievs deserves hanging for
stealing, so brokers deserves hanging for Extortion, let him go, and the Devil
and six pence go with him, then he shall have money and company, the cruelty of
this hell hound first caused this Proverb to be in use, That a cunning knave
needs no broker.

How now Master Spruce, you have played the tailor surely, you have got you New
Clo^ths, new hat new shoes; and stockins, new band and Cuffs, and a new shirt,
but I wonder what is become of all the Army that marched under your command, have
you removed their quarters only at present til all your new things goes to
Mistress Lavender, then your old bosom friends must be again your chiefest
Companion, Well tailor, well, thou have a fine Art in cutting three sleeves,
for two, and casting one into hell, And bid the Devil take it, for you are often
troubled with such trifles, powder beef will not serve your turn, but you must
have cabbidge with it, this is a custom that belongs to taylers, as the lash
does to a Bridewell-bird.

How now Master Doore-Keeper, I see you are a kind of a plain-fac'd gentleman,
now since you came from Kingsland College, and took your degrees in a
hot-house, what though you have lost your Pimping place, now Damerus Page sings
in Newgate you may live well enough with ketching of Mice against a wall. it
will not hurt your nose, nor be offensive to the Commonwealth; it was the
using of Venus trade excessively that caused the bridge of your nose to fall,
and your head to have a bal'd crown, there went the hair away, and now you
must turn Fiddler and get a sound poast to prop up your nose, else your music
will play nothing but the running of the Rats in Smithfield.

What Is here Jeremy's Ghost. a coarse raised from the dead, or an air spirit
covered in a black suite, O Pinch-out the Usurer, that hunger snouted rascal,
who has got a Red Herring a broyling in his bosom to serve him for his days
diet: good Master save charges let me persuade you to relieve the poor, if not
to be liberal to your self and your friends and not to go creeping about like
a wandering Jew, looking as bleak in the face at winter as a withered face Band
does that has been carted upon a Shrove Tuesday: why will you starve your
guts to increase your riches? do thou not know when thou art gone all is gone?
spend free with moderation, for that which is got over the Devils back will be
spent over the Dams belly: stand back with your short knife, your Mills and
Iills and your impudent bulks that stare a man in the face whilst another picks
his pocket, you have learned the slight of hand and can conjure better then any
hocus pocus in England, you have your art at your fingers ends, as if you had
served seven years to the trade, and so come to be Freemen of the City, being
sworn at the Old daily, your names is recorded at Newgate, your Copy sealed
with a Roman T. and your Indenture at last hanged upon the files of Tyburn and
there is an end of a bad Market.

Stand off Master Ketch-po^e, you that can with your false warrants and
counterfeit Writs to arrest poor senseless men that cannot read your
subtilty, this knave is merciles, for if you fall into his clutches he drags
you to Lobs pound as round as a hoope, give him his fees and that will stop his
mouth, but without money you must to Prison and there lie and perrish if the
Creditor be no more merciful then the Bayliffe: these kind of people are the
Commonwealths Cormorants, that devour whole Families at a Mouth-full, they
have abundance of exploits, deceits, cunning, craft, treachery, traps, snares,
false-hood, and perjury, that it is good for an honest man (if he can) to keep
out of their company.

How now, what art thou whose head hangs down like a Bul-rush? O it is a Knight
of the Post, a public and a common for sworn Varlot this fellow for 12. pence
shall swear the richest man in England out of his estate, and oaths goes down
with him as easy as a Sow sucks a Tub full of wash, and has as good an
appetite to forswear himself as a big-bellied Woman long^ for Butter-milk.

H^ makes no Oats of his Oaths, as a horse does of chap hay, but with him
they have as good a digesture as the best meals meat a man can eat at a table,
a Halter ch^ak him and all those that are of his generation: and whilst knaves
do either hang or mend let all honest men sing with me this wholesome Ditty,
called, an Item for honest men,

The tune is, Ragged and Torn.

O What a mad world is this,
that Knaves are in every Town,
For right must often t^ke wrong,
since honesty is thrown down:
The weakest must go to the wall,
the strongest themselves can defend,
And poor men must pay for all;
for their troubles will never have end.
Yet knavery still I defy,
for I scorn to be of their crew.
Though others do flatter and lie,
I Am ragged and torn and true.
I will not be like to mine host,
that always enlarges his score,
Nor yet a grand knight of the post,
nor pimp for to wait on a whore:
These callings are wicked and bad,
and none but grand knaves that do use it,
Whilst honesty sets very sad,
it is pity that knaves should abuse it,
For I still do knavery defy, etc.
The Lawyer and Broker are evil,
the Millers a leacherous thief,
The Usurer clings to the Devil,
and the Tailor gets Cabbidge and beef
These all are expert in their trades,
and know how to shirk and to shift,
But those are the merriest blades
that helps a dead man at a lift,
Yet knavery, etc.
The ^aker and divelish Trappan,
the File-cly and Ketchpole agree,
To undo and wrong every man,
so wicked and bad now they be:
They lay their traps and their Gins.
and every politic snare,
Is laid to break poor men's shins,
unless you do take special care.
But knavery still I defy, etc.
Then Item I Would have you beware
of those that dissemblers be,
And those that speaks wondrous fair. whose hearts and their tongues disagree
With Item take heed of your foes, and those that pretend are your friends
For you may want money and clothes, when as they have served their own ends
And Item still knavery defy, and all that belong to the crew.
A penny these Items will buy, and so I do bid you adieu.
S. S.

FINIS.

