A Twofold CATECHISM: The One simply called A Scripture-Catechism; The Other, A
brief Scripture-Catechism for Children. Wherein the chiefest points of the
Christian Religion, being Question-wise proposed, resolve themselves by
pertinent Answers taken word for word out of the Scripture, without either
Consequences or Comments. Composed for their sakes that would fain be Mere
Christians, and not of this or that Sect, inasmuch as all the Sects of
Christians, by what names soever distinguished, have either more or less
departed from the simplicity and truth of the Scripture. By John Biddle, Master
of Arts of the University of Oxford.

Isai. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

LONDON, Printed by J. Cottrel, for Ri. Moon, at the seven stars in Paul's
Churchyard, near the great North-door. 1654.

The Preface.
I Have often wondered and complained that there was no Catechism yet extant,
(that I could ever see, or hear of) from whence one might learn the true
grounds of the Christian Religion, as the same is delivered in the holy
Scripture, all Catechisms generally being so stuffed with the supposals and
traditions of men, that the least part of them is derived from the Word of God.
For when Councels, Convocations, and Assemblies of Divines, justling the Sacred
Writers out of their place in the Church, had once framed Articles and
Confessions of Faith according to their own fancies and interests, and the
Civil Magistrate had by his Authority ratified the same, all Catechisms were
afterward fitted to those Articles and Confessions, and the Scripture either
wholly omitted, or broughtin only for a show, not one quotation amongst many
being a whit to the purpose, as will soon appear to any man of judgment, who
taking into his hand the said Catechisms, shall examine the texts alleged in
them: for if he do this diligently and impartially, he will find the Scripture
and those Catechisms to be at so wide a distance one from another, that he will
begin to question whether the Catechists gave any heed at all to what they
wrote, and did not only themselves refuse to make use of their Reason, but
presume that their Readers also would do the same. In how miserable a condition
then (as to spiritual things) must Christians generally needs be, when thus
trained up, not, (as the Apostle advises) in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, but in the supposals and traditions of men, having little or no assurance
touching the reality of their Religion! Which some observing, and not having
the happiness to light upon the Truth, have quite abandoned all Piety
whatsoever, thinking there is no firm ground whereon to build the same. To
prevent which mischief in time to come, by bringing men to a certainty, (I mean
such men as own the Divine Authority of the Scripture) and withal to satisfy
the just and pious desires of many, who would fain understand the truth of our
religion, to the end they might not only be built-up themselves, but also
instruct their children and families in the same, I have here (according to the
understanding I have gotten by continual meditation on the word of God)
compiled a Scripture-Catechism, wherein I bring the Reader to a sure and
certain knowledge of the chiefest things pertaining both to belief and practice,
whilst I my self assert nothing, (as others have done before me) but only
introduce the Scripture faithfully uttering its own assertions, which all
Christians confess to be of undoubted truth. Take heed therefore whosoever thou
art, that lightest on this Book, and there read things quite contrary to the
doctrines that pass current amongst the generality of Christians, (for I
confess most of the things here displayed, have such a tendency) that thou fall
not foul upon them, for thou can not do so without falling foul upon the holy
Scripture it self, inasmuch as all the Answers throughout the whole Catechism
are faithfully transcribed out of it, and rightly applied to the Questions, as
thou thy self may perceive, if thou shall make a diligent inspection into the
several texts with all their circumstances. Thou will perhaps here reply, that
the texts which I have cited, do indeed in the letter hold forth such things as
are contrary to the doctrines commonly received amongst Christians, but they
ought to have a mystical or figurative interpretation put upon them, and then
both the doctrines and the texts of Scripture will suit well enough. To which I
answer, that if we once take this liberty to impose our mystical or figurative
interpretations on the Scripture, without express warrant of the Scripture it
self, we shall have no settled belief, but be liable continually to be turned
aside by any one that can invent a new mystical meaning of the Scripture, there
being no certain rule to judge of such meanings, as there is of the literal
ones: nor is there any error, how absurd and impious soever, but may on such
terms be accorded with the Scripture. All the abominable Idolatries of the
Papists, all the superstitious Fopperies of the Turks, all the licentious
Opinions and Practices of the Ranters, may by this means be not only palliated,
but defended by the Word of God. Certainly might we of our own heads
figuratively interpret the Scripture, when the letter is neither repugnant to
our senses, nor to the scope of the respective texts, nor to a greater number
of plain texts to the contrary, (for in such cases we must of necessity admit
figures in the sacred Volume, as well as we do in profane ones, otherwise both
they and it will clash either with themselves, or with our senses, which the
Scripture it self intimates to be of infallible certainty, see 1 John 1. 2, 3.)
might we, I say, at our pleasure impose our Figures and Allegories on the plain
words of God, the Scripture would in very deed be, what some blasphemously
affirm it to be, a Nose of wax. For instance, it is frequently asserted in the
Scripture, that God has a similitude or shape, has his place in the heavens,
has also affections or passions, as love, hatred, mercy, anger, and the like,
neither is any thing to the contrary delivered there, unless seemingly in
certain places, which neither for number, nor clearness are comparable unto
those of the other side. Why now should I depart from the letter of the
Scripture in these particulars, and boldly affirm with the generality of
Christians, (or rather, with the generality of such Christians only, as being
conversant with the false Philosophy that reigns in the Schools, have their
understandings perverted with wrong notions) that God is without a shape, in no
certain place, and incapable of affections? Would not this be to use the
Scripture like a nose of wax, and when of it self it looks any way, to turn
it aside at our pleasure? And would not God be so far from speaking to our
capacity in his Word, (which is the usual Refuge of the Adversaries, when in
these and the like matters concerning God, they are pressed with the plain
words of the Scripture) as that he would by so doing render us altogether
incapable of finding out his meaning, whilst he spoke one thing, and understood
the clean contrary? Yea, would he not have taken the direct course to make men
substitute an Idol in his stead, (for the Adversaries hold, that to conceive of
God as having a shape, or affections, or being in a certain place, is Idolatry)
if he described himself in the Scripture otherwise then indeed he is, without
telling us so much in plain terms, that we might not conceive amiss of him?
Thus we see, that when sleep, which plainly argues weakness, and imperfection,
had been ascribed to God, Psalm. 44. 23. the contrary is said of him, Psalm. 121.
4. Again, when weariness had been attributed to him, Isa. 1. 14. the same is
expressly denied of him, Isa. 40. 28. And would not God (think ye) have done the
like in those forementioned things, were the case the same in them, as in the
others? This consideration is so pressing, that a certain Author, (otherwise a
very learned and intelligent man) perceiving the weight thereof, and not
knowing how to avoid the same, took up (though very unluckily) one erroneous
tenet to maintain another, telling us in a late book of his, entitled
Conjectura Caballistica, that for Moses, by occasion of his writings, to let
the Jews entertain a conceit of God as in humane shape, was not any more a way
to bring them into Idolatry, then by acknowledging man to be God, as (says he)
our Religion does in Christ. How can this consist even with consonancy to his
own Principles, whilst he holds it to be false that God has any shape, but
true that Christ is God? For will a false opinion of God no sooner lead men
into Idolatry, then a true opinion of Christ? But it is no marvel that this
Author, and other learned men with him, entertain such conceits of God and
Christ, as are repugnant to the current of the Scripture, whilst they set so
high a rate on the sublime indeed, but uncertain notions of the Platonists, and
in the mean time slight the plain, but certain letter of the sacred Writers, as
being far below the Divine Majesty, and written only to comply with the rude
apprehensions of the vulgar, unless by a mystical Interpretation they be scrued
up to Platonism. This is the stone at which the Pride of learned men has
caused them continually to stumble, namely, to think that they can speak more
wisely and worthily of God, then he has spoken of himself in his Word. This
has brought that more-then-Babylonish confusion of language into the Christian
Religion, whilst men have framed those horrid and intricate expressions, under
the color of detecting and excluding Heresies, but in truth to put a baffle on
the simplicity of the Scripture, and usher-in Heresies, that so they might the
more easily carry on their worldly designs, which could not be effected but
through the ignorance of the people, nor the people brought into ignorance, but
by wrapping up Religion in such monstrous terms, as neither the people, nor
they themselves that invented them, (or at least took them from the invention
of others) did understand. Wherefore there is no possibility to reduce the
Christian Religion to its primitive integrity, (a thing, though much pretended,
yea boasted-of in Reformed Churches, yet never hitherto sincerely endeavored,
much less effected, in that men have by severe penalties been hindered to
reform Religion beyond such a stint, as that of Luther, or at most that of
Calvin) but by cashiering those many intricate terms, and devised forms of
speaking, imposed on our Religion, and by wholly betaking our selves to the
plainness of the Scripture. For I have long since observed, (and find my
observation to be true and certain) that when to express matters of religion
men make use of words and phrases unheard of in the Scripture, they slily under
them couch false doctrines, and obtrude them on us: for without question the
doctrines of the Scripture can be so aptly explained in no language as that of
the Scripture it self. Examine therefore the expressions of Gods being infinite
and incomprehensible, of his being a simple Act, of his subsisting in three
persons, or after a threefold manner, of a Divine Circumincession, of an Eternal
Generation, of an Eternal Procession, of an Incarnation, of an Hypostatical
Union, of a Communication of Properties, of the Mother of God, of God dying, of
God made man, of Transubstantiation, of Consubstantiation, of Original sin, of
Christ's taking our nature on him, of Christ's making satisfaction to God for our
sins, both past, present, and to come, of Christ's fulfilling the Law for us, of
Christ's being punished by God for us, of Christ's merits, or his meritorious
obedience both active and passive, of Christ's purchasing the kingdom of heaven
for us, of Christ's enduring the wrath of God, yea the pains of a damned man, of
Christ's rising from the dead by his own power, of the Ubiquity of Christ's body,
of apprehending and applying Christ's righteousness to our selves by faith, of
Christ's being our Surety, of Christ's paying our debts, of our sins imputed to
Christ, of Christ's righteousness imputed to us, of Christ's dying to appease the
wrath of God, and reconcile him to us, of infused grace, of free grace, of the
the world of the elect, of irresistible workings of the Spirit in bringing men
to believe, of carnal reason, of spiritual desertions, of spiritual incomes, of
the Outgoings of God, of taking up the Ordinance, etc. and thou shall find,
that as these forms of speech are not owned by the Scripture, so neither the
things contained in them. How excellent therefore was that advice of Paul to
Timothy in his second Epistle to him, chap. 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound
words which thou have heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus?
for if we once let go those forms of sound words learned from the Apostles, and
take up such as have been coined by others in succeeding Ages, we shall
together part with the Apostles doctrine, as woeful experience has taught us.
For after Constantine the Great together with the Council of Nice had once
deviated from the language of the Scripture in the business touching the Son of
God, calling him coessential with the Father, this opened a gap for others
afterward, under a pretense of guarding the Truth from Heretics, to devise
new terms at pleasure, which did by degrees so vitiate the chastity and
simplicity of our Faith delivered in the Scripture, that there hardly remained
so much as one point thereof sound and entire. So that as it was wont to be
disputed in the Schools, whether the old ship of Theseus, (which had in a manner
been wholly altered at sundry times by the accession of new pieces of timber
upon the decay of the old) were the same ship it had been at first, and not
rather another by degrees substituted in the stead thereof: in like manner there
was so much of the primitive truth worn away by the corruption that did by
little and little overspread the generality of Christians, and so many errors
in stead thereof tacked to our Religion at several times, that one might justly
question whether it were the same Religion with that which Christ and his
Apostles taught, and not another since devised by men, and put in the room
thereof. But thanks be to God through our Lord Jesus Christ, who amidst the
universal corruption of our Religion, has preserved his written Word entire,
(for had men corrupted it, they would have made it speak more favorably in
behalf of their lusts and worldly interests, then it does) which Word if we
with diligence and sincerity pry into, resolving to embrace the doctrine that
is there plainly delivered, though all the world should set it self against us
for so doing, we shall easily discern the Truth, and so be enabled to reduce
our Religion to its first principles. For thus much I perceive by mine own
experience, who being otherwise of no great abilities, yet setting my self with
the aforesaid resolution for sundry years together upon an impartial search of
the Scripture, have not only detected many errors, but here presented the
Readers with a body of Religion, exactly transcribed out of the Word of God;
which body whosoever shall well ruminate and digest in his mind, may by the
same method, wherein I have gond before him, make a further enquiry into the
Oracles of God, and draw forth whatsoever yet lies hid, and being brought to
light will tend to the accomplishment of Godliness amongst us, for at this only
all the Scripture aims: I say, the Scripture, which all men, who have
thoroughly studied the same, must of necessity be enamoured with, as breathingout
the mere wisdom of God, and being the exactest Rule of a holy life, (which all
religions whatsoever confess to be the way unto Happiness) that can be
imagined, and whose Divinity will never even to the worlds end be questioned by
any, but such as are unwilling to deny their worldly lusts, and obey the pure
and perfect precepts thereof. Which obedience whosoever shall perform, he shall
not only in the life to come, but even in this life be equal unto Angels.

JOHN BIDDLE.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. OF the holy Scripture, or Word of God. Chap. 2. Of God. Chap. 3. Of
the Creation. Chap. 4. Of Christ Jesus. Chap. 5. Of the Holy Ghost. Chap. 6. Of
Salvation by Christ. Chap. 7. Of Christ's Mediation. Chap. 8. Of Christ's
Prophetic Office. Chap. 9. Of Remission of Sins by Christ. Chap. 10. Of
Christ's Kingly Office. Chap. 11. Of Christ's Priestly Office. Chap. 12. Of
Christ's death. Chap. 13. Of the Universality of Gods love. Chap. 14. Of Christ's
Resurection. Chap. 15. Of Justification and Faith. Chap. 16. Of keeping the
Commandments, and having an eye to the Reward; of Perfection in virtue and
godliness to be attained; and of departing from righteousness and Faith. Chap.
17. Of the duty of Subjects and Magistrates, Wives and Husbands, Children and
Parents, Servants and Masters. Chap. 18. Of the behavior of Men and Women in
general; and in special of Aged Men, Aged Women, Young Women, and Young Men.
Chap. 19. Of Prayer. Chap. 20. Of the Church. Chap. 21. Of the Government and
Discipline of the Church. Chap. 22. Of Baptism. Chap. 23. Of the Lords Supper.
Chap. 24. Of the Resurrection of the dead, and the last Judgment; and what
shall be the Final Condition of the Righteous and the Wicked thereupon.
A Scripture-Catechism.
CHAP. I. Of the holy Scripture, or Word of God.
Question. WHat does the Scripture testify concerning its own authority?
Answer. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God. 2 Timothy 3. 16.

Qu. What, concerning its own usefulness and excollencie?
A. All Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness:

That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul.

The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.

The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.

More to be desired are they then gold, yea then much find gold: sweeter also
then honey, and the honeycomb.

Moreover, by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is great
reward. Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times. Psalm. 12. 6.

Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them. Psalm. 119.
129.

Qu. What does the Scripture testify concerning its own sufficiency?
A. The holy Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

These are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of
God, and that believing ye might have life through his name. Joh. 20. 31.

Qu. How would you answer them, who (notwithstanding the testimony of the
Scripture it self touching its own sufficiency) should bear you in hand, that
certain traditions and commandments of men are necessary to salvation?
A. Ye have made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.

In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
Matthew. 15. 6, 9.

Qu. What would you say to a man introducing a new form of words unheard of in
the Scripture, and such a doctrine as tends not to godliness?
A. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard, in faith and love
which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 1. 13.

If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness,

He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words.
1 Timothy 6. 3, 4.

Let that abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. 1 John 2. 24.

Qu. What benefit shall redound unto us thereby?
A. If that which ye have heard from the beginning, shall remain in you, ye
also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. 1 John 2. 24.

Qu. What would you say to such as should require you to follow the judgment
of Fathers, Councels, and Learned Divines, when you find it not agreeable to
the Scripture?
A. To the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them. Isa. 8. 20.

Qu. Is the Scripture plain enough to be understood, even by the simple?
A. The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. Psalm. 19. 7.

The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding to the simple.
Psalm. 119. 130.

Qu. Is the Word of God a dead letter of it self?
A. The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
Heb. 4. 12.

The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. Joh. 6.
63.

Qu. But do the things recorded in the Word of God concern us?
A. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Romans
15. 4.

Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a
wise man which built his house upon a rock. Matthew. 7. 24.

Qu. Which are the most affectionate passages in all the Scripture, flowing
from the mouth of one enamoured on the Word of God?
A. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.

My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times.

O how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day.

How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth.

I love thy commandments above gold, yea above fine gold.

I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds great spoil. Psalm. 119. 14, 20, 97,
103, 127, 162.

CHAP. II. Of God.
Qu. HOw many Gods of Christians are there?
A. One God. Ephesians. 4. 6.

Qu. Who is this one God?
A. The Father, of whom are all things. 1 Cor. 8. 6.

Qu. What is this one God?
A. A spirit. Joh. 4. 24.

Qu. Have you more ample descriptions of God in the Scripture?
A. He is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords:

Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach
unto; whom no man has seen, nor can see. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.

The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion: flow to anger, and of great
mercy.

The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works. Psalm.
145. 8, 9.

Qu. Is not God, according to the current of the Scripture, in a certain place,
namely heaven?
A. Our God is in the heavens. Psalm. 115. 3.

The Lord looks from heaven: he beholds all the sons of men.

From the place of his habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants of the
earth. Psalm. 33. 13, 14.

Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth. Eccles. 5. 2.

Look down from thy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people Israel. Deuteronomy.
26. 15.

Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of
thy glory. Isa. 63. 15.

Hear thou from thy dewlling place, from heaven.

Hear thou from heaven.

Hear thou from the heavens.

Hear thou from heaven.

Hear thou from heaven thy dewlling place.

Hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dewlling place.

Hear thou from the heavens.

Hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dewlling place. 2 Chronicles. 6. 21, 23,
25, 27, 30, 33, 35, 39.

Your Father which is in heaven.

Your Father which is in heaven.

Your Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5. 16, 45, 48.

Your Father which is in heaven.

Our Father which art in heaven. Mat. 6. 2, 9.

Your Father which is in heaven.

My Father which is in heaven. Mat. 7. 11, 21.

In heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven. Matthew. 18. 10.

These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the
hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee.

I have glorified thee on the earth.

And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self. Joh. 17. 1, 4, 5.

I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the
world, and go to the Father. Joh. 16. 28.

Jesus knew that his hour was come, that he should depart out of this world to
the Father. Joh. 13. 1.

And he being full of the holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw
the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.

And said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the
right hand of God. Act. 7. 55, 56.

Qu. Is God in the Scripture said to have any likeness, image, similitude,
person, and shape?
A. God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.

So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him. Genesis
1. 26, 27.

In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him. Genesis 5. 1.

Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of
God made he man. Genesis 9. 6.

My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my house.

With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches: and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold. Number. 12. 7, 8.

Therewith bless we God, even the Father: and therewith curse we men, which are
made after the similitude of God. Jam. 3. 9.

Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him?

Will ye accept his person? Job 13. 7, 8.

The Father himself, which has sent me, has born witness of me. Ye have
neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. Joh. 5. 37.

Qu. What passage of the Scripture intimates, not only that the Saints, in the
perfect state of the world to come, shall see God face to face, but also
comprehend, or fully know him?
A. When that which is perfect, is come, then that which is in part, shall be
done away.

For now we see through a glass darkly; but then face to face: now I know in
part, but then shall I know even as also I am known. 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12.

Qu. Are there not, according to the perpetual tenor of the Scripture,
affections, or passions in God, as anger, fury, zeal, wrath, love, hatred,
mercy, grace, jealousy, repentance, grief, joy, fear?
A. Israel joined himself to Baal-peor: and the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang them
up before the Lord against the sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be
turned away. Number. 25. 3, 4.

Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon
them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the Lord have spoken
it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them. Ezekiel. 5. 13.

Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why does thy wrath wax hot
against thy people?

Turn from thy fierce wrath. Exodus 32. 11, 12.

The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Romans 1. 18.

The God of love and peace shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love.

God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. 1 John 4. 8, 16.

Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness.

Thou hate all the workers of iniquity. Psalm. 5. 4, 5.

Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort. 2 Cor. 1. 3.

God who is rich in mercy. Ephesians. 2. 4.

The God of all grace. 1 Pet. 5. 10.

The Lord God, merciful and gracious. Exodus 34. 6.

I the Lord thy God, am ajealous God. Exodus 20. 5.

They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God. Deuteronomy. 32. 21.

The Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. Exodus
32. 14.

And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him
at his heart.

And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created, from the face of
the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the
air: for it repents me that I have made them. Genesis 6. 6, 7.

And they put away the strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord, and
his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel. Judge. 10. 16.

The Lord will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy
fathers. Deuteronomy. 30. 9.

I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of
them to cease from among men:

Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries
should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high,
and the Lord has not done all this. Deuteronomy. 32. 26, 27.

Qu. Does not God know all our thoughts, words and actions?
A. Thou know my down-sitting, and mine up-rising; thou understandest my
thought afar off.

Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways.

For there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it
altogether. Psalm. 139. 2, 3, 4.

Qu. As for our free actions, which are neither past, nor present, but may
afterward either be or not be, what are the chief passages of the Scripture,
from whence it is wont to be gathered, that God knows not such actions, till
they come to pass? yea, that there are such actions?
A. Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every
fowl of the air, and brought them unto Adam, to see what he would call them.
Genesis 2. 19.

The Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and
evil: and now lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life,
and eat, and live for ever;

Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden. Genesis 3. 22, 23.

And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.

And it repented the Lord that he had made man, and it grieved him at his
heart.

And the Lord said, I will destroy man, whom I have created, from the face of
the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the
air: for it repents me that I have made them. Genesis 6. 5, 6, 7.

And it came to pass that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him,

Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, and offer him for a burnt-offering.

And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.

And the angel of the Lord called unto him, and said, Lay not thine hand upon
the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fear
God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me. Genesis 22.
1, 2, 10, 11, 12.

And God said unto Moses, Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and say
unto them, The Lord God of your fathers appeared unto me.

And they shall hearken to thy voice.

And Moses answered, and said, But behold, they will not believe me; nor
hearken to my voice.

And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thy hand? And he said, A rod.

And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it
became a serpent.

And the Lord said to Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And
he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand.

That they may believe that the Lord God of their fathers has appeared to
thee.

And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom.
And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold, his hand
was leprous as snow.

And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into
his bosom again, and plucked it out of his bosom, and behold, it was turned
again as his other flesh.

And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the
voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.

And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs,
neither hearken to thy voice, that thou shall take of the water of the river,
and pour it upon the dry-land: and the water, which thou take out of the
river, shall become blood upon the dry-land. Exodus 3. 15, 16, 18. Exodus 4. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, God led them not
through the way of the land of the Philistims, although that was near: for God
said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to
Egypt. Exodus 13. 17.

Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you;
and the people shall go out, and gather a certain rate every day, that I may
prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no. Exodus 16. 4.

And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.
Exodus 32. 14.

I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur
against me.

Doubtless ye shall not come into the land concerning which I swear to make you
dwell therein. Number. 14. 27, 30.

Thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty
years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in
thy heart, whether thou would keep his commandments, or no. Deuteronomy. 8. 2.

The Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with
all your heart, and with all your soul. Deuteronomy. 13. 3.

I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of
them to cease from among men:

Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries
should behave themselves strangely; lest they should say, Our hand is high, and
the Lord has not done all this. Deuteronomy. 32. 26, 27.

Now these are the nations which the Lord left, to prove Israel by them; and
they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the
commandments of the Lord. Judge. 3. 1, 4.

The Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed, that thy house, and the house of
thy father, should walk before me for ever: but now the Lord says, Be it far
from me: for them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel, saying, It repents me that I
have set up Saul to be king, for he is turned back from following me, and has
not performed my commandments. 1 Samuel 15. 10, 11.

Hezekiah prospered in all his works.

Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent
unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to
try him, that he might know what was in his heart. 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.

What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?
wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes? Isa. 5. 4.

Thus says the Lord, Stand in the court of the Lords house, and speak unto all
the cities of Judah;

If so be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may
repent me of the evil which I purpose to do unto them. Jer. 26. 2, 3.

This word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words, that I have
spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah.

It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do
unto them, that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may forgive
their iniquity and their sin. Jer. 36. 1, 2, 3.

The word of the Lord came to me, saying,

Prepare thee stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; it may be
they will consider, though they be a rebellious house. Ezekiel. 12. 1, 3.

In every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God. Phil. 4. 6.

As we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, so we speak, not
as pleasing men, but God, which tries our hearts. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.

Qu. How must we worship God?
A. They that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. Joh. 4. 24.

Qu. How must one love him?
A. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy might. Deuteronomy. 6. 5.

Qu. Could we love him with all the heart, if he were three? or is his oneness
the cause hinted by Moses why we should love him thus? How sound the words
according to the Sea Ainsworth's Translation
truth of the Hebrew text?
A. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one. Deuteronomy. 6. 4.

Qu. Wherein consists the love of God?
A. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. 1 John 5. 3.

Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected. 1 John 2.
5.

Qu. What if a man say he loves God, and in the mean time hates his brother?
A. If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: for he that
loves not his brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has
not seen? 1 John 4. 20.

Qu. What advantage will it be to you, to know the Father the only true God?
How speaks Christ in his prayer to the Father, concerning this thing?
A. This is life eternal, that they may know thee the only true God. Joh. 17.
3.

CHAP. III. Of the Creation.
Qu. WEre the heaven and earth from all eternity, or created at a certain time?
and by whom?
A. In the beginning God created heaven and earth. Genesis 1. 1.

Qu. How long was God a making them?
A. In six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them
is. Exodus 20. 11.

Qu. How did God create man?
A. The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. Genesis 2. 7.

Qu. How did he create woman?
A. The Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept; and he took
one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in stead thereof.

And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and
brought her unto the man. Genesis 2. 21, 22.

Qu. Why was she called woman?
A. Because she was taken out of man. Genesis 2. 23.

Qu. What does Moses infer from her being made a woman, and brought unto the
man?
A. Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave to
his wife: and they shall be one flesh. Genesis 2. 24.

Qu. Where did God put man, after he was created?
A. The Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there he put the man
whom he had formed. Genesis 2. 8.

Qu. What commandment gave he to the man, when he put him into the garden?
A. The Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou
may freely eat:

But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it;
for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Genesis 2. 16, 17.

Qu. Was the man deceived to eat of the forbidden fruit?
A. Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the
transgression. 1 Timothy 2. 14.

Qu. By whom was the woman deceived?
A. The serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty. 2 Cor. 11. 3.

Qu. How was the woman induced to eat of the forbidden fruit? and how, the man?
A. When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he
did eat. Genesis 3. 6.

Qu. What effect followed upon their eating?
A. The eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked: and
they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. Genesis 3. 7.

Qu. Did the sin of our first parents in eating of the forbidden fruit bring
both upon them and their posterity the guilt of hellfire, deface the image of
God in them, darken their understanding, enslave their will, deprive them of
power to do good, and cause mortality? If not, what are the true penalties that
God denounced against them for the said offense?
A. Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and thy
conception: in sorrow thou shall bring forth children; and thy desire shall be
to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

Unto Adam he said, Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and
have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat
of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat of it all
the days of thy life.

Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee: and thou shall eat the
herb of the field.

In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the
ground: for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall
thou return. Genesis 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.

CHAP. IV. Of Christ Jesus.
Qu. HOw many Lords of Christians are there, by way of distinction from that
one God?
A. One Lord. Ephesians. 4. 5.

Qu. Who is that one Lord?
A. Jesus Christ, by whom are all things. 1 Cor. 8. 6.

Qu. How was Jesus Christ born?
A. The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: when as his mother Mary was
espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the
holy Ghost. Matthew. 1. 18.

The angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary;

Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call
his name Jesus.

He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest.

Then said Mary to the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?

And the angel answered and said unto her, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. Luke 1. 30, 31, 32, 34, 35.

Qu. How came Jesus Christ to be Lord, according to the opinion of the apostle
Paul?
A. To this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord
of the dead and living. Romans 14. 9.

Qu. What says the apostle Peter also concerning the time and manner of his
being made Lord?
A. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses.

Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye now see
and hear.

Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that
same Jesus, whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ. Acts 2. 32, 33, 36.

Qu. Did not Jesus approve himself to be God by his miracles? and did he not
those miracles by a Divine nature of his own, and because he was God himself?
What is the determination of the Apostle Peter in this behalf?
A. Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God by miracles, wonders and signs,
which God did by him. Acts 2. 22.

God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost, and with power, who went
about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil: for God was
with him. Acts 10. 38.

Qu. Could not Christ do all things of himself? and was it not an eternal Son
of God that took flesh upon him, and to whom the humane nature of Christ was
personally united, that wrought all his works? Answer me to these things in the
words of the Son himself.
A. Verily, verily I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what
he sees the Father do: for what things soever he does, these also does the Son
likewise.

For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself does;
and he will show him greater works then these, that ye may marvel.

I can do nothing of my self. Joh. 5. 19, 20, 30.

The Father that dwells in me, he does the works. Joh. 14. 10.

Qu. What reason does the Son render, why the Father did not forsake him, and
cast him out of favor? was it not because he was of the same essence with him,
so that it was impossible for the Father to forsake him; or cease to love him?
A. He that has sent me, is with me; the Father has not left me alone, for I
do always those things that please him. Joh. 8. 28, 29.

As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you: continue in my love.

If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my
Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. Joh. 15. 9, 10.

Qu. Does the Scripture avouch Christ to be the Son of God because he was
eternally begotten out of the Divine essence, or for other reasons agreeing to
him only as a man? Rehearse the passages to this purpose.
A. The angel said unto her, Fear not Mary: for thou have found favor with God.

And behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall
call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the
Highest, and the Lord God shall give to him the throne of his father David.

Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?

And the angel answered and said unto her, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy
thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Luke 1. 30,
31, 32, 34, 35.

Say ye of him, whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou
blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God? Joh. 10. 36.

We declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the
fathers,

God has fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he has raised up
Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee. Act. 13. 32, 33.

And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first-begotten of
the dead. Rev. 1. 5.

He is the head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning, the firstborn
from the dead. Col. 1. 18.

Being made so much better then the angels, As he has by inheritance obtained
a more excellent name then they.

For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son. Heb. 1. 4, 5.

So also Christ glorified not himself, to be made an high priest: but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. Heb. 5. 5.

Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Romans 8. 29.

Qu. What says the Son himself concerning the prerogative of God the Father
above him?
A. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for
my Father is greater then I. Joh. 14. 28.

But of that day and that hour knows none, no not the angels which are in
heaven, nor the Son, but the Father. Mark 13. 32.

Of that day and hour knows none, no not the angels of heaven, but my Father
only. Matthew. 24. 36.

Qu. What says the Apostle Paul?
A. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God
even the Father.

And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself
be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.
1 Cor. 15. 24, 28.

I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ: and the head of
the woman is the man: and the head of Christ is God. 1 Cor. 11. 3.

All are yours,

And ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.

Qu. Howbeit is not Christ dignified, as with the title of Lord, so also with
that of God, in the Scripture?
A. Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God. John 20. 28.

Qu. Was he so the God of Thomas, as that he himself in the mean time did not
acknowledge another to be his God?
A. Jesus says unto her, Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto
my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God. Joh. 20. 17.

Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall
go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven
from my God. Rev. 3. 12.

Qu. Have you any passage of the Scripture, where Christ, at the same time that
he has the appellation of God given to him, is said to have a God?
A. But unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom:

Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, wherefore God thy God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Heb. 1. 8, 9.

CHAP. V. Of the Holy Ghost.
Qu. HOw many Holy Spirits of Christians are there?
A. One Spirit. Ephesians. 4. 4.

Qu. Wherein consists the prerogative of the Holy Spirit above other spirits?
A. The Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God.

For who of men knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is
in him? even so the things of God knows none, save the Spirit of God. 1 Cor.
2. 10, 11.

Qu. Whence is the Holy Ghost sent?
A. Down from heaven. 1 Pet. 1. 12.

Qu. By whom?
A. God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts. Gal. 4. 6.

Qu. Does not Christ affirm that he also sends him? how speaks he?
A. If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I
will send him. Joh. 16. 7.

Qu. Had Jesus Christ always the power to send the Holy Ghost, or did he obtain
it at a certain time?
A. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses.

Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye now see
and hear. Act. 2. 32, 33.

This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him, should receive:
for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified.
Joh. 7. 39.

Qu. What were the general benefits accruing to Christians by the Holy Ghost?
A. By one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 13.

The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God.

Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit himself makes intercession for us
with groanings which cannot be uttered.

And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit,
because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God.
Romans 8. 16, 26, 27.

The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given
unto us. Romans 5. 5.

Your love in the Spirit. Col. 1. 8.

That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you
the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him. Ephesians. 1. 17.

The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may
abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost. Romans 15. 13.

The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17.

Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and
were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
holy Ghost, were multiplied. Acts 9. 31.

The he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened
with might, by his Spirit, in the inner man. Ephesians. 3. 16.

Qu. What are the special benefits accruing to the apostles by the holy Ghost?
what says Christ to them hereof?
A. The Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. Joh. 15. 26.

When he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. Joh.
16. 13.

Qu. Should the holy Ghost lead them into all truth, as speaking of himself,
and imparting of his own fullness? What says Christ concerning him?
A. He shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak.

He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you. Joh. 16. 13, 14.

Qu. Do men receive the holy Ghost while they are of the world, and in their
natural condition, to the end that they may become the children of God, may
receive the word, may believe, may repent, may obey Christ? or, after they are
become the children of God, have received the word, do believe, do repent, do
obey Christ?
A. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever.

Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him. Joh. 14. 16, 17.

The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14.

Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Gal. 4. 6.

When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria had received the
word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, who when they were come down,
prayed for them that they might receive the holy Ghost.

For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus. Acts 8. 14, 15, 16.

He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water.

But this he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: for the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified. Joh. 7. 38, 39.

Paul, having passed through the upper coasts, came to Ephesus, and finding
certain disciples,

He said unto them, Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye believed? and they
said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost,
Act. 19. 1, 2.

In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise. Ephesians. 1. 13.

That we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. Gal. 3. 14.

God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word
of the Gospel, and believe.

And God which knows the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the holy
Ghost, even as he did unto us. Acts 15. 7, 8.

Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Acts 2. 38.

And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the holy Ghost, whom
God has given to them that obey him. Acts 5. 32.

CHAP. VI. Of Salvation by Christ.
Qu. IS not Christ in Scripture called a Savior?
A. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3. 18.

Q. Is Christ our Savior originally and of himself, or because he was given,
exalted, and raised up by another to be a Savior?
A. There is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved. Act. 4. 12.

Him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior. Acts 5. 31.

Of this man's seed has God, accorcording to his promise, raised unto Israel a
Savior, Jesus. Acts 13. 23.

Q. How do the Saints expect to be saved by Christ?
A. We shall be saved by his life. Romans 5. 10.

We look for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile
bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to
the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. Phil. 3.
20, 21.

CHAP. VII. Of Christ's Mediation.
Q. IS not Christ called the Mediator between God and men?
A. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus. 1 Timothy 2. 5.

Q. Is not Christ also called the Mediator of the New Covenant? or of a better
Covenant?
A. Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant. Heb. 12. 24.

He is the Mediator of a better covenant. Heb. 8. 6.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ's Prophetic Office.
Q. IS not Christ dignified as with the title of Mediator, so also with that of
Prophet?
A. He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you.

For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise
up unto you, of your brethren, like unto me. Acts 3. 20, 22.

Q. Forasmuch as Christ was to be a Prophet like unto Moses, and Moses had this
privilege above other Prophets, that God made not himself known to him in a
vision, nor spoke to him in a dream, but face to face, as a man speaks to a
friend, and showed to him the similitude of the Lord, Exodus 33. 11. Number. 12. 6,
7, 8. can you cite any passage of the Scripture, which intimates that Christ
did see God, before the discharge of his Prophetic Office?
A. Every man that has heard and learned from the Father, comes to me.

Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is from God, he has seen
the Father. Joh. 6. 45, 46.

Qu. From whence does it appear that Christ, like to Moses, heard from God the
things that he spoke?
A. Ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard
from God. Joh. 8. 40.

He that has sent me is true, and I speak to the world those things which I
have heard from him.

As my Father has taught me, I speak these things. Joh. 8. 26, 28.

All things that I have heard from my Father, have I made known unto you. Joh.
15. 15.

I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received
them. Joh. 17. 8.

Qu. Can you further cite any passages to prove that Christ as a man ascended
into heaven, and was there, and came from God out of heaven, before he showed
himself to the world, and discharged his Prophetic Office; so that the talking
of Moses with God in the person of an angel bearing the name of God, was but a
shadow of Christ's talking with God?
A. No man has ascended into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the
Son of man, which is (or, rather, was) in heaven. Joh. 3. 13.

What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascending up where he was before? Joh.
6. 62.

I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me. Joh. 6. 38.

I am the living bread which came down from heaven. Joh. 6. 51.

Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true
bread from heaven.

For the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life to
the world.

The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down
from heaven.

And they said, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we
know? how is it then that he says, I came down from heaven? Joh. 6. 32, 33,
41, 42.

As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so, he that
eats me, shall live by me.

This is that bread which came down from heaven. Joh. 6. 57, 58.

I proceeded forth and came from God. Ioh. 8. 42.

Ye are from beneath, I am from above: ye are of this world, I am not of this
world. Ioh. 8. 29.

Jesus knowing that he was come from God, and goes to God. Ioh. 13. 1, 3.

I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the
world, and go to the Father.

His disciples said unto him, Lo, now thou speak plainly, and speak no
parable.

Now are we sure that thou know all things, and need not that any man
should ask thee: by this we believe that thou came forth from God. Ioh. 16.
28, 29, 30.

I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received
them, and known surely that I came out from thee. Ioh. 17. 8.

Qu. Of what consequence was it, in the judgment of Christ himself, that his
disciples had believed that he came out from God? what says he?
A. The Father himself loves you, because ye have believed that I came out
from God. Ioh. 16. 27.

Qu. Does not John the Baptist affirm that Christ surpassed all others, because
he came down from heaven above? what says he?
A. He that comes from above, is above all: he that is of the earth, (or
rather, was from the earth) is earthly, (or rather, is of the earth) and
speaks of the earth. He that comes from heaven, is above all.

And what he has seen and heard, that he speaks. Ioh. 3. 30, 31, 32.

Qu. You have already showed that Christ was like unto Moses in seeing God, and
hearing from him the things which he spoke. But Moses exceeded all other
Prophets likewise in that he only was a lawgiver. Was Christ therefore like
unto Moses in giving a law also? and is there any mention of his law?
A. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. 6. 2.

Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay: but by the
law of faith. Romans 3. 27.

The law of liberty. Iam. 2. 12.

The perfect law of liberty. Iam. 1. 25.

Qu. Does not Christ then partly perfect, partly correct the law of Moses? What
is the determination of Christ himself concerning this matter?
A. Ye have heard, that it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not kill:
and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.

But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say unto his brother,
Raka, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hellfire.

Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery.

But I say unto you, That whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a
writing of divorcement.

But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the
cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry
her that is divorced, commits adultery.

Again, ye have heard that it has been said to them of old time, Thou shall
not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths.

But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne;

Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
city of the great King.

Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black.

But let your communication be, Yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then
these, comes of evil.

Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth.

But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.

And if a man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have
thy cloak also.

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not
thou away.

Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and has
thine enemy.

But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute
you.

That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he makes
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and
on the unjust. Matthew. 5. 21, 22, 27, 28, etc.

Qu. You have made it plainly to appear that the law of faith, or the new
covenant, whereof Christ was the Mediator, is better then the law of works, or
the old covenant, whereof Moses was the Mediator, in respect of precepts: is it
also better in respect of promises?
A. He has obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much he is the Mediator
of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises. Heb. 8. 6.

The law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did. Heb.
7. 19.

Qu. Were those better promises of God touching eternal life and immortality
hidden in the dark, and not brought to light under the law?
A. Christ Jesus has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel.
2 Timothy 1. 10.

Qu. Though the promises of the Gospel be better then those of the law, yet are
they not (as well as those of the law) proposed under conditions of faith and
perseverance therein, of holiness and obedience, of repentance, of suffering
for Christ and his truth, etc? How speaks the Scripture hereupon?
A. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness; even so must the Son of
man be lifted up:

That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.

For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the
onely-begotten Son of God.

He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that believes not
the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on him. Joh. 3. 14,
15, 16, 18, 36.

Then said Jesus to the Jews that believed on him, If ye continue in my word,
then are ye my disciples indeed. Joh. 8. 31.

We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence
steadfast to the end. Heb. 2. 14.

But Christ as a Son over his own house; whose house we are, If we hold fast
the confidence, and the rejoyoing of the hope firm unto the end. Heb. 3. 6.

If a man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor. 2 Timothy 2.
21.

If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Romans 8. 13.

Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Act.
3. 19.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his
place, except thou repent. Rev. 2. 5.

Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them
with the sword of my mouth. Rev. 2. 16.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Joh. 13. 17.

Whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings, and does them, I will show you
to whom he is like.

He is like a man which built a house, and dug deep, and laid the foundation
on a rock.

But he that hears, and does not, is like a man that without a foundation
built an house upon the earth. Luke 6. 47, 48, 49.

If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he will also deny
us. 2 Timothy 2. 12.

If children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs of Christ: if so be
that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. Romans 8. 17.

CHAP. IX. Of Remission of sins by Christ.
Qu. WHo shall have remission of sins by Christ? What says the Apostle Peter?
A. To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. Acts 10. 43.

Qu. Does not Christ himself forgive sins? What says the Apostle Paul?
A. As Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Col. 3. 13.

Qu. When Christ forgave sins on the earth, did he forgive them as being God,
or as being a man empowered by God? Likewise when he now forgiveth sins in
heaven, does he forgive them as God, or as one exalted by God to that end? Cite
the Scriptures pertinent hereunto.
A. Jesus seeing their faith, says to the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good
cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee.

And behold, certain of the Scribes said within themselves, This man
blasphemeth.

And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?

For whether is easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and
walk?

But that ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins,
(then speaks he to the sick of the palsy) Arise, take up thy bed, and go
unto thine house.

And he arose, and departed to his house.

And when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God, which had
given such power to men. Matthew. 9. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior, for to give repentance and
remission of sins to Israel. Act. 5. 31.

CHAP. X. Of Christ's Kingly Office.
Qu. WAs not Christ Jesus to be a King? what says the angel Gabriel to the
virgin Mary concerning this?
A. Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall
call his name Jesus.

He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of David his father.

And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there
shall be no end. Luke 1. 31, 32, 33.

Qu. Is Christ Jesus already invested in his kingdom, and did he after his
ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God, exercise dominion
and sovereignty over men and angels? Rehearse some clear passages of the
Scripture to this purpose.
A. That ye may know,

What is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, according
to the working of his mighty power:

Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at
his own right hand in the heavenly places,

Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name
that is named not only in this world, but also in that which is to come:

And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

By the resurrection of Jesus Christ:

Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God, angels, and
authorities, and powers, being made subject to him. 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22.

And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first-begotten of
the dead, and Prince of the kings of the earth: Unto him that has loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood,

And has made us kings and priests unto God even his Father; to him be glory
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Rev. 1. 5, 6.

Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and Savior, for to
give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Acts 5. 30, 31.

To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I
overcame, and am set with my Father in his throne. Rev. 3. 21.

I Jesus have sent mine angel, to testify unto you these things in the
Churches. Rev. 22. 16.

Brother Saul, the Lord (even Jesus that appeared unto thee in the way as thou
came) has sent me, that thou might receive thy sight, and be filled with
the holy Ghost. Act. 9. 17.

These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he
is Lord of lords, and King of kings. Rev. 17. 14.

He was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called, The word
of God.

And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written, King of kings,
and Lord of lords. Rev. 19. 13, 16.

All power is given unto me in heaven and earth.

Go ge therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I
am with you always even unto the end of the world. Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20.

So then after the Lord had spoken to them, he was received up into heaven, and
sat on the right hand of God.

And they went forth and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and
confirming the word with signs following. Mark 16. 19, 20.

Qu. For what cause, and to what ends was Christ Jesus exalted to his kingdom?
A. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.

Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth:

And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father. Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and Savior, to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Acts 5. 31.

Qu. How ought men to honor the Son of God Christ Jesus?
A. Even as they honor the Father. Joh. 5. 23.

Qu. What danger is there in not honoring the Son?
A. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father that sent him. Joh.
5. 23.

Qu. Ought men to honor the Son as they honor the Father, because he has the
same essence with the Father, or because he has the same judiciary power? What
is the decision of the Son himself concerning this point?
A. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son:

That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. Joh. 5.
22, 23.

Qu. Did the Father give judiciary power to the Son, because he had in him the
divine nature personally united to the humane, or because he was the Son of
man? What is the decision of the Son himself concerning this point also?
A. He has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of
man. Joh. 5. 27.

Qu. Is it the will of God that Jesus Christ should be worshipped of angels and
men?
A. When he brings the first-begotten into the world, he says, And let all
the angels of God worship him. Heb. 1. 6.

God has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name:

That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth. Phil. 2. 9, 10.

Qu. Did men worship Jesus Christ before his death and resurrection? what
examples thereof have you?
A. Then they that were in the ship, came and worshipped him, saying, Of a
truth thou art the Son of God. Matthew. 14. 33.

Jesus said unto him, Do thou believe on the Son of God? He answered and
said, Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?

And Jesus said unto him, Thou have both seen him, and it is he that talks
with thee.

And he said, Lord, I believe: and he worshipped him. Joh. 9. 35, 36. 37, 38.

Qu. Did men worship Christ after his resurrection and ascension? And what
example thereof have you?
A. It came to pass while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried
up into heaven:

And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem, with great joy. Luke 24.
51, 52.

Qu. When men ascribe glory and dominion to Christ Jesus in the Scripture, and
withal intimate the ground thereof, is it because they conceive him to be very
God of very God, and to have been eternally begotten out of the Divine essence,
or because he gave himself to death? Let me hear how they explain themselves.
A. Unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,

And has made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father; to him be glory
and dominion for ever and ever. Rev. 1. 5, 6.

Qu. Are the Angels of the same opinion with the Saints, when they also ascribe
glory and dominion to him? let me hear how they also explain themselves.
A. I beheld, and heard the voice of many angels, saying with a loud voice,
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. Rev. 5. 11, 12.

Qu. May men call upon the name of Jesus Christ? and have you examples of such
as have prayed to him?
A. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many, of this man, how much
evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem:

And here he has authority from the chief priests, to bind all that call upon
thy name. Acts 9. 13, 13.

With all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours. 1 Cor. 1. 2.

And they stoned Stephen, saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. Acts 7. 59.

Even so, come, Lord Jesus. Rev. 22. 20.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved
us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and a good hope through grace,

Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. 2 These. 2.
16, 17.

Now God himself even our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto
you. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11.

CHAP. XI. Of Christ's Priestly Office.
Qu. IS not Christ Jesus a Priest?
A. We have a great highpriest, Jesus the Son of God. Heb. 4. 14.

Qu. Did not Christ take this honor to himself?
A. Christ glorified not himself to become an high priest: but he that said
unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. Heb. 5. 5.

Qu. What manner of high priest is Christ?
A. Such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in the heavens:

A minister of the sanctuary, and of the tabernacle, which the Lord pitched,
and not man. Heb. 8. 1, 2.

Qu. Was not Christ a priest whilst he was on earth, namely when he died on he
cross?
A. If he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that there are
priests who offer gifts according to the Law. Heb. 8. 4.

And it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of Melchisedeck
there arises another priest,

Who is made, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of
an endless life. Heb. 7. 15, 16.

Qu. What benefit happens by Christ's priesthood?
A. He became the author of eternal salvation,

Called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedeck. Heb. 5. 9, 10.

Qu. Unto whom is Christ, as a Priest, become the author of eternal salvation?
A. Unto all them that obey him. Heb. 5. 9.

Qu. How can Christ save them by his priesthood?
A. He is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them. Heb. 7. 25.

Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. Heb. 9. 28.

Qu. Is not the sacrifice of Christ to be reiterated, as that of the Levitical
Priests? if not, what is the reason thereof?
A. Every priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same
sacrifices, which can never take away sins.

But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down
at the right hand of God: from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made
his footstool.

For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Heb.
10. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Qu. How did Christ enter into the holy place to offer himself?
A. By his own blood. Heb. 9. 12.

Qu. Why would God have Christ come to his priestly office by sufferings?
A. It became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect
through sufferings.

That he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. Heb. 2. 10, 17, 18.

Q. What is the true and genuine use you would have us make of this doctrine?
A. Seeing that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.

For we have not an high priest that cannot be touched with a feeling of our
infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.

Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16.

CHAP. XII. Of Christ's Death.
Qu. WAs it the will and purpose of God that Christ should suffer the death of
the cross? What says the apostle Peter to the Jews concerning this?
A. Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God among you,

Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye
have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. Act. 2. 22, 23.

Q. What say the disciples in general concerning the same?
They lift up their voice to God with one accord, and said,

Of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod,
and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered
together,

For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.
Acts 4. 24, 27, 28.

Q. Did Christ die to reconcile and bring God to us, or on the contrary, to
reconcile and bring us to God?
A. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.
Romans 5. 10.

He is our peace, who has made both one.

That he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain
the enmity thereby. Ephesians. 2. 14, 16.

God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. 2 Cor. 5. 19.

Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God. 1 Pet. 3. 18.

Qu. For whom did Christ die?
A. We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead.

And that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. 2 Cor. 5.
14, 15.

There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,

Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. 1 Timothy 2. 5,
6.

We see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the angels, for the suffering
of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God should
taste death for every man. Heb. 2. 9.

I am the living bread, which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. Joh. 6. 51.

Q. What was the procuring cause of Christ's death?
A. He was delivered for our offenses. Romans 4. 25.

He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities.
Isai. 53. 5.

Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15. 3.

Qu. What are the ends of Christ's suffering and death, intimated by the
Scripture?
A. He learned obedience by the things which he suffered. Heb. 5. 8.

Christ suffered for you, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his
steps. 1 Pet. 2. 21.

Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God. 1 Pet. 3. 18.

This is my blood of the New Testament, (or, New Covenant) that is shed for
many for the remission of sins. Mat. 26. 28.

That through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the devil;

And deliver them, who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject
unto bondage. Heb. 2. 14, 15.

That he might sanctify the people with his own blood. Heb. 13. 12.

That whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
10.

That they which live, should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him
which died for them, and rose again. 2 Cor. 5. 15.

Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world. Gal. 1. 4.

Ye who were sometimes far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle
wall of partition between us:

Having abolished in his flesh the law of commandments in ordinances, for to
make in himself of twain, one new man, so making peace.

And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having
slain the enmity thereby. Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16.

It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell,

And having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all
things to himself (or rather, for him) by him, I say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven.

And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked
works, yet now has he reconciled,

In the body of his flesh through death. Col. 1. 20, 21, 22.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Universality of Gods love.
Qu. THose Scriptures which you have already alleged, when I enquired for
whom Christ died, intimate the universality of Gods love to men: yet sorasmuch
as this is a point of the greatest importance, without the knowledge and belief
whereof, we cannot have any true and solid ground of coming unto God, (because
if he from all eternity intended good only to a few, and those few are not set
down in the Scriptures, (which were written that we through comfort of them
might have hope, Romans 15. 4.) no man can certainly, yea probably infer that he
is in the number of those few, the contrary being, ten thousand to one, more
likely) what other clear tassages of Scripture have you, which show, that God,
in sending Christ, and proposing the Gospel, aimed not at the salvation of a
certain elect number, but of men in general?
A. God so loved the world, that he gave his onely-begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

For God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. Joh. 3. 16, 17.

The bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life to the
world. Joh. 6. 33.

Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves,
and know that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. Joh. 4. 42.

We have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior
of the world. 1 John 4. 14.

I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me, should not
abide in darkness.

And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not
to judge the world, but to save the world. Joh. 12. 46, 47.

Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature:

He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that believes not,
shall be condemned. Mark 16. 15, 16.

If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from
the hope of the Gospel which ye have heard, and which was preached to every
creature which is under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a minister. Col. 1. 22.

We preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we
may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Col. 1. 28.

I exhort that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be
made for all men.

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior,

WHO WILL HAVE ALL MEN TO BE SAVED, AND TO COME UNTO THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
TRUTH. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 3, 4.

The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count slackness)
but is long-suffering to usward, NOT WILLING THAT ANY SHOULD PERISH, BUT THAT
ALL SHOULD COME TO REPENTANCE, 2 Pet. 3. 9.

God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them. 2 Cor. 5. 19.

We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:

And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2. 1, 2.

Qu. These texts which you have now cited, are all taken out of the New
Testament; is there not a like manifestation of the universality of Gods love
in the Old? How speaks the prophet Ezekiel?
A. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live: turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.
11.

Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God:
wherefore turn your selves, and live ye. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.

Qu. What says Jeremiah?
A. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. Lam. 3. 33.

Qu. What says David?
A. The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion: slow to anger, and of great
mercy.

The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works. Psalm.
145. 8, 9.

CHAP. XIV. Of Christ's Resurrection.
Qu. Ought Christ, as to suffer, so also to rise from the dead the third day?
A. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
the dead the third day. Luke 24. 46.

He rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15. 4.

Qu. Was there so great power and consequence in Christ's resurrection? How
speaks Paul?
A. I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord.

That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection. Phil. 3. 8, 10.

If Christ be not risen, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins.

Then they also that are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. 1 Cor. 15. 17,
18.

It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again. Romans 8. 34.

Qu. How speaks Peter?
A. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. 1 Pet. 1. 3.

Qu. Did Christ rise by his own power, yea did he raise himself at all? or was
he raised by the power of another, and did another raise him? What is the
perpetual tenor of the Scripture to this purpose?
A. Though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the power of
God. 2 Cor. 13. 4.

Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father. Romans 6. 4.

By Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead. Gal. 1. 1.

If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, dwell in you;
he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies,
by his Spirit that dwells in you. Romans 8. 11.

He which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus. 2 Cor. 4.
14.

Ye turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true God,

And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus
which delivers us from the wrath to come. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10.

Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the Name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead,
even by him does this man stand here before you whole. Acts 4. 10.

The God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus. Heb. 13. 20.

But God raised him from the dead.

God has fulfilled the same unto us, in that he has raised up Jesus again.

And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead.

He whom God raised again, saw no corruption. Acts 13. 30, 33, 34, 37.

Him God raised up the third day. Act. 10. 40.

God has both raised up the Lord, and will also raise us up by his own power.
1 Cor. 6. 14.

Who by him believe in God that raised him up from the dead, and gave him
glory. 1 Pet. 1. 21.

Qu. Were the Apostles and the Holy Spirit himself sent to bear witness that
Christ raised himself, or that God raised him? How speaks the Scripture?
A. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses. Acts 2. 32.

The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, has
glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up; and denied him in the presence
of Pilate;

And killed the Prince of life, whom God has raised from the dead, whereof we
are witnesses. Acts 3. 13, 15.

The God of our fathers raised up Jesus.

Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and Savior,

And we are his witnesses, of these things, and so is also the Holy Spirit,
whom God has given to all them that obey him. Acts 5. 30, 31, 32.

We have testified of God, that he raised up Christ. 1 Cor. 15. 15.

Qu. Of what consequence is it to believe that Christ was thus raised?
A. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine
heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Romans 10. 9.

Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was impured to him.

But for us, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up
Jesus our Lord from the dead. Romans 4. 3, 23, 24.

Qu. What is the prayer of the Apostle Paul to this purpose? How speaks be to
the Ephesians?
A. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto
you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him.

The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know,

What is the exceeding greatness of his power to ^s-ward, who believe,
according to the working of his mighty power,

Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18,
19, 20.

CHAP. XV. Of Justification and Faith.
Qu. HOw many sorts of justification or righteousness are there?
A. The righteousness, which is of the Law. Romans 10. 5.

The righteousness, which is of God by Faith. Phil. 3. 9.

Qu. How is the righteousness, which is of the Law, described?
A. Moses describes the righteousness, which is of the Law, that the man which
does those things, shall live by them. Romans 10. 5.

Qu. How speaks the righteousness which is of Faith?
A. The righteousness, which is of faith, speaks on this wise, Say not in
thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that is to bring Christ down from
above.

Or, who shall descend into the deep? that is to bring up Christ again from the
dead. Romans 10. 6, 7.

Qu. But what says it? Romans 10. 8.
A. That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.
Romans 10. 9.

Qu. In the justification of a believer, is the righteousness of Christ imputed
to him? or is his own faith counted for righteousness?
A. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. Romans 4. 5.

Qu. Was Abraham the father of the faithful, justified in this manner?
A. He believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for righteousness. Genesis
15. 6.

Qu. Was not this written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness.
A. It was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him:

But for us also. Romans 4. 23, 24.

Qu. On what terms? if we apprehend and apply Christ's righteousness to our
selves?
A. If we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Romans 4.
24.

Qu. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Is it
not sufficient for us if we believe as he did? what says Christ?
A. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. John 14. 1.

Qu. What says Peter?
A. Christ was manifested in these last times for you;

Who by (or, through) him believe on God. 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21.

Qu. Does not God justify men, because of the full price that Christ paid to
him in their stead, so that he abated nothing of his right, in that one drop of
Christ's blood was sufficient to satisfy for a thousand Worlds? If not, how are
they saved?
A. Being justified FREELY by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus.

In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 1. 7.

Qu. Did not Christ merit eternal life, and purchase the kingdom of heaven for
us?
A. The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6. 23.

It is your Fathers good-pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Luke 12. 32.

CHAP. XVI. Of keeping the Commandments, and having an eye to the reward; of
perfection in virtue and godliness to be attained; and of departing from
righteousness and faith.
Qu. ARe the commandments possible to be kept?
A. His commandments are not grievous. 1 John 5. 3.

My yoke is easy, and my burden light. Mat. 11. 30.

Qu. But though it be possible to keep the commandments, yet is it not enough
if we desire and endeavor to keep them, although we actually keep them not?
And does not God here accept the will for the deed?
A. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of
the commandments of God. 1 Cor. 7. 19.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.

Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken
him unto a wise man which built his house upon a rock.

And every one that hears these sayings of mine and does them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish man which built his house upon the sand. Mat. 7. 21, 24,
26.

Whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his
doing. Jam. 1. 25.

Glory, honor, and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile. Romans 2. 10.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Joh. 13. 17.

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. Luke 11. 27.

We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things done in his body, according to what he has done, whether it
be good or evil. 2 Cor. 5. 10.

The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels, and
then he shall reward every man according to his works. Mat. 16. 27.

Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every man
according as his work shall be. Rev. 22. 12.

If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. Mat. 19. 17.

Qu. Which? Mat. 19. 18.
A. Thou shall do no murder; Thou shall not commit adultery; Thou shall not
steal; Thou shall not bear false witness; Honor thy father and thy mother; and,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Mat. 19. 18, 19.

Qu. Though it be not only possible, but also necessary to keep the
commandments, yet is it lawful so to do, that we may have a right to eternal
life, and the heavenly inheritance? may we seek for honor, end glory, and
immortality by well doing? is it the tenor of the Gospel that we should live
uprightly in expectation of the hope hereafter? and finally, ought we to suffer
for the kingdom of God, and not (as sum are pleased to mince the matter) from
the kingdom of God? Cite the testimonies of the Scripture to this purpose.
A. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. Rev. 22. 14.

-- The revelation of the righteous judgment of God:

Who will render to every man accorto his deeds.

To them, who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honor,
and immortality, eternal life. Romans 2. 6, 7, 8.

The grace of God, that brings salvation, has appeared to all men,

Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world;

Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13.

That ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer.
2 Thessalonians. 1. 5.

Qu. Have ye any Scripture that says we must believe that God is a rewarder of
them that seek him, and that if we come not to him with such a faith, it is
impossible to please him?
A. Without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him. Heb. 11. 6.

Qu. Have you any example of keeping the commandments under the law? what says
David of himself?
A. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness, according to the
cleanness of mine hands has he recompensed me.

For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my
God.

For all his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his statutes from
me.

I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity.

Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness,
according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight. Psalm. 18. 20, 21, 22,
23, 24.

Qu. Have you any example under the Gospel?
A. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and
do those things that are pleasing in his sight. 1. Joh. 3. 22.

Qu. Have you not examples of the choicest Saints, who obeyed God in hope of
the reward, both before, under, and after the Law?
A. By faith. Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which he should
after receive for an inheritance, obeved, and he went out, not knowing whither
he went.

By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country,
dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
promise.

For he looked for a city which has foundations, whose builder and maker is
God. Heb. 11. 8, 9, 10.

By faith Moses when he was come to years refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter;

Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season:

Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt:
for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.

Let us run with patience the race that is set before us,

Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God. Heb. 12. 1, 2.

Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith
of Gods elect, and the acknowledging of the truth, which is after godliness:

In hope of eternal life. Tit. 1. 1, 2.

Qu. Do not the Scriptures intimate that Christians may attain to perfection of
virtue and godliness? and that it is the intention of God, and Christ, and his
ministers, to bring them unto this pitch? Rehearse the texts to this effect.
A. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and unblameable before him in love. Ephesians. 1. 4.

Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it:

That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word.

That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and without blemish.
Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.

Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Be ye perfect even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. Matthew. 5. 48.

Finally, brethren, farewell: be ye perfect. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

We preach warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Col. 1. 28.

He gave some, apostles: some, prophets: some, evangelists! some, pastors and
teachers;

For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ:

Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, always
laboring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete
in all the will of God. Col. 4. 12.

The very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole spirit,
and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 These. 5. 23.

To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God even
our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved
us, and given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace,

Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
16, 17.

Qu. Have you any example of perfection before the Law?
A. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with
God. Genesis 6. 9.

The Lord said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is
none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God;
and escheweth evil? Job. 1. 8.

Qu. Have you any example of perfection under the Law?
A. There was in the days of Herod the king of Judea, a certain priest named
Zacharias, of the course of Abia; and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron,
and her name was Elizabeth.

And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord, blameless. Luke 1. 1, 2.

Qu. Have you any examples under the Gospel?
A. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his
steps.

Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22.

I looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written on their foreheads.

These are they which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins: these
are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the
throne of God. Rev. 14. 1, 4, 5.

Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments,
and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. Rev. 3. 4.

Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we
behaved our selves among you that believe. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10.

Qu. If works be so necessary to salvation, as you have before shown from the
Scripture, how comes it to pass that Paul says, We are justified by faith
without works? Meant he to exclude all good works whatsoever, or only those of
the Law? How does he explain himself?
A. We are justified by faith without the works of the Law. Romans 3. 28.

Qu. Can you make it appear from elsewhere, that Paul intended to exclude from
justification only the perfect works of the Law, which leave no place for
either grace or faith, and not such works as include both? and that by a
justifying faith he meant a working faith, and such a one as is accompanied
with righteousness?
A. By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves: it is
the gift of God.

Not of works, lest any man should boast.

For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained, that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 8. 9, 10.

Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grase, but of debt.

But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness. Romans 3. 4, 5.

There is a remnant according to the election of grace.

And if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more
grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more grace: otherwise work is no
more work. Romans 11. 5, 6.

If they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise
made of none effect.

Because the law works wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression.

Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace: to the end the promise
might be sure to all the seed. Romans 4. 14, 15, 16.

In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but faith working by love, God. 5. 6.

The just shall live by faith.

For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Romans 1. 17, 18.

Qu. What answer then would you give to a man, who wresting the words of Paul
in certain places of his Epistles to the Romans and the Galatians, should bear
you in hand, that all good works whatsoever are excluded from justification and
salvation, and that it is enough only to believe?
A. Will thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?

Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his
son upon the altar?

See, thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made
perfect?

And the Scripture was fulfilled which says, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God.

Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.

Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had
received the messengers, and had sent them out another way?

For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead.
Jam. 2. 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

Qu. What is the advice of Paul to Titus concerning the business of faith, and
works, and the Law?
A. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works: these things are good and profitable unto men.

But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings
about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain. Tit. 3. 8, 9.

Qu. You showed even now out of Paul, that the faith of him that will be saved,
must be accompanied with justice or righteousness; I would therefore know of
you who is a just or righteous man? is it not such a one as apprehends and
applies Christ's righteousness to himself, or, at most, desires to do
righteously? Is not he accepted of God?
A. Let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as
he is righteous.

He that commits sin, is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the
beginning.

In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil:
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God. 1 John 3. 7, 8, 10.

If we know that he is righteous, know ye that every one that does
righteousness is born of God. 1 John 2. 29

God is no respecter of persons:

But in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him. Acts 10. 34, 35.

If a man be just, and and do that which is lawful and right,

Has not eaten upon the mountains, neither has lift up his eyes to the idols
of the house of Israel, neither has defiled his neighbors wife, neither has
come near to a menstruous woman;

And has not oppressed any, but has restored to the debtor his pledge, has
spoiled none by violence, has given his bread to the hungry, and has covered
the naked with a garment;

He has not given forth upon usury, neither has taken any increase; has
withdrawn his hand from iniquity, has executed true judgment between man and
man;

Has walked in my Statutes, and has kept my judgments to deal truly, HE IS
JUST, he shall not dye. Ezekiel. 18. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Qu. May not righteous men depart from their righteousness, and believers from
their faith, and so perish? And is it not false, that once in Christ, and ever
in Christ?
A. When the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does,
shall he live? all his righteousness, that he has done, shall not be
mentioned: in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has
sinned, in them shall he dye. Ezekiel. 18. 24.

When I shall say unto the righteous, that he shall surely live: if he trust to
his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
remembered, but for his iniquity that he has committed he shall dye for it.
Ezekiel. 33. 13.

Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils. 1 Timothy 4. 1.

This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, that thou war the good warfare:

Holding faith, and a good conscience, which some having put away, concerning
faith have made shipwreck.

Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme. 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19, 20.

The younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to wax wanton against
Christ, they will marry:

Having condemnation, because they have cast off their first faith. 1 Timothy 5.
11, 12.

The love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. 1 Timothy 6. 10.

Their word will eat as does a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus:

Who concerning the faith have erred, saying that the resurrection is past
already, and overthrow the faith of some. 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.

Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God.

But exhort one another daily, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. 12, 13.

Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the
same example of unbelief. Heb. 4. 11.

It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,

And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come:

If they fall away, to renew them again to repentance. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works.

Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is,
but exhorting one another.

For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins.

He that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses.

Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to the
Spirit of grace?

Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of reward.

Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him.

But we are not of them that draw back unto perdition: but of them that believe
to the saving of the soul. Heb. 10. 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 35, 38, 39.

Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God. Heb. 12. 15.

Cursed children,

Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of
Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness.

When they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts
of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them
who live in error.

For if, after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning.

For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered to
them.

But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned
to his vomit again; and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.
2 Pet. 2. 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22.

Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also
being led away with the er or of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. 2
Pet. 3. 17.

For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith,
lest by some means the tempter had tempted you, and our labor be in vain. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5.

Because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith. Be not
highminded, but fear.

For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed, lest he also spare not
thee.

Behold therefore the goodness, and severity of God: on them which fell,
severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in goodness: otherwise
thou also shall be cut off. Romans 11. 20, 21, 22.

But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably.
Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Romans 14. 25.

Through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died? 1
Cor. 8. 11.

I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest when I have preached
to others, I my self should be a castaway. 1 Cor. 9. 27.

If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered. Joh.
15. 6.

Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away. Joh. 15. 2.

CHAP. XVII. Of the duty of Subjects and Magistrates, Wives and Husbands,
Children and Parents, Servants and Masters.
Qu. WHat is the duty of all them that are under authority?
A. Let every foul be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13. 1.

Q. Why must every soul be subject to them?
A. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God.
Romans 13. 1.

Q. What does he that resists the power; and what shall they receive to
themselves?
A. Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13. 2.

Qu. Why shall they that resist, receive damnation?
A. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil. Romans 13. 3.

Qu. How shall a man behave himself that he need not fear the power; and whence
comes it so to pass?
A. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same.

For he is the minister of God to thee for good: but if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid: for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the minister
of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Romans 13. 3, 4.

Q. Is not the fear of wrath or punishment the only motive to subjection?
A. Ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake. Romans 13. 5.

Qu. Must we not also pay to the higher powers tribute and custom?
A. Render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom. Romans 13. 7.

Q. Why should we pay tribute to them?
A. For this cause pay you tribute also: for they are Gods ministers, attending
continually upon this very thing. Romans 13. 6.

Qu. Though what you have cited out of the apostle Paul does intimate the duty
of the Magistrate, yet have you not some passage of Scripture that does
expressly set it down?
A. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. 2 Samuel 23.
3.

Q. What benefit shall accrue to him that rules so?
A. He shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even a
morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear
shining after rain. 2 Samuel 23. 4.

Q. What is the duty of wives and husbands, according to the doctrine of the
two great apostles, Paul and Peter? Rehearse their words.
A. Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.

For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the
church: and he is the Savior of the body.

Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let wives be to their own
husbands in every thing.

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave
himself for it:

That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word.

That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and without blemish.

So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies: he that loves his
wife, loves himself.

For no man ever yet hated his own flesh: but nourishes and cherishes it,
even as the Lord does the church.

For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave unto
his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.

This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church.

Nevertheless let every one of you in particular, so love his wife even as
himself, and the wife see that she reverence her husband. Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, etc.

Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.

Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them. Col. 3. 18, 19.

Likewise, ye wives be in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey not
the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the
wives:

While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear.

Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and
of wearing gold, or of putting on of apparel:

But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of
great price.

For after this manner in the old time, the holy women also who trusted in God
adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands.

Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are as long
as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.

Likewise ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honor to
the wife as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of
life, that your prayers be not hindered. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, etc.

Qu. What is the duty of children and parents, according to Paul?
A. Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.

Honor thy father and thy mother (which is the first commandment with promise)

That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth.

And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is well pleasing to the
Lord.

Fathers, provoke not your children, lest they be discouraged. Col. 3. 20, 21.

Qu. What is the duty of servants and masters, according to the doctrine of the
two aforesaid Apostles?
A. Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh,
with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ:

Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart;

With good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men:

Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of
the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

And ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing
that your master also is in heaven, neither is there respect of persons with
him. Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own masters worthy of
all honor; that the Name of God, and his doctrine be not blasphemed.

And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they
are brethren: but rather do them service, because they are faithful and
beloved, partakers of the benefit. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.

Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well
in all things, not answering again:

Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Tit. 2. 9, 10.

Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh: not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God:

And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men:

Knowing, that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for
ye serve the Lord Christ.

But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done: and
there is no respect of persons.

Masters, give to your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye
also have a Master in heaven. Col. 3. 22, 23, 24, 25. Col. 4. 1.

Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward.

For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully.

For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it
patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently;
this is acceptable with God.

For even hereunto are ye called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example, that ye should follow his steps. 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20, 21.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the behavior of men and women in general; and in special of
aged men, aged women, young women, and young men.
Qu. WHat would the apostle Paul have men in general do? How speaks he?
A. I will that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and
doubting.

In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefacedness and sobriety: not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array;

But (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works.

Let the women learn in silence with all subjection.

But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to
be in silence. 1 Timothy 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

But speak thou the things which become sound doctrine.

That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in
patience.

The aged women likewise that they be in behavior as becomes holiness, not
false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good things.

That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to
love their children,

To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands,
that the word of God be not blasphemed.

Young men likewise exhort to be sober-minded. Tit. 2. 1, 2, etc.

CHAP. XIX. Of Prayer.
Qu. IS not Prayer a Christian duty?
A. Pray without ceasing. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.

And he spoke a parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray,
and not to faint. Luke 18. 1.

Q. How ought men to pray?
A. Lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. 1 Timothy 2. 8.

Q. What if a man doubt or waver as he prays?
A. Let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. Jam. 1.
7.

Q. What if we pray in anger, and do not forgive, if we have ought against any?
A. If you do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive
your trespasses. Mark 11. 26.

Qu. What then is the confidence that we have to Godward in praying?
A. That if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. 1 John 5. 14.

Q. If a man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, what is his
duty in relation to prayer?
A. He shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death.
1 John 5. 16.

Qu. What if he sin a sin which is unto death?
A. I do not say that he shall pray for it. 1 John 5. 16.

Qu. How are the persons that have sinned unpardonably, and so unto death,
described in the Scripture?
A. He that shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but
is in danger of eternal damnation.

Because they said, He has an unclean spirit. Mark 3. 29, 30.

If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins,

But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the adversaries.

He that despised Moses law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses.

Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of grace? Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29.

Qu. How stands the Lord affected to them that call upon him?
A. The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him. Psalm. 145. 18.

The same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him. Romans 10. 12.

Qu. Is he nigh unto all them that call upon him in whatsoever manner?
A. To all that call upon him in truth. Psalm. 145. 18.

The Lord is far from the wicked: but he hears the prayer of the righteous.
Prove. 15. 29.

We know that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God,
and does his will, him he hears. John 9. 31.

Qu. Did not Christ himself prescribe a form of prayer to his disciples, so
that there remains no doubt touching the lawfulness of using a form?
A. It came to pass, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased,
one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught
his disciples.

And he said unto them, when ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done as in heaven, so on
earth.

Give us day by day our daily bread.

And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Luke 11. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Qu. How must we make our addresses to the Father that we may receive
whatsoever we pray for? what says Christ to his disciples?
A. Verily, verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it you. John 16. 23.

Qu. Was it the custom, during the time that Christ conversed on the earth,
(much less before he came into the world) to pray unto God in the name of
Christ, or through Christ? or did it begin to be used after the resurrection
and exaltation of Christ? what says Christ himself concerning this?
A. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that
your joy may be full.

The time comes when I shall no more speak unto you in parables, but I shall
show you plainly of the Father.

At that day ye shall ask in my name. John 16. 24, 25, 26.

Qu. Have ye any example of praying to God through Christ after his
resurrection, and exaltation?
A. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,

Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen. Heb. 13. 20, 21.

CHAP. XX. Of the Church.
Qu. WHat is Christ in relation to the Church, and the Church in relation to
him?
A. He is the head of the body, the Church. Col. 1. 18.

Qu. How many such bodies has Christ?
A. One body. Ephesians. 4. 4.

Qu. What kind of head is Christ?
A. From which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered,
and knit together, increases with the increase of God. Col. 2. 19.

Qu. Who are the Church?
A. They that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints 1 Cor. 1. 2.

Qu. Upon what foundation is the Church built?
A. Upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief cornerstone. Ephesians. 2. 20.

Qu. What other honorable titles does the Scripture give unto the Church,
besides that of the body of Christ?
A. The bride the Lambs wife. Rev. 22. 17. Rev. 19. 7, 8. Rev. 21. 9.

The temple of God. 1 Cor. 3. 16.

The house of God, the pillar and ground of the truth. 1 Timothy 3. 15.

Q. What special promise has Christ made to the Church?
A. the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Mat. 16. 18.

Qu. What does Christ elsewhere say of himself, that may give assurance to the
Church that this promise shall be made good?
A. Behold, I live for ever and ever, amen; and have the keys of hell and
death. Rev. 1. 18.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Government and Discipline of the Church.
Qu. WHen Christ was ascended up on high after his death and resurrection, and
so ceased to be personally present with his Church, whom did he set apart for
the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of
his body?
A. He gave some, Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and
some, Pastors and Teachers;

For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ:

Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Qu. What is the advice of the two great Apostles Paul and Peter to the elders
and governors of the Church?
A. Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock, over the which the holy
Ghost has made your overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. Acts 20. 28.

The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness
of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be
revealed:

Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.

Neither as being lords over Gods heritage: but being ensamples to the flock. 1
Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.

Q. What reward does the apostle Peter tell them they shall have at the
appearance of Christ, if they do as he prescribes?
A. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory
that fades not away. 1 Pet. 5. 4.

Qu. What is the duty of the younger, or private sort, in relation to the elders
or public officers of the Church?
A. Likewise ye yongers, submit your selves unto the elders. 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch
for your souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Heb. 13. 17.

We beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you;

And to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12,
13.

Q. What says the Scripture concorning the maintenance of them that instruct
and oversee the Church?
A. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, in
all good things.

Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap.

For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Gal. 6:
6, 7, 8.

If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall
reap your carnal things?

Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the things
of the temple? and they which wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar?

Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the gospel, should live
of the gospel. 1 Cor. 9. 11, 13, 14.

Let the elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially
they who labor in the word and doctrine.

For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the
corn; and, The labourer is worthy of his reward. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18.

Qu. What says the apostle Paul to Titus concerning the persons that are to be
ordained Elders, Bishops, or Overseers of the Church?
A. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed
thee.

If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not
accused of riot, or unruly.

For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not self-willed, not
soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre;

But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate,

Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince gainsayers. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9.

Qu. What says he to Timothy concerning the same subject?
A. This is a true saying, If any man desire the office of a bishop, he
desires a good work.

A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of
good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach;

Not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre, but patient, not a
brawler, not covetous;

One that rules well his own house, having his children in subjection with all
gravity.

(For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of
the church of God?)

Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation
of the devil.

Moreover, he must have a good report of them which are without, lest he fall
into reproach, and the snare of the devil. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc.

Q. How ought those to be qualified that are to be ordained Deacons, for the
keeping and distributing the common stock of the Church?
A. Likewise must the deacons be grave, not double-tongued, not given to much
wine, not greedy of filthy lucre,

Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.

And let these also first be proved, then let them use the office of a deacon,
being found blameless.

Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children, and their
own houses well. 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9, 10, 12.

Q. How ought their wives to be qualified?
A. Even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all
things. 1 Timothy 3. 11.

Qu. What direction does the Apostle give touching the casting of unworthy
members out of the Church?
A. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the tradition which ye received of us. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6.

But now have I written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is
called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or
a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one no not to eat.

For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not ye judge
them that are within?

But them that are without, God judges. Therefore put away from among your
selves that wicked person. 1 Cor. 5. 11, 12, 13.

CHAP. XXII. Of Baptism.
Qu. WHat is the judgment of John the Baptist, of Christ Jesus, and of the
Apostle Peter touching the doctrine of Baptisms? How speak they?
A. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that comes after
me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize
you with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Mat. 3. 11.

Wait for the promise of the Father, which ye have heard of me.

For John verily baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy
Ghost, not many days hence. Acts 1. 4, 5.

As I began to speak, the holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning.

Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized
with water: but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost. Acts 11. 15, 16.

Qu. Though the passages which you have alleged plainly intimate that the
baptism of the Spirit was the baptism of Christ, as that of water was John's
baptism, yet did not the Apostles of Christ baptize with water? what says Paul
of this also?
A. I baptized the house of Stephanas. 1 Cor. 1. 16.

Qu. But diverse think the Apostles were sent to baptize as well as to preach.
What therefore says the same Apostle concerning this also?
A. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. 1 Cor. 1. 17.

Qu. Howbeit when Paul himself, and the believing Romans were baptized, into
what does he say they were baptized, and to what end?
A. So many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death.

Therefore we were buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father: so we also should walk
in newness of life. Romans 6. 3, 4.

Qu. Forasmuch as so great stress is put by some upon water baptism, what
baptism is it, (even in the judgment of the Apostle Peter,) whereby we are
saved; the said baptism of water, whereby the filth of the body is washed off:
or the baptism of the heart, whereby it is cleansed from an evil conscience?
A. The like figure whereunto, even baptism does also now save us; not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Lords Supper.
Qu. WHen was the Lords supper instituted, and to what end?
A. The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread:

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my
body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.

After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This
cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me.

For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords
death till he come. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26.

Q. What hurt happens to him that receives the Lords supper unworthily?
A. Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29.

Q. How shall a man behave himself, that he may be a worthy communicant at the
Lords table?
A. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup. 1 Cor. 11. 28.

Qu. What examination is it, on which Christians should put themselves? What
says the same Apostle concerning this point?
A. Examine your selves, whether you be in the faith: prove your own selves. 2
Cor. 13. 5.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Resurrection of the dead, and the last Judgment; and what
shall be the final condition of the righteous and the wicked thereupon.
Qu. WHat do you believe concerning the resurrection of the dead?
A. That there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and
unjust. Acts 24. 15.

Qu. By whom shall the dead be raised?
A. By Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15. 22.

Q. Why are the dead raised by Christ, rather then by God himself?
A. Since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. 1
Cor. 15. 21.

Qu. How came Christ by this power?
A. As the Father has life in himself: so has he given to the Son to have
life in himself. Joh. 5. 26.

The last Adam was made a quickening spirit. 1 Cor. 15. 45.

Qu. By whom shall God judge mankind?
A. God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. Romans 2. 16.

He commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which
was ordained of God to be the judge of quick and dead. Acts 10. 42.

Qu. What assurance has God given that he will judge the world by this man?
A. In that he has raised him from the dead. Acts 17. 31.

Q. What shall be the different issue of the good from that of the bad at the
resurrection?
A. All that are in the graves shall come forth; they that have done good, to
the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection
of damnation. Joh. 5. 28, 29.

Qu. Shall not the wicked and unbelieving live for ever, (though in torments,)
as well as the godly and the faithful? or is eternal life peculiar to the
faithful?
A. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that believes
not the Son, shall not see life: but the warth of God abides on him. John 3.
36.

Qu. Though this passage which you have cited seem clearly to prove that
eternal life agrees unto no other men, but the faithful: yet since the
contrary opinion is generally held amongst Christians, I would fain know
farther of you, whether you have any other places that directly affirm that the
wicked dye, and that a second death; are destroyed, and punished with
everlasting destruction; are corrupted, burnt-up, devoured, slain, pass away,
and perish?
A. The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6. 23.

If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye through the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Romans 8. 13.

I will give unto him that is athrist, of the fountain of the water of life
freely.

But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: which is the second
death. Rev. 21. 6, 8.

Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.

He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death. Rev. 2. 10, 11.

When they shall say, Peace and safety: then sudden destruction comes upon
them, as travel upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
3.

The day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. 2 Pet. 3. 7.

The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels,

In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9.

He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Gal. 6. 8.

These as natural bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of
the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their
corruption. 2 Pet. 2. 12.

If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy. Gr. corrupt. 1
Cor. 3. 17.

We are not of them that draw back to perdition: but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul. Heb. 10. 39.

Which the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures,
unto their own destruction. 2 Pet. 3. 16.

Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather
his wheat into the garner: but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable
fire. Mat. 3. 12.

If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins,

But a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation (Gr.
fervor of fire) which shall devour the adversaries. Heb. 10. 26, 27.

But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me. Luke 19. 27.

The world passes away, and the lusts thereof: but he that does the will of
God, abides for ever. 1 John 2. 17.

We are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them
that perish.

To the one we are the savor of death unto death; and to the other the savor of
life unto life. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.

Qu. What is the use that our Savior himself would have us make of this
doctrine touching the destruction of men in hellfire?
A. Fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Mat. 10. 28.

Qu. In what manner shall Christ come and administer judgment at the last day?
A. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory.

And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one
from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats.

And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.

Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:

Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and
ye came unto me.

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, and fed thee? thristy, and gave thee drink?

When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?

And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto me.

Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink:

I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick,
and in prison, and ye visited me not.

Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or
athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee?

Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did
it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into
life eternal. Mat. 25. 31, 32, etc.

Qu. Is there not another resurrection and judgment that shall precede this
last and general one, and peculiarly belongs unto the saints that have been
slain for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God? what says John the
Divine concerning this matter?
A. I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given to them:
and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and
for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were
finished. This is the first resurrection.

Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: on such the
second death has no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand years. Rev. 20. 4, 5, 6.

FINIS.

