The Black Dutch ALMANAC OR Predictions and Astronimocall Observations
fore-shewing what will further happen to the King of Scots and other Kings and
Commonwealths, from the aspects and conjunctions of the Planets in their
Quotidian motions.

Also A new Prophesy sound in Dutch, foretelling of a great fleet of ships and
of Danes Sweds, etc. to be seen this present year 1652. and bloody fights by
Sea and Land, with variety of other matter concerning the English, the
Hollander and the French.



printer's device consisting of the goddess Diana wearing a moon crown with her
bow, arrow, and dog

Dec. 4. Print at Amsterdam, and reprinted at London by J. Clowes 1651.

General Astromicall Calculations for the ensuing year 1652. foretelling what
will happen to Charles Stuart King of Scots, Lewis King of France, John King of
Portugal, etc.
FRom the influence of the Celestial bodies the last years black Almanac
foretold the dreadful flaughter of the Scots Nation in the Month of September
then following, and what we have seen to befall their King at the same time. in
like manner the same Author has taken upon him to draw some conclusions out of
the rules of Astronamy, to show what will be the chief undertakings of him, and
several other Kings this year, as you shall find it set down in the
Predictions for every Month. And although you have already several sorts of
Diviners in this kind, which speak more like unto the answers from the heathen
Oracles, then to the understanding of the people, yet that which is here
performed (not dispising others) is done in such familiar words, and by such a
rule of certainty as will not Slightly be condemned for falsehood, or like a
nose o^ wax with a little help be turned any way. There is a Dutch Prophecy
written many years since by one John Flusheers a man of great learning, lately
come to light in these words in English; A King for are shall fly a pace over
Britains fields with fear.
When two Eclips in one month shall happen to appear.
To Holland then for succor he shall seek to make escape.
And if no refuge there be found: To France he takes hie race.
The Chirkins wings are sorely clipped, and n'ere shall plumed be.
Though Denmark, Sweden, florence, shall send out a fleet to Sea.


ARIES

TAURUS

GEMINI

CANCER

LEO

VIRGO

LIBRA

VIRGO

VIRGO

SAGI^

CAPRIC^^^

AQUA

PISSES

zodiac man (man of signs)

Januaries Predictions.
THe new January begins at the Hague at such time as Sol enters into Aquarius,
and Jupiter in Vergo which presageth diversity of Counsels, and no good to
the Butter-boxes, and if they contend with England, their black Counsels will
return upon their own heads, Saturn with them is ascendent which threatens
mortallity, and many other e^ils and mischiefs, and if they are not thankful
for what they have, or ungrateful to old friends, they are threatened to be
scourged soundly, for this whole year together; This season is like to prove
very cold, and if the Snow lie not too thick, a man will be seen to slide eight
miles in a morning to Market with a Basket of Eggs upon his head, and an old
woman that drops a Polonia Sassage by the way, and meets with it again, at her
return; will hardly be at the pains to carry it home again to show it. Some
great persons that doated much upon Christmas are likely to dye this month
with Gormandizing; The men of Rotterdam will be much adicted to stoath and
idlensse, in so much that for the most part the women shall manage the chiefest
affairs in the way of Trade and commerce, whilst their Husbands are tasting
their Liquor, and fill their panches therewith to the brim. This season will
hardly afford any roasted Pigions flying in the Air, but a fat Goose at the
Kitchen fire will smell very kindly:

Februaries Predictions.
SOl in Pifes and Saturn in Canser, Venus is of very little force, for Mars
has a strong influence, and rather then he will be unfurnished with
Instruments to do his work, a contention is likely to arise between three sorts
of men of Eminent Coats, viz. the Buffe coat, the Black and the Gray coat, The
two latter whereof, do grudge and repine at the first for that they think his
Coat the richer and most durable, but these contests are not likely to receive
any determimation as yet, for that many sudden fears and unlookt for occasions
are ready to break forth, And Saturn begins to vex exceedingly in these parts
of the world, he being the principal figure o signifier of disturbance,
sorrow, melancholy, malice, treachery, and the like, some Message is preparing
for England, and some smooth Overture, some harm will befall the Dutch at Sea,
either by a stormy fight, or boisterous winds, some eminent action is foreseen
to be done by the English Northward, but that may rather be expected to fall
out by Land then by Sea. Some subtle heads with fine gay antic Garments, and
sober men will act the part of Mad fools.

Marches Predictions.
THe great Luminary of the world happens to be Eclipst this present Month on
the 29. day which will be more visible in England then in Holland, and the
effects greater, especially among the poorer sort, who are like to have their
pockets Eclipst many Months after. The Sun enters Aries, A fiery sign and does
predict chollerick mutations, yet hapily there may be a reconsiliation, some of
the learned have troubled themselves to branch out the several effects that
may arise from Eclipses, and yet have but like unto blind men, sometimes hit
the mark; I hope to be more certain in my predictions, for as the time now is,
we may without error affirm that such as are invectively malicious against the
Government under which they live, will at last be found out and suffer an
Eclips of those privileges which otherwise they might have enjoyed under the
same. The worst aspect this Eclips has upon Holland is the troublsomnesse of
the Seas, a mischief not easily disgested, nor of unvalued concernment to self
ends. The wetnesse of the former season will produce a rot amongst sheep, and
women will be generally inclined quickly to forget their Husbands if once they
can bury them.

Aprills Predictions.
GReat divisions in Counsels, this Month are like to arise from the diversity
of influences of the Celestial bodies, if there be not some juggling, the Scots
King may find assstance from several places and raise new fears in England;
great troubles are in France and fears arise in several parts by reason of
the hight of the English State, Portugale is much troubled, and let Kings and
Portugalis now loo^ to themselves, for when Saturn has a Quadrat aspect with
the Sun, great grief, sorrow, want and mishape shall befall unto Kings and
chief Governors, friends fail in their promises and great cause of fear and
discontent on all sides, great moistness is to be expected this Month, and he
that goes while he finds an Appell or Pear growing upon a Tree had need put on
a new pair of Shoes; The finest wit is apt to commit the greatest folly, and
some Poets will love to play the fool when men of a common sufficiency deserve
commendations, being more pliable and willing to submit to their Superiors,
and if the English State dive narrowly into the constitution of some of that
Nation, they will find most men easier to follow, then to be led by force, like
unto generous horses, that are better governed with an easy bridle then a
cutting bitt.

Mayes Predictions.
OH Monstrum horrendum, more ill news from Sea arrives at the Hrgue? if the
differences are not now composed betwixt the English and the Hollander, a
squadron of Vantrumps will be in danger about this time, some black designs
are probably discovered against the English Common wealth, and Holland has
cause to cleave to some sure friends in alliance, the Planets seem not to
favor the French with abillity to assist them in time of danger; It is an ill
wind blows no body good, but the constellations of the heavens brings it not
to thee, great news expected from the Dutch Ambassadors in England; The
Soldiers swell with fury, the Citizens minds rise high, and most men's spirits
are elevaed, and the heavens decrees are immutable, and I cannot find any good
aspects upon the French. Now is the time for Kings to lose all or win all, and
if that King has not by this time settled a peace with the Princes, the King
may be glad to offer another Treaty, for sear of an English Design to be
suddenly put in execution, and their minds are in miserable perplexity, that
are troubled with what is like to happen hereafter.

Junes Predictions,
THe Sun in Cancer and Saturn in a Quadrat is as bad or worse then the former,
yet do I guess this aspect will not be of any great force in Holland or in
England, the worst I can find unto them is the death of some of those that sit
at the helm unlamented, many pyracies committed by Sea, great bloodshed in
France, if the Spaniard have a fight with the French, about this time, he is
likely to prevail, some great remoraes of an eminency sounds abroad beyond hour
horizon; what it should be I guess not, unless it should be of some great
Fleet at Sea, it may be only a report of new Levies for the Scots King, in
Denmark or Scotland or both, yet of any place, let not the Scots think to
thrive this year, Saturn and Mars, etc. are transcendent with them and before
summer is ended, their Royal Blackcoats will not dare to show their teeth, and
Saturn being passing through a Quadrat presageth fear, terror, and treachery in
that Nation, but the Aspect is yet better in Holland, if they trouble not the
water, or love to fish in such, they may live at quiet, but if otherwise, they
must smart as well as the rest.

Julies Predictions.
WHy do not the Commons of France stir with more activity to promote their own
liberty, and freedoms, help is promised, if the Dutch are not bad neighbors.
The Stars do threaten some contention, if not loss at Sea, by the Dutch, if
they are hinderers of a noble Design, they will have time to repent of it, and
smart for it too: both in Italy, Venice, Florence, and other of the Eastern
Countries, they are vexed with War, Blague, or Famine; some strange news is
produced at this time out of the Northern Countries, I shall say little of the
Conjunctions this Month, but the Aspects are good for those that are getting,
therefore it cannot be good to give much where is but little honor,
greatness, riches dignities and tryumphs are appointed for those, that know
how to afflict trouble and destroy others; Two sorts of People are always to
be feared, The rich for their own sakes, their vice, and condition; The poor
by reason of their necessities and imprudence. This sign will have great
influence upon such as are accustomed to ill language, especially among women
which use to scould a their Husbands.

Augusts Predictions.
THe noisome heat of the Dog Star will vex many this month, especially such as
live in hot Countries, besides the general influence of the Plannets foretell
ill success to Kings, and chiefly to John King of Poetugal, and Lewis King of
Frnace. It is naught swallowing of Bullets this month, yet I fear a great
slaughter of men, and a general calamity amongst other creatures. God preserve
the Northern Countries from the Plague, or some other infectious disease, most
men's deeds are so hellish and black, that all judgments threatened (without the
prevention of the Almighty) may justly pull down from heaven a Deluge of
sorrow, yet for these parts of the world, I have better hopes, for with us, Sol
hastes to the Triangle of Jupiter, as if Providence had disposed a sudden
conclusion of our troubles; and there is promised high and honorable things to
be done by Free States, in which England seems to get the preeeminence in
glory and greetnesse, and that persons in power shall rejoice and gain victory
over their enemies of what Nation soever, yet it is not so, but some men are in
misery, and not redressed.

Septembers Predictions
Astrange diaster, about this time or perhaps in the forgoing Month is
threatened, There be some men that nothing can satissie, who would think that
such as have already (and if occasion be, will again) joined in one, against
the Common Enemy should not agree amongst themselves; but either in envigh,
because other men are in greater places then themselves, or some other
self ends are repining, yea, and it may be impeaching one another, many
piracyes are daily heard of to be committed at Sea. A great battle is likely to
be fought in France, where some King or great person is like to fall: Something
may naturally be calculated from the influence of the Celestial bodies of some
further misfortune to the Scots King, either by a fall or a shot from his
horse: The two Eclipses in one Month viz. one of the Sun and another of the
Moon in March last, affoard very much matter to work upon, and invites the
English to a reconcilirtion in judgment, very strange intelligence comes from
several parts. This is the time that wisemen will do nothing but for
themselves, and say, that there is no reason that ways, that wisdom should put
themselves in danger for fools.

Octobers Predictions.
SOL enters Scorpio, and an opposition with Saturn, certainly this will be a
time of great consultation in England and Holland, yet a Quadra for many days
with Mars signifies much blood shed in France, Ireland, and some other places,
some strivings amongst great persons consequently follows about the nullifying
of some thing formerly decreed, or had been long in use: by this time much may
be done in order to the equal administration of Justice in several places
where it has in part been neglected, then happy are the people that live under
such a Government, yea thrice happy are they, if that a dissembling flatterer,
or insinuating Parasite, (the worst vermin in a Common wealth) has not an
office himself of trust, or at least some honest man in great power to speak
for him; Its an ill wind blows no body good, but the influence of the heavens
seems to be very sparing where to bestow. All men will not be of one mind,
either in Holland, Spain, Italy, France, Germany, England or Scotland, although
the Sun goes round all the world over.

Novembers Predictions
THe Stars yet fight against many great ones, especially Princes and
Potentates, if Spain loses not what fortune seems to favor them with, they
may enlarge their, interest, both in France and Portugal, yet many do
willingly endure multitudes of evils, besides those that are naturally
incident to them; some men are like to be rackt in pieces for the offenses long
after doubted, and because a man ought not to be punished without just cause:
sometimes punishments are inflicted worse then death, those that are settled
States are like so to continue, notwithstanding all the threats, and plots of
their enemies. Some of our Burgamasters are like to receive great losses
abroad, and yet in danger of being questioned for their unjust dealings at
home. The Cat is in love with fish, but has no mind to wet her feet. Be merry
while you may, the Chickens are washing, but to my grief I shall find but few
rosting in the poor man's Kitchen.

Decembers Predictions.
SOL enters, Virgo is passing into an opposition with Luna, the next is a
Triangle, and so faleth into a Quadrat, also Saturn first passes through a
Quadrat. Let young men forbear to (...) a wooing, till Venus comes into a
Sextile, which ^ill be the sixteenth day of this month, and then its probable
they will find efficacy the fruits of their desires. Some honest minded men do
manifest their desires to beget a right understanding indifferences, and wash,
and labor to make the Blackamoore white. It is not good to be dipped too deep
this month for fear of a Quartane Ague, w^nt of money will give such a check
to Bachuns, that he will not be such a devourer this month, as he has been in
former times.

FINIS.

