EXPOSITIONS AND SERMONS UPON The Ten first Chapters of the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST, according to MATTHEW.

Written by CHRISTOPHER BLACKWOOD, Preacher to a Church of Christ in the City
of Dublin in IRELAND.

Necesse est nobis Scripturas sanctas in testimonium vocari, sensus quippe
nostri and enarrationes, sine his testibus fidem nullam habent.

Orig. homil. 1. in Jerem. It Is needful the holy Scriptures should be called
into witness, because our meanings and Expositions, without these witnesses,
have no belief.

Quaemadmodum si quis herbas aridas, nec odorem, nec colorem gratum habentes,
in medici officina dispositas repererit, etc.

As if a man shall find in a Phisician or Apothecaries shop, dry herbs, having
neither smell nor color, though they may seem to have a base show, yet he will
suspect there is some virtue and remedy in them: so in the Apothecary shop of
the Scriptures, if any thing meet, which at first sight seems to be contemned,
yet we may surely set down that there is some spiritual profit in it, because
Christ the Phisician of souls, is to be supposed to have put nothing idle or
unprofitable in this his shop, meaning of the Scriptures.

Orig. hom. 8. in Levit. LONDON, Printed by HENRY HILLS, for FRANCIS TYTON, and
JOHN FIELD, and are to be sold at the Three Daggers, and at the Seven Stars in
Fleetstreet. 1659.

To the Right Honorable Lord, CHARLES FLEETWOOD, late Lord Deputy of Ireland,
and now Lieutenant General of the forces in England.
MY LORD,
TO testify that due acknowledgement of Your Lordships favors, whereto I am
obliged, I have hereto prefixed Your Lordships name. Among all studies none are
to be preferred before the study of the Scriptures. LUTHER, when one Chapter
was opened to him, said, Me thinks I see heaven opened. Here are several
Chapters opened, wherein, if God shall open himself to Your Lordships heart,
heaven shall undoubtedly be opened unto you. Let not Your Lordship herein
expect the flourishing garnish of humane Eloquence, nor the glorious varnish of
Rhetorical expressions, but naked truth, or at least the same dressed up in an
homely garb. Truth is more potent them Eloquence, the spirit better then wit,
Faith greater then Learning, and the foolishness of God stronger then men. All
knowledge, save that of the Scriptures, is but perishing food, yea the very
knowledge of the Scriptures is no better, unless, as the understanding be
affected with the truth of them, the will be affected with the goodness therein
presented. In vain is all knowledge if it be not improved to the benefit of our
own souls. If our knowledge consist only in methodical discoursing of God, we
shall glorify him only as the Painter does the party whose picture he has
exactly taken. With all the truths of God our hearts should have such
correspondence, as between the Character and Letter instamp'd. My Lord, if now
and then you shall redeem an hour from Court-affairs to Closet-contemplation to
peruse this ensuing Treatise, I hope (through the blessing of God) your labor
will not be in vain. I have no more at present, save to exhort you to take
opportunities of doing much for God, who has done so much for you, that so
your faith and fruits of righteousness, may abound in the day of account, which
with my prayers to the Lord for Your Lordship, Your Lady, and Posterity, is the
hearty request of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships in all duty to serve and observe you; CHR. BLACKWOOD.

TO THE READER.
BEing desired by some of my friends, to Print some Annotations upon the New
Testament, though my life was too far spent, and I not like to accomplish it,
my Body being much worn, yet I thought it advisable to make an Essay herein,
but the Providence of God so disposed, that I had no sooner finished 3. or 4.
Chapters in Matthew, but I was called from the City of Kilkennie in Ireland, to
be Overseer of a Church of Christ in Dublin, to whom preaching I was
necessitated in order to their edification, to handle some Points largelier
then the nature of an Exposition calls for; but yet, I suppose, not with less
profit to ordinary Readers. I have not, according to the itch of the times,
affected new fangled interpretations, but judging it unsafe to move the bounds
of the faith, I have trodden in the steps of the best ancient and modern Divines
that Providence led me to, adding, changing, rectifying, inventing, and
proposing what I thought needful.

Thou may perhaps in some points meet with a judgment differing, from
thine, in some one thing, yet let not that cause thee either to reject or not
promote the truths in this ensuing Treatise, wherein we agree in most things.
If the Lord may have glory, and thy soul Edification and Comfort, and any
Comfort may redound to me in the day of my account, (which speedyly draws on) I
trust I shall have my end. With much carefulness I have endeavored to avoid
the misleading of Gods people. I cannot promise thee all in this Treatise is
truth, yet, notwithstanding all fear of losing friends and procuring enemies, I
have pressed after truth, through multitudes of impediments, temptations, and
discouragements. That the answer of those prayers which have been poured out
for a good success upon these weak endeavors, may redound to the rejoicing of
both our souls in the day of the Lord, is the earnest request of

Thy well wishing friend for the Lords sake, C. B.

The Authors Introduction to the ensuing Treatise.
TO the better understanding of this Gospel, which, through the assistance of
the good Spirit of the Lord, I now undertake, there must be certain things
first to be considered, whereunto I shall propose these ensuing:

I. That by the Gospel or (...) is meant The glad Tidings of Salvation, of
(...) that signifies Well, and (...), To tell, though sometimes the word Gospel
is taken for the Reward of good Tidings, as Cicero to Atticus says, O thy
sweet Epistles, to which I confess Evangelia, that is, the Reward of good
Tidings is due. This word Gospel is taken 1. Generally for the whole Scripture,
which declares this Message, for there were many sprinklings of the Gospel in
the Old Testament, Genesis 3.15. Deuteronomy. 18.18. 2. Or particularly, 1. for the
promise of forgiveness of sins to them that believe and repent, Luke 24.47.
Acts 10.42. 2. For the publication of this Gospel; so Paul, Romans 16 25. was
separate to the Gospel of God, that is, to the preaching of it. See also Gal.
1.15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.8. Christ was raised from the dead according to my Gospel,
that is, the preaching of my Gospel, Romans 2.16. God shall judge all secrets
according to my Gospel, that is, according to my preaching.


II. In that it is said according to Matthew, we may note that the prime Author
of this Gospel was not Matthew, but the Spirit of God, Matthew only penned
what the Spirit dictated.

III. This word [According] or according to Matthew, signifies that the Gospel
of Matthew was not another Gospel from the Gospel of Mark, Luke, and John,
neither does it bring another History or Doctrine, but only that there was
another Writer or Penman, and another manner of writing: the Gospel is one,
but it is written of four Evangelists in a fourfold manner, order and style.

IV. The different Relations of these four Evangelists is no way derogatory to
the truth of that one Gospel; for if all the words were alike and the same, the
Enemies then of Holiness and of the Gospel might have thought there was a
Conspiracy among the Evangelists for to deceive, but when they write in a
diverse manner (though not in a contradictory manner) it appears that in the
simplicity and sincerity of their hearts they wrote as they were commanded, one
being appointed by God to handle that which the other passes by: nor was there
any need of four Pen men, had they writ for matter and manner one and the same
thing.

V. Not only the 4. Evangelists but the Book of the Acts and the Epistles and
Book of Revelations is called a Testament, in the Greek (...)* which word
signifies a Disposing, Appointment or Declaring of a Will, Non morientium
v^luntatem, sed viventia p^cta. Ar^^.
Law or Promise, whether it proceed from one or more; this word (...), when
there is speech of Christian Doctrine, signifies a Covenant, yet does it also
signify a Testament, Heb. 9.17. because in it is contained the will of Christ
confirmed by his death. This Testament is called the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6.
in opposition to the Old, saying, Who has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament: and verse. 14. The Vail remains untaken away, in reading the Old
Testament; besides it is called New, alluding unto the words of Christ, Luke
22.20. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, in that Christ established
his Doctrine, by his Death it is called by the name of New Testament: in a word,
when mention is made of Blood, then (...) signifies a Covenant; when it sets
forth the freeness of the Promise or Legacy, then the word Testament is used;
also the word Testament is used rather than Law, to show how gently God deals
with his People in the times of the Gospel; so that if the New Testament at any
time he called by the name of Law, it is called the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. or
Law of Liberty.

VI. Concerning the Penman Matthew, observe we, first, the time wherein he
wrote, for which we can have nothing but humane testimony, which is, as Pareus
mentions out of Theophilact and Eusebius, that Matthew in Judea first wrote the
Gospel in the third year of Caligula, which was the ninth year after Christ's
Ascension into Heaven; and it was the opinion of the Fathers, that the Gospels
were written in the same order we have them in the Bible, the Gospel according
to Matthew the ninth year after Christ's Ascension, the Gospel of Mark two
years after, the Gospel of Luke in the fifteenth year after Christ's Ascension,
and the Gospel of John in the thirty second year after Christ's Ascension, as
Theophilact noted. Secondly, concerning the Language wherein Matthew wrote, the
learned generally declare, that he wrote it in the Hebrew Tongue, for he abode
about eight years in the Country of Palestine after Christ's Ascension, as it
has been held by the great consent of Antiquity; therefore it is likely the
Gospel was written in the Language of that Country, so Papias, Irenaeus, and
Origin, and Eusebius relates out of Pantenus, Eusebius. l. 5.
that the Gospel of Matthew written in Hebrew was delivered to the Indians by
Bartholomew. Hierom remembers this Gospel to be in Hebrew in his time in the
Library at Caesarea, and at Berea, and elsewhere. It may very well be thought
that that Hebrew Copy which was kept by the Nazarites at Berea, and translated
by Hierom into other Languages, was transcribed out of the original Book writ
by Matthew. These Nazarites were the true offspring of them who first embraced
the Faith in Judea, and as they were called Christians, because they embraced
the Faith of Christ at Antioch; so were the Christians of Berea called Nazarens
of Jesus of Nazareth, vide Grotium. And the Syriack Interpreter has prefixed
this Title, The Gospel which Matthew declared in Hebrew in the Country of
Palestine. Lapide cites Athanasius in Synopsi, who says, The Gospel of Matthew
was writ in the Hebrew dialect, and brought forth at Jerusalem, and interpreted
by James the Brother of the Lord.

VII. The occasion that moved Matthew to write his Gospel was a Persecution
that arose in Judea, so that the Saints were in danger to be scattered, that
therefore they* wanting the Teachers of their Faith, might not want the
Doctrine, they entreated Matthew that he would write them a History of the
works of Christ, that where ever they should be they might have the state of
the whole Faith with them, Auctor. imperfect. in Matthew. in Prooem. Moreover, as
Maldonate well observes, it was necessary the Apostles should commit to writing
the History and Doctrine of Christ, that their Hearers might not forget what
the Apostles had spoken, nor might not understand it otherwise than it was
spoken, and also that they might preach to others absent, and to the
generations following by the Scripture. However solicitations and necessities
of Christians moved, no doubt Matthew spoke no otherwise than he was inspired,
for that which was written as a Rule of Faith was also inspired, 2 Timothy 3.16.
All Scripture was given by inspiration of God. And the Doctrine of the Apostles
is said to be the Foundation of Believers, Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. The four Evangelists, the Acts and the
Epistles of Paul, etc. were of undoubted authority among all Orthodox, as
Aretius observes. To conclude, as Chrysostom. in Matthew, The four Evangelists wrote
the Gospel neither at one time, nor one place, neither helping one another, nor
counselling one another, that there might be (...), the greatest demonstration
of this Truth.

AN EXPOSITION upon the GOSPEL of MATTHEW.
CHAP. I.
VERSE 1. The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ the Son of Abraham, the
Son of David, etc.
IN this Chapter are two parts, 1. The Genealogy or Generation of Christ from
v. 1. to v. 18.

2. The Birth of Christ from v. 18. to the end of the Chapter.

V. 1. The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ,] that is, a Catalogue of the
Ancestors of Jesus Christ: this Pedigree of Christ is reckoned up for these
Reasons: 1. To difference Jesus Christ from Joshua the Son of Nun, who was a
Type of Jesus Christ, but was not descended from David as Christ was. 2.
Because when Christ has two Natures, his Divine and Humane Nature; the
Evangelist only mentions the Generation of his humane Nature, for his divine
Nature is unspeakable, Isai 53.8. 3. For as much as Generation is taken for
Life, Genesis 6.9. Noah was perfect in his Generation, that is, in all parts of
his Life: hence Matthew intends to set down the Life of Christ.


Of Jesus Christ] that is, here is the Generation, not of a common man, or an
ordinary Nobleman, but of Jesus Christ. Jesus signifies a Savior, Christ
signifies Anointed, for he was anointed King, Priest, and Prophet of his
Church, Heb. 1.9.

The Son of David, the son of Abraham] the Evangelist names two of the most
excellent Progenitors of Christ, because the Promises of the Messiah were
especially made to these, for the Jews knew that the Messiah they were to
believe on was to descend from the Lineage of Abraham and David. David is set
before Abraham, not because he was before him in Faith, but in kingly Dignity;
and though the Jews were counted the children of Abraham, yet the Messiah was
called the Son of David, Matthew. 15.22.

V. 2. Abraham begat Isaak, and Isaak begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and
his Brethren.

Here is a Description of Christ's Genealogy from Abraham to Christ in a direct
Line, Abraham begat Isaak, Isaak begat Jacob, Jacob begat Judas and his
Brethren, that is, Jacob begat not only Judah, but the other eleven Patriarchs
who were in a collateral Line, the Evangelist goes no higher than Abraham to
derive Christ's Pedigree, because he counted it sufficient to show that Christ
according to the flesh was the Son of Abraham and David, to whole Families the
Promise of the Messiah was bound, Genesis 22.18. In thy Seed shall all the Nations
of the earth be blessed, 2 Samuel 7.12, 13. When thou shall sleep with thy
Fathers, I will set up thy Seed after thee, and I will establish the Throne of
his Kingdom for ever.

V. 3. And Judas begat Pharez and Zara of Thamar, and Pharez begat Ezrom, and
Ezrom begat Aram.

The Evangelist goes on in the Line of Christ, showing, Judah begat Pharez and
Zara of Thamar, he names four Women that were great Sinners, as Thamar,
Bathsheba, and Rahab, and Ruth that was a Moabitess or Gentile, because these
Women were not joined to their Husbands in an ordinary manner, but an
extraordinary; Thamar deceitfully prostituted her self to Judah, Genesis 38.10. to
v. 27. Bathsh^ba was first joined to David by Adultery, and then by Wedlock;
Salmon married Rahab, because she received the Spies; Ruth married Boas who had
been a stranger in the Land of Moab, and came back poor into Judea; Christ that
came to put away sin was born of Sinners, to teach us what a vanity there is in
Pedegrees; in any Pedigree, should we look some Generations past, there are
some wicked and scandalous.

Judah begat Pharez and Zara] Genesis 38.28, 29, 30.

Pharez begat Ezrom] called also Hezron, Ruth 4.18. 1 Chronicles. 2 5.

Ezrom begat Aram] called Ram, Ruth 4.18.

V. 4. And Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Naasson, and Naasson begat
Salmon, and Salmon begat Boas of Rachab, and Boas begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed
begat Jesse.

These Generations are fetched out of Ruth 4.18.

Qu. How could Salmon mary Rahab being a Harlot and a Stranger, seeing it is
said, Deuteronomy. 7.3. Thou shall make no Marriages with them Also Deuteronomy. 23.17. There
shall be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel?

Answ. She had been a Harlot, but now was not. Secondly, it was not unlawful
to mary Strangers, because they were Strangers, but because they were Idolaters
(which she now was not) Josh. 2.11. Exodus 34.16. Take not of their Daughters to
thy Sons, lest they make thy Sons go a whoring after their Gods. The same we
may say of Ruth, though a Moabitess, Thy People shall be my People, and thy God
my God, Ruth 1.16.

Obed begat Jesse] Maldonate moves another Question:

Quest. How it could be, that betwixt Salmon and David there could come betwixt
them only three men, 1 Kings 6.1.
when 366. years came betwixt; for the Temple began to be built in the 480*
year after the People came out of Egypt, and the fourth year of Solomon's
Reign, so that take out the four years of Solomon's Reign, and the seventy
years of David's Life, and the forty years the People were in the Wilderness
before they past over Jordan to take Jericho, the remainder will be 366. years.

Answ. It Is not incredible that four men of that time, wherein man's life was
so extended by nature and temperance, should live 366. years; for Salmon
marying young with Rahab, they might all live under an hundred years, and at
the same time Moses, though much spent in labor, lived 120. years, Deuteronomy. 34.7.

V. 6. And Jesse begat David the King, and David the King begat Solomon of her
that had been the Wife of Urias.

Jesse was of low condition, 1 Samuel 20.27. Saul called David the Son of Jesse,
by contempt, yet was he the Root from which Christ sprang, Isai 11.1. [ Begat
David the King] this word added for honor sake [ of her that was the Wife of
Uriah] to signify, that God did not repent of his Promise made to David,
because of his Adultery with Bathsheba.

V. 7, 8. And Solomon begat Roboam, and Roboam begat Abia, and Abia begat Asa,
and Asa begat Jehosaphat, and Jehosaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Ozias.

Joram begat Ozias] three Generations coming betwixt, 1 Chronicles 3.11. which were
Ahaziah, Joas, and Amaziah who begat Ozias, called also Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.
and Azariah. If you ask why these three were omitted? It may be answered,
because Jehoram joined himself to the house of Ahab and Jezabel, taking Ahab's
Daughter to Wife, 2 Chronicles. 21.6. Now God had threatened to make Ahab's
posterity like Jeroboam's, 1 Kings 21.22. that is, utterly to extinguish them.
Now a wicked man's Posterity is reckoned to the third or fourth Generation,
Exodus 20.5. If these three had been reckoned there had been seventeen
Generations, they are excluded because born of the seed of Ahab.

V. 9, 10. And Ozias begat Joatham, and Joatham begat Achas, and Achas begat
Ezekias, and Ezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses begat Amon, and Amon begat
Josias.

Ozias begat Joatham] he is said to become mighty, because he prepared his ways
before the Lord his God, 2 Chronicles. 27.6.

Jotham begat Achas] he was an horrible Idolater, 2 Chronicles. 28.2, 3. He made
molten Images for Baalim, and burnt his Children in the Fire, and sacrificed
under every green Tree.

Achas begat Hezekias] he was a Prince of strong confidence in God, none of the
Kings of Judah equalled him in this grace, 2 Kings 18.5, 6. and of much
sincerity and brokenness of heart, Isai 38.3, 5.

Ezekias begat Manasses] who did after the abomination of the Heathen, 2 Kings
21.2. build the high places which Hezekiah destroyed, and worshipped all the
Host of Heaven, v. 3. and made his Sons pass through the fire, and dealt with
Familiar Spirits, v. 6. but he humbled himself greatly for these and other
evils, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13.

Manasses begat Amon] who had a short Reign and a wicked; he reigned two years,
2 Kings 21.20, 21. and trespassed more and more without humiliation, 2 Chronicles.
33.23.

V. 11. And Josias begat Jechonias and his Brethren abou the time they were
carried away to Babylon.

Josias begat Jechonias] this Josias is said to walk in all the ways of David,
and not turn aside, 2 Kings 23.2. his heart was humbled and tender at Gods
threatenings against Jerusalem, v. 19. he turned to God with all his heart,
soul, and might, 2 Kings 24.25. Josias had four Sons, Johanan, Joakim,
Zedekiah, and Sallum, 1 Chronicles. 3.15. now none of his Sons are called Jechonias.
Hierom on the first of Daniel says, that Porphiry objected this place to the
Christians: so did Julian, as Hierom mentions on Matthew. 1. Some think the fault
was in the Libraries, who being deceived with the likeness of the words
Jojakim, who was Josiah's Son, and Jojacin who was his Grandchild, razed out
the former as superfluous, not considering that they lost one of the two and
forty Generations hereby: but this fault was not in all the Copies, for Robert
Stephan out of ancient Books restores the place thus, Josias begat Jakim, Jakim
begat Jechonias and his Brethren; and the very matter it self speaks forth the
truth of Stephan's Copy; so that the reading is to be restored, Josias begat
Jakim and his Brethren, and Jakim begat Jechonias, which lineal Descent appears
Jer. 22.18. where Jehojakim is called the Son of Josiah, and Coniah the Son of
Jehojakim, v. 24. the word Jah being taken from his name, as some have thought
in contempt.

About the time they were carried to Babylon] there were two carryings away
into Captivity, in the first whereof Jehojakim was carried away captive, 2
Kings 24 12. this was (...) or Transmigration, when Jehojachim yielded himself
to the King of Babylon freely, whether upon the persuasion of Jeremy, or
otherwise. The second was (...) or Captivity, when Zedekiah rebelled against
the King of Babylon, so that Jerusalem was taken by force, Jer. 39.7. Three
several times the People were carried away in the Captivity at that time. See
Jer. 52.27, 28, 29, 30.

V. 12. And after they were brought to Babylon Jechonias begat Salathiel, and
Salathiel begat Zerubbabel.

Jechonias begat Salathiel] which appears Hag. 1.1, 14.

Obj. But Jechoniah is writ childless, Jer. 22.10.

Answ. He is not said to be childless, because he had no Children; for it
appears he had, v. 28. but childless in respect of the Kingdom; because none of
his Posterity were to sit upon the Throne of David, v. 30. Besides it appears
Jeconiah had eight Sons, whereof Salathiel was one, 1 Chronicles. 3.17, 18.

Salathiel begat Zerubbabel] this Zerubbabel brought the Jews out of Babylon
into Judea, Zach. 4.6, 9, 10. a Type of Christ who brings his People out of
mystical Babylon to Sion.

V. 13. Moreover Zerubbabel begat Abiud, Abiud begat Eliakim, Eliakim begat
Azor.

In this last Tesseradecas or fourteenth Generation are reckoned up not Kings,
but chief Rulers, they that followed Salathiel in Luke are supposed to have had
two names, according to Philo, till you come to Simeon, so that Neri is the
same with Jechonias, and Melchi with Joakim.

V. 14, 15. And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud,
and Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob.

There Is nothing spoken of these nine Generations in Scripture, but it is like
the Evangelist took them out of the Tables of the Families preserved in
Captivity, or rather that the Spirit did inspire the Evangelist herein.

V. 16. And Jacob begat Joseph the Husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus
which is called Christ.

Jacob begat Joseph the Husband of Mary] the Pagans and Jews have vented sundry
Questions against this, as Celsus in Origin l. 2. and Julian and others
mentioned in Maldonate. They reason, either Jesus was naturally begotten of
Joseph, and so could not be the son of God naturally, or else the Genealogy of
Joseph proves nothing concerning the generation of Christ, that he was of the
lineage of David.

Answ. Though Joseph were the supposed father of Christ, yet his genealogy
proves that Jesus was the son of David, because Mary his mother was of the
Tribe of Judah and family of David, which appears because Joseph was a just
man, and fearing God, therefore he married a wife of the same Tribe, and she
also feared God, and so the bond of a command of God lay upon both their
consciences, which is mentioned Numb. 36.6, 7, 8. Let them marry to whom they
think best, only to the Tribe of the family of their father shall they marry,
so shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from Tribe to
Tribe -- and every daughter that possesses an inheritance, shall be wife unto
one of the family of her father, that the children of Israel may every one
enjoy the inheritance of his father.

2 Before Joseph and Mary came together, Mary was with child of Jesus, Matthew.
1.18. she remaining still a Virgin, verse. 23. Now verse. 1. Jesus is said to be
the son of David, the son of Abraham, Matthew. 1.1. therefore Christ must needs
be the son of David by the mother, therefore Mary his mother was the daughter
of David, which further appears Luk, 1.32. he shall be called the son of the
Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David.

Quest. But why does Matthew reckon up the Genealogy of Joseph rather then Mary?

Answ. It was a custom among the Jews, that the Genealogies of the men, not of
the women should be reckoned up.

2 He could not so well have set down the Genealogy of Mary, if he had not also
set down Joseph her husband, who was of the Tribe of Judah, which proved her
(being a godly woman) to be also of the same Tribe, because it was not lawful
to marry otherwise.

3 It appears that Mary as well as Joseph was of the same Tribe and lineage: for
though the Jewish women might marry to one of another Tribe, yet if in their
fathers house there was no heir male, and so the females happened to succeed in
the inheritance, to keep the inheritance in the same Tribe, and that it might
not pass to another, the inheriting woman was bound to marry one of her own
Tribe, Numb. 27.7.

4 Because Christ was born after the espousing of Joseph and Mary, therefore
Christ might be ascribed to Joseph and Mary, he had as it were power of the
body of the Virgin, and therefore of the fruit of her body. Besides the off
spring that is born in wedlock, whenever or howsoever begotten, is ascribed
by all Civil Laws unto the husband and wife so married.

Therefore as Christ is truly the son of Mary, though he be not naturally but
supernaturally born of her, so is he also the son of Joseph, because God
attributes this fruit unto him, as a reward of keeping his virginity in wedlock
till such times as the Virgin had brought forth her first begotten son, Matthew.
1. ult.

Besides, the husband and wife by wedlock are made one civil person, Matthew.
19.6. they twain shall be one flesh. Wherefore they have all things common, and
in particular a common offspring, so that Joseph was not the adoptive, but the
matrimonial father of Christ, and Christ was subject to him, Luke 2.51.

Quest. But how does it appear that Joseph was then married to the Virgin Mary,
seeing the Text says, she was only espoused, verse. 18.

Answ. 1 Espousals are as it were the first marriage, because there is a mutual
affiancing (upon a presupposal of no essential impediments) hence verse. 20.
Mary was then called Joseph's wife.

2 Joseph is bid not to fear to take her to wife, verse. 20. who being informed
by the Angel no doubt did accordingly; moreover, taking does presuppose giving,
for in many places and nations, Virgins have been wont to be given to their
husbands by their parents or guardians. Besides, Mat. 1.24. it is said, He did
as the Angel commanded him and took her to be his wife.

V. 17. So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations,
and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations,
and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations.

Quest. Why did the Evangelist divide all these generations into three
fourteens?

Answ. First, to show the threefold estate of their government; 1 under Judges,
2 under Kings, 3 under Governors and Priests after the Captivity. The Lord
tried all ways to keep them in their duty, and when nothing would serve he sent
his Son.

14 Generations] By generation he means the person begotten, which adds a
degree. Matthew omits some persons less considerable to make the number round
and fit. There wants one of these 42, and therefore the learned put in
Jechonias twice, the one Joacim which was confounded (as Jerome thinks) with
Jechonias, the other his son Jechonias. Unless to make up the 42 generations,
we number Christ as the last person of the third Classis or Division.

V. 18. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise, when as his mother Mary
was espoused to Joseph, before they came together she was found with child of
the Holy Ghost.

The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise] The Evangelist sets not forth
the whole History, as Luke professedly does, only shows first, whence the
Virgin was with child, which was of the Holy Ghost; 2 when it was, that is to
say, when Joseph and Mary were espoused, before they came together, that is,
when she was promised by her parents, or affianced unto him, but yet before
they came together, she was not yet delivered into the hands of her husband by
her parents, but abode under their keeping and tuition.

Of the Holy Ghost] Not that the Holy Ghost was the father of Christ, but that
the Holy Ghost did cause that a Virgin should conceive without a man: for the
Holy Spirit did not lie with the Virgin after the manner of men, but that which
the generation of man could do, he himself could do much more perfectly,
without any such generation.

V. 19. Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privily.

The Law was Deuteronomy 22.14. if a man took a Damsel and found her not to be a Maid,
then v. 22. they were to bring her out of her fathers house, and the men of the
City were to stone her with stones: But Joseph being a just man and enclining
to mercy, would not expose her to open infamy, or make her a public example.
Lapide says, the Cretians were wont to bring adulteresses through the midst of
the City to be beheld and mocked at by the people.

Was minded to put her away privily] That is, by a secret divorce giving her a
bill of divorce secretly. Joseph seeing the holy and spiritual life of the
Virgin, might seem to question how she should conceive of adultery, and perhaps
to have judged the contrary, but whence or how she had conceived he knew not,
but because he knew she had not conceived by him, he would put her away. The
Greek word (...) absolvere, signifies to absolve or free, that is, Joseph freed
her from her promise, and so to put her away only upon some other pretense
then adultery. For husbands among the Jews had many other causes of divorce
besides adultery, Matthew. 19.3. where the Pharisees ask, whether it were lawful
for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

Observe 1. Innocent and harmless persons are sometimes exposed to suspicion, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10.

2 Obs. We must so be angry at the sins of others, that some mercy must be
retained toward the sinner, Moses, Exodus 32.31.

V. 20. But while he thought on these things, the Angel of the Lord appeared
unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto
thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.

In this Verse three things, 1 the anxiety of mind that was upon Joseph, he
was full of perplexity, sometimes thinking her guiltless, from the holy
carriage he saw in her, sometimes he thought her guilty, because himself had
not touched her: many turnings and rowlings were in his mind what to do.
Saints are sometimes in much perplexity of spirit, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. 2 Cor. 4.8.

2 The Consolation. Against his trouble the Angel of God appears unto him in a
dream, bidding him not to fear to take unto him Mary his wife. God is wont to
come in the time of trouble, Psalm. 46.1. so that Saints are not tempted above
strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. God appearing in the Mount, Genesis 22.14.

Quest. Why does the Angel appear to him in a dream, and to the Virgin when
awake?

Answ. The Angel appears to Mary awake, because faith and consent was required
of her: First, she conceived Christ by faith, before she conceived him in her
flesh, and her consent was required, that she might as it were (to use Bernards
expression) be the Bride of the Holy Ghost, and conceive by him. Besides it was
needful the Virgin should know whom she bore in her womb, and whence she
conceived.

1 The Angel appeared to Joseph in his sleep, not only here, but when he went
into Egypt, Matthew. 2.13. and when he came out thence, because according to his
good pleasure he was wont to appear as well in dreams as in visions, Numb.
12.6. also vocally, 1 Samuel 3.6, 8, 10. also inspiredly.

2 The Angel appears to Joseph in sleep, to let him see the provident care of
God, who thinks of our troubles when we do not think of our selves, even when
we are asleep.

Qu. But why did not the Virgin Mary her self tell Joseph of her thus being
with child?

Answ. It is like she did, which probably was the first ground of Joseph's
knowing her so to be, but Joseph was slow in believing her, till the Angel
appeared to him.

Qu. Is there no use to be made of dreams now?

Answ. 1 There are d verse sorts of dreams, as 1 Natural, so the things which
the sense on the day time carries over to the understanding, being more deeply
settled there, are sent back again to the fancy or common sense, and this not
only in men, but in bruits. A dream comes through multitude of business,
Eccles. 5.3. 2 Moral, which arises from wise discourses and reading books. 3
Diabolical, which come from Satan, such are filthy dreams, of which Jude 8
against these the ancient Church prayed; H^stemque nostrum comprime ne
polluantur corpora. Bridle our enemy that our bodies be not defiled. 4 Divine,
so God appeared to Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7.12, 13. Sometimes God has appeared thus
twice, Job 33.14, 15. twice he appeared thus to Paul, Acts 16.9.18.9. and so he
appeared to Pilates wife, Matthew. 27.19

2 There may be use made of dreams: as the Urine or Pulse are signs of
sickness or health, so dreams may show us what our natural complexion is, and
what humor is predominant; where yellow Choler abounds, there we dream of
fire, strife, and fightings; where black Choler abounds, men dream of smoke,
darkness, funerals; where Phlegm abounds, men dream of showers of rain, wells
of water, rivers, and such things as have a cold moisture; where Blood abounds,
men dream of things beautiful, clear, and sweet. Martyr out of Galen, tells of
a man that dreamed he had a thigh of stone, and in a few days after he fell
into a palsy, and of another that dreamed he fell into a cistern of blood,
which signified abundance of blood, and that he stood in need of blood
letting. Sometimes in sleep, men seem to have such a burden they cannot bear
it, sometimes to be so light that they do as it were fly, which is nothing
else but the excess and defect of humors. To conclude, dreams of preferment do
too much point out ambition in us; unclean dreams do too much point out
wandering imaginations on the day time, or excess of gluttony at night; terrible
dreams may put us in mind what we might look for if God were not more
merciful; favorable and successful dreams may put us in mind what we might
expect if our sins did not stand in the way. But for Divine dreams when they
are, its like the understanding on the day time has been well employed in
Divine things, and the frequenter they are, they denote perhaps a better frame
of spirit, aspiring after Divine things. Yet as we are not to expect direction
from them, God having spoken clearly by his Son, so are we not altogether to
slight them, seeing God has formerly manifested himself by them, besides God
has not lost any of his prerogative, but that he can manifest himself by them
yet.

The third part, is the ground of Joseph's consolation, which is, [For that
which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost] because fear will not be cast
out by words, but by reasons, the Angel gives a reason why Joseph should not
fear, viz. because that which Joseph feared was an act of adultery, was of the
Holy Ghost, and therefore he had cause rather to rejoice then to grieve,
because of his spouse Mary the long lookt-for Messiah was now to be born. Such
a message Joseph had at another time when he was in his fear, Luke 2.10. the
Angel said, Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, for
unto you is born in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And
therefore thou Joseph may take her from her friends or kindred to be thy
wife, and thou may with a quiet conscience live with her. Moreover, the
Angel calls him the Son of David, to raise up Joseph's heart to consider, that
he as well as his wife was of that family, to descend from whom the Messiah was
promised to all the believers of the Old Testament; and so he, the said Joseph,
should have the honor to be the civil father of this Messiah, as the Virgin
his wife had the honor to be his natural mother. And therefore verse. 16. its
said, (...), not (...), of which in the feminine gender Christ was begotten,
not of whom, to prove that Joseph was only a civil father, provided to take
care of the Virgin, and the Messiah she went with.

V. 21. And she shall bring forth a son and thou shall call his name Jesus, for
he shall save his people from their sins.

Here is a second ground to quiet Joseph's heart, taken from the quality or
excellency of this son whom the Virgin should bring forth, he should be a
Savior to save his people.

Bring forth a son] Not as the Valentinians, who taught that Christ brought a
heavenly body from heaven, and passed through the Virgin as a channel, but as
the Virgin truly conceived Christ, so she brought him forth according to Esa.
7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and shall bring forth a son, and therefore
thy spouse is not an adultress, but a most pure Virgin. This the Angel Gabriel
told the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.31. That she should bring forth a son, and call
his name Jesus, and here the Angel tells the same in effect to Joseph.

And thou shall call his name Jesus] Fathers usually gave names to their
children. Jacob called his son Benjamin, though his mother called him Benoni,
Genesis 35.18, Zacharias named his son John, Luke 1.63. yet sometimes the mother,
as Hanna called her son Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.20.

His name Jesus] (...), from his saving. Christ is the name of his Office,
Jesus of his Nature and Person; the name in the Old Testament is Jehoscua,
ascribed unto Joshua the Captain, and to Joshua the Priest in the Type, but to
Christ in the truth, because he is the alone Savior of his People, Acts 4.12.
Heb. 7.25. He is able to save them that come unto God by him; for though
Baptism is said to save, 1 Peter 3.21. and Preachers, 1 Timothy 4.16. Baptism does
save by way of signification, Preachers, as Instruments by way of publication.

For he shall save his People from their sins] three things are considerable,
1. Whom Christ saves? Resp. All Believers, because by faith alone this
salvation is received: all his Body, for he is called the Savior of the body,
Ephesians. 5.23.

2. From what Christ saves? Resp. From their sins which would bring them to
Hell: as a Physician brings a Potion to his Patient, not to kill Death, but to
kill the Disease that would bring the Patient unto Death; so Christ came not to
quench the Flames of Hell, but to save his People from their sins, which would
bring them to Hell. Now Jesus saves us, 1. From the power of sin, Romans 6.14.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the Law, but under
grace. 2. From the punishment of sin, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Jesus who delivered us
from the wrath to come. 3. From the guilt of sin, Romans 8.1. There Is no
condemnation to them that are in Jesus. 4. From the weariness and burden of
sin, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, I will
give you rest. 5. From the remainders of sin, this will be in another World,
Romans 7.24, 25. Who shall deliver me from this body of death? I thank God
through Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57.

3. The means whereby Christ says, viz. his Death and Intercession. If when we
were Enemies we were reconciled by the Death of his Son, much more being
reconciled we shall be saved by his Life, Romans 5.10. 1. By his living, to make
Intercession for us, as it is expounded, Heb. 7.25. wherefore he is able to
save to the utmost them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make Intercession for them. This is one Argument of Christ his Godhead to save
his People from sin, for it is applied to Jehova, Psalm 130.8. He shall redeem
his People from all their iniquities. If there were a Physician in the World
that could save a man from all Diseases, multitudes of Patients would come to
him: how should Believers then come to Christ, who saves his People from all
their sins, Psalm 103.1. 2. As the Woman that had the Bloody Issue touching
Christ, was healed; so we touching Christ by the hand of faith, the bleeding
wounds of our sins are stanched. This is true tidings of joy to all believing
souls, that such a Savior is born, Luke 2.10, 11.

V. 22. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord by the Prophet, saying,

The Evangelist sets down a third ground to stablish Joseph's heart, and
together with him the hearts of all other Believers, viz. that this Prediction
of a Virgins bringing forth was foretold seven or eight hundred years ago, in
the Reign of King Ahaz, Isai 7.14. Joseph at first was ready to be startled at
these strange News the Angel told him, but when he heard that all that the
Angel told him was confirmed by the Scriptures, this brought full satisfaction.
The sum of the Promise was, that not only that God would save the House of
David, Isai 7.13. from the Syrians and Men of Israel their Enemies, v. 8, 9.
but that also he would save the believers among them from their spiritual
Enemies; and because the matter seems hard to believe, the Lord gives them a
sign to confirm it, viz. Behold a Virgin remaining a Virgin still shall be with
childe^ so that as in Painting or Building there are first rude Lines or
Draughts made by the Painters, who after by degrees perfect that which they had
conceived in their minds, according to the Idaea therein, so as the Lord had
prophesied of a Virgins conceiving, so now he perfects and fulfils it: so that
as the calling of the Israelites out of Egypt, Hosea 11.1. was a Shadow of the
Deliverance of the Sons of God out of the spiritual Egypt of Hell; so these
things told then by Isai, did shadow out what was now fulfilled.

V. 23. Bernard thinks the Devil fell out of envy, envying men that Dignity,
that God should become Man.
Behold a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they
shall call his Name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.

The Evangelist sets forth not only the sum of the Prophecy, but the
wonderfulness of it. [Behold] this Adverb still points out attention and
admiration, [Behold] as if he should say, Men and Angels wonder at this strange
unheard of thing, that a Virgin should conceive and bring forth Emmanuel, that
is, God-Man, Jer. 31.22. The Lord has created a new thing upon earth, A Womam
shall compass a man. Some men will not wonder at any thing to conceal their own
ignorance, but here is a providence to admire all.

And they shall call his Name Emmanuel] that is, being interpreted God with us,
that is, not only spiritually, that is, reconciled to us, 2 Cor. 5.19. but
because the Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us, John 1.14. [They shall
call] all the saithfull and many others shall so call him God with us; for this
Pronoun Relative [they] has respect unto a plurality. See Luke 12.20. Luke
16.9.

Quest. How can Jesus be called Emmanuel?

Resp. Not in sound, but in sense; Christ was called Emmanuel from the Dignity
of his Person, and he was called Jesus from his Office and effects of it: and
in all this it sell out that the Prophecy of Esaias was fulfilled. Shut your
eyes without Christ, and say, that you know no other God but he, that was in the
bosom of Mary, and sucked her Breasts. Where that God Christ Jesus is, there is
whole God, or the whole Divinity found, the Father and the Spirit, Luth. in Ps.
130. I shall also add what a late Writer adds to interpret this Prophecy, viz.
that within a space of time wherein a Virgin might marry, and conceive, and
bring forth, and the Child come to the distinguishing of good and evil, Isai
7.14, 15. Rezin and Pekah, Ahaz his two Enemies, should be brought low, and
from this he calls an high improved sense over and above the vulgar sense which
belonged to the words, that from this place the Spirit should gather, that a
Virgin should bring forth a Son.

V. 24. Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the Angel of the Lord had
bidden him, and took unto him his Wife.

Here we have Joseph's obedience to the Angel seen, first in taking unto him
his Wife, as the Angel bad him. When we are convinced of Gods Commands, we must
neither dispute them nor delay them, Psalm 119.60. now Joseph takes both Mother
and Child into his tuition.

V. 25. And knew her not until she brought forth her firstborn Son, and
called his Name Jesus.

Here is the second thing wherein Joseph's obedience to the Angel was seen,
viz. in not knowing his Wife, he means in a matrimonial way, as it is taken
Genesis 4.1. to make it appear that Christ was not conceived of Joseph, but of the
Holy Ghost. So the phrase is taken Number. 31.35. 1 Samuel 1.19. No doubt the Angel
had given Joseph command herein, not to know her, because he did as the Angel
commanded: this was done, as for the stablishing of our Faith on Jesus Christ,
as being conceived in such a wonderful manner, so for to verify the Promise,
that the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. [Untill
she brought forth her firstborn Son] It is not for us to contend to find
whether the Virgin Mary were a Virgin ever after she brought forth her
first-begotten Son, it is curious to seek, and more curious directly to define;
that son is said to be the firstborn, before whom there was none, though he
were the only begotten. This word [untill] often signifies an infinite time or
perpetuity, Psalm 110.2. Genesis 28.15. Psalm 123.2. 1 Samuel 15.35. 2 Samuel 6.23.
Genesis 8.8. Job 27.5. Isai 22.14.

First-born] the firstborn excelled the rest of the Brethren, 1. in power, and
therefore when the Father died it is supposed the eldest Son ruled in the Family
before Governments of Magistracy were set up: so Christ was firstborn, Col.
1.15. Romans 8 29.

2. The firstborn had a double Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 21.15, 16, 17. or a double
portion in the Inheritance; so Christ excelled, 1. in his divine nature, being
begotten of the Father from everlasting, Mich. 5.2. 2. In his humane nature,
being conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of a Virgin. All Saints are called
firstborn, whose names are writ in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. but this will be when
they come to Heaven, for then they will have Lordship enough and double
Inheritance.

And called his Name Jesus] we must refer this to Joseph, who according to the
Angels command called his Name Jesus, which Name was given to him the day that
he was circumcised, Luke 2.22. And whiles the eight days were accomplished for
the circumcising of the Child they called his Name Jesus.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter there are three parts, 1. The History of the Wise men and of
Herod, from v. 10. to v. 12. 2. The Flight of Joseph into Egypt with the Virgin
Mary and her Child Jesus, being thereunto warned by God, v. 13, 14, 15. 3. The
bloody Cruelty of Herod, in slaying the Infants of Bethlehem, v. 16, 17, 18. 4.
The death of Herod with the return of Joseph, Mary, and the Child Jesus out of
Egypt into Nazareth a City of Galilee, v. 19. to the end of the Chapter.

In this History of the Wisemen we have 1. the Inquisition of the Wisemen, v.
1, 2. Where is he that is born King of the Jews, v. 2.

2. The ground of their Inquiry, For we have seen his Star in the East, v. 2.

3. The effects of this Inquiry, which are three, 1. Herod was troubled, and
all Jerusalem with him, v. 3. 2. Herod gathers all the chief Priests and
Scribes to inquire where Christ should be born, which he found to be in
Bethlem, v. 4, 5, 6. 3. Herod's dismission of the Wisemen with a pretense to
worship that new King as soon as he knew where he was, v 7, 8.

4. The satisfaction these Wisemen had to their Question, amplified 1. From
the Sign, which was, the Star they saw in the East went before them, till it
came and stood over the place where the young Child was. 2. From the thing
signified, They came into the house and saw the young Child with Mary his
Mother.

5. Their Gratulation or Thankfulness for this so great Mercy, seen in four
Particulars, 1. In their great Exultation, They rejoiced with exceeding joy, v.
10. 2. In their Devotion, They worshipped him, v. 11. 3. In their liberal
Contribution, in that they opened their Treasures and presented unto him gifts,
gold, frankincense and myrrh, v. 11. 4. In their careful preservation of him
whom they found, they would not return to carry word to Herod, as judging him
to pretend hypocritically, but returned to their own Country another way, v. 12.

V. 1. Now when Jesus was born in Bethlem of Judea, in the days of Herod the
King, behold there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem.

V. 1 Now when Jesus was born in Bethlem of Judea] The inquiry of the Wise men
is set down, first from the place where Christ was born, which was Bethlem
Judah. There were two Bethlems, one in the Tribe of Zebulon, Jos. 19.15.
another in the Tribe of Judah, called Bethlem Ephrata, Micah 5.2. in this was
Christ born: 1 Because the Prophet Micah had foretold it; 2 Because the place
it self might point out unto them the Judge of Israel, or the Messiah: 3 David
himself was born there, 1 Samuel 17.12. therefore it was fit that the flower of
the house of Jesse should ascend and grow where the root was.

In the days of Herod the King] 2 The Wise men's inquisition is set down from
the time, viz. in the days of Herod the King, that is in the time or reign of
Herod Ascalonites: It was a time of great affliction, when even little children
suffered, enough to make Rachel mourn as she lay in her grave, Jer. 31.15. As
the Prophesies of him came when the Church was in great distress, as Balaams
Prophecy when in the Wilderness, Numb. 24.17. Esaias Prophecy when they were
ready to be overrun with two Kings, Esa. 7.14. Daniels Prophecy when Israel
was in captivity, Dan. 9.14, 15, so himself came when the Church was in great
distress.

Herod the King] Who now was old. He was a Gentile and a stranger, who being
now King, it appeared that Shiloh was come, because the Scepter was departed
from Judah: Of him Josephus speaks l. 14. cap. 18. Herod was an Edomite,
betwixt whom and Israel was still enmity.

Behold came Wisemen from the East] 3 From the place, they came from the East.
About this two questions; 1 who they were? Resp. Wisemen: this was none of the
least of their wisdom, that they came to Christ, (...), the word in Greek
has been taken sometimes for Magicians, Acts 8.9. Acts 13.6. but its a Persian
word, and signifies, as Pareus observes, a Wise man, and so Maldonate; so that
as the Philosophers were famous wise men among the Greeks, and Brachmans among
the Indians, and Druides among the French, so were the Magi or the Wisemen
mentioned here among the Persians. Sundry of the ancients have thought these
Wise men to be Kings, but the Scripture is silent herein: For the number of
them, whether 3. or more, the Scripture is silent, but they were three at
least, because the Scripture speaks not in the dual, but plural number. 2
Whence they came,

From the East] Probably from Persia in the East, because both the word Magoi
is a Persian word, and because they are said to come from the East. And because
it was the Law of the Persians to worship their Kings, and not to go unto them
without a gift. Others think they came out of Arabia, Esa. 60.6. All they of
Sheba shall come, they shall bring gold, and incense: Also, Psalm. 71.10. The
Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts; besides, Arabia was nearer to
Judaea, then Chaldea or Persia, besides, Arabia abounds with gold,
frankincense, and myrrh. So Cor. Lapide.

Came to Jerusalem] These Wise men came a long journey, and a dangerous,
through Arabia, through the black Tents of Kedar, famous for robberies, Psalm.
120.5. at the worst season of the year. These will rise up in judgment against
many of us, whom coldness of weather, distance of place, intention of business
hinder. These Wise men come to Jerusalem, they thought the King would be born
in the Royal City, and therefore they seek him there. Sometimes strangers seek
after Christ, when home-dwellers look not after him, Luke 4.25, 26, 27. Now if
you ask when they came to Jerusalem? Some think 12 or 13 days after they saw
the star at first; hence the Feast of Epiphany or Manifestation: but it is like
the next day after they saw his star they came forward, though it is probable
that it was near upon a year before Herod put the infants of Bethlem to death,
that while being spent in acquainting Caesar with the design, and in the
plotting and projecting of the business.

V. 2. Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his
star in the East, and are come to worship him?

Here is the question the Wise men propound. 1 See the greatness of their
faith! they ask not whether he be, but where he is, presupposing he was born.
They acknowledge his natures; his manhood, in that he was born; his Godhead, in
that they call the star his, he the owner of it; they also acknowledge his
Kingly office so freely, that it came to Herod's ear: they were neither afraid
of Herod, nor ashamed of Christ; a politic bosom faith, becomes not them that
enquire after Christ. The question was full of danger and amazement, as casting
down Herod from his throne, and to set up a new King, which was no less then
capital.

2 The ground of their faith. For faith must have both a ground, and an
evidence, Heb. 11.1. (...) and (...), which differences a believer and a
credulous person who believes every thing, Prove. 14.15. The ground of it was,
for we have seen his star in the East. For this star, it was not an ordinary
star, for it moved as they went, and shone on the day time, placed lower then
the fixed stars perhaps like a blazing star. Chrysostom thinks it was some
invisible power, or Angel figured in the shape of a star. And the Lord calls
them by a star rather then by an Angel, as condescending to their weakness,
because they were much imployd about the stars. Now if you ask, how they came
to know what this star did portend? Though some think they living in the East,
might know it from Balaam's prophecy, Numb. 24.17. I shall see him but not
now, I shall behold him but not nigh; there shall come a star out of Jacob, and
a scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab: yet I
suppose they came to know this star by Divine revelation only, but whether
soever, they came to know it.

But whereas some from hence would conclude the lawfulness of Judicial
Astrology, it is groundless; only this I must confess: 1 That the stars have an
influence here below, Judges 5.20. The stars in their paths or courses fought
against Sisera.

But I say it is groundless, 1 Because Astrologers proceed by way of
observation, as in such a year, and such a concourse of Planets, wars and
rebellions to have been, therefore this year the same will happen in the like
concourse; but here no experience or observation went before, for never had a
Virgin brought forth before.

Some have thought stars to be the causes of things: But Christ was not
therefore born because the star appeared, but therefore the star appeared
because Christ was born.

Others in this Age, are apt to think them signs of our actions, as if heaven
were the book wherein God writes all future actions and events: the stars are
for signs oft-times, as days and years, but it seems to me in no wise signs
of those things which depend upon the will of man, the future motions whereof
are only known to God.

That Astrologers allege experience, it nothing moves me, for all the
predictions of Astrology are mere particulars; but although they had any
certainty, yet it were better to be always in the fear of God, then to be
tormented with fear of events, Luth. in Genesis cap. 1.

We are not to heed Astrologers, Jer. 10.2. Be not dismayed at the signs of
heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them: If they foretell us prosperous
things and they lie, we shall be wretched by hoping in vain; if they foretell
to us adversity and lie, they make us miserable by fearing in vain; if they
foretell unhappy things to us and speak truth, to what purpose is it to
foreknow those things we cannot prevent? and if they should truly foretell
prosperity, expectation would weary us out. Lapide in Jer. 10.
King Muleasses foretold in the year 1544, that he should lose his kingdom,
and his life be in danger; to shun it he went out of Africa, and in his
departure brought upon his own neck that which he would have shunned. To
conclude, these Astrologers and Star-gazers, and Monthly Prognosticators,
cannot save us from the things that shall come upon us, no more then they could
Babylon, Jer. 47.13. They enrich your ears with words, that they may enrich
their own purses with money.

In the East] By this is meant not so properly the region of heaven, as the
land from whence they came, q.d. we living in the East, saw there a star
shining in the East, which accompanied us, these Wise men, as the pillar of
fire and cloud did Israel. This star, or such an one like it, was seen in the
West toward the end of Augustus reign, and Pliny says, it was held to be a
happy star, but the Western men for want of light did misapply it.

And are come to worship him] Here was the end of their coming, viz. to worship
him: yet do they not find him in a worshipful case, but in a stable, in a
manger, yet by faith they overlook all this and worship him; worship is a
great matter, in that heaven and earth, stars and prophets, lead us to it; for
this end the Eunuch came out of Aethiopia, and the Wise men from the East. The
world was made for this end, that he that created it might be worshipped: the
Scripture was made for this end, that he that inspired it might be worshipped.

The word (...), signifies the gesture of the body, lying down to give honor,
Zanch. in 4. Praecept.
of (...) and (...) a Dog, to fall down as dogs do at their masters feet. The
Wise men being persuaded that a Kingdom was appointed for this child, after
the manner of the Eastern nations (who are generally known to have worshipped
their Kings) they fall down to worship: yet did they not only apprehend him to
be a King, and so worshipped him with a civil worship, but also they
apprehended him to be the King of heaven, and so worshipped him with a
Religious worship.

V. 3 When Herod the King had heard these things, he was troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him.

We have here the effects of the inquiry of the Wise men, which is, 1 Herod was
troubled] Fearing as if this King would drive him out of his Kingdom, and
because he was a tyrant and distrusted the faithfulness of his subjects.
Besides Herod living long among them, knew their prophesies, that a King was
promised to the Jews. He had no cause indeed to fear, because Christ came to
give a heavenly Kingdom to believers, not to take away any earthly Kingdom
from any earthly Prince.

And all Jerusalem with him] The causes of their fear, were because they feared
new broyls would be in the Commonwealth, and because there were many that were
of Herod's party and interest, that stood and fell with him, Herod himself
having slain many persons for to get the Kingdom, as Hyrcanus, and
Aristobulus, and diverse others mentioned by Josephus. Diverse of his creatures
as well as himself were troubled, as looking to fall if their master fell. Also
they were troubled, being given up to pleasure and ease, and not once thinking
of the coming of the Messiah: these and such causes troubled them. All
Jerusalem] he means the greatest part, and those who bore the sway in the
nation. Obs. Men of bad consciences are mightily troubled, where there is any
apprehension of danger, Esa. 7.2.

V. 4 And when he had gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born?

Here is a second effect of the Wise-mens Inquiry, which is, that Herod calls a
Council, to inquire where Christ should be born.

All the chief Priests] Herod after the manner of the Kings of Judah called a
Council of the chief Priests, who were disposed in their several courses, being
four and twenty in number, who were Governors of the Sanctuary and of the
House of God, 1 Chronicles. 24.4, 5. These are called the chief of the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 36.14. and the Ancients or Elders of the Priests, Jer. 19.1. over all
these there was one chief Priest. [And Scribes] The Scribes were they that
wrote out, and read, and expounded the Scriptures; such was Ezra 7.9, 10. See
Nehem. 8.8, 9. Every Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God brings forth new
and old, Matthew. 13.52. Before the Captivity the Priests were wont to teach,
Ezekiel. 44.23. Mal. 2.7. But after the Captivity they were taken up in
Government, and did not their duty in teaching.

He demanded of them where Christ should be born] That is, according to the
Scriptures, where the place should be, to which they answer out of Gods Word.

V. 5. And they said unto him, In Bethlem of Judea, for thus it is written by
the Prophet,

Here is the Answer of the Priests and Scribes to Herod's Question, where they
point out the place: they tell him out of the Prophet Micah, that Christ was to
be born, not in Bethlem which was in the Tribe of Zabulon, Josh. 19. but in
Bethlem in the Tribe of Judah.

V. 6. And thou Bethlem in the Land of Judah art not the least among the
Princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my
People Israel.

Art not the least] Because so great a Governor was born in thee, though thou
art but small in respect of thy Buildings. Micah reads it, Thou art little or
least. Matthew reads not little or least, which seems contrary. Resp.
Chemnicius carries it, as if they were not the words of the Scribes, but of the
Evangelist, who by the change of the Affirmative into a Negative would
celebrate the grace of God to that poor Town, q. d. the Prophet says, Thou art
least, but indeed thou art not least.

2. It might be said to be least in respect of other greater Cities, and may be
said, not the least, because the Governor came out of it, and not only
Christ, but David, who was a Type of Christ. Some read it in Micah
interrogatively, which has the force of Matthew's Negative.

Among the Princes of Judah] Micah has among the thousands of Judah, for the
People were divided into thousands, Exodus 18.21. for they were Dukes or Princes
that had the Governments over thousands, in the Greek (...).

For out of thee shall come a Governor that shall feed my People Israel] As a
Shepherd feeds his Flock, as the Evangel st spoke of his Priestly Office, that
he should save his People from their sins, so he speaks of his Government,
having respect to his Kingly Office.

V. 7. Then Herod when he had privily called the Wisemen, inquired of them
diligently what time the Star appeared.

Herod made this Inquiry privily, 1 to still the Tumults and Reports of the
People, who expected their Messiah. 2. That he might know all the Circumstances
of the Star, as how long it had appeared, of what form, what greatness, whether
uncessantly. 3. That when they came from Bethlem they might not blab the matter
abroad among the Multitude, but tell him of it as the Magistrate, who was bound
especially to worship him.

What time the Star appeared] That so he might appoint the killing of the
Infants, (which now he had projected) according to that time, that so he might
secure the Kingdom to himself. Tyrants use to secure their Kingdoms though by
the death of many innocent persons. The word for inquired is (...), signifies
an exact kind of Search, such as is made in the Examinations of guilty persons.

V. 8. Then he sent them to Bethlem, and said, Go and search diligently for the
young Child, and when ye have found him, bring me word, that I may come and
worship him also.

Herod sends the Wisemen upon this Message, that this new born King being
taken, he might spare the rest of the Infants of Bethlem. He pretends to
worship him, but intends to worry him, q. d. Ye Wisemen do well to seek this
King, for no doubt this is he that is prophesied of, and the time and place
well suits to the Prophecy, he is that great Prince prophesied of, and
therefore bring me word where he is, that I may worship him. Obs. Wickedness is
never so abominable as when it is covered over with pretended holiness, 1 Kings
21.9, 10. 2 Samuel 15 8, 9.

V. 9. When they had heard the King they departed, and lo the Star which they
saw in the East went before them, till it came and stood over where the young
Child was.

Here is the satisfaction the Wisemen had to their Question, the Star which a
while ceased to appear now appears again, and goes before them till it makes a
stand, that is, it ceased to go any further, and it is likely in a short time
vanished after the Wisemen came to the place where the Infant Jesus was. There
was no doubt a great stumbling block to the Wisemen, that not a man of
Jerusalem to whom the Messiah was promised would so much as stir out of doors
to accompany the Wisemen to inquire after this King, but the knowledge of the
Prophecy of the place where Christ was to be born, and the appearance of the
Star heals this offense.

V. 10. And when they had seen the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

Here is the first Branch of their Thankfulness, they rejoiced with exceeding
great joy. Joy should be proportionable to the good enjoyed. A man does not so
rejoice at the yeaning of a Lamb, as when his Wife brings forth a Son. There
could be no greater joy than to hear and know the Messiah of the World to be
born. We should rejoice exceedingly in Christ, and in the means that lead to
him; they did not so much rejoice in seeing the Star which they had often seen
before, but that they had found Christ whom they sought. As it was to them, so
should it be exceeding joy to us to find Christ, Song 1.4.3.4. Zacheus
received Christ joyfully, Luke 19.6.

V. 11. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with
Mary his Mother, and fell down and worshipped him, and when they had opened
their Treasures, they presented unto him Gifts, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

Here is their second testimony of Thankfulness, in that they worship him.

And when they were come into the house] Some have thought that the Tax which
Augustus imposed was now ended, and that Bethlem being now empty of Strangers,
Joseph had taken some Citizen's house to sojourn in; but being the Tax
continued a long time by reason of the accession of new Strangers, therefore we
may suppose the house to be no other than the Stable whereinto necessity had
enforced Joseph, by reason of the multitude of Strangers in the Inn, Luke 2.7.
She brought forth her firstborn Son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and
laid him in a Manger, because there was no room for them in the Inn. All this
was to teach us humility: the Lord of glory laid in a Manger, in stead of a
Palace a Stable, in stead of a Cradle of State a Beasts Cratch, no Pillow it is
like but a Lock of Hay, no Hangings but Dust and Copwebs, he was in so low a
condition, 1. That all persons may have access to him, Shepherds as well as
others. 2. To show himself to be the Messiah and Savior of poor as well as
rich. 3. Because it was suitable to the rest of his Life which was spent in a
great humility. Men are apt to look for a Messiah in State, in a Crimson
Mantle, in a Cradle of Ivory, and to have found him in the best house in
Bethlem, in the best Chamber there; but we shall not find him in any such
place, but in a Stable. Learn we hereby to be lowly in heart, Matthew. 11.29.

And fell down and worshipped him] No doubt by divine instinct they knew the
Divinity of Christ, hence they worshipped him, not only with civil worship, as
one born King of the Jews, but with divine worship, which was it is like the
outward gesture of reverence, and kneeling, and falling down, for so the Greek
words signify.

They presented unto him Gifts, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh] It was usual for
the Persians and for the whole Eastern People to go to their Kings with Gifts,
Gen 42.11. 1 Kings 10.2. They brought the best things their Country afforded.
Myrrh grows in Arabia, Frankincense among the Sabeans a part of Arabia, Arabia
Faelix brings Gold, therefore the Kings of Arabia brought Gold to Solomon. The
Lord hereby would provide for Joseph and Mary, and the Child, being speedily
to go into banishment. For the mystical sense, it is thought they offered to him
Frankincense as God, acknowledging his divine Nature, Myrrh as man,
acknowledging his humane Nature, (that which they believe in their hearts they
protest by their Gifts) and that he should die for the Salvation of Man, for
Myrrh was bestowed upon him at his Burial, John 19.39. They offer to him Gold
as acknowledging him their King and the King of all the earth. Bernard
acknowledges no Mystery herein, but thinks they offered Gold to minister to his
want, Myrrh to strengthen the Members of the Infant, Frankincense to take away
the stink of the place. But one end may be, for the fulfilling the Prophecy,
Psalm 72.10. The Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring Gifts. Also v. 15. He
shall live, and to him shall be given of the Gold of Sheba. Let us bring to
this our King also three Gifts, Gold, that is, Faith, or a Heart by Faith
purified; for Frankincense, devout and fervent Prayers, that may come up like
Incense; for Myrrh, let us bring Tears, Mortification and Brokenness of Heart.
In that they bring not only Gold to minister to Joseph and Mary's wants, but
Myrrh and Frankincense, it argues there is a Mystery lies hid herein.

V. 12. And being warned of God in a Dream, that they should not return to
Herod, they departed to their own Country another way.

That neither the Wisemen nor the Child Jesus should become a Prey to Herod's
cruelty, they are warned of God to go home another way. There Is a secret
Providence watches over, not only the Head but the Members, Psalm 91.1, 10.
The Lord also hereby showed what manner of a Kingdom this King should have; he
should have a Crown, but it should be of Thorns; a Kingdom, but full of
crosses, exposed to the snares and persecutions of the mighty men of the World:
but also comforts them, that he the Lord was able to disappoint the most
artificial Projects of the most cunning Tyrants.

V. 13. And when they were departed, behold the Angel of the Lord appears to
Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise and take the young child and his mother, and
flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word, for Herod will seek
the young child to destroy him.

The 2d part of the Chapter, in which are these things;

1 The command the Angel gives to Joseph, which was, to take the young child
and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word.

2 The reasons of the command, for Herod will seek the young child, not to
worship him, as he pretended to the Wise men, but to destroy him if he tarry
any longer in Bethlem. All the commands of God are for the good of his people,
and are founded upon reason. 2 A second reason to fulfill the prophecy, I have
called my Son out of Egypt, v. 15.

3 Joseph's obedience in both the branches of the command:

1 In taking the child and his mother and flying into Egypt.

2 In his tarriance there; he abode there till the death of Herod, when word
came to him for his return.

And when they were departed] We see the changeableness of earthly comforts; as
it were yesterday the Wise men came, but now they are departed. See we Gods
goodness, when one comfort is taken away, another comes. The Angel appears when
the Wise men were gone. Flee into Egypt] When we look on our afflictions,
remember Christ was afflicted from the cradle.

Obs. It Is the duties of Masters of Families, to take care of their relations,
1 Timothy 5.8.

2 Obs. It Is a sufficient ground to fly, when we know persons lie in wait for
our lives, but with this disposition, that if taken, rather we resolve in Gods
strength to lose our lives, then to deny the truth.

Flee into Egypt] Because it was a Country near at hand, whereunto the journey
would be less.

And be thou there until I bring thee word] Gods command should be the rule of
our motion. As the soldier is not to leave his station without the command of
his Officer, no more are we without Gods command.

For Herod will seek the young child to destroy him] The Angel knew this by
divine revelation: For God knows the thoughts of men's hearts a far off, Psalm.
139.2. And the motions of our wills: Though the Angel might suspect it from the
cruel and proud disposition of Herod; yet only he knew it from revelation.
There is no wisdom nor counsel can stand against God, Prove. 21.30. The Angel
says not Herod will destroy, but only seek to destroy, Psalm. 37.32.

V. 14. When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night and
departed into Egypt.

Here is the obedience of Joseph. We must go from Country, friends and kindred
when God calls, so Abraham, Genesis 12.1. 2 though we know not whither. Here was a
long and dangerous journey for Joseph, an old man, to carry a woman that had
lately lain in, and an infant of about forty days old above two hundred miles,
through a vast Wilderness into Egypt, to sojourn among persons utterly unknown,
whose language probably he knew not, and that in the depth of Winter; but faith
overcomes all difficulties, he believes the Angel that he would bring him word
when it was fit to remove, as he said v. 13. Faith in Joseph swallows up carnal
fears.

15. And was there till the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my
son.

And was there till the death of Herod] Here Is the second branch of Joseph's
obedience. We must not only go whither God will have us, but tarry there as
long as he will have have us. How long Christ was in Egypt, and in what place,
and what miracles he did, the Scripture is silent herein.

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet,
saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son] The Scripture is fulfilled four
ways: 1 When that which is plainly foretold is fulfilled, as that a Virgin
shall conceive a child, Esa. 7.14. compared with Matthew. 1.23.

2 When the Scripture prophesies in general of such and such persons, it may be
applied to every particular, as when wicked men contemned Isaiahs Ministry, the
Lord sends the Prophet Isaiah, cap. 6.9. to preach, That they should hear but
not understand, see but not perceive. To such contemners Christ at several
times applies it, as Matthew. 13.13, 14, 15. Joh. 12.39, 40. and the Apostle
applies it to such Jews, Act. 28.26, 27. so Romans 11.8. as it is written, God
has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears
that they should not hear to this day; which though spoken by Esaias, and
aiming at the wicked that then lived under his ministry, yet being spoken in
general, falls upon all that have a spirit of slumber.

3 Analogically, or by way of proportion. So this Scripture, Out of Egypt have
I called my Son, which is taken out of Hosea 11.1. That place cannot literally
be meant of Christ, because that Israel there meant, the Prophet upbraids with
unthankfulness: therefore it is meant by way of similitude. As Israel the
adopted Children of God were called out of Egypt by the Ministry of Moses, so
was Christ the natural Son of God called out of Egypt by the Ministry of the
Angel, the Members were called out in Hosea, The Head here.

4 Prophesies are fulfilled, by way of Type, when the thing typified answers to
the Type. So the Prophets phrase of calling my Son out of Egypt, being spoken
singularly, was a Type of the Son of God, who was to be called out of Egypt by
the Angel: neither needs this seem strange, for Sinah and Sion, Hagar and Sarah
which signify the two Testaments are more unusual Types, and further fetched.

The third part of the Chapter.

V. 16. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the Wisemen, was
exceeding wrath, and sent forth, and slew all the Children that were in
Bethlem, and in all the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according
to the time that he had diligently inquired of the Wisemen.

We have here the History of Herod's Cruelty, from v. 16. to v. 19. set down, 1
From the outward cause of it, viz. his being mocked of the Wisemen. 2 From the
inward cause, viz. an exceeding Wrath he conceived in his heart, partly for the
Indignity he conceived the Wisemen had done him, and partly to hear that there
was one born that should be Heir of his Kingdom, and he not know who he was. 3
From the cruel Edict or Command he sent forth, to slay all the Infants of
Bethlem, two years old and under. 4 From the prophetical Prediction thereof,
Jeremy prophesied, In Rama was there a voice heard, Lamentation, Weeping, and
Mourning, Rachel weeping for her Children.

Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the Wisemen] We have the outward
cause of Herod's cruelty, viz. his being mocked of the Wisemen; for they
promised they would return unto him, but God having admonished them of his
Treachery returned not to him, neither did Herod presently go to murder the
Infants, for about thirty days after Christ was presented in the Temple, Luke
2.22. which was about eighteen days after the Wisemen came, and a little while
after dwelt at Nazareth in Galilee, Luke 2.39. And likewise, it is probable the
Tyrant Herod had endeavored to find Christ, that he might kill him alone,
before he would kill so many Infants, which thing he knew would render him
odious to all. Moreover there was a common Report (that when Joseph and Mary
came to present Christ to the Lord at the time when Mary was purified) that the
Child Jesus was openly declared by Simeon and Anna to be the Messiah, and from
thence Herod supposed the Wisemen had deceived him.

Was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the Infants in Bethlem, and
in all the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under] Because the Report of
the Wisemen, and the Witness of Simoon and Hanna in the Temple stuck much in
the minds of men, so that Herod could not without fear of a Tumult vent his
Malice against Christ, he deferred his Malice to a fitter time, and, hearing of
his being presented in the Temple, began to inquire where his abode was; but,
when he could not find him in all Judea, he thought he was hid for fear, he
dissembled the matter a while, thinking hereby, that his Parents fearing
nothing would bring him out of the place where he was hid, but when, after his
long dissembling, the Child was no where to be found in Judea, the second year
when he saw his opportunity, he endeavors to take away the Life of the Child:
but because no man could certainly show him who or where that Child was,
unless that he was of the House and Lineage of David, and born in the City of
Bethlem: hence he came to this bloody Result, that if he were in Bethlem or in
any of the Coasts thereof, Herod's Executioners should kill all the Infants
therein, and so him among the rest. And lest there might be any error in the
Children, he computed the time from the Appearance of the Wisemen; and lest
the Computation should not fully answer, Herod adds something both above and
below the Compute: Two years old and under.

From two years old and under] How Herod could gather all the Infants together
is no difficulty, seeing no doubt he had the like pretense that he had to the
Wisemen, some one or other specious pretense. Macrobius writing the Jeasts of
Augustus, Saturnal. lib. ^ cap. 4.
says, that when Augustus heard that, by the Command of Herod, the Children in
Syria under two years old were slain, and that in the company his own Son was
slain, said, I had rather be Herod's Hog than his Son. Joseph mentions also,
Lib. 17. Cap. 3. that the Pharisees foretold that it was decreed of God that
the Kingdom should be taken from Herod and all his Offspring, and past over to
a new King, for which cause he slew many of the Pharisees; he slew also, as
Philo mentions, the Sanhedrim or 72 Judges, who were of the Family of David,
about the same time. It Is thought he slew these Judges as a Preparative to his
wickedness of Infant-killing, that he might not give account thereof in
judgment.

Now Herod deferred the killing of the Infants so long, 1 That he might inform
himself of the Rise, Person, Parents, and Place of Christ. 2 That he might
obtain leave of Augustus to do it. 3 That he might get a Catalogue of all the
Infants names, which was easy to get among the Jews that had Books of their
Genealogies, and perfect Registers in order to the Birth of the Messiah.

Now perhaps this slaying their Infants might be some Judgment upon them, for
their not receiving the Son of God, but causing him to lodge in a Stable.

Nor did Herod act all this wickedness without punishment, for a little after
he was taken with an insatiable Appetite of taking Nourishment, sharp Ulcers of
his Bowels, also with a Rottenness in his secret parts, which brought forth
Worms, a difficulty of Breathing, and a drawing together of his Sinews, which
brought him into intolerable pain, of which in a short time he died; and a
little before his death he secured sundry principal Jews, and calling his
Sister Salome and her Husband Alexander said, I know these Jews will triumph at
my death, but, if you will execute my Commands, I will make them to bewail me;
those men that I have in custody, as soon as I shall die without delay kill ye,
that all Judea and every particular house even against their wills, may bewail
my death. Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 8. ex Joseph. lib. 17. cap. 8. also lib. 1. cap.
21.

The Coasts thereof, or Territories] A Territory is all those Fields which ly
within the ends of every City: so Grotius out of Pomponius the Lawyer. I
suppose he means the Liberties of every City, we read Matthew. 15.39. of the
Coasts of Magdala.

V. 17. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the Prophet, saying,

V. 18. In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning, Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, because
they are not.

Fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy] Cap. 31.15. There the Prophet,
because the living Jews of Judah and Benjamin were not moved with their going
into Captivity, by a kind of Prosopopeia he brings in dead Rachel bewailing
their misery; now because something like it fell out, it may be said
analogically to be fulfilled.

2 Rachel was buried near that place where the Infants were slain, Genesis 35.26,
28, 29. That therefore the Prophet might show the tragicalness of that doleful
sight, he brings in Rachel weeping, as if the Misery both of the Captivity and
of the killing the Infants were so great, that the living could not
sufficiently bewail it. It Is usual in Tragedies to call up the spirits of dead
persons.

In Rama] Rama was a City in the Tribe of Benjamin, Josh. 18.25. Bethlem in
part of the Tribe of Judah, near to the Coasts of Benjamin, Genesis 35.16, 19, 20.
neither was Rama far from Bethlem, Judges 19.13. compared with v. 18. The
Prophet shows the mourning was so great that it should be heard unto the Tribe
of Benjamin.

Rachel weeping for her Children] By Rachel may be understood the Mothers of
the Infants, who by weeping and crying out did in vain endeavor to resist the
Executioners whom Herod sent.

And would not be comforted] It Is credible the Executioners in the Kings name
excused the slaughter of the Infants, and comforted the weeping Mothers, that
the King would recompense their loss with other benefits, but they would not be
comforted, because they saw they were deprived of their most dear Infants.

Because they are not] In vivis, they are not alive. To be, is the same with to
live. Psalm 39.14. Before I go hence and be no more, that is, live no more,
Psalm 37.36. It Is said of a wicked man, He passed away, and lo he was not, that
is, he was not alive. Genesis 5.24. Enoch was not, that is, lived not among the
sons of men here, for God took him up to Heaven.

Quest. But seeing the Son of Man came not to destroy but to save, why would he
suffer so many Infants so near allied to him in Blood and Affinity to be slain
for him.

Answ. In the thirtieth Chapter of Jeremy the Prophet speaks comfort of
restoring Israel by Christ, so here Christ shows the way to his Kingdom was by
a bloody slaughter, either actually or habitually. It Is like these Infants were
all saved, because though their wills did not consent, yet, as soon as they
came to knowledge in a glorified estate, they did actually consent, to have not
only done that but much more for Christ. In the Gospel Times Salvation is by
Destruction, Life by Death, Matthew. 10.39. He that loses his Life for me shall
find it eternally. Now when these Infants could have no will to undergo their
sufferings, by reason of their not understanding, the very suffering it self
was a material Martyrdom for Christ, the formality whereof was made up in the
free grace of God. Besides whereas Rachel, Jer. 31.15. weeps for her Children
and would not be comforted, because they were not, that is, she feared the
Promises of the Messiah profited them nothing, seeing they were so cut off from
the Land of the Living, the Lord answers her, v. 16. Refrain thy voice from
weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy works shall be rewarded: that is,
the work of the patience of the Mothers, who willingly part with them for
Christ, and the work of the sufferings of the Infants, and therefore the Text
says not, There is a Reward to the Will, but to the Work. Of this sort are all
such Infants which have been murdered for Christ, and out of hatred to
Christian Religion. These Lambs were to be sacrificed, because the Lamb of the
World was to be crucified, as Augustine says, Sermon. 1. de Innocent. In that
then Christ suffered the Tyrant Herod to rage against these Infants, it was not
out of any careless respect unto them, but in reference to their Crown: and to
let us see the watchful providence of God, how it is able to dispoint the
Projects of the greatest Tyrants, and to let us see the frame of the hearts of
tyrannous Princes, that will do any mischief to get or keep a Kingdom.

The fourth part of the Chapter.

V. 19. But when Herod was dead, behold an Angel of the Lord appears in a
Dream to Joseph in Egypt,

In the remaining part of the Chapter we have three things, 1 The Angels
appearance to Joseph in Egypt, v. 19. set down from the circumstance of time,
viz. when Herod was dead. 2 The Angels Message to Joseph which was, to take the
young Child and his Mother, and to go into the Land of Israel, amplified from
the Reason, For they are dead which sought the young Childe's life, v. 20.

3 Joseph's obedience, v. 21. He took the young Child and his Mother and came
into the Land of Israel, v. 21. His faith is amplified, 1 From some weakness
that accompanied it, v. 22. When he heard that Archelaus Herod's son did reign
he was afraid. 2 From the Victory over that Weakness and Fear, being warned of
God the second time in a Dream, he came into Galilee, and dwelt in Nazareth.

But when Herod was dead] This Tyrant reigned seven and thirty years, Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 10. Now he is dead, but Christ lives. Christ was now about
four years old, he went the year before Herod's death, and tarried two years
there in Egypt.

The Angel of the Lord appears to Joseph in a Dream] God forsakes not his
People in any place, no not in Egypt. No place so mean that Angels disdain to
go into, for the good of Saints, Heb. 1.14. Here Is the perseverance of Joseph's
faith, he stirs not a foot, till he was called back by the command of God.

V. 20. Saying, Arise, and take the young Child and his Mother, and go into
the Land of Israel, for they are dead which sought the young Childs life.

Here is the Angels command to Joseph, backed with a Reason, They are dead, etc.
These words agree with that Exodus 4.19. Go, return into Egypt, for all the men
are dead which sought thy life, to show some proportion betwixt the bringing of
Israel out of Egypt by Moses, and betwixt the Redemption of Mankind from Sin
and Death by Christ. Fears are apt to startle us in our obedience, hence the
Angel removes the Danger that Joseph may not fear.

Go into the Land of Israel] That the Child might be brought up there, lest he
should seem to be an Egyptian, and that Joseph might, together with the Virgin,
enjoy the benefit of Ordinances whereof they had been long deprived, and that
their expense might be lessened, which doubtless was not little, being in a
strange Land.

V. 21. And he arose and took the young Child and his Mother, and came into
the Land of Israel.

Here Is Joseph's obedience. Our obedience ought to be cheerful, Psalm 119.32.
I will run the way of thy Commandments. Also present, Psalm 119.60. I made
haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. 3 Universal, as Joseph's was,
to go into Egypt, to stay there, to come out. 4 Conscientious, done out of a
Command of God, for God's Commands ty the Conscience; such was Joseph's
obedience, here he moved from the Command the Angel gave him from God.

V. 22. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the room of his
father Herod, he was afraid to go thither, notwithstanding being warned of God
in a Dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee.

But when he heard that Archelaus did reign] Joseph hoped that now Judea would
be brought into a Province of the Roman Emperor, of whom he would have been
less afraid than of petty Kings, that are fearful upon every suspicion, and
therefore cruel: and besides Archelaus was more cruel than the rest of his
Brethren. Herod had nine Wives, by two of them he had no Issue, by the other
seven he had nine Sons and three Daughters, Alexander, Aristobulus, and
Antipater, which three he put to death in his lifetime, Joseph. Antiq. cap.
17. and lib. 1. de Bello Jud. cap. 17. Also he had Herod, Archelaus, Antipas,
Philip, etc. Now Herod made two Wills, in the former he made Antipas the Heir
of the Kingdom, in the later he made Archelaus King of Judea, and Antipas
Tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip Tetrarch of Trachonitis, therefore Joseph
thought either that no King would succeed Herod, (and indeed Archelaus was King
only by courtesy, not by Caesar's appointment) or, if any King should
succeed, it should be Antipas, according to Herod's first Testament, but it
proved otherwise: hence Joseph was afraid, and so much the more, as Chemnicus
observes, because Archelaus was a bloody man, who commanding in his Horse among
a Multitude of People, slew and wounded three thousand persons, against whom
the Jews rebelled, and Caesar nine or ten years after banished him for his
cruelty. To free Joseph from this fear, the Angel commands him to turn aside
into Galilee, and to dwell in Nazareth. The causes why Joseph was afraid of
Archelaus was, lest as his Father, so he should seek the Life of the Child;
Christ being thus placed in Nazareth came not into Judea, till he was about
twelve years old, because now Archelaus was banished, and in Archelaus the
Offspring of Herod ceased to reign in Judea, and the Roman Governors ruled in
his stead, who probably had not so much as heard of Christ.

It will not be amiss to understand this History from the Egg, as Cor. Lapide
cites it out of Josephus, Eusebius, and Zonaras. Herod being dead in the 37
year of his Reign, his two Sons that remained, Archelaus, and Herod Antipas,
contended about the Succession of the Kingdom: Augu-Caesar committed this
Controversy to Caius Caesar his Nephew to be decided, his Award was to judge
the Kingdom to neither of them, but dividing it into four Tetrarchies,
appointed it to be governed by four Tetrarchs: he gave to Archelaus Judea, to
Antipas Galilee, to Philip the third Brother Trachonitis, and to Lysanias he
gave Abilene, as appears Luke 3.1. When therefore Matthew says, Archelaus
reigned, it was not as King, but only as Tetrarch or Governor of a fourth
part of the Nation: after nine years of his Tetrarchy, Archelaus was banished
seven years before Augustus's death. Archelaus being banished, Augustus placed
three Presidents over Judea, Coponius Ambivius, and Annius Rufus, who governed
till the death of Augustus. Augustus being dead, and Tiberius Caesar succeeding
him, he made Valerius Gratus Governor of Syria, and after him Pontius Pilate,
who crucified Christ. To Pilate succeeded Marcellus Cumanus, Claudius Faelix,
Portius Festius, Albinus, and Florus, under whom in the twelfth year of Nero,
thirty five years after Christ's death, the Jews began to rebel against the
Romans, and shortly after were overthrown by Vespasian and Titus, for in the
fifth year after in the eighth day of September, Jerusalem was taken and
destroyed of Titus.

V. 23. And he came and dwelt in a City called Nazareth, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, He shall be called a Nazarene.

This Testimony in these same words is no where found in Scripture.

But 1 we find it spoken in so many words of Samson in the Type, Judges 13.5.
The Child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb, which is fulfilled in
Christ, who is the Antitype, 1 As Samson was exceeding strong, so Christ, in
that he binds the strong man, Luke 11.22. 2 As Samson slew more at his death
than in his life, so CHRIST destroyed death by his death.

2 There is no Witness brought out of one Prophet, but there is one Witness
brought out of all the Prophets; for all the Prophets that speak of Christ set
him forth to be holy. So that as in the old Law they that gave themselves to
some peculiar holiness above the common Prescripts of the Law were called
Nazarites, Numb. 6.3, 6, 8. They were to drink no Wine, and to be holy, etc. So
these things were fulfilled in Christ, who did not devote himself to Wine and
such kind of Ceremonies, but to the bloody and shameful Death of the Cross,
so that the sense is, things were so ordered by God that Joseph and Mary being
returned out of Egypt should dwell at Nazareth, that from his dwelling there
the name of Nazarite might stick unto him, whereby his most perfect holiness
and the Vow he took upon him, which was to die for our salvation, might be
signified.

3 Whereas Christ was called in contempt a Nazarite, John 1 46.7.42. Vicisti
Galilaee, Vicisti, the Saying of Julian. As all Christians were by the Heathen
contemptuously so called, Tertul. cont. Marcion. The Evangelist would turn the
name into honor, withal signifying that it was no impediment why he should
not be believed to be the Messiah, seeing he was called a Nazarite, not from
his Birth which was in Bethlem, but from his breeding.

4 Christ was called a Nazarite, not only in respect of his Vow, but in
respect of the Place, alluding to the derivaion of the word Nazareth, of the
Hebrew word Neser, that signifies a Branch, because Nazareth was situate in a
place abounding with fruit trees. So Christ is often called by the Prophets a
tender Plant, a Rod, and a Branch, Isai 11.1. The cause of this name was
because the Messiah was to have Nazareth, a place of Trees and Branches, for
his Country. Christ is often called a Branch, Zach. 6.12. The Man whose Name
is the Branch.

The name of the City Nazareth is not read in the Old Testament, and therefore
it is not certainly known how it was then writ. If it were writ by Zain, then
it is derived of Nazir, that is, Separate, holy, consecrate, of the Root Nazar,
that signifies to separate, consecrate. So the religious persons of the Old
Testament that separated themselves from Wine and the World were called
Nazarites; so Christ in respect of his holy Life and Vow of his Death might be
called a Nazarite. But if Nazarene be derived of the Hebrew Neser, by Tsadde,
then it must be written by S. i. Nasarene, then it signifies a Branch; and so
Christ was called a Nasarene, from the abundance of Branches and fruit trees
wherewith the Town of Nazareth did abound, so Chemnicius, Lapide, Pareus.

CHAP. III.
V. 1. In those days came John the Baptist preaching in the Wilderness of Judea,

V. 2. And saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.


WE have in the two former Chapters heard of Christ his Birth and Education. We
have little in Scripture concerning the Actions of his Youth, save that once he
reasoned in the Temple with the Doctors there, Luke 2.46. therefore the
Evangelist comes to his manly estate. In the thirtieth year of his Life he was
baptized, and shortly after began his Ministry: for among the Jews no man began
his Ministry before the thirtieth year of his age, 1 Chronicles. 23.3. the words
are, The Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and upwards. In the
mean time it is like Christ exercised the Art of a Carpenter with his father.
Such a long silence in Christ may condemn our pride, who are apt to think it
nothing to know, unless others know that we do know.

In the Chapter are three parts, 1 The Ministry of John from 1. to v. 14. 2 The
Baptism of Christ from v. 14. to the end.

John's Ministry is set down, 1 Generally from the Time, Doctrine, Habit,
Feeding, and Office of Baptizing, from v. 1. to v. 7. 2 Specially, from his
Reprehension to the Pharisees and Sadduces, from v. 7. to v. 13.

In those days] 1 His Preaching is set forth from the time John was born,
fifteen years before Augustus's death, by the common consent of ancient
Writers, he began to preach in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, Luke 3.1, 3.

In the Wilderness] For good men were wont to fly into Wildernesses for fear of
Persecutors, Heb. 11.37. His Preaching is set forth, 2 From the place, viz. in
the Wilderness, whither some think he fled for fear of Herod: he preached also
in all the Country about Jordan, Luke 3.3. No ground that hence persons, from
John's Example, should live in Wildernesses, for such a kind of Life is
contrary to the Law of Creation, which said, It was not good for Man to be
alone. 2 It Is contrary to Communion of Saints; for the Gifts and Graces we have
we are to communicate to others.

John being in the Wilderness was first called here to preach, Luke 3.1, 2. In
the fifteenth year of Tiberius the Word of God came unto John the Son of
Zacharias in the Wilderness; for four hundred years, that is, from Malachy to
John Baptist, no Prophet was extraordinarily called; but John has a new
Calling, being to be a Preacher of the New Testament. It was not called a
Wilderness, because altogether void of Towns, for Bethabara was there, John
1.28. a Town built near unto Jordan; but because there were but few Inhabitants
in it, he exercised his Ministry in Aenon and Salem, John 3.23.

And saying, Repent] His Preaching is set forth, 3 From the Doctrine he
preached, viz. [Repent] Repentance is not only an external Amendment of our
Life, but a change of heart and life, Romans 12.2. 2 Cor. 3 18. the parts whereof
are, 1 Transformation, Romans 12.2. 2 Humiliation, this is called Sorrow
according to God, 2 Cor. 7.9. 3 Reformation, Jon. 3.10. No man begins a new
life that repents not of his old, (...) post sactum sapere, opponitur (...).
This Doctrine was preached by Christ, Matthew. 4.17. by Paul, he testified
Repentance toward God from whom we have gone astray, and faith toward Jesus
Christ, as the way of our return unto him, Acts 20.21. In Repentance there is a
Transformation or turning from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan
to God, that they might obtain Forgiveness, Acts 26.18. Sometimes Repentance is
divided into, 1 Mortification or dying to sin, Heb. 6.1. 1 In the reign, so the
Apostle, How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein? Rom 6.1, 2.
2 In the Relics, this is gradual, step after step, 2 Cor. 4 16. As the
outward man is perishing, the inward man is renewing; penitent Souls are purged
to bring forth more grace and less sin, John 15.2. 2 Vivification or living to
God, of this see Romans 6.11, 13. 2 Cor. 5.13.

The Fruits of this Repentance are, besides those mentioned 2 Cor. 7.11. as
care of pleasing God in all things, and fear of offending him in any thing,
Genesis 39.9. Indignation against all sin, especially our own, Isai 30.22. Hosea
14.3, 8. Zeal of God's glory, rejoicing to see his Name glorified, and mourning
to see it dishonored, What are all the Palaces of the World to a contrite
heart, yea Heaven and Earth, seeing it is the Seat of Divine Majesty? Luth.
Tom. 3.457.
Psalm 119 139. and others mentioned there, there are also, 1 A shunning
occasions of Evils, Genesis 39.10. 2 An hatred of all sin, as being contrary to
that Life we live, Psalm 97.10. 3 A sadness and grief of heart for sinning
against such a Father, Psalm 51.3. Luke 15.17, 18. The Soul wishes, O that it
were to do again I would never have done it, neither is this only in the first
Repentance, when we first turn to God, but in the repeated acts thereof after
any slip or backsliding. 4 Heart-bleeding Confessions, that the Soul does not
only historically but meltingly declare his sins to the Lord, Psalm 38.17 5 A
forsaking of all sin, Isai 55.7, 8. Mead in loc. Diatr. par. quar.
Prove. 28.13. To have sinned condemns not, but not to repent this condemns.

For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand] That is, the Kingdom of the God of
Heaven, so interpreted Dan. 6.24. The Heavens do rule, that is, the God of
Heaven rules, Luke 15.18. I have sinned against Heaven, that is, the God of
Heaven. The Baptism of John, was it from Heaven or of Men? That is, from God or
men, Matthew. 21.15. This Kingdom is not outward like the Kingdoms of the World,
having power over the Body, nor of this World, for then would his Servants
fight to defend it, John 18.36. Not stablished by Armies, Swords, and Garrisons,
but a spiritual Kingdom within us, Luke 17.21. Suitable to those spiritual
invisible Enemies we war against, who now and then employ wicked men in their
Service, who are but the Horses in the Devils Battles, the Devils and the
Angels being the Riders. This Kingdom is partly militant, fighting against
Devil, World, Flesh; partly triumphant, 1 Cor. 15.24. Christ then ruling till
he have put down all power. This is called the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Because the
King thereof has his Throne in Heaven. 2 Because the beginning thereof is from
Heaven, not from Earth. 3 Because it is governed by the power of Heaven not by
earthly Magistrates.

Is at hand] This Kingdom is said to be at hand, as a Woman with child when
her tenth Month is come may truly say her Travel is at hand, so might the
Baptist say when the last Weeks of Messiah's Weeks was begun, the Kingdom of
Heaven was at hand. To understand which consider Dan. 9.14. Seventy Weeks are
determined upon thy People, and upon thy holy City, to finish transgression,
and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the Vision, and to
anoint the most holy. The meaning is, the Jews counted their years by sevens,
every seventh year being a year of rest for the Land, and so called a
Sabbatical year, according to which Account the Angel tells Daniel, that
seventy of those Weeks of years were allotted for the standing of their Temple
and Common wealth, when both should be restored again after the Captivity,
which make in all four hundred and ninety years. Now these four hundred and
ninety years being expired, as appeared by the coming of the Messiah, and
Jerusalem being destroyed within forty years after, John might very well say
the time was at hand.

V. 3. For this is he that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The
voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
Paths straight.

The Baptist gives a Reason why he preaches Repentance, and that in the
Wilderness, because he is that voice of one crying in the Wilderness prophesied
of by Esaias cap. 40. and commanding that a way should be prepared for the
Messiah now come in the flesh by repentance. This is the same with John 1.23. I
am the voice of one crying in the Wilderness.

Prepare ye the ways of the Lord] The literal sense was, that the Jews in
captivity in Babylon would prepare themselves to return into Judea, though the
Country of Judea were waste, and the Journey long, because all Impediments
were to be removed by the bounty and kindness of King Cyrus, whom God stirred
up to show mercy to the Jews, but mystically he sets forth the Deliverance of
Gods People from sin and death by Christ.

The way of the Lord] That is, 1 Do not cause any block by absenting from the
present proffers of grace 2 Believe, and hope, and receive this Son of God who
is now offered to you, and the tenders of grace, that your wills may not be
contrary when he calls, Matthew. 23.37. John 5.40. Apoc. 3.20.

Make his Paths straight] That is, by walking in an universal obedience, both
by doing and suffering, that we may not turn out of the way of duty because of
dangers and hazards, Prove. 4 25. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine
ey-lids look straight before thee, as a man that winks with one eye taking
level at a Mark, that seems not so much to see with his eyes as with his
ey-lids, Heb. 12.13. Make straight paths unto your feet, (avoiding all crooked
walkings because of the cross) lest that which is lame be turned out of the
way. Whiles a poor Soul goes out in crooked paths, it is with him as with a
Traveller, who going out of his way arrives not without some difficulty at his
Journeys end.

V. 4. And the same John had his Raiment of Camels hair, and a leathern Girdle
about his Loins, and his Meat was Locusts and wild Honey.

Here John is set forth from his Apparel, and Feeding. The Law of the Nazarites
was to consecrate themselves to God, And they withdrew themselves from the
common manner of Living that they might better intend the Law of God, Number. 6.1.
Judges 13.5. Amos 2.12. Now these Nazarites they were either by Vow, such were
sundry under the Law;

Or by Birth, such was Samson, Judges 13.5. and John Baptist, Luke 1.15. He
shall drink neither Wine nor strong Drink. The end hereof was, that all men's
eyes might be on them, to see what God would do by them. This more austere
course of Life was taken up by John, not to condemn the use of softer Apparel,
or sweeter Meat, but because it was commanded unto him by the Angel.

Raiment of Camels hair] Not of your Grograms or Chamlets, or of precious
Stuff, but base, hairy, horrid and course, Matthew. 11.8. What went ye out into
the Wilderness to see? a man man clothed in soft clothing. In Palestine as
they were wont to spin Goats hair, Exodus 35.26. All the women whose heart
stirred them up in wisdom spun Goats hair; so were they wont to spin Camels
hair, of which in likelihood John's Garment was, and not of the Camels Skin.
It Is like John's Garment was of the coursest sort, to teach all men, in
particular Teachers, all due moderation of Apparel, and contempt of the World,
not to teach us to seek Righteousness thereby, as foolish Monks do by putting
themselves to penance, by wearing course and hairy Garments. For John's
Preaching was to carry persons for to seek for righteousness only in Christ,
and not to seek for righteousness by outward Apparel. It was very fitting that
they that preach Repentance should show forth Repentance in their Garments.

Leathern Girdle about his Loins] Whereas Aaron had a Linen Girdle, Lev. 16.4.
Sometimes it was blue, and purple, and scarlet, Exodus 39.29. John's Girdle was
Leather, to bind his Clothes close unto his Body. Herein he did resemble
Elias, 2 Kings 1.8. who was girt with a Girdle of Leather about his Loins. The
richer Jews had Girdles inlaid with Gold and Silver, John's Girdle was of
Leather, girt about his Loins after the manner of the Eastern People, Luke
12.35. Let your Loins be girt about. It was usual with the Hebrews in their
Mourning to be clothed with Hair, Joseph. lib. 16. Antiq. and such were the
Nazarites of the Hebrews, and suitable to them who did not cut the Hair of their
Head nor Beard, to these a leathern Girdle was very suitable.

And his Meat was Locusts and wild Honey] (...) Locusts, so called, because
they eat up (...) the Tops of Ears and Plants. The Locusts and Grasshoppers are
put among creeping things that may be eaten, Levit. 11.22. The Eastern People
were wont to eat them, as Diadorus Siculus, lib. 3. cap. 3. and Jerome. cont.
Jovin. witness; we because we have not seen it are ready to abhor from it, so
would we be from the eating of Snails, yet as I am informmed, are they commonly
eaten in France and Spain, etc.

And wild Honey] Desert places abound with this, Bees gathering Honey in the
Roots of hollow Trees, or Clefts of Rocks. It has been observed, that in
hotter Countries there has been such plenty of Honey, that when the Bees could
not be received in Hives they have flown into the Woods: and this may be
supposed to have been in Palestine, because it was an hot Country, and because
the Scripture says, It flowed with Milk and and Honey, Levit. 20.24. and from
Jonathan's tasting Honey by putting the end of his Rod in an Honeycomb when he
was upon his March, 1 Samuel 14.27. also Psalm 81.16. O that Israel had hearkened
to me, I would have fed him with the finest of the Wheat, and with Honey out of
the Rock would I have satisfied thee. Rabanus out of the Travels of Arnulphus a
French Bishop says, In the Desert of Judea there are found a little kind of
Locust, which being of slender and short bodies after the manner of a finger,
may be easily taken in the Grass, and being boiled in Oil give Meat to poor
People. We must not then think the Evangelist speaks any monstrous thing of the
Baptist, but only this, that he abstained from Riot and Dainties, and used
homely Diet which could be got any where; this kind of Feeding was not common
to all the Inhabitants of that place, for, because John lived in this manner,
the Pharisees thought the Devil was in him, Matthew. 11.18.

For his Drink no doubt it was suitable to his Meat, as the Angel bad, Luke
1.15. that he should drink neither Wine nor strong Drink. He did it that all
men might see that God would do some singular thing by him, and God hereby
would show his power in calling to such a Service (as the Preaching of the
Gospel was) a country wilderness man, John 1.6, 7. John was sent of God to
bear witness of the Light, and to baptize, John 1.33. who had a sign from God
to know this Messiah, even the Descent of a Dove upon him. So that he could
point out and preach to the People, Behold the Lamb of God, John 1.29. compared
with v. 33. He received not only a Command to preach, (as concerning
Mortality, All flesh is grass, Isai 40.4. and concerning Repentance, Of turning
the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, Luke 1.) but also he received a
Command to baptize, that is, to gather a Church after a new manner. In the
dispensation of his Ministry it is like he received those Mysteries of the
Destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation, under the Metaphor of an Ax
laid to the Root of a Tree, and that Christ in Pentecost would baptize
Christians with fire and with the Spirit.

V. 5. Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Region round
about Jordan,

V. 6. And were baptized of him in Jordan confessing their sins.

John had preached the Doctrine of Repentance, that whereas they thought they
were righteous by their works, and without sin, and that though they lived
wickedly yet they should not fear Gods wrath, because God was merciful,
therefore John shows they were all under wrath, and whereas they were
confident on their prerogative, that they were Abraham's seed, John preached unto
them they should change their opinion, and that righteousness was only through
Christ.

Having preached repentance unto many of his hearers, they came to receive the
baptism of repentance.

Then went out unto him Jerusalem and all Judaea] Partly because they had for
400 years been without an extraordinary Prophet, even from the days of Malachy,
partly because of the powerfulness of his doctrine, and austerity of his life,
and partly because he by his doctrine prepared them for the Messiah, upon whose
coming all men's minds were set. They coming to him, he taught them next to
repentance and faith in the Son of God, that he had a new command from God,
that by a new kind of baptism he was to gather a Church unto the Messiah that
was now coming, that by that rite believers might help their faith. Whereunto
some apply those prophetical Scriptures, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will power, or sprinkle,
clean waters upon you, and you shall be cleansed: and Zach. 13.1. In that day
there shall be a fountain set open for sin and for uncleanness. This was called
the baptism of repentance, to show that none of right ought to take it up, but
those that repented first, and those that believed first, Act. 19.4. John there
taught that they that were to be baptized should believe on Christ, and hence
his baptism was called baptism for forgiveness of sins, for this John in his
ministry made known, Luke 1.77.

All Judaea] That is, persons of all age, condition and sex, not every
individual person.

And all the region round about Jordan] That is, from all places of both sides
of the river of Jordan.

Were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins] That is, they first
confessing their sins were baptized of him: together with the confession of
their sins, they professed a belief of the doctrine which he preached. Tertul. in
his book of repentance, says, We are not therefore washed that we should cease
to sin, but because we have ceased, because we are already washed in heart.

This very baptism in the manner of it, Apol. to Antoninus.
was continued in Justin Martyrs time. Whosoever are persuaded and believe
those things to be true that are taught and spoken by us, and have received
that they can so live, they are taught to pray fasting, and to beg of God the
forgiveness of their former sins, we praying and fasting together with them,
then are they brought thither of us where there is water, and with the same
manner of regeneration that we our selves are regenerated are they regenerate,
in the name of the Father of all things, and Lord God, and of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and of the Holy spirit, then they are made a sacrifice in the water.

Tertul. to Quintilla cap. 1. Happy is the Sacrament of our water, because the
offenses of old blindeness being washed away, we are freed into an eternal life.

For the signification of the word (...), take it out of Grotius. The propriety
of the word shows, that this rite was wont to be done by dipping or covering
all over with water, not by sprinkling; Also the places chosen for that rite
prove it, Joh. 3.23. John was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there
was much water there, Act. 8.38, 39. The Eunuch and Philips going into the
water and coming out of it, and many allusions of the Apostles which cannot be
referrd to sprinkling, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. We are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,
so we should walk in newness of life. Paul proves they should not live in sin,
because they were dead; he proves they were dead, because they were buried in
baptism. Heb. 10.22. We find the dipping of the body, our bodies washed in
pure water, not the sprinkling of the brow. So that it appears that sprinkling
was not the baptism of John or Christ; 1 From the subject of baptism, It was
not a part but the whole body; 2 From the form, It was not sprinkling but
burying, Col. 2.12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein ye are also risen
again; 3 From the matter or element, It was much water, Joh 3.23. which needed
not, if sprinkling had been enough; 4 From the adjuncts of going into the water
and coming out, practiced by Christ, Matthew. 3. and by the Eunuch, Acts 8.38, 39.

Magnus writing to know Cyprians judgment of them that were baptized only by
sprinkling in sickness, answers in the end of his 66 Epistle, 1 That divine
benefits in nothing should be either lamed or weakened; 2 Necessity compelling,
and God pardoning, divine abridgements bestow the whole benefit on believers; 3
He mentions that those so baptized were called Clinici or bed Christians; 4 If
any man thought they had got nothing, because they were sprinkled, he says, If
they escape their sickness let them be baptized. Whereby we may gather, first,
That the right way of baptizing was by burying. 2 Because the opinion of those
times was, that baptism took away sin, and therefore many put off their baptism
till near the time (as they thought) of their death, but, death coming upon
them suddenly, they took sprinkling of a little water in their beds instead of
baptism, with an intention to be buried in water in case they recovered.

Moreover the Greek word (...), signifies to drown, dip or plunge, as Scapula
in his Lexicon interprets it, and (...), to sprinkle, Mar. 1.9. John baptized,
(...), into Jordan, which he could not have said, had not the word baptize
signified an application of the subject to the water, not of the water to the
subject.

Pareus on the 6th of the Romans says, The ancient rite in the Apostolical
Church was this, the persons baptized were dipped all over in a River, with
some tarriance under the water, then they rose up again; Dipping showed
crucifying and death, because it was not without terror, and coming up out of
the water signified resurrection with Christ. Par. in Romans 6.

Mr. Fox says, Augustine and Paulinus baptized persons in rivers, and not in
hallowed fonts, as witnesses Fabianus cap. 119, 120. Acts and Monuments, Part.
1. page 138. After, speaking of Austin, he says, He departed after he had
baptized ten thousand Saxons or Angles in the West River that is called Swale
besides York, on a Christmas day: where note by the way Christian Reader, says
Mr. Fox, That whereas Austin baptized then in Rivers, it followed then there
was no use of Fonts. See Acts and Mon. Part. 1. page 154. Also, page 156. he
says, During the life of King Edwin, Paulinus christened continually in the
Rivers of Gwenye and Swala, in both Provinces of Deira and Bernitia.

Confessing their sins] That is, professed themselves guilty of sinful
purposes, and sinful customs, and many sinful actions, and that now they
repented for them all, Acts 2.37, 38. Peter's hearers professed their faith and
repentance for killing the Lord of life, and were instantly baptized. With this
confession there went an holy hatred of their sins: as the Ephesians showed
their wicked deeds, so they burnt their conjuring books, Acts 19.17, 18. and if
the confession of the sins of persons in these times baptized were more
particular and with more grief, it would come nearer the Apostolical practice.
Truly it argues a great change of heart when persons formerly proud, unclean,
intemperate and unrighteous, shall not only confess themselves sinners, but
also such kind of sinners. Moreover, they professed they feared the anger of
God, and desired to escape it at the day of judgment. Also they confessed
other believables, that they believed on the Messiah that was to come after,
and begin his preaching, Act. 19.4. Also, no doubt they made professions of
their self-denial, without which they could not be Christ's Disciples, Luke
14.26. nor yet John's disciples; for John's baptism and Christ's being one and the
same specifical baptism, as confession went before John's baptism, so must it go
before Christ's baptism, and as making disciples (which was to teach to
conversion, believing and self-denial) went before Christ's baptism, so must it
go before John's baptism. And so the Eunuch, before Philip would baptize him,
made profession of his faith, Act. 8.37. So Heb. 10.22, 23. Our bodies washed
in pure water, let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering.
That is, that profession we made at our baptism. So that baptism is as an
handwriting passing betwixt God and us, we confess our sins, and profess our
faith, and he signs over and confirms unto us the pardon of our sins,
according to 1 John 1.9. And therefore it follows that no wicked persons that
never came to the sight of their sins, nor to humiliation for them, are to be
admitted to baptism; nor yet infants, for their receiving destroys the
qualifications preceding baptism, which is confession, for they were not first
baptized and then confessed, but first they confessed and then they were baptized.

V. 7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces come to his
Baptism, he said unto them, O Generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee
from the wrath to come?

We have here John's Ministry set down, from the reprehension he gives to the
Pharisees and Sadduces, from v. 7. to v. 13.

Here may be a Question, why John threatened these Pharisees so severely that
came to his Baptism. To know this consider, 1 Who the Pharisees and Sadduces
were. 1 The Pharisees did not only observe the Levitical Rites in a more
exquisite way than others, but had many other outward traditions, as Washings,
and Corban, etc. wherein they placed Righteousness and the Desert of eternal
Life; to get an opinion of Holiness, they separated themselves in Apparel and
Diet from other men, but not hence were they called Pharisees, but because
they, not content with the Letter only, would search out the hidden sense:
hence were they called Pherussim, that is, Interpreters. These Pharisees sprung
up about one hundred and fifty years before Christ; they attributed some things
to Destiny, but not all things, but they said some things were in a man's own
power to do or not to do, Joseph. l. 13. Ant. c. 9. These confessed the
Resurrection, acknowledged Angels and Spirits, Acts 23.8. and to gain opinion
they made broad their Philacteries, the pieces of Parchment which they wore on
their Breasts, wherein the Commandments were written, Matthew. 23.5. These had
the Office and Authority of public Teaching confirmed by the testimony of
Christ, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's Chair, whatsoever they bid you
observe that observe and do. The Scribes are put before them, as being of a
more ancient Institution, perhaps divine.

2 The Sadduces: These denied a Providence of God in the World governing humane
things, they denied the Immortality of the Soul and the Resurrection of the
Body, they thought there was neither Angel nor Devil, Acts 23.8. They were
indeed plain Atheists, who thought Religion was invented to keep men in aw: for
outward and politic ends they observed some outward legal Rites: these
attributed nothing to Destiny, but all to the will of man, and that we are
Authors as well of our own Happiness, as of our Misfortune, Joseph. lib. 13.
Antiq. cap. 9. The Pharisees following the faith of Moses and the Prophets
opposed these; the People followed the Pharisees, the great men followed the
Sadduces. The Sadduces denied all the Old Testament save the five Books of
Moses, Tertul de Praescrip. And therefore Christ Matthew. 22.31, 32. proves the
Resurrection out of them. They are called Sadduces, that is, righteous, because
they did arrogate the name of Righteousness to themselves, or rather of Sadoc
their Author, as Chemnicius and Lapid affirm.

2 To answer the Question why John so severely received these Pharisees and
Sadduces, the Reasons were, 1 Because of the dangerousness of their Errors:
the Pharisees out of persuasion of their own Righteousness did not fear the
wrath to come; the Sadduces out of their Atheism did not fear or believe any
wrath to come, yet both made a show of Religion.

2 They came to him dissemblingly, with a mind to tempt him, not to learn by
him.

3 To gain a further opinion of Holiness by being baptized of holy John.

4 Hereby to stop John's mouth that he might not thunder against their Vices.

5 To discover them to all the Multitude who were ready for their pretenses to
think otherwise of them, and in danger to be deluded by them.

6 That in the Pharisees and Sadduces, who were most blameworthy, the
Multitude might not content themselves with a feigned show of Repentance.

7 To manifest his own sincerity in Preaching, that though they were the most
eminent men for place and learning, yet he would not spare them in his Ministry.

Generation of Vipers] John's speech to them is partly reprehensory. John
alludes to the Devil that old Serpent, whose offspring they were, as also to
the Viper, whose Skin is beautiful, but her Poison is in her Tongue. As if he
should say, Ye are an evil Egg of an evil Bird; ye are poisonous sons of
poisonous fathers. Christ applies these words to them, Matthew. 23.31. Ye are the
sons of them who killed the Prophets, fill ye up the measure of your fathers
sins. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the Damnation of
Hell? As the Viper eats through the Bowels of the Dam, that it may come to
life, Plin. l. 10. c. 62. Rhodogin. l. 3. c. 37. so you Scribes and Pharisees
kill your Mother, the Synagogue, and your spiritual Fathers, the Prophets and
faithful Teachers, that you may live in your pride and covetousness. This
Comparison was made by Hierom and others, but experience has found the
contrary true, as Gesner, Mathiolus, and others; therefore it is called Vipera,
quasi vivipara, because that Serpent does not lay Eggs, but brings forth a
living Creature.

Again, as Vipers devour Scorpions, and therefore their Poison becomes
stronger, Aristot. lib. 8. Hist. Animal. c. 29. So the Pharisees and Sadduces
eating the poisonous opinions of their Rabbis, by adding their own, increase
the Poison of their Errors.

Again, Christ so calls them to upbraid the whole Order of them, as well absent
as present; as if he should say, Both these Factions beget Serpents, though
they differ among themselves.

Again, as the Viper is a most poisonous Creature, Acts 28.4. Gesner. l. de
Serp.
When the Barbarians saw the Viper stick on Paul's hand, they looked upon him as
a dead man, their Biting is counted mortal in the third day at furthest; such
were the erroneous Doctrines taught by Pharisees and Sadduces, also their
bitter slanders against John Baptist and Christ.

Moreover this phrase is taken out of Isai 59.5. They hatch Cockatrioe Eggs,
and weave the Spiders Web; he that eats of their Eggs dies, and that which
is crushed breaks out into a Viper.

Besides John hereby would not only inform them of their poisonous malice and
hypocrisy, but would inform them of their natural pollution they bring into
the world.

Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come] As if he should say, Ye
live so securely as if there were no vengeance after this Life, you Sadduces
think there is no Hell, and you Pharisees are so presumptuous that you think
you need not fear Hell, but who has told you so? It is your own carnal
confidence. 2 You were never brought to the sight of your sin, and the
punishment due for it, why then will you come to my Baptism which is a sign of
remission of sins. 3 Some take it as a word of Admiration, as if John should
say, I cannot be brought to think that you do repent, though you profess it,
but if it be possible for you to escape it, it must be by Faith and Repentance:
certainly that your Consciences may be awakened, know there is much difficulty
herein. Matthew. 23.31. Serpents, Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the
Damnation of Hell?

From the wrath to come] He means not destruction by the Romans, but
principally hell fire; the other is not excluded, wrath has lain upon them
sixteen hundred years, of which Christ speaks, Luke 23.28, 29, 30, 31. Zach.
5.11. The Ephah, or the full measure of the sins of the Synagogue, were carried
into the Land of Shinar; that is, they were scattered all abroad, as the
inhabitants of the earth were at the confusion of tongues in the Land of
Shinar; and the ephah was stablished upon her own base, to signify, that by
their new blasphemies against Christ and hardness of heart, that all the world
may look upon their banishment and misery, as they do upon a pillar set upon a
base or foundation, without hope of deliverance till their conversion be
accomplished, Romans 11.25.

2 John means hell fire, Matthew. 23.33. which he opposes against the Kingdom of
heaven, v. 2. q. d. the Soldiers, and Publicans, and common people have come
to me, Luke 3.12, 13. What shall we do, and what shall we do? and I have showed
them a way to escape wrath, but what shall I do with you? you see not your sin,
and then how can you be healed, and being not healed how can you escape wrath,
even hell fire? Obs The judgments of God ought seriously to be applied to
hardened and impenitent sinners, Psalm. 11.6, 7.68.21. Romans 2.5, 8. 2 These. 1.8.
1 Peter 4.17.

V. 8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance.

John lays down next after his reprehension, an exhortation to the Pharisees
and Sadduces, to bring forth fruits, that is to say, Works worthy of
Repentance, Acts 26.20. He means not a worthiness of merit, as if our Works
could deserve any thing at Gods hand, nor as if our Works of congruity or the
moral Works of natural men could deserve so much of God, that he should be
bound to enable us to do Works of Repentance, or condignity to deserve any
thing from God: but he means a worth of sutableness, as a bountiful Lady is
worthy of a liberal Lord or Gentleman, that is, she is suitable. So, bring forth
Fruits worthy of Repentance; that is, suitable or declarative of your
Repentance, as if he should say, Show that you do not come with a counterfeit
Repentance, but let your outward signs of Repentance, (as care of pleasing God,
hatred of former sins, good Works contrary to your former evil Works, tears and
sighs) evidence the inward Repentance of your hearts, and this is the way and
means of escaping the wrath to come, wherewith I have threatened you. You O
Sadduces, repent of your Atheism; you O Pharisees, turn the pride of your own
Righteousness into self-abasement, your seeming sanctity into real sincerity,
your covetousness and griping to Alms and Restitution, your secureness to godly
fear; let there be some sutableness (though we do not enjoin a Popish
commensurate equality) betwixt your Sorrow and Humiliation and your former
sins: as Peter for Denial wept bitterly, Matthew. 26.75. Not to give satisfaction
to God, which only Christ his Blood does, but to show your turning away from
sin, and your grief for what is already done; and to show you earnestly wish it
were undone, and that you would not upon any terms do it, were it to do again.
Besides, Fruits worthy of Repentance implies a vehemence of affection for God,
as formerly we have had for sin, a burning affection to God, as formerly we
have had to sin, to yield our members weapons of righteousness, as formerly
they have been weapons for sin, Romans 6.13, 19. Finally know, Repentance is an
inward Grace seated in the Heart, but the Fruits of it are brought forth in the
course of our Life.

V. 9. And think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our father,
for I say unto you, God is able of these Stones to raise up Children unto
Abraham.

The words are a Discovery of the false rests these Phariand Sadduces had,
which the Baptist lays open in order to their repentance: As, whereas thou
calls us a generation of Vipers, we are Abraham's seed; whereas thou exhorts us
to repent, we are a holy nation: whereas thou threatens us with the wrath to
come, if any such thing be, it belongs to Reprobates: But we are the elect
people of God, if God should cast off us that are the sons of Abraham, then his
promise would take no effect, Romans 9.5. but he would be unfaithful. To this
John answers, The Children of the promise are counted for the seed, and not the
children of the flesh, Romans 9.8. Birth privileges may inright you to the Land
of Canaan, but it cannot inright you to the promise of spiritual blessings
here, nor glory hereafter. You do not imitate the Faith and works of Abraham,
but the wickedness and treachery of your ancestors since Abraham, therefore you
are not the Children of Abraham, nor an holy Nation, but a generation of
Vipers, and in vain do you (as many in these days do) imagine the promises to
belong to the carnal seed. This still was the Jews foolish boasting, that they
were Abraham's seed, Joh. 8.33. and thence thought themselves free, and needed
no other freedom, when Christ at the same time tells them they were the
Bondslaves of sin, till such times as he freed them, and tells them v. 39.
that, if they were Abraham's children, they would do the works of Abraham. The
words are, as if John should say, Though you Pharisees and Sadduces go to Hell,
the promise made to Abraham will not in the least jot be made void, being it is
not made to them that succeed in the flesh, but to them that succeed in the
faith and works of Abraham, whether they be Jews or Gentiles.

[ God is able of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham] by Stones is
meant either the Rocks that lay upon the Banks, or shore of Jordan, Luke 19.40.
If these should hold their peace the stones would immediately cry out. Neither
was this other then when God made man of the dust of the earth, and breathed
into him a living soul. Some by Stones understand the Gentiles, from whom the
Jews did expect Faith and Godliness as from the Stones; neither is it
incredible for God to make Children of Stones, seeing Isaac was begotten from
Abraham when his body was dead (to her being an old woman, though afterward he
had Children by Keturah a young woman) and Sarahs body also, Romans 4.19. For
Abraham's dead body is resembled to a Stone, Isa. 51.1. Look unto the Rock
whence ye are hewn. q. d. You Pharisees, Sadduces, and Jews think if you
should perish, what would God do for an offspring? I tell you he is able to
raise them from the Gentiles; nay, if need were, from the dead, or liveless
Rocks, whence your self at first had your beginning, and wherewith at present
your hearts have some resemblance and similitude: as God turned Lots Wife into
a Pillar, which was standing many hundred years, yea, even in Josephus his
time, so can the same God turn a Stone into a Man, doing that bodily which he
does spiritually, taking away an heart of Stone, and giving an heart of flesh,
Ezekiel. 36.26.

Obs. There is an Omnipotence in God to do whatsoever can be done, even what he
wills, Psalm. 115.3. Matthew 26.53.

2 The spiritual promises of God are not tied to fleshly issue, Rom 9.6, 7, 8,
9. Gal. 3.7, 29. but to the Children of promise [ to raise up children to
Abraham] setting forth the manner how Abraham should have Children, not by
begetting only, but by raising up. As in the Law, they that were born of the
brother, remaining alive, were sons to the deceased brother, not by nature but
by Law, so all believers are planted into Abraham, and become not Children of
the flesh, but Children of the promise, Romans 4.12, 13. The Baptist, Christ and
the Apostles endeavor to take away the pride and Carnal confidence conceived
from the Holiness of their ancestors. Abraham, as a common father or trustee,
received the promises from God, which belong to all believers. Hence Abraham is
called a father like unto God, Romans 4.17. (...), both in spirituality, as God
is to his Children, (for the believing Gentiles are not descended from his
Loins) 2 In universality, so that as God is an universal Father, not only of
the believing Jews, but also of the Gentiles, Romans 4.17. so was Abraham.

V. 10. And now also the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, therefore every
Tree which brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire.

The Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees] Here is a Motive to stir up the
Pharisees and Sadduces to Repentance, because laid his Ax to the Root of the
Trees. By Trees he means Men or Jews, Matthew. 12.33. Make the Tree good and his
Fruit good. By Ax he means, 1 the Threatenings of the Word, which were now laid
to the Roots of men's hearts, Every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit is
hewn down, as Husbandmen do with Trees that cease bearing Fruit, they cut them
down to make firewood of them, so will the Lord do with you Jews, Luke 13.7.
Cut it down, why cumbreth it the Ground? John 15.6. Withered Branches are by
the Husbandman cast into the Fire and burned.

Every Tree which brings not forth good Fruit] Every Man, Woman, City among
you [is hewn down and cast into the Fire] Whereas you think you being once the
People of God, shall still so continue to be, know ye that at present ye have
the Ax laid to you, you shall be cut off from your Root Abraham, Romans 11.22.
And first ye shall be destroyed by the Romans. 2 Ye shall be cast into the Fire
of Hell, for your unfruitfulness. 3 Your posterity shall be given up to a
spirit of slumber, They shall have Eyes, but not see, Ears, but not hear,
Hearts, but not understand, Romans 11.8. For though Deuteronomy. 20.20. Fruit Trees were
not by the Law to be cut down, no not in time of a Siege, yet Fruit Trees that
either never bore, or had done bearing, might be used either in the Siege, or
for firewood.

Obs. A present or speedy Judgment of God may be expected of those that under
means of grace remain unfruitful Trees, Luke 13.6, 7. John 15.6, 7. Luke
20.16. Isai 5.4, 5, 6.

V. 11. I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance, but he that comes
after me is mightier than I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.

John's Ministry is set down from the difference betwixt him and Christ, 1
Whereas the People might be apt to think him to be the promised Messiah, he
tells them he was not, he declares himself to be only the Minister of outward
Baptism, but Christ who was shortly to be shown to them was the Author of
inward Baptism. The occasion of John's speech here, is set down Luke 3.15. All
men mused in their hearts whether John were the Christ: John answers, I indeed
baptize you with Water, etc.

I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance] That is, you Jews, and
repenting Publicans, and Soldiers, as appears Luke 3 10, 11, 12, 13. I baptize
you with Water unto Repentance already wrought, which I judge by the confession
of your sins, v. 6. and by the profession of your Faith, Acts 19.4. Not you
Pharisees unto a future Repentance. For John turns his speech from the
Pharisees to the People, doubting whether he were the Messiah, Luke 3.14, 15,
16. And therefore John's Baptism, as also the Baptism of every Dispenser, is
not the Baptism of future Repentance, but of present Repentance, Acts 2.39, 40.
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Christ, for the
Remission of sins. Hence Infants, for want of present Repentance are excluded
from Baptism: what change of heart, shame, sorrow, or hatred of sin can there
be in them? By baptizing persons to Repentance for time to come you make two
Baptisms, whereas the Scripture makes but one Baptism, Ephesians. 4, 5.

But he that comes after me is mightier than I] Or more excellent, 1 Both in
Gifts and Grace. 2 He it is that makes my Ministry effectual. 3 He is the
Bridegroom, I am only his Friend to sue for a Marriage betwixt you and him,
John 3.29. 4 He must daily increase in his praise and esteem, I must daily
decrease in mine, John 3.30. as the light of the Sun swallows up the light of a
Star. 5 I have the spirit in such a measure, he has the spirit out of measure,
John 3.34. 6 Whereas I never did any Miracle among you, John 10.41. he shall do
Miracles, raise up the Dead, cast out Devils, etc.

Whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear] This is a service committed to the
meanest servants, such a phrase in English, I am not worthy to carry his Books
after him. Some take it as the custom of the Hebrews, who, going into some
more holy place, were wont to put off their Shoes, Exodus 3.5. Josh. 5.15. Put
off thy Shoes, for the place where thou stand is holy ground, and those who
were more rich or noble had some Body to carry their Shoes. Other Evangelists
have, the Latchet of whose Shoes I am not worthy to unloose; in which speech
they allude unto the manner of their being shod. In hot Countries their Shoes
had only Soles below and tied above, and therefore they were to be loosed
before they could be pulled off, the Greeks call them (...) And we when we come
home or go to bed call to the meanest Boy to pull off our Shoes. Hence Psalm
108.10. Over Edom will I cast out my Shoe, that is, I will employ the Edomites
in the basest service, as to take away my Shoes when they are put off. John
hereby acknowledges Christ to be his Lord, and himself his meanest Servant.

He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire] Some think John
Baptist has respect to that Acts 2.1. visible pouring out of the Spirit in the
shape of fiery Tongues at Pentecost, though this be a truth as appears Acts
1.5. John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost not many days hence. Yet may we understand it of the power of the Spirit,
or of inward Baptism, whereby the Spirit in the Hearts of Believers burns up
their Lusts, not only enlightening of them, but inlivening and kindling in
them holy affections. As the Spirit is called Water from the purging away of
our filth, Titus 3.5. so is it called Fire, because by a spirit of burning he
burns up our dross, Isai 4.4. The Lord shall purge away the Blood of Jerusalem
from the midst thereof by the spirit of burning. In a word, Gospel Preachers
may baptize you with Water, but the Spirit renews us inwardly by the Spirit Now
that the Ethiopians baptize with Fire, they add to the Institutions of Christ,
and to the Scriptures, which shadows out unto us, and presents to our memories
the benefit of the Spirit by variety of expressions. The Abissines brand the
baptized persons with Fire, Beza in loc. This practice gave occasion to some
bolder Library keepers in some Copies to blot out the word Fire. The Spirit is
well resembled by Fire, because it has the properties of Fire, as to purge, to
drive away darkness, to shine, to kindle, to snatch upwards, to strengthen,
Ephesians. 3.16. to change into it self, 2 Cor. 3.18. Believers are by the Spirit
changed into the same glorious image. Mark 1.8. It Is said, he shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost. Fire is left out here, for explanation sake, it is added,
by the Figure Hendiadys. The sum is, Christ alone bestows whatsoever outward
Baptism figures or signifies. Now Fire in this place seems to be opposed to
Water. I baptize you with Water, says John. Christ baptizes with Fire, to
signify unto us that some fiery and spiritual power toward our purging and
cleansing is represented to us, by the Water of Baptism. Besides, this purging
Fire bestowed on the Elect, is opposed to that everlasting burning Fire, which
in the former Verse is threatened to fruitless Trees.

V. 12. Whose Fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and
gather his Wheat into the Garner, but will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable
Fire.

John had set forth the power of Christ about Baptism, now, to awaken his
Hearers the more, some of whom were in a deep sleep, he extends it further to
the last Judgment, which he shows by similitude of an Husbandman, who when the
Harvest is come, gathers the Corn with the Chaff into the Floor, and by and by
thresheth it, and separates the Chaff from the Wheat.

Whose Fan is in his ^a^d] That is, the Preaching of the Gospel; before the
Lord ^owse us up thereby, we are, as it were, folded up in an heap of
confusion, until which come the whole World is like a great heap of Chaff. Or
rather by Fan understand his judging power.

He will thoroughly purge his Floor] That is, his Church, gathering out of the
Field of the World his Corn, he brings it into his B^rn, as the Husbandman
does, and when by an outward Call in the Ministry of the Word he has brought
them in, because there are and will be many Hypocrites in his Churches, hence
he will thoroughly purge his Floor (as the Husbandman does) of the Chaff, that
is, of wicked men, who are compared to Chaff, Psalm 1.4. Job 21.19. But this
will be at the Day of Judgment, which should be as a comfort to Saints, and
terror to awaken carnal men: so that the Floor signifies not the Place but the
Corn upon it, by a Metonymie.

Wheat into the Garner] That is, Saints into Heaven, where the Sheep are at the
Judges right hand, from thence they go to Heaven, Matthew. 25. ult. When the Fan
has once severed them, that is, his power and wisdom whereby he is able to
sever Sheep and Goats, whereby he is able to judge persons for every thing done
in the B^dy, whether thoughts, words or deeds. This Fan is said to be in his
hand, it shows the ^ear approach of the Judgment. James 5.9, The Judge slandeth
before the Door. For if th^^e were some hundreds of years to the last Judgment,
yet, compared with Eternity, they are as nothing.

Burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire] Not that it cannot be quenched, but
that it does not quench in burning wicked men, it never turns their Bodies to
Ashes. Neither is this impossible, for the Sun it self which many suppose to be
Fire is always burning and never quenched; we read of the Bush burning and not
consumed, Exodus 3. This Fire is still kindled by the breath of the Lord, Exodus
30.33. This is five times together mentioned Mark 9.43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
that we might the more fear it. So that we see the woeful condition of the
Chaff, they are not only severed from the Wheat, but after the manner of the
Nation of Palestine they are burnt in the Fire.

V. 13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be baptized of
him.

We have here in this second part of the Chapter the Baptism of Christ set
down, wherein we have, 1 The end of Christ's coming from Galilee to Jordan,
which was to be baptized of John.

2 We have John's Prohibition of him, together with his Reasons, I have need to
be baptized of thee, and come thou to me?

3 Christ's Answer to John, showing why he would be baptized, which was, for
the fulfilling of all Righteousness, v. 15.

4 Christ's Reception of Baptism, amplified 1 From the Adjunct, He ascended out
of the Water being baptized, being then thirty years old, Luke 3.23. 2 From the
signs that accompanied his Baptism, which were three. 1 The opening or cleaving
of the Heavens, so that something might be beheld above the Stars and Planets.
2 The Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him, v. 16. 3 A
Voice from Heaven testifying that Christ was the welbeloved Son of the Father,
in whom he was well pleased.

V. 13. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan to John, to be baptized of him.

To be baptized] Quest. Why does Christ come to be baptized, seeing he had no
sin, and John's Baptism was a Baptism of Remission of sins?

Answ. 1 For the fulfilling of all Righteousness, that is, all the righteous
promises of God, Matthew. 3.15.

2 To allow of John's Baptism as instituted by God, which was cavilled at by
many.

3 That in Baptism Christ might have the testimony of the Holy Ghost in the
shape of a Dove, that he was the Son of God, and therefore to be believed on.

4 Because Christ took our sins upon him, and therefore, as a guilty person and
a penitent, he offers himself to John's Baptism, that being baptized by him he
might as it were wash away our sins in himself, he did as it were bury the old
Adam under Water in his Burying, and rising up from under the Water he did as
it were lift up the World of Believers that were drowned.

5 That, for as much as baptized ones were the Subjects of his Kingdom, that he
might be like his Brethren in all things, hence he took up Baptism to be
imbodied with his People, that he and they might be one Body.

6 To bring in credit such a hazardous and contemptible Ordinance.

7 That as God had instituted Circumcision the sign of the old Church, so
Christ would ordain Baptism as the sign of the new Church, and that not only
by word but also by deed.

8 That the Baptist might then declare unto the Multitude that this baptized
person was the Messiah so long hoped for, John 1.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

Then] When the Baptist had been a while preaching and baptizing and preparing
the People for Christ, and had told them that the Messiah was speedily to be
manifested to them, and the people were on fire to have him manifested, and as
the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts whether John
were the Christ, then comes Jesus to Jordan, where not only signs from Heaven
manifested him to be the Messiah, but John also openly declared him, partly
because the people were apt to think John the Messiah, to clear himself
thereof, and partly to make the Messiah known, being it was fully revealed to
him, John 1.33. The people being therefore instant that he would show the
Messiah, whom he preached to come after him, John answers, that he had not seen
him by face, but only had received this answer from God, That he should in his
Baptism be manifested to Israel, and in this manner, that the Holy Ghost in the
bodily shape of a Dove should descend upon him. See John 1.29. to v. 35.

[ From Galilee] The 2 thing is the circumstance of place. Christ comes from
Nazareth in Galilee, least any should think the business was carried politickly
betwixt John and Christ, therefore providence orders it that till the 30th.
year of their age they live and are brought up in diverse places, that John
could say, I knew him not, Joh. 1.32. and when John began his ministry about
Jordan, Jesus did not adjoyn himself to him, but abode in Galilee, that John
might know and preach this that the Messiah was come into the world, but was
not yet made manifest, and that he knew him not by face, but that he should be
manifested in his Baptism. Moreover Christ, when he comes to John, does not
talk familiarly with him before he desires Baptism, but then, when he desired
baptism he came out of Nazareth of Galilee. Neither was Christ baptized in
secret, but when all the multitude were baptized, Christ was Baptized. Now it
appears when Jesus was Baptized, all the multitude was baptized, Luke 3.21. It
was the providence of God that a great concourse of people should be Baptized
when Jesus was Baptized; that so besides John's testimony they might see the
visible signs confirming him to be the Messiah, all which did so clearly
confirm it, that this was called his manifestation unto Israel, Joh. 1.3^.

[ In Jordan] Christ's Baptism is set down from the place, viz, Jordan. It was
that River through which the people were brought into the Land of Promise: Not
as if Baptism were confined to a River, but that it may be adminstred in a
Pond, or Lake, or Sea, or Brook, or in any other water wherein there may be
burying.

V. 14 But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be Baptized of thee, and
come thou to me.

[ But John forbad him, saying: I have need to be Baptized of thee] as if he
should say, if one of us must be Baptized, I have more need to be Baptized of
thee, as the most worthy person, then thou of me.

Quest. But how does this agree with that, Joh. 1.31, 33. I knew him not, but
he that sent me, said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending
like a Dove, and remaining on him, the same is he that baptizeth with the holy
Ghost.

Ans. That phrase of I knew him not must be limited to that circumstance of
time before his coming out of Galilee, when it was, that the spirit revealed
Christ to John.

[I have need to be Baptized of thee] as if he should say, I Will give reason of
my refusal: 1 My Baptism, is a Baptism of Remission of sins, but thou have no
sin, therefore thou have no need of Repentance, nor no need of Baptism, and I
am afraid of profaning Baptism, if I should dispense it otherwise then it is
appointed

2 Thou art not only without sin, but thou take away the sin of others, and
into the Faith of thee others are Baptized for Remission of sins.

3 It Is thy spirit only that applies the Grace given in Baptism, and I of my
self cannot deserve it, and therefore I have need to be Baptized of thee with
the spirit, and thou have no need to be Baptized of me with water.

Obs. Holy Persons are sensible of their own corruption, yea, the more holy the
more sensible.

2 Obs. The holiest Persons have need to be Baptized of Christ, that is, to be
washed from their sins with the blood and Spirit of Christ, Joh. 3.5.

3 Obs. Though water Baptism must be but once, yet the Baptism of the Spirit
ought to be repeated again, and again, 2 Cor. 4.16.

V. 15. And Jesus answering, said unto him, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness: then he suffered him.

Suffer it to be so now] We have here Christ's Reply, acknowledging John's
arguments to be true in respect of his person; but in respect of his office, it
being a state of emptying, and abasement, and humiliation, therefore I will
have it done (says Christ) Suffer it to be so now, so that in opposition to
John's arguments Christ brings two reasons.

1 I am not yet declared to be the Christ by the descent of the spirit of God
upon me, and by the opening of the Heavens, and by a voice from Heaven, but
come unto thee as a private man, and therefore thou ought not to refuse me,
though I am greater then thee; and therefore suffer it to be so now.

2 For thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness] this is the second
reason. The meaning is, 1 I am not baptized for that cause that others are, for
to signify forgiveness of sin, for I have no sin, but to sanctify Baptism,
that it may be a mean or an instrument of the application of the righteousness
of Faith. So Luther.

2 Though I be greater then thee, It Is the Fathers will I should receive
baptism from thee, and consecrate it in my body, that they that are baptized
into me, may acknowledge me to be one of their brethren.

3 This word righteousness must not be taken strictly, but broadly, not only
to signify what belongs to the law, but for whatsoever has respect either to
equity or honesty. The Law of Moses had set down nothing of this Baptism, and
the Heavenly command John had received belonged only to Repenting sinners, yet
Christ being a pattern of perfect innocence, the sign Baptism was not in vain
in him, which signified a purpose of innocence; neither could it be shown more
effectually how great an honor was due to the Rites appointed by God, than if
Christ should by his Example commend the use of them to us. Again, Christ by
this Ceremony was as it were imbodied with us, and to confirm to Believers that
are baptized as they ought, that they shall have the Heaven open unto them, and
the Spirit coming upon them.

4 Christ understands not a justice of equality and of the Law, but of equity
and of his calling. Therefore Christ answers to the Argument of the Baptist by
a Distinction, which was this, The more unworthy ought to be baptized of the
more worthy: Christ answers, Yea, unless the righteousness of calling require
the contrary, that the more unworthy be called to baptize the more worthy? but
thou art called to baptize me, for I am not here now as a Lord but as the
Servant of the Lord, to be entered into the Church of the New Testament, and to
my duty, therefore I will do what belongs to me, and do thou what belongs to
thee, and so both of us will fulfill the righteousness of our respective
calling, I taking up Baptism, and thou dispensing of it; thou baptizing me with
the Baptism of Water, I baptizing thee with the Baptism of my Blood.

5 It is a point of Righteousness, that Masters and Teachers should practice
that they commend to others, that by their own Example they may teach others,
Acts 1.1. Jesus began first to do and then to teach.

6 By Righteousness he means whatsoever the Father has commanded, whatsoever
is just, holy, and acceptable to God.

Then he suffered him] We have here John's modesty, that denying his own
opinion he obeys Christ and receives him to Baptism. It behooves our Reasons to
fall down when stronger Reasons are brought, and not to defend them because
they were ours. Though John thought it absurd and uncomely, yet, when he heard
the Righteousness of both their Callings were fulfilled thereby, he gives way.
So did Peter, John 13.8. that would not let Christ wash his Feet, till Christ
told him, If I wash thee not thou have no part in me; then Peter suffered
Christ to wash his Feet: so John here it is like kept Christ by his hands from
entering into Jordan, not out of stubborness, but out of misguided reverence;
now Christ bidding John to suffer it to be so now, and giving him Reasons,
thereupon he suffered him.

V. 16. And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the Water,
and lo the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove and lighting upon him.

We have here Christ his receiving of Baptism set down, 1 From the Adjunct,
when he was baptized, he went up straightway out of the Water. Because he was
let go without the confession of sins, when others were not, as some think, but
rather because all made their profession before they came in, and so
straightway went out, therefore little can be gathered from hence, save that
when he came out of the Water he went to Prayer, to teach us to partake of
Batism and the Supper with reverence, Luke 3.

Now for Christ's Baptism, it was a burying of the whole Body in Water, for it
was with his Members, thus Col. 2.12. Romans 6.4. Heb. 10.22. He is not said to
go out, but to ascend, because the Earth or Land is higher than the Water.

And lo the Heavens were opened] We have the signs accompanying Christ his
Baptism, and confirming the same, viz. the Heavens opening. The Heavens were
opened to him, not that the Heavens were opened upon all the Earth, but that
part of Heaven where Christ prayed on the Bank of Jordan: or upon the rest, as
John and other baptized persons, but upon him. The manner of the Heavens
opening Mark sets down by cleaving, the Heavens were cloven, (...), to rend and
cleave, as he that cleaves Wood. This opening of the Heaven was a testimony of
this heavenly Teacher and of his Doctrine, that both he and his Doctrine were
from Heaven, which by the Dispensation thereof opens the Gate of Heaven to
Believers. Doubtless there was glorious Light that by the Beams thereof shone
upon Christ, like that which shone upon Paul going to Damascus, Acts 9. By this
Mystery the Lord signified, that Baptism was now consecrated in the Body of
Christ to be a sign of heavenly grace. It Is very like that all the heavenly
Orbs were open, that men might have looked into the Empyraean Heaven, or the
Heaven of the Blessed, which also fell out when Stephen was stoned, who saw the
Heavens open, and the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God, Acts 7.55, 56.

Out of this (...) of the Heaven came down the holy Spirit in the bodily shape
of a Dove, and sensibly let down it self till it abode on Christ.

And the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him] We have
here the second sign confirming the calling of Christ, and installing him in
his Office visibly. This was for the fulfilling of the Prophecy, Isai 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me: Not as if Christ were without the Spirit
before, but now it was made visibly manifest to others.

Like a Dove] Quest. Whether was it a real Dove, or only a similitude?

Answ. It was a bodily shape like a Dove, Luke 3.22. It Is like it was not a
true Dove, but only the form of a Dove, formed by the Angel, and therefore
Matthew, Mark and Luke say, As a Dove, and like a Dove. It Is like it was of a
fiery matter, as the fiery Tongues were. The Spirit appears in the likeness of
a Dove, to show that that Spirit that was in Christ was full of meekness, Isai
42.1, 2, 3. I have put my Spirit upon him, the bruised Reed shall he not break,
nor smoking Flax shall he not quench. See Matthew. 11.29. Again, a Dove
represents the Graces of the Spirit, Isai 11.2. The Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, to show the innocence, purity and charity in Christ.

A Dove was the sign of the Reparation of the World after the Flood, and here
it is a sign of Reconciliation by Christ.

This Dove was a fit Resemblance to this Lamb of God; for as the Lamb is most
harmless among Beasts, so is the Dove among Birds.

The Flight of this Dove denotes the divine Influence of the Spirit coming from
Heaven into the Members of Christ, as well as into the Head. Mahomet by putting
Corn into his Ear accustomed a Dove to fly to his Ear, which eat what was there
put; by this way he persuaded the People the Spirit of God was familiar with
him, and suggested to him his Alcoran.

Yet must we not think this substance or body resembled by a Dove to be
hypostatically united to the Spirit of God, as the humane nature of Christ was
to Christ, but as Angels oftentimes took humane bodies and appeared to men with
them, and laid aside those bodies afterward, so did the Spirit of God.

As the Heavens were opened unto Christ, to show his Doctrine was not earthly,
but heavenly, so did the Spirit come upon him, to show his Doctrine was the
Ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. called The glorious Ministration of the
Spirit, this visible Appearance of the Spirit could not but send diverse of the
Spectators to the perusals of those places of the Prophets forementioned, Isai
11.2.42.1, 2, 3.61.1. especially Christ so interpreting the visible descent of
the Spirit upon him, Luke 4 18.

To conclude, by this visible sign of a Dove is shown, that Christ is that
harmless one in whom the Spirit has his constant residence; in and through
whom alone we are to receive of the gifts of his Spirit, for whose sake rather
than for his own (in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily) this Spirit
descended upon him, and especially for John's sake, to whom this sign was
promised, whereby he should be certified in a most absolute clearness of the
person of the Messiah. John 1.32. On whom thou shall see the Spirit descending
like a Dove, that same is he. This Spirit John is said to see, not essentially,
but believingly; for by a Metonymie the name of the spiritual thing is given to
the visible sign.

V. 17. And lo a Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased.

We have here the third sign confirming the Call of Christ, and his Instalment
into his Office, viz. a voice from Heaven, when the Heavens clove that voice
sounded. It was the voice of the Father doubtless, in that he says, This is my
beloved Son: here was the first clear Revelation of the Trinity under the New
Testament; the Father shows himself in a voice, the Son in the flesh or humane
nature, the Spirit in the likeness of a Dove.

This is my beloved Son] Not an adoptive but only begotten; my only
everlasting and coequal Son. These words are partly taken out of the second
Psalm v. 7. I will declare the Decree the Lord said unto me, Thou art my Son.
By this forementioned voice he made his Son King upon Sion That Psalm is to be
referred to this.

Of this beloved Son, Isaak was a Type, Genesis 22.2. Take thy son, thy only son,
thy son whom thou love. And so was Solomon called Jedidiah, or the beloved of
the Lord. Often was Christ called Beloved in the Book of Canticles, the Fathers
voice might have respect to these Figures. Of this Christ speaks John 17.26. I
pray that the love wherewith thou love me may be in them. Ephesians. 1.6. We are
said to be accepted in this Beloved.

In whom I am well pleased] The same with that, In whom my soul is well
pleased, Matthew. 12.18. As if he should say, Thou, my Son, only and chiefly
beloved, please me in all things, and that infinitely, and no man pleases me
but by thee, yea by thee am I appeased with all them I have given thee, at whom
I was offended by the sin of Adam, and there is nothing in thee that displeases
me. Enoch pleased me, Heb. 11.5. but not so as thou do, for in thee I am
appeased and reconciled to the World of Believers. The show of a Dove was a
dumb thing, therefore here is a voice to make all things concerning the Messiah
out of question, and also opening the whole Mystery of our Redemption; for what
is our Redemption but this, whereas formerly we were at enmity with God, now
God is well pleased with us in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself. These words are taken out of Isai 42.1. and
in that Chapter is the calling and sending of Christ to his Ministry described,
and indeed the whole Scripture whence some words are taken should be looked into.

To this in the Transfiguration was added Hear him, not Plato, Socrates, Moses,
further than he Witnesses of Christ, but hear him who being in my bosom, John
1.18. shall reveal my Mysteries which have been hid from the foundation of the
world. He shall open the way to Heaven to you.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter there are four parts.

1 Christ his Tentation, from v. 1. to v. 12. 2 Christ's Preaching in Galilee,
from v. 12. to v. 18. 3 Christ's calling of four Disciples, Peter, Andrew,
James, John. 4 The Confirmation of his Doctrine by Miracles, v. 23, 24, 25.

In the Temptation observe, 1 The Time, v. 1. immediately after Baptism. 2 The
Place, in the Wilderness, v. 1. 3 The efficient Cause, viz. the Spirit of God.
4 The End, to be tempted of the Devil, v. 1. 5 The kinds of the Temptations,
which are three, 1 To Unbelief, v. 2, 3. 2 To Presumption, v. 5, 6. Cast thy
self down, for he shall give his Angels charge of thee. 3 To the vain glory of
the glory of the World, v. 7, 8, 9.

6 The Victory Christ got over these Temptations, so that the Devil was forced
to give ground, v 11. amplified from the Weapon wherewith Christ overcame him,
which was the Word of God.

7 The comfort Christ had after the Temptation was over, The Angels came and
ministered to him.

V. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted
of the Devil.

This Temptation of Christ is set down, 1 From the Time Then] When? Even
presently after his Baptism, Mark 1.12. Immediately the Spirit drives him into
the Wilderness, and being full of the Holy Ghost he was led by the Spirit into
the Wilderness. So that in the same day he was baptized he began his Fast of
forty days.

He was led of the Spirit] 2 His Tentation is set down from the efficient
Cause, v. 12. the Spirit, He was led of the Spirit, or driven or cast out by
the Spirit, (...), so Mark, or (...), led away or snatched away. These phrases
set down the violent impulsion and force of the Spirit in his heart, as appears
Luke 4.1. Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led
by the Spirit into the Wilderness. It was not then Satan that led him, but the
Spirit of God. Whether carried through the air, as Elias, 2 Kings 2.16. and
Ezekiel cap. 3.12. and Philip when he was taken from the Eunuch, or whether he
went on his feet, I leave it in the midst; but from the word (...), of (...)
sursum, and (...) duco, I incline to think he was carried up into the air.

3 Whither he was led, viz. [Into the Wilderness] It Is like the great
Wilderness, where he was with the wild Beasts, yet are not any persons to live
in Wildernesses now for Penance, for though every action of Christ be for our
instruction, yet is it not for our imitation. What popish Eremite is so carried
as Christ was? Christ went into the Wilderness to testify his divine glory, in
abstinence, not only from flesh, but from all manner of meat, which has no
place in Eremites: he went to be tempted of the Devil, and therefore chose the
fittest place, even a solitary Wilderness. We pray that we may not be led into
Tentation. If there were any such end of an Eremitical or Wilderness Life, as
Penance, yet were it meet to be professed rather among men than beasts, that they
who have beheld our Fall, may behold our Repentance. And if the Warrant of a
Wilderness Life be fetched from the Example of Christ, it must of necessity be
shut up in the space of forty days and forty nights; after the end of which
forty days Temptation he lived the rest of his life in the society of men.

To be tempted of the Devil] This was the end Christ was led into the
Wilderness. Christ was thus tempted, first, that he might be fitted for his
Ministry by Tentations; for knowledge of Tentations is one great requisite to
make an able Teacher. 2 To show with what Weapons a Christian ought to oppose
the Temptations of the Devil. 3 That he might be succouring and helpful to us
in our Tentations, Heb. 2.17. For that he himself has suffered, being tempted,
he is able to succor them that are tempted.

4 To show that Christ is stronger than Satan in time of Tentation, 1 John 4.4.
Christians overcome, because greater is he that is in them, than he that is in
the World.

5 That we may come unto him with boldness and confidence, seeing he was in all
the principal points of Tentations tempted as well as we, Heb. 4.15, 16. He was
in all points tempted like unto us, let us come therefore unto him with
boldness.

6 Satan tempted Christ, that in overcoming Christ he might hinder the Work of
our Redemption, by drawing him to sin; for the high Priest that was to redeem
us was to be holy, and harmless, and undefiled. Heb. 7.26.

7 That by his combating with Satan he might obtain victory to us, John 14. ult.

8 To let young Converts see, that after Baptism, that is, the profession of a
sincere and holy life, Temptations hang over such.

9 To let us see, that bare Tentations are not sins, unless we give our consent
to them. Satan's Temptations to evil are our crosses and Satan's sins, provided
we groan under them and oppose them. In holy men God works a distaste of Satan's
Temptations, yet may a Saint have as horrid thoughts cast into his heart as the
Devil can invent, who is indeed the great temptation-master.

10 That we, by Christ his Example, may learn to fight it out with Satan and
not to give way, like valiant Soldiers that stand and maintain their ground
against their Adversary, Ephesians. 6.11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil.

Learn we from this, seeing Christ was led or driven of the Spirit to his
Tentation, that we do not rashly cast our selves into Tentations, because we
know not what weakness we may show therein.

V. 2 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered.

When he had fasted forty days] Christ his temptation is amplified from the
concomitants that accompanied his temptation, which was prayer and fasting.
Because fasting kindles prayer, therefore he used fasting, as Moses and Elias
had communion with the Lord miraculously, Exodus 24.18. forty days and forty
nights, 1 King. 19.8. so had Jesus Christ.

From hence Papists stablish Lent. They say Christ his example is a command for
us, but by this reason all the miracles of Christ should be instead of a
command, but who can imitate Christ in miracles? Moses at the receiving of the
Law, and Eliah at the restoring of it, and Christ the restorer of the new Law,
fasted forty days apiece, but what is this to us? The example of Moses and
Elias gave no warrant to the Jews to imitate that fast, no more does Christ's
fast give warrant to us to imitate that.

2 There is great difference between Christ his fasts and Papists; for Christ
fasted but once, they yearly; Christ abstained from all meat and drink, they
only from flesh and that which comes of it; Christ abstained from food without
need or appetite to it, they hunger when they fast: Besides in their fasts the
Shambles are only changed into Fishmarkets, or into Grocers and Comfit-makers
shops, which are more pampering to the flesh. Luke says, that in those forty
days Christ did eat nothing, Luke 4.2. but they eat every day.

Now for the fast of Christ it was supernatural. For to fast above seven days
is death; for though sick persons in whom there is abundance of slimy phlegm,
and their natural heat is weak, may live above seven days without meat, for
they are nourished of the moisture of the body and phlegm, which the little
heat in their body does slowly eat up. Yet man naturally cannot live without
meat seven days, because for want of nourishment the natural heat dies. As the
fire of a Lamp is put out for want of oil, the body also being dried becomes
unfit, that the soul should inform it; besides, the bowels (as Hippocrates
observes) wanting chylous moisture grows together and then the man dies.

For Christ, his divine power did keep his body strong without hunger, and did
likewise suspend the action of natural heat, and other contrary qualities
weakening one another; and in the mean time afforded strength and animal spirits
to the head and brain, which were necessary to the contemplation of 40 days:
For though Christ's natural heat might be suspended by his deep contemplation so
that he might slowly digest (for the powers of the soul when they go into
contemplation they have little left for digestion and nourishment (as we see
generally in great students) and so might keep him alive without meat the
longer, yet not forty days.

He was afterward an hungred] When Christ began to be hungry the tempter came
to him: hitherto he stood doubtful, and durst not come, partly because of the
voice he had heard out of heaven, and partly because his forty days fast did
portend some great thing, but now seeing Christ to be hungry he comes the more
impudently; as he came to the head so to the members, when the feeling of
affliction begins to touch them. He was not hungry all the forty days, but
after, he was hungry to show he was man. Some think Christ by his hunger did
objectively allure Satan to tempt him, that so he might overcome him, as a
party of soldiers sometimes feign a running away that they may allure the
enemies to follow them, and so cut them off, either by an ambush, or by an
orderly facing about, so the devil tempted Christ as man, not knowing him to be
God, or if he did know him to be God, Christ does as it were encourage his
cowardly enemy that durst not set upon him as God, showing himself to be man.

V. 3. And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God
command that these stones be made bread.

We have here the first of the three temptations wherewith the devil assaults
Christ.

And when the tempter] So he is called, 1 These. 3.5. from the first temptation
wherewith he supplanted Eve, he is called the Tempter; not because he is the
alone tempter, but because he is the chiefest, for sometimes our flesh, and
sometimes the world tempts. This tempting of Satan was nor barely by way of
suggestion, for that would easily have been repelled from the holy heart of
Christ, but in some outward and bodily form, perhaps of a man. To tempt is to
try, but Satan is an ensnaring trier.

He said unto him, If thou be the Son of God] Meaning, as that voice at thy
baptism declared, and as John Baptist has preached thee to be; do not thou
suffer hunger having whereby thou may assuage thy hunger. Satan thought,
either by the miracle, or by Christ's inability to do the miracle, he might know
whether he were the Son of God or no, that so he might vent his old wrath and
envy against him.

It Is like the devil did not come abruptly upon him, but first saluted him
courteously, as what, Sir, art thou meditating of? I saw thee to be baptized of
John in Jordan, I heard a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, I
would fain know whether the voice meant that thou art truly the Son of God by
nature, or an adopted Son by grace. I see also by thy long fast of forty days
that thou art hungry, if therefore thou art the Son of God succor thy hunger,
and turn these stones into bread, for thou can easily do it.

The scope of Satan's temptation was to tempt Christ, 1 To unbelief, as if he
should say, Thy father has hitherto forg^^ten thee, and sent thee no meat, now
thou see thy God fails thee, therefore necessity puts thee upon to provide
for thy self. The scope of Satan was to draw Christ from resting on Gods word,
and to follow what unbelief should suggest, and this appears by Christ his
answer, Man does not live by bread alone.

So that though I will not deny but Satan might tempt Christ to a vain boasting
of his own power, yet specially he tempts Christ to unbelief, either that he
should not believe that testimony that was given at his baptism, or to doubt
that God would fail him of necessary livelihood: As he overcame the first Adam
with unbelief of the threatening, Genesis 3.3. so does he endeavor to overcome the
second Adam with unbelief of the promise. And seeing Satan dare call in
question the Sonship of Christ, no wonder if he tempt Saints to call in
question their sonship.

Where we may see Satan's craft. Christ being hungry is tempted to provide bread
in such a way as Satan prescribes. He usually fits his temptations according to
men's present conditions, marking in his temptation whereunto persons are
inclining, or wherein they are wanting; so that as Fowlers lay several baits
for the birds, and Hunters for the wild beasts, and Fishers for the fish, and
lays for every one their proper bait for to catch them, so to the hungry or
poor, Satan sets before them bread and livelihood; to the full, idleness and
sloth; to the proud, honors; to the covetous, gain; to the revengefull, wrongs
and discontents; to the curious, Magic and inch^ntments; to the adulterer,
beauty; to the drunkard, wine, etc. as he tempted the head so does he the
members; to the afflicted, despair; to the idle wantonness; to the busy,
trouble; to the severe, cruelty; to the merciful, flattery.

V. 4. But be answered and said, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

But he answered and said] We may see the defense Christ had against Satan's
temptation, it was the Scripture: for that is our sword we are to fight with,
Ephesians. 6.17. which the Papists taking from the people, expose them to Satan's
open violence. A man that is to go where thievs way-lay him will be sure to
have his sword; yet is not the bare repeating the word in an heartless manner a
defense against Satan, but to repeat it believingly, after which the temptation
uses presently to vanish.

But herein we must join precept, promise and threat; precept, forbidding such
a sin and commanding such a duty; the promise, in case we consent not, nor obey
Satan's temptations, this we must set against all Satan's proffers; the
threatening in case we yield to the temptation: because Eve set not the
threatening against the devils temptation, and minced off the temptation, which
was, In the day thou eats thereof thou shall die, which she minced into this,
Lest ye die, Genesis 3.3. she was overcome of the tempter.

Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God] As if he should say, Man shall live of every thing which the
Lord has commanded or appointed to the sustenance of man's life, and not only
of bread, as the Jews lived of Manna 40 years. So that if the Lord should
command us to eat grass and snakes, etc. we should live by them as by the most
delicate meat: yea, if he should command it, we should live without any meat,
as Moses and Elias did. Therefore by word here, is not only meant the
promises, but the decree, for the word that goes out of a man is his will,
pleasure or decree. So that by word is meant the decree of God, which he has
published for the nourishing the creatures. Now Christ herein does not answer
to that which the devil kept silent, which was, the devil desired to know
whether he were the Son of God or no, but only to what he spoke, which was, to
command that these stones should be made bread.

So that first Gods promises are not to be measured by the want of bodily
things, for God is able to make a new meat for us to live upon. 2 When second
causes are wanting, we must not depart from the faith of a promise to be helped
by a miracle, but we must live upon that word, for God will rather work a
miracle, then fail of a promise.

Every word] That is, every divine command, whether general or special, wherein
there is an express or silent command of necessary things. Moses, to stir up
the Jews to obedience of the Law, tells them, God would give them things that
were needful, either by ordinary means or by extraordinary, as he had done
when he fed them with Manna, which Christ applies to himself, when the devil
lyingly would make him believe that he should perish, if he turned not stones
into bread.

V. 5. Then the devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a
Pinnacle of the Temple;

V. 6. And says unto him, If thou be the Son of God cast thy thy self down,
for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in
their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone.

Here is the second temptation wherewith the devil assaulteth Christ.

Then the devil takes him and sets him on a Pinnacle of the Temple] It Is
questioned whether the matter were only in vision? Answ. It was a real rapture
of the body of Christ through the permission of God, neither was this any
disparagement to Christ, for that the devil carried him through the air and set
him upon a Pinnacle, neither is this any wonder that Christ should suffer
himself to be so used, seeing he suffered himself to be crucified of the Jews.

Now though the devil did so take Christ that he might be seen of all, yet
Christ (as Aquinas observes) did so invisibly act (the devil not knowing it)
that he could be beheld of no man, either by hindering the sight of his body,
or the sight of their eyes. Yet was the devil notably mocked, for he thought if
Christ were the Son of God he would not suffer himself to be taken up by him,
and carried through the air, and thence he should know whether he were the Son
of God or no; but Christ concealing his Godhead, suffered his body to be taken
up by the devil, and so frustrated the devils expectation and left him still in
doubt.

Into the holy City] He means Jerusalem, called the holy City, Matthew. 27.53.
the beloved City, Revel. 20.9. the City Jerusalem, called Gods holy Mountain,
Dan. 9.16. the City of the great King, Matthew. 5.35. the City of God, and
Mountain of holiness, Psalm. 48.1.

And sets him on a Pinnacle of the Temple] A Pinnacle is the top of a building
with a sharp point, yet has it some breadth upon it, wherein a man may stand.
Others think the Temple to be plain with a battlement, and so all their houses
were commanded to be made, Deuteronomy. 22.8. Thence Satan tempted Christ to throw
down himself, as if he should say, Show by this miraculous fall to all that
thou remainest not hurt, that thou art the Son of God, and so all the people
will acknowledge thee for the Messiah. We see the devil has no power to
compel, no not in the height of his temptation.

If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down] A true voice of the devil. The
voice of God is to all believers, as Paul speaks to the Jailer, Do thy self no
harm, but satan says, cast thy self down. All temptations of self-destruction
come from satan. Against these let us reason,

1 We must not kill another, much less our selves.

2 We read not that Saints, but wicked men, to have killed themselves, as Judas,
Saul, Achitophel. For Jonah, and Sampson, they did it by private motion, or
else prophetically they knew the mind of God. And as Jonah was a Prophet, so
Sampson was like a good Captain, that had rather die then his enemies prevail.
Some examples are heroical, some Moral: Heroical examples are which do not
agree with laws. An heroical man breaks the rule, but does not leave behind
him an example, Luth. in Genesis 29. such was Sampson and Jonah in Heroical
actions. An example is of no force, unless it be like in all things.

3 Take heed of Satan's reasons; As its likely Satan brought this reason to
Christ; Thou dependest upon the providence of God in thy greatest hunger and
want, now depend upon the same providence in bearing thee up, if thou fall down
from the pinnacle. So Satan comes to many souls, Make away thy self, its soon
done, the pain is quickly past, thou art like to lie in anguish all thy life;
the longer thou lives the more will the score of thy sins be, and thy torments
in hell more. If it be once done it will appear to be Gods decree, and I hope
thou will not be against the accomplishment of that; if thou live longer thou will increase thy sins, and make away thy self at last. Do not then reason with
Satan, but pass easily from his suggestions by diversion of thoughts, also
slight them, they oftener (as some think) go away by slighting then by force.
As its most safe to pass by a barking Dog and to contemn him, so one way of
overcoming is to despise Satan's suggestions, and not to dispute long with them,
so will they fall of themselves, the more you roll them in your mind, the more
vehement are they; besides Satan can bear nothing worse then contempt, Luth.
Tom. 3.376.

4 Labor to draw good out of such hellish suggestions, and so Satan will be
weary of such tempting, as to spend the time with less sin with them then
without them.

5 Consider, God will require blood at the hand of man, Genesis 9.5. not only at
the hand of him that slays his brother, but at the hand of a man self: now if
God require it, what a woeful condition art thou in, seeing if God enter into
judgment for one sin with us, we are undone.

6 As soldiers are not to leave their station without the command of their
Officers, no more are we to go out of the body when we please. Hierom speaks in
the person of Blesella that killed her self, I will not receive those souls which
have gone out of the body against my will. Job and the Apostles who were still
under persecutions, never thought to shorten their troubles this way; and
therefore though some heathens looked on life as a banquet, from which they
might rise full and then go away, or as a play which a man may leave when he
list, yet ought we not to go from life till God call us. Hence Simeon asks
leave to die, Luke 2.29. Lord let thy servant to depart in peace, and Paul, I
desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23. the prisoner must not go out till the
prison door be open.

7 Thou do not only murder thy body, but hereby thou murderest thy soul,
which is the most heinous murder.

8 Remove outward accidents, as knives, going near rivers, wells, etc. if
inclined to this, unless when thou art in thy due calling; as if thy journey
lie by sea, or thou must have a knife to eat thy meat; here fight it out by
faith, that thou may not give place to the devil, for if a person so tempted
be called to go over a bridge over any great river, when it is in the compass
of his calling, let him not fear, but fight it out by faith and go on his way,
that he may not do service to the devil.

9 Walk close with God, and by degrees the temptation will vanish, thou
believing and repenting; After the Jailer believed, we read nothing of his
former temptation to destroy himself.

10 Be much in prayer that God would bridle the tempter, lay open the violence
and uncessancy of his temptations.

11 Take heed of dispondency of spirit, as to think that none of Gods children
were ever in your condition, for the same afflictions are accomplished among
the brethren that are in the world. 1 Pet. 5.8.

12 Use constant resistance and distaste of his temptation, Jam. 4.7. Resist
the devil and he will flee from you; it is not only a command but a promise.

13 Set faith on work to quench his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. 1 Pet. 5.8. Your
adversary the devil goes about as a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour,
whom resist steadfast in the faith. Let faith be acted as upon Christ for
pardon, so upon the power of God, that he is able to keep you, and upon the
promise of God that he will keep you, and not suffer you to be tempted above
what you are able.

For it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee] We may see
Satan's malice and craft in abusing Scripture, to take away, if possible,
Christ's life. Christ thus strove with him, to warn us to take heed lest by a
deceitful pretense or allegation of Scripture, we fall into Satan's snares. Nor
must we think worse of Scripture because Satan abuses it, no more then we do of
meat and drink because Drunkards and Gluttons abuse it.

And in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy
foot against a stone] The Angels have no hands unless when they assume bodies:
by hands he means the help of the Angels, as if he should say the help of the
Angels in every danger and fall will be so present, that thou seems to be
carried in their hands.

Only Satan's deceit is to be noted, that in citing Psalm. 91.11. he leaves out
these words, To keep thee in all thy wayes] that is, in the ways of thy
calling. And Satan applies it to actions done without our calling, without
command, without necessity, merely of presumption. Some understand the Angels
protection to be from casual evils which we not knowing come upon us, but we
may rather extend it to all evils that come upon us in the compass of our
callings.

V. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God.

Christ shows that Satan's strange Interpretation of this Scripture was contrary
to other Scriptures. Where we see a Rule in interpreting Scriptures, so to
interpret them, that one part may not jar with another. [Again] That is, on the
contrary, in opposition to thy depravement.

Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God] As if Christ should say, We are so to
hope for help from God in time of Dangers, that we do not tempt God.

1 To tempt God, is to require an Experiment of his Power, other than he has
appointed. So Psalm 78.18. the Israelites, when God gave them Manna to nourish
them, they not content herewith, tempted God by asking Meat for their Lusts.

2 To tempt God, is to impose a Law upon the Creator, and to alter his
Appointment, when God shall give us such means to maintain and preserve us and
we will seek for other.

3 To tempt God, is when out of presumption, or without necessity, we seek the
experiment of his power, wisdom, goodness and truth, Exodus 17.2. compared with
v. 7. they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord amongst us or not? The
Israelites had a Promise that God would be present with them in the Wilderness,
but now, when they wanted Water, in their thirst they cry out, If God do not
now give us Water to drink, we will not believe he is in the midst of us.

4 When we cast our selves into dangers, and neglect ordinary means, Mal. 3.15.
They that tempt God are even delivered.

5 When we sin boldly against a manifest Command, and yet think the Promises
belong unto us; so those who walked in the imagination of their own evil
hearts, adding drunkenness to thirst, promised themselves peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19,
20. Number. 14 22.

6 By pressing indifferent things as necessary, Acts 15.10, 11. They tempted
God by pressing Circumcision as necessary to Salvation, which was only an
indifferent thing, when the Lord had appointed the righteousness and grace of
Christ the way of Salvation.

7 By desiring a needless Miracle; so the Jews would have Christ show a sign
that they may believe on him, as Moses gave their fathers Manna in the
Wilderness, John 6.30. Christ had given them a sufficient sign herein, but that
would not content them, they had seen Christ feed five thousand men with five
Barley Loaves and two Fishes, yet must they have a sign.

Diverse of these ways, if not all, the Devil tempts Christ, as to work a
needless Miracle; to throw himself headlong, that the Angels might take him up
in their hands; to cast himself down, when there were steps to go down. In sum,
Christ lets Satan see the Promises of God are so to be taken and applied that
we do not tempt God.

V. 8. Again the Devil takes him into an exceeding high Mountain, and shows
him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them.

Here is the third Tentation Satan brings to Christ, which is the presentment
unto him the glory of the World, with which Christ's senses were so delighted,
that no Lust or inordinate affection was in his heart; Satan showed him all the
Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them in a moment of time, Luke 4.5.
Satan showed unto Christ the multitude of Nations, the excellency of Cities,
the riches, attendance, and glory of Princes Courts, that so Christ seeing them
might desire them, and desiring them might fall down and worship him.

Shows him all the Kingdoms of the World] Some think Satan showed them by
pointing at them with his finger, and that Satan told Christ by words in what
thing every Kingdom excelled. Others think the Devil flew with Christ through
all the Kingdoms of the World, and in a little time showed them to him. But the
Text says, The Devil took him into an high Mountain and showed them to him.
Some think the Devil by an imaginary Vision presented all the Kingdoms of the
World. But this Tentation was outward, not inward. Therefore I lean to the
first, that the Devil from that high Mountain showed Christ only the coast and
situation of all the quarters and Kingdoms of the World, saying, this is
Europe, this is Africa, this Asia, this England, this France, Spain, etc. And
because he showed him the glory of them, it is like the Devil like a Painter
represented unto Christ all the glorious things that were in every Kingdom, by
thickening of the air, wherein the Devil made certain Images of things which
were no less apparent to Christ, than Colors in the Rain-bowe to us, for
neither were the eyes, nor imagination of Christ deluded.

3 Satan showed the Kingoms of the World by way of proportion, showing the
wealth, pomp, and glory of some one Kingdom, that was nigh that high Mountain.
For the Kingdoms of the World have only a greater quantity of that which may
be seen in one Kingdom.

We may by the way observe the order of the Tentations. The first Tentation was
of Distrust, from which Satan being driven away by the Promise, the Devil sets
upon Christ by a second, which was, If thou ascribe so much to the Promise,
then cast thy self down, for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge
over thee. His third Tentation was taken out of Psalm 2.8. Ask of me and I will
give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth
for thy possession, which though it were the speech of the Father to Christ,
yet so much Satan gathered, that all the Nations of the World belonged to
Christ. The Devil therefore shows them to him, as if he should say to Christ,
That way thou go in humbling thy self, thou shall never subject the Kingdoms
of the World to thy self, for thou see they are possessed of them that are my
Servants, therefore if thou will worship me, thou may become Lord and Heir of
all these Kingdoms, more easily, speedily, and surely, than if thou trustest to
that voice that sounded unto thee from Heaven.

V. 9. And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall
down and worship me.

Here is the Devils proffer to Christ, All these things will I give thee; The
condition, If thou will fall down and worship me.

All these things will I give thee] In this Proffer, see the Devils Lies, 1 He
challenges that to be his which belongs to Christ, for he is Heir of all
things, Heb. 1.2. All power is given unto him in Heaven and Earth, Matthew.
28.19. 2 That he had power to give the Kingdoms of the World to whom he will,
as Luke sets it down. Whereas this only is Gods property, Dan. 4.25. for
though Satan be called the Prince of the World, John 12.31.14.30. and the God
of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4. yet this is meant only of the World of the Wicked,
in whom he reigns, Ephesians. 2.2. Not that he is Proprietary of any Kingdom of the
World.

Quest. But how durst Satan to have the impudence to speak thus to Christ?

Answ. Because he had seen Christ again and again to forbear to do any Miracle,
though solicited thereto, therefore Satan began more certainly to think he was
not the Son of God,

2 Because he feigned himself to be the Son of God, and to be God, in that he
says, The Kingdoms of the World were delivered to him, and that he gives them
to whomsoever he will, Luke 4.6.

3 He was blinded with the ambition of Godhead even from the first, and
therefore he desires so to be worshipped.

4 He hereby thought to try whether Christ were the Son of God, for it is like
he reasoned thus, If this Christ be the Son of God he will be angry at me for
taking his Dignity from him, and counterfeiting my self to be Gods Son,
wherefore being angry he will reply, whence is this arrogance of thine? how
dares thou thus blasphemously speak, thou proud and lying spirit? I am the Son
of God, thou art Satan; it is thy duty to worship me, how dares thou then
require me to worship thee?

If thou will fall down and worship me] Here is the condition: None get any
thing of the Devil at a cheap rate. For falling down in worship it was the
manner of the Eastern People, not only to their Kings but to their God, yea it
was the manner of the Jews so to worship God, Psalm 95.6. Dan. 3.7. Ezra 9.5.
Nathan speaking to David about Adonisah's reigning, he fell on his face to the
ground, 1 Kings 1.23. That outward sign of Reverence was not proper to divine
worship, when it was used out of divine worship. We may know when it is done
^ightly or otherwise, by the meaning of him, that gives it, and of him that
requires it, therefore Grotius out of Sozomen praises a certain Christian, who
having worshipped the King of Persia in a civil way, being after solicited to
fall off from Christ in the same manner to worship the King again, he refused.

Now there being no manner of Worship, neither civil, nor divine, due to Satan,
Christ abhorred so much as to give him civil Worship.

Now for the Tentations wherein he tempted Christ, they were 1 To Covetousness,
for the Devil knows how unsatiable the heart of man is after earthly things,
and to many the Devil need not proffer so largely, neither a housefull of Gold
as Balaam, nor all the Kingdoms of the World for a handful of Gold, nay a far
less matter will serve the turn.

Also the Devil tempts Christ to a false faith, th^^ ^e may believe him to be
the Son of God; also to Idolatry, that he might worship him as God; also to
Pride, If thou will worship me, I Will make thee the greatest King in the World.

Now whereas most men among us would spit in their faces that should say they
worship the Devil, know that when thou art overcome of Covetousness, and Pride,
in the reign thereof, thou worships the Devil: and on this condition Satan
helps many men to glory and riches.

From Christ his Repulse of Satan, learn we to drive him back: drive back his
Temptations of Unbelief, by faith in God and in his providence; his Temptation
to Presumption by keeping our selves in the fear of God, and the duties of our
callings; his Temptations of Covetousness and Ambition, by a weaned affection
to the world, Not to love the World, or the things thereof, 1 John 2.16. His
Temptation to Idolatry, by giving God both inward and outward worship.

V. 10 Then Jesus said unto him, Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

We have here a twofold Answer of Christ to Satan's Argument. First he answers
to the person of the Tempter, and then to the Temptation. 1 To the person of
the Tempter, Get thee behind me Satan; (...), Hupage, Get thee gone, depart,
appear no more before me, but get thee behind me, for I will neither hear
thee, nor look upon thee, thou do not only promise false things, but also
thou requirest wicked and blasphemous things of me, to wit, that I who am thy
Creator should worship thee who art my Creature.

This word [behinde me] is not in some Copies. This word [begone] is used, when
we reject those whom we have a while endured with some trouble and tediousness.
Blasphemous words should not be patiently heard of Christians, no more than
they were of Christ, but to be rejected with great indignation.

Also we may learn when the Devil grows troublesome with blasphemous
Temptations, not to dispute with him, but to drive him away with anger, saying
with one of the Ancients, Thy uncleanness be upon thee, O Satan, because thou
art an unclean Spirit, uncleanness is thy work. Let not Satan's blasphemous
thoughts which he casts into thee, fill thee with doubting, whether such
Injections can befall Gods children, and so put thee into an habit of heavy
walking: but drive him back as Christ does by the Word. Satan being he cannot
torment Saints in Hell, will labor to torment them here on Earth.

It Is a point of wisdom to draw some spiritual good out of Satan's blasphemous
Tentations: When he suggests there is no God, say, Nay Satan, the Word to which
I am confined says there is; besides in the Lights of Heaven I see a shadow of
his divine countenance, in the Creation of the World I see his infinite
greatness, in his universal provision I see his goodness, let these motions
make us see Satan's malice that he has against the Majesty of God, let us also
with more dearness adore and love the Majesty of God. Be also humbled that thou
can not with greater abhorrency abominate such hellish Blasphemies, also
strive to be more strongly settled that there is a God, that there is a Heaven
and Hell, because Satan endeavors to instill the contrary. Let it also be a
strong Argument that thou in more likelihood than formerly belongs unto God,
for so long as thou lie dead in thy sins the Devil never affrighted thee with
blasphemous thoughts; but now since thou came home to God, and begannest to
embrace his ways. Besides, gather experience by these blasphemous thoughts to
comfort others in the same kind.

For it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God] The meaning of
Christ's words are, those things which properly belong to the Worship of God
are not to be given to any Creature, neither ought a Dispute concerning any
such thing to be received, but angerly to be rejected, as Christ here does. Yea
those things which belong to Worship they are to be given to no Creature, nor
to be divided betwixt God and Creatures. This place is taken out of Deuteronomy. 6.13.
in stead of Worship there it is Fear, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God; for the
Hebrews put Fear for all the Worship of God, hence Rabbi Juda in libro Chasidim
says, If any man see the Devil and be afrid of him he falls down before him.

And him only shall thou serve] (...), Latreuseis, this word rendered serve,
neither in the rise or use of it is proper only to God. See Acts 7.42.10.25.

And therefore their distinction of Latreia, that it is only due to God, and
Doulia to Saints, and Hyperdoulia to the Virgin Mary. This word only excludes
all others, save the Lord, from divine Worship. And therefore the popish
distinction of Adoration which they acknowledge only to be given to God, and
that of Invocation, wherein they acknowledge Saints may give good things, and
drive away evil, is vain. All Invocation presupposes three things, 1
Omniscience, that he that is called on may hear our Groans. 2 Omnipresence,
that he every where hears our Prayers. 3 Omnipotence, that he can succor us in
our miseries: now can Saints departed do any of these? and therefore why should
they be invoked? and therefore that it is not lawful to give divine Service or
Worship to any save God only, I Will give these Reasons.

1 We have a Command only to call upon God in the Name of Christ, John 16.23,
24. Ephesians. 2.18. Heb. 7.25.

Now we have no Command to call upon any Saint departed.

2 We have no Promise of being heard, if we so call.

3 We have no Example of one godly man that did so.

4 The Saints departed know not our Wants, Isai 63.16. Abraham is ignorant of
us* and Israel knows us not.

5 It darkens and derogates from Christ's Mediatorship, to whom it belongs to
intercede for his People, which they blasphemously ascribe to Saints,
especially to the Virgin Mary. Now Christ alone conveys the things that are
Gods to us, and ministers the things that are ours to God. Now we are commanded
to come in our Wants, not to Saint departed or Angel, but to this Mediator,
Heb. 4.14, 15, 16.

6 By calling thus upon Saints we put them into the Throne of Christ, and
invest them with Gods properties, as to hear Prayers and to know our Wants.
Romans 10.14. We are only to call upon him on whom we believe. Yea hereby we
invest them with Gods properties, for we acknowledge the person we pray to the
searcher of our heart, and the author of our good. And therefore Chemnicius
writes, The Papists in their Temples paint Christ threatening and casting Darts
against sinners, the affrighted sinners they fly to Mary, who puts her self
betwixt as a Mediatress and drives back the Darts, this honor Christ gets
hereby that he is less loved, less sought, and counted less merciful.

7 He that we call upon must know the states of all that call upon him every
where, that he may judge what is expedient, or not expedient for them: but this
is proper to God alone, Psalm 65.2. neither does it help them to say that
Saints departed know the states of all by the revelation of the Angels, or in
the glass of the Trinity, or from those that die, for our Prayers ought not to
be founded on such Dreams, but on plain Scriptures, and so much more in that
the Saints the Papists call upon are scarcely any where to be found, save in
the Popes Calendar.

Yet do we not think slightly or speak reproachfully of the Saints departed,
whose Memories are celebrated in Scripture, Psalm 106.16. for there is Memory of
Saint Moses and Saint Aaron, as well as of Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, etc. In
the New Testament, there is a Catalogue of many Saints, Heb. 11.32. Yet does it
not follow that Saints are to be called upon; we are to praise God in his
Saints, and to acknowledge the grace of God in them, and to imitate them, but
not to worship them, Gal. 1.23. Neither that divine benefits may descend upon
us through their mediation; nor as helpers together or workers together with
Christ in the work of our salvation, or that they plead our cause with God, by
offering their merits for to obtain our salvation, or that they obtain pardon
of sin or the grace of God to us, which Popish Writers make the ends of
invocation of Saints; All which ends are blasphemously derogatory to the glory
of Christ's merits and intercession. Thus are men more ready to do all things,
which either themselves choose, or men have ordained, then those things which
God has commanded, because in the commands of men, the old man is untoucht,
yea is nourished by the commands of men, but in the commands of God it is
mortified.

It were endless to set down the multiplication of this superstition, to show
all the ends Papists give of calling upon Saints, as because Christ is a more
hard and just Judge, therefore we must have mediators to come to him, and
because we want deserts, that therefore the Saints would apply the deserts
which they have more then enough for themselves unto us, to interpose them
betwixt Gods justice, and our unworthiness, that so we may be made worthy of
the promises of God. Moreover they teach that all the benefits we want are
bestowed of God upon the blessed in heaven, that they being implored may give
all things which belong to this life and the life to come. Men are taught in
their necessities to fly to the grace, mercy and help of Saints, and to place
their faith and hope in them, also they think the blessed in heaven know every
man's vows and the thoughts of their minds.

Now this invocation of Saints, 1 is no where in Scripture. Hence Christ brands
the Samaritans, they worshipped they knew not what. Now Scripture tells us that
God only in the name of Christ is to be called upon, Joh. 14.6. Heb. 4.15,
16.7.25.13.15. Now it must needs be dangerous to go from the rule of the word
for prayer. 2 They invest the Saints departed with those things which are
proper to God, as to be a refuge, a deliverer, to give good things which God
only gives, Jam. 1.17. to fly to them in prayer for grace and mercy. 3
Papists derogate from Christ's intercession, which is one part of his
Priesthood, for whereas we for our sins are unworthy to come into the presence
of God with our prayers or persons, God has given Christ as a mediator to
appear in our behalf, Heb. 2.17.7.25.9.24. Papists call upon Saints directly,
that they would interpose their merits betwixt Gods justice and our
unworthiness.

For 200 years after Christ, there was no news of invocation of Saints, Justin
Apol. 2. Tert. Apol. c, 30. Iren. l. 2. c. 58. About the year 240 Origin was
the first that began to sow the seeds of invocation of Saints, who, as Hierom
observes, brought in many poisonous opinions into the Church of Christ, and in
that age it began only to be disputed, and Origin from some Apocryphical
Scriptures began to think it might be so, and after manifestly to affirm it;
but he affirms, these assertions were only private opinions, but not the
received opinions of the Church. Orig. l. 2. in Roman. and in his disputation
against Celsus he does in effect deny it. In Cyprians time invocation of Saints
about the year 250 took another step; for Cyprian and others spoke to the
living Saints before they departed out of this life, that after death they
would be mindful of them with God, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 1. ad Cornel. l. 2. de
habitu Virg.

All this while they were not called upon after death, but about the year 370,
by occasion of Panegyrical Orations that were made at the decease of friends,
etc. it began to be brought into the Church by Basil, Nyssen and Nazianzen,
bringing it from the private devotions of Monks, into open assemblies. And in
their Panegyrical orations, they called up the souls of them whose memory they
celebrated, and so Nazianzen calls up the soul of Constantine.

Yet must we know that these opinions were not received every where, and of
all, for true opinions; yea the very Authors hereof in their strains of
Rhetoric do not dissemble their doubts, that the Saints in heaven prayed for
those here; Hence they use these words, As I think, and, As I persuade my self,
and, If it be not a rash thing to say it, and so that phrase here, Thou soul of
Constantine, if thou have any understanding.

Yea this opinion in that time was strongly opposed by Epiphanius, and put into
the Catalogue of Heresies, and he inveighs against it in his book against the
Collyridians. And Chrysostom in many places inveighs against the persuasions
of the common people, who neglecting repentance and godliness, cast all the
business of hearing their prayers and salvation upon the intercession of
others. Hom. 44. in Genesis Hom. 5. in Matthew, etc.

Moreover the Synod of Laodicca, about the year 368, says, It behooves not
Christians, the Church being left, to go away, and to make Congregations of
Idolatry to Angels, all which are forbid: whosoever shall be found at this
hidden Idolatry let him be accursed, because leaving our Lord Jesus Christ the
Son of God he goes to Idols.

Cyril answering the Emperor Julian, telling the Christians they worshipped
many miserable men that were used by a hard Law, meaning Martyrdom, Cyril
says, I confess the memory and honor of the Martyrs, but deny the worship of
them.

For the Latin Church, passing by Ambrose, who is sometimes for it and
sometimes against it, Vigila^^us, as appears (...) of H^er^m, maintained these
three propositions. 1 That the Marty^s or Saints which departed out of this
l^^e are not to be worshipped; 2 That while we live we may pray one for
another, but after death no man prays for another. 3 That the souls of the
blessed are not present at their graves, nor come not betwixt God nor the
affairs of the living, which first position Hierom does not deny; to the
second, he says, The Church in another world prays for the Church of
believers in this world; from whence it follows not that Saints are to be
called upon when dead.

To conclude, Augustine falling into those times wherein all persons were full
of presumptions, was forced to give way to the times, yet did he endeavor to
call persons back to call upon the name of God, when he durst not freely
reprehend the commonly received presumptions, l. cont. Faustin.

This presumption then prevailed, that the souls of the blessed heard prayers,
and brought them to God, and bestowed benefits, and therefore they came
together to their graves to pray to them; but he concludes against this, that
souls departed know not things done here, and he was sure that if it were so,
his mother would no night forsake him, which he found otherwise. In a word,
generally Augustine was against invocation of Saints, setting aside in some
supposititious writings falsely ascribed unto him.

V. 11. Then the devil leaves him, and behold Angels came and ministered unto
him.

We have here the victory over the tempter. The devil brought the worst of his
fiery darts, but Christ overcomes him. We may see the temptations of Satan are
limited, that God will not still suffer Satan to tempt, 1 Cor. 10.13. nor us to
be tempted above strength.

Luke adds, when the devil had ended all the temptation ^e departed from him
for a season. Satan left not Christ altogether, but only for a season, to let
us know that the rest of his life was not free from temptations, and to teach
us that sometimes Satan politickly gives way, to try afterward whether he can
find us secure. Satan will try whether we have not lost our former strength,
care or vigilance, or whether God that now does not, will not at another time,
for some causes, suffer us to be led into temptation. Satan would come oftener,
but that God who knows our strength, or rather our weakness, will not suffer
him. Satan is apt to come again with the same temptation, to see if he cannot
tire and weary us out with the anguish and vexation of it, 2 Cor. 12.8. Satan
thrice tempted Paul with pride: and sometimes he changes his weapon. Let us do
as the Pilot does, have our compass ready, and stand ready to turn your needle
to any point, knowing that your lust within is for any sin, and Satan can as
easily tempt us to prodigality as to covetousness.

Only when Satan comes with some other weapon God does it for our good; as
change of Physic is good for the body, for the same Potion always used will
not work so well, so the longer we are used to the same temptation the less it
works. God will have Satan turn some other way, to purge some other stream of
lust.

Besides, God will have us learn skill by experience at all sorts of weapons:
by the falls of Hezekiah, and Jehosaphat, and David, learn we that when one
temptation is over another will come, which will be a mean to prevent spiritual
pride and security.

As we must not be secure when the temptation comes, but set against it before
Satan's suggestion join with our corruption, set against it while it is young,
so let us not be secure when the storm of the temptation is blown over, let us
do as Mariners that mend their tacklings against another storm come. We are apt
to think we shall have no more such temptations, and then comes the tempter.
Satan was never so beaten by any, as by Christ; yet he came again and again. A
man that is once well beaten in the Field will hardly be brought to fight with
the same man again, but it is not so with Satan. We must have some good days to
breath in, else we should not be willing to live, and more fits of Temptations
we must have, or else we should not be willing to die.

And behold the Angels came and ministered to him] Here Is the comfort Christ had
after the Temptation was over, Angels come to minister to him. Consolations are
wont to follow after Temptations. Hereby Christ saw the Father had a care of
him, and whereas solitariness in a Wilderness was one Trial, here is the company
of good Angels; nor had he only their company, but also he had them ministering
to him Meat and other necessaries till he came out of the Wilderness.

The word [Behold] lets us see that this was no little wonder that the Son of
God, who was even now exposed to Satan's scorns, should have not only one, but
diverse Angels ministering to him. The like was in his passion, Luke 22. As in
Battle when the Enemies are dispoiled and driven away, Friends come to
congratulate with us; so the Devil being overcome the Angels come to rejoice
with Christ As the Angels ministered to Christ after his Combat, so do they
serve Believers, they are all ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. but it is not to
Run-aways, but to then who have valiantly stood it out.

Thus we see Satan's great Temptations, 1 Distrust in Adversity.

2 Presumptuous undertakings without a Call.

3 To seek success in our Calling, as Riches, Honor, etc. without and against
a Command of God.

The second part of the Chapter containing Christ's Preaching in Galilee, in
which observe,

1 The time when, which was when John was cast into Prison.

2 The place where, viz. in Galilee.

3 The end wherefore Christ preached, which was, 1 For the fulfilling the
Prophecy, v. 14. 2 For the enlightening of those in darkness, v. 15, 16.

4 The subject matter of his Preaching, which was the Doctrine of Repentance,
v. 17.

V. 12. Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into Prison he departed
into Galilee.

We have Christ's Preaching set forth, 1 By the time when, which was when Jesus
heard that John was cast into Prison, from that time Christ began to preach, v.
17. which was as soon as John Baptist his forerunner was cast into Prison: of
this mention is made Acts 10.36, 37. The Word which God sent unto the Children
of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ: that Word you know that was
published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee after the Baptism which
John preached. This circumstance of time notes to us, that this Jesus was the
Lord whom they looked for, who sent John as a Messenger to prepare the way of
his Gospel; which was prophesied by Isai, cap. 40.6. and Malachy, cap. 4, 5, 6.
Hence the Disciples when they saw Elias come after Christ in the
Transfiguration, they scrupled, saying, Why do the Scribes say that Elias must
first come? Christ tells them that John Baptist was that Elias the forerunner
of Messiah, according to those words of his father Zachary, Thou Child shall
be called the Prophet of the Highest, for thou shall go before the face of the
Lord to prepare his way: namely, (as the Angel told him) in the power and
spirit of Elias, Luk^ 1.17. This John was Christ's forerunner, both in his
Birth, being born six Months before him, and in his Preaching, and also in his
Passion and Suffering. Matthew. 17.12. Elias is come, and they knew him not, but
have done to him whatsoever they listed, even so also shall the Son of man
suffer of them.

Now seeing the coming of Christ is twofold, the first in the flesh, the second
to judge the World, whether do not the Prophesies imply that there must be an
Harbinger of his second coming as well as of his first: for though the
Prophecy of Isai 40.6. seems applicable only to his first coming, yet that
Mal. 4 5. seems to be applicable to both his commings, I will send you Eliah
the Prophet before the coming of that great and terrible Day of the Lord; and
he shall turn, or restore, the hearts of the fathers to the children, that is,
he shall bring the unbelieving Jews to have the same heart then holy fathers
and progenitor^ had; that is, he should convert them to the faith of Christ
their fathers hoped in and looked for, lest, continuing obstinate to the great
and terrible Day of the Lords Judgment, they should perish among the rest of
his Enemies: to understand which, the old Prophets ( Daniel excepted) for the
most part, spoke of the coming of Christ, without distinguishing his first and
second coming, and applying those things which respectively concern the state
of either of them.

Again it appears from Matthew. 17.10. the Disciples upon the Transfiguration
asked Christ, Why say the Scribes that Elias must first come? Christ answers,
Elias truly shall first come, and shall restore all things. These words being
spoken of Christ after John Baptist was beheaded, imply plainly that he is to
come again: besides, how can this restoring of all things be verified of the
Ministry of John Baptist, which continued but a short time, and did no such
thing as these words seem to imply? for the restoring of all things belongs not
to the first but to the second coming of Christ, Acts 3 19. Repent and be
converted for the blotting out of your sins, that the times of refreshing may
come from the presence of the Lord, and that he may send Jesus Christ which
before was preached unto you, whom the Heavens must receive until the times of
the restitution of all things. If the M ster come not to restore all things
till then, surely his Harbinger who is to prepare his way for restoring all
things is not to be looked for till then.

Whereas Malachy says, Behold I will send you Eliah the Prophet, it proves no
more that it should be Eliah the This bite in person, than when it is said,
David shall rule over you, proves Christ should be David in person. It Is like
if it be one that comes again it should be John Baptist himself, who was the
Harbinger of the first coming, so that as Christ had two comings, so his
Harbinger should have.

2 We have Christ his Preaching, set forth by the place, which was Galilee, The
Word begun from Galilee, Acts 10.37.

Galilee was part of the Land of Canaan, it was divided into two parts, the
higher and lower, the higher was for the most part the Land of Nephtali,
wherein stood Capernaum, the chiefest City of Galilee, situate upon the bank of
Jordan, over against which on the other side stood Chorazin: the lower Galilee
contained the Tribes of Zebulon and Issachar, wherein were the Cities Nazareth
and Bethsaida near the Lake or Sea of Galilee, and Cana. Also Mount Iabor where
he was transfigured.

In Galilee was Christ's conversation principally when he was upon earth, there
it was Christ healed the Nobleman's son, John 4.46. In Nazareth a City of
Galilee he was conceived, Luke 1.26. and brought up, Matthew. 2.23. there he
began his Preaching in Capernaum: thence it was that his Disciples were, Acts
1.11. Ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? Acts 2.7. When the
Holy Ghost was given it is said, Are not all these that speak Galileans? Jesus
went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and healing all manner of
sickness, Matthew. 4.23. at Cana in Gatilee he turned Water into Wine, his
Transfiguration was upon Tabor a Mount of Galilee, his ordinary residence was
in Galilee, he came into Judea, (as it is thought) only at the Feast times when
the whole Nation assembled at Jerusalem; during which times (partly during his
stay there, partly in his going and returning) he did all in a manner that he
did out of Galilee, and the last Feast he came thither, offered himself a
Sacrifice upon the Cross. And when he was risen from the Dead he appoints his
Disciples to go see him in Galilee, Matthew. 28.10. Only his Nativity was at
Bethlem upon the occasion of the Taxing, his Passion at Jerusalem, and his
Ascension upon Mount Olivet near to Jerusalem.

V. 13. And leaving Nazareth he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the
Sea coast, in the Borders of Zebulon and Nephtali.

V. 14. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying,

V. 15. The People which sat in Darkness saw great Light, and to them that
sat in the Region of the Shadow of Death Light is sprung up.

We have in this History the beginning of Christ's Ministry, set down, 1 From
the occasion of it, which was Christ's hearing that John was cast into Prison.

2 From the place of it, which was Capernaum, a City in the Coasts of Zebulon
and Nephtali lying near the Sea.

3 The end of his Ministry there, which was twofold, 1 For the fulfilling of
the Prophecy of Esaias, mentioned cap. 9.1, 2. v. 14, 15. 2 For the
enlightening of People that sat in darkness, v. 16.

4 The sum of his Doctrine, which was Repentance, v. 17. Repent for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand.

Leaving Nazareth] John gives the Reason hereof, Because a Prophet has no
honor in his own Country, John 4.44. This was the Town where his Parents
dwelt, Luke 2.39. wherein he had lived thirty years, Luke 4.16. Matthew. 2.23.
hence called Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee, Mat. 21 11. the Reason
why he could have no honor, there was, because it was his own Country. Many
Prophets that have their gifts and graces admired in strange places, are
(partly from meanness of Parentage, and partly from childish weakness in their
childhood acted, partly from observation of some Infirmities in them, partly
from Passions to which the holiest are liable, (Christ only excepted) and
partly from curiosity, men being apt to loath Manna because of the commonness
of it, and partly from wantonness, men having itching ears and desiring change)
apt to be contemned by their own People.

As it should be the care of a faithful Teacher to keep up the authority of
his Ministry, Titus 2.15. so should it be the care of Gods People to honor the
Prophets of God, and to esteem them that are over them in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians.
5.12. lest their Ministry become ineffectual; for the Message will never be
esteemed where the person is vilified. Christ was exceeding contemptuous of the
glory and praise of men, as appears John 7.3, 4. but he knew none could receive
good by his Ministry that did not esteem reverently of his person: which
reverence and honor because he could not have it at Nazareth, he goes to
Capernaum. Teachers should have such sanctity of life, powerfulness and
impartiality in Doctrine, sufficiency of maintenance, as may keep their persons
from contempt, and the People of God should count it their happiness to have
such as they can reverence; for the obtaining such let them spare no pains nor
cost.

He came and dwelt in Capernaum upon the Sea-coast] Capernaum did adjoyn to
Jerdan, where Jordan flowed into the Sea of Tiberias: it was, by reason of its
lying on the Sea, the Metropolis of Galilee, and the chief Mart town; here
Christ and his Disciples lived the best part of three years, hence it was
called his own City. Faithful Teachers when they are rejected by one they are
received by another, Matthew. 10.23, 37. What then, though thy person and
Doctrine be contemned by some it will be received by others. Some persons
fearing God probably drew Christ thither, here being come he works Miracles,
preaches p^^^^ull Sermons, and calls the People from their Pride and Riot,
asserting no doubt the doctrine of John, for which he was cast into prison, yea
he preached upon the same text, asserting the doctrine of repentance, saying,
Repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand.

Christ indeed began his Ministry at Nazareth, Luke 4.16. and preached a
gracious sermon to them, and some wondered at the gracious words that proceeded
out of his mouth, v. 22. but the greatest part being contemptuous of him, and
being enraged from a close application of his doctrine to their consciences,
thought to break his neck, from v. 23. to v. 31. he went through the midst of
them and came to Capernaum, where the people were astonished at the
powerfulness of his doctrine, v. 32.

In the borders of Zebulon and Nephtali] The Prophet Esaias mentions these
places to have been harassed by Tiglath Pileser King of Assyria, 2 King. 15.29.
in the days of King Pekah, as Ijon, Abel-Bethmaacah, which were in these
Tribes, etc. and carried them captives to Assyria, by occasion of which
calamity, Esaias cap. 9.1, 2. comforts them, that in recompense of their
grievous vexation above the rest of their brethren, they should have the first
and chiefest share of the presence of the Messiah, who should preach and work
miracles among them, and he shows how this should be, v. 6, 7. Unto us a
child is born, and unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon
his shoulders, etc. And this was that which was fulfilled in this time, when
Christ came to Capernaum and the adjoining places, making Galilee the place of
his preaching, and Capernaum the chief seat thereof.

V. 14, 15. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying, The land of Zebulon and the land of Nephtali, by the way of the sea
beyond, Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles.

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias] The Evangelist means
that prophecy mentioned, Esa. 9.1, 2. which Mr. Mead translates thus.
According as he the first time debased the land of Zebulon and the land of
Nephtali, so in the latter time (meaning by the incursions of the Assyrians) he
shall make it or them glorious. Meaning by the coming of the Messiah who should
converse among them, referring the former part of the Verse to the last Verse
of the eighth Chapter, which makes the sense most plain and easy.

If any ask why the Messiah should make these people glorious, it follows, The
way of the sea by Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles, the people that walked in
darkness, viz. of affliction, have seen a great light, the meaning is, the way
of the Seacoast from Capernaum and through Bethsaida, supposed to be the great
road from Syria to Egypt, By the side of the red Sea or Mediterranean, and then
by the Mountains of Trachonitis, and the Cities of Cedar, and Chor^zin, and the
River Jordan, and then to Capern^um, and then by the sea of Galilee near
Bethsaida. Adrichom. p. 115.
which is supposed to be meant by the way of the sea, even these inhabitants
were much enlightened by the doctrine and miracles of Christ, according to the
prophecy of Esaias.

By the way of the Sea] He means the inhabitants dwelling on the Seacoasts
beyond Jordan were enlightened by Christ's ministry. It Is said to be beyond
Jordan, in respect of Jerusalem, in respect whereof the Scripture sets down the
situation of places.

Galilee of the Gentiles] So called either because part of it was long, and
even till Solomon's time inhabited by Gentiles, or because that Solomon gave to
Hiram King of Tire twenty Cities in the land of Galilee, which its like were
peopled in a great measure with the King of Tyre's subjects, who were Gentiles,
or because it was the outmost part of the Land, and so next unto the Gentiles.
Because of the adjoining sea it was inhabited with men of several sorts of
nations; as Egyptians, Arabians, Phenicians, as Strabo notes; and therefore
some think it was called so of old, for tion is made of Tidal King of Nations,
Genesis 14.1. see also Jos. 12.23.

V. 16. The people which sat in darkness saw great light, and to them that
sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up.

The people which sat in darkness saw great light] He means such as lived in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, so expounded Luke 1.79. Darkness is taken
for affliction, Ps. 112 4. Unto the upright arises light in darkness, also
it is taken for ignorance and unbelief, Acts 26.18. both are here meant; whereas
formerly the inhabitants of Zebulon and Nephtali had a mixture of Judaism and
Gentilism, now they come to see the truth of the Gospel.

And to them that sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up] By
the region and shadow of death, he means a natural estate, for by nature all
are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 1.2. Luke 15. ult. Col. 2.13.

V. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent, for the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Here was the sum of Christ's preaching, to invite men to repentance. This
doctrine was preached by John Baptist his forerunner, and confirmed by Christ.
See my Treatise of repentance, also the notes in Matthew. 3.2.

V. 18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called
Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were
fishers:

We have from v. 18. to v. 23. 1 Christ calling sundry of his Disciples,
amplified; 1 From the place, which was as Jesus walked by the sea of Galilee; 2
From the occasion, which was their fishing, saying, I will make you fishers of
men, v. 19.

2 Their obedience to the call of Christ, They immediately left their nets and
ship, and followed Christ, v 20, 22.

And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee] There Is a twofold call of Christ, 1
To discipleship that they might be instructed in the doctrine of Christ: of
this the Evangelist speaks, Joh. 1. There were sundry besides the twelve thus
called.

2 To Apostleship, thus Christ took out of the number of his Disciples, twelve,
whom he appointed to preach, whom he appoints to be fishers of men, of this the
Evangelist Matthew speaks, and it is supposed there was a year betwixt these
two. Now Christ called them as he was walking by the sea of Galilee, elsewhere
called the sea of Tiberias, because Herod had built a City there, and called it
by the name of Tiberius Caesar, to ingratiate himself with the Emperor Tiberius
Caesar, Joseph. Antiq. l. 8.

Saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother] Luke sets down
all the Apostles were called together, cap. 6.13. Mar. 3.19. John sets down, c.
1.40, 41. first Andrew was called, then Peter; therefore we must remember the
forementioned distinction of Discipleship and Apostleship.

Casting their nets into the sea, for they were fishers] The calls of Christ
usually meet persons when they are employed in their lawful callings.

V. 19. And he says unto them, Follow me and I will make you fishers of men.

Christ does not call the learned men of the world, the eloquent Orator, the
subtle Logician, for to make his own power more manifest, whiles he had such
weak and simple instruments, 1 Cor. 1.23. Where is the wise? Where is the
Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world?

Follow me] Leave not only your lusts, but your ordinary employments, that you
may be instructed in the way that leads to life.

And I will make you fishers of men] It Is a metaphor, the sea is the world, the
fishes, men, the net the Gospel, Math. 13.47. the fishers are the preachers.

Preachers are compared to fishers, 1 For their painfulness; fishermen must
rise at all hours, and undergo many hard storms, so must preachers.

2 For their watchfulness, they must rise at all hours, so preachers.

3 For diligence, Fishers must let down their net at all hours, whether they
take something or nothing, so must preachers.

Men are like unto Fishes, 1 As fish stands need of salt to keep it from
putrefaction, so do men stand need to be seasoned with the Gospel, and with
gracious discourse, Col. 4.6.

2 As fishes are begotten of water and live in it, Rondel. l. de pise. c. 13.
and are nourished by it, and die without it; so if you be taken by the Gospel,
You must be born of water and the spirit, Joh. 3.5. of the blood of Christ,
compared to water, Ezekiel. 36.25. Rev. 7.14. and of the spirit of Christ, without
which you can neither live nor be nourished.

3 As the greater fishes devour the less, and the great Whale devours all, so
the great men of the world devour the smaller, and the devil devours all,
unless rescued by Christ.

4 Fishes, as soon as they perceive the net, swim away from it; so natural men
put away the Gospel from them, Job 21.14. Acts 13.46.

5 As fishes are not taken unless they take the bait, so are not souls unless
they receive the glorious things of the Gospel, Romans 1.16.

6 As fishes wander in the sea confusedly, until they be taken and put into
fish ponds; so do natural men in the sea of this world, till they be converted
and brought into the Church.

V. 20. And they straightway left their nets and followed him.

The powerful work of Christ upon their hearts was so great, that they leave
their ship and nets to follow Christ, yea every enjoyment they had, as
servants, kindred, calling. There should nothing be too much for us to leave
when Christ calls for it, Luke 14.33. we cannot else be Christ's Disciples: yea
our very lives are to be left for Christ, Matthew. 10.39. God forbid we should
rejoice in any thing save Christ, Gal. 6.14.

Moreover, what obedience they performed to Christ was speedy and present. When
God calls we must give present obedience, so Abraham in sacrificing Isaac, Exo.
22.29. Psalm. 119.60. we must not consider the issues and events of things, when
we have a clear command of God before us.

V. 21. And going from thence he saw other two brethren, James the son of
Zebedee and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending
their nets, and he called them.

We have here two called more from their Fisher-craft to be Christ's Disciples,
whom he retains a good while with him about the doctrine of the Gospel; For
though men of mean parts and callings may teach, yet not before they have
learned themselves. In that he calls poor Fishermen, we may admire the free
grace of God, and the greatness of his power, who by such weak means could
overcome the world, 2 Cor. 4.7. The treasure of the Gospel was in such earthen
Vessels, That the excellency of the power might be of God, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.

V. 22. And they straightway left the ship, and their father, and followed him.

We may see, 1 Their dependence upon the providence of Christ, for they did not
reason, how shall we do to live if we leave our callings?

2 All worldly things must be held with a disposition to part with them; when
Christ calls for them they presently left their nets. This besides the command
of God, and example of Saints, should move us, that what we part with for
Christ's sake, We shall have an hundred fold in this present world, and life
everlasting hereafter, Matthew. 19 27.

3 From their not going till they had (...), we should learn when we attempt
any thing hazar^ious. (...) to see our call, Heb. 11.8. Abraham being called
(...) went, not knowing whither he went. The children of F^^^^aim going against
their enemies without a call, turned their backs in the day of battle, Ps.
79.9. compared with 1 Chronicles. 7.21, 22. So Israel going up against the
Canaanites, when God forbad them by Moses to go, were smitten by them, Numb.
14.41, 42, 43, 44, 45.

4 In that they leave ship and father, learn that matters of affection as well
as matters of profit must give way to Christ, Genesis 12.1, 2.

V. 23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness, and
all manner of disease among the People.

We have in this last part to the end of the Chapter two things, 1 The
diligence of Christ in preaching and working Miracles. v. 23.

2 The effect hereof, viz. Multitudes followed him bringing their sick unto him.

He went about all Galilee] Persons that are not fixed to the oversight of one
Church, but have a Call to go into the World, must not content themselves to
tarry in any one place. Christ went about all Galilee preaching in their
Synagogues. Where the seed is cast among much ground it is probable some of it
will take root and bring forth fruit.

And preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom] That is, the glad Message of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the way to attain it. If any man ask how Christ could be
permitted to preach in the Synagogues; it was partly because grave and godly
and knowing men, either known so to be, or commanded by others, were so
permitted to speak: so the chief Ruler of the Synagogue permitted Paul to speak
unto the People, Acts 13.15. After the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the
Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have
any word of exhortation to the People, say on

Besides, Christ confirmed his Doctrine with Miracles, and so all men whom
malice blinded not might see that he was a Teacher come from God, and therefore
might easily have access into the Synagogue. Now a Synagogue is the same with a
Convent or Meeting, it is every Assembly of men that meet together, whether for
judgment or for counsel, or for holy things. After the word Convent, or
Meeting, or Synagogue (for they are all one) came to be transferred and brought
to those places where these Meetings were, Luke 7.5. He has loved our Nation,
and built us a Synagogue, as the word Church in continuance of time came to be
transferred to the place where the Church met. The Christian Assembly is called
by the name of Synagogue in the Greek, James 2.2.

For the distinction betwixt Teaching and Preaching, both which Christ uses,
(...) and (...), Teaching may have respect to the opening prophetical
Scriptures, for the same Greek word is used by Luke, when Christ opened the
Prophecy of the sixty first of Esaias, Luke 4.15, 16, 17. Preaching is the
gathering Doctrines and Observations from the Word, with an application of them
by reprehension, Exhortation, Instruction and Consolation.

Now Christ preached thus in the Synagogues, partly to take advantage of a
Concourse of People, and partly that his Doctrine might come to the test, being
not preached in a corner, but before judicious Hearers, John 18.20. Jesus said,
I spoke openly to the World, I ever taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple,
whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said nothing.

There was of these Synagogues almost in every great City, as at Antioch, Acts
15.22. at Corinth, Acts 18.8, etc. which Jews that traded about Merchandise,
and out of a zeal to gain Proselytes set up, whom Heathens did not hinder there
to profess their faith: nor Christ disdain to go into them, though some of them
had been defiled by the Samaritan mixtures, whose Religion was jumbled with
superstitions, 1 Kings 17.33. Learn we from Christ's example to seek for lost
souls, Ezekiel. 34.4.

Healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people] By
sickness called (...), he means an habituated, rooted disease; by weakness he
means want of strength, weariness, languishing, which are the predictions of a
disease. This distinction is 1 Cor. 11.30. Many are weak and sick among you;
now Christ healed all weaknesses and sicknesses,

1 To gain authority to his Doctrine not heard of before in the World.

2 To fulfill Prophesies, as Isai 35.5.

3 That being healed in their Bodies they might seek to him for their Souls.

4 To prove himself to be the Christ, Matthew. 11.2. when John's Disciples ask,
Art thou he that should come, or shall we look for another? Christ answers, Go
tell John what you see, the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the
Lepers are cleansed.

Christ could have done other Miracles, as Moses did, Exodus 4.4.6.9. but he
chooses such Miracles as were useful and beneficial to men, the more to affect
them; he heals their diseases and weaknesses, and this not by Plasters and
Medicines, after the manner of Physicians, but by the Word of his Power, and
all this to strengthen our weak faith.

V. 24. And his fame went through all Syria, and they brought unto him all sick
People that were taken with diverse Diseases and torments, and those which were
possessed with Devils, and those which were lunatic, and that had the Palsy,
and he healed them.

We have the effects that followed his Preaching and Miracles, 1 His fame went
through all Syria, that is, the fame of his Miracles and Doctrine. God makes
glory and praise to accompany worthy and renowned actions, as the shadow
accompanies the body: let us not then pursue our own glory.

Through all Syria] Syria lies upon the Mediterranean on the West, on the East
bounded by Euphrates, on the North bounded by Cilicia and Armenia, on the South
by the Deserts of Arabia and Egypt.

And they brought unto him all sick People] That they might see his power
extended to all sorts of Diseases he heals all the sick, in particular he heals,

1 Torments, that is, racking Diseases that so torment the sick as if they were
upon the Rack, as Malefactors are, to confess their wickedness and their
Confederates.

2 Possessed with Devils, in whom the Devil had such a power to cause them to
mischieve themselves and others.

3 Lunatic, these were such as the Moon had an influence upon, especially at
the full, at which time they dote, or are mad. The Moon has an influence over
them that have a moist and weak Brain, in the new Moon and full Moon it
increases, and mingles the Humors, to wit, Phlegm and Melancholy, and troubles
the Brain, so that some are carried to dotage, others to madness, others to the
falling sickness, and with these evils the Devil sometimes gets in, and by
stirring up the Humors of black and yellow choler, sorely afflicts the sick,
so that sometimes he drives them to despair, sometimes to murder themselves.

4 Palseys. A Palsy is a Convulsion of the Sinews, that a man that has it is
not able to move.

And he healed them] Without requiring faith of them, for he had not yet shown
his power, and many of them coming from far, had little faith in him;
afterward when he had shown many Miracles among them he required faith of the
sick.

1 We may learn from these Multitudes, from the necessities of our wants and
weaknesses to seek after Christ.

2 How great soever our Diseases be, to be confident; there is power enough in
Christ to heal us.

V. 25. And there followed him great Multitudes of People, from Galilee, and
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan.

Here is the last effect of Christ's healing, to wit, Multitudes followed him.
When Christ will let forth his power he can make Multitudes follow him. Some
followed him for heavenly things, some to be healed of their diseases, some out
of curiosity, some out of envy to carp at him. In these times, some follow
Christ because of profit, some for honor, some from examples, some for their
relations sake, few out of sincere love, as resolving to suffer with him, but
as soon as Christ and his Cross come together they leave him, as the stony
ground, Matthew. 13.21. The people of God are not multitudes but a people
redeemed from tongues, and people, nations, and languages, Revel. 5.9. If we
follow Christ because multitudes follow him, we shall as easily leave him when
multitudes forsake him. Usually multitudes are corrupt young and old: compassed
Lot's house, Genesis 19.4. in the old world all flesh had corrupted their ways,
Genesis 6. Multitudes worshipped the golden Image Nebucadnezz^r had set up.

From Decapolis] In English from ten Cities, the name of these ten Cities
according to Brocard and Adricomius are, Tiberias, Sephet, Asar, Cedes,
Caesarea Philippi, Capernaum, Bethsaida, Chorazin, Bethsan, or Scytopolis, and
Jotapata, where Josephus was Governor fighting against the Romans and Titus.

From Ju^ea and from Hierusalem] That is, not only from the City of Jerusalem,
but from the Country lying thereabouts.

And from beyond Jordan] That is, from the Countries placed beyond Jordan, in
respect of Calilee, as Gilead, Trachonitis, Abilene, and all that Country that
fomerly belonged to Sihon and Og, and the Countries of Arabia, which were the
happy Arabia abounding with Spices, and the rocky Arabia, and the desert Arabia
which was a Wilderness. And from many other remote countries; so that a while
after Christ his death Justin Martyr said, There is no one kind of Mortals
whether Barbarians or Greeks, or by what other names they be called, either of
the Hamazobians or Nomades that want a house, and live in tents, among whom by
the Name of Jesus Christ crucified, prayers and thanksgivings are not made to
the Father and Creator of all things, Justin. cont. Tryph.

CHAP. V.
WE have in this Sermon, 1 The Preface, v. 1. 2 The Sermon, in the rest of the
Chapter.

V. 1. In the preface observe, 1 The Author of the Sermon, viz. He, that is,
Jesus. 2 The place where it was, in the Mount. 3 The occasion, seeing
multitudes follow him. 4 The persons he taught, his Disciples. 5 The gesture he
used, he sat.

1 The Author of the Sermon, viz. Jesus Christ; wherein he propounds a new
Law far more perfect then the law of Moses, wherein there are diverse things
added, for to this, Thou shall not commit adultery, is added, He that looks
upon a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her in his heart;
instead of, Thou shall not kill, He that shall say to his brother Racha, shall
be guilty of hell fire. Is not the law of committing of Adultery safe, to which
the law of not lusting is added? Tert. de pudicitia. All conclude that Christ's
intent is to clear the true meaning of Moses and the Prophets, which was
corrupted by the false gloss of the Jewish teachers; but it seems to me that
Christ added some things, not only by way of explication, but by way of rule;
and this he did as the Prophet of his Church, whom we are to hear in all
things, Acts 3.22.

2 The place where; it was in the Mount: Thither he went to spend the night in
prayer, in order to the calling of his twelve Disciples, for this Sermon, and
that Luke 6. was one and the same, as appears by their matter and subject This
Mount is supposed by Chorographers to be (...) saida, and here Christ called
his Disciples unto him, and chose out of them Twelve, whom he called Apostles
and sent them forth to preach. In the top of this Mountain Christ chose his
twelve Apostles, in the descent of the Mountain he preached this Sermon. Both
Matthew and Luke gather the chief points of Christian doctrine into one place.

3 The occasion; which was not only Disciples, but multitudes were there
present. Teachers should observe opportunities when to preach: We may desire to
preach among multitudes, not for vainglory sake, but because where there are
many its like some or more will be wrought upon.

4 The gesture; He sat. Luke 4.16. He stood up and read his Text, and then
sat down and preached. He sat among the Doctors hearing and asking them
questions, Luke 2.46. being apprehended, he told the multitude, I sat daily
with you in the Temple teaching, Matthew. 26.55. Christ taught sitting, because
it was the manner and custom of the Teachers of that Church so to do, Matthew.
23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, Luke 5.3. He sat down and
taught the people out of the ship. Christ sat down, either because he was
weary in going up the Mount, or because of the length of his Sermon, which if
delivered with amplifications, would have wearied him standing, and to show
that Preachers are not confined to one kind of gesture, but as Christ
sometimes preached sitting, sometimes standing, so may they.

5 Whom Christ taught; viz. his Disciples, who to prevent the multitudes that
would have pressed him, stood near him. Yet did he not only teach them, but also
taught the multitude.

V. 2, 3. And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God.

He opened his mouth] That is, Christ that had formerly opened the mouths of
the Prophets, now opens his own mouth, Heb. 1.1. God who at sundry times, and
in diverse manners, spoke unto the Fathers, has in these last times spoken unto
us by his Son.

Blessed are the poor in spirit] In these words two things are considerable; 1
The happy and blessed condition of them that are poor in spirit. 2. The reason
of it; For theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. For the former, Obs. Poverty of
spirit is a blessed frame of spirit.

But, before I come to open this point, let me lay down some cautions, as, 1
That Christ shows not by what means we may come to blessedness, but only the
qualifications of them that do attain it, as in Ps. 15. in the whole Psalm;
much less does Christ set down by what merits we obtain blessedness. He shows
what manner of persons he will have them to be who expect blessedness, viz.
poor in spirit, mourners, meek, merciful, hungring after righteousness; these
are rather notes of blessed men than procuring causes of blessedness. Such we
are to put difference betwixt, Scriptures that speak of the causes of
blessedness, such as these John 3.16. 6.54. 8.24. Psalm 32.1. and those that
speak of the properties of blessedness, such as Psalm 1.1. 112.1. James 2.1.

So that we see the meaning why Christ says not, Blessed are they that are
redeemed with Blood, or blessed are they which believe in me, because he would
teach, not wherefore we are blessed, but who they are that are blessed.

Four things to be discust; 1 What it is; 2 Grounds of it; 3 Trials; 4 Means to
it.

1 What spiritual poverty is.

It Is whereby a poor soul, having some grace, sees a want of further grace, and
so goes for supply out of himself to find it in Christ.

There are two degrees of it, 1 When we are convinced of our miserable estate
by nature, so that the soul desires to be otherwise then it is, Joh. 16.10.

2 After we are in Christ, whence follows, 1 Sight of emptiness in all things
save Christ, Phil. 3.8. compared with Christ the soul counts them dung. 2 Self
abasement Luke 18.13. the Publican cries, God be merciful to me a sinner, Phil.
3.8. Paul calls himself less then the least of all Saints.

3 Earnest desire after the favor of God, Esa. 41.17, 18. When the poor and
needy seek water, I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst
of the valleys.

Take we notice of our poverty; by nature we are not able to pay our debts, and
apt to be cast in prison for them.

Grounds of spiritual poverty.
1 Else we will not come to Christ; the prodigal came not to his father till he
saw himself poor.

2 This is the end of Gods permitting us to fall; God left Hezekiah to try him
that he might know all that was in his heart, and thereby to humble him for his
pride, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. compared with 26. Peter after he had fallen to deny
Christ, he went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 27.75.

3 This is the end why God lays outward poverty on us; that which pride feeds
upon is some outward thing that the flesh takes occasion to swell with, now
when the fuel is taken away the fire goes out. Manasses was hereby brought to
inward poverty; riches are mostly the nourishment of sin, and hardly can a rich
man come to heaven, Matthew. 19.23. You see your calling, brethren, not many
mighty, not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. Contrarily, Has not God chosen
the Poor of this world? Jam. 2.5. Poor men do usually more readily believe then
rich men, because they are less wrapped up in cares and earthly hindrances, hence
Christ does with his people as a Physician with his Patient that has a foul
body, he purges him almost to skin and bone, that having made the body poor,
there may be a spring of better blood and spirits. Thus providence serves to
predestination, that poverty among other things serves to the good of the
elect, Romans 8.28.

4 Spiritual Poverty makes us successeful in the things of this life. Many
going in their own wit and strength prove very unprosperous, Prove. 3.5, 6.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding, in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy steps.
Psalm. 78. He took David from following the Ewes to feed Jacob his people. The
reason is because God delights to lift up them that give glory to his name, 1 Samuel 2.7, 8. he makes such to be the pillars of the earth, Psalm. 113.7, 8.

5 Spiritual Poverty is that emptiness God is wont to fill, Luke 1.53, He
fills the hungry with good things, but the rich he has sent empty away, Such
an heart is a spiritual emptiness, so that as every thing in nature is filled
with something so in grace.

6 Men spiritually poor have their prayers answered, Psalm. 34 6. This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard him, Psalm. 9.18. The needy shall not always be
forgotten the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever: When the
sorrows of death compassed David, the Lord heard him out of his holy temple,
Psalm. 18.4, 5, 6. So Jonah, chap. 2.7. When my soul fai^ted within me I
remembered the Lord, and my prayer came in unto thee into thine holy temple.

7 Persons spiritually poor are wont to trust in God. Zeph. 3.12. I will leave
in the midst of thee an afflicted poor people, and they shall trust in the name
of the Lord. Such persons seeing the uncertainty of all other refuges are wont
to refuge themselves in God, Psalm. 142.4, 5.

Trials of spiritual poverty.
1 Persons spiritually poor are full of sense of wants, out of which they
mightily pour out their souls. You need not dictate words to a man that is
sensible of wants. A poor Tenant that has had an hard bargain, can
sufficiently tell his tale to his Landlord. See examples Psalm. 34.6. Psalm.
142.2.102.1, 2. Job 29.12.

2 In persons so qualified there is a care of using and frequenting ordinances.
See Psalm. 84.6, 7. Poor Persons go to all places to get riches, Psalm. 107.36.
to 42. so they that want grace and comfort will attend upon all means; they
will go to Gods ordinances. Persons that think there is too much reading, and
hearing, and preaching, were never humbled, why complain they not of the sun
for light, and of the earth for plenty?

3 Persons spiritually poor are very much in esteeming any measure of grace,
Col. 1.12, 13. 1 Timothy 1.12. the woman of Canaan esteems crumbs, Matthew. 15.27. A
soul that sees the want of grace, and the excellency of it, is thankful for
every good motion. A Christian knowing he deserves nothing, is thankful for
every thing, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. Psalm. 116.12, 13.

4 Persons spiritually poor are fearful to offend God, because the dependances
of their grace, comfort and glory is upon God, Phil. 2.12, 13. Even as poor
people are afraid to offend those upon whom their earthly dependence is, for
maintenance, or countenance, Hos. 3.5. Jer. 32.39.

5 Such persons are teachable; you may lead a man poor in spirit with any
Counsel, having smarted for sin, Acts 9.6. Lord what will thou have me to do?
Esa. 11.6. and because they are teachable, God delights to teach them, Psalm.
25.9.

6 Such persons are not wont to upbraid others with their conditions, they are
so taken up with their own, Luke 15.16, 17. compared with v. 30. The prodigal
he looks only on his own misery, the elder brother upbraids the prodigal, This
thy son has devoured thy living with harlots, and thou have killed for him the
fatted calf.

7 Men that are spiritually poor are especially troubled for spiritual wants,
as blindness of mind, hardness of heart, unbelief, Mark 9.24. Esa. 63.17. Why
have thou hardened our heart from thy fear? 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. for this thing,
(that is, for removing the thorn in the flesh) I besought the Lord thrice.
Jer. 17.14. Heal me, and I shall be healed. Hos. 14.3. Take away all iniquity.

8 Persons spiritually poor are wont to clear God in all his proceedings
against them. Ezra 9.13. All that is come upon us is for our evil deeds, and
great trespass, and thou have punished us less then our iniquities deserve.
Ezekiel. 16.63. That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy
mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee. See
Psalm. 51.4. Levit. 26.39.40.41. Psalm. 145.17. Dan. 9.8, 9.

9 He is not vain glorious but ascribes all to grace, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. he has
low thoughts of himself, whatsoever others think of him, Matthew. 8.8. Psalm.
115.1.

Means to spiritual poverty.
1 Look upon the mixture of corruption in your best and holiest services, this
will make you cry out with sighs, Oh that my ways were directed that I might
keep thy statutes: Psalm. 119.5. Oh wretched man who shall deliver me! Romans
7.13. Neh. 13.22. Remember me O my God, concerning this, and spare me according
to the greatness of thy mercy.

2. Look on thy woeful estate, both before and after calling; before calling,
poor, and blind, and wretched, and miserable, Rev. 3.17. owing ten thousand
talents and not able to pay a penny; Matthew. 18.24. and after calling not able
to think a good thought without grace. 2 Cor. 3.5. What have we that we have
not received? 1 Cor. 4.7.

3 Look on the humble dispositions of Saints of most grace. Abraham counts
himself dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. Job abhors himself in dust and ashes, c.
41.6. Agur says, I am more brutish then any man, Prove. 30.2. Asaph says, So
foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee, Psalm. 73.22. Jacob, I
am less then the least of thy mercies, Genesis 32.10. John Baptist, I have need to
be baptized of thee: I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his shoes, Matthew.
3.14. Luke 3.22.

4 Spiritual conviction, that the spirit let us see our worthlesseness, Rev.
3.17. q.d. thou art, but thou know it not, that thou art poor and blind and
naked, Joh. 16.10. he shall convince of sin, so that as the sun gives a light
whereby we behold, as the gloriousnes of the sun, so the loathsomness of the
dunghill, so the spirit convinces of our own vileness, and his own fullness.

5 Present to your selves abasing considerations, as, What was I before I had
mercy? how unprofitably spent I my time? what will these glorious things of the
world be in time to come, wherein we are apt to be conceited, when heaven and
earth shall be on fire? since we were called, how have we discredited our
profession? how barren and watchless are we? how short are we of that we might
have been?

6 Believe the promises made to souls poor in spirit; I will look to him that
is poor and of a contrite spirit, Esa. 66.2. Yea dwell with him, and revive
him, Esa. 57.15. yea Christ came to preach glad tidings of the gospel to such,
Luke 4.18. Matthew. 11.3. Rev. 2.9. I know thy poverty, but thou art rich. God
will feed such souls with grace and comfort, Zach. 11.7. Luke 1.53. yea, God
will be a strength to such in their distress Esa. 25.4. Psalm. 69.33.

7 Look upon thy own wants and weakness; the more thou see them the more will thou trust in God, Zeph. 3.12. From heaven did the Lord behold the earth, to
hear the groaning of the prisoner, Psalm 102.19, 20. I am poor and sorrowful,
let thy salvation set me up on high, Psalm 69.29.

For theirs is the Kingdom of heaven] That is both kingdom of grace, Esai
61.1. For the poor have the Gospel preached to them, Mat. 11.3. but especially
the kingdom of glory is meant, Luke 12.32. Matthew. 25.34. though such persons
are beggarly in their own feeling, being sensible of their lack of faith, love,
joy, hope, yet have they an interest in the riches of grace and glory.

We may apply this to comfort the poor in spirit, who are full of miseries
inward and outward. The worlds proverb is, Blessed are the rich because theirs
is the kingdom of the earth, but Christ pronounces, Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

V. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

By mourning Christ means such mourning as is for offending God, whether it be
by sighs, groans, or an inward grief of heart; such persons though they may
seem miserable in the eyes of the world, yet are they blessed.

1 God is wont to make comforts to abound according to their sorrows, 2 Cor.
7.6. God comforts them that are cast down, and this proportionable to our
sorrows, 2 Cor. 1.5, 7.

2 God is wont to bottle all their tears and sorrows, Psa. 56.8. Psalm 55.
Consider how I mourn in my complaint.

3 There Is a time coming when God will turn the mourning of Saints into
dancing, and their sackcloth into gladness, Psalm 30.11. John 16, 20. Ye shall
weep and lament, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. There is not only a
fountain of justification set open for such mourners now, but a state of
glorification hereafter, Zach. 12.10, 11, 12, 13, compared with Chapter 13.1.

Hence see, 1 The mistake of the world, who think happiness to be placed in
delights and pleasures, and shun those things which may procure any sorrow or
cross, as confession of persecuted truths; against this Christ says, Mourners
shall be comforted.

2 It Is consolation for distressed consciences; If thou can truly mourn for
thy transgressions, thou shall be comforted. Let what ever distress come upon
an afflicted heart, yet if thou can mourn for offending God, thou shall be
comforted.

3. It Is consolation to persons who have afflicted estates in this world;
there is a day coming when comfort shall come, provided that with mourning for
thy miseries thou specially mourns for thy sin, Luke 16.25. Now he is comforted
and thou art tormented. Though thy comfort come not yet, yet in Gods time it
shall come. They are not blessed who mourn for the loss of their wealth, or
death of their friends, but they who mourn for offending God.

4 In all our confessions and professed humiliations, see that you do not
declare them only historically, but mourn for them. Psalm 38.17. I will
declare mine iniquities, and will be sorry for my sin. When thou prays, let thy
heart mourn in prayer, Psalm 55.2. When thou speaks of sin, speak mournfully of
it. Now to move us hereto consider,

1 God has the joy of the Holy Ghost in store for mourners, Esa 61.1, 2, 3.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, to give the oil of joy for the spirit of
mourning and heaviness. Saints seldom find such comfortable revivings, as
when they are most mournful.

2 This mourning is more comfortable then the loud laughters of the world.

Properties of Mourning.
1 Let it be continued, that length of time may not wear it out; length of time
eats out worldly griefs.

2 Universal. That King that was sorry for his consent to Daniels death, Dan.
6.14, was not sorry for his denial of the truth, in refusing to venture all in a
good cause. Herod was sorry for John's death, but could rejoice in Herodias.

3 After conversion as well as before. It Is a vain opinion to think we need not
sorrow after conversion, and that a Christians state is altogether a state of
joy. Joy and sorrow may stand together in the soul, but not about one and the
same object; joy in God, and sorrow for sin.

4 Let thy mourning be, not only in regard of the damning power of sin, but
principally in regard of the contrariety thereof to the nature of God, and to
the nature of him that loves thee, Luke 7.38, compared with v. 48. Mary having
a sense of Gods love weeps bitterly, and washes Christ's feet with her tears.

5 Let it be joined with faith. First Christ looks upon the soul, and gives
some testimony of his love to it, and then the soul looks on Christ with a sad
heart, Matthew. 26.75. Christ first looked on Peter, then he went out and wept
bitterly. Its the nature of faith to apply the wounds and sorrows of Christ
unto it self, Esa 53.5. thence follows mourning, Zach. 12.10.

6 This mourning for sin is the greatest; hence resembled to the mourning for
an only son when dead, Zach. 12.11. to the drawing of water, 1 Samuel 7.6, as if
it had been in buckets. The ground whereof is, because they apprehend sin as
the greatest of evils: 1 Because it is the cause of all evils, Deuteronomy. 28.

2 It keeps off the greatest good.

3 It cannot be purged away but with the greatest price, even Christ's blood.

4 There Is more evil in sin then in any thing: hence follows, 1 A resolution
not to meddle with sin, as Jehoshaphat, when he had smarted by joining with
Ahab in sending out a fleet, he would not join with his son Ahaziah, though
solicited. When a man has had a fall from a resty horse which had like to
have broke his neck, he will hardly come upon his back again. 2 He will not be
hired for any gain of sin against God; he will not sell himself as Balaam did.

Trials of thy Mourning.
1 True mourning that comes from the spirit of grace, looks at God who has
been dishonored, and at Christ who has been crucified, Psalm. 51.3, 4. Mine
iniquity is ever before me; against thee, thee only, have I sinned. Hos. 6.1.
Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn us and he will heal us. Luke
15.18. Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee: so it looks on
Christ as crucified, Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have
pierced.

In opposition to this, there is a mourning flowing from the spirit of bondage,
which is a forced work; this differs from the other, as the motion of a clock,
from the motion of a living creature: the one is moved from a principle of
life, the other from weights; in the one a man is humbled, in the other he
humbles himself.

2 True mourning has a change of heart going with it, Jer. 4 14. Luke 7.38.
those eyes that had been employed in wanton glancings now they weep; those hairs
that had been laid out to entangle now wipes Christ's feet; those lips that had
kissed wantonly now kiss Christ's feet. Hypocritical mourners have no change of
heart, they are like thievs who forbear stealing while in prison only.

3 If thy mourning for sin be right, outward contents will not take it off.
David had the delights of a Court, yet did not this take off his mourning,
Psalm 51.3.38.6.

4 If thy mourning for sin be right, it will be on this ground, because it
turns away the face of God, 2 Chronicles. 7.12, 13.

5 Thou will mourn for secret sins as well as for open, Psalm 19.12. Cleanse me
from my secret sins, as vain thoughts, Jer. 4.14, etc.

6 Thou will mourn especially for thy great sins, as David does for his
adultery and murder, Psalm 51, 14. and Paul for his blasphemy, 1 Timothy 1.13.

7 Thy mourning will be especially for thy master sin, Psalm 32.4, 5. All
David's mourning was nothing, till he came to touch upon this sin of murder, to
mourn for it.

8 Thou will mourn for it, not only in times of extremity, as Pharaoh, Exodus
9.27. and Judas, Matthew. 27.4. but likewise in times of prosperity.

9 True mourning looks at Gods face and favor, 1 Samuel 7.3. Psalm 51.8, 12.
Ezekiel. 7.16. Hypocrites mourning is to have temporal judgments removed, 1 Kings
21.27. and so Jehoram, 2 Kings 6.29, 30. and those who howled upon their beds
for Corn and Wine, Hos. 7.14.

Means to mourning.
1 Urge the Lord with his Promise of taking away thy stony heart, Ezekiel. 36.26.
Zach. 12.10. God promises to pour upon the house of David, and the Jerusalem
of Jew and Gentile, a spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall mourn,
etc.

2 Be frequent in self-examination, Psalm 22.28. They shall remember themselves
and turn to the Lord, Lam. 3.39. Jer. 31.19. after Ephraim was brought to know
himself he lamented.

3 Keep thy heart under the powerful dispensation of the Word, Jer. 23.29. The
Word is a Fire and Hammer, Acts 2.37.

4 Look often on Christ crucified. Hard is thy heart if it mourns not when thou
remembrest the dying of Christ, Zach. 12.10. looking on him they pierced, they
mourned.

5 Pray for the Spirit of grace to be poured upon thy soul, Isai 32.15. When
the Spirit is poured from on high, the Wilderness will be a fruitful Field,
that is, those hearts that were like Wildernesses and Forests, when the spirit
was poured from on high, became fruitful Fields.

6 Get assurance of thy interest in Christ crucified. A man cannot mourn
heartily for sinning against the Lord, so long as he knows not but God may damn
him in time to come: but when Gods love is manifested, there will be great
sorrow.

7 Mournful considerations, as that thou have broken an holy Law, thou have
offended a tender Father, that thou have lived an unprofitable life, that thou
have sadded righteous men, and gladded wicked men, that thou have been partaker
with other men in their sins, that thou have often slidden back from God, that
thou have been so dead-hearted in thy secret approaches to God.

8 Consider the benefits of holy mourning, as, 1 Joy is wont to follow it,
Psalm 97.11.126.6, 7. as a joyful Harvest follows a weeping Seed-time, when
the poor Farmer mourns to cast away his precious Seed which his Family so much
wants, Luke 6.25. Isai 57.18. Isai 6.1, 2, 3.

2 Such persons are marked in an evil time, Ezekiel. 9.4. Job 5.11.

3 Such persons are not without blessedness, though they be without comfort;
for, Blessed are they that mourn. Yea a time is coming when the Lord shall be
thy everlasting Light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended, Isai 60.20.

4 This is one of the effects of Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.7. Joel 2.12.

5 Godly mourning is a special means to compose the dissoluteness and looseness
of our affections, which are apt to be scattered too much among carnal joys,
James 4.9, 10. Be afflicted and mourn, let your laughter be turned into
mourning, and your joy into heaviness.

9 Practice duties, as, 1 Private admonition, 2 Samuel 12.7. Psalm 141.5.

2 Take a fit season for plowing up thy heart, Jer. 4.3. when softened by
outward trouble.

3 Get a particular knowledge of thy evils, 1 Samuel 12.19. We have sinned in
asking us a King.

2 The Reason why mourners are blessed, For they shall be comforted; here in
part, 2 Cor. 1.4. and hereafter fully in Heaven, James 1.12. Apoc. 7.17.

V. 4. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Obs. Meek persons are blessed.

1 What meekness is. 2 Why the meek are blessed.
1 What it is: it is a certain moderation of mind, speech and gesture, whereby
a man becomes gentle and tractable toward those with whom he converses, so
that he is not sharpened unjustly at their follies, and frowardness, and
smaller offenses they commit against him.

2 Why meek persons are blessed.

1 Because Christ pronounces them blessed, Psalm 149.4. The Lord takes
pleasure in his people, he will beautify the meek with salvation. Psalm 147.6.
The Lord lifts up the meek. The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, Isai
29.19.

2 Christ promises such persons rest, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek,
and ye shall find rest for your souls. Now what rest is this, save the rest of
grace and glory?

3 A meek spirit is of high price in the sight of God, 1 Peter 3, 4. God exalts
such souls in blessedness. Hence Preachers are sent to preach good tidings to
the meek, Isai 61.1. Psalm 76.9.

4 Let us learn this duty, 1 We have the example of Christ herein, Matthew. 21.5.
Behold thy King comes, meek, riding upon an Ass, 2 Cor. 10, 1, I beseech you
by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, 1 Peter 2, 23, Isai 53, 7,

2 We have Saints commended for it, Number, 12, 3, Moses was a very meek man above
all the men of the earth: Stephen Acts 7, 60, Jer, 11, 19,

3 It Is a great point of prudence to be of a meek spirit, Jam. 3, 13, q, d, a
meek and a temperate carriage does point out a prudent man.

4 God has promised sundry blessings to such, as, 1 Guidance and teaching in
his way, Psalm 25, 9, 2 Satisfaction, Psalm 22, 26,


5 The infirmities and ignorance of those among whom we live, Gal, 6, 1, We
live not among perfect persons, but among those who are apt to be overtaken
with faults.

6 Meekness will make our lives comfortable and pleasant.

This meekness has these properties.

1 It moderates anger, impatience and revenge, John 8, 48, 49, when the Jews
told Christ he had a Devil, he answers, I have not a Devil: with this caution,
that when Gods glory lies at stake then it speaks, as in Moses, Exodus, 32, 27,
who broke the Tables, though a meek man.

2 It shows it self by gentle answers and calm speeches, Prove, 26, 11.

Means to Meekness.
1 Get poverty of spirit, that you seeing your own wants and weaknesses may
carry meekly toward others, Gal, 6.1. Restore him in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self lest thou also be tempted.

2 The ornament of this grace before God and men, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. Hence it is
propounded to women instead of other ornaments.

3 The woeful effect of a passionate frame of spirit, Prove. 29.22. A furious
man abounds with transgressions; it is apt to stir up strife.

4 Consider we cannot walk worthy of our Christian calling without it, Ephesians.
4.2. Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called, with all meekness.

5 As to have the sea calm, the winds must be quieted; so, to have a meek
spirit, we must mortify our lusts, Jam. 4.1. Whence come wars and fightings,
come they not hence? even from your lusts? Though you may lay the cause on
something else, yet turbulency of heart arises from pride, impatiency, envy,
revenge, etc.

6 Consider the times wherein thy self was sinful and outrageous, Tit. 3.2, 3.
showing all meekness to all men, for we our selves were sometimes foolish and
disobedient, living in malice and envy, and thou then stood'st in need of
forbearing, so do now to others.

Obj. But if we must be thus meek, how shall sin be reproved, and Gods glory
preserved, and sinners gained?

A. As a good Musician must know when he must strike the string of a lower
sound, when of a higher, so must a Christian wisely consider from due
circumstances, where is place for meekness, where for holy anger; hence, 1
meekness must be with conservation of Gods glory, as in Moses.

2 With a due witnessing against sin in the compass of our callings, both by
reprehensions and punishments; herein Eli failed toward his sons, 1 Samuel 2.23.

3 With an endeavor to amend the sinner by reproof, Gal. 6.1. We must not let
him lie being fallen, for fear of grieving him, no more then we would let a man
lie that has broken his leg, for fear of putting him to pain; only, as the
one is done by a gentle hand, so should the other be by a meek spirit.

There may fall out times and places where the exercise of meekness may be
suspended, and other graces take turn, as to make good music all the strings
must be in tune, but it is not for all to sound, but some at some times must be
silent, that others may do their part and their sound be heard.

For they shall inherit the earth] q. d. Whereas it may be said, If we be thus
meek we shall expose our selves to all losses, Christ says, Nay, such shall
inherit the earth. Obj. Such as revenge themselves, and will put up no wrongs
are rather Lords of all things. Ans. Though they be Lords yet the
tumultuousness of their lives keeps them from a comfortable possession of any
thing. Some by earth understand heaven, Psalm 27.13. hence heaven is called
(...), i.e. the land over against us, see Psalm 142.5. thou art my portion in
the land of the living, q. d. ye meek are driven from your possession, but you
have a better in heaven.

He shall inherit the earth] That is, he has not only right to all at
present, 1 Cor. 3.22. All is yours, but he shall partake of the new heaven and
new earth, 2 Pet. 2.13. They are not only possessors of all by having
contentation, which is in stead of all, but they shall actually reign on earth
with Christ, Apoc. 5.10. and has made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and
we shall reign with him on earth. Hence the text says not, the meek do
inherit, as if they had such a measure of earthly things as others, or more,
but they shall have it for an inheritance; Those that have followed me in the
regeneration shall sit upon Thrones, Matthew. 19.28. the Kingdom, and Dominion,
and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the most high. Also Heb. 2.5. Unto the Angels has he
not put in subjection the world to come, there Saints have an inheritance.

To apply this, 1 Comfort your selves in that small measure of earthly
possessions. As Abraham comforted himself, that he should be heir of the world,
Romans 4. though as yet he had not a foot thereof, so should we comfort our
selves in the promise.

2 In all our spoil of goods, when persecutors drive us from our possessions.

3 In banishment, whithersoever thou art driven thou art in thy own earth.

2 Exhortation, 1 Not to take any thing upon pretense of right to all, for thou
have them but only in promise.

2 Moderate thy affections to the world, thou shall have earth enough one day,
be not like them Esai 5.8. They lay field to field, that they may be placed
alone in the midst of the earth.

3 To have a greatness of mind in hope of these enjoyments. Earthly heirs are
apt to have greatness of mind and to swell because of their estates, 1 Timothy
6.17. but let us have a spiritual greatness of mind to contemn the pomp of the
world, Eccles. 2.11.4 To press after the qualification.

4 To get weanedness of affection to present possessions, knowing though now
you have a right in them for a time yet they shall be given to others (though
you shall have your share if godly) notwithstanding any assurance in law, that
they are made over to you, and your heirs for ever. 1 Cor. 7.30.

5 To have your faith and hope raised up to the expectation of the promise of
new heavens, and new earth, Esa 65.17. 2 Pet. 3.13.

6 To press after meekness in hope of this inheritance.

V. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be filled.

Here is another blessedness proposed.

Q. What is meant by righteousness?

A. Some think the way of righteousness, and the doctrine of that obedience
that God requires of us.

2 I rather think it to be meant of a conformity of our will to Gods will, that
together with Christ's righteousness made over to us we may have this.

Obs. It Is a blessed thing to have an hunger and thirst af-righteousness.

Reas. 1 Because with a thirst after righteousness goes along a groaning under
corruption, Gal. 5.17. The spirit lusts against the flesh. Now to groan under
corruption is a blessed thing; for, 1 Such persons hate the evil they do, and
groan to do the good they do not, Romans 7.15. 2 They consent unto the goodness
of the law, v. 16. 3 They delight in the law after the inner man, v. 22. all
which declare a blessed temper of spirit.

2 Because souls that hunger and thirst are under a promise of satisfaction,
Esa. 44.17. They are not thence blessed because they hunger and thirst, but
because they shall be filled: blessedness will be in fullness not in hunger, but
hunger must go before filling that we may not loath the loaves. Aug. de verbis
domini Sermon. 5.
When the poor and needy want water, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the
Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them, I will open
rivers in high places. Esa. 35.7. The parched ground shall become a pool, and
the thirsty land springs of water; The Prophet speaks it of the effects of the
Gospel, in that fruitfulness and comfort comes to such souls, Esa. 44.3. I will
pour water upon the thirsty, and floods upon dry ground, Joh. 4.14.

3 Because an hunger and thirst after righteousness eats out our hunger and
thirst after the world, Joh. 4.13, 14. Whosoever drinks of this water shall
thirst again, but whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst; Hence the woman of Samaria leaves her water pot for to do her
duty, v. 28. Mary, Luke 10.41. she leaves attendance on Christ to hear his word.

The reason is, because the soul sees better meat and drink then it saw before.
So that as when we are at a feast, and see a freedom to partake of better meat
and drink, our hunger and thirst is taken off, from that which is more course
to that which is more delicate and pleasant; so the soul seeing Christ and
holiness to be meat that endures to everlasting life, and all things here but
perishing food, the hunger and thirst to the one eats out the hunger and
thirst to the other, Joh. 6.27.

4 Hungring and thirsting after righteousness argues a principle of renovation,
because naturally our desires are after the flesh and carnal things, Ephesians.
2.2. Romans 8.5. Phil. 3.19.

Now, when our desires, and hungrings and longings are for righteousness, it
argues a principle of renovation, Joh. 6.35. I am the bread of life, he that
comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never
thirst, q. d. when once a man comes to Christ he does not hunger and thirst as
formerly he did.

5 It Is a blessed thing to be made like Christ; but in hungring after
righteousness we are made like to Christ, Joh. 4.32. My meat is to do the will
of him that sent me, and to finish his work;

Hence Christ preferred the doing the will of God before his food, Mark 3.20.
so Job 23.12. I esteemed the words of his mouth more then my necessary food.

For application, 1 Information of the cursed condition of those who hunger and
thirst after wickedness, after uncleanness, revenge, and not in some one act or
motion, but it is the usual temper of their hearts, see it in covetous persons,
Amos 8.5. When will the sabbath be gone that we may set forth wheat, making the
Ephah small and the shekell great? They sleep not except they have done
mischief, they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of violence,
Prove. 4.16, 17. See it in Ahab who laid him down on his bed, and would eat no
bread, why? his sickness was for Naboths Vineyard, 1 Kings 21.4. Amnon was sick
for his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.2. The drunkard for all he has such misery by
his potting, Prove. 23.29, 34. Yet when he awakes he seeks it again, Hos. 7.4,
6, 7. Their hearts were heated with revenge and uncleanness like an oven, and
in the morning these lusts of theirs did burn like a flaming fire v. 7.8.

2 The difference betwixt godly and wicked; one says, Who will show any good,
Psalm. 4.6. the other says, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance on us. v.
7. Phil. 3.19.20. Job 20.12, 13.

3 No earthly thing is able to satisfy the hunger and thirst of a Christian,
Esa. 55.2. wherefore do you lay out your money for that which is not bread, and
your labor for that which satisfies not? Eccles. 5.10. He that loves silver
shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase.
Solomon had abundance of all, yet nothing satisfied him, but all was vanity,
Eccles. 2.11. The main reason is, because that which principally afflicts the
soul, is either guilt with which Belshazzar was afflicted; though his Lords and
Ladies were about him, yet his knees falls to trembling, Dan. 5.6. or filth,
which so made Paul to cry out, Romans 7.23. as one that is brought into captivity
by a stronger then himself, sigheth and groans, saying, Who shall deliver me,
etc. and the world cannot take away these.

Grounds to take off the heart from earthly things.
1 We are not sure to get them; we come into the world as a lottery, many get
blanks, few prizes.

2 We are not sure to hold them when gotten; fire, water, plunder, etc. may
take them away, Job 1.20.

3 Should we get them they cannot fill the soul. We may as well fill a bag with
grace as the soul with earthly things. In this sense earthly things they may be
called a show or an apparition, 1 Cor. 7.29. as there are apparitions of men
and horses in the air, which are not what they seem to be.

4 The moderation we have in other things, we would have so much money as would
serve our journey, so much meat as will fill our belly, so much Physic as will
purge our disease. Let us moderate our desires to the world.

5 The enjoyment of these glorious things in the world, is like the clothing of
a Stage Player with glorious apparel: the player thinks not himself, nor do
others think him better for his apparel, for he shall go off from the stage
and be as he was before, so shall we go off from the stage of this world.

6 Within these things we look after there is much emptiness. What is within
riches? Cares. What is within honor? Disquiet: for one that is bowed to, there
are thousands that bow. What is within pleasures? Weariness. What is within
bravery and beauty but a gladding of the beholders, not the havers? What is
within government? fears of insurrections, and a servile courting of all sorts
of men; these are like pictures that seem goodly stuff far off, but near at
hand they are base and course.

2 Exhortation to raise up your hunger and thirst after righteousness, Psalm.
119.80. Mine eyes fail with looking, but Lord when will thou comfort me? David's
soul panted for God, as the heart for the rivers of water, Psalm. 42.1, 2. yea
his heart and flesh cried out for the living God, Psalm. 84.1, 2. Psalm. 27.4.
there was one thing his soul looked after Multa novit vulpes, verum Echinus unum
magnum, as the proverb, The Fox knows many things, the Hedge-hogge knows one
great thing.

Holy persons long to know their duty, as every man desires to know what
belongs to the office he is employed in, Psalm. 119.33, 34. so do they thirst
for a conformity to it, Psalm. 19.10. More to be desired are they then gold, yea
then fine gold, sweeter also then honey and the honey comb, Psalm. 119.130. I
opened my mouth and panted, for I longed for thy commandments. He uses a
Metaphor from hungry or thirsty persons; look as when they are hungry or
thirsty they greedily open their mouth to take in meat and drink to quench the
thirst, so when my soul considers the sense of Gods anger against sin, or my
own filth, I fly to thy word to quench my thirst by thy promises, and to get
direction by thy commandments.

Motives to hunger and thirst after righteousness.
1 The most abundant fullness of outward things, avails nothing without this,
Luke 12.19. He had abundance of earthly things, but the devils fetched away his
soul, when his barns would not hold his corn. As Samuel bad Saul not to set his
mind upon asses, when he had a kingdom befallen him, 1 Samuel 9.10. So say I, why
should thy appetite go after earthly things when thou have such an object as
holiness?

2 The Lord is wont to fill every hungring soul with spiritual good things,
Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, i. e. thy desires and affections, and I will
fill it, Luke 1.53. He has filled the hungry with good things, Psalm. 145.19.
He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him.

3 Christ invites every hungring and thirsting soul to come unto him, Isai 55.1
Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters; as if a Physician should
make a proclamation to all sick Patients to come unto him and he would heal
them, q:d: you have thirsted after vain knowledge, honors, wealth, now here are
spiritual dainties, the Doctrine of Remission, Pardon, Peace, thirst ye after
these, come ye to the Waters. To the Water of Justification, Rev: 1.5 To the
Water of Sanctification and Baptism, Titus 3.5 here is Wine and Milk, that is,
all manner of Delicates.

Matthew: 11.28 Come unto me all ye that are weary of your corruptions, and heavy
laden under them, that is, that hunger after righteousness, and I will give you
rest. John 7 37, 38 If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink, on the
last day of the Feast Christ utters this speech: he takes occasion from their
drinking the Waters of Siloah, which that day they were wont to draw out, using
that speech of Esaias, Ye shall draw Waters with Joy out of the Wells of
Salvation, Esaias 12.3 Christ seeing this shows them who is the true Fountain of
Salvation, Zach: 13.1 and takes his words from Esaias 55.1 that is, whosoever
has a desire after holiness and happiness let him come to me and I will quench
his thirst. He that believes on me out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living
Water. Among the Hebrews there were certain Cisterns of stone to receive them,
and in the midst of them certain Pipes or Cocks out of which Water flowed.
Prove: 5.15 Drink Waters out of thine own Cistern, and running Waters out of
thine own Well; let thy Fountain be be dispersed abroad; now every medium or
concavity is called by the Greeks a Belly, Mat: 12.40 therefore Christ
signifies that they who believe on him should be so filled with Water, that it
could not be contained within them, but should flow out on every side with
great streams; now by Water he means the Spirit, and by Living Water he means
Spring Water, or Water continually flowing, all plenty of Water are called
(...) or Rivers. Matthew: 7.25, 27 That from such a soul there should be plenty
of the graces and comforts of the Spirit, not only for himself, but for the
benefit and comfort of others, Revel: 21.6 I will give unto him that is athirst
of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely, Now what is the Fountain of the
Water of Life, but only the Blood of Christ, and the Fountain of his Graces,
Zach: 13.1 compared with Rev: 1.5, 7, 14.

Rev: 22.17 The Spirit and the Bride, say, Come, and whosoever is athirst let
him come and take of the water of life freely. The Spirit invites all thirsting
souls to come to Christ; for as the Waters of a Spring can rise no higher than
the Spring from whence they come, no more can any holy desires further than the
Spirit works them in us.

4 The greatest part of our grace lies in desires, Psalm 119.5 Psalm 38.14.

Means to hunger and thirst after Righteousness.
1 Feel thine own wants. There needs not much Invitation to an hungry man to
eat, or a thirsty man to drink, Revel: 3.17, 18 John 4.15 Sir, give me this
Water that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw. What drives a man to the
Physician but the sight of his Diseases?

2 See there is fullness for every want. Art thou hungry? he has Bread, John
6.51 The Bread which I will give is my Flesh which I will give for the life of
the World. Art thou thirsty? he has Water of Life. Art thou a Babe? Here is
Milk to feed on. Art thou sad? Here is Wine to glad thy heart.

3 Consider such as hunger and thirst shall be filled, partly in this life by
receiving the testimony of the Spirit witnessing with their spirits, Rom: 8.16
touching the reconciliation with God in Christ, and some fruits of
sanctification whereby the old man is crucified and the new man renewed in
them; but principally in the state of glory, when they shall have perfect
holiness and happiness.

4 Sharp Sawces procure a stomach. Let the bitterness of sin and afflictions
procure a hunger and thirst after righteousness, Jer: 2.19 the Paschal Lamb was
eaten with sour Herbs, to show that Christ is sweet to them that feel the
bitterness of sin.

5 Purge your stomachs. Naturally we feed on pleasures, profits and carnal
contents, and we are apt to surfeit on them. Consider we the vanity of them,
Matthew: 6.20 Prove: 23.5 1 John 2 16, 17 1 Peter 2.1, 2 q, d, So long as you
delight in sin you will have no stomach to holiness. Sin works on our soul as
ill humors do on our stomachs, it cloys us and makes us loath all spiritual
food.

6 Converse with them that are spiritual, that have tasted heavenly things;
when we see them contemplate Christ and his benefits, the soul reasons there is
some excellent thing in Christ and his benefits, and in an holy life that takes
up these men's minds.

7 We know not how soon these Dainties may be taken from us, let us as those at
a Feast, who having neglected eating at the latter end fall to afresh. While
the Jubilee is, take out a pardon; while the Physician is present get out a
Medicine: imitate Joseph to lay up against a Famine; no man ever repented the
pains he has taken for his soul, but many have lamented their neglects.

8 Exercise gets stomach. Exercise in prayer, in bearing crosses, in resisting
temptations, will sharpen our affections to an holy life.

9 In order to hungring and thirst get a taste of the sweetness of an holy life,
1 Peter 2.2 He that has tasted any sweet thing, the more he has tasted it,
the more he will desire it; as in learning, sweet meats, etc. Love the best
life, and custom will make it sweet to you.

10 Relish holiness. Where there is a relish of any good thing we will the
more desire it. If we relish spiritual things we will hunger and thirst after
them, Rom: 8.5 They that are after the Spirit savor the things of the Spirit.

11 Consider the durableness of this Food. Other meat when it is eaten the
sweetness is presently gone, but holiness and Christ is a Food that endures to
everlasting life, John 6.27 All food else is perishing, even the knowledge of
natural and civil things, yea the speculative knowledge of divine things: the
truths of God are the food of the soul, but unless the goodness of truths be
the food of the will and affections they are but perishing food. In religious
discourses all ornaments, besides that which quickens and strengthens, is but
perishing food.

V. 7 Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Two things, 1 A Proposition, Merciful men are blessed.

2 The Reason, For they shall obtain mercy.

Obs. Merciful men are blessed.

Reas. 1 Such shall find mercy with God, 2 Timothy: 1.16 The Lord grant mercy to
the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me; the Lord grant unto him that
he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. v. 18 Come ye blessed of my Father,
for I was hungry and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink,
Matthew: 25.34.

2 From the rules of contrary. Merciless men are cursed: why? they find no
mercy with God. The glutton would not give so much as the crumbs to poor
Lazarus, Luke 16.21 hence he could not get a drop of water to cool his tongue
being in torments. James 2.13 He shall have judgment without mercy that has
showed no mercy. Now as merciless men are cursed, so merciful men are blessed.

3 All the good things that have been done for God are promised not only to be
acknowledged, Philemon 6 Every good thing in you shall be acknowledged, but
also promised to be rewarded, Heb: 6.10 God is not unrighteous to forget your
work, and labor of love which ye have toward his Name, in that ye have
ministered to the Saints, and do minister. Prove: 11.17 The merciful man does
good to his own soul.

For application, let it inform us of our duties. The very Heathens praised it,
much more the Scriptures: see the compassionate Samaritan, Luke 10.30 ad 38
there is a story of a man that fell among thieves, (for I do not think it to be
a parable but a story) the Levite and Priest past by, pretending, it is like,
either the haste of their journey, or the danger of their stay, lest they
should be robbed, but the Samaritan he takes care of him.

2 Exhortation to mercifulness.

1 This is the way to lay up in store a good foundation against the time to
come, Luke 16.9 Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that is, of your
earthly goods, so called because mostly found among unrighteous persons, and
most accounted by them, and therefore it appears they are not the true good;
that when you fail of your Mammon or Wealth, they may receive you into
everlasting Tabernacles. For so the word signifies, 2 Cor: 5.1 that is, either
the Angels may receive you, or that the poor whom you have helped through their
daily prayers for you may be instrumental for your admission into Heaven. Luke
12.33 Sell that you have and give alms. Some pretend they have no money, but
you have money-worth; mercy is such a piece of service that you must sell corn
and cattle in order thereto; yea the necessity of Saints may be so great that
lands and all must go, Acts 4.37 What is the issue? you will hereby provide
bags that wax not old, a treasure in the Heaven that fails not. 1 Ti: 6.18 Be
ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves
a good foundation against time to come. As if he should say, The foundation of
earthly things is a sandy and uncertain foundation, and therefore build not
upon it, but lay up works of mercy in the bellies and backs of the poor; these
works of mercy are compared to a foundation, because as from an hidden
foundation the house rises to a great height, so from these good works the
degrees of a glorious life arises, Prove: 11.17.

2 Such merciful men shall find mercy with God; where the Lord meets with a
common objection, most men are ungrateful and ready to lift up the heel
against their benefactors, however, such shall find mercy with God, Eccles:
11.1 Cast thy Bread upon the Waters and thou shall receive it after many days;
also with men they shall find mercy, God bowing their hearts to favor
merciful men, Psalm 112.4 to v. 10.

3 Mercy is one of the principal things which God requires; hence it is put
before Sacrifice, Matthew: 9.13 so that Sacrifice may be dispensed with, that
Mercy may take place; hence it is called one of the great points of the Law.
Luke 11.42.

4 By mercifulness to others we become like to God; Luke 6.36 If we do not
resemble him in this, but will be cruel and harsh, we may look that God will so
carry himself to us, Psalm 18.25 Mat: 18.32, 33 he that was cruel for an
hundred Pence, himself being forgiven ten thousand Talents, was cast into
Prison till he paid what was due. v. 34, 35 James 5 11 The Lord is pitiful and
of tender mercy.

5 There is no love of God in us, if there be no mercy, 1 John 3.17 He that
shuts up Bowels of Compassion, how dwells the love of God in that Man? 1 John
4.20 The Apostle with love to God joins love and mercy to men: He that loves
not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?

6 It Is the note of God's elect that they put on Bowels of Mercies, Col: 3.12
where see they put on, 1 Mercies, having respect to the several kinds, as,
giving, Heb: 13.16 where Distribution is called by the name of a Sacrifice;
Charity is compared to a beautiful upper Garment, Col: 3.14 2 Mercy in
forgiving, Mat: 18.35 Matthew: 6 14, 15 3 These Mercies flow from Bowels, 1 John
3.17 Such Bowels had Christ, Matthew: 9.37 when he saw them as Sheep without a
Shepherd, his Bowels earned toward them. So that mercy is an holy compassion
of heart whereby a man is moved to help another in his misery.

7 Merciless men are curied with God, by the rule of contraries: Its an
argument that men without pity have never obtained mercy. Such are they that
rejoice at the miseries of Gods people, Ezekiel. 25.3, 4, 5, 6. and such as grind
the faces of the poor for to maintain bravery and vanity. This merciless
cruelty is condemned Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. Thou shall not harden thy heart from thy
poor brother, but shall lend unto him. Such merciless persons may seek for
mercy themselves, but they shall not be heard, Prove. 21.13. Amos 1.11.

8 By mercy we are made Gods Almoners to disperse his goodness among men, Psalm
112.9. it is more then to be Almoners to Princes.

Rules in showing Mercy.
1 Do not only draw out your hand or your purse, but your soul, Esai 58.10.

2 What mercy you show do it from a cheerful heart, not grudgingly, or of
necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7.

3 Take notice of their misery, either from your own sight thereof, or from the
beholding of others, Job 30.25. Did not I weep for him that was in misery, and
was not my soul grieved for the poor? Prove. 24.11, 12. Many say they knew not
that such a man was in affliction, and that such a man was delivered to death,
well but God searches the heart, and knows that thou knew it.

4 Show all sorts of mercies, soul-mercies in teaching the ignorant, in
comforting the afflicted, Esai 50.4. body mercies in feeding the hungry,
visiting the sick, helping the fatherless and widows, Jam. 1.27. to deal thy
bread to the hungry, Esai 58.6. that thou bring the poor that are cast out to
thy house, when thou see the naked that thou cover him, etc.

5 According to our ability. Where God gives more he looks for more; He which
sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he which sows bountifully shall
reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. Acts 11.19. Disciples sent relief according to
their ability, Luke 21.4.

6 Let mercy be with sincerity, Matthew. 6.1, 2, 3. that your right hand may not
know what your left hand does: not as the Scribes, Matthew. 23.5. that did what
they did to be seen of men.

7 Let mercy be with simpathy, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak?
who is grieved, and I burn not? many come to persons in pain and ask how they
do, but are no more moved then if they were flints, Amos 6.6, 7. Pharaohs
daughter will rise up in judgment against many, Exodus 2.6. 2 Chronicles. 36.17.

8 Look upon it as a singular mercy that God has made others objects of your
mercy, and not you objects of others mercy, Acts 20.35. It Is more blessed to
give then to receive.

9 Look often on the commands of God herein, 1 Peter 3.8. Be ye all of one
mind, having compassion one of another, be pitiful, Jude 22. of some have
compassion.

Also examples Heb. 10.34. Ye had compassion of me in my bonds, Mark 5.19. Luke
10.32.

V. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Q. What is meant by purity of heart?

A. Some think sincerity, as Matthew. 6.1. opposed to hypocrisy: for many are
like apples that look well but are rotten at the heart. 2 Purity, taken
legally, no man has it, Prove. 20.6. Who can say I have made my heart clean; I
am clean from my iniquity? There is no man righteous on earth that does good
and sins not, Eccles. 7.21.

2 Purity of heart is taken Evangelically. To be pure is to be full of it self,
and not to have any other thing mingled with it; so purity of heart is that
which does not admit any sin to mingle with the frame and purpose of the heart,
but the heart still casts it out of it self, it resists and rejects it.

As a thing is said to be pure though it may have some dross cleaving to it, as
it is pure gold when its dug out of the Mineral, though there be much dross
in it, and we say it is pure air, though for a time there be many fogs and mists
within it, and it is pure water, though there may be some mud at the bottom, a
man may be said to have a pure heart, though there be a cleaving of much dross
to it.

Holy men have a fountain of original corruption in them, and from this
fountain sins arise continually, as the scum in the pot; but as in wine, or
honey, or water, though the scum arise yet still it purifieth it self, and
casts it out; contrarily in men of impure hearts the scum arises but it seeths
in, Ezekiel. 24 12. She wearied her self with lies, etc. and her great scum went
not out of her, q. d. Holy men have their scum arising in their hearts, as well
as wicked, but here is the difference, wicked men's scum seeths in, and mingles
together, but men of pure heart have a cleansing and purifying disposition,
that casts out what ever evil comes, though it be continually rising; though he
be many times mired he still washes himself again, he cannot endure it, he
does not as the swine delight in it, Matthew. 15. That which comes from within
defiles the man; the meaning is, when sin arises in a man from day to day, if
he cherish sin and entertain it, and suffer it to dwell and abide in his heart
quietly, without disturbance, if he suffer it (as it were) to be sodden in, now
they defile the heart; but if sins arise in the heart, and he continually
resist them, and casts them forth, and purifieth himself from them, such a man
is not defiled with them, nor is his his mind defiled nor conscience defiled:
but notwithstanding this boiling out of evil he is a man of a pure heart: yet
may sin cleave to a man as dross does to the silver, but it mingles not with
the regenerate part, nor that mingles not with it, no more then oil and water
do, which though they touch they do not mingle together.

Reas. Now these pure in heart are blessed, because they are holy persons in
Gods account, that is, they are persons in whom holiness has predominance,
Psalm. 15.2. Who shall sojourn in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy
hill? The Prophet answers, He who has clean hands and a pure heart, Psalm.
24.3, 4. Heb. 12.14. Follow holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.
Holy persons are freed from the power of the second death.

2 Because such persons are believers, Acts 15.9. purifying their hearts by
faith, that is, every believer from the blood and spirit of Christ, draws power
to purify and purge the heart from that filth which arises therein. Now to
every true believer there is a promise of blessedness.

3 Because a purifying of the heart and hope of blessedness are inseparably
annexed or joined together, 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him,
that is, to see the Lord to his comfort, whereof he had spoken, verse 2.
purifieth himself, as God is pure. A man may have other hopes without this, as
hope to be rich, to be honorable, but he cannot have this hope without purity.

Use 1 Exhortation to follow after purity of heart. When the heart is pure thy
hands will be pure: clean hands and a pure heart go together, Psalm 24.4. thy
prayer will be pure, Job 16.7. Mal. 1.11. thy conscience will be pure, that it
will witness thou lives not in sin, 1 Timothy 3.9.

Means to purity of heart.
1 Get the blood and spirit to purify thy heart. As the blood of Christ purges
the soul from guilt, Heb. 9.14. so does the spirit from filth, 1 Peter 1.22.
Seeing you have purified your hearts through the spirit, Psalm 51.7, 9, 10.

2 Purify your hearts from double mindedness, James 4.8. Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded. Now that is double
mindedness, when a man thinks to grasp grace and sin, and holds them in an
equal poise, as the young man, Matthew. 19. he would fain have held Christ and
the inordinate love of the world together. Contrarily Nathaniel, John 1.47.

3 Content not your selves with outward purity. The Pharisees by an outward
show of purity, by making clean the outside of the cup and platter, got great
authority among men, Matthew. 23.25. though their hearts were full of rottenness;
and they that followed after inward purity of heart were contemned; but in
opposition, Christ commends to his Disciples inward purity. Many are pure in
apparel, but few in this.

4 Nourish Gods fear in you, cleanse your selves from all filthiness, 2 Cor.
7.1. how shall we do it? Perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Gods fear
makes a man afraid to let any sin have a quiet abode in him, Psalm. 19.9. The
fear of the Lord is clean.

5 Believe the promises. By the belief of the promises we partake of the divine
nature, and to escape the corruption of the world, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. 2 Cor. 7.1.

6 Purity of heart is a preparative for communion with God, Psalm 24.3. Who
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Who shall stand in his holy place? He
that has a pure heart, verse 4.

For they shall see God] Here Is the reason of their blessedness, for they shall
see God; 1 In this life, as a pure glass receives the image proposed to it, 2
Cor. 3.18. we beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord are changed into
the same glory.

2 In the life to come. Men of pure heart are not seen in the world, or taken
notice of, but in another world they shall see God. Now in the sight of God is
fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. ult. Matthew. 18.10. setting forth the glory of Angels
(he says) They always behold the face of my Father in heaven.

For as the sun is not beheld but by sound eyes, so God that is a most pure
light cannot be seen but by a pure heart.

For the former of these, the beholding God in this life is;

1 The beholding of God in the creatures, Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work, Romans 1.20. The eternal
power and Godhead of God, are clearly seen by the things that are made. God
left not himself without witness whiles he gave fruitful seasons, Acts 14.17.
Carnal men might oppose many things against Atheism, but they consider not the
works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, Psalm. 28.5.

2 The beholding of God in his word. By this was Christ set forth evidently
crucified, Gal. 3.1. The word enlightens the eyes, Psalm. 19.8. In the glass of
the word we behold God with open face, 2 Cor. 3.18. which sets him forth, 1 By
removing all imperfections from him. 2 By ascribing all perfections to him.

3 The beholding of God in the light of his countenance Psalm. 17.15. I shall
behold thy face in righteousness, Job 13.16. An hypocrite shall not come before
him, that is to behold the light of his face, Psalm. 140. ult. the upright shall
dwell in his presence. The beholding of this is the earnest desire of every
holy man, Psalm. 4.6, 7. If there be so much comfort in this when we behold it
here, what will there be in future blessedness?

2 In the life to come we behold God. This beholding is an eternal fullness of
joy, 1 Its a fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. ult. In his presence is fullness of joy.
If Solomon's servants were blessed that stood in the presence of Solomon, 1
Kings 10.8. and beheld his wisdom, much more they who behold the glorious
presence of God in heaven.

2 Its eternal. If a man were to leave heaven after a thousand years it were
not happiness, but we shall for ever enjoy this happiness, 2 Cor. 4.18. 2 Cor.
5.1. 1 These. 4.18. This joy consists, 1 in the absence of all evils, as 1
freedom from sin, both original wherewith now assailed, Romans 7.15. and actual,
1 Cor. 15.55. We shall set our feet on our corruptions, as Joshua did his feet
on the necks of the Kings.

2 Freedom from temptations, especially those of Satan which often make the
life comfortless.

3 From labors, Rev. 14.3. The dead in the Lord rest from their labor. They
have the rest of an eternal sabbath, Heb. 4.10. All things rest when they come
at their proper place; this is a maxim among men, but true of glorified
persons.

4 From society of wicked men. The Egyptians whom you have seen you shall see
them no more for ever, Exodus 15.13. shall then be made true, all that do
iniquity shall be gathered out, Matthew. 13.41. and turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17.

5 From all necessities of nature. We shall need no house to dwell in, no fire
to warm us, no meat to feed us, no Physic to cleanse us, for our bodies shall
be spiritual, not needing any of these, 1 Cor. 15 43.

6 From all sorrow and mourning, Revel. 21.4.

2 This joy consists in the enjoyment of all goods, as

1 Light Psalm. 36.9. In thy light shall we see light, darkness is part of the
torment in hell.

2 Pleasures, and that for evermore, Psalm. 16. ult. hence heaven is called
paradise, Luke 23.43.

3 Life: of this shall mortality be swallowed up, as time is swallowed up of
eternity, 2 Cor. 5.4. mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

4 Perfect knowledge of God. We shall see him face to face, that is plentifully
and clearly, as two men that behold one another, 1 Cor. 13.12. we shall then
know the mysteries of the Scriptures, of Providence, of the Trinity, of the
incarnation.

5 Communion. If the communion betwixt the mother and her little smiling infant,
betwixt husband and wife, betwixt friend and friend be so sweet, which
communion is not so appropriate to any, but that all saints enjoy it, as all
creatures enjoy the sun which yet is enjoyed of every individual creature.

6 Joy. The joy of the holy Ghost is only the earnest hereof, Ephesians. 1.14. The
joy of the holy Ghost exceeds the joys of the world, 1 Pet. 1.8. the joy of
heaven exceeds the joy of the holy Ghost, as the whole bargain does the
earnest; but the joy and glory of heaven which Saints shall have at the last
judgment or manifestation of Gods sons, shall exceed what they have now; hence
they groan for the adoption of their bodies, Romans 8.23. the Saints departed
till their fellows come to them shall not be made perfect, Heb. 11.40. when
the whole number of the faithful shall come together there shall be a new
treasure of glory broken up, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. He shall come to be glorified of
his Saints, and to be admired of all them that believe: now their admiration
must needs arise from some new glory they had not seen before: in that day
heaven it self shall be opened, there shall not be only a drop, the whole
Godhead shall manifest himself, there we shall rejoice at this voice, I am
Joseph.

This joy is demonstrated; 1 From the object: the beholding of God alone
(though there were neither Saint nor Angel) makes us happy, Rev. 21.7. He that
overcomes shall inherit all things, How? I will be his God; he has all things
that has him that has all things, 1 Cor. 15.28. God shall be all in all, you
need not in glory to step to any creature.

2 The subject of this joy, is the general assembly of the first born whose
names are writ in heaven. The righteous shall shine as the Sun, Matthew. 13.43.
so that as a drop of water powered into a vessel of wine loses both taste and
color, and becomes wine: or as Iron put into the fire, does after a sort take
the nature of fire; or as the air enlightened with the sun seems not so much to
be enlightened as to be light it self; so shall we in the future glory be
transformed that we shall not so seem to be glorified, as glory it self.

So far as this present World surmounts that Life we lived in our Mothers Womb,
so far does the Life in Glory surmount this present Life. When we were in our
Mothers Womb we could not have imagined that we were to come into such a
spacious World, so full of glorious Objects, why should we then doubt of the
glory of that future state?

3 The propriety of this glory and joy: it is not barely the beholding of glory
that makes us happy, for some think the Goats shall behold the happiness of the
Sheep at the last, to increase their misery. Therefore all this glory shall be
yours, John 17.22, The glory which thou gave me I have given them. Ephesians:
1.19, there is a Riches of Glory in the Saints.

Use. For Application, let it provoke us to holiness and purity. Heb: 12.14,
Follow holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Psalm 17.15, I shall
behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness, q: d: when mine Enemies abound with earthly happiness and delights,
and leave their treasure to their children, I shall be satisfied with the
beholding of thee, I shall appear before thee in righteousness, that is, in the
righteousness of my cause. Of which v: 1, and when I awake out of these present
troubles, and at the Resurrection, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness; that
is, if there were neither Saint nor Angel thou would fully satisfy me.

Thus Paul like a stout Runner pressed toward the Mark of Holiness for the Prize
of Glory, as he that runs in a Race runs toward the Goal for the Prize, Phil:
3.13, 1 Cor: 9.25, 26, Where God means to bestow Heaven he first bestows
heavenly qualities. If Heaven vomited out unholy Angels, or at least they left
it of their own accords, Jude 6, then will it not receive profane persons.
Without are Dogs, Revel: 22.15, and thereinto enters nothing that defiles
nor that works abomination.

2 Exhortation to holy persons to long for this sight of God. We shall see him
not quantus, sed qualis est, not according to his greatness but according to
his glory, 1. John 3.2, We shall see him as he is. We shall not see God
infinitely in himself, but comprehensively, so far as we shall be able to
comprehend, as Bottles cast into the Sea cannot receive the whole Sea, but
only according to their capacity. This was Job's comfort when his Reins were
consuming within him, yet that he should see God, Job. 19.25,

If in this World we take such delight in the beholding of beautiful Creatures,
as Sun, Moon, Stars, Medows, Fountains, Rivers, Children, Pearls, what delight
shall we take in the beholding of God? the beholding of whom shall dim all
other Beauties, as the Light of the Sun does the Light of a Candle.

But woeful will wicked men be who shall be severed from the blessed presence
and face of God, 2 Thessalonians: 1.9, It was the aggravation of Haman's misery that he
had his face covered that he might not see the King, Hester 7.8, much more
woeful will the case of wicked men be, after they have received their Sentence,
they shall never see the Kings face more.

Object. But God is invisible, Col. 1.15, Whom no man has seen, nor can see. 1 Timothy: 6.16, John 1.18, No man has seen God at any time.

Answ. In this present life no man can see Gods face and live, Exodus: 33.20, We
cannot see God with bodily eyes in this life, because the act of seeing
presupposes a visible object, but in God there is neither bodily light, color,
nor figure. Besides, the Father never took any visible shape upon him in the
Old Testament, the Son was wont to appear by assuming some Creature upon him,
and the Holy Ghost appeared in the shape of a Dove, and of fiery Tongues, but
the Father seldom or never took any shape upon him. Foolish is that Idolatry
that must have a visible God. These are thy gods O Israel, Exodus: 32.4,

Object. Exodus: 23.9, 10, 11, Aaron and Moses, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of
the Elders went up into the Mount and saw the God of Israel, and there was
under his feet a paved work of a Saphire-stone, and the body of Heaven, as it
were, in his brightness. Also v. 11, the Nobles of Israel saw God, and did eat
and drink.

Answ. They saw not God in his essence but in a shadow, that is, in some
sensible shape which God was pleased to choose, and man's frailty could bear. For
that Saphire-pavement that was under his feet was meant the glorious majesty of
God which excells all the shining of Heaven, and the brightness of precious
stones. This shadow or resemblance the Nobles and Elders of Israel saw, yet
upon them laid he not his hand, nor slew them, for they ate and drank
delighting in the glorious resemblance they saw: the common people did not see
God in this shape for fear they should make an Idol, or Image of him; but the
Nobles and Elders, because they were wise men and men fearing God they saw this
shadow or sight: this is mentioned in opposition to that common fear, Judges
13.22, Manoah says to his Wife, We shall surely die because we have seen God.

Object. Moses saw Gods back parts, Exodus: 33.18, 20, compared with 22, 23,
having desired to see Gods glory, v. 18,

Answ. Moses desired to see the divine essence, not in it self but in some
shape, or figure, that so he seeing the glorious majesty of God might declare
it to the people. He heard the voice of God and he would fain see the form of
him that spoke to him, (as appears by Gods answer, Thou can not see my face,
for no man can see my face and live, v. 20,) but God answers, Thou can not
see it; for this shining of my face though it be bodily and assumed, yet
because in some respect it shadows out the brightness of my essence and
majesty, hence it is so great that no mortal eye can behold it, but he would be
dazzled and blinded with the shining thereof, but there is an hollow Rock in
Sinah, get thee in there, and I will cover thee with a Cloud till my glorious
Face pass by, and then I will take away the Cloud that thou may see my back
parts, like the hinder part of the Train of a Prince, when he is past by, so
that the light there was so tempered that Moses could behold it, and was
greatly refreshed with it.

2 There Is the sight of God in the Life to come; and so Saints with glorified
eyes shall behold God, Job 19.26, 27, Though Worms destroy this Body, yet in my
Flesh shall I see God, whom mine eyes shall behold and not a stranger, (or a
strange pair of eyes) though my Reins be consumed. Matthew: 18.10, In Heaven their
Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven. 1 Cor: 13.12,
We see him now through a Glass darkly, then face to face, apprehensively
according to our capacity, not comprehensively according to his immensity and
greatness.

V. 9 Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of
God.

Quest. What is meant by peacemakers?

Answ. Not only those who interpose or come betwixt persons at ods, but also
show themselves desirous of peace; and in order thereto, have their affections
composed to peace, themselves having first obtained peace from God, Rom: 5.1,
Two things, first the persons pronounced blessed, viz. peacemakers and such as
earnestly follow peace.

2 The Reason, For they shall be called the Children of God, what ever the
World account them, they are most like to God. In this World God calls them his
Children though the World slight them, and in the World to come they shall be
called, that is, publicly manifested to be, the Children of God.

Obs. Persons that interpose to set others at peace, and diligently follow
peace themselves are blessed persons.

Reas. 1. Because this peaceable disposition whereby we are thus peaceably
affected, flows from that peace persons have inwardly in their own hearts; for
as you see impure spirits are very unpeaceable, as devils and wicked men, Rom:
3.17, so holy men are very peaceable, as being the fruit of Christ's atonement,
Ephesians, 2.13, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will toward men,
Luke 2.14, q: d: This was one fruit of Christ's Death, to stablish peace among
men.

2 Because peacemakers are little accepted among men, for those who undertake
the Task of making peace sometimes they provoke one side, Exodus: 2.13, Moses
reproving the Israelite that wronged his fellow, presently that person shows
his spleen, Who made thee a Judge over us? Will thou kill me as thou did the
Egyptian? Sometimes peacemakers provoke both sides, that both sides have such
persons, hence many will not take upon them that office being so thankless:
Christ therefore pronounces such persons blessed, and therefore would have us
to go on in this duty.

Cautions.
We are not to make sinful agreements or peace-makings, Nehem: 5.6, 7, 8, as
Jehu to Jehoram, What peace so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel are
many? 1 Kings 9.22, Who will stand up with me against the evil doers? Who will
take my part against the workers of iniquity? Psalm 94.16, 2 The endeavors of
Christians will not always take effect to obtain peace, Psalm 120.5, 6, 7,
Matthew: 10.34,

Use. Exhortion, 1. To peacemaking, 2 To peace.

Follow peacemaking, and to put an end to Divisions betwixt man and man;
famous was Abraham who set all the Herdsmen at one, by proffering to take the
left hand or right, Gen: 13.8,

Means to peacemaking.
1 By Exhortations breed in persons an eager desire after peace, 1 By letting
them see the mischief of strife, Prove: 17.14, The beginning of strife is as
when one lets out Water, therefore leave off strife before it be meddled with.
A similitude from those who digging away the dam or bank of a River, the Waters
flow out on every side, so that there is no way either to call back them that
are gone out, or keep in those that yet are not gone out. See it in Abimelech
and the men of Sechem, who falling at odds they destroyed one another, Judges
9.23, If ye bite and devour one another, as so many Dogs, take heed ye be not
destroyed one of another, Gal: 5.15, See the woeful end of strife, James 3.16,
There Is confusion and every evil work. Know thou not that it will be
bitterness in the end?

2 It Is honorable to be at peace, Prove: 20.3, It Is an honor to a man to cease
from strife. 1 Samuel, 10.27, It was Readiness honor when children of Belial despised
him and brought him no presents that he held his peace. As one said to Luther,
Vince animos iramque tuam qui caetera vincis.

2 For all Societies and Cities to choose prudent holy men to make peace betwixt
man and man. Then would Courts of Justice have little to do: whereto if there
were the authority of a Prince to interpose to cause persons to stand to just
arbitrations it will be of the more force, and this practice well becomes
Magistrates in Cities, Elders in Churches. 1 Cor: 6.6, 7,

3 Make Propositions that may meet in the midst, that neither party may have
their whole desire in litigious cases, with this Exception that it be not in
matters of Religion: here we can abate nothing, we cannot bend the faith to
politic ends. This was Jeroboam's wickedness, who altered the time and place
of worship to accommodate his subjects.

2 Exhortation to peace. As we should make peace among persons at difference,
so should we, as much as in us lies, be at peace with all men, Romans 12.18. The
Apostle is full of exhortations herein, 1 Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.11. Col. 3.17.
We are called to peace; God calls to it, who then calls to contention save
Satan?

Means to peace.
1 Mortify your lusts, James 4.1. Whence come wars, come they not of your
lusts? The sea would be calm were it not for strong winds, so would your
hearts were it not for your lusts; now the sins to be mortified are, 1 pride,
Prove. 13.10. 2 tale-bearing, Prove. 26.20, 21. 3 unrighteousness, Prove. 15.27. 4
provoking speeches, Gal. 5.26. 5 immoderate meditation of wrongs we have
suffered. 6 hatred, Prove. 10.12. 7 forcing of wrath, Prove. 30.33. 8 Let every
one do his duty in that kind of life to which God has called him, let him not
lift up himself above others, nor reprehend the works of others and praise his
own as better, but let one serve another by love. Luth. Tom. 4.167. 9 Practice
Christian moderation in remitting of your right for peace sake, Phil. 4.4. the
word is epieikeia, which signifies a yielding of our right.

2 Study peace, 1 These. 4.11. The Apostle bids the Thessalonians to study to be
quiet. We study books, arts, sciences, but this is an excellent study. Sit down
and think this man and I are at ods, how should I make up the matter? This is
the pursuing of peace, Psalm. 34.14. Seek peace and pursue it.

3 Practice Christian kindness, as giving, lending, etc. One end why God gives
us the things of this life, is that we may maintain peace with them. Every man
is a friend to him that gives gifts, Prove. 19.6. Jacob took off a malice of
twenty years standing by a gift. Gifts are compared to precious stones, Prove.
17.8. so that as persons that wear precious stones do often delight to look upon
them, so do such persons look upon gifts. Also mutual entertainments, mutual
visitings, mutual counsellings and comfortings.

4 Where you are damnified put up small wrongs, Mat. 17.26, 27. though Christ
were free from paying tribute, yet that he might not offend, he bids Peter pay
a piece of money for tribute.

Where you have damnified others, give satisfaction for the least wrong, Jacob,
Genesis 31.39. for peace sake gave satisfaction to Laban for that which was torn
of beasts, or stolen by day and night.

5 In case of offense with any man, proffer reconciliation both in your
speeches and cariages. Imitate the Lord, who, though the person offended, yet
sought to us, 2 Cor. 5.19. As when an house is on fire every man brings water
to quench it, so let us meet one another in the midst to quench the fire of
contention, Luke 12.58. Agree with thine adversary whiles thou art in the way
with him.

6 Beware of stigmatizing one another with nick names; take heed lest ye put
off the name of Christ from those that have put on Christ, Gal 3.28. by calling
them Puritans, Sectaries, Anabaptists. If every natural body no less desire its
own unity then its being, why should not the mystical body in like manner?

7 Get the peace of Christ to rule in your hearts, Col. 3.17. Creatures of a
meek and peaceable nature, though you use them never so harshly, yet are they
peaceable, because they have principles of meekness and patience in them,
whereas creatures of fierce natures, as Lions and Wolves, though you use them
never so gently yet will they be fierce, because they have such principles: so
wicked men have not known the way of peace, Romans 3.17. but godly men usually
are of peaceable spirits, because the peace of God rules in their hearts.

Motives to Peace.
1 Peace is a blessing that comprehends all blessings under it, Psalm 29.1^.
The Lord will give his people the blessing of peace. What is our joy but the
peace of our consciences? What is our health but the peace of our humors? If a
man were in heaven and could not have it in peace, it would not be comfortable.
Everlasting peace is part of our joy in Heaven.

2 That which is the excellentest life every one desires to live. Such is a
life of peace, not only in that the most flourishing Commonwealths have lived
it, but God and Angels: that which is the worst life devils and wicked men
live, such is a lite of contention. Hence Christ the Prince of peace lived this
life; called the Prince of Peace, Esai 9.6. gave it for a legacy to his
Disciples, John 14.27. Esai 11.6, 7, 8.

3 The universal peace that is among all creatures. The heavenly bodies, Sun,
Moon and Stars keep their course; the Sea keeps within the girdle of the
Sands and does not invade the earth; the Winds blow not together but
successively; the contrary qualities in the world, heat and cold, drought and
moisture, are so tempered together, that like musical discords they make a
perfect harmony: Woods of trees, fields of corn, grow without molesting one
another, creatures not only of the same kind but of different kind feed
peaceably one by another. If peace be among all bodies, let it be much more
among the mystical body of Christ, Psalm 133.1. How good a thing is it for
brethren to dwell together in unity.

4 The common enemy should set us at peace; I mean the Popish and Prelatical
combinations. So that the question is not so much, what kind of government we
shall have in Protestant Churches, but whether we shall have any Protestant
Church at all? At the Battle of Lepanto when there was great differences and
animosities betwixt the three generals, Don John and Venereus and the third
general, yet when the battle came to be fought they united against the Turk and
got a mighty victory against his navy, the like whereof has hardly been heard
of. Phil. 1.20. Jude 3. contend for the common salvation.

5 Herein consists the form of charity, not in this, that we are all of one
mind, for that is kept for heaven, but that we are peaceably affected in our
hearts, and wish well one to another. When Luther had vented some hard speeches
against Calvin, says he, though Luther count me a dog, yea a devil, yet I Will
count him a famous servant of God.

6 The smalness of matters which causes a breach of peace: many are as angry
for rejecting their opinions as Jonah was for his gourd. I know the smallest
thing in Religion ought to be made conscience of, yet those points without the
knowledge whereof many have come to heaven, though they may obstruct public
communion, yet know I no cause why they should hinder peace and private
communion among those that fear God. Learn we of the Romish Churches (if it be
expedient and lawful so to call them) among which there are controversies of
far more moment, viz. of the infallible judge in all points, of the Christian
faith; the Spanish and Italian Churches defend the Pope to be the supreme
judge, affirming him so to be inspired with the spirit of truth that in all his
decrees and determinations he cannot err, on the other side the French cry him
out of his infallible chair, and conclude him subject to error, and deposable
by a general counsel; yet in this brawling there is no universal breaking of
communion, why then should not private communion be granted among those that
fear God?

7 The multiplicity of relations that ties Christians to peace, worship of the
same God, profession of the same faith, expectation of the same hope, suffering
for the same cause, begotten by the same word, children of the same father,
have the same comfort of love, the same fellowship of the Spirit. Phil. 2.1.

8 The benefits that come by it, 1 The kingdom of God consists in it, Romans
14.17. Some Christians thought that others could not come to heaven if they did
not eat such meats as they, but Paul tells them, The kingdom of God consists
not in meat and drink, but in righteousness and peace, and joy of the holy
Ghost. 2 It Is the way to a long and an happy life, 1 Pet. 3.11. 3 The fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace, Jam. 3.21. q. d the crop of grace and glory is
not reaped of proud and contentious persons, of such as make rents in Churches,
and would be many masters, of which he speaks, v. 1. nor of those who boasting
of themselves and their opinions would alone seem to be wise; but it will be
reaped of peaceable Christians, who being of a peaceable spirit themselves
endeavor to make peace among others, and sow the seed of peaceable discourses
in order thereto.

4 By peace we resemble God, for when in God there are three subsistences, yet
there is one will, one love, and one consent, whereas in contention weresemble
the Babel builders.

5. Peace is the way to have the presence of God with us, 2 Cor. 13.11. Live in
peace and the God of love and peace shall be with you. Some creatures are by
artificial means invited, as Pigeons by looking glasses, and Larkes by the
resemblance of the Sun in a looking glass, by peace the God of peace is
invited, who unites those one to another that are united to him, John 17.21.

I Will conclude with Bernards Distich Nullum turbavi, discordes pacificavi:
Laesus sustinui, nec mihi complacui.

6 The peaceable carriage of you to others will cause others to carry peaceably
to you, Judge. 8.3. Gideon peaceably answering the men of Ephraim (who did
unjustly in proud wrath chide him) their spirits abated toward him.

For they shall be called the children of God] that is, they who evidence their
Christianity (out of conscience of the command) by stablishing peace among them
with whom they live, are and ought to be acknowledged among men as regenerate,
and thereupon called Gods children: 1 They are his children in likeness; as God
sent his Son into the world to make peace, 2 Cor. 5.19. so do they. 2 They are
like Christ, who being God and man made peace with the blood of his cross, Ephesians.
2.14. Col. 1.20. and took away all enmity betwixt God and us.

3 They shall be called the children of God in heaven, though sometimes in this
world they are not seen nor acknowledged; 1 John 3.1.

4 They shall be so called, because having first made peace with God, they,
feeling the sweetness of it, make peace with men.

Ob. But how can such as make peace with men be called Gods children, seeing we
find many carnal men good arbitrators and make-peaces among neighbors?

Ans. 1 Such persons do it not out of conscience of the command, but either out
of vain glory, or to keep themselves employed in business, and so to keep off
their consciences, or at most out of a principle of good neighborhood, whereas
Gods children do it from the command.

2 They make peace, not out of the sense of inward peace they have with God,
but out of the beneficial concernment of neighbourly peace.

3 Carnal men making peace, it is usual in matters of claim betwixt man in meum
and tuum, but peacemakers to whom the promise belongs make peace where there
are heart boylings, and sinister conceptions, and heart grudges betwixt man and
man

4 Carnal peace makers are stirred up to do what they do upon solicitations,
and entreaties; but those to whom the promise is made, are stirred up to their
duty by the belief of the promise, and it is done many times in secret where no
man knows what they aim at, but themselves know that they aim at a right
understanding betwixt neighbor and neighbor, Christian and Christian in order
to peace.

Use. Exhort to peacemaking, that this promise may belong to you, as God is
called the God of peace, Romans 16.20. 1 Cor. 14 33.2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 4.9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Heb. 13.20. So by endeavoring after peace you
shall be like unto him.

V. 10. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

In this verse 3 things, 1 The suffering, its persecution. 2 The cause, not for
wickedness, but for righteousness sake. 3 The crown, theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.

Quest. What is meant by righteousness?

Answ. Neither universal or paticular morral righteousness, for many of the
heathens suffered for honest interests, and for righteous causes, but spiritual
righteousness is here meant, as for the profession of their faith, for
conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 2.19. This is thank worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God suffer wrongfully and endure grief: So that
righteousness signifies obedience to all the commands of God. Here is
inrightment to blessedness, when we will rather suffer then transgress the
commandment of God.

Observe. They that are persecuted for Christ, and his cause and commandments,
are blessed persons. Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation,
for when he is tried he shall receive the crown.

For Application. 1 Be exhorted to suffer persecution,

1 For Christ's sake, 1 Hereby thou will prove thy soundness of heart, Dan:
3.17, 18, Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego, and Daniel cap. 6, showed their
sincerity herein: unsound men will not suffer Persecution, Gal: 6.12, The
denying of Circumcision was the Object of Persecution, hence the false Teachers
would have the Galatians circumcised lest they should suffer Persecution,
Matthew: 13.21. See it in the Stony Ground.

2 This is the principal difficulty in Christianity, to witness truth before
Kings, Psalm 119.46, and Councils, Matthew: 10.17, To resist to Blood, Heb: 12.4,
and not to love our Lives so much as our Duty to God, Luke 14.26, 27, Rev:
12.11, 17,

3 In all Persecutions for Christ thou shall have wisdom to answer the
Persecutour, Luke 21.15, I Will give you a Mouth and a Tongue, that your
Adversaries shall not be able to gainsay. Acts 6.10, They that reasoned against
Stephen, were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit in Stephen.

4 Thou shall have strength to overcome the Persecutours, 1 John 4.4, Greater
is he that is in you than he that is in the World. Isai 43.1, 2, When thou goes
through fire and water the Lord will be with thee. Rom: 8.37, We are more than
Conquerours. How? We are sure of Victory before we fight. 1 Cor: 10.13,

5 There Is a day coming when God will reckon with all Persecutours, Psalm 9.12,
When he makes inquisition for Blood he remembereth them. God will inquire who
slew Hooper, Bradford, etc. who articled against such and such, who brought
them before Ecclesiastical Courts, High-Commissions, Committees, Assizes,
Sessions, Psalm 12.5, For the sighing of the Prisoner will I arise, 2 Thessalonians:
1.6,

6 A great deal of good comes to Christians by suffering Persecution. 1 Hereby
affections come to be loosened from the World, and to be fastened upon God,
Psalm 142.4, 5,

2 Christians formerly loosened one from another, come now to be fastened. The
Children of one Father that fall out among themselves are soon united against a
common Enemy.

3 Persecutions tend to the furtherance of the Gospel, Phil: 1.12, 1 By
propagation or spreading of the truth. Upon Stephen his Persecution many of the
Brethren preached the Word of God far and near, Acts 11.19, and the hand of the
Lord was with them, v. 21, to convert many.

2 By confirmation of those who are weak in faith, Phil: 1.12, Many of the
Brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds are much more bold to speak
the Word without fear.

3 Hereby the World sees that God has Worshippers who do not cleave unto him
for worldly advantage: Whiles for the hope of Israel they are bound with
Chains, Acts 28.20, and will not accept of Deliverance out of most painful
sufferings in hope of a better Resurrection, Heb: 11.35,

7 Consider the cause for which thou suffer, set down 1 By the goodness of
it, Acts 5.41, Rejoicing they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name,
Rom: 8.36, For thy sake we are killed all the day long. Revel 1.9, John was in
the Isle of Patmos for the Word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.
This cause is more worth than thousands of my Life.

2 By the clearness. It is not wrapped up in consequences, and must have
Sophisters to fetch it out, but it is clear, Dan: 3.16, the three Children said,
O Nebuchadnezzar we are not careful to answer thee in this O King, as if he
should say, We desire no clearer cause to lose our Blood in. It Is a comfort in
suffering clearly to see our way.

3 By the fewness of Witnesses and multitudes of Adversaries, 2 Timothy: 1.15,
4.16, when Paul came to witness before Nero all those of Asia forsook him at
his first Answer.

8 Consider the woeful condition that will befall Persecutours,

1 Their strokes and malice falls on Christ, Zach: 2.8, He that touches you
touches the Apple of mine Eye. Acts 9.6. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

2 They have extreme horror of conscience, Jer: 20.2, 3, Pashur was a
Persecutour, he smote Jeremiah and put him in the Stocks, and God threatens to
make him a terror to himself and to all his friends. Zedekiah who smote
Micaiah, 2 Kings 22.24, in a day of trouble goes from chamber to chamber to
hide himself. Herod was tormented with John's death.

3 Such persons as persecute have upon them at present an evident token of
perdition, as you that suffer persecution have of salvation, Phil: 1.28,

4 The people of God every where are imploring God against Persecutors, Luke
18.7, Shall not God avenge his own clect that cry unto him daily? I tell you,
he will avenge them and that right speedily. Herod might have lived long had it
not been that the Church was imploring God against him, Acts 12.5, Lam: 5.59,
60, 61, etc.

5 Persecutors come to fearful ends, Acts 12.23. Herod was eaten up of worms,
Jezabel thrown out of a window and eaten up of dogs, why? She slew the Prophets
of God, Revel. 6.9, 10, 11.

6 They are branded with infamy to posterity, 2 Ti. 4.14. Alexander the
Coppersmith did me much evil and greatly withstood my words. Elimas, Acts
13.10. there is present information given among the godly who persecute.

7 All godly men rejoice at the downfall of persecutors; the Jews teasted when
Haman was hanged. When the wicked perish there is shouting, Prove. 11.10. Let
not this joy be out of personal hatred, but because justice is glorified, the
Church delivered, and Satan's kingdom weakened.

9 Submit to the providence of God in all persecutions, and look to it, for, 1
If the hairs of our heads are noted by God, much more our lives, Matthew. 10.29,
30. 2 Persecutours cannot touch the soul, Matthew. 10.28. 3 Our times, Eberties,
estates are not in the hands of persecutors, but in Gods hand, Psalm. 31.13, 14,
15.83.4.5. Revel. 2.10. for it is God gives us our cup to drink, John 18.11. as
mastiff dogs fall upon men when their chain is unloosed, so do wicked men upon
Saints when God unlooses his cham of providence.

4 As in active obedience we labor that what we do may please God; so in
passive obedience endeavor that what God does may please us, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.
Behold here I am, let him do to me as seems him good. Mark 14.36. Take away
this cup from me, nevertheless not my will but thine be done, 1 Samuel 3.17. It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

5 In all persecutions and sufferings commit thy soul to God, desire him to
take care of that, so Christ, Luke 23.46. Father into thy hands I commit my
spirit, so Stephen, Acts 7.59. As in times of extremity we commit our jewels
into the hands of trusty friends; when houses are on fire and there are
combustions, men have principal respects to their jewels and gold, oh that I
could save that. The worst persecutors can do is to take away life, when the
body dies it is like the setting of the Sun, which in short time rises again.
Therefore in all persecutions commit your soul to God in welldoing, 1 Pet.
4.19. as into the hands of a father. We read of many deceits in Scripture, but
we never read of a father that beguiled his child. We must also commit our
bodies and goods to God, but we must be at a point with these, if God will have
them, but we must not be so with our souls.

6 Beware of indirect means of escaping that persecution which providence casts
thee into. In particular, beware of cowardliness, compliancy to great friends
and kindred, base shisting tricks and distinctions, gluedness of heart to
earthly things, 2 Timothy 4.16. Imitate Antipas who held the faith, though sure to
die for it, Revel. 2.13.

7 Consider that all second causes are only instruments in the hand of God.
The wicked are called Gods sword, Psalm 17.13. the staff in their hand is Gods
indignation, Esai 10.5, 6. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the
robbers? did not the Lord? Esai 42.24, 25. 2 Samuel 16.12.

2 Use. Consolation. In sufferings and persecutions you have a kingdom.

1 That as such sufferings abound, so shall consolations abound, 2 Cor. 1.5. so
that what ever they lose, they have an hundred fold with persecutions, Mark
10.29, 30.

2 It Is no new thing to be persecuted. Abel was persecuted of Cain, 1 John
4.12. Isaac of Ishmael, Gal. 4.29. As he that was born after the flesh
persecuted him that was born after the spirit, so it is now, yea, whosoever
will live godly, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. so that we are not to
count fiery trial a strange thing, 1 Pet. 4.12. Brother shall persecute
brother, Matthew. 10.21. and three shall persecute two in the same family, Matthew.
10.35.

3 In the greatest violence persecutors can inflict, believers shall not be
forsaken of God, 2 Cor. 4.9. persecuted, but not forsaken, not tempted above
strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. All men (says Paul) forsook me, but
the Lord stood with me, when he came before Nero that Lion. Matthew. 10.17. I Will
give you a mouth that all your adversaries shall not be able to resist.

4 God is wont to deliver his people from persecuting hands. Persecutions befe^
Paul at Iconium, Lystra and Derbe, but out of them all the Lord delivered him,
2 Timothy 3.11. God delivers, 1 Sometimes by setting one wicked man against
another, Acts 23.6, 7, 8. the Pharisees contended against the Sadduces for the
resurrection, and so took Paul's part. 2 Sometimes by making the earth to help
the woman, Revel. 12.16. 3 Sometimes by providing some City of resuge, Matthew.
10.23. If they persecute you in one City stye to another. 4 Sometimes by death,
when the death of his Saints shall set forth Gods glory, John 21.18.

Means to suffer persecution.
1 Get assurance of pardon; Guilt makes a man cowardly. What made Paul so to
triumph? Romans 8.35. Why he had assurance of pardon, v. 38, 39. I am persuaded
neither life nor death shall separate me from the love of God.

2 Pray and endeavor for a patient frame of heart. When great troubles and an
impatient heart meet, how hardly are troubles born? when Christ had told them
they must be betrayed by brethren, and friends, and be hated of all, he bids
them possess their souls in patience, Luke 21.17, 18, 19. strengthened unto all
patience, Col. 1.11. that is to patience in all things. Hence be contented to
be emptied from vessel to vessel; you know how to live with your estates, but
learn how to live without them, Phil. 4.12, 13.

3 Look that the cause you suffer for be good, 1 Pet. 4.16. If any man suffer
as a Christian let him not be ashamed.

4 Strive not to meddle with much of other men's estates, no more then for mere
necessity, so that if we lose for Christ we our selves alone may be losers; for
such debts in persecuting times will be apt to contract disquiet.

5 Go in Gods strength. Peter going in his own strength came to deny Christ,
Mark 14.29, 30, 31. how came Paul to stand when others sh^unk? God stood with
him and strengthened him, 2 Timothy 4.17.

6 Get clearness of light. When a man comes to suffer he will not go a jot
beyond that he has clear light for, H^b. 10.34. after they were illuminated
they endured a great sight of affliction. Though the heart be upright and cause
good, yet the person suffers fearfully for want of (...).

7 Look upon God in his greatness, and so shall you not fear men how great
soever, Psalm 27.1. The Lord is my light and salvation, whom shall I fear? Mat.
10.28 F^^r him that is able to cast soul and body in to hell fi^e. (...)
51.12.13 Wheart thou that art afraid of a man th^^ shall are, and (...) the
Lord thy maker? Heb. 11.27. Moses endured, and was not afraid of the wrath of
the king, for he looked upon him that was invisible.

8 Beware of the threats and flatteries of persecutors. Be not scared with
their threats, Dan. 3.16. when they threaten fiery furnaces, Lions dens, nor
yet allured with their flatteries, Dan. 11.32.

9 Be content to live in a low condition. Many will comply to any thing because
their spirits are so great they must live in such an height: low conditions are
crosses that must be taken up as well as other crosses, Luke 14.26, 27.

10 Either you must suffer with men for confessing truth, or with God for
denying it: If it be the will of God its better that you suffer for well doing
then for evil doing, 1 Pet. 3.17.

11 Get a holy resolution to choose persecution or any other affliction rather
then to sin against thy conscience, Job 36.21. Take heed, regard not iniquity,
for this have thou chosen rather then affliction.

12 When thou choosest persecution, rather then to sin against God the kingdom
of heaven is thine, as in the text. Men's minds are apt to be broken and cast
down in persecutions, hence Christ promises a kingdom, Matthew. 19.29. Hence let
us not under persecution bewail our condition, as if it were most miserable,
seeing this kingdom will be yours.

V. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.

V. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for
so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

Here are 4 things considerable; 1 The sufferings, revilings, set down by two
aggravations, 1 Saying all manner of evil against you. 2 Saying it falsely.

2 The cause, for Christ his sake.

3 The affections Christians must have under these sufferings, viz. they must
rejoice and be exceeding glad.

4 The grounds of this affection of joy, which are two,

1 The greatness of the reward in heaven.

2 Their conformity herein, to the Prophets and other holy servants of God.

1 The sufferings, which are revilings.

Obs. The people of God in this present life are exposed to the worst and most
false revilings for Christ's sake, Luke 6.22. They shall reproach you, and cast
out your name as evil, for the son of man's sake.

Reas. 1 From that enmity that is betwixt the seed of the woman and the seed of
the Serpent, Genesis 3.15.

2 Because the Saints do not suite themselves to the manners and customs of
the world, but by a contrary course condemn the wicked manners of the world;
hence the world, to justify themselves and to condemn Gods people, they load
them with reproaches, John 15.19 If ye were of the world the world would love
its own, but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you.

3 Because wicked men have a principle of hatred against Christians, Matthew.
10.22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake, Prove. 26.28. A lying
tongue hates those that are afflicted by it.

Use. Be not discouraged under revilings, seeing it is for the cause of Christ,
Heb. 13.13. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his
reproach. That is, be not ashamed if you be reproachfully cast out of cities,
seeing ye are reproached for Christ. He calls cities by the name of camp or
tent because many cities begun from tents, and the castles in them are called
Castra or Tents.

1 If those that take up reproaches against holy men shall not rest in heaven,
Psalm. 15.3. What shall become of them that raise them. Such were there in
Ter^ullians time, Apol. cap. 7. we are called most wicked from the Sacrament of
infant killing and the eating of them, and the incest we commit after the
banquet, that dogs throw down the lights, to wit that they may procure a
meeting of knaves and whores together, by the immodesty of darkness and lusts,
to whom Tertullian says, find it out if ye believe it, or do not believe that
which you have not found out -- who ever heard any such infant crying? who ever
unlockt the cruel mouths of these Cyclops and Sirens to the Judge? who has
found out some unclean footsteps in his Wife? who when he had found out such
wickedness has concealed them? Minucius Faelix in his Octavius, The Heathens
thought that Christians did devour Infants, make incestuous Banquets, that they
worshipped an Asses head, p. 118, for ye killed the Just One, and before him
his Prophets, and now them that place their hope in him, and ye despise the
Creator of all things that sent him, cursing them in your Synagogues that
believe on him, for ye have no power to kill them because of them who at
present govern. Justin Martyr against Triph. p. 181. After ye had killed that
Just One, by whose stripes was healing to them that go to him by the Father,
when ye knew he was risen from the dead and ascended into Heaven, you were so
far from repenting of your evils, that you sent choice men from Jerusalem into
all the earth, saying, The Heresy of the Christians was to acknowledge no God,
scattering those words against us, which all that know us not boast of,
therefore ye are not only the cause of iniquity to your selves, but also
altogether to other mortals. Justin^bid.

2 Revilers do but after their kind. They are called Devils, 1 Timothy, 3.6, 2 Timothy, 3.3, also Dogs, Psalm 59.6, now we wonder not at Dogs snarling.

3 Look upon Revile^^^^ as a just punishment from God, though unjust from (...)
2 Samuel, 16.10, The Lord has bid Shi^^^ to ^^se David.

1 God inflicts them, because we do not that good to men we should do.

2 Because we make little conscience of sinning against God in secret.

3 Because we have so little care of the honor of God, 1 Samuel, 2.30, hence God
has no care of our name.

4 Because we have so little care to preserve the good names of others, Matthew,
7.2,

4 Such Revilements as are cast upon thee were cast upon Christ, and upon the
godly. For Christ he was called a Drunkard, a Glutton, Matthew, 11.19, said to
cast out Devils by Beelzebub, Matthew, 12.24, accused as a Blasphemer, Matthew,
26.65, looked upon as a Madman by his Friend, Mark 3.21, railed upon, Mark
15.29, called a Perverter of the Nations, forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar,
Luke 23.2, that he was a Samaritan and had a Devil, John 8.48,

Yea Gods people have been so reproached, Psalm 44.13, 14, 16, Thou make us a
reproach, a scorn, a by word, a shaking of the head. David was the Song of the
Drunkards, Psalm 69.11, 12, yea, he became a Proverb to them. Christians were
counted Turners of the World upside down, Acts 17.6, Paul was counted a
pestilent Fellow, and a Mover of Sedition, and not counted worthy to live, Acts
22.24 5,

Come we to the second thing, the affections Christians ought to have under
Revilings, Rejoice and be exceeding glad.

Obser. Christians should be so far from being dejected under wicked Revilings
for Christ, that they have cause to rejoice and be glad.

1 Because all Revilings add to their Crown: even when we are asleep and are
not aware of it, yea when we know not of it they add to our Crown, Luke 6.23,
Blessed are you when men shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil,
rejoice you in that day, and leap for joy, for behold your Reward is great in
(...),

2 Because such persons so reproached when Christ shall appear in glory shall
be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Peter 4.13, Rom, 8.17,

3 Because there is a Day coming, when all Reproaches shall be wiped off, Isai
66.5, Your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my sake, said, Let
the Lord be glorified, but he shall appear for your joy. James 5.9,

4 In all Reproaches you have the Spirit of Glory and of God resting on you, 1
Peter 4.14, as if he should say, Why do you not rejoice in your Reproaches, you
have great cause: why? the Spirit of Power and of Glory (as it is supposed to be
the best Reading) that glorious Spirt of God will not forsake, but will abide
with you, yea will rest upon you.

5 Either thou art reproached deservedly or undeservedly; if deservedly, it is
not a Reproach but a Judgment; if undeservedly, why should thou blush for
another man's sin?

Use. For Application, learn to rejoice in all Reproaches and other hardships
that shall come upon you for Christ. Your Glory in Heaven is not uncertain, for
Christ then would not bid you rejoice in it: show your joy herein by your words
and gestures, and by your cheerful walking, James 1.2, Rom, 5.2, Acts 5.41,

The last is the Ground of this Affection of Joy, because they are said to be
blessed, and because their Reward in Heaven is great.

Obser. The Saints of God are happy under all manner of Revilements for Christ.

1 Happy in this Life, 1 Because they have the rejoicing of a good Conscience,
Acts 23.1, 2, 3, Acts 24.5, 6, when there were railing Accusations against him,
yet his Conscience could witness that he walked uprightly, v. 16,

2 Sooner or later God will clear their innocence, as we see in Joseph's case,
and in David's, upon whom the Courtiers in Readiness Court cast Reproaches, yet he
died in honor, 1 Chronicles, 29, It Is with the name of a Christian as with the Sun,
which is sometimes hindered from our sight by Clouds and Eclipses, but
recovering a clear Sky shines the more bright; so Reproaches sometimes cloud
our names, but in a while they are dispelled by the upright walking of Saints,
Isai 51.7, 8, Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their
revilings. Why? For the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm
shall eat them as Wood, that is, all their Reproaches will insensibly by
degrees wear away.

3 The Revilings and Wrongs done to Gods people God takes them as done to
himself, 2 Kings 19.16, Hear the words of Sennacherib, who has sent Rabshakeh
to blaspheme the living God. Also v. 22, 23, Whom have thou reproached and
blasphemed? even the holy one of Israel; yet Rabshakeh's Reproaches were
against Gods people, Acts 9, Rom, 15.3,

2 They are happy in the Life to come, because their Reward is great in Heaven.
He means not the Reward of Merit but of Grace; as if a King should give ten
thousand pound a year for an hours service. What I promise to give a man that
is his reward, though his service do not equal it: as if I promise a man an
hundred pound for making me a pair of gloves. Now in merit there must be a
proportion betwixt the work and wages, for the recompense of merit is an act of
righteousness, now in all righteousness there must be equality; when reward is
promised to Gods children it is not to establish merit, but to let Saints see
that their labor will not be in vain.

Reasons against merit.
1 God needs not any of our services, nor gets no benefit by them, Job 22.3.
Can a man be profitable to God? Job 35.7, 8. If thou be righteous what give
thou to him, or what receives he of thine hand? Acts 17.25. He is not
worshipped with men's hands as though he needed any thing.

2 When we have done what we can, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10.

3 All good works are the workings of God in us; and therefore reward is not
due to our own works, but God crowns his own grace in us, so that Deus est
debtor noster, non ex commisso, but promisso, as Aug. says, God is our
debtor, not for any thing done by us, but for his promise, Matthew. 10.42. So he
promises to reward a cup of cold water given to a disciple.

4 There is no proportion betwixt our sufferings and the crown of glory, Romans
8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. we ought to take heed herein, because the Papists use it
to destroy grace.

Seeing then there is a reward in heaven, let us endure reproaches: we endure
bitter Physic and sharp cutting in hope of long health; let us endure
reproaches and other sufferings in hope of glory, Heb. 10.34.

Use. Caution Render not reviling for reviling; imitate Christ, 1 Pet. 2.23.
and Paul 1 Cor. 4.12. being reviled we bless. Yea he took pleasure in
reproaches, 2 Cor. 12.10. Let us look to the reward in heaven, as Christ did,
Heb. 12.1, 2.

3 Things may comfort under these;

1 That our heart is well affected to every man, yea even such as rail against
us, Matthew. 5.44.

2 That in private prayer we can pray for such reproaches, Psalm. 109.3, 4.

3 That thou have a God to make thy complaint unto in all revilings, as
Nehemiah did, Nehem. 4.3, 4.

4 Your great reward in heaven.

2 Exhortation. Carry patiently under revilings, for else;

1 Thou will disturb thine own peace.

2 Hereby thou will by an impatient frame of spirit discover so much evil as
may be a just cause of revilement.

3 By impatiency herein we may make others think us to be guilty.

4 By reviling again you harden others in their reviling.

5 You show great weakness, to think so as if there were no other means to
deliver you from an ill name, but by an ill tongue, Psalm. 38.12.13. When David's
enemies spoke mischievous things against him, he was a man that is both deaf
and dumb, yet must we not so neglect our names, that we should neglect the
crimes falsely objected to us, and confirm the slanderers, but we must say, I
have not a Devil, also, If I have spoke evil, bear witness of the evil. He that
neglects his name is cruel; a good conscience is necessary for us before God,
a good name before our neighbor, Luth.

Ob. But I am guiltless and innocent, and they reproach me falsely.

Ans. The more false the things are, the more cause thou have to rejoice: if
they were true thou had cause to be confounded.

For so persecuted they the Prophets] Here Is the second ground of rejoicing.
It Is no otherwise with you then with the ancient Prophets of God, whom they
persecuted with reproaches, as David, Psalm. 31.11. Who was a reproach among his
neighbors. Psalm. 41.10. Mine enemies reproach me, saying, Where is thy God? So
strange were his reproaches, that his heart was as it were broken with them,
Psalm. 69.20. So Jeremy cap. 20 10. I have heard the defaming of many, Report,
say they, and we will report it. Nay it has generally been the lot of true
Prophets to be persecuted, Matthew. 23.34. So that we may say Which of the
Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? W^^ness Eliah, Micaiah, Amos c.
7.13. Zachary, Matthew. 23.35, 36. Yea the Disciples, Matthew. 10.23. So that we
may ^^y, Gal. 4.29. As he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit. So it is now. Gal. 4.29.

V. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth, but if the salt have lost its savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be
cast out and to be trodden under foot of men.

Ye are the Salt of the Earth] Quest. Does Christ call Ministers the Salt of
the earth, or all believers?

Ans. Christ calls believers, whether preachers or others, the Salt of the
earth, 1 Because Christ not only taught the twelve but all the disciples; 2
Because it is not appropriated unto preachers alone, but unto all believers to
season others with grace, for not only preachers but all believers have the
means of seasoning others; as 1 Savoury speeches, Col. 4.6. Let your speech be
always with grace powdered with salt. 2 Savoury examples, Luke 14. ult. Have
salt in your selves and peace one with another; that is, as you live together
in peace, so let there be savoury and holy examples: earth is put for the
inhabitants of the earth by a Metonymie; salt for them that do the duty of
salt, by a Metaphor.

But if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned] It is
good for nothing, no not so much as for the dunghill, because it causes
barrenness, as if Christ should say, If other men be unsavory, you may season
them, but if you be unsavory who shall season you?

Use. To apply this see, 1 How unsavory man's nature is, unless it be seasoned
by the word, Psalm. 14.3. men by nature are altogether become stinking, their
throats are like open sepulchers, Romans 3.13. Like putrified flesh to man's taste.

2 See the duty of Christians, which is to season others. This is done, 1 By
the word, which like unto salt gives relish Psalm 119.9. Wherewith all shall a
young man cleanse his way? by taking heed unto thy word.

2 By a holy and blameless conversation. Scandalous practices make persons to
stink, Genesis 34.30. Simeon and Levi, by their slaying the Sichemites, made Jacob
to stink among the inhabitants of the land. Holy practices insensibly gain
others, 1 Pet. 3.1. Wives be subject to your husbands, that if any obey not the
word, they may be won by the conversation of their wives: let no man be led
with vain glory because of present hearers, let us live blamelesly among men,
and speak nothing for trifling sake, but being much silent to answer to what is
needful, let us avoid wicked suspicions of others concerning us, and our
received opinion of them is to be tried envy not any man who is dearly loved
before others Just. Mart. ad Zenam and Serenum. p. 390. Let no worldly
conference flow from us, but that which fits us for virtue. Our neighbor
speaking let us not laugh at him, nor hinder him, until by our silence he be
ashamed and be silent, Ibid. p. 391, 392.

2 Exhortation to Christians to be like unto salt. 1 As salt draws out
putrefying humors out of meat, and makes it rellishable for the palate, so
Christians by their doctrine and examples, and in particular Preachers, draw
out the rottenness in the hearts and tongues of men, and makes them fit for
society of Christians; hence they are called the salt of the earth, to show,
that they should not season one, or two, or a few, but even the whole earth:
and to press it the more upon them, he used this similitude, not once but
often, as Mark 9. ult. John 14. ult.

2 For profitableness. Sale and sole nihil utilius; salt is most profitable,
called by some the balsome of nature: it is mingled with all mixed bodies and
preserves them from corruption. So Christians are very profitable, Philemon 11.
Formerly unprofitable, now profitable to thee and me.

3 Christians are like salt for wisdom: salt was an emblem of wisdom; as salt
seasons meat, so wisdom seasons the minds of good men. Hence Sapientia is
derived a sapore, from savor, because wisdom is the savor of the mind, that
which the soul is in the body, that are Christians in the world.

4 Salt is of a hot and fiery nature, because cast it into the fire it kindles,
and of a watery nature, because if you pour water upon it it turns into water.
So the Disciples of Christ should be hot and zealous for God, yet should this
heat be mingled with knowledge and discretion, lest we fly out as those Luke
9.53. who called for fire from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, or those who
out of zeal to God persecuted Christ and his Righteousness, Rom: 10.2.

5 As Salt stirs up Thirst, so Christians should stir up others to thirst after
Christ and heavenly things. John 7.37. Revel: 22.17. We should not so much look
for Examples from others, as give Examples to others.

Lyvy called Greece the Salt of the Nations; it is more truly said of
Christians.

6 As by Salt Meat is made fit for our Taste, so by the Salt of an holy
Conversation the Word is made fit for the Relish of others, 1 Peter 3.1, Hence
Christians are called the Salt of the earth, that is, of earthly minded men.

7 As for preservation of Meat and other things from putrefaction there must be
a just measure of Salt, neither too much nor too little, so Christians in
general, nor Teachers in special, ought by an unseasonable application of the
Law to swallow up afflicted Consciences, Psalm 69.26, They persecute him whom
thou have smitten, and talk to the grief of him whom thou have wounded; nor by
an unseasonable application of the grace of God to encourage impenitent
persons, Rom, 2.4, 5,

8 As Salt brings Desolation and a Curse to that which is not seasoned by it,
Gen, 13.3, Zeph, 2.9, so the Word in the Mouths and Lives of Christians to whom
it is not a savor of life, is a savor to death, 2 Cor, 2.16.

2 Exhort to live savoury Lives our selves, else how can we season others? If
the Salt have lost its savor what is it good for? Take heed therefore of all
scandalous sins; for,

1 By these the Name of God is blasphemed. Ezekiel, 36.20, The Babylonians seeing
the loose lives of the Jews, cried out, These are the people of the Lord, these
are come out of the Lords land. Rom, 2 24, The Name of God is blasphemed by
you. Loose Christians are called Spots, Jude 12, Deuteronomy, 32.19, When David
committed folly with Bathsheba, by that thing he made the Enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme, 2 Samuel, 12.14, When the strong despised the weak, and the weak
judged the strong, they caused their good to be evil spoken of, Rom, 14.16, How
careful are we to preserve the name of a Friend, how careful should we be to
preserve the Name of God?

2 An holy savoury walking free from scandalous sins is a man's glory, 1 Samuel,
12.3, 4, Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass? or of whose hand have I received
a Bribe? and they said, Thou have not defrauded us, nor taken any thing of any
man's hand. 1 Cor, 9.15, It were better for me for to die, than that any man
should make my glorying void, See 2 Cor, 1.12, 1 Thessalonians, 2.10, Contrarily, it is
a dishonor to a Christian to be guilty of a spot of uncleanness, etc.
Demetrius had a good report of all men, yea and of the truth it self, 3 Epist.
of John v. 12,

3 Scandalous sins are worse to keep men off from embracing the truth than
persecutions; for by scandals men are hardened from embracing the truth, Rom,
14.13, Let no man lay a stumbling block or a scandal to another; for sometimes
persons were made by the contentions among strong and weak to stumble, and so
not to join to Gods people, sometimes they were made to fall, yea to fall off
from Christian Assemblies. Holy example is a duty we ow to the whole world, and
as by holy examples persons are built up toward Heaven, so by wicked words and
works, yea by indifferent things done unseasonably, persons are made worse, and
built up toward destruction. Lev, 19.14, Thou shall not lay a stumbling block
before the blind. Scandals are as Pits and Snares to catch living creatures,
wherein the unwary and blind are taken.

4 A savoury Life free from Scandals is a special means to stop the mouths of
wicked men, Dan, 6.4, they found naught against Daniel but for the Law of his
God. 1 Peter 2.12, Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that
whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may glorify God in the day
of visitation, 1 Peter 3.16, having a good Conscience (whereunto an holy Life
is joined) that whereas they speak evil of you as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ. Titus 2.8, They
that are of the contrary part will be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of
you: contrarily, when persons that profess shall fall into scandals, wicked men
draw these Conclusions, as,

1 Because some professing persons are bad, therefore their Religion is bad.

2 Because one is bad, thus they are all.

5 By an unsavory scandalous Life thou have a hand in other men's damnation. A
man's own personal guilt is heavy enough, he need not add the weight of other
men's sins, Matthew, 18.6, Woe to the World because of offenses: there is not only
a Woe to the person that gives the offense, but to the World. This is a Rock on
which thousands dash their souls. Therefore as all Creatures by natural
instinct are shy of the Snare laid for them, so should all persons take heed
that when a Scandal falls out there be not a Woe to them. The unholy carriage of
Eli his sons made people abhor the offerings of the Lord, 1 Samuel: 2.17.

6 Nothing so darkens the glory of the Church, as the spots and unsavory Life
of those that pretend to Christianity. What has kept people from joining to
us? Was it Prisons, Banishment, hazards? Perhaps so in some, but that which in
likelihood has hindered many, has been our not walking up to our Profession.
Fire and Faggot though it may scare some, yet it cannot make them think in their
consciences such and such Tenants to be Errors, but scandalous practices of
headiness, pride and passion: worldly mindedness makes them think in their
consciences we are in an error, and so may in time hearten them to persecute
us. Moreover, hereby blurs and reproaches are cast upon the Church. If it be so
great an offense to bring a scandal on one Israelite, that he that did it was
amerced in an hundred Shekels of Silver for bringing up an evil name upon a
Virgin in Israel, Deuteronomy. 22.19. then what shall be done to them that bring a
Reproach upon all the Israel of God?

7 The great triumphs and outcries wicked men make when any of Gods children
fall into scandalous sin (I say, Gods children, for properly a scandal cannot
be given but by Gods children, or by them that profess the truth) when such are
overtaken, though the wicked themselves be a thousand times worse, they are apt
to triumph, Psalm 38.16. When my foot slippeth (though I did not actually fall)
they magnify themselves against me. As things that fall from on high make a
great sound, so the falls of persons that are high in profession are heard afar
off. Wicked men hunger and thirst after the falls of godly men, and if at any
time they fall into evil, like hungry Dogs they muzzle in their Excrements,
like Horse-Flies that passing by many precious Flowers fasten upon Dung. The
wicked pass by the graces of Saints, and fasten upon their infirmities.

Means to live savoury Lives free from Scandal.
1 Make conscience of sinning in secret, if not, thou may look when God may
give thee up to scandalous sin, Prove. 26.26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit,
his wickedness shall be revealed before the whole congregation. Because David
made little conscience of sinning in secret, 2 Samuel 12.12. in that he so
cunningly slew Uriah and took his wife, hence the Lord says, Thou did it
secretly, but I will do this thing openly; I will reveal thy scandalous sins in
their punishments, to all Israel.

2 Take heed of such sins as are wont to spot Christians, as 1 Worldly
mindedness, Phil. 3.19. 1 Cor. 7.29. 2 Censoriousness. Its sawciness in us to
judge another man's servant, Romans 14.4. 3 Janglings 1 Cor. 1.11.3.3. 4 Telling
uncertainties for truths, Psalm. 119.29. 5 Rents and divisions, because of
difference of judgment. This evil age has added this new sin not known in the
Apostles times. 6 Detraction, James 4.12. Speak not evil one of another
brethren. 7 Denial of the truth, Jude 4. new ashamed are they that have denied
the truth, either in doctrine or practice, to look other men in the face? 8
Venturing upon things that are not expedient, they ask, Is the thing lawful,
then presently they do it: an action may be lawful yet varied with some
circumstance of calling, age, etc. it may be inexpedient, 1 Cor. 10.23. all
things are lawful, but all things are not expedient. 9 Unpeaceableness and
strife, such was the differences betwixt strong and weak, Romans 14.13.

3 Look upon the falls of others, and tremble at them, as Lot, Aaron, David,
Peter, the incestuous person. Let us then do as Mariners who steer off from
that rock where others have suffered shipwreck.

4 Look upon the miseries that follow the scandalous sins of Christians, as 1
Horror: the incestuous person was so troubled for the offense he had given,
that he was like to have been swallowed up with too much sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7. 2
Punishment, 2 Samuel 12.14. Because by this deed thou have given great occasion
to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is born unto thee shall
surely dye. So reproach is another punishment: all sins are called by the name
of reproaches, how much more are scandalous sins reproaches? Romans 15.3.

5 Nourish Gods fear, Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not lay a stumbling block before
the blind, but shall fear the Lord thy God, Nehem. 5.9. Ought we not to walk
in the fear of God, because of the heathen that are round about us? q. d. Gods
fear is a special preservative from scandalous sins. The fear of the Lord is
clean, Psalm. 19.9. Hence Abraham would not contend, Genesis 13.6, 7. 1 Cor. 6.1.

6 Mourn for other men's scandals. He that can truly mourn for scandalous evils
in others, will hardly venture upon them himself. Ezra 9.1, 2, 3, 4. Ezra when
he heard that the Priests and Levites had taken of the daughters of the heathen
to wife, and that the Princes and Rulers were chief in this trespass, he rent
his garment, and sat astonished; Besides thy mourning for another man's scandal
may occasion the scandalous person to mourn for his own sin. And so much the
more should we mourn for such scandals, because often they are spiritual
judgments to punish unprofitableness under spiritual blessings, that they who
would not be won by the holy examples of some, might be hardened by the evil
examples of others.

V. 14. Ye are the light of the world; a city that is set on an hill cannot be
hid.

Here is another Metaphor whereby the Lord commends unto us an holy example,
viz. to shine before others by life and doctrine: There would be much fewer
wicked men then are (in likelihood) if we would be such Christians as we ought
to be; if we would do good for evil, if we would patiently bear revilements.
One Paul drew many to the faith; if all the Saints were such how many would be
converted?

For application, 1 It taxes them who having such holy examples remain in
darkness, and love darkness more then light, Phil. 2.19.

2 To shine forth in holy example, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. We are all children of the
light, therefore let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober.
v. 6. Be like John, a burning and shining light, Joh. 5.25. to shine as lights
in the world, holding forth in your practice the word of life, Phil. 2.15. the
Apostle alludes unto those fires and candles that are lightened and fet up on
high, near unto some rocks and quicksands, that Mariners and Seamen that sail
that way may escape such rocks and sands.

A city that is set on an hill] A third Metaphor to commend to Christians an
holy example. Look as a city built upon an hill is visible to all, so are the
virtues and vices of Christians, when their lives are holy they draw many to
Christ, when they are corrupt they turn many from Christ.

Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick] A fourth Metaphor or similitude is taken from a candle set in a
candlestick, that gives light to them in the room, such was Joshua and
Zerubbabel, Zach. 4.11. this was signified by the candlestick in the midst of
the tabernacle and temple, yea the seven Churches are called candlesticks, Rev.
1.20. Churches ought not to meet in secret, I mean for worship, unless in some
unusual case.

V. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works
and glorify your father in heaven.

Let your light so shine before men] n this verse 2 things:

1. A duty, Let your light shine before men. 2 The ends of the duty;

1. That men may see your good works: 2 may glorify Gods:

1. The duty [let your light so shine before men.]

Obs. Christians ought to shine as lights to others.

Ob. But we are bid to do good in secret.

Ans. Augustine answers, he does good, not that he may be praised, but God
glorified in him; he that does this need not fear to be seen of men.

1 From the state of conversion, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were once darkness, now ye are
light in the Lord, walk as children of the light, 1 John 1.6.

2 That men may see your good works, not to ambition as the Pharisees who gave
alms to be seen of men, Matthew. 6.1. but to conversion to draw others to the
faith, not that you may be seen save in the praises of God, Aug. in loc. Tom.
10. de verb. dom.

3 That men may glorify our heavenly father] 1 By receiving and approving the
heavenly doctrine that you profess, Song. 6.1. The daughters of Jerusalem ask
the Church, Whither is thy beloved gone that we may seek him with thee?

2 By conversion to the same faith, 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your conversation
honest among the Gentiles, that they may by your good works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. 3 By thanksgiving for so great a
favor, 1 Pet. 2.9. Praise him who has called you from darkness to his
mavelous light.

For application, let your light shine forth to others for these ends;
testimony of conscience before God, and testimony of a holy life before men. 2
Cor. 8.21. Providing things honest, not only in the sight of the Lord but of
men, be not content to shine only by doctrinals, for so did the Jewish
teachers, Romans 2.17, 18, 19. they were lights to them that were in darkness,
and rested herein, but shine forth also in practicals.

Moreover in all your holy walking propose this end, not that you may be
magnified and lifted up above the stars, but that God may be glorified as the
author of that little good you do: the glory and praise of Christians in
heaven is Christ, as they are his glory and praise on earth, Luth. Tom. 2.94.
So did John Baptist, Joh. 3.30. He must increase, I must decrease, 2 Cor. 4.5.
We preach not our selves but Christ Jesus the Lord, John 7.18. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Romans 14.7, 8. If any praise be cast on thee, (as God has made honor to
accompany virtuous actions as the shadow accompanies the body, so has God
appointed estimation and praise to accompany a holy life) give this glory to
God, Psalm 115.1. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name do we give
praise.

There is a secret influence in holy example, though we speak never a word. It
will afflict our souls in death, not only to think of our personal evils, but
of our exemplary evil.

2 Exhort. Where you see holy Examples to follow them, Luke 10.32. Shall God
kindle Lights for us, as Sun, Moon, and Stars, and shall we not walk by their
light? Shall God give us holy Examples and we not walk by them? Romans 11.11. The
Example of the Gentiles shall at length provoke the Jews to believe. As
Christians wrong the souls of wicked men when they do not give them an holy
Example, so do wicked men wrong their own souls when they follow not that
Example which is given them. A man's Life shows what his mind is, for by the
endeavors of our daily conversation our natures not appearing are understood.
Justin. Martyr ad Zenam and Serenum. p. 394.

That they may see your good works] 2. things. 1. What a good work is, 2. What
properties are requisite.

1 What it is. Answ. It Is any thing commanded by God, and done by a regenerate
man, so that 1 it must be commanded by God, Mic. 6.8. He has showed thee O man
what is good, and it must be the work of a man whose person is accepted in
Christ, Matthew. 7.16. Make the Tree good that the Fruit may be good, Romans 8.8.
They that are in the Flesh cannot please God. For as the sins of believers do
not redound to their persons to make their persons wicked, no more do the works
of wicked men materially good (as alms, bounty, etc.) redound to the persons
of wicked men to make their persons righteous; Prove. 15.8. Esa. 66.2.

2 The properties of a good work, besides these two laid down, as 1. commanded
of God, 2. done by a person accepted so.

3. It must be done in a right manner, as God has set down Heb. 8.5. See thou
make it according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount, John 14.31. as my
father gave me a command, so I do: not only what he commanded, but as he
commanded.

4 It must be done to God, Zach. 7.5. To whom have eye fasted, to me, even to
me? Alms is a thing God commands, yet if therein we have vainglorious ends, we
have no other reward, but the praise of men, Matthew. 6.1, 2. Yet this single
circumstance is not enough to make a work good, for some thinking to do God
service have killed his servants, John 16.2. and some merely out of zeal to
God, opposed Christianity and went about to stablish their own righteousness.

5 That which is a good work must be brought about by just and holy means, Romans
3.8. We must not do evil that good may come, we must not lie for God, Job 13.6,
7. herein Rahab, the Midwives, Exodus 1.19. and Jacob are supposed to fail, Genesis
27.24.

6 It must have a good end. This is first in intention, though last in
execution; Romans 14.7, 8. None of us, That is, of us that are Christians (though
the world do otherwise) that lives to himself, and no man dies to himself, 2
Cor. 5.15. Jehu did a good work in destroying Baal out of Israel, 2 Kings 10.
and Amaziah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a
perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. they had some selfish ends, as all carnal men
have, in what they did.

Use. Learn how to judge of good works; they are good when thus qualified. Many
things glorious in the sight of men by these rules of qualification are
abominable, Esai 1.13.66.3. Luke 16.15. 2 Cor. 10.18. Moreover the good works
done by regenerate men are not the causes of justification but the effects and
consequents thereof. Non praecedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum.
They do not go before the person to be justified, but follow him that is
justified.

2 Exhort. To perform good works, looking to all these circumstances, therefore
let us have these ends,

1 To be profitable to men, Titus 3.8. He that believes in God must be careful
to maintain good works, these things are good and profitable to men: he means
honest Trades and Employments to minister to their own and others needs.

2 To testify the truth of our faith, James 2.14, 15. Show me thy faith by thy
works, also v. 16, 17. As Abraham's sacrificing his only son testified his
faith, and Rahabs receiving the Spies with the hazard of her life.

3 To show forth our thankfulness to God, Romans 12.1. q. d. Show forth your
thankfulness to God, by yielding the members of your body as well as the
faculties of your soul to his service.

4 To be paterns and examples of holy life to others, 1 Timothy 4.12. Be thou an
example of the believers. Titus 2.7. In all things show thy self a pattern of
good works. 1 Peter 3.1. they that at present did not obey the Word, may
without the Word be won by the good conversation of their Wives.

5 To add fruits that may be acknowledged in the day of account, Matthew. 10.41,
42. Heb. 6.10. Gal. 6.9. 1 Cor. 15.58. 2 Peter 1.10, 11. Phil. 4.17. Paul did
not desire a Gift from the Philippians, but Fruit that might abound to their
account.

Glorify your Father in Heaven] This is the second end of Christians shining
light, that the beholders may glorify God, that is,

1 By declaring him to be glorious who has such servants and worshippers. I
mean declaring him glorious among men, 2 Thessalonians. 1.12.

2 By ascribing all glory to his Name for working his servants hearts from
their natural defilement to such an holy estate. Romans 11.36. Of him, and from
him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever. 1 Peter 2.12. The
converted Gentiles seeing the holy Lives of Christians, glorify God in the day
of visitation. Psalm 86.9, 10. When Paul was converted from persecuting Truth
to preaching it, they glorified God that saw and heard it, Gal. 1.22, 23.

In Heaven] God is set forth from the place he is in, viz. Heaven (...), in
Heavens, that is, not only in the Heaven of the Blessed, which is called that
Heaven of Heavens, that most blessed Country which is looked for by Saints,
Heb. 11.10. But in all other Heavens, where he is by his omnipresence, as he is
in the Heaven of the Blessed by his special presence. Yet is he not included in
any place, before there was any Creation he sufficed to himself without any
place.

V. 17 Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets; I am not
come to destroy but to fulfill.

The third part of the Chapter.

In which, 1 A correction of an erroneous conception, as if Christ came to
destroy the Law, or the Prophets: I came not to destroy them.

2 A right information wherefore he came, viz. To fulfill the Law and Prophets,
not to destroy it.

3 Here is the unchangeableness of the Law set down, v. 18, 19.

4 Here is an explanation of some Commandments depraved by the false Glosses of
the Pharisees, v. 21, 22. to the end of the Chapter.

Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets] Some thought
that, because Christ preached Repentance after a new manner of way and Faith
also, and did not press the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Temple-worship,
that he came to destroy the Law: to this Christ says, The Doctrine of the
Gospel does not oppose the Law or the Prophets.

Think not that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. In the Greek (...),
signifies to oppose the Law, John 10.35. The Scripture cannot (...), be broken
or opposed, John 5.18. (...), not only because he opposed the Sabbath. John
7.23. If a man receive Circumcision on the Sabbath that the Law of Moses (...),
may not be broken or destroyed. For which the Apostle uses (...), Romans 3. ult.

2 That the word destroy is taken for oppose, appears by v. 19. where doing and
teaching is opposed to breaking, or rather to opposing.

And therefore whereas the Jews cry out against the Apostles, as going against
the Profession of their Master, know, the Apostles would have never mentioned
these words of Christ if their Doctrine had differed from his; we cannot think
that those grave men that were so constant in the defense of their Doctrine,
not only not to have written things contrary one to another, but things
contrary to themselves, therefore we must inquire how their sayings may agree.
Hence know there is a twofold Law,

1 Natural, which is everlasting and common to all, this is right reason. This
makes men good out of love of virtue.

2 Civil, this looks only to outward innocence, and does not look to the
mind, as the Law of Nature does. This is peculiar to every Nation, and
changeable; this restrains men from evil for fear of punishment; Because of
transgressions the Law was added, Gal. 3.19. that is, the Law written in Tables
was added to that Law writ in the heart, so that 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is not
made for a righteous man.

So then the Law of Moses had certain things brought from the Law of Nature,
and certain things proper to that People, and applied to those Times. Justin
against Triph. says, some things are universally and by nature everlasting
goods, which they that performed had common praise with Christians.

But some things were added because of the Peoples hardness of heart, (and by
reason of occasions of Times and places may be added) therefore as before the
Law of Moses was given, true Faith working by Love was that which God looked
after, so in the Law of Moses God would have himself loved with all the heart,
would have the heart circumcised, etc. but all this was properly translated
from the Law of Nature, and was not properly a part of the Civil Law, but the
scope and mark at which the Civil Law aimed.

But to fulfill the Law] So that the scope of the Law was to make men good, as
by the fear of God, and love of God, and love of one another, Matthew. 22.38, 39,
40. these are called the greatest Commands on which depends the Law and the
Prophets. So loving of our Neighbor is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.8.
Gal. 5.14. and James says, If ye fulfill the royal Law according to the
Scriptures, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye shall do well; this
fulfilling of the Law according to the Scripture, he means the Books of Moses.

But that which was commanded by the Law was observed by few, but Christ has
enabled his People under the New Testament to perform, writing his Laws in
their hearts by his Spirit. Therefore we see how Christ fulfilled the Law; that
which was chief and unchangeable in it, I mean the Law of Nature, Christ
established it, and confirmed it.

But that which was civil and positive, part whereof concerned the Jewish
worship, and part concerned civil society or the government of the
commonwealth of Israel, though it came to an end at the death of Christ, so
far as it concerned worship, and came to an end at the destruction of
Jerusalem, so far as it concerned civil society, yet did not Christ oppose
these laws, neither by his example nor by his doctrine, he did not oppose the
Church laws but observed them, Matthew. 8, 4. Show thy self to the priest and
offer the gift that Moses commanded: also Christ kept the Passover, Matthew.
26.18. Till himself had put an end to them by his death, to keep the Jews from
going a whoring to strange worships, and to sever them from other nations, God
gave them the ceremonial law, but when the time came the Jews and Gentiles
should be embodied in one worship, the other worship vanished, as laws of war
do when peace comes to take place, therefore Christ did nothing against the
ceremonial law, as he does nothing against the laws belonging to the time of
war, that when the war is ended shall proclaim peace, or as the shadow vanished
when the body comes, Col. 2.17. Which are the shadow of things to come but the
body is Christ, Heb. 10.1.

Therefore this law was fulfilled of Christ, 1 Because he obeyed it, and
commanded others to obey it as long as the law giver would have it in force, 2
Because by his sacrifice he put an end to it, Heb. 8.13.

2 For the laws of nature or naturals, Christ fulfilled them explaining them
more clearly then ever they were explained, strengthening them by more exact
commands, hence the law of Christ is called the perfect law of liberty, James
1.25. Ireneus l. 4. c. 27. the Lord dissolved not the naturals of the law, but
extended them, and fulfilled them, as a vessel that had some water before, but
is now filled up to the brim:

To conclude, Christ fulfilled the ceremonial law by giving himself typified
therein: not by taking off the bond of the law, but by withdrawing the cause
for which that law was given and did continue: this law was called carnal or
fleshly, for the rites of fleshly sacrifices beheld therein: besides Christ
fulfilled the law of nature, as a picture that is first drawn rudely, but after
the ^ainter comes to draw it to the life, so the law of nature was set down
more imperfectly, now more perfectly.

Besides Christ fulfilled the law and Prophets, by fulfilling the prophesies
that went of himself, as Deuteronomy. 18.18. Esa. 66.1, 2. Ezekiel, 36.25, 26. Zach,
12.10.

We see then that whereas the Pharisees slandred Christ and his doctrine, that
he was an apostate, and an enemy to the law of Moses which God had writ in
tables of stone, and that he brought a doctrine to the law overturning all
godliness, and whereas carnal men had an opinion that now under the new
Testament they were free from the bonds of the ten Commandments, and so from
all punishment, and therefore they were privileged to swear and be drunk, and
what not? which position was also gathered by wicked persons from the Epistles
of Peter, Paul, and James, as Romans 3.28.6.1, 2. Christ therefore speaking to
his disciples that they might not be bewitched with either of these opinions,
says, Think not that I came to destroy the law, or, to oppose it, I came to
fulfill it.

Now for that which is commonly called the moral law, or law of manners, Christ
fulfilled it; 1 By being made under the law for us, Gal. 4.4. and after being
made a curse for our transgressions of it, Gal. 3.10. 2 By imputing and placing
us righteous before God when we once believe on Christ, Romans 5.19. by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous, or as the word signifies
[constituentur] placed righteous, 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans 8.3, 4.

2 He fulfills it in us by writing the law of God in our hearts Jer. 3.33. and
working in us a bent and respect to all the commandments of God, Psalm. 119.6.

Now, besides whath has been said, the reasons I give for so opening this
Scripture, are both, that 1 There may be no clashing betwixt this Scripture and
those mentioned, Gal. 2.21. I through the law ( viz. of Christ) am dead to the
law ( viz. of Moses) also John 8.17. It is written in your law, also John
15.25. It is written in their law, also Romans 7.2, 3, 4. says, as the wife is
free from the husband by his death, so are we free from the law by the
sacrifice of Christ, and so much the more when we are implanted in him, also
Col, 2.14. blotting out the hand writing of ordinances which was against us, he
took it out of the way, nailing it to the cross, q. d. he did not only take
away ceremonial but all other laws that might be hand writings against us, that
as the Lord forgave the elect their debts, so he made void all the specialties
or bonds that might witness the debt, 2 Cor. 3.11. making a difference betwixt
the new Testament and the ministration of death, which was written and graven
in stones, he means the law, ver. 7, he says, ver, 11, If that which was done
away ((...) which is translated, made void, Rom, 3. ult) were glorious, also
ver. 13, Moses put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not
look to the end of that which is Abolished, Christianus si proprie definiatur
est filius gratiae and remissionis peccatsrum, qui nullam prorsus legem habet,
sed est supra legem, peccatum inferum. Luth. Tom. 4.54.
(...). Besides there are other places, 2 Cor. 9.20, 21. To them that are under
the law, as under the law, that he might gain them that are under the law; to
them that are without law, as without law, being not without law to God, but
under the law to Christ that I might gain them that are without law. In showing
his compliance both to those that were without law, and to those under the law,
he justifies them without law, that they were not without law to God, because
they held the abolition of the law, but they were under the law to Christ, Gal.
3.23, 24. The law was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, but after faith
is come, or Christ believed on is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster,
see Gal. 5.23. 1 Timothy 1.9. Gal 5.19. Wherefore serves the law? It was added
because of transgressions. How long to endure? till the seed should come, which
seed was Christ, ver. 16.

2 That no man should dare to think as if there were any contradiction in these
and such like Scriptures, as Faustus the Manichee did, who did deny this Gospel
to be penned by Matthew, and denied this Sentence to be any of Christ's words,
because it is false, that Christ did not destroy the Ceremonies, seeing
Christians do not observe them. Consider the Law having no place in
justification, and nothing contrary to the Law of the New Testament in point of
meats, days, or ceremonies, we ought with Paul to think it holy, just and good.

Ob. But if the law be thus fulfilled, what shall we think of the ten
Commandments?

Answ. The Decalogue or ten Commandments is part of the Law of nature, Romans
2.15. Which show the works of the Law written in their hearts. Yea every
command of them was observed before the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai,
even the command of the Sabbath, Exodus 16.29. now they being the Law of nature
are to be observed: for example, its writ in every man's heart that there is a
God, and that this God is one, and that he is the immediate object of worship,
and that his name is to be sanctified, etc. All the question is about the
Sabbath or seventh day from the creation, which is put to an end, Col. 2.16.
yet is it written in every man's heart, that if God be to be worshipped, there
must be a time for his worship, and if it be left to the scantling of every
carnal man's heart, it will be little enough, yea in time it will come to
nothing among such; it remains then that godly men, as they have it writ in
their hearts to give God a time, so that they give him that time which the
Churches at Corinth and Galatia and Troas gave unto him, and as they, so
doubtless all the Apostolical Churches. This was the day which the Spirit calls
the Lords day, as like phrases call the Lords table, the Lords body, the Lords
supper, whereto that speech of Psalm. 118.24. has respect, This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad herein.

For all the rest of the Commands, as the obedience of inferiors to
superiors, and that every man shall enjoy his own wife, life, state, and good
name, etc. is writ in every man's heart.

Moreover for that of the Sabbath, the distinction of diverse of the Rabbis is
to be observed, viz. one thing is commanded in these words, Remember thou keep
holy the Sabbath, the cause of which holy worship is a thankful remembrance of
the creation of the world, another thing is commanded in these words, The
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do not manner
of work; this rest, respecting their servitude in Egypt belongs to the Hebrews
only, Exodus 31.13. remembering their own servitude in Egypt, they should
handle their own servants gently, which also was the opinion of Irenaeus. l. 4.
c. 30. and Eusebius l. 1. c 4. so that to distinguish rightly we must
distinguish the commands of worship, and the commands of rest, as by their
causes, so by their times.

The Christians observed the Sabbath, and had their assemblies thereon, in
which assemblies the Law was read, Acts 15.21. which continued to the Council
of Laodicea, to whom it seemed better that that day the Gospels should be read;
and therefore from the ancient fathers Balsamon observes, that almost in all
things the Sabbaths were equaled to the Lords days, which two days Nyssen calls
brethren. Also Justin Martyr against Tripho, before Abraham there was no need
of circumcision, nor before Moses of the celebration of the Sabbath feasts and
offerings, p. 186. Asterius calls them a beautiful couple, also Clement Constable.
l. 7. c. 24. says, Keep holy the Sabbath day and the Lords day, because this
is dedicated to the memory of the creation, the other to the memory of the
resurrection; also cap. 8. he says, let servants labor five days, but on the
Sabbath day and Lords day let them wait on the doctrine that makes to Godliness
in the Church. In the ancient Church they had a custom not to fast on the
Sabbath, because it was a day of gladness, except on the Sabbath that was
before the burial of Christ, Ignat: ad Philip. and Tertul. de jejun. and
therefore Eusebius mentions that Constantine forbade Christians to be summoned
to law on the Sabbath, no less then on the Lords day, because those days were
dedicated to holy assemblies, and therefore whereas some think from that (...),
one of the Sabbaths, the Lords day is placed into the room of the Sabbath, they
are deceived, seeing there is no mention hereof by Christ or the Apostles.

Now when the Christians observed these two days, viz. the Sabbath and Lords
day, they did not do it of any command of God, or of the Apostles, but by
voluntary consent, by the power of liberty given to them, unless I should add
by divine example, which is not of little force, see Jer. 26.18.

Unless we add, that the spirit calls the day of worship the Lords day, Rev.
1.10. on this day there was a meeting of all that dwelt in the City and
Country, though he call it Sunday, Justin Apol. 2.

Q. Whether to these ten commandments, as the law of nature, may not other
commands of the Gospel be referred?

A. Yes, to the first we may refer all those commands which forbid the least
show of worship to be given to false Gods, 1 John 5.21. and that the true God
alone be worshipped, John 17.3. 1 Cor. 8.6.

To the second command we may refer all commands forbidding resemblances of
God, and the worshipping of God through any mean which himself has not
instituted, Matthew. 6.24. Ephesians. 5.5. Phil. 3.19.

To the third command we may refer the due sanctification of the name of God,
Matthew. 6.9. and to keep our words in the bounds of yea and nay, Matthew. 5.^4.
Jam. 5.12.

To that of the Sabbath we may refer that certain hope concerning the rest in
heaven, the taste whereof we have in peace of conscience, Heb. 4.9, 10, 11.

To the fifth we may refer all honor due to Princes, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 6, 7. to
Masters, Col. 3.22. to Husbands, Ephesians. 5.22. to Pastors, 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17.

To the sixth command all wrath and hatred which are the seeds of murders,
Matthew. 5.22. 1 John 3.15.

To the seventh command are reckoned all impurities and all divorces, without
the cause of adultery, Matthew. 19.9.

To the command against theft are referred, not only those commands which forbid
us to hurt the goods of others, but that we should profit them, Col. 3.25. 1
Cor. 12.7.

To the ninth is referred those commands which caution us against lying, and
enjoin us a continual care of truth, Ephesians. 4.24, 25.

To the tenth are referred the commands of quenching inordinate motions, Gal.
5.24. Ephesians. 5.22, 23. the baits of which concupiscence, are wealth, honor,
pleasure, 1 John 2.16.

V. 22. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one
title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.

We come to the second Part, viz. to a right information wherefore Christ came,
he came to fulfill it, which fulfilling is amplified from the certainty thereof,
that heaven and earth shall sooner pass, then that the least jot or title of
the Law be not fulfilled.

Verily] In the Greek (...), it is an Hebrew word set sometimes in the
beginning, sometimes in the end of a speech: it has diverse significations
which cannot be expressed in one word: 2 Cor. 1.19.
sometimes it signifies (...) truly, but being joined to words of praying or
wishing, it has the same signification with quaeso or utinam, with I pray, or,
Oh that, or, I would to God.

And therefore Davenant in Colos. p. 526. says its derived of the Hebrew word
Aman, which in Hiphil signifies to believe, in Niphal signifies to be firm,
stable and faithful, it is a particle of confirmation and assurance. When it is
added to a prayer, it is as it were the seal of it, as Hierom speaks. By this
word believers show the sure persuasion of their hearts that God hears their
prayer.

So that Amen is not the voice of one swearing, but of one affirming a thing to
be spoken by him, or confirming a thing already spoken. It Is of one affirming
when it is set before a speech, as here it is confirming when it is set after,
and does as it were seal it, Deuteronomy. 27.16. 1 Cor. 14.16.

Christ in regard of his truth and stability is called Amen, Revel. 3.14.

Till heaven and earth pass] It Is a Proverb, as in English we say when the sky
falls, which according to the order of nature seems impossible, as if he should
say, heaven and earth shall sooner pass, then that things foretold of God
should not be fulfilled. Esa. 54.10. The Mountains shall remove, but my
covenant of peace shall not be taken away, q. d. sooner Mountains remove then
my covenant fail. Psalm. 102.27. They shall wax old (meaning heaven and earth)
but thou art the same in the word of thy promise, which undoubtedly shall be
fulfilled. No heresy has overcome at length, but the victory of the word
abides. Arrius, Manicheus and the Papacy have perished, but the word of God
abides for ever, Luth. Tom. 4.422. such phrases are, Psalm. 89.38. Jer. 33.20,
21. Psalm. 72.7.

One jot or one title] It Is a proverb. Jod is the least of the Hebr. Letters,
and title, or (...), or apex, is a part of a letter, as the head or tail of a
letter, hence that phrase de juris apicibus disputare, to dispute of the titles
of the Law: It Is a Hebrew proverb, there is not either a letter or a sign in
the Law, on which great mountains do not depend. One title of doctrine is more
worth then heaven and earth, therefore we suffer it not to be hurt in the
least, Luth. Tom. 4.161.

The Rabbis and other Jews had such a sollicitous care, that they had not
only a most exact account of the sections and verses, but they took notice of
the Letters of the Alphabet, as how often Aleph and Beth and other Letters were
mentioned in the Old Testament, so that there could not fail a title which
would not from that wonderful diligence be restored.

Q. Here might be a question mentioned by Prideaux de Punctorum Hebr. origin.
Seeing Iota's and titles or points are reckoned alike, if the points were not
in that time, why does Christ mention them?

A. There are three opinions concerning the beginning of the Hebrew points, 1
That they were brought in with the Letters on Mount Sinai, and given by Moses
to God: of this opinion was Picus Mirandula, Junius, Polanus, and Broughton,
and many others, both Jews and Christians.

2 A second opinion, that these points came in about the time of Ezra, as
Reuclin, Buxtorf, etc.

3 The third opinion that they came in after the finishing of the Talmud, and
the threefold Masorah, final, textual, and Marginal, 500. years after Christ,
which is ascribed to the Tiberians those wise men.

For this opinion Elias the Levite is the Standard Bearer, whom besides many
Papists, Luther, Fagius, Drusius, and Martinius follow, and to this opinion
this Author leans.

1 Because Origin, Hierom, Philo, and other ancient translators never once
mention these points, and take away these points there is nothing will be taken
away from the certainty of reading, as to matter and sense, but only in
respect of pronunciation, and easiness of learners.

2 In other Oriental tongues the points are later then the consonants, why not
then in the Hebrew, seeing they draw their beginning from it? These points were
added, not as elements of the tongue together with consonants, but as
distinctive and directive, that the tongue might be preserved pure among so
many calamities, and might more easily be perceived, and more exactly
pronounced by others.

Moreover the Septuagint translated the Old Testament out of the Hebrew text
unpointed. Many other reasons may be seen in this Author.

But to answer to the question, these tittle or (...), are certain pointed tops
of letters, parts of letters, but points are not parts but added to the
letters. There are two titles, one of the Law, the other of Letters, the Text
speaks of the former.

Besides distinguish betwixt the rise of points and the perfecting of them,
whereby they went along with the text. Ezra for the more easy knowledge of the
text might invent some things, and might pass it over to his successors, who
might increase them, and therefore they might in Christ's time be profitably in
use in the Synagogue as the Text shows, yet it follows not that the Text was
pointed, or that the Art of pointing was before the Tiberians, which was 476
years after Christ, who lived at Tiberias in Galilec.

Shall in no wise pass from the Law] That is, shall not pass without
fulfilling. But Christ of purpose handles this matter more darkly, lest he
should offend the tender minds of the Apostles with those things, which they
could not well bear, till the spirit was given, who should lead them into all
truth, Joh. 16.13.

So that the force of the argument is, if one Iota or Jod, or one point of a
Jod cannot perish, much less can the whole Law perish till all be fulfilled. If
we look to the letter Iota and not the Hebrew Jod, some would gather it as
probable that Matthew wrote in Greek, but I have proved the contrary before,
and Christ speaking to the Hebrews says one Jod, as the Syriack and Hebrew
has it, as Lapide tells us, and the Greek Interpreter for Jod put in the Greek
Iota which is equivalent.

So that the sense is, there is not the least thing (such as is Jod and Iota)
of those things which are written in the Law concerning me and my actions and
mysteries, which shall not in every point be fulfilled.

Till all be fulfilled] That is, till all things that are written in the Law
and the Prophets 1 Concerning me and my actions be fulfilled, 2 Till all things
commanded, promised and threatened be fulfilled.

V. 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: but,
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

In the words two things, 1 A Threatening, Whosoever shall break one of Gods
Commands, and teach others so, he shall be called least in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

2 A Promise, But whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called
great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments] The scope of this place
shows that this Verse has respect unto the Teachers. Hierom refers it to the
words of the Law, but others of the Ancients to the Commands of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which are the fulfilling of the Law. Therefore Christ says not,
Whosoever shall break one of the least of those Commandments, but of these,
having respect to the foregoing Commandments, to which blessedness was
promised, and to other Commands of an holy Example, etc. and also to the
following Commands which contain a more large explication of things which are
of eternal equity. Christ argues, If it were lawful for no man to break the
Law, much less to break the Commands of the Gospel, Heb. 2.23. Every
transgression and disobedience of the Law received a just recompense of reward,
how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Yea, Christ says,
Whosoever shall by his interpretation weaken the Law of Christ, as the
Pharisees did against whom Christ preached, instructing his Apostles and
Messengers to be Teachers of another Sect, and that they are not to deprave the
Commands of Christ by false Expositions as the Pharisees did.

The least of these Commandments] That is, there is not the least Command in
these Sermons of Christ which any man can despise without the loss of
salvation. Some carry it to the Law of Nature contained in the Books of Moses,
which the Pharisees called small in respect of their traditions, to which they
gave a greater perfection than to Gods commands, which is not to be despised.
Some think Christ has respect to the distinction which the Pharisees gave of
the Commands, to wit, greatest and least, the greatest to be them which
commanded external obedience, as, Thou shall not kill, etc. the least which
commanded the moderation of the affections, as anger, wrath, etc. These
Commands are called least, not because they were so, but because they were so
in the Pharisees opinion.

And shall teach men so] That is, or shall teach men so, the Conjunction is put
for a Disjunction: he means whosoever shall teach these false interpretations
of the Law in the Church, and scatter his Errors, as the Pharisees, Sadduces,
and Herodians then did, and so led persons into seducement.

So] That is, to do as himself does, who keeps not the Commands of Christ, and
teaches others that they are not to be kept.

He shall be called least in the Kingdom of God] When thou art called least in
the Kingdom of Heaven suspect Hell and punishment. Chrysostom. that is, he shall
be nothing accounted of when the end of the World shall come. He shall be
called, that is, he shall then be pronounced so to be by the Judge, by the
Sentence of which Judge it shall be declared how great every man is, and in what
estate he shall be. Neither shall he be in no place, because he shall rise
again and be judged, but he shall be in the last place, because he shall be
cast into utter darkness. Some by least understand no place there at the
Judgment, as Psalm 1.6. The wicked shall not stand in judgment. Others
understand the last place: this word (...), In the Kingdom, does properly
denote the time, as Luke 14.14. Besides, the Day of Judgment is called by the
name of Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. To conclude, by least he means none, because none
can be in the Kingdom of Heaven, but those that are great they are sons, heirs,
and so it is expounded, v. 20.

But whosoever shall do and teach] These words though they principally look at
Teachers, yet are they not so to be bound to them that others should be
excluded, for it is the duty of all Christians, not only to go before others
by example, but by admonition and instruction, Romans 15.14. Col. 3.16. It Is said
of Christ, He began both to do and teach. Whosoever shall do and teach both
great and small Commandments, that is, whose bent of heart is for all the
Commandments. Teachers must not look for any Crown, if they do not practice
that which they teach others; they are like unto Highway Marks, which show the
way to others but do not go in it themselves.

The same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven] That is, pronounced
happy and blessed at that day, Dan. 12 2. They that turn many to righteousness
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. They shall be called great, Teacher
and Fathe of the Disciples, and Children whom he has begotten. Hence it
behooves every Teacher who expects this Crown, to examine whether what he
teaches unto others himself do first set upon the practice thereof, lest it be
said, Romans 2.21. Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self?
Teachers that know, and teach, and do not practice, they are like Uriah that
carried the Letters of his own death; or like the Philosophers that saw little
fruit of their teaching of virtue, because those things they taught others
themselves did not practice.

To conclude this point, I do by all that is said stablish the ten
Commandments, so far as what is contained in them is of the Law of Nature, and
not altered in the New Testament but completed; and for any other part of the
Law of Nature which was commanded in the Old Testament, I judge it to be
established, as also all the Evangelical Promises and Precepts of the Law are
established by Christ and the Apostles, Romans 3. ult. Do we then make void the
Law through Faith? Nay, we establish the Law. Tertul. de pudicitia, we stablish
the Law, to wit, in those things which being also now brought in by the New
Testament are forbid cumulatiore praecepto, by a more heaped Command; for, Thou
shall not commit Adultery, Who so looks upon a Woman to lust after her has
already committed Adultery in his heart; and for Thou shall not kill, who so
shall say to his Brother Racha, shall be guilty of Hell. See then whether the
Law of not committing Adultery be not safe to which the Law of not lusting has
come or been added? In a word, whatsoever is laid down in the Old Testament,
which was not either ceremonial, or proper to the Jewish Commonwealth only,
and peculiar to their Church State only, or has not been nullified by some
Commandment of the New Testament, is and ought to be of perpetual observation,
by all Christians, as being holy just and good; and I must say as Justin to
Tripho, I am altogether persuaded there is no Scripture diverse from another, I
will rather confess I understand not the things that are spoken. Page 225.

For to diminish any thing from Gods Word is far from me, only I have
endeavored to reconcile where any thing seems contrary in the New Testament to
the Old. One Title of the Word is greater than Heaven and Earth, said Luther.
Among all the gifts of God this is one of the largest, he that takes away this
does as it were take away the Sun out of the World; for take away the Word,
what is the World but a Hell, notwithstanding all the glorious things in it?

Howbeit I shall not forbear to write what Justin Martyr, who when he writ his
second Epistle to the Emperor Antoninus, he says, it was then 150 years from
the birth of Christ, from which taking the 33 years of Christ his being on
earth, and the years of the life of Justin, he was within much less then an 100
years after Christ his ascension, yet see how he disputes against Tripho p.
175, Apol. 2. p. 65.
176. Justin, have you nothing against us but that we are not circumcised, nor
keep your Sabbaths; and holy days, nor live according to the prescript of the
law? Tripho, we wonder at you that boast of true Religion, and would excel
other men, when your life differs nothing from them, as that ye keep neither
holy days, nor Sabbaths, neither have circumcision, moreover you place your
hope in a crucified man, have thou not read that the soul that is not
circumcised shall be destroyed; you slighting this Covenant and Testament you
have no respect of the following commands, and ye go to persuade your selves
that you know God, doing nothing of those things which those that fear God do.
Justin, we worship no other God but him that made heaven and earth, and hope
not in any other God but in him in whom you hope, but we hope not by Moses nor
by the law, for then should we do as you; but now I have read, O Tripho, that
there has been a latter law, (...), and a Testament most sovereign of all,
(...), that Testament I say it behooves all mortal men to keep, whosoever aspire
to inherit the kingdom of God, for the law which was proclaimed in Horeb is now
old, and is only yours, but this is common to all, seeing that a law brought
against a law, the latter abolishes the ancienter, and the latter Testament
derogates from the former. Christ the everlasting and final law is given to us,
and a faithful Testament, after which Testament there will not be further law,
precept, nor any command. These and much more Justin says. I cite this to
abate the heat of some who are too much inclining to Jewish observations, for
my self I judge, as before, the old Testament to be in force, the former
restrictions and limitations by me laid down being observed, and so does Justin
page 190. Do thou acknowledge these things, O Tripho? they are laid up in
your writings, yea rather in ours then in yours, for we believe them and obey
them, but ye whiles ye read them do not attain the mind and sense of them, cont
Triph. -- and we confess those Commandments are sweeter then honey and the honey
comb, as appears by that, that we do not deny his name unto death, Ibid. see
the same more fully page 202. ibid.

V. 20. For I say unto you, except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Christ retorts the accusation of the Scribes and Pharisees, that they opposed
and depraved the law, not in the least Commandments, but in the greatest;
which Christ sets down, generally in this verse, specially in the following
verses: in this verse, because they teach such a righteousness as excludes out
of heaven; for they did not only teach a righteousness of works, but obliged
their hearers only to outward duties, so that if they did not kill a man, or
lie with another man's wife, nor take away with their hands another man's goods,
they were just in those commands respectively.

Except your righteousness exceed] That is, except your righteousness overcome
that obedience which they require.

The righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees] He names these sects, because
they had gotten an opinion of holiness above other sects, as the Herodians and
Esseans, from which holiness they were far enough, but if you ask what this
righteousness was, we may see from Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, 1
Phil. 3.6. which consisted 1 In an outward unblameableness, and in opposing
such sins as hindered civil society.

Now whereas the law forbad heart sins, as well as outward offenses, the
Pharisees interpreted sin rather according to to the mind of their counsel,
then to the mind of Gods law: and for these inward sins they were done away by
their daily sacrifice. And therefore Tripho disputing against Justin says, The
commandments of the Gospel seem to be so great and wonderful that they cannot
be performed of any man, to wit the commands of inward innocence. And therefore
Josephus censures Polybius for ascribing the death of Antiochus to an
intentional sacrilege, though not committed. For the Pharisees outward
righteousness, see Matthew. 23.25, 26.

2 In civil righteousness and just dealing with men, otherwise they could
never have gained that opinion of sanctity.

3 In partial righteousness; for doubtless they observed some of Gods commands
with much seeming devotion, as in paying tithe of Mint, Annise and Cummin,
Matthew. 23.23. mean time they omitted judgment, mercy and faith.

Hence 1 See the folly of men. Carnal professors who content themselves with
either 1 Civility in dealing justly with men as the Pharisee, Luke 18.12. Or 2
With formality because they pray, read, fast, give alms, yet all these things
did the Pharisees. External righteousness is that most look after, never
looking to the evils of their hearts, as malice, pride, etc. neither to
suppress them nor to be humbled for them.

2 See how far many are from heaven, who have not so much as these Pharisees
had, not so much as an external righteousness, open swearers, drunkards,
scoffers at goodness.

3 See that if you come to heaven you must get a righteousness exceeding all
pharisaicall righteousness; this is had only by Christ, who being made over
unto us for righteousness by faith, Gal. 2.16. Phil. 3.9. is made over also for
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. working in us uprightness which is called by the
name of righteousness, Job 27.5, 6. Psalm. 32. ult. If you ask how the
righteousness of one can save so many, I answer, even as the sin of the first
Adam could condemn many.

Ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven] That is, into the state
of glory, because the kingdom of heaven is joined with the word enter. See
Matthew. 18.3. Matthew. 19.23. Joh. 3.5. Acts 14.22.

2 Entering into the kingdom of heaven is opposed to hell fire, Mark 9.47, 48.
This name of the kingdom of heaven was never mentioned in the old Testament,
but only wrapped up in certain signs, shadows and types.

And therefore this not entering into the kingdom of heaven, is not meant of a
Church consisting of Pastor, of People, as if such persons that practiced
external or partial righteousness were unworthy to be teachers in the Church,
but Christ speaks to all his disciples that they look that they have a
righteousness both of doctrine and life exceeding Scribes and Pharisees.

Now Christ does not show what this more abundant righteousness is, because his
scope was not here to teach what this righteousness is, but only to convince
the Pharisees who were teachers of a false righteousness.

V. 21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
kill, and, whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment.

Christ proves in special to the end of the Chapter that the Pharisees were
falsifyers of the law, and so retorts the accusation that was by the Pharisees
cast upon him, upon themselves, because either they depraved the words of the
law, as concerning murder, divorce, and swearing, etc. or else coldly expounded
it of the letter, never looking to the obedience of the heart.

Ye have heard that it was said by them of old] These words are referred to the
time of Moses, 1 Because the word [old] has respect unto a long continued
oldness, Luke 9.8, 19. Act. 15.21. 2 Pet. 2.5. Revel. 12.9. 2 Because the words
that Christ recites and mentions are the same that are found in the Law,
sometimes without addition of any Interpretation, as v. 27, 31, 33, 38. So that
Christ speaks not only to them that had spoken to him, but to the Disciples
and to the multitude, and to the imperfections of the Mosaical Law. This
Covenant of the new Testament, much excels that Covenant given on Mount Sinai,
Gal. 4.24. Heb. 8.6. Christ was the mediator of a better Covenant, which was
stablished upon better promises.

But indeed both these interpretations are to be taken; for Christ does oppose
himself to the Law of Moses as to the Scribes, and supplies the imperfections
and defects of them both, for the Law of Moses was imperfect, and therefore
Christ perfected it by the Law of the Gospel.

Thou shall not kill] Many thought that by this Law only murder was forbid,
but Christ teaches that wrath, strokes, reproaches and murtherous words, the
foregoing of murder, was forbid.

And whosoever kills shall be in danger of judgement] That is, shall be put
to death by the Civil Magistrate, Exodus 21.12, 14. Levit. 2.17. Numb. 34.16,
17, 18, 19.30.33. this was to be done, lest the land should be defiled with
blood: for though now judgment of life and death was executed by the Romans,
yet was their manner of judgment known to all, and fresh in every man's memory.
Josephus says there were seven of these Judges, to which there were fourteen
Assessors, who were mostly of the Levites, to these there were one or two
supernumeraries, which make up three and twenty, which the Hebrews generally
say was the number.

Now to speak a little concerning this command of killing, there was a twofold
killing;

1 Casual, when a man meant no harm, yet accidentally killed a man, as by
throwing a tyle from an house, or an axes head flies off, and kills a man as he
was hewing wood. in this case the thing being done ignorantly, there was a City
of refuge, Exodus 21.13. Deuteronomy. 19.5, 6. Numb. 35. Such a man was to remain in
the City of refuge till the High Priests death, and if the avenger of blood
took him without that City he might kill him.

2 Voluntary, when persons have murtherous intentions, either by sword, pistol,
club, or poison, to take away any man's life, so those that hinder conception,
or procure abortion, by potions, ignorant Physicians, so those who shall desire
the death of their parents, or friends, to have their estate, or the death of
their husbands or wives, or children, because they are straightened to maintain
them, or out of a desire to enlarge their condition, so those that shall not
feed the poor in some cases, when they are in danger of perishing. This command
is a hedge for the preservation of the life of man.

1 This murder is either of the heart, as wrath, envy, hatred, etc.

2 Of the tongue, as to wish evil to our neighbor, as to wish him dead, or to
give him provoking speeches.

3 Of the hand; This is so much more heinous, by how much the person is more
near related to us in consanguinity. By the Cornelian Law among the Romans such
were sown in a sack and cast into the sea, as being unworthy to partake of any
of the Elements.

Nor is the inventor only, but also the shedder of blood guilty. Not only
David who contrived Uriahs death, but also Joab who was the shedder. So not
only Ahab and Jezabel were guilty of Naboths death, but also the Judges and
Elders of Jezreel, and the sons of Belial who witnessed against him were all
murderers, 1 Kings 21.8. to verse ^5.

Now, that murder escapes not without punishment, we see, not only in
Abimelech, who slaying Gideons sons had his brains beat out with a piece of a
Millstone, Judge. 9. But also in Zachariah the son of Jehojada, whose blood was
shed by Joas and by his Nobles, in which same year came the Syrians with a
small Army, and slew all the Princes, 2 Chronicles. 24.23, 24. and the Servants of
the King conspired against him, and slew him, v. 25. Joab that murdered Abner
was put to death by Solomon, and Absalom that murdered Amnon was himself slain
by Joab. Yea the intentional Murder of Haman was punished with the actual
destruction of himself and his sons. Yea the Jews that murdered Christ, his
Blood is yet on them and on their children. The old World before the Flood much
guilty of Murder, as appears Matthew. 23 35. in the end the Flood sweeps them
away.

If it be asked whether the Revenger of Blood may transact with the Murderer for
satisfaction; I answer, He may not, Deuteronomy. 19.12.

If it be asked, whether Intercession may be made for a Manslayer? Answ. Yes,
for casual Manslaughter, but not for voluntary Murder.

If it be asked whether the Magistrate may put any Malefactor to death? Ans.
Yes, Genesis 9.6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed,
which was a Law of Nature before the Jewish Laws. As when the Surgeon cannot
provide for the safety of the whole body, without cutting off some diseased
member, proceeds to cut it off: So the Magistrate provides for the public good
by cutting off such evil doers, Prove. 20.26. A wise King scatters the wicked,
and brings the Wheel over them.

Object. But God condemns Revenge, Romans 12.17. Avenge not your selves.

Answ. Private Revenge is condemned, but not public, Romans 13.4. The Magistrate
is a terror to evil works, he bears not the Sword in vain, he is a Revenger
to execute wrath on them that do evil.

Object. But by putting Murderers to death, they are deprived of seasons of
Repentance, which is contrary to Charity.

Answ. Private Charity must give way to public: by cutting the Murderer off
the Magistrate provides for universal safety.

Object. Christ did not command to stone the Woman taken in Adultery.

Answ. Christ does not disallow the Law of stoning such, but only minds them
of their guilt and hypocrisy; besides, Christ only absolves her from her
sins, not from temporal judgment.

Object. But are not Duels lawful?

Answ. No, they are unlawful, whether to shun Reproach of Cowardice, or for
the trial of a secret or unknown thing, or in case of slander.

1 Strifes were appointed to be ended, 1 By Oaths, Heb. 6.17. or by Courts of
Justice.

2 There Is no Promise that God will succor the innocent in this case to give
him victory.

3 Such sin both against their Neighbor, in killing him uncondemned how guilty
soever, and against themselves in exposing their own Lives to danger.

4 Whether thou killest or be killed, thou art a Murderer.

Quest. Whether is it lawful to make war?

Answ. The Soldiers asking John, what they should do in order to Repentance,
he bids them not cast away their Weapons of War, and withdraw themselves from
the calling of Soldiers, but bids them be content with their Wages, Luke 3.14.

Cornelius converted did not change his Calling.

Paul, Acts 23.17. took the Guard of men who were sent to guard him from the
Jews fury, in number four hundred and seventy. Also 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes to
warfare at his own charge, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth entangleth himself
with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who chose him to be a
Soldier.

Revel. 17.14. The Babylonians make war with the Lamb, and the chosen and
faithful who are with the Lamb overcome him, which Soldiers who are on the
Lambs part are commanded to burn her with fire, cap. 18.6, 7, 8.

Quest. But what think you of a cruelty, may a Christian use any such thing?

Answ. No, Magistrates are not to condemn persons to a greater Punishment than
their Offense deserves. Conquerours in War are not to use their Captives
rigorously above the nature of their Offense. Whereas David 2 Samuel 12.31. made
the Ammonites to be put under Sawes, and Harrows of Iron, and made them pass
through the Brick-kiln; the cause was, they showed greatest unkindness to David
for his great kindness; besides, they abused his Ambassadors by cutting off
one half of their Beards, and shaving their Garments to the Buttocks, 2 Samuel
10.4. besides, by the Law of like for like, as they had made their children to
go through the Brick-kilns in honor of their Idols, it was just to cast them
into the same Furnace into which they had cast their chidren. Yet some think
only their Governors were so served. Junius reads it, He cast them into the
Furnace of Moloch. For the cutting off Adonibezek's Thumbs and Toes, it was a
just Requital of like for like. Judges 1.6. For Gideon's slaying the Elders of
Succoth with Thorns and Brambles, Judges 8.14, 16. The persons thus punished
were only the Elders or chief Magistrates of the City, who had refused, not
only to give Bread unto Gideon and his three hundred men, when they were
faint, but also gave slighting speeches to them, for which Gideon threatens,
that he would tear their Flesh with Thorns and Briars, Judges 8.4, 5, 6, 7.

Besides, where Gods people have gone from a particular rule, we must judge
they either did it by a private motion, or else they sinned in so doing.

V. 22. But I say unto you, Whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause, shall be in danger of the judgment, and whosoever shall say unto his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the counsel, but whosoever shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

In this verse Christ explains, fulfils and supplies the law of Thou shall not
kill, and shows that not only murder is forbid, but also inward and outward
wrath, which breaks forth into reproachful speeches.

But I say unto you] That is, I ordain, being as well a lawgiver of the
Evangelical, as of the law natural.

Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause] Anger simply is not a
sin, it is ascribed to God, it was in Christ, Mark 3.5. Yea it was in man in
Paradise; only inordinate anger desiring private revenge, is forbid, and also
when it is in vain, as 1 When it is without cause.

2 When it is without measure, against this Paul, Ephesians. 4.26, Be angry and sin
not, let not the sun go down upon your wrath.

Shall be guilty of the judgement] As if he should say, You Pharisees exceed
all measure in your anger, and with a malicious heart rail upon the most
innocent persons, upon me and my disciples, but I would have you take heed of
this anger, for you shall have a greater torment in hell for your anger, then
that which murderers have here, and if you add railing to your anger, you
will have a more grievous punishment, and if your railing be more ha^nous your
torments will be greater, you will be guilty of the judgment, and of the
counsel, yea of hell fire. The law of Moses did not threaten such kind of
wrongs unless they had cursed their parents, or their Gods or magistrates.

Of the judgement] By the judgment he means the counsel of the three and
twenty men, of which I spoke before, they had also a judgment of three men,
who judged of money matters, though sometimes this counsel was called the
Synedrion, yet for distinction sake that same assembly of three and twenty was
called the judgment, because they judged of murders and inflicted death, and
the other great counsel was called the Sanhedrim or Synedrion, from the
different degrees of punisments among the Jews. Christ would show the degrees
of punishment in another world, according to the greatness of sin, as if he
should say, Look as among you Jews there are different offenses, some are
judged in your counsel of three and twenty, and some in your great Sanhedrim,
and that with the highest punishment which you have to inflict, that is to say
burning, so in the court of heaven some sins, as rash anger, are less
sentenced, others more sorely, as when our anger shall break forth to railing.

Whosoever shall say to his brother Racha] Racha is a Syriack word, and
signifies (as Lapide and others collect from learned men) 1 Empty, as empty of
wealth or poor, or as some, empty of brain or wit. 2 It signifies spittle or
spit upon, to signify they esteemed one another no better then the spittle
they spat out of their mouths. 3 It signifies contemned, vile, despised,
abject, and in this signification Michael Maronita in his proeme of the Syriack
Grammar thinks it to be taken: the Ethiopian expounds Racha thus, he that shall
say to his brother, he poor by contempt and of torn garments, shall be guilty
of the counsel.

Shall be in danger of the counsel] This consisted of 72, in this causes of
high concernment were handled, as Heresy, False prophecy, Idolatry, Apostasy.
This Counsel sat at Jerusalem, and its supposed these seventy were set over
them, in remembrance of the 70 souls Jacob brought into Egypt, these ruled over
them sometimes, and some think Pharaoh made them their taskmasters; these went
part of the way into the mount with Moses, Exodus 24.9. After when they seemed a
little to be laid aside, by Jethroes counsel, the Lord sets them up again,
Numb. 11.16. Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou
know to be elders of the people and officers over them, and bring them to
the tabernacle of the congregation, and I will take of the spirit which is upon
thee, and I will put it upon them.

If there were any thing more dark or more intricate that fell out among the
Judges of cities, they were to have recourse to this counsel, whereof the high
priest was one, and I take it mostly the president therein, all, both inferior
Judges and private persons, were commanded to obey their answer on pain of
death, against them that should oppose. Of this there is mention made, Deuteronomy.
17.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Also Jehoshaphat confirmed them, see 2 Chronicles. 19 8, 9,
10, 11. In this Senate both matters of God and matters of the King and kingdom
were handled, and that they might be encouraged herein, Jehoshaphat tells them
they had Amariah, a man well skilled in judgments and S^bad^ah, a man well
skilled in civil affairs, and diverse of the Levites excelling in other
learning. So great was their authority that of some causes the king himself did
not judge, Jer. 38.5. Zedekiah says the King can do nothing against you. The
Hebrews note that the king came not into the Sanhedrim, least his opinion
should take liberty of judging from others, who thought diversely from him.

For this see Jer. 26.16, 17, 18. Ezekiel mentions these 70 old men, Ezekiel.
8.11, 12. and Jazaniah was chief: the Hebrews say these seventy retained their
authority in Babylon, and Artaxerxes established this power when they came out
of the captivity, Ezra. 7.25, 26. after when they took up arms against
Antiochus, the government of things was in this Senate, in which Court the
kingly Scepter was kept. This order continued till Herod the great, who slew
them all (as a just judgment because these Senators had neglected to bridle
his boldness and power) except one Sameas, whom they had often contemned
admonishing such things, in the room of whom Herod appointed others of his own
faction. After, in Augustus his time, the power of this Senate came to be
strainted, the power of life and death being taken from them, and diverse other
counsels set up in several cities about civil affairs. Yet it is mentioned in
the new Testament. Joh. 7.50. of these Nicodemus was one, and Joseph another,
Acts 4.6, 7. also Acts 5.21. This counsel is distinguished from the Senate, or
city Magistracy of Jerusalem, so also, Luke 22.66. Jerusalem being destroyed
by Titus, this Senate came to an end.

So that the meaning of what is spoken, is, there is such proportion betwixt
wrath and a reproachful word, and betwixt the punishment of both, as there is
betwixt the judgment of the three and twenty, or the Synedrion, or chief
Council; as this exceeds that, so the punishment of a reproachful word exceeds
the punishment of anger.

But whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be guilty of hell fire] Some give
this interpretation, you Hebrews bring persons for anger and reviling to the
Council, alluding to their manner of proceeding, but I for the same sin
threaten a greater punishment unto them, even hell fire.

But the more common interpretation is, whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall
be guilty of hell fire, (...). The word translated hell, properly signifies the
fire of Gehenna. Without the City of Jerusalem, there was a place called
Gehenna, or, the Valley of the son of Hinnom, wherein was a place called
Tophet, Jer. 7.31, 32. where the Jews after the example of the Phoenicians,
burnt their children to Moloch, timbrels and pipes making a noise, lest the cry
of the burnt child should be heard. Josiah polluted this place by bringing
dead carcasses into it, 2 Kings 23.10. compared with Jer. 7.32. It was also
called Tophet, which as Lapide says, signifies a Timbrel, from the playing
upon timbrels there. It was called Ghehinnom of Ghe, i.e. A Valley, and Hinnom
the name of a Jew. It was a pleasant Valley near Jerusalem, but because of this
horrible burning of their children, the Jews hereby signified the torment of
the damned. Esai 30.33. Tophet is prepared of old, he has made it deep and
large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a
stream of brimstone does kindle it. As the miserable infants shut up in a
brazen Idol, fire being put under, were broyl'd and burnt with an unspeakable
torment, so the wicked in the prison of hell, shall be tormented with
unquenchable fire.

Now the cause for which among others, is, for passionate railing, and calling
fool, that is a wicked man, who in Scripture is so called, not a natural fool,
or under-witted, but a wicked man, a contemner of God, Psalm. 14.1. The fool
has said in his heart, there is no God, then which there is hardlier a more
grievous railing, especially when it is done, (...), without cause.

Yet this does not hinder, but that those, who have a duty of chastising
others, may be sharply reproved, that they may be rowsed out of their
sleepiness, as Christ calls his Disciples, Luke 24.25. O fools, and slow of
heart, and to the Pharisees, Matthew, 23.17, 19. Paul calls foolish Galatians,
Gal. 3.1. and Christ calls the Pharisees, Generations of vipers, Matthew. 23.33.
resembles them to graves and whited sepulchers, v. 27.

To conclude this verse, for the prevention of our hearts to break out into
anger and so to railing, I Will lay down some considerations about anger, as,

1 What it is. A. It Is an affection whereby the blood about the heart, being
heated by the apprehension of some injury offered to a man's self or friend, and
that in truth or in opinion, the appetite is stirred up to take revenge.

Its twofold, 1 Just, and this is twofold, 1 created, so anger was in Adam to
rise up against all that should tempt him to sin, knowing that in the day he
sinned he should dye.

2 Renewed, whereby we are angry at our own or other men's sins, so Moses, Exodus
32.32. he was so angry that he slew three thousand who were actors in the
golden Calf. Phineas slew Zimri and Cosbi, Numb. 25.7, 8. so we may have a just
anger, when our own name, or state, or wife, or life is violated.

2 There is an unjust anger, which is when we have a desire of revenge stirred
up in us upon unjust causes; Jon. 3.

Now that thy anger may be just and not sinful, consider, 1 The properties of
holy anger. 2 The remedies against sinful anger.

1 The properties of holy anger, as,

1 It must have a just cause, Exo. 11.8. Moses went from Pharaoh in a great
anger: Lot was angry with the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7.

2 It must be proportioned to the fault. We must not bring a club to kill a
fly, nor set an house on fire to roast an egg. Here Jonah failed, who was so
angry for a gourd, and the Disciples who for a contempt would have had fire
come down from heaven, Luke 9.53.

3 With love of those with whom we are angry; so Moses prayed for Israel, when
he was so angry at their golden Calf, Exodus 32.11.

4 In matters of importance, not for trifles. There Is more justice then love in
such a carriage, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6.

5 It must be short; the Sun must not go down upon it lest it boil up into
malice, Ephesians. 4.26. and so much the shorter, as we see signs of repentance in
the person offending. Absaloms long retained anger turned into malice, and in
fine to murder.

6 It must be moderate. Not as Simoon and Levi, who slew innocent as well as
guilty, Genesis 34.25. Some are like cruel hangmen, who having a just cause to
execute the office, to wit, the Judges command, do in the execution thereof use
all cruelty. So persons being commanded to be angry with the sins of their
brethren, seem glad they have got such an occasion to show their fury, though
too many can swallow the same evil in a friend.

Remedies against unjust anger.
1 Take heed we be not abused by false imaginations, as to be angry for a man's
not saluting us when perhaps he never saw us, or to think a man bears us no
good will when he discovers no ill will against us. To think a man loves us not
because he comes not so often to our house when perhaps his business will not
permit, or because we see a man laugh, to think, he laughs at us.

2 Consider thy own vileness. Carry meekly to others, for thou wast as bad as
they, Tit. 3.3. Jam. 3.2.

3 Consider Gods patience, how many imperfections he patiently bears in us,
10000 talents, let us bear with pence, Matthew. 18. ult. He is over thee, as thou
art over others.

4 Avoid occasions of anger, as contentious companions, Prove. 22.24. drunken
company, Prove. 23.29. too much affecting any thing; for when we lose it, it
will cause much anger. As we keep gunpowder and tow far from fire, let us avoid
occasions of anger.

5 Consider nothing befalls thee but by the providence of God. This kept David
from anger when Shimei cursed, 2 Samuel 16. and Job, c. 1.22. he raged not against
the devil, nor the Sabeans, but looked at God and quieted his heart; and though
you have not deserved it at their hands, yet have you deserved much more at
Gods hand, Genesis 50.20, 21. it was not ye but God sent me hither.

6 Behold anger in another how odious it is. Should a man see himself in a
looking-glass when he is in a Bedlam fit, how ugly would he look to himself?

7 It makes us unfit to duties, as to prayer, 1 Timothy 2.8. Lift up holy hands
without wrath, to hearing, receive with meekness the ingrafted word, Jam. 1.21.
to receiving, 1 Cor. 11.17, 18. to Church Communion, 1 Cor. 1.10. to mutual
edifying, hence Paul and Barnabas parted companies, Acts 15.

8 Angry men take that which is proper to God, which is vengeance, Romans 12.19.
Vengeance is mine, and not thine. An angry man makes himself to be Judge, and
would have God to be his Executioner.

9 Interpose reason and deliberation; without this the soul is like a ship
without Compass or Pilot, let reason teach thee not to be hasty in thy answers.
Theodosius was taught by Ambrose to take thirty days respit before he punished
any offense, because in that space his anger might be assuaged, and his
judgment rectified. It Is as absurd for passions to lord over reason, as for an
intemperate scold to justle out a reverend Judge. It Is not comely to be angry,
for it is a kind of madness, but if it shall seize upon us, let us so use it,
that it be for the correction and amendment of our neighbor: he that uses it
besides reason hates himself and his neighbor, by troubling himself and
grieving his neighbor, Justin. ad Zen. and Seren. p. 395.

10 Consider the loveliness of a meek spirit both with God and man, 1 Pet. 3.4.
it is an ornament of great price. It Is the sinews of all delightful society,
and draws (like a Loadstone the iron) the spirits of men to it.

11 The scandal. Every blind man can see the evil of a waspish choleric
spirit, this made Jacob and his sons to stink, Genesis 34. ult.

12 Get out of the company of those who have offended us, as Jonathan did, 1 Samuel 20.34. besides thou shall hereby cover thy sin, which moves thy adversary
to scorn and laughter, and thy friends to sorrow and pity. Also hereby shall
thou appease thy anger, by removing the object. Prove. 12.16.

13 Suffer not anger to lodge with you. We cannot sometimes keep it from
entering, but from lodging, Eccles. 7.9. anger rests, what in a wise man's
heart? no, in the besome of fools; though we be sometimes touchy, let us not be
heavily disposed as Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.23. Let anger be like a fire of thorns,
quickly extinct. A spark or coal of fire if it light on us it will not hurt us,
if it be presently shook off, but if it lie still it causes burning; so will
our anger, if we let it alone we give place to the devil, who will boil it into
malice, by amplifying the indignity done to us, and the unworthiness of the
person. Usually the devil chooses an angry passionate heart to act his designs,
as we see in Saul and Cain. Anger is a young twig, envy is a tree and a great
beam. Luth.

14 Look on the bad effects in nature; it casts into a fever, dries up radical
moisture, hastens consumptions; It makes the mind drunk. In passion reason
that should govern us, is like a key to a lock that is jumbled, it makes men to
be angry with the bruits, as Balaam with his Ass, Number. 24.10. to throw things
out of their hand, which after they are forced to take up.

15 Suppress anger in thine heart; though it do not boil out, many are like
rivers which are most dangerously deep, where they run smoothest, retaining
that principle to be abhorred, that professed hatreds lose their place of
revenge. If this inward anger be not suppressed in the heart we know not to
what excess it may break out, as in Cain, and Haman.

Obj. But I am naturally angry and choleric.

Answ. By this reason might the adulterer, murderer, thief, excuse their
letchery, theft and murder.

V. 23. Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest
thy brother has ought against thee;

V. 24. Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first go and be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

Q What is meant by offering?

Answ. A free will offering mentioned, Levit. 1.2.

Christ herein shows that this Commandment against murder is not fulfilled, if
there be any grudge betwixt us and our neighbor, and we do not return into
good will with him, and herein Christ shows two things:

1 That unless we be reconciled to our brother, all duties of godliness, as
prayers, hearing, receiving are nothing worth; therefore as often as we come to
the worship of God, we must cleanse our hearts from these. So the Apostle
commands, 1 Timothy 2.8. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Malice, and wrath, and calling a person
Racha does no less disable from prayer, then from the supper. This should be a
ground of humiliation for all such carriages, when we come before the Lord. No
voluntary offerings, whether costly or of free will, that are offered with an
angry heart do please God. And therefore foolishly did the Pharisees suppose
that gifts offered in the Temple did expiate sins, which the Judges did not
punish, though there were no amendment of heart.

2 That in vain persons profess themselves to be worshippers of God, who offend
their brethren, and after proudly contemn them, for under one kind Christ
points out all outward exercises of worship, wherein men counterfeit godliness,
rather then truly witness it. If we give all our goods to the poor and have not
charity, it profits not.

If thou bring thy gift to the Altar] Christ speaks of the worship of the
Christians, in words applied to the worship of the Jews, when they offered
sacrifices and gifts on the Altar of the Temple, though I grant (...) was the
name often given to the Lords Table, so called in reference to the sacrifice
there signified, which was Christ, Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar whereof they
have no right to eat that serve the Tabernacle, yet was it not called (...),
which was proper only to heathen Altars: besides it appears by the Apostles
Canons, that Christians brought gifts and laid them upon the Altar or
Communion Table, for the use of the Ministers and poor, and for the use of the
Ordinances, Canon 3. and Canon 5.

And there rememberest thy Brother has ought against thee] That is, any just
complaint concerning wrong done to him, though thou have nothing against him,
yet if he have any thing justly against thee, yet ought thou to consider
hereof. This is needful, 1 In respect of God, who looks not so much upon the
Gift, as upon the Heart clean from Hatred and Malice, Isai 1.15. When you make
many Pra^ers I will not hear; your hands are full of Blood.

2 In respect of our selves, because unless we be reconciled to our Brother, we
pray against our selves, when we desire forgiveness of God as we forgive
others, Col. 3.13. Forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any
one.

Quest. But what if the person will not be reconciled?

Answ. This may comfort thee, thou have done thy duty; Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after Righteousness. Christ absolves thee, if thou seek
Reconciliation and can not obtain it.

Moreover, if the Supper of the Lord be here meant, and I know no absurdity in
including of it, how necessary is it for Brethren to be united, hence it is
called a Communion, that is a common union betwixt Christ and Believers: and
indeed this Unity and Love is the Badg of Christ's Disciples, we tell an
apparent Ly when we come to this Communion, and have not an Union with our
Brethren, 1 Cor. 10.16. We being many are one Bread and one Body; in token of
which Union Christians before the Supper gave an holy kiss one to another, as
Lapide observes.

This must be limited to respect time and place, for if the person offended be
far from thee, then let thy affection go to him, and give satisfaction as soon
as thou can, only we may see how unholy a thing Discord and Strife is, that
it unhallovvs every service.

Also Christ condemns selfishness, whereby too often we stand too much upon our
own right, even to loss of Charity, contrary to Phil. 4.4. Let your moderation
in remitting of your right, (...), be known unto all men.

V. 24. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with
him, lest at any time the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and the Officer
cast thee in Prison.

V. 25. Verily thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost Farthing.

Christ goes on further to commend unto us Reconciliation, and the scope of
these words is, 1 that we should endeavor to be reconciled with that person
whom we have offended, this is done,

1 By confessing our evil, Luke 17.3, 4.

2 By professing our sorrow for it, Luke 17.4.

3 By declaring that we would willingly that the thing we have done were
undone; and if it were to do again we would not in any wise do it; this is
satisfaction, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.

4 By making a just apology to our Adversary, Josh. 22.26. The two Tribes and
an half made an Altar beyond Jordan, but not for burnt-offering, nor for
sacrifice, with which apology, that the Altar was made only for civil use, the
rest of the Tribes were satisfied, for want of which apology the Benjamites
were destroyed, Judges 20.43.

2 That the person offended should accept satisfaction, and not show himself
irreconcilable, or hard to forgive a Wrong, Mark 11.25. Forgive if ye have
ought against any, that your heavenly Father may forgive you your trespasses.
Col. 3.13. Much more bear offenses in Wives, and Friends, and Servants, which
are made up with so many benefits.

Now this Forgiveness contains,

1 A removal of inward grudg and displeasure, Levit. 19.18.

2 Forbearance of all manner of Revenge, Romans 12 19.

3 To be lovingly affected and ready to do good, as if we had not been offended
at this person, so Joseph toward his Brethren.

Quest. But must we forgive all offenses?

Answ. In offenses done against us are two things,

1 The Injury. 2. The Damage. For example,

A man strikes a Tradesman or a laboring man, so that he keeps his bed, and is
at expenses for the cure of the Wound, besides he has lost what he might have
earned, and spent that he might have saved. Exodus 21.18, 19. The Injury must be
forgiven, that is, that want of love my Neighbor owes me, but the damage is
to be forgiven, when Wisdom and Charity requires, for we are not to stand upon
our right in every trifle, 1 Cor. 6.7.

Quest. In what order are we to forgive?

Answ. We are to forgive if a person do not ask pardon, Mark 11.25. but we are
not to profess our forgiveness unless he profess his repentance, Luke 17.4.

Motives to Forgiveness.
1 Our selves stand in daily need of forgiveness from God, Matthew. 18.35.

2 Gods forgiveness of us, as the Wall being heated with the Beams of the Sun,
warms them that stands by.

Object. If it were once or twice I could forgive.

A. We are to forgive till seventy times seven times, that is, four hundred and
ninety times, a definite number for indefinite.

Object. But he had no cause to do me wrong.

Answ. Thou had as little cause to sin against God, yet he forgave thee.

Verily thou shall not come out thence till thou have paid the uttermost
Farthing] There is no Allegory to be sought here,

1 Because of the foregoing dependence and connection.

2 Because Christ preached it to the people and multitudes.

Only Christ would teach us from what we see done among men, to conjecture
what we may expect from God, Luke 12.58. they make better conditions with
their adversaries, that yield in time, then they that stand out, but the scope
of the place aims at reconciliation with men, lest we standing out, they use
extremities against us, by imprisonment or otherwise.

Adversary] By adversary he means our neighbor, who is offended at us, whether
by our fault or his, and the scope is, that besides the mischief coming unto
our selves by his suing of us, we do not fulfill the sixth commandment, unless
we be reconciled to him.

Ob But this will take away all courts of justice, and what will become of
Lawyers?

Answ. Christ speaks of composing common offenses, which will never be wanting
in this world: for titles of land, etc. he leaves them to Magistrates. Besides
Christ aims principally to instruct disciples, not citizens or civil men, for
Christ would have no disturbance of civil peace among his followers.

Whiles thou art in the way with him] Here is an argument to reconciliation,
from the opportunity; this life is a short passage, and thou knows not whether
thou shall live till to morrow.

Least the adversary deliver thee to the judge] Christ had brought two reasons
moving to agreement, 1 Because strife and hatred defile the worship of God. 2
From the opportunity. A 3 reason is from the danger of deferred reconciliation,
least the adversary deliver thee to the judge; its dangerous both in respect of
God and man to defer reconciliation.

Paid the utmost farthing] Here Is a fourth reason, from the extremities that
will come upon standers out, they shall be made pay to the least mite; quadrans
is the least coin, hence that phrase of meretrix quadrantaria for a farthing
whore.

To seek for allegorical expositions, as to make this adversary to be Satan,
or our flesh, or our conscience, which bites till we agree with it, or the law
of God, is frivolous. Such is that, to make the judge to be Christ, the officer
to be the devil, the prison to be hell, or purgatory, as if the least debt of
offense were to be paid in purgatory, all which is to seek a knot in a bulrush,
as the proverb is.

V. 27. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
commit adultery.

V. 28. But I say unto you, Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Christ comes to show how the Pharisees had depraved the seventh Commandment
concerning adultery.

Concerning strumpets, that they have been of old, appears Genesis 38.14. only
they did not live in the Cities but in the Country, and went veiled, whereas
honest women were uncovered. When Judah saw Tamar in the high way, he thought
her to be an harlot, because she had covered her face, Genesis 38.15. and desired
to come in to her.

Adultery is the breach of wedlock, when one of the parties are married. And
therefore adulterium, quasi ad alterius thorum accessio, the coming to another
man's bed, as to the relation of husband and wife they are equally obliged,
having power of one another body, 1 Cor. 7.4.

We may see the greatness of this sin, in that it was not only forbid by the
Pharisees, but by Christ.

To dissuade from this sin, consider, besides that burning concupiscence burns
up this natural heat; the adulterer sins against his own body, 1 Cor. 6.17. he
does as it were dip his body into a filthy sink, and mi^es himself; and withal,
he alludes unto a custom that they had, who when they came from their beds of
uncleanness, used to wash themselves all over, as Chrysostom observes. Such
persons though they escape the judgment of the Magistrate, yet shall they not
escape Gods judgment, Heb. 13 4.

This sin by the Law of nature was capital; God threatens he would slay
Abimelech if he committed it with Abrams wife, and hence Abimelech threatened
death to any of his servants that should defile Abrams wife, Genesis 20.11. Judah
sentenced Thamar for this sin, Genesis 38.24. Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 29.22, 23.
caused two adulterous Prophets to be burnt in the fire, their names were
Zedekiah and Ahab.

To dissuade from this sin, consider;

1 It Is exceeding difficult to be recovered from this sin; It Is as hard as to
get out of a narrow pit, Prove. 22.14. so that Solomon says, One man among a
thousand have I found repenting of this sin, but not one woman, Eccles. 7.26,
27, 28. The reason why is, because this sin takes away the understanding, Hos.
4.10. and transforms a man into a bruit, so that Jer. 5.7, 8. the Jews are
compared to horses neighing after mares, and as if fornication had been an
indifferent action, as the heathens counted it, they assembled themselves by
troops in harlots houses.

2 Other sins carry singly to hell, this draws others with it, which increases
trouble to the conscience, that though the adulterer himself has repented, yet
has he drawn another into that sin whereof she perhaps has not repented.

3 The mischief it brings to a man; to his estate, Thy labors will be in the
house of a stranger, Prove. 5.10. Yea thy self hereby will be brought to a
morsel of bread. Pro. 6.26. Also it destroys reputation, which will hardly ever
be made up, Prove. 5.9. yea it destroys life, Prove. 5.9. Prove. 6.26. The
adulteress hunts for the precious soul, also Prove. 5.10, 11, 12. Yea it brings
consumption to the flesh and bones, and horror to the conscience, Job 24.17.

4 Whoredom inslaves a man. Of all things we are most jealous of our liberty,
Sampson with Dalilah, Herod with Herodias, Solomon with his Concubines, how
inslaved were they, to come upon the call of a strumpet, to have all that he
has at her command, to be afraid of her discovering of him, to have insolent
carriage toward him, what a slavery is this?

5 The dignity of Christians, their bodies are for the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.13. are
members of Christ, v. 15. Temples of the holy Ghost v. 19. bought with a price,
v. 20.

Remedies against Adultery.
1 Let every man keep to his own wife, 1 Cor. 7.1. compared with v. 9. this is
the way to prevent burning. Prove. 5.15. Drink waters out of thine own Cistern,
and running waters out of thine own well; as if he should say, When burning
lust fires a man, there is need of water to quench it, the remedy which must
quench it, is compared to a cistern and a pit. Now as every man had rather have
waters within doors then fetch it abroad, so let every man have his own wife to
quench the burnings of his desires. Whereas he names running waters, he shows
that remedy of quenching lusts by strumpets is like muddy water, which is
trodden with the feet of many beasts, but the other is clear; the effect hereof
is ver. 16. Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of water in the
street. By fountains and rivers he means children flowing from his wife, as a
fountain or spring. Besides, ver. 16. Thy children thou have by her shall be
thine own, and not straugers, whereas children begotten on strumpets are
children of the people.

2 Get a dear love to thy wife, Pov. 5.19, 20. q.d. If thy wife shall be as the
loving Hind and pleasant Roe thou shall never go after strumpets, err thou in
her love, how? by overlooking a squint eye, a hard visage, a dull
understanding, which may seem deformities to others, do thou overlook them.

3 Believe the al-seeing eye of God beholds thee in every place. Prove. 15.3.
The eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and good. Prove.
5.21. Heb. 4.13. This kept Job from this sin, Job 31.4. and Joseph, Genesis 39.10.

This thought, that God sees not, emboldens many to this sin. Job 24.15. The
eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me. The
more secretly thou do, this sin, the more abhorred it is of God, 2 Samuel
12.12. 2 Kings 17.9. Many persons, when they are in strange countries and
secret places, venture to commit this sin, as I have known some, who through
horror of conscience have confessed adulteries committed far from home.

4 Beware of venturing upon this sin, upon hope of future repentance, for few
have repented of this sin, Eccles. 7.28. and those who have repented, have had
exceeding horror in their consciences for this sin, as we see in David, Psalm.
51.8. None that go into her return again, Prove. 2.19. Neither take they hold of
the paths of life. That is, very few do return.

5 Shun all occasions and provocations to this sin, as dalliance, wanton
touches, and embraces, Prove. 6.27, 28, 29. As he that takes fire in his bosom
must needs burn his garments, so the wanton touching of a strange woman must
needs fire the body and mind; and as he that goes barefoot upon hot coals must
needs burn his feet, so he that goes in to his neighbors wife, though not in
away of adultery, but in a way of private converse, as walking, talking
together in secret, especially if there be any kind of touchings, without
prayer and watchfulness, will be apt to be fired in his fancy, memory, mind,
and will: as Tow presently takes fire, if the fire do but touch it, so
whosoever wantonly touches a woman shall not be innocent. Women are to be
honored, but there is danger in their company, let us consider their
endeavors in secret to swallow up their neighbors, they judge of themselves,
whether they can make war against chastity, Justin Martyr ad Zenam. Joseph
shunned all occasions, as being in private with his Mistress. To accompany with
persons noted for this sin, is an occasion, Psalm. 26.4, 5. the attire of an
harlot is an occasion also why women may be tempted to this sin, Prove. 7.10.
Hos. 2.2. Let her take away her fornications from before her face, and her
adulteries from between her breasts. The meaning is, she wore the attire of an
harlot in those parts. There is a chastity of habit, which much preserves the
person that wears it from the assaults of aculterers: a sign of wantonness held
forth in apparel or gesture, emboldens laseivious persons.

6 Beware of filthy talk, as scurrilous jeasts: filthy talking argues a filthy
heart, Matthew. 12.34, 35. rotten communication is condemned, Ephesians. 4.29. Ephesians
5.4. many make their tongues, which should be their glory, to be their shame.
If so much uncleanness come out of the tongue, how much more is there in the
heart? An angry displeasing countenance, though there were no other reproof,
were enough to silence such wicked tongues.

7 Take heed of idleness, it was the cause of David's sin, 2 Samuel 11.1, 2. As
the land until'd grows full of weeds, and the standing pool of frogs and toads,
so will the idle soul corrupt it self. When the mind is intent on business, it
has no leisure to wander about lascivious objects.

8 Read and study Gods word, its a preservative against this sin, Prove. 2.10,
11, 15, 16. Prove. 6.23, 24. It preserves thee from her flatteries, when she
shall profess she loves none like thee, and if it were not to thee she would
not prostitute her self to any. This word hid in the heart preserves the young
man whose lust is strongest, Psalm. 119.9, 11. For persons that fare daintily,
live idly, and pray and read rarely, its a rare thing for them to be preserved
from this sin.

9 Restrain thy thoughts from uncleanness, Job 31.4. Job would not think upon a
maid in any lascivious way. But of the heart proceeds adultery, Matthew. 15.18,
19.

Ob. But there is sweetness in this sin.

Answ. The more present sweetness, the more the future bitterness.

2 Consider how much more sweet is peace of conscience. Labor then to give an
absolute denial to this sin when it is in the first motion: if we cannot put it
out when it is but a spark, how can we put it out when it is in a flame?

10 Take heed of an adulterous eye, 2 Peter 2.14. Having Eyes full of Adultery,
that cannot cease from sin. When a City is besieged care must be had of the
Walls and Gates, Prove. 6.25. Let her not take thee with her Ey-lids, as if he
should say, if thou would not lust after her do not look upon her.

V. 28. But I say unto you, whosoever looks upon a Woman to lust after her,
has committed Adultery with her already in his heart.

But I say unto you] Christ here comes to correct the depravement of the
Pharisees, that they which kept themselves from bodily Adultery, were free
from all guilt thereof, But I say, that whosoever looks upon a Woman to lust
after her has already committed Adultery with her in his heart.

Whosoever looks upon a Woman] Not accidentally, or looks upon her by reason of
occasion, or company: nor is it unlawful for a Husband to look upon his Wife,
or a Suitor upon a Maid or Widovv he sues unto, but looking upon a Woman in a
lustful way is condemned, which is contrary to the end of this Commandment,
which is Chastity.

Concupiscence is the Mother of Lust, and the Eyes are the Windovvs to let it
in, and as Wrath is the Mother of Murder, so is Concupiscence of Adultery.
James 1.14, 15. Lust conceives and brings forth sin. Hence pray, Psalm
119.37. Turn away mine Eyes from beholding vanity.

The Pharisees depraved this Command two vvays.

1 In that they did not understand it of inward Concupiscence, but of that
which broke out into touches, kisses, or bodily Adultery.

2 That by this Law they thought was forbid the Concupiscence of another man's
Wife, but not of an unmarried Woman; but Christ says, that all lustful
thoughts of a Woman though she be not a Wife is unlawful.

Learn we then Job's Lesson, cap. 31.1. I have made a Covenant with mine Eyes,
why then should I think upon a Maid? Also Prove. 6.25. Lust not after her Beauty
in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her Ey lids. What though she be
beautiful, yet is Beauty fading; if she be honest she is none of thine, if she
be a Strumpet consider how filthy her soul is.

Besides, remember how Abimelech was taken with Sarahs Beauty; remember how
Sichem was foiled looking on Dinah, Potiphar's Wife looking on Joseph, David
on Bathsheba, Amnon on Thamar. As our Mother Eve at first was foiled by the
Eye, Genesis 3.6. seeing the forbidden Fruit was pleasant to the Eye she took it,
Sampson was also taken with looking upon Dalilah.

Therefore as the Sun on a sudden darts out Beams, and the Clouds lightening,
so does beauty and feature dart out the beams wherewith it shoots the arrows of
love and desire into the hearts of persons: therefore if at any time the Eyes
should go out, let the mind call back the Eyes, as from nets and snares laid
for the soul. In other creatures there is a natural shiness of snares laid for
them, let there be so in us. And what I say of wanton lookings we may apply to
wanton listenings and touchings. And also that wanton looking which is Adultery
in Men toward Women, is Adultery in Women who shall lustfully look upon Men.
(...) also signifies solicitations, Can. 4. Syn. Neocaesariensis.

Has committed Adultery with her already in his heart] Though men can neither
see nor punish the Adultery of the heart, yet God sees it. Such a speech Job
31.7. If my heart have walked after mine eyes, and any blot (he means of
uncleanness) has cleaved to my hands, then let me sow, and another reap, yea
let my Offspring be rooted out. God looks into the heart, he sees the mind and
purpose, which distinguishes evil deeds; a Thief is a Thief before he puts
forth his hand to steal: Wickedness is laid open by the doing, but does not
then begin; the mind becomes adulterous if it set before it the image of
pleasure that might be had with such a party, and shall desire it. Tertul de
poeniten. The will is the beginning of the deed, which is not then freed, when
some difficulty hinders the Commission of the thing willed; neither can the
will in this case be excused by the inability of perfecting that which it wills.

For application, 1 Be humbled for all your wanton lookings and lustings you
had in the state of nature and ignorance, as the prodigal in the return to his
father. Other sins are confessed in prayer, let this also.

2 Admire the grace of God to converted souls, that can look upon a woman
without lusting after her, Tertul. de Velandis Virg. A Christian looks upon a
woman with safe eyes, he is blind in his mind toward lust.

3 Caution of us for the guiding of the eye, not to fix it on any object that
may stir up lust, neither lustful books, nor pictures, nor mixed dancers,
neither to fix our eyes upon the beholding the beauty of wanton women. Beauty
indeed may be beheld, that as in other works God may be praised, so in that,
and therefore when one asked a certain Philosopher what there was in beauty
that it was so desired? he told him, it was a blind man's question: only let
us be wary herein that we dwell not too long on such objects, lest our hearts
should be carried after our eyes, and as restraint at all times should be upon
our sight, so especially when we come to worship God. Eccl. 5.1. Look to thy
feet when thou enterest into the house of God: it is a Syneedoche, for all the
affections of soul and members of body.

4 Exhortation to cleanse our flesh and spirit from all unchaste and unholy
lusts, Jam. 4.8. Cleanse your hands and purify your hearts, from what? Even
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. Thy body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, do not defile it, 1 Cor. 6.19.

Remedies against heart-lust through the eye.
1 Beware of private conversing men and women together. A Christian man is
commanded to confer with a Christian woman with all chastity, 1 Timothy 5.2. (...).

2 Call back your hearts from meditations of beauty and feature to better
meditations. The absence of holy thoughts causes the Lord to deliver us up to
vain thoughts, Psalm. 81.10, 11. I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and
they walked in their own counsel. Romans 1.24, 26, 28. As they liked not to
retain God in their knowledge, he gave them up to a reprobate mind, to choose
things reprobated, yea he gave them up to the lusts of their hearts.

3 Be often eying Gods eye in all places, Hebr. 4.13. There is not any creature
which is not manifest in his sight, Pro. 15.3. Psalm. 139.2. He knows our
thoughts far off.

4 Be not greedy to hunt after beauties; Remember one fit of an ague blurs it,
and how that beauty withers as grass, Psalm. 39.11. Thou make his beauty to
consume away like a meth: think what a change age and death puts upon it.

5 Consider, the eye is not satisfied with seeing, Eccl. 1.8. but rather more
unsatisfied, whiles the more they behold the more are burning desires kindled
in the soul.

6 Use prayer that God would turn thy eyes from vanity, Psalm. 119.31. and
watchfulness, that thou keep thy heart with diligence, for out of it are the
issues or goings out of life and death, Prove. 4.23.

V. 29. And, if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee,
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not
that thy whole body be cast into hell.

V. 30 And if thy right hand offend thee, out it eff, and cast it from thee,
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not
that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

These words belong to the former command, forbidding adulterous looks. They
are an Objection, Who can but love beautiful men and women? nature inclines to
love that which is beautiful.

Answ. To this Christ answers by an argument from the greater to the less; If a
Gangrene had infected part of the body, you would rather have that infected
member cut off, then have the whole body hazarded; how much more should we do
it, when the doing thereof will prevent the eternal destruction of soul and
body? if we could not therefore save our souls otherwise, we should be content
to pull out our eyes, but I require no more but that thou turn thy eye from an
ensnaring countenance; thou ought to cut off thy hand, but I require no more
then that thou keep it off from unchaste touchings. We suffer hard things for
the saving of our body, much more should we suffer hard things for the saving
of our souls, and so much more, because it costs less, namely the cutting off
of our lusts. Such phrases there are, Matthew, 18.8. Mark. 10.45. only there
they are applied to every darling sin, here they are applied to that sin
wherein persons have the least power of resistance. Of this Job 23.11. My foot
has held his steps, his way have I kept and not declined. Job 31.1. I have
made a covenant with mine eyes, v. 7. No blot has cleaved to my hands, also,
v. 5. his foot hastened not to deceit; the meaning of this precept is, that the
nourishment of lust is to be avoided; lust traveling with a sinful act, Psalm.
7.14. Jam. 1.14, 15. if it be hindered to bring it forth, that sinful act
becomes abortive, and lust it self dies.

Therefore this command, as all other commands that seem to command wickedness
or sin, ought to be taken figuratively, literally this precept were a breach of
the sixth command, Thou shall not kill, and so it were a cruel command, but it
is a most gentle Command: it had been hard if he had bid us keep company with
women, behold them, and abstain from them. Julian taking these sentences
literally mocked at Chistian Religion as foolish, cruel and vain, because it
commands to maim our own members: He mocked at Christians because no man did it,
he mock at Christ because no man obeyed him; but this Apostate might have seen
from the scope, that these words were not to be taken literally, but
figuratively. For Christ teaches this, seeing there is so much danger of the
eyes that they are as gates to let lust in and out, they are to be plucked away
from vanity, yea to be plucked out rather then be offensive to the soul.

Some of the ancients understood by right hand kindred and friends, any dear
thing which draws from God, but here is meant all occasions of lust taken from
the eye in particular, such was that curiosity of looking into the Ark of God,
1 Samuel 6.19.

Means to pluck out the abuse of the eye, and to cut off the hand.
1 Mortify our earthly members. Though corruption be in you, let it be like a
dead carcass. 1 God works habitual or inward mortification, not only by
raising up those that are dead in sin, but by stirring up the affections of the
soul to a desire of raising, and then crucifying sinful affections or lusts in
us. 2 For outward actual mortification, that is our work, hereby we resist
temptations and keep in inordinate affections.

These sinful affections are called members, as corruption is called a body,
Romans 6.6. and because it puts forth its power in all the members of the body,
and as our natural members perform our natural actions, so our corruption uses
these sinful affections as instruments to fulfill the desires thereof.

2 Look upon every allowed lust as that which severs betwixt God and us, Esa.
59.1. we are eagerly affected against those who endeavor to sever betwixt us
and our dearest friends.

3 Look upon your old man as crucified with Christ, Romans 6.6.

4 Get renovation in the imagination, for want whereof there are so many filthy
lustings in the eye, and listnings in the ear.

5 Look upon these as those which will destroy the soul, as in the text.

V. 30. It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife let him give her a
writing of Divorcement; But I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his wife,
saving for the cause of fornication, eauseth her to commit adultery, and
whosoever shall marry her that is divorced commits adultery.

Christ further clears the seventh Commandment, asserting that this command is
broken if a man shall put away his wife except for fornication; the Law allowed
divorce in diverse cases, but Christ only in the case of fornication.

It has been said] 1 By Moses, from divine inspiration, not upon his own
private fancy; for the commandments and statutes which Moses taught them, the
Lord commanded him for to teach them, Deuteronomy. 6.1. for he that would not
determine in a matter of inheritance (as in the case of the daughters of
Zelophehad) without first asking God, in a matter of greater moment, would not
do any thing without Gods command: and though Christ Matthew. 19.8. ascribes
divorce unto Moses, yet those things which came from God are ascribed to Moses,
Matthew. 8.4. Mark 1.44.7.10. Luke 5.14.

Now this divorce was made for some kind of filthiness, as for leprosy,
scolding, etc. Deuteronomy. 24. 1 For it was scarcely used in case of fornication, for
if the wickedness of fornication appeared, the adulteress was stoned, Levit.
20.10. and if she were suspected she was purged with the waters of jealousy,
Numb. 5.27. and God dispensing with the Jews for to put away their wives for
sundry causes, they did not sin herein in my opinion. Ob. But Mat. 19.8. Mose
because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives,
therefore it was only a permission. Answ. This their hardness was the cause
why God granted the Jews liberty herein, lest the Jews should kill their wives
whom they could not put away, yet this grant did make their putting away
lawful, because God for the hardness of the Jews did dispense with them in the
law of matrimony: by this putting away of wives, God typified the putting away
of the Jews, and the betrothing of the Gentiles.

Whosoever shall put away his wife] For only the husband by the Jewish law
might put away the wife. The Pharisees corrupted this law of divorce: the
original law was, Deuteronomy. 24.1. That if a man hated his wife for some filthiness,
giving her a bill of divorce he might put her away, but might never take her
any more after he had put her away. Now the Scribes and Pharisees depraving
this law, the Jews for every small matter put away their wives, showing the
seventh Commandment was not violated if they gave them a bill of divorce;
hence Christ reprehends this interpretation.

Now the form of this putting away, as the Lawyers tell, was, Tuas res tibi
habeto, tuas res tibi agito, that is, look to thy own affairs, condition tua
non utar, in severing the betrothings placuit renunciationem interv enire.

Let him give her a writing of divorcement] This was a writing whereby the
husband commanded his wife to depart from him. The form whereof was (as Grotius
mentions) this, Of my own accord and no man's compulsion, I have decreed to
leave, refuse and put away from me thee, hitherto my wife, and even now do send
thee away, forsake and refuse thee, and cast thee away from me, that thou
may be in thy own power; and may depart whither thou listest at thy own
will and pleasure, neither let any man at any time forbid it, and so be thou
let go, that it may be lawful for thee to mary to what man thou will.

Now that it was lawful for a man to put away his wife without bringing the
cause to the judge, appears by Christ's words; for Christ says, It was spoken
of them, he that puts away his wife let him give her a writing of
divorcement. Besides else how could Joseph have put away Mary privily. The
ancient Gauls and other nations granted the husbands power of life and death
over their wives. Grotius.

Quest. Whether did Moses grant divorce only in case of fornication?

Answ. No, for Christ says that grant was made for the hardness of their
hearts, Mat. 19.8. Mark 10.5.

But I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife except for the cause of
fornication] Qu. What if a wife be a witch, or one that endeavors to murder
her husband, etc. what then? may she not be put away? Ans. yes, but Christ
names fornication, because it is the proper cause of divorce, and directly
repugnant to marriage, whereas other causes are general, excluding from all
civil society.

Quest. But what if the adulterous wife repent, may not the husband take her
again to bed and board.

Answ. He may pardon it, because the offense is principally committed against
himself, but he is not bound, because Christ here gives him liberty to put her
away, 1 Samuel 25.44 compared with 2 Samuel 3.14, 15, 16.

Quest. Whether divorced persons may marry again to one another after divorce?

Answ. No: Jer. 3.1. If a man put away his wife and she become another man's,
shall he return unto her again? shall not the land be polluted? The reason was
least under pretense of divorce they should lend one another their wives, as
the Lacedaemonians and Cato did.

Quest. Whether divorced persons may mary at all, without committing adultery?

Answ. The innocent person doubtless may, for why should a chaste person suffer
for the Adultery of his yokefellow?

2 God has provided Marriage a Remedy against Incontinency, for all sort of
persons. 1 Cor. 7.2. but if parties lawfully divorced might not mary again,
then they should want this Remedy, and be exposed to a necessity of sinning.

Quest. Whether putting away in any case be lawful, seeing Mal. 2.15, 16. The
Lord hates putting away.

Answ. The Prophet speaks not of any putting away, but of that which was done
to innocent Women, only for Barrenness, upon which cause Divorce first began
at Rome: and yet the Romans were an hundred and twenty years without an Example
of putting away. Abraham, though Sarah was barren till ninety nine years of
age, never put her away.

Causes her to commit Adultery] How could this be?

A. She that was put away being branded with the Reproach of Divorce could not
get another Husband, and so being hopeless of marying, as being counted defiled
(as Moses phrases it) turned Strumpet, now Christ casts the fault hereof upon
him, who for a slight cause would put away his Wife. This is to expose the
frail age of a young Woman to temptation. Hence M.T. Cicero was blamed, because
for light causes he put away his Wife Terentia.

And whosoever marieth her that is divorced commits Adultery] Christ means
it (as Grotius thinks) of one that is of the same Faith and Profession, so that
we may understand it of them who received those that were put away before there
were Endeavors of Reconciliation used of one of them to the other. 1 Cor.
7.11. But if she depart, let her remain unmaried, or be reconciled to her
Husband. Also it is meant of those who being greedy of other men's Wives, by
Divorce made way to mary them. Hence Matthew. 19 9. the former Husband is said to
commit Adultery, if he shall mary another, so that the Crime of Adultery falls
on him, he has taken away all hope of agreement betwixt the former
yoke-fellows, so that hereby Christ would establish hope of Reconciliation.

Otherwise Moses Law standing in force as it did then, it had been hard that
they that had married a Woman put away should be counted for Adulterers.

Quest. What do you think of this case when a Husband remains a certain time
from a Wife, whether another man may mary with her?

Answ. The absent party is either beyond seas, or in his own country. If
beyond seas, there must be a greater time granted to hear of him. By the Law of
Constantine if the Wife did not hear of the safety of the Husband in four years
she was permitted to mary to another.

To give my opinion, there must be a precise time set down, wherein if the Wife
do not hear of the Husband it may be lawful to mary, as if being in the same
Nation he do not send to her in two years, or if being in a foreign Nation he
do not send to her in four years, for in such a space of time it may be
supposed a man may write from any part of the Earth; unless he be in captivity:
such a Man not sending to his Wife in such a space of time may be supposed to
put her away, howbeit I think in these cases to consider seriously what the
Laws of the Nation are is most expedient, and so far as they concur with
lawfulness and expediency to follow them.

For Application, 1 Caution, Not to put away Wife or Husband: there are four
Mischiefs in it, 1 Such an one is a Murderer, because he hates his Wife. If
Christians are commanded to love their Enemies, how much more then their
yoke-fellows, who may have vitia, but not flagitia, per^^ps faults, but not
heinous offenses.

2 Such an one is guilty because he has put away one who has not committed
Adultery. For this cause only putting away ought to be; for though there be
other failings, yet ought there to be reconciliation. Lactantius says, He is
an Adulterer who has married her that is put away; and he is an Adulterer who
has put away his Wife, except for Fornication, that he may mary another.

3 He is guilty, because he makes her commit Adultery.

4 Because he that takes her that is put away becomes an Adulterer.

2 Exhort. To keep the Bond of Matrimony inviolate, in no wise to break it, as
being the Covenant of God, Prove. 2.17.

3 Learn, not to put away a Wife or Husband for Idolatry, Infidelity, 1 Cor.
7.12, 13. only if the Idolater will depart, and put the Believer away, the
Believer is free: Nor for Error in person, as if a man think he mary a Virgin
and does not, because she has done nothing since his Wife; nor for Error of
Estate, as supposing to mary one rich but she is poor; nor for Idolatry, Ezra
10.2, 3. Compare Romans 7.1, 2, 3, 4. nor Heresy, 1 Cor. 7.12. no nor yet for
poverty is a person to put away his Wife, no nor for frigidity or coldness,
because not able to perform the duty of Marriage, nor for some incurable
Disease, these may hinder a Marriage from being, but not break it after it is
solemnized, 1 Cor. 7.10, 11. Let not the Wife depart from her Husband, and let
not the Husband put away his Wife.

Quest. But what if the Wife be of contrary Religion, as a Papist, and will not
live with her Husband in such Countries where the Husband may safely profess
the Faith?

Answ. It was the judgment of Calvin and the other Helvetian Preachers, that
there might be a Divorce, whereof there were two Examples; one of Pizarro, who
married a Wife who would not live with him, save in the Roman Territories, where
he must either deny the Faith, or lose his life. After Divorce he was married,
as I remember, for I have not the Book by me, to one Magdalen Moor. The other
is of Galeazeus Caracciolus, whose Wife refusing to live with him save in
Italy, where he was either in danger of denial of Christ, or loss of life, he
was divorced from her and married to a Gentlewoman of Roan, who fled for the
Gospel sake. 1 Cor. 7.15. But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart, a
Brother or Sister is not in bondage in such a case, but God has called us to
peace, that is, to peace of conscience herein, as Martyr expounds it. Now the
reason is, because such a person totally puts away such a yoke fellow for doing
his duty, or if retained it is with an intention to murder him.

4 Exhort. To be wary in choice of yoke-fellows, seeing the Bond of Marriage is
an indissoluble Bond, it cannot be broken save for Adultery, beware how you
choose, let Women beware how they consent: if it were as common Bargains, that a
man might be rid of them losing his Earnest, or if they were taken as some take
Apprentices, upon liking, or as some buy Horses to lose so much, if they
dislike and return them, but this is an eternal Bond, therefore ought to be
done with much deliberation, as being only once to be done. Beware then how
you choose for Beauty, Portion. Many Women are soon won, for person, kindred,
riches, because he that has her is able to deck her in fine Apparel and
Jewels, never looking what ability such a man has to instruct her, and to
bring up the Children they shall have in Gods fear.

And so much more ought we to be advised, because Marriage is that point upon
which depends in a great measure our eternal Estate, for the Estate it self it
is but for a few years, but eternal things both of our selves and posterity
much depend upon it.

How angry was God for his peoples matching themselves with Idolaters, Nehem.
13.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Ezra 9.2, 3. such kind of marriages are in danger of
turning us from God, Deuteronomy, 7.3, 4.

5 To stablish the consciences of competent Judges in granting divorces; when
one of the persons is a fornicator, it is of the light of nature that he that
keeps not the conditions of a contract or bargain should lose the benefit of
it, and the contract be made void; that whoredom was a just cause of divorce
in Moses time, was in respect of gentle husbands who would not have their wives
put to death; such an husband was Joseph to Mary: or in respect of such
husbands, who though they believed their wives were strumpets, and perhaps
found them so, yet they were not able to prove it in judgment, the proper
punishment thereof was death, either burning, Genesis 38.24. or stoning, Levit.
20.10. Joh. 8.5. but now Christ warrants any Judge to proceed to divorce in
this case of adultery.

But for other cases, as for a woman against her husbands will to go to the
banquers of strangers, or without just cause to lie out all night, or to go
into the Baths with men, these are no sufficient grounds of divorce, though
they may be grounds of suspicion.

6 To rest contented in the state of marriage wherein God has placed us, and
hate putting away, Mal. 2.16. as God hates it so should we. And so much more,
because God joins persons in marriage, Matthew. 19.6. What God has joined
together, let no man put asunder. Besides, they are one flesh.

V. 33. Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths:

V. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods
throne, nor by the earth for it is his footstool, etc.

In the words are two propositions, 1 Thou shall not forswear thy self, Levit.
19.12. Ye shall not swear by my name falsely.

2 Thou shall perform to the Lord thine oaths, Numb, 30.2. If a man swear an
oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do
according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. Out of these two places are
the words of this text taken: in the bare words there appears no corruption,
but in Christ's answer the depravement appears in three particulars.

1 Thou shall not forswear thy self] that is, swearing by the name of God, but
if thou forswears by creatures thou may.

2 For the latter, but shall keep or perform thy oaths, that is, oaths made by
the name of God, but to break oaths made by the creatures is no perjury.

3 They taught that rash and needless swearing was no profanation of the name
of God, so that they swore truly.

In opposition to these corruptions Christ says, Thou shall not forswear thy
self, that is, thou shall perform that thou have sworn to the Lord, or by the
Lord that thou will do. Thou shall perform thy oaths, as all other oaths, so in
particular vows confirmed by an oath. Besides to perform to the Lord thine
oaths, signifies, that if we will swear, we must swear by the true God, not by
idols. From this thus explained observe,

Obs. Perjury is an heinous sin before God. There Is a flying roll of curses
that goes out against false swearers, Zach. 5.2, 3. It Is called a roll, because
the Jews books were not distinct by leaves as we have, but one piece of
parchment wrapped upon a stick like a map, which was called a roll, because
rolled together. In this was writ their perjuries, and the punishments of them;
it is said to be flying, to signify the swift vengeance that hangs over
impenitent persons, it hangs as it were in the air waiting for Gods command to
fall down like an Eagle, or Hawk upon the prey. They went as swift in their
sins as wild Asses or Dromedaries, but as the Ass is found in her-moneths in
her silthiness, when she is big that she cannot run, men wait for her, Jer.
2.23, 24. so does the roll of judgment wait for other sinners, in particular
for perjured persons. The length of this roll was 20 cubits, the breadth but
ten, signifying that it went over all Judaea, which was twice as long as broad,
as Hierom observes: the length of it from Dan to Beersheba was 160 miles, the
breadth from Joppa to Bethlem was 46 miles. This roll was writ on both sides,
on one side of it were curses for the thief, on the other side curses for the
swearer.

Lastly, this curse is said to remain in the midst of his house, and shall
consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof. This was fulfilled,
Matthew. 23.27, 28.24.1. in that there was not left one stone upon another, not
only the Temple destroyed, but also every private man's house, Luke 19.44. so
that they were laid even with the ground, and not one stone left upon another.

This sin is condemned, Hos. 10.4. Levit. 19.12. Zach. 8.17.

Examples of persons punished for false swearing, are Zedekiah, Ezekiel. 17.16,
17, 18, 19, 20. the Lord threatens for the oath that Zedekiah swore to the King
of Babylon and brake, that he should dye. Shimei was put to death for the oath
he brake which he had sworn to Solomon, 1 Kings 2.42, 43, 44, 45. For Saul his
breach of the oath which Joshua and Israel had sworn to the Gibeonites, seven
of his sons were hanged in the days of David, 2 Samuel 21.1. to v. 10. Famous
was Gods judgment on Ladislaus King of Poland, who, upon the Popes Counsel and
dispensation, broke his oath which he had sworn to Amurath the second, Acts and
Mon. vol. 1. p. 968.

But shall perform to the Lord thine Oaths] An oath is the affirming or denying
a thing, with the calling on the name of God to witness and avouch the truth of
the thing affirmed, denied, or promised, that they to whom we swear may not
doubt of the truth of our words.

1 Oaths are lawful, 1 Because practiced by God and Christ, Psalm. 95.11. Psalm.
110.1. Esai 45.23. and by Saints, by Jonathan, and David, by Paul, Romans 1.9. 2
Cor. 1.23. 2 Cor. 11.31. Gal. 1.20.

2 Oaths are of the Law of nature, Genesis 21.23, 24. Abraham and Abimelech, or at
least Phicol his Captain, swore one to another.

3 The useful need thereof, as to bring forth a truth, Exodus 22.10, 11. as if a
man deliver a beast to keep and it be stole, then was he that had the beast to
keep, to purge himself by oath, and the owner was to accept his oath. Also that
things done privily may come to light, Numb. 5.19. so the Priest swore the
woman suspected of incontinency, to find out whether she were guilty or
innocent.

Properties in swearing.
1 Look to a right call, as 1 When the Magistrate ministers an oath, to answer
so far as Law requires, otherwise non tencor respondere, I am not bound to
answer. 2 When the glory of God and edification of his Church requires it, 2
Cor. 1.23. Romans 1.9. 3 For mutual peace and ending of controversies. So Jacob
and Laban swore one to another, Genesis 31.53. so an oath is an end of strife,
Heb. 6.17.

2 Look to the thing thou swears, that it be lawful, not as Herod's oath to
Herodias, nor as the forty, who swore to kill Paul. Such an oath was David's,
who swore to destroy all Nabals house, 1 Samuel 25.22.

3 Look the thing thou swears be in thine own power. It Is rashness to swear a
thing that is not in thine own power, as to swear to live a single life, etc.

4 Swear in truth, judgment and righteousness. 1 In truth, which excludes all
equivocation. Words are to be taken as men commonly understand them. An oath is
called (...), an hedge, to signify that when a man swears he sets an hedge
about himself, which he may not break; this excludes all swearing of things we
know not, and things we doubt of. 2 In judgment, not lightly or rashly, but
weighing all due circumstances. Eleazar, Genesis 24.3. when Abram swears him not
to take a wife of the Canaanites for his son, but of his kindred; before
Eleazar swears, he proposes his exceptions, viz. What if the woman will not go
with me? To which Abram answers, If the woman be not willing to follow thee,
thou shall be free from this mine oath. Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth
and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. None must swear
save those who have judgment to discern what an oath is. 3 In righteousness;
That you affirm nothing against conscience, neither for malice, nor favor, as
those sons of Belial did against Naboth, who swore, That Naboth blasphemed God
and the King, 1 Kin. 21.13. This property of an oath excludes all swearing for
custom, as many do that are chosen into public places, and are chosen into
societies, who swear not because they mean to keep their oaths, but because
else they cannot be enfranchised.

2 Reprehension of profane swearing, which is so common: for this sin God has
a controversy, Hos. 4.1. Lands mourn, Jer. 23.10. and the sinner becomes
guilty, Exo. 20.

Obj. But if I swear not, men will not believe me?

Answ. They would sooner believe thee if thou forbarest it. He that hears thee
make no conscience of swearing, will think thou makes no conscience of lying;
besides better be suspected of men, then condemned of God and conscience.

Obj. It Is a foolish custom I have got.

Answ. This renders thee so much more guilty, that it is thy custom; if a thief
or murderer at the bar should plead that it has been his custom to thieve
and murder, would not this make him more guilty?

Object. My oaths are small, as, by my faith and troth.

Answ. Consider against what a great majesty they are committed. If any sin
seem little, let hell fire seem great. To use faith and truth cannot be less
then an appearance of evil.

Object. But I swear by a good thing.

Answ. The goodness of a good thing aggravates the offense when abused, as we
see in wine and beer, when abused to drunkenness.

Object. All the country use it.

Answ. We must not follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23.2. the sinfulness of
multitudes brought the flood upon the old World, and fire upon Sodom.

Remedies against profane swearing.
1 Beware in those cases where men are apt to swear amiss, as to gratify a
friend, or to be revenged of an enemy.

2 Use not an oath when the matter can be otherwise determined; also if thou be
a judge impose not an oath when not necessary, nor upon men of no credit, who
make no conscience of it, nor in matters of no moment, nor tumultuously and in
haste, nor when thou knows that which is sworn will not, or cannot be
performed, as some judges were wont to swear Churchwardens in times past, nor
to make a person to accuse himself, which is contrary to nature, that a man
should punish himself. Oaths are good and profitable, but they are to be used
as medicines, when there is necessity of them; not else.

3 Take heed of easiness in swearing, yea and in calling God to witness; ease
brings custom, and custom blasphemy.

4 Rid thy heart of impatience and vain glory. In an angry man's mouth, oaths
are very frequent, and vain glorious men think it a bravery to swear: profane
swearers would have other men think them so stout that they care neither for
God nor man.

5 Let it be with a due fear and reverence of the name of God, and of his
Majesty. Eccles. 9.2. Good men fear an oath, that is they fear the glorious
name of the Lord in their oath. So Athanasius Sermon. de passione et cruce
domini, purging himself to Constantius in this manner, God is my witness and
his Christ, that I never made mention of thee for evil to thy brother Constans
Augustus, neither stirred up him against thee. Pliny (as Grotius says)
mentions that the Christians were wont to bind themselves with an oath, not for
any wickedness, but that they would not commit thefts, robberies or adulteries;
that they would not deceive nor deny a thing committed to their trust, when it
was called for. So David Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn to keep thy commandments.

But I say unto you, Swear not at all] That is not by any forms of oaths which
are after mentioned, as by heaven or earth; to swear falsely is destructive, to
swear truly is dangerous, not to swear is safe. The scope of Christ is to
discover the Pharisees jugglings, who excused persons from perjury when they
swore by heaven and earth; though they broke their oaths, yet they declared
them innocent from perjury, provided they swore not by the name of God. 2
Christ speaks against all rash and common swearing, whether by God or creatures.

Neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God] q. d. a perjury that is made
by heaven redounds unto God, for in the creatures the Creator is understood,
for they are created of God, and all that they have they have it from God.
Vainly then do you Pharisees say, If an oath be made by God it binds, but it
binds not if it be made by creatures; He that swears by the creature either
makes it God, which is Idolatry, or understands God in it.

So that Christ shows that all rash swearing and all irreverence and abuse of
the name of God was forbid, contrary to the scribes doctrine, who taught the
command was only broken by perjury.

The scribes had another error, that he that swore by the temple and altar was
not bound, but he that swore by the gold of the temple, or the gift of the
altar was bound, Mat. 23.16. because gold and the gift upon the altar tended to
the priests gain.

The Jews were wont to swear by heaven, the Pharisees made nothing of it; hence
Christ shows that he who swears by heaven and earth, swears by God who has
heaven for his throne, and earth for his footstool: he alludes to Esai. 66.1.
Heaven is my throne and earth is my footstool.

Neither by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King] Alluding to
Psalm. 48.2. where it is so called, he that swears by Jerusalem swears by him
that has set his throne at Jerusalem, as he that swears by the temple swears
by him that dwells therein; for whosoever swears intends to call the first
and infallible truth for witness.

Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black] As if he should say, Think it not lawful to swear by thy head
(as diverse heathens and Jews did) because it is not thine own but Gods, and
that which is Gods thou ought not to curse, as thou do if thou forswears
thy self: he that swears by his head, swears by God the maker of it, and he
desires he may receive his life or soul for a pledge, that if he forswear
himself, his life and soul may be forfeited.

Because he cannot make one hair white or black] It Is a proverb for doing the
smallest thing, such as to add a cubit to our stature. If we cannot do the
least thing, as to color one hair, how can we do such a great thing as make a
head, that we should venture to swear by it, as if it were our own making?

Quest. Whether it be lawful to swear by creatures, as by the stars, light,
bread, drink, etc.

Answ. No, 1. Because it is Idolatry. Men hereby invest the creatures with Gods
properties. For men make those things their God whereby they swear, and they
hereby apply the religion of an oath to a creature, which is only due to God.
Polycarpus would rather be burnt then swear by Caesar's fortune, Eusebius. Hist. l.
4. c. 15. Nor would the Christians swear by the Genius of their Prince, Tert.
Apol.

2 Oaths are only to be by the name of God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God, and swear by his name. Deuteronomy. 10.20. He that swears on the earth
shall swear by the God of truth. Esa. 65.16. After the emperors had given
their names to Christ, the oath given to soldiers, (as Vegetius mentions) was
by God and Christ, and the holy Spirit, and by the majesty of the Emperor,
which according to God is to be loved and embraced of mankind. This was a
corruption, for we are to swear only by God. The Prophet. Zeph. 1.5. reproves
them who swore by the Lord and by Malchom.

3 No creature whereby we swear can search our hearts, no Saint, nor Angel, to
know whether we swear true or false, nor reward in case we swear truly, nor
take vengeance in case we swear falsely.

4 We are to swear to none but him we are to serve and worship, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Thou shall serve the Lord thy God, and swear by his name; but God only is to
be worshipped and served, Matthew. 4.10. Him only shall thou serve, therefore
him only shall thou swear by. Martyr says in the council of Carthage, it was
forbid that any man should swear by creatures, and if a clergy man so swore he
was to be excommunicate.

5 Such a kind of swearing by creatures takes away the reverence of an oath,
and causes persons to use it rashly and (...).

(...). But whether may a Christian take an oath of him (...) will swear by
Idols or creatures.

(...) swears by the God of Nahor, when Nahor (...) Genesis 31.5^. Jacob he takes
his oath and swears by the fear of his father Isaac. And so Christians may take
an Oath of a Mahumetan swearing by Mahumet, because he to whom the Oath is
sworn looks not at the Error of the Oath, but at the Confirmation of the Truth
and of the Promise made. Besides, he to whom an Oath is sworn, I mean the
Christian, though he requires an Oath, does not require a corrupt Oath.

Quest. Whether it be lawful to lay the hand upon the Book, and to kiss it, in
taking of an Oath, when it is imposed on us by a lawful Magistrate?

Answ. No, because an Oath is part of Gods worship, see Deuteronomy. 6.13. and this is
a Superstition, or a Super-institution in it,

1 Because it confines our outward Worship to a bodily Service, which was never
commanded by God, nor exemplified by Saints. Now as the Christians twenty years
ago opposed Bowing before the Altar, and bowing toward the East, when it was
imposed, though herein they were required only to bow to the God of Heaven and
Earth, placing an absoluteness in that which God left indifferent, so we in
like manner may oppose this Superstition of Confinement in Laying our Hand upon
the Book, and kissing the Book in taking of an Oath, when God has left it
indifferent what gesture or outward signification we will express. Hence the
Scripture mentions variety of gestures, sometimes the Putting the Hand under
the Thigh, Genesis 24 9. sometimes lifting up the Hand to the most high God, Gen,
14.22.

2 Because in the Worship of God there is introduced a humane Invention, which
ought not to be (seeing he that ows the Worship must appoint the manner how he
will be worshipped) That there is a humane Invention brought in, appears,
because that together with their swearing, they are at the same time required
to lay their Hands upon the Book; now as some of the Non-conformists brought it
as an unanswerable Reason, that the Cross ought not to be used in
Infant Baptism, but was will worship, because it was joined with the worship of
God, as it was then accounted; and that it was joined with the supposed worship
of God, appeared, because the worship was a good while begun before the Cross
was used, and after the Crossing there was the saying the Lords Prayer, and a
Thanksgiving for the Regeneration of the Infant. This Argument I producing once
to a great learned Bishop, he was not able to answer it, but was in a manner
silenced at it. Let those then be silenced who will offer to introduce Laying
the Hand upon the Book in the Worship of an Oath, and impose it on others to
observe their Invention.

3 It Is unlawful, because Magistrates in some places place the essence of an
Oath in Laying the Hand upon the Book, hence it is unlawful; now in that they
place the essence of an Oath in laying the Hand upon the Book, appears, because
they will not give you an Oath unless you will swear in that manner.

2 Because they think the Oath is not full without it: for though in the most
religious manner you call the Searcher of hearts to witness, and though you are
willing to lift up your hand to Heaven to the most high God, yet nothing will
serve, unless you lay your Hand upon the Book, they will not give you an Oath,
witness Ald. Hook one of the Judges for Probate of Wills at Dublin, who thus
refused the Testimonies and Oaths of me and another, who were Witnesses to a
Will, wherein the Legatees were only a Widow and three very small fatherless
Children. As the calling of God to witness to confirm a truth by a person that
discerns what an Oath is, is one part of the essence of an Oath, so these men
would have Laying on of Hands on the Book to be another part of the essence
thereof, unless we may suppose that they make Swearing in the Worship of God to
be the thing signified, and Laying the Hand upon the Book and kissing it, to be
the outward sign thereof, so that the Worship shall be from Heaven, and the
sign from man, a grosser presumption than which there were not many in the
Prelacy.

4 If there be any outward visible gesture required in taking of an Oath, there
being none commanded by God, it must be such as is exemplified by God, Angels,
and godly men; but not laying the Hand upon the Book, but lifting up the hand
toward Heaven, is such as is exemplified by God, Angels, and godly men;
therefore, if any gesture be required, lifting up of the hand to Heaven must be
it.

See it, 1 In God, Deuteronomy. 32.40. I lift up my hand to Heaven and say, I live for
ever.

2 See it in Angels, Revel. 10.5, 6. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the
Sea, and upon the Earth, lifted up his hand to Heaven, and swear by him that
lives for ever and ever, who created Heaven and Earth.

3 See it in a godly man, the Father of the faithful, Genesis 14.22. Abraham said
to the King of Sodom, I have lift up my hand to the Lord, the most high, the
Possessour of Heaven and Earth, that I will not take from thee a thread even to
a shoe-latchet.

Moreover Dan. 12.7. I heard the man clothed in Linen which was upon the
Waters of the River, when he held his right hand and his left hand unto Heaven,
and swear by him that lives for ever.

5 I have read of a conscientious Witness in the Book of Martyrs about three
hundred years ago, who conscientiously opposed this Abomination.

6 I have heard upon good Information I trust, that there was an Ordinance of
Parliament to dispense with tender Consciences herein, which it behooves all
tender Consciences to have, if it may be had, to produce it against the
rigidness of (...) who will either force them to lay their hands upon (...), or
else give no Oath. There was a Witness of Christ that opposed laying his hand
to swear upon a book. See Acts and Mon. vol. 1. P. 701. Col. 2. also P. 702. In
the life of William Thorp a Priest, A certain Clerk asking William Thorp if it
were not lawful to kneel down and touch the holy Gospel book, and kiss it
saying, So help me God and this holy doom, William Thorp answered out of a
discourse betwixt a Lawyer and a Master of Divinity, The Master of Divinity
said, it was not lawful to give or take any such charge upon a book, for every
book is nothing else but diverse creatures, of which it is made of, therefore to
swear upon a book is to swear by creatures, and this swearing is ever
unlawful: this sentence witnesses Chrysostom, plainly blaming them greatly
that bring forth a book to swear upon. Also page 702. being asked to lay his
hand upon the book and swear, William Thorp answered, If Chrysostom proves him
worthy of great blame that brings forth a book to swear upon, It must needs
follow that he is more to blame that swears on that book. After a Clerk
bidding him lay his hand upon the book, touching the holy Gospel of God,
William Thorp answered, I understand that the holy Gospel of God may not be
touched with man's hand, ibid. that is not unadvisedly.

V. 37. But let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is
more then these comes of evil.

The meaning of Christ here, is not to forbid swearing in just cases, but
profane and rash swearing, whether by God or creatures. This is mentioned,
Jam. 5.12. as if he should say, Let your speech usually be a bare affirmation
or denial. For that which is added to these by calling God or creatures to
witness comes of evil.

Yea, yea; nay, nay] Christ notes to us the constancy that should be also in
our speeches, without faltringor deceitful equivocating, 2 Cor. 1.19, 20. Our
word among you was not yea and nay.

Besides Christ teaches that in promises not sworn, our faith ought to be kept
in like manner as if they had been sworn, Psalm. 15.4. He that swears to his
own hurt and changes not. So much appears, Jam. 5.12. Let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay, lest you fall into condemnation. In stead of (...), sub judicio,
Grotius reads out of some Copies, (...), lest you fall into hypocrisy, that
is, lest ye be found deceitful, which becomes not Christians. Joseph speaks of
the Essens, Every thing that was spoken of them was stronger then an oath. Some
there are that think promises have not a binding power, but a simple
affirmation of a thing that in future we would do, ought to proceed from that
mind, that at that time would do that thing which we say we would do in
future. Yet he is not bound thereby, nor we are bound thereby, because the will
of man has a power to change his decrees, neither can he take away that right
from himself by the alone respect of himself.

So that we must distinguish, 1 Betwixt the declaration of our mind, wherein
we show our present intentions, but yet with the reservation of our future
liberty of changing our present determination upon new reasons we yet see not.

2 And betwixt a promise. For in a promise there is the translation of a man's
right to another; as a man that owes an horse may pass him over to another by
some sign of his will; now because by such a sign some right passes over to
another, therefore the will cannot honestly change it self.

Now that a promise may be of force, there are four requisites;

1 That the promiser be capable of promising, and therefore those that want
reason, as children and mad men, their promises are of none effect; there can
be no willing without understanding.

2 That the things promised be just; herein Herod's promise was of no force when
Herodias desired John's head.

3 That we promise what is in our own power. If a servant promise his service
to him that is not his master, this promise is nothing, because it is beyond
the power of the promiser; so if a man should promise to reach heaven, it is
out of his power.

4 After our promise is made to any person, upon consideration that we look
upon it as an absolute debt, which we cannot in conscience nullify, unless the
person to whom we promise do acquit us.

Whatsoever is more then these comes of evil] Evil in the masculine Gender
signifies the evil spirit, the devil, who tempts to swearing as well as to
other sins, without any necessity of an oath. If we take these words [of evil]
in the Neuter Gender, then we must understand that this sin of vain swearing
comes of the evils that are in the hearts of men. As from, 1 Irreverence of the
name of God. 2 Distrust, when men will not believe without an oath. 3 From a
custom of swearing wherein persons have been bred. 4 From the custom of men,
in not standing to their promises, and not using faithfulness in their
speeches, so that it is as if Christ had said, think not you will be excluded
from the society of men if you refrain from swearing, for the manner of
swearing, springing up from men's unfaithfulness, if you shall honestly perform
your words and promises, you will sooner be believed without an oath then
others with an oath.

Yet know that Christ does not count oaths evil or unlawful in the whole, but
things that are not to be used save in matters of very great moment; as bring
called before a Magistrate, or when something is committed to the trust of
another, or for purging our own innocence, when suspected, Number. 5.19. or when
persons are slow to believe that which is profitable for them to believe, or
for Gods glory, To. 9.1. Oaths are not to be used but in these and such like
cases as have been named.

For Application, learn to keep within the bounds of yea and nay, avoiding all
profane swearing. If the Princes of the world will not suffer their names to
be abused, will God suffer it? Will Christ suffer his vvounds, his heart, his
blood, his foot to be sworn by? Also all profane cursing, to vvish they might
sink, be hanged, be damned, be burnt, never to come in the Kingdom of heaven,
never see wife or children, or the face of God, that this bread may be their
last if it be not so.

Moreover beware of swearing by creatures, as by the cross, by light, by
heaven, by faith, troth, by Jerusalem, by thy head: remember whatsoever is
above yea and nay is sin.

Avoid the calling of God to witness in trivial things, as even many professors
do, using such words, as the Lord knows, God can vvitness with me. Moreover
learn to be constant in your words and promises, that your faithfulness may
persuade men to believe you without oaths.

V. 38. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth.

Here Is another Commandment depraved by the Pharisees, which was the law of
like for like, or retaliation, Exodus 21.23, 24, 25. This law of giving eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, which was appropriated to the Judge, they applied it to
private persons, that every man might avenge himself. That it belonged to the
Judges only, see Deuteronomy. 19.21. the scope of which law was to keep men from
avenging themselves, seeing they had the Magistrate an avenger of their
wrongs. Only where Magistracy cannot be had, there may be an unblameable
defense. The law of the 12 Tables was, if he has broken a member let there be
like for like. Now the Pharisees expounded the law of God to serve the corrupt
humors of the Jews, who were much given to private revenge; yea it is
natural to every man to think revenge sweeter then milk, then life. Corrupt
teachers are ready to expound the law of God according to the manners of men,
as Princes frame their governments according to the manners of their people.

V. 39. But I say unto you, Resist not evil, but whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.

Resist not evil] Christ in answer forbids all private revenge. We should only
desire to defend our selves and ours, not thirst to hurt our Enemy. For that
revenge that Sampson had against the Philistines for his eyes, Judge. 16.28, 29.
It was not the revenge as of a private man, but of a Magistrate, as appears by
the assistance God gave him at that time, neither would Sampson have prayed to
God for assistance in any sin. Certainly were it not lawful to drive back
force with force, the Apostles following Christ would not have carried swords,
Luke 22.38. It is of the law of nature to defend our lives, and to turn away
those things that hurt, which if it were not, thievs and robbers would spoil
honest men: this may be where we cannot have defense from Magistrates. But to
push like rams, as those Kings, Dan. 11.40. is forbid. Whereas Christ blamed
Peter, Mat. 26.52. Put up thy sword into his place, for all they that take the
sword shall perish with the sword, It was not for driving away force by
force, but for his desire of revenge, which revenge appears, in that it was
not probable that such a multitude as came to take Christ, should be driven
back by two or three armed men. Also Christ blames him for going on so rashly,
without his command or the Magistrates command. He that takes away thus any
man's life with the sword, shall perish either by man's sword, or by the sword
of Gods vengeance.

Moreover this command of not resisting evil, seems to be a supplement to
Moses. Tertul. cont. Marcion l. 4. Christ taught us a new pattern, forbidding
the course of wrong permitted by the creator, requiring eye for eye, and tooth
for tooth. When he teaches vengeance is mine, I will repay it, he teaches that
patience expects revenge; yea the Lord does not only forbid revenge, but the
remembrance and calling to mind of the wrong.

Beware then how you use private revenge, whether it be that which is inward,
as the bearing of a grudge, condemned, Levit. 19.18. Jam. 5.9. Grudge not one
against another, or that which is outvvard, when a man shall vent revengful
words or actions, Prove. 20.22. Say not thou I will recompense evil, but wait
on the Lord and he shall save thee. Prove. 24 29. Say not thou I will do to him
as he has done to me, I will render to the man according to his work. Christ
gave not reviling for reviling, 1 Pet. 2.23. he was led as a sheep to the
slaughter, Esai. 53.7. as a sheep before the shearers is dumb, so opened he not
his mouth.

But whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also]
This is a proverb taken from Lam. 3.30. he gives his cheek to him that smites
him; it signifies to suffer wrongs patiently rather then revenge our selves
This was exemplified by Christ, Esa. 50.6. I gave my back to the smiters, and
my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid not my face from shame and
spitting. Christ meets with an objection; if I may not revenge my self, by
bearing one wrong, I invite my enemy to do me another: Christ therefore says,
its better to take the second wrong, then to revenge our selves, can preserve
us from further injuries, or else repair us for what we suffer.

Now because this general rule of not revenging our selves might seem hard,
Christ instances in 3 particulars.

1 In assaults against our body, ver. 39. 2 Against our property, ver. 40. 3
Against our liberty, ver. 41.
As 1 In assaults don to our bodies, as when a man shall strike us on the
cheek, which is not to be taken literally, for Christ, Joh. 18.23. says, when
they struck him, If I have done evil bear witness of the evil, but if well, why
smitest thou me? Paul, when Ananias commanded him to be smitten on the mouth,
said, God shall smite thee thou whited wall: but Christ hereby would teach
christian patience in bearing wrongs offered to their body here, and to their
goods after, and to perform the precept of non revenge. Yet does not Christ
intend patience in all sorts of wrongs, but in light wrongs, as a box or a
blow, but if it prejudice our life, we may fight with him, and rather kill then
be killed. Exodus 22, 2. a man might lawfully kill a thief in the night without
the guilt of blood, so we may bear the loss of a garment, but if it prejudice
our estate we may go to law with him, so to go two miles with a man if he
compel thee, but not to go an hundred. By this first instance Christ
reprehends the usual practice of fighting and quarrelling, as being the acts of
evil men, and not of Christians, who are to suffer.

Ver. 40. And if any man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also.

Christ gives a second instance, wherein Christian patience is to show it self,
viz. in bearing smaller wrongs done to our estate and property, as if a person
by oppression in law take away one garment, and then another.

The meaning is, when Christians are spoiled of one part of their goods, they
ought by patience to prepare themselves for the spoil of the rest. Christ means
not as if we might not come to sue at law for the just defense of our estates;
few indeed sue in courts of justice with a patient spirit, yet because some do
so, we must not condemn going to law, till impatience do appear, and seeing the
cloak is more worth then the coat, Christ signifies, that when we receive a
less loss, we should prepare for a greater: in sum Christ forbids scandalous
and impatient going to law, 1 Cor. 6.1, 2. ad 8. Paul appealed to Caesar. Zenas
a lawyer is reckoned among believers. We should also learn to prefer our
peace before our goods, and to be slow in going to law, in that its apt to
disquiet the mind. An ounce of peace is worth a pound of victory; Law should be
used as desperate Physic, only in case of extremity.

Ver. 41. And whosoever shall compel thee to go with him a mile; go with him
twain.

Here Is a third case wherein Christian patience is to appear, viz. in loss of
liberty, which is when a man shall compel thee to go with him a mile: as in
these days they will press posthorses for the service of the state, so were
they wont to press persons for the service of the Emperor. (...) is to lead to
a ready way or to be a guide to carry burdens: its a Persian word, as Aretius
observes, (...) are the messengers of the King, who forced persons to bear
burdens, and necessitated persons to needful service, its like from the
Persians this custom came among the Jews. Christ means that we should show our
patience by going with him two miles, rather then contend with him, so you
shall overcome him that compells you, and so shall make him friendly to you,
but if thou resist him thou will stir up contention with him, and lose thy own
peace, and stir up hatred to thy self, and by impatience disgrace thy
profession. As it is a sign of a vveak stomach not to digest hard meat, so its
a sign of a weak mind not to digest a hard word. It was Caesar's praise that he
forgot nothing save injuries, Cicero pro Marcello: forgetfulness is the remedy
of injuries.

For application, 1 Learn patience in all these cases. Let patience have a
perfect work, Jam. 1.4. That we may be patient not only in one case but in
every case let thine enemies wickedness be vvearied (and if possible) overcome
by thy patience.

2 For Christians to prepare for all kind of suffering in body, goods, name;
hereunto are we called, 1 Pet. 2.21. a christians state is a state of
suffering.

3 To be patient, as in other losses so in the loss of liberty. The Hebrews
after the Persian power came among them, were forced to bear Onus Angariae,
the burden of compulsion, they had freedom from this by Demetrius, as Joseph.
Orig. 13. It Is like the Romans after used it, as in their compelling Simon to
carry Christ's Cross, yet if we can shake off such slavery at any time, we
should choose it rather, 1 Cor. 7.22.

4 Exhort to put up light Injuries done to our bodies, which do not disable
our bodies, nor leave any vvound behind them, yea though in some measure
reproachful, as a box on the ear, if we revenge our selves we expose our
selves to more hazard, and if we think to redress our selves in any Court of
Judicature, it will put us to more trouble and charge, therefore best put up
the Wrong at first: for too often it is in Courts of Justice with poor innocent
Clients as with Sheep, who, thinking under Bramble-bushes and Thorn-bushes in
time of a Storm to shelter themselves, do leave their Wool behind them, and
therefore Christ in bidding us let our Coat go, intimates that besides our duty
to avoid private revenge, to take notice of the delays and expencefulness of
Courts.

V. 42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee
turn not thou away.

Give to him that asks thee] Christ next to the duty of Forgiving touches
upon the duty of Giving. Christ his purpose is not to make us prodigal, (as we
must needs be if we give to every one that asks us) but liberal, and that we
think it not enough to help some few with our Charity, but we should do good to
all so far as our Charity will reach, Gal. 6.10. Do good to all, yea to such as
cannot requite us, Luke 6.33. Luke 14 12, 13. Hence Luke 6.30. Christ says,
Give to every man that asks of thee. Instead of giving like injury for like,
I appoint the Law of Charity and Bounty, though it were such an one as formerly
had struck thee on the cheek, and sued thee at the Law, yet coming to want,
relieve him. Do not thou, for Wrongs and Injuries he has done to thee, Turn
away thy face from him. This word Turn not away, and those words Luke 6.30. He
that takes away thy Goods ask them not again, which are joined with this
Command, Give to every one that asks of thee, show, that this is the meaning,
that in stead of Retaliation of Injuries, Christians should retaliate Benefits,
as giving and lending, for Christ speaks of one who has done the Wrong, and
like a Thief has taken away thy Goods.

Not that Christ means that we should give to every man that asks, for then
should we have nothing for our selves, but let our Charity be according to our
ability. Alms is compared to Seed, 1 Cor. 9. and Seed uses not to be carelessly
scattered, but to be sown with discretion.

Nor are we exempted from this duty till persons ask us, for we being able, are
to inquire for objects to be relieved. As Onesiphorus sought out Paul very
diligently at Rome, knowing him to be in want, 2 Timothy 1.17.

Now in performing the duty of giving, consider these things.

1 We must be pitiful to the poor. We must have Bowels of Mercies, Col. 3.12.
draw out our soul to the hungry, Isai 58.10. if we can draw out no more. Job's
soul was grieved for the poor, Job 30.25. The Command Deuteronomy. 15.7. was, If there
be among you a poor man of one of thy Brethren within any of thy Gates, thou
shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor Brother. We must
not then shut up our bowels against such, 1 John 3.17. Some give out of credit,
as the Pharisees, Matthew. 6.1, 2. looking at their own glory, or out of
hypocrisy, as Judas, John 12.5, 6. or out of importunacy to be rid of the
poor, but few out of bowels.

2 We must relieve, Heb. 13.16. To do good and to communicate forget not, for
with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. 1 Timothy 6.18. Ready to distribute,
willing to communicate. For this was Cornelius praised, Acts 10.4. For this
there are six Grounds.

1 The Promises made to this duty. Such an one is happy, Prove. 14.21. He lends
to the Lord, and God will repay him, Prove. 19.17. His Seed are blessed, Psalm
37.26.

2 It will be a great comfort in an evil time. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, Psalm 112.7. Why? v. 9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor.
Eccles. 12.2. Give a portion to seven, Why? You know not what evil will be on
the earth. Psalm 41.1. Dan. 4.27. 3 What is so given brings a Blessing upon our
Estates, Deuteronomy. 26.13. compared with v. 15.

3 Give cheerfully, 2 Cor. 9.8. God loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 8.4.
Praying us with much entreaty to take upon us the ministering to the Saints.
Works of Mercy should be Meat and Drink to us, John 4.32. flowing like Water
from a Conduit; not only show mercy but love to do it, Mic. 6.8. Many men's
mercy comes like so many drops of blood from their heart, Deuteronomy. 15.10. Thy
heart shall not be grieved when thou gives unto him.

4 Seasonably, give whiles thou have it to give, Eccles. 11.2. Leave it not to
Executours, Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withhold not thy hand.

5 According to ability, Acts 11.29. the Disciples every one according to his
ability determined to send relief to the Brethren of Judea. For the quantity of
giving, every man is to give as God has prospered him, 1 Cor. 16.2. He that
sows sparingly shall reap sparingly. 2 Cor. 9.6. Though we give away Water we
must not give Fountain and all.

6 In sincerity, Matthew. 6.1, 2. Make not Alms more public than the
circumstances discover themselves.

Object. But I know not how soon I may want my self.

Answ. God has promised to keep thee from want, Prove. 28.27. He that gives to
the poor shall not lack, but he that hides his eyes and will not look upon him
shall have many a Curse. Prove. 11.24, 25. There is that scatters and yet
increases, and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to
poverty. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall be
watered again. What is thus given will bring a blessing on the rest. Deuteronomy.
15.10. For this thing ( viz. of relieving the poor) the Lord thy God shall
bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puts thy hand unto. A man is
not poorer for discreet mercy, for it is like Seed which a poor man sows, which
returns plenteously to him and his, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that sows bountifully shall
reap bountifully.

Object. But my Children will want what I give.

Answ. By thy penuriousness thou may undo thy Children, Prove. 11.24. but not
by mercy, Psa. 112.2. compared with v. 9. Psalm 37.25. by righteous is meant
merciful. See v. 21, 26. Prove. 13.22.

Object. But the poor generally are wicked.

A. Ex. 23.5. If a Beast in misery must be relieved, yea the Beast of such an
one as hates Gods people, Exodus 23.5. much more himself. Though they be wicked,
1 They may belong to Gods Election. 2 Thou respects not them so much as the
Lord, to whom thou lendest it, Prove. 19.17. 3 That thou give, though to the
unvvorthy, shall not lose a Reward. Eccles. 11.1.

Object. But I would give, if others gave equally with me.

Answ. There ought to be care had of equality, 2 Cor. 8.13. but if there be
inequality herein, let not other men's sins hinder thee from doing thy duty, and
make thee to do it grudgingly, and so thou lose thy Reward.

Means to give Alms.
1 Get faith to believe that God will not fail thee. Heb. 13.5. and that what
thou do for Christ's sake, Matthew. 25. that he will own it, and that thou will
one day find in heaven what thou now gives, 1 Timothy 6.19.

2 Be laborious in a calling, Ephesians. 4.28. Alms is such a piece of service, that
even they that labor with their hands are to give to those in want. Laboring
you ought to support the weak, remembering it is more blessed to give then to
receive. Acts 20.35.

3 Spare money from superfluities, from costly apparel, costly buildings, costly
diet. Many persons, though they have great incomes, they have nothing at all to
give to godly uses, they have so many vain ways of expense.

4 Remember the liberality of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9. Who, when he was rich, for
our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich. The
Apostle brings it as an argument to stir up to benificence to the poor.

5 Consider it is an act of righteousness in God to acknowledge all the mercy
which is done for his name, and to requite it, Heb. 6.10. Matthew. 10.41, 42.
Matthew. 25.34, 35.

6 The perplexity which will be in the conscience when we come to dye and have
neglected this duty, then will conscience, or Satan, or both, ring that saying
in our ears, Matthew. 25.29, 30. Take away the talent from him, and cast this
unprofitable servant into utter darkness.

7 Consider the blessings present and future, wherewith God crowns this grace
at present, Give and it shall be given you, good measure pressed down, shaken
together, running over, Luke 6.38. for God is able to make all grace abound
toward you, that you, having sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work, 2 Cor. 9. In future, you shall have glory, Mark 10.30. Luke 12.33.
Sell that you have and give alms, provide bags that wax not old, a treasure in
heaven that fades not. Contrarily, merciless men shall have no mercy, James
2.13.

8 Pure religion consists in this, Jam. 1.27.

9 Consider there is no difference betwixt thee that gives and them that are
given to, but only thy estate, Aug. de verb. dom. ser. 5. both born naked,
both begin their life weeping. When dead and their tombs broke open are the
bones of the rich known? Ibid.

Q. Who must give Alms, and to whom must they be given?

Answ. All that are able; Superfluities to minister to conveniences,
conveniences to necessities, necessities to extremities: the two first must
relieve, the two last may take relief. Christ though he lived of the
contributions of others who ministered to him, Luke 8.3. yet he used to give
alms of that he had, Joh. 13.19. distributing to the necessities of Saints,
Romans 12.13. to necessities, not to superfluities. The compassionate Samaritan
could not pass by the necessity of him who fell among thievs, Luke 10.33. only
the word, Romans 12.13. is not necessities, but (...), the uses of Saints, we
must not forbear relieving the poor Saints, till they come into great
necessity, for our selves would not be so dealt withal. In case of extreme
necessity of brethren we are to part with all, rather then the poor Saints
should starve, as they did at Jerusalem in the Apostles times, Acts 4.34, 35.
the Churches of Macedonia were in want themselves, yet supplied they the
extremities of the Saints at Jerusalem, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2.

Q Whether ought all goods to be common?

Answ. No. 1 From the contracts of buying and selling, which is mentioned:
Lydia was a seller of purple, Ananias after he had sold had the money in his
own power. Paul blames the Corinthians for defrauding and going to Law one with
another, which shows every man kept his property. Mary, Acts 12, 12. had a
house of her own where the Church met.

2 The Scripture every where commands alms, but there were none to give it or
take it, if all things were common to Christians.

3 Examples disprove community. Philip the Deacon received Paul at his house.
Tabitha is reported to be a liberal matron, who made coats for the poor.
Onesimus was servant to Philemon.

4 This community would run to absurdities; As,

1 It destroys endeavors, for who would not frame excuses from taking pains,
and would not favor himself when he works for a community?

2 It would cause endless contentions, some alleging the greatness of their
pains, others alleging the necessity of their persons.

3 Hereby two virtues would be destroyed, Temperance which bids us refrain from
that which is another, and Liberality which bids us do good to others.

5 The Laws against stealing condemn this, Ephesians. 4.28. there can be no theft
where all things of right are common.

Obj. The Church of Jerusalem had all things common.

A. True, but it was not commanded but voluntary, for after they had sold their
lands they were in their own power. Besides, the extreme poverty of the
brethren required the rich to give in their estates, unless they would have
seen their poor brethren perish.

Besides, that Church being the first, must do some extraordinary thing. Hereby
also they showed that the possessions they had in those places, were not much
to be accounted of, as being shortly to become the prey of the Enemies.

But there was no community in the Churches of the Gentiles, as appeared by
their contributions which they made for poor Saints, yet are not the Churches
to suffer any Saint to want. Justin Martyr says, We that loved the increase of
our moneys and the fruits of our possessions above all other things, now we
bestow those things which we have in common, and communicate them to whatsoever
poor Saints, Apol. 1. page 41. Justin means with their own consent, and when
need required, and desire it might be done now, rather then poor Saints perish
or be in extremities.

Obj. This division of properties is not of the Law of nature, because nature
does not command it to be made, nor incline to it.

Answ. All men by nature are born naked, yet natural reason bids that men be
clad to keep them from the cold; so nature has not made a division of things,
yet natural reason, to prevent contentions, bids that such a division should be
made. The Law of nations, which is no other then the common judgment of men,
from the principles of natural equity does now establish it. What we possess we
possess by humane right, either of first occupation, or after contracts, for by
divine right the earth is the Lords.

Q. Whether must we give alms to beggars that go from door to door?

Answ. The usual practice of begging is the seminary of vagabonds; but beggars
are of two sorts. 1 Strong and able, these are not to be relieved, because
relief maintains them in their idle life, 2 These. 3.10.

2 Poor, sick or maimed, who cannot work; such was that lame man that begged of
Peter and John, at the beautiful gate of the Temple, Acts 3.2, 3. probably he
was a good man, because twice mention is made of his praising God, v. 8, 9.
These poor and maimed persons, in case the Magistrate make no provision for
them, nor yet wealthy persons, it cannot be avoided but they must be suffered
to beg, and alms ought to be given to them; but specially minister to the poor
labourer and housekeeper, who comes not abroad and has a great hungry family.

Q. Whether can that which is another man's goods be taken by a poor man against
the will of the owner, the poor man having nothing of his own to sustain life?

Answ. 1 Necessity cannot dispense with positive laws, to make the goods of
another mine, and mine his. We are to bear any necessity rather then to commit
any iniquity, if we must not lie nor forswear to save life, then we must not
steal to save life, Job 36.21. Take heed, regard not iniquity, this have thou
chosen rather then affliction; as necessity cannot make another man's wife at
thy command, no more can it another man's goods. Its the excellency of a
Christian to know how to want, Phil 4, 12, and to resolve so to depend on God
in a promise, rather to starve then steal.

Object. But the Disciples being hungered did pluck the ears of corn, therefore
its lawful to take that which is another in case of necessity, Matthew. 12.1.

Answ, The Disciples did what they did not, because necessity takes away
property, or because estates are so divided among men, that no man ought to
suffer his neighbor in extreme necessity to perish, but because what they took
was their own by the gift of God, Deuteronomy. 23.24, 25. When thou comes into the
standing corn of thy neighbors, then thou may pluck the ears with thy hand,
but thou shall not move a sickle into thy neighbors standing corn.

Besides its lawful to pluck an apple, a pear, or an ear of corn, not for
necessity, but for delight, because in such cases there is a silent consent. We
do it sometimes the owner standing by, who by his silence allows it, and if the
owner were absent, we have his interpretative consent, we have a persuasion,
that were the man by, he would give us leave to pluck an apple or an ear of
corn, even by the common law of humanity.

The Law commanding the theif who stole for need, to make restitution, had
been in vain, if need did dispense with property, and give title to so much of
our neighbors goods as would satisfy need, seeing its against reason that a
man should make restitution for that which is ones own. Yet it seems they
who war in a just cause, may in extremity take from others to relieve their
extremity. The persons they take from are either friends or enemies, if
enemies, what they take is lavvful spoil, if they be friends, they fighting
for their cause they may take from them, 1 Cor. 9.7. due cautions being
observed.

From him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away] Lending was a duty
under the Old Testament, and that freely, for to lend upon use was no benefit,
Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. Thou shall lend thy poor brother sufficient for his need. Psalm.
37.26. a good man is merciful and lends. Psalm. 112.5. a good man shows
favor and lends.

There are three sorts of borrovvers, 1 Those that have no means of repaying
you again; if these come to borrow we are not bound to lend to these, but to
give them, as duty and charity requires.

2 Poor men, that follow an honest calling and have means of paying you again;
here you are to lend freely, because of the duty of lending commanded here,
also Luke 6.35. (...) hoping nothing therefrom. As I must not take a penny at
present, so I must not hope for a penny in future, because it is my duty to
lend freely, as it is my duty to visit my brother in his sickness, to pray for
him, and to comfort him in his affliction of conscience.

3 Rich men who borrow your money to make a gain of it, either by purchasing, or
merchandise, etc. here you owe not a duty of lending, and therefore Propter
officium indebitum, for an undue service and benefit you take profit, as six
per cent. or the like: you have an hundred pound, your neighbor has an
hundred pound a year, he comes to borrow your hundred pound, may you not take
profit of him for the same? yes out of question.

Object. but you must not bind this rich man absolutely to pay you six in the
hundred, because it may fall out, he may not get a penny by your money, but
lose, and so this will be uncharitable.

Answ. No. It will not be uncharitable, for if the borrower make fifty pound
profit in the hundred, I shall have but my six pounds, or what is agreed upon,
and therefore if he lose by my money I must look for my Rent, for it must be
granted that the Loan of money is worth a certain Rate per cent. and the
Borrower stand to the hazard.

Reasons why it is lawful to take of rich men for lending.
1 Because the prohibition of taking money for loan is determined only to poor
men, never to rich men. See Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. Exodus 22.25. Luke 6.34, 35.

2 From the Rule of Equity. Is it equal that a rich man should use my money and
get by it, and I get nothing? Besides there is a burden upon the Lender, for
now all opportunities of disposing his money to profit is taken away, because
another man, a rich man, has borrowed his money.

3 I ow the rich man no such duty, and therefore, owing him nothing, I may take
something of him.

4 From gratitude: we ought to be thankful where we receive, now where is
thankfulness if you pay back only the principal?

5 From Charity, which teaches every man to have a care of his own. 1 Timothy 5.8.
Now if rich men have my money and grow richer by it, and I have nothing from
it, where is my care?

Only if thou have store of money, beware that thou do not so lend out thy
money to rich men for profit, that thou have not to supply the poor, where duty
calls for it. Lev. 25.35, 36, 37. If thy Brother be waxen poor thou shall not
give him thy money upon usury.

Quest. But what is usury?

Answ. The taking of any thing from a poor Brother for the duty of lending, or
from a person to whom we are bound to lend freely.

To these we are to lend freely because they borrow for the sustentation of the
life of them and theirs, whereas rich men borrow to get gain thereby: hence
rich Christians ought to lend freely to the poor, even though sometimes the
principal may be in hazard. See for this more in my Treatise of Repentance and
Restitution.

V. 43. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor and
hate thine Enemy.

V. 44. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and
persecute you.

Christ reproves another depravation of the Pharisees, which had three
Branches, 1 that they expounded Neighbor, to be only Friend or Kinsman,
whereas the Lord means all men who have a common nature with us, Luke 10.32. 2
That they left out of the Text these words [thy self] Levit. 19.18. The Command
was, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. 3 That their Enemies were to be
hated, whereas the contrary appears, Prove. 25.21. If thine Enemy hunger feed
him. Exodus 23.4.5. If the Ox or Ass of an Enemy were wandering they were to
bring him home. Now the Scribes gathered, 1 That as the Jews lived in
opposition to the foreign Enemies, Moabites, and Ammonites, and Amalekites,
they might also hate their private and personal Enemies. 2 That the Scribes
drew this principle of hatred of Enemies from the Rule of Contraries, which
was, we must love our Friends, therefore we must hate our Enemies: now a right
Consequent will not follow from Contraries, unless they be equal. From all this
Christ clears the Law.

But I say unto you, Love your Enemies] Christ sets down,

1 The Command, 1 Generally, Love your Enemies, 2 Particularly in three
Branches, 1 Bless them that curse you. 2 Do good to them that hate you. 3 Pray
for them that despitefully use you and persecute you.

2 The Reasons of it, 1 That you may be like God, as children to their father,
v. 45. 2 From the Lords own Example, who makes his Sun to shine, and Rain to
fall on the just and on the unjust. 3 From the difference betwixt Publicans or
civil men, or sinners, and betwixt Christians. Sinners love those that love
them, and salute those that salute them, but Christians must love them that do
not love them, and salute those that do not resalute them, or do it very
slightingly.

But before I come to handle the point concerning Love to Enemies, I dare not
condemn Tertullian and others, who hold Christ his Command to be a supplement
to Moses Law, while he says, The old Law teaches us love to Neighbors, the
new Law to love Strangers. Also Tertullian further, So long as the Sacrament
was among Israel, he worthily did command mercy to brethren alone, but when he
gave the ends of the earth for an inheritance and possession to Christ, and the
Nation began to be blotted out, as it was spoken by Hosea, They that were not
my people are my people, and she that had not obtained mercy has obtained
mercy. From thence Christ extends the Law of fatherly goodness to all,
excluding no man in mercy more than in vocation.

Many think (says Grotius) from these words, Thou shall hate thine Enemy, that
they have a firm Argument to prove that all things which Christ says were said
of old or by the Ancients, are not to be referred to the Law of Moses, but to
the Interpretations of the Expounders of the Law, but he thinks respect is had
to Moses words. The Jews were commanded to do some common benefits to their
Enemies, Exodus 23.4. But if we look Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3, 4. The Enemy here
mentioned was one of their Brethren, he who in Exodus is called an Enemy, in
Deuteronomy is called a Brother. Besides these, there were other Enemies they
were commanded to show no mercy unto, as the Hittites, Gargashites, Amorites,
etc. Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 5.19 Thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek
from under Heaven, thou shall not forget it. Yet were conditions of peace to be
offered to them, that if they would, they might redeem their destruction with
servitude, but if they refused the offered conditions, they were to be killed
without mercy. Now there being no cause in Christ's time, that the Jews should
allege or pretend for their hatred of other nations, the Laws which they had
against the seven nations, those exceptions being taken away which God for
certain causes had prescribed unto them, the Law of nature remained whole that
every man is to love one another. I must confess I do much incline to this, in
regard there were so many prayers in the Old Testament against enemies.

So that the meaning then is, the precept of Moses concerning the kind dealing
of the Jews with other men, extended not universally to all, but particularly
to their countrymen or fellow Jews, called the sons of thy people, see Deuteronomy.
22.1. to others who were aliens and also enemies they were not bound to be
kind, but against some, that is the seven nations, they were commanded to
proceed hostilely, but I say unto you, let your kindness be extended to your
enemies. Why both these interpretations may not be embraced I see no reason.
That there were falsifications by the Interpreters of the Law is without doubt,
in that they so limited neighbor to a son of Abraham, and left out part of the
command belonging to love. And also the latter from those two places, Exodus
22.4. compared with Deuteronomy. 22.1. Deuteronomy. 7.2.

And it is also safe to interpret Scripture in the most extended sense. Though
this scruple of this side remains, that the Canaanites were commanded to be
killed, but not to be hated, as a Judge commands a guilty person to be slain
yet does not hate him.

The words being thus expounded, we will consider the words generally, and
gather,

Obs. It Is the duty of Christians to love their enemies,

1 From Christ's example, Romans 5.10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the death of his son. For all the Samaritans would not give him harbor,
Luke 9.53. yet he brought grace to their doors, Joh. 4.10.

Also from the example of Saints. How kind was Joseph to his brethren that
sold him into Egypt, Genesis 50.20. Stephen prayed for his persecutors, Acts 7.59.
Jeremy did not desire the woeful day against those that went about to take away
his life, Jeremy 17.16. How often had David Saul in his power, yet would he not
hurt him. It Is related of Bishop Cranmer that he so loved his enemies, that it
became a Proverb, That the readiest way to get a good turn from him, was to do
him an injury.

2 There may be some good in an enemy. His created nature is good as being from
God, he has or may have many good parts in him, which if malice did not blind
us we might see, now goodness wherever it is ought to be an object of love.

Thy love to thy enemy may be a mean to overcome his enmity, Romans 12.19. As
coals of fire melt hard metals, so will thy kindness melt him.

4 Though at present he may be an enemy, yet he may in time become both thy
friend and Gods friend. Though now for the present he do thee wrong, he may
come to relent, Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his
enemies to be at peace with him. He that turned the hearts of the Egyptians to
lend his people their jewels, can turn thine enemies hearts. Paul once an enemy
to God and his people, after conversion, a true friend to both. The Jews though
at present enemies for your sakes, yet are they beloved for the fathers sake,
and shall be friends to Christianity. Romans 11.28. Esau's heart was turned to
Jacob, Genesis 33.10.

5 The mischiefs which come from hatred of our enemies.

1 Hereby we do more heart to our own souls then our enemies can do, filling our
souls with malicious distempers.

2 We multiply contentions farther and farther. There Is no way to overcome the
evil of an enemy but by doing good to him, Romans 12.21. We should be glad when
God puts an opportunity in our hand to overcome the malice of our enemies, that
we may see the uprightness of our heart herein. Miriam had spoken against Moses
in a way of detraction, Numb. 12.1. God smites her, for so doing, with
leprosy, Moses prays for her healing with much earnestness, v. 13. So does
Samuel pray for the people when they had cast off him and his government, 1 Samuel 12.18.

Obj. Papists say, it is matter of counsel to love enemies, but no command.

A. It Is well if it be so, yet no sin if it be omitted: do it, thou have more
reward; omit it, thou have no punishment.

Counsels are only given to some few that can receive them, Matthew. 19.11, 12.
but this command is given to all, as the other duties commanded in this Chapter
are precepts, as, Let your light shine forth, v. 16. also v. 24.28, 29, etc.
are all precepts and not counsels, so is this; Besides the reasons in the Text,
and v. 45. show that it is not left as an arbitrary thing. Yea we find it
conjoined with the most precise precepts, Romans 12.18. Col. 3.13. 1 These. 5.15.

Obj. But David often prays against his enemies.

Answ. 1 It may be conceived he means the enemies of the Church, not his own
personal enemies.

2 He did this rather by a Prophetical spirit, as rather denouncing what will
come, then desiring what may come.

3 It was not out of any revengefull desire, as if he took pleasure in the
destruction of wicked men, as out of a desire that the truth and justice of God
may be made glorious in the destruction of wicked men.

4 The Prophets pray for the destruction of wicked men, not of their persons
but of their Kingdom, which being destroyed the Kingdom of Christ is enlarged.

5 The Prophets wish for temporal evils upon wicked men, that they may be
corrected and amended, Ps. 83.16. Fill their faces with shame, that they may
seek thy name, O Lord. But if this cannot by prayer be obtained, then that the
Church may be freed from them, and the justice of God glorified.

6 If none of these take place, which we may in most Scriptures suppose, then
we must think, that either David and others sinned herein, or that the Law of
the new Testament tends more to charity then the old, and is a more perfect law.

Obj. But it is a rule in justice to give like for like, he hates me, why should
not I hate him?

Answ. Like for like is not a rule always to go by, for it takes place only
in just things. The contrary is commanded, 1 Pet. 2.23. 1 Pet. 3.9. Render to
no man evil for evil, or railing for railing.

2 Revenge is an act of Gods, Psalm. 94.1. Vengeance is mine, not thine, Deuteronomy.
32.15. Also it is an act of the Magistrate, who is a revenger to execute wrath
on them that do evil, Romans 13.4.

Obj. But he is my enemy, and hates me causelessly.

Answ. 1 Lay aside thy hatred toward him, that he may love thee.

2 Thou will have great comfort in thy conscience when thou can love a
causeless enemy, Psalm. 7.4. Yea, I have delivered him that without cause was
mine enemy.

Obj. But he is a wicked man, and the Prophet David says, Psalm. 139.21. Do not
I hate them that hate thee?

Answ. It Is one thing to hate a wicked man, another thing to hate the
wickedness in a man. If you hate his wickedness, you will hate the same
wickedness in others, even in your friends, which you do not, therefore your
hatred against the person makes you hate the sin. When David hated his enemies,
it was with a perfect hatred, now perfect hatred is that, which hates not the
person for the sin, nor loves the sin for the person.

Object. But if we must pray for our enemies, we must pray for the Devil and
his Angels.

Answ. Christ means only such enemies, for whom there is revealed a
possibility of hearing; for if a man sin against the holy Ghost, we are not to
pray for him, 1 John 5.16. God has revealed the irrevocable damnation of the
devils, Jude 6. in that they are reserved in everlasting chains.

Object. But we read of particular men that cursed. Noah cursed Canaan, Genesis
9.25. Cursed be Canaan, a servant, of servants. Joshua cursed them that built
Jericho, Jos. 6.10. compared with 1 Kin. 16.^4. Peter cursed Magus, thy money
perish with thee, Act, 18.20. Paul wished They were cut off, that troubled the
Galatians. Gal. 5.12. Elisha cursed the forty and two children, 2 King. 2.24.
Paul cursed Alexander. 2 Timothy 4.14.

Answ. When the Saints desired these things it was made evident to them from
God, that they should come to pass, they did not do it out of any spirit of
enmity.

Object. But is this commandment of loving our enemies possible?

Answ. Its possible according to the tenor of the Gospel, though not according
to the law, when we consent to the law of God herein, and have a will, a desire
and endeavor to love our enemies, Romans 7.18. God looks upon it as done: when
also we are troubled for the uncharitableness of our hearts, v. 14. and cry to
God against these risings, 2 When God inables us in some good measure to do
them good, to feed them in their hunger, Romans 12.19. to humble our selves for
them in their sickness. Psalm. 35.11, 12, 13, 14. David sought God by fasting
and prayer for them that scoft at him.

Use, to apply this, it serves for reprehension of those who hate their
enemies. You say, how do you know it? Answ. by thy unpeaceable speeches.
Joseph's brethren hated him and could not speak peaceably unto him. Genesis 37.4.

2 By thy afflicting thine enemies with secret whisperings, open slanders, and
false reports, Prove. 26.28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by
it.

3 By thy unkind carriage, when thou shall pass by them in such offices of
courtesy as they show to other neighbors, 1 King. 1.26.

2 Exhortation to love your enemies: naturally we hate them. Tit. 3.3.

Show your love to them, 1 by not purposing to revenge your selves, and by
purposing not to revenge your selves, Prove. 24.29. Say not, I will do to him as
he has done to me.

2 Desire not God to avenge your cause: so Stephen, Acts 7.59.

3 By being sorrowful when any evil befalls thine enemy, Psalm. 35.12, 13. When
David's enemies were sick he humbled himself with fasting. David was really
sorrowful for Saul's death, and declared it by putting to death him that slew
him, Prove. 24.17, 18. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, nor let not thine
heart be glad when he stumbleth: why so? 1 Least the Lord see it, and it
displease him.

2 It will cause the Lord to turn away his wrath from him.

4 By striving to forget the wrongs done by your enemies. If we strive not to
forget them, we shall hardly forgive them.

5 By striving to be at peace with him that is thy utterest enemy, Romans 12.18.
If it be possible live peaceably with all, Let him see that thou art not of an
implacable spirit, but ready to meet him on any reasonable terms.

6 By looking on it as a cross, when any man is so implacable that he will not
be at peace with thee, Ps. 120.5, 6, 7. I am for peace, but when I speak
thereof they are for war; woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with such
persons.

7 By thy willingness to do thy enemy good when it lies in thy power. Exodus
23.4, 5. If thou see the Ox or the Ass of thy enemy going a stray, thou art
to bring him home again, or if he lie under his burden thou shall surely help
him. As God also spares his enemies in his long suffering, and does them good
in his providence, not to strengthen them in wickedness but to lead them to
repentance, so ought we; and as he puts his hook in their noses to bridle their
malice, so may we.

Motives to this duty.
1 Vengeance belongs to God, Genesis 50.15, 19. who will revenge thy wrongs far
more sharply then thou would have him, Psalm. 94.1. Into whose hands its a
fearful thing to fall, Heb. 10.31. He that does wrong shall receive for the
wrong that he has done, Col. 3.25.

2 Consider what an enemy thou wast to God when he cast his love upon thee; for
all he was the party offended, and stood no need of thee, yet he sought unto
thee. Col. 1.21. 1 John 4.10, 11, 12. thou reasonest thou can live without
thy enemy, so could God without thee; thou say he has done thee many
wrongs, so have thou done to God.

3 Either thy Enemy repents of the wrong done to thee, or not: if he do not
repent of it, God will punish him more sore then thou would have him
punished; if he do repent of it, what Christian spirit is there that will not
pardon it? This kept Christ from rendering reviling for reviling, 1 Pet. 2.23.
why? he committed his cause to God, who judges righteously. It was the praise
of Solomon that he desired not to have the life of his enemies, 1 Chronicles. 1.11.

4 Thou never suffers any wrong but God is first offended, and more offended
then thou art, and takes thy wrong more heinously then thou thy self, therefore
revenge not thy self, hear not that suggestion, that it argues good metal to
be quick of touch.

5 This is the way to overcome him, Romans 12.18. as contraries do overcome one
another when they draw them into their own similitude, when we are drawn by
provocations to rage as wicked men do, then they overcome us, but when we
refrain from revenge we overcome them, as David did Saul, 2 Samuel 24. Daven. in
Col. 3.13.

Bless them that curse you] Christ comes in three particulars, to show our love
to enemies, which is, 1 by blessing them that curse us, so Paul. 1 Cor. 4.12,
being reviled we bless. By blessing he means a speaking to him with kind words;
when he speaks cursed words to thee, do thou speak kind words to him. We pray
for you, and for all other men that are enemies to us, that repenting with us
you may not blaspheme, and reproach him, who for his works and miracles done in
his name was without blame, even Jesus Christ, and believing on him may be
saved at his glorious coming, and may not be condemned of him to fire. Just.
Mar. cont. Triph. p. 196.

Do good to them that hate you] Second particular wherein to show our love to
enemies, viz. in doing them good. Romans 12.20. Elisha 2 King. 6. ver. 20. when
his enemies were smit with blindness, he prays God would give them sight, also
ver. 22. when the king of Israel would have smote them, Elisha would not
consent thereto, but bids that bread and water be set before them, and yet they
were such as came to take away his life. Do good then to their souls by
endeavoring to bring them to repentance; also to their bodies, if you give
alms to a company of poor people, not to exclude two or three, because they
have hurt thee, so lend to them; also do good to their posterity.

Pray for them that despitefully use you] The third particular is to pray for
enemies: when they are cursing thee, pray God to forgive them; when they are
pained in their bodies, pray God to ease them; when decayed in their Estates,
pray God to supply them; when they are damning their souls, pray God to save
them: thus David to his enemies, Psalm 35.13. and Stephen Acts 7.59. and Christ
Luke 23.34. When thy Enemy by tale-carryings, underminings, disgraceful
speeches, uncharitable censures, and slanderous accusations strives to work
thee out of the affections of the godly, or of those who may do thee good, do
thou pray for them, not that they may have success in their wickedness, but
that they may acknowledge their evils and be pardoned.

This is the excellency of a Christian, to do things above nature, to pardon
spiteful persons: such prayers are not only instrumental to obtain pardon for
our Enemies, as the prayers of Christ and Stephen did, but are arguments or
evidences of Gods pardoning us. What a blessed thing will it be at the day of
Christ to appear to have been a mean by thy prayers of saving the soul of a
persecuting Enemy? When David's Enemies compassed him with words of hatred, and
became adversaries to him for his love to them, he gave himself to prayer,
Psalm 109.3, 4, 5.

V. 45. That you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, for he
makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends Rain on the
just and unjust.

Christ here gives Reasons why we should love our Enemies, as, 1 [That ye may
be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven] not that love to our Enemies
is the form of our Adoption, but a demonstration thereof, that ye may be, Phil.
2.15. that is, that ye may be made manifest to be. He that performs not this
duty is none of Gods children. Love to Enemies does manifest our Adoption,
because Love to our Enemies does flow from that Love God has showed to us when
we were Enemies, 1 John 4.10, 11.

Of all duties Christians should be careful to practice those which evidence
assurance, 2 Peter 1.10. This duty tends thereunto. What shall we think of
those who are so far from loving their Enemies that they do not love their
Friends? these are like the rebellious Angels who having had a blessed nature
from God, set him at naught. Many have such a frame of spirit, as Achitophel
had to David, Psalm 55.12, 13. and Joas to Jehoiada, 2 Chronicles. 24.22. Many men
lay aside not only grace but even the light of nature.

Also that ye may be the Children of your Father, that is, like to your Father,
as Children to their Father: your Father does good to his Enemies, giving them
the Sun to shine on them, and the Rain to fall on their Land to make it
fruitful, be ye like him, Ephesians. 4. ult. compared with cap. 5.1, 2. He that is
like another is proverbially said to be his Son.

Who makes his Sun to rise and his Rain to fall] All Nations refer the effects
of Nature to the God of Nature; hence these phrases, it rains, it thunders,
that is, God rains and thunders. Psalm 19.4, 5. In the Heavens has he set a
Tabernacle for the Sun, which is removed as a Tabernacle from place to place.
The day is thine and the night is thine, thou have prepared the light and the
Sun. Psalm 74.16. To him that made great Lights, Psalm 136.8, 9.

Also for the Rain it is from him, He says to the small Rain and to the great
Rain, Be thou on the earth, Job 37.4.

Learn, 1. To acknowledge the highest cause on whom all second causes depend. As
in bodies politic, inferior governments depend on the superior, or as in
artificial motions the inferior depend on the superior, as in motions of
Clocks and Watches. So the secondary causes depend upon the first. He gives the
early and latter Rain. In droughts therefore seek to God for Rain, 2 Chronicles.
7.13. Jer. 14.22. In immoderate Rains seek to God for fair weather, Isai 38.8.

2 Praise God for fruitful Seasons, Psalm 147.7, 8, 9.

3 See outward things fall alike to all, the Sun shines to all, the Rain falls
on all, Eccles. 9.1, 2.

V. 46. For if you love them which love you, what reward have you? Do not even
the Publicans the same?

Here Is a third Reason from the unprofitableness of other love which arises
from natural friendship, or that which arises from our own profit and benefit,
which has no Reward with God, whereas love that is done for Gods sake has a
Reward with God. He that loves not his Enemies, declares that he loves not his
Friends for Gods sake but for his own sake, because his Enemies in some sense
may be said to bear the Image of God, as well as his Friends.

Do not even the Publicans the same] They are called Publicans from public,
because they gathered the public Tributes, wherein too often they oppressed the
poor, and so became infamous among the Jews, not because they gathered the
Magistrates Tribute, nor as if these Publicans were the worst of men, but
Christ speaks according to the received opinion of men, for Matthew and Zacheus
were Publicans. It Is like in all the Roman Provinces, and so in Judea, the
Romans farmed the Customs, but they let it out to the Jews, and so this became
abominable to other of the Jews, that they should be Instruments of their
slavery, and therefore Publicans are joined with Heathens and sinners, and
therefore as appears out of the Thalmud, they were not admitted to be Witnesses
before the Jewish Judges.

What Reward have ye] i.e. No Reward, for you receive a Reward from your
Friends even like love, but if from faith in Gods Command you love both your
Enemies and your Friends, you may hope for a gracious Reward. Sylla boasted
that he overcame his Friends with Benefits, and his Enemies with Mischiefs, and
therefore, as Plutarch in his Life says, he cruelly tore Marius; but let
Christians overcome Enemies with good turns. How much better did Phocion, who
being condemned to death, being asked of his Friends what he would have told to
his Sons answered, I will that he forget the Wrong the Athenians have done to
me. If Heathens did thus, what should Christians do?

V. 47. And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more then others? Do
not even the Publicans so?

Here Is a fourth reason, because salutations belong and ought to be performed,
not only to brethren and friends, but also to enemies. Under salutations
Christ comprehends all signs of good will, as putting off the hat,
embracement, asking how they do. So that the fourth reason is taken from the
difference of Christian love and that which is worldly, the one salutes friends
only, the other salutes enemies. Unless then your love extend to enemies, you
differ nothing from the Publicans charity.

These duties of salutation, as asking, Is all well? 2 Kin. 9.17, 18, 19, 22.
three times this salutation is mentioned, Is it peace? how do you all at home?
These duties the Jews did only to their fellow Jews, judging all others
unworthy of salutation: now Christian religion teaches us to salute all, except
it be those who are Apostates from Christianity. 2 Epist. of John, v. 10. If
there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your
house, neither bid him God speed, for he that bids him God speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds. For that command of Luke 10.4. Salute no man by the
way, Christ means they should make such have in divulging and publishing the
Gospel, that they should not spend their time in salutations.

V. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your father in heaven is perfect.

In the words, 1 A duty, Be perfect. 2 The pattern of this duty, As your father
is perfect. 3 The inference whence it is enforced, Therefore.


Be ye perfect] Not in equality, but in similitude; as Luke 6.36, Be ye
merciful as you father is merciful.

Probably it might be taken out of Levit. 11.44.19.2. from whence Peter took
it, 1 Pet. 1.16. Be holy as I am holy.

Perfection is taken, 1 For the perfection of sincerity, Genesis 17.1. Walk
before me and be thou perfect. Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just and a perfect man in
his generation, and Noah walked with God, that is, his sincerity showed it self
by walking with God, making God present with him, and himself present with God
in his actings. Now this perfection of sincerity is taken in opposition to
hypocrisy in the reign, Isa. 38.3. Remember how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart. Luke 1.76. In holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. Many have an outward perfection, but they
are like Apples, rotten at the core, though they look lovelily. Contrary
Saints, 2 Cor. 2.17.

2 Perfection is taken for universality of obedience, Psalm. 119.7. I will
praise thee with uprightness when I shall have learned, not only notionally
but practically, thy Commandments. Now when a man lives in a purpose of any
sin, or in an omission of any known duty, or in an unresolvedness against any
known evil, he is not perfect; also if he admit a constant neglect of any duty,
or an ordinary Commission of any sin, he is not perfect; but when a man, though
he be subject to infirmities, had rather dye then omit a known duty, or live in
a known sin, he is perfect, and will grow out his infirmities in time, as a
sound man wears out his sickness. This perfection is called Sanctification
throughout, 1 These. 5.23. and turning to God with the whole heart, Joel 2.12.
Jer. 3.10. There is not any thing in his soul the bent whereof is not from God.
Now where men are not thus perfectly universal, something or other steals away
their heart, as riches, honor, etc. that if God and that come in competition,
they leave the Lord. This universality of obedience is seen in eying every of
Gods commands, Psalm. 119.6. as in governing the tongue, without which we are
not perfect, Jam. 1.26. compared with Jam. 3.2. q.d. he is not a perfect man
unless he look to this command of governing his tongue as well as other.

3 Perfection is taken for singleness of heart, Genesis 17.1. which is when a man
singles out God from all other objects, he will follow God in his ways, that
neither favors of great ones, contempts of multitudes, proffers of preferment,
nor persecutions of enemies, shall draw him off from the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
Heb. 11.24. Dan. 6.10.

4 Perfection is taken for straightness, Psalm. 37.37. Mark the just and perfect
man, or, as the word is rendered, straight man. Straightness appears in a man's
ayms and ends, as when a person shall make Gods glory, profitableness to
others, and his own salvation to be his end. Imperfect men go in crooked paths,
Psalm. 125.4. Crooked hearts and straight rules to aim at God cannot meet.

For application, try your perfection of heart by four trials suitable to this
fourfold acception of perfection.

1 Whether are you sincere to eye God in what you do, as in alms, prayer, and
fasting? Matthew. 6.1, 2, etc. Col. 3.22, 23. speaking to Christian servants he
says, Servants obey your masters, not with eye service, as men-pleasers, but
with singleness of heart fearing God, and whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as
to the Lord, and not to men, q.d. in all your services eye God, 2 Cor. 2.17.

Obj. But if none are perfect with God, but those that eye God, what will
become of me who have so many byends in what I do?

Answ. Gods children, though by ends creep into them, groan under them, Romans
7.16, 17. 2 Their earnest desire is to be wholly rid of them, and where a man
can do no more but will, his will is accepted for the deed, 2 Cor. 8.12. 3
Ordinarily and usually they look at Gods eye in what they do, and this is a
blessed temper, belonging only to perfect men. Romans 8.1. Thou herein walks
after the spirit, and so art blessed.

2 Whether do thou look at all Gods commands? Herod did many things, but
would not part with Herodias, Mark 6.20. If thou will walk before me, as David
thy father walked, in integrity of heart and in uprightness, to do according to
all that I have commanded thee, 1 Kings 9.4. As if he should say, Thy heart O
Solomon cannot be perfect unless thou observe all my commands. The young man,
Mat. 19. proved his unsoundness, in that he would not part with all for Christ;
in something or other unsound men discover themselves, if not to the
observation of others, yet to the conviction of their own hearts, if they would
not want in the due trial hereof. If thy blood rise when thou hears a stranger
swear an oath, and thou can hear thy Apprentice to lie and cheat, and never
be moved at it, this is but a false fire. True obedience, as it disputes not
the comands of God, but obeys them cheerfully, so does it not divide the
commands of God but obeys them equally, Ps. 119.6. Joh. 15.14.

3 When a man is not only willing to do, but to sufer any thing that God
commands, Matthew. 19, 17. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all; as if he
should say, If there be any enjoyment in the world that a man is not willing to
part with, as to leave this pleasant dwelling, to part with thy country, to
fall out with thy near friend, to lose the favor of this man that could prefer
thee, to leave such an Office or employment as brings it in, or if there be any
evil thou art not ready to suffer, as banishment, imprisonment, reproach and
confiscation of goods, thy heart is not perfect with God, Acts 9.6. Lord what
will thou have me to do? Let the business be easy or difficult, tell me what
thou will have me to do. See in Moses, Heb. 11.25, 26. Gal. 6.14. God forbid
that I should rejoice in any thing save in the cross of Christ, that is neither
in wealth, honor, liberty or relations more then in duty to God.

4 Whom do thou make thy end? A perfect man makes God his end, Romans 14.7, 8.
None of us who profess our selves to be Christians lives unto himself, etc. 1
Cor. 10.31. Joh. 7.18. He that has no unrighteousness in him, that is to say,
a perfect man, seeks the glory of him that sent him. The Apostle exhorting
servants to uprightness, bids them with good will do service as to the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.6, 7. and bidding masters to be upright in their places, v. 9. he urges
on this ground, Knowing they have a master in heaven. Also Col. 3.23.
Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord and not to men. This
consideration, that I have to do with God, makes a man act uprightly, and the
execution hereof declares him to walk perfectly. 2 Cor. 4, 5. We preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord. That is, in our preaching we only aim that
the Lord may be exalted. Unsound men have God in admiration for advantage, but
when they have got what they would, and are delivered from what they fear, they
start aside: Contrary, sound men have not only a constant good opinion of God,
but also make him their end in all things. Psalm. 101.3, 4. I will walk with a
perfect heart; how does that appear? I will set no wicked thing before me, that
is, I will eye God, and not iniquity. Carnal men eye their credit, profit,
pleasure, and herewith are they moved to act, but a perfect man is moved with
this, that God beholds him that this thing he does is pleasing to God, and that
God sees and approves it, as when he does alms in secret, Matthew. 6, etc.

If it be asked how I shall know whether Gods eye moves me to do what I do, or
other ends of credit or profit?

We may know it hereby; a perfect man will do duty though other ends be taken
away, he will suffer for a good conscience though no praise but reproach
accompany it. Secondary respects may make a perfect man move with more
cheerfulness, but Gods eye moves the soul to act without any of these, without
whose command the soul stands still, as the servant does at the command of him
who is not his master.

As your Father which is in heaven is perfect] Perfection in God is his
essential fullness of all goodness and virtues.

Perfection is twofold, 1 That which is perfect in its kind, so the light is
perfect light.

2 For self-sufficiency, so God is perfect. As the Sun has a self-sufficiency
of light in it self, standing no need of the Moon, or stars; so God has a
self-sufficiency in himself, not standing need of any creature, yea he has all
the perfections of creatures in himself. Acts 17.25. Neither is he worshipped
as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life, and breath and all
things.

Perfection in God is an essential property, whereby he has the perfections of
all creatures in himself, from everlasting to everlasting, and nothing is
wanting to him, but he is the pattern and cause of all perfection of nature and
grace that is in the creature.

Properties of the perfection in God.
1 It Is independent. The creatures may be perfect in their kind, yet they
depend on something else; as a River though it be a perfect River, yet it
stands need either of the fountain or of the sea to maintain it. He stands not
in need of Princes, of men or Angels. Though he use them as instruments, it is
not because he cannot act and bring about his ends without them, for he that
could make the heavens and earth by the word of his mouth, Psalm. 33.6. what
cannot he do?

2 It Is incomprehensible. Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou
find out the Almighty unto perfection? Job 11.7. It is as high as heaven, what
can thou do? deeper then hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is
longer then the earth and broader then the sea, v. 8, 9. there is no searching
out of Gods perfection, but God searches out the perfection of every creature,
Job 28.3.

3 Its incapable of addition, there is nothing can be added to it, our
righteousness cannot add any thing to him, nor our wickedness derogate any
thing from him, Job. 22.3. Job. 35.7, 8. if the blasphemer reproach God, God is
not the worse, if we worship him, he is not the better.

4 Its unspeakable, Nehem. 9.5. he is exalted high above all blessing and
praise: Though we are commanded by our lives, Mat. 5.16. and praises to
glorify God, yet we do not add any thing hereby to his essence, but only
declare him glorious, if we call him holy, just, righteous, etc. he is all
these in the abstract, holiness it self, justice and mercy it self, so that we
cannot flatter him.

5 Its an unmixed perfection. The creatures have perfections in their kinds,
but they are mixed with imperfections. Saul was a proper man but wicked,
Absalom beautiful but unhappy, Naaman honorable but he was a leper, but in
God there is wisdom without folly, truth without falsehood. Tit. 1.2. light
without darkness, 1 John 1.5. God is light and in him is no darkness at all;
holiness without sinfulness, Psalm, 5.4. Hab. 1.13.

6 Gods perfection is self existing, the perfection of his understanding, that
he conceives things at once and not successively, the perfection of his will,
Romans 12.2. whereby he wills whatsoever is good at once, now the perfection of
creatures is a borrowed perfection. If a man would be perfect in any thing he
propounds unto himself a perfect pattern; the perfections of all creatures,
sun, moon, stars, wine, gold, pearls, are from him, Romans 11.36. of him are all
things, every creature without his influence, is as the air without the sun, a
dark and comfortless body. Psalm. 30.7. By thy favor thou made my mountain
strong, thou did hide thy face and I was troubled.

For Application 1 To magnify Gods perfection: depending servants magnify
bountiful Lords, we praise the sun, not only because of its glorious
splendour, but because we receive of its heat and light: Moses says, ascribe ye
greatness to our God, why? because his work is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

2 Be content with God alone, seeing all perfection is in him: as we count it
day when the sun shines, though never a starr appear, so should we be content
with God alone: the heavenly Jerusalem had no need of the sun or of the moon
to shine in it, for the glory of God did enlighten it, and the lamb was the
light thereof, Rev. 21.23. though the figgtree should not blossom, and there
were no fruit in the field, and the herds were cut off from the stall, and the
vine should not give her increase, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, Hab. 3.16,
17. yea though thou were in banishment, poverty, slavery, imprisonment, be
content with God. David, 1 Samuel 30.6. when all was gone and the people spoke of
stoning him, he encouraged himself in God, also Paul and Silas, Act. 16.25. As
death and imprisonment is nothing to those who are filled with the joy of the
holy Ghost, so all outward comforts are nothing to fill the soul till God come
with them.

3 To make up all our imperfections we meet withal in this world in God, when
we loose honors, estates, liberty, relations, country. How did God make up
Joseph's name when it was taken from him unjustly? and David's name when it was
justly gone? so that he dyed full of honor, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. Job lost his
estate and children, and God doubled them to him, Job 42.12. how much more when
any enjoyment is forsaken for a good conscience? Mat. 19.27. Mar. 10.29, 30.

4 Be humbled in sight of thy own imperfections, he is pure, thou sinful; he
stands in need of nothing, Psalm. 16.3. Thy goodness extends not to him, thou
needs every thing, Psalm. 19.12. Psalm. 130.3.143.2. Luke 17.10. when we have
done all we are unprofitable.

5 That we should have a holy greatness of mind arising in us from the interest
we have in such a God of such perfection. As carnal men have a greatness
arising from riches, honor, learning, kindred, office, which is like the
greatness of a swollen member, arising not from the strength but weakness
thereof; so Saints should have a greatness of mind from having such a perfect
God for their portion. If contrymen are puffed up their wealth being enlarged,
why should not we be lifted up in the confidence of so great a God that has
all things in his hand? Luth. in Psalm 121. Psalm 16.5. The Lord is the portion
of mine inheritance and of my cup, thou maintainest my lot. It Is a Metaphor
from the custom of dividing Inheritances, wherein every Heir has his portion,
as if he should say, When others have lands, moneys, Princes favors for their
portions, The Lord is my portion. Also, He is the portion of my cup, a Metaphor
from the manner of banquets, wherein every one has a cup of sweetmeats given,
so others have a cup of wealth, of honor, etc. but God is the portion of my
cup. Such a greatness of mind had David, Psalm 119.96. I have seen an end of
all perfection.

6 Look upon God as a God of perfection: other lords need the service of their
servants, but God needs none of our services. And being of such perfection we
should pursue after his service, as the men of the world pursue to be servants
to great Princes.

7 Make God the pattern of thy actings; in all imitations we choose the most
perfect pattern.

CHAP. VI.
V. 1. Take heed that ye do not your Alms before men, to be seen of them,
otherwise ye have no Reward of your Father which is in Heaven.
THis Chapter has six parts in it, the first is of avoiding hypocrisy and
vainglory, and following after secrecy and sincerity in the giving of Alms.

Whether this Chapter be a continued Sermon with the former is not much
material.

Take heed ye do not your Alms before men, to be seen of them] Either of the
party to whom you give, that they should tell of your liberality, and cry you
up, or of others. Most men have a greater thirst of credit than of virtue.
Vainglory and spiritual pride is ready to intrude into all our services,
unless we be watchful.

Quest. But is it not lawful to give Alms publicly?

Answ. Yes, we may do good every where, but we must not do them that we may be
beheld of men, but our consciences must witness, that if no eye were upon us we
would do the same in secret, that we do publicly. God does not turn away the
eyes of men from our Alms, but our heart from their eyes. The Lord does not
forbid others from seeing our bounty, but forbids us to do it for to seem
bountiful: for in no duty more than this the heart is apt to be carried out
after sight of men. Vainglory is like that Worm which eat up Jonah's Gourd.

Object. But do not the Commands of Christ, Matt. 5.16. Let your light shine
forth before men, and this Command contradict?

Answ. No. Suppose two men, one does Alms in secret, so that no man knows of
it, no not he that receives it, he offends this Command, Let your light shine
forth: now no man sees his good deeds, and so does invite to imitation, others
shall be barren, whiles they think no man does that which God commands, and a
greater mercy is done to him that has an Example of Imitation, than to him
that is relieved. Another gives Alms only to be praised, he does not offend
against this Command, Let your works shine forth, but against this Command, Let
thine Alms be in secret. Aug. Sermon. 31. de quatuor questionibus, he there
compares these to foolish Virgins, which did shine but had no Oil, that is, no
conscience of pleasing God in their good works. He observes both these
Precepts, that does good before men, not that others may praise him, but that
others may imitate him.

Otherwise you have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven] That is, if
you make your own praise your end and not God, you cannot look for any Reward,
nay, in stead of a gracious Reward you may look for Punishment for your
vainglory.

No Reward] This word Reward does not note an equality betwixt the Work and the
Reward. Merces the Latin word, as Varro says, is derived of Mereri to obtain,
so that it seems to signify a Gift, so that that Reward bestowed on our
obedience is founded on the free Promise of God: for else all our doings and
sufferings are not to be compared to the future glory.

Use. For application, 1 Be attentive over your hearts in giving Alms.

2 Look upon vainglory as that which does unhallow your Alms, it is a sweet
Poison, it is the Mother of Hell, as Chrysostom calls it, the Moth of
Liberality. It Is equal that every man have his Reward from him he labors for,
now when you give to men, it is equal you have men's praise, it is not equal that
there be a double but a single Reward for one labor.

V. 2. Therefore when thou do thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before
thee, as the Hypocrites do, in the Synagogues and in the Streets, that they may
have glory of men; verily I say unto you, They have their Reward.

Sound a Trumpet] It Is a Proverb, for the Hebrews were wont to call the people
together by a Trumpet, Number. 10.2. Joel 2.15. Psalm 81.3, 4. Though Lyra and
Pareus think they called both the poor and beholders in the Synagogues and
Streets where there were any concourse of men. So that to sound a Trumpet is a
Proverb for to call the people for witness; these Pharisees pretended they
only called the poor together by sounding a Trumpet, but the thing they
intended was vainglory, and therefore they sought the most eminent places that
they might have many Witnesses.

As the Hypocrites do in the Synagogues] Christ alludes to the calling together
on the Stage, for the people is called together with a Trumpet to behold the
Play, for in profane Writers Hypocrites are called Stage Players, (...), a
simulando, from the counterfeit person they bear; so these Pharisees pretended
to be the Servants of God, when indeed they were the Servants of vainglory.

Verily I say to you, they have their Reward] That is, Praise with men not with
God. Chemnicius thinks it was a custom that the poor in Israel did not beg
from door to door, but that the poor of every place at set times were called
together into a certain place by the sound of a Trumpet, that they might
receive Alms, either out of the Tithes of the poor, Deuteronomy. 14.28. or other Alms
of charitable minded people: this appointment had some reason in it, 1 That
wandering Beggars might not by their importunity get away Alms from others, and
the true poor be neglected, and this was done in the Synagogue where the Law
and Prophets were read, that both the Givers and Receivers might be warned of
their duty. Christ does not blame this custom, but the Pharisees would not
give their Alms in common but by themselves, and when they did it they would
have a Trumpet sounded when they went through the City to the place of Alms,
hence they had the praise of men for reward.

V. 3. But, when thou do Alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does.

The words are a Proverb, that is, If thy left hand had eyes it might not see
the Charity which the right hand does, though the left hand be most serviceable
to the right hand of all the members. Hereby Christ would have us content with
the testimony of Gods eye, we must be so far from publishing our Alms to others
that we must do what we can to keep it from our selves, that we do not applaud
it, or wonder at it, or feed our eyes or minds with the meditation of it,
neither of the quantity given, nor manner of giving, nor persons to whom it is
given. The righteous say, Lord, when saw we thee an hungry and fed thee, and
thirsty and gave thee drink? Matthew. 25.37. He that gives let him do it with
simplicity, Romans 12.8. This will be a means to prevent pride and upbraiding of
the poor, and enslaving the poor to us, whom we are apt to think we have
obliged to us by our benefits. Augustine interprets the left hand the carnal
desire of the mind, the right hand the spiritual love of the mind. If a man
out of pure love to God give Alms, here the left knows not what the right hand
does; but if a man in giving Alms seek for profit, he mingles the conscience of
his left hand with the works of his right hand. Aug. Sermon. 31. de quatuor
questionibus.

V. 4. That thine Alms may be in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret
himself shall reward thee openly.

That thine Alms may be in secret] i.e. Removed from the eyes of men, and done
to God. If so, Thou shall have praise before men, Christ and Angels in the day
of judgment, Matthew. 25.34, 35, 36. 1 Cor. 4.5.

Obj. But if we do alms in secret we shall lose them.

A. No, it is enough to have God a witness, who will one day recompense it, Luke
12.14. and acknowledge it. Here the hypocrite has some hundreds looking on, in
the day of Christ thou shall have millions beholding.

Not as if always secrecy of place were required, for sometimes we give in
public, either to stir up others by our example, or to relieve a poor person
we meet in an open place; but here our hearts ought to be removed from the eyes
of men, and there is more occasions of vainglory by giving in public then in
secret.

And thy father which sees in secret himself shall reward thee openly] As if
he should say, Though there be no witness nor rewarder among men, yet do not
think thou have lost thy labor, though men bury thy alms in forgetfulness or
unthankfulness, yet God beholds thee, Heb. 4.13. he looks on thy heart, 1 Samuel
16.7. Romans 2.30.

Openly] Not in a corner, or before a few witnesses, or the inhabitants of one
City or Country, but before the whole world, Matthew. 25.34. Thou shall be
recompensed at the resurrection of the just, Luke 14.14.

Obs. The Lord sees all our secret actions, all our thoughts and imaginations,
Jer. 4.14. yea long before thinking, Ps. 139.4. no thought hid from him, Job
42.6. What Adam did in the garden, what Cain did in the field, what Lot's
daughters did in the night is known to him.

Reas. 1 Because he judges every secret thing, which he could not did he not
see it, Eccles. 12.14. 1 Cor. 4.5. He will reveal the counsels of the heart,
Psalm. 90.8.

2 Because he is omniscient. Darkness and light are alike to him, Psalm. 139.12.
Job. 11.11. Psalm. 94.7, 8. Hebr. 4.13.

For application, 1 Reprehension to those who think God sees not their secret
wickedness, because in the height of heaven, Psalm. 10, 11. and think that he
cannot judge through the dark cloud, Job 2^.12, 13. Ezekiel. 8.12. yes, God sees
thy evils and will set them in order before thee, Psalm. 50.^0, 21. I know the
things that come into your mind every one of them, Ezekiel. 11.5.

2 Comfort, when we do holy actions in secret, as prayers, alms, fasting, Esa.
38.3. He saw Hezekiahs tears and truth of heart. We have a witness in heaven to
all our actions, Job 16.19, 20. this comforted Peter; Thou know all things,
thou knows that I love thee.

3 Admonition not to sin in secret. Carnal men think that bread eaten in secret
is pleasant, Prove. 9.17. many venture to do shameful things in secret, which
are a shame to speak of, Ephesians 5.12. but know God sees thy secret sins, thy
secret accepting of persons, Job 13.10. he will surely reprove thee for it;
also thy secret smiting thy neighbor, Deuteronomy. 27.24. thy secret uncleanness, 2 Samuel 12.12. thy secret malice and murder, Psalm. 10.8. compared with v. 11. thy
secret hypocrisy, Luke 12.1, 2. thy stifling thy conscience when thou will not
suffer it to speak out, 1 John 4.20. thy tricks to keep off conviction, thy
rovings of heart in holy duties, Ezekiel. 33.31. Prove. 5.14. thy hudling and
posting over prayer for form sake in thy closet, Esai 43.22.

1 God does not only see our secret actions, but also ponders and considers
them. He sees wickedness, will he not then consider it, Job 11.11. Prove. 5.21.

2 He remembers thy secret sins; Jer. 17.1. The sin of Judah is written with a
pen of Iron, and point of a Diamond; so also are thy secret prayers and alms,
Acts 10.4.

3 He will convince thee of thy secret actings, Joh. 4.18. how did Christ
convince the woman of Samaria of her secret adultery?

4 He will discover thy secret actions before men and Angels, 1 Timothy 5.25, 26.
2 Samuel 12.12. so that there is nothing secret that shall not be made manifest,
nor hid that shall not be known, Matthew. 10.26. The children of Israel did
secretly those things which were not right before the Lord, 2 Kings 17.9.
Contrary, if thou be sincere in secret, the Lord will discover thee, Joh. 1.47,
48. he saw the widow casting in two mites and took notice of it, Luke 21.2. he
will discover the intention of the man that gave a cup of cold water to Christ,
and could give no more, Mat. 10.42.

5 He will discover thy secret intentions as well as thy actions. The Prophet
told Gehezi not only what he had got from Naaman, but to what intention he
meant to employ it, even to buy olive-yards and vine-yards, sheep and oxen
therewith, 2 Kings 5.26. so he knows our intentions for good when they are
good, Luke 21.2.

V. 5. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are, for they
love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men; Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward:

Christ, next unto a right direction in alms, comes to give a right direction
in prayer, in which, 1 He sets down the sins to be avoided.

2 The manner of right performance.

The sins to be avoided are,

1 Hypocrisy, v. 5. 2 Vain glory, v. 5. They love to pray standing that many
eyes may be on them. 3 Vain repetitions, v. 7.

2 The manner of right performance, which must be, 1 With confidence, Pray to
thy father. 2 With secrecy, Pray to thy father in secret, v. 6. 3 Grounds
hereof, 1 Your father who sees in secret will reward openly. 2 It Is a
heathenish practice to use vain repetitions, v. 7. 3 The knowledge God has of
your wants, and his readiness to supply you, v. 8.

And when thou prayest thou shall not be as the hypocrites are] That is, as the
hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees,

For they love to pray standing in the Synagogues.]

Q. Whether is it not lawful to pray standing?

A. Yes, Mark 11.25. When ye stand praying, forgive. The Pharisee and the
Publican stood both when they prayed, Luke 18, 11, 13. The Levites stood and
cried with a loud voice unto the Lord, Neh. 9.4. Abraham stood praying, Genesis
^8.22. Moses and Samuel, Jer. 15.1. and Job cap. 30.20. And sometimes, and more
frequently, kneeling was used. Solomon, 1 Kings 8.54. arose from before the
altar of the Lord from kneeling upon his knees. Daniel kneeled upon his knees
three times a day, Dan. 6.10. Every knee shall bow to me, Esai 45, 23. I have
left unto me 7000 that have not bowed the knee to Baal, 1 Kings 19.18.
Wherewith shall I bow my knee before the most high God? Mic. 6.6. Let us bow
down and kneel before the Lord our Maker, Ps. 95.6. To stand in prayer is not
unlawful, but to stand that thou may be seen is unlawful.

In the new Testament we read that Christ kneeled down and prayed, Luke 22.41.
Peter kneeled down when he prayed for Tabitha, Acts 9.40. Paul kneeled down and
prayed with them all who had brought him on his way, Acts 20.36. Also Paul
bowed his knees to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.14. Stephen
kneeled down in his last prayer, Acts 7.60. Also Paul and his company kneeled
down on the shore and prayed, Acts 21.5. In prayer that gesture is to be used
that does most quicken and help to the duty. The ancient Christians were wont
to kneel in remembrance of the fall of Adam, and of all his posterity, and
sometimes to pray standing in remembrance of the grace of Christ, whereby we
have risen from our fall.

Kneeling on the six days was a badge of our fall by sin, but that we do not
kneel on the Lords day is a sign of Resurrection: From the times of the
Apostles this custom came in, as Irenaeus mentions, Lib. de Pasch. Quest. and
Respons. ad Orthodox. q. 115. ascribed to Justin. Aug. Epist. 119.115.

2 Q. Whether was it not lawful to pray in the Synagogues?

A. Yes. David says, Bless ye God in the Congregations, Psalm. 68.26. For by
Synagogues he means public prayer which was used, Matthew. 18.20. Acts 1.14.
practiced by the hundred and twenty, also Acts 4.24. Acts 12.5. where the
Church were praying for Peter. Grounds of public prayer, 1 There God is wont
to communicate his presence, Psalm. 26.8.65.4.52.8.76.1, 2.132.13, 14.133.3.

2 The concurrent prayers of Gods people is wont to be more strong, as many
hands lifting at a burden lift the burden though great, many flames of fire
united in one are not easily quenched, many springs of water conjoined make the
stream the stronger: if the prayers of one Moses were so strong to keep God
from destroying Israel, Exodus 32.10.11. Psalm. 106.23. what will the prayers of
many do? Acts 12.5. as we see in Peter's case, who was delivered by the prayers
of the Church.

3 In that there are public Officers chosen of Churches to present their
requests before the Lord, hence as those that are sollicitours for a
Corporation had need to know the wants thereof, so should the Officers of
Churches in special be acquainted with the brethrens wants.

4 Because public occasions require it, both in Church, as the seeking some
special mercy from God which concerns the whole Church, as Peter's deliverance,
Acts 1.5, 12. the whole Church sometimes wants a mercy, Matthew. 18.20. the whole
Church sometimes wants to have a judgment turned away, Acts 4.24. also in the
Commonwealth for to pray for the happiness of the Magistracy, 1 Timothy 2.1. I
exhort that supplications, prayers, be made for all men, for Kings and all that
are in authority. By the blessing of whose prayers and examples is a City
exalted, Prove. 11.11.

5 It Is for the honor and glory of God to have so many petitioners waiting on
him for his royal assent, a joint cry of one and the same spirit from so many
breathings of his people. (...) prayer is as it were a public hue and cry made
our by an embodied Church against the common enemies of Je^^s Christ, of their
souls. Praise waits for him in Sion, Psalm. 68.^.

6 In public prayer there is, as it were, the conjunctions of the spirits and
graces of a body of Christ, as it were, in one. Hence the whole Church, Acts
^.42. as they continued in breaking bread together, so did they in prayer, and
were as it were of one accord. These all continued in one accord with prayer
and supplication, Acts 1.14. Acts 4.24. the Church lift up their voices with
one accord: the breathings of the spirit which were scattered in many, are as
it were united in one, and as the waters of several channels disburthen
themselves sometimes in one current: so that where his name is thus recorded,
he is wont to come and bless his people, Exodus 20.24. In all places where I
record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee. Seeing then there
are such conjunctions of spirits, he that is the mouth ought to be careful to
present only such requests wherein all Christians do agree, and the body, that
are worshippers; and all the worshippers are to come together like so many
Doves to their windows, Esai 60.8. even the Prince himself not excepted, Ezekiel.
46.10. that they may serve the Lord with one consent or shoulder, Zeph. 3.9.
the usual careless neglect whereof, if it do not speak forth profaneness, yet
does it speak forth a spirit of lukewarmness.

7 In public prayer there is a provocation of one another by godly examples.

In the corners of the streets] That is where they might be beheld of the
inhabitants of two or three, or four streets at once: whereas there is in
sincere prayer, 1 A proposing of the eye of God, Esa. 38.5. A holy heart
directs his prayer to God, as an archer does his arrow to the mark, Psalm. 5.3.
In the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee.

2 A Diligent use of all means, for prayer is only one part of the means.

3 It must not proceed from feigned lips, Psalm. 17.1. Give ear unto my prayer
that goes not out of feigned lips. Burning lips and a wicked heart, pretending
many glorious expressions in word, when there is no sutableness of spirit
thereto, such are like potsheards covered over with silver dross, Prove. 26.23.
we must not only draw nigh with our lips but also with our hearts, Esa. 29, 13.

4 Avoiding all affected gestures and expressions, for prayer properly does not
consist of Rhetorical expressions, nor of their studied or invented
conceptions, but of the pouring forth of the sigh or groan in the heart. God
does not like affected complements, but abhors it; as in all other ordinances,
so especially in prayer, God seeks such worshippers as worship him in spirit
and truth, Joh. 4.23, 24.

5 A heart bent against all sin, Psalm. 66.18. such persons are upright, and
therefore usually their prayers upright, and such as God delights in, Prove.
15.8. the prayer of the upright is his delight.

6 When we speak the present temper, frame and disposition of our hearts, the
confessions to be of present sensible wants, the petitions to be of things that
the soul, in the frame of it, earnestly longs after; to be full of expressions
from brain and memory, prompting the mouth, may gain an opinion among men, but
has little audience in the court of heaven. We had better discover to a whole
Church that distemper that is upon us, by dumbness, barrenness, sencelesness,
and hartlesness, then seem something to men and nothing to God by artificial
expressions in prayer. Hence prayer is never called by the name of expression,
but its called by the name of breathing; Hold not thy peace at my breathing,
Sam. 3, 56. by the name of sighs and groans, Romans 8.26. and by the name of
desire, Psalm. 10.17. God is not a hearer of the voice but of the heart. Cypr.
de orat.

7 If thy prayer be sincere thou will find it by thy closet prayers. A neglect
of secret prayer, or a careless drowsy performance of it, and that usually,
argues a spirit of slumber, out of which if the soul be not awakened, it may in
time be cast into a deep sleep. These are like some married persons who before
people have a great deal of love, but in secret are full of discontents. Let us
have the same apprehension of Gods eye in secret that we have before a
multitude, and as much bewail thy dead heartedness there, as that which thou
finds before a multitude.

Ver. 6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have
shut thy door, pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which
sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber] That is, any secret
place, both to shun vain glory and to gather thy affections to God. Some have
gathered a mystical sense, by closet understanding the heart, by shutting the
door, the shutting out of vain thoughts, only to think of God; but the literal

1 Is here meant; yet when he says enter into thy closet he bids us not avoid
the society of men when we pray, but Christ speaks comparatively, rather to
enter into a closet to pray, then to desire multitudes of men to look on us.

2 Christ here commends unto us closet prayer; hence says, when thou prays,
as speaking of a duty which lies upon every believer, though not precisely
pointing out the number of times, hence the wives are to mourn apart from their
husbands, Zach. 12, 13. and the husbands from their wives, 1 Cor. 7.5. Yea
servants apart, as Eleazar Abraham's servant did, Genesis 24.12.

Reasons for secret prayer.
1 Examples of holy persons; Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.13. Cornelius, Act. 10.4. Peter
prayed upon the house top, Act. 10.9. Abraham, Genesis 18.22. to ver. 3^.
expostulating all that while in behalf of Sodom. Isaac, Genesis 24.63. and Christ
often, Luke 6.12, 13. and that penitent, Lam. 3.28. and David, Psalm. 55.18. and
Daniel, chapter 6.10.

2 There are particular necessities which concern particular souls, as David
when he sought God for the life of the child, Paul for removing the thorn in
the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.9. There are secret occasions for obtaining personal
mercies and turning away personal judgments.

3 That we may more freely unbosom our selves to God to power out our sighs and
groans to him, Ps. 142.2. David when he was alone in the cave, powered out his
complaint before God, and showed before him his trouble, Psalm. 42.4.102.2. Job
16.20. when alone, his eyes powered out tears to God.

4 That we may be free from outward entanglements, hence Christ often prayed in
private for this end.

5 That we may enjoy more of communion with God. The soul usually enjoyes most
of God in secret. God is wont to speak comfortably to the soul in the
wilderness, Hos. 2, 14, Jacob, Genesis 32.23. wrastled with God and prevailed; in
these prayers God often speaks peace to his people, Psalm. 85.8. in this the Lord
came into Hannas soul, 1 Samuel 1.15.18. to Hezekiah, Esa. 38.5. I will lead you
with weeping and supplications, Jer. 31.9. Pretend not this will hinder thy
occasions, for David, Job, Cornelius, prospered much in their affairs, nor that
thou art a servant, for what servant but may find some corner to pray in? as
thou art the servant of men so art thou the servant of God. again though thou
art a servant, yet do thou own God for thy father, and therefore must pray
unto him in secret, and must not forbear though forbid by thy master, no more
then Daniel did when forbid by the King. Pretend not want of convenience of
place, for we may find many odd corners, fields, gardens, outhouses: if you
have places for your horses, cows, hoggs, can you not get some retiring place
wherein to meet the Lord?

For application, let it be thy constant practice thus to pray. Satan has many
excuses and pretenses to hinder this sacrifice, he will tell thee this and that
occasion, that unless thou resolve with a peremptory will, thou will be kept
from it. Many prove as unsuccesful for want of private prayer, as the disciples
were, who assayed to cast out a devil without praying before hand for it, Mat.
17.21.

Motives.
1 Christ delights in the Saints secret prayers. O my dove that art in the
clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, that is, thou that
hidest thy self by faith in me that am the rock, and by degrees of faith like
so many stairs fixest upon me, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice,
Song. 2.14. Jer. 33.3.

2 The sweet answers God has given to closet prayers, Esa. 38.5. Blessed be
God who has heard the voice of my weeping, Psa. 6.6. Psalm. 31.22. Jonah when
in the whales belly, Jon. 27.

3 The great refuge Saints have herein. Manasses when in chains, 2 Chronicles. 33.11
12. thus sought God. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8. Esther and her maidens when the Jews
were designed to destruction. When a child of God is overtaken with some sin or
in distress, he would not for a world want this. Peter, Mar. 14.72. when Esau
came against Jacob, this was Jacobs refuge, Genesis 32.9.

4 Our own personal wants, wherein perhaps not one in the church or family is
in our case.

Only in secret prayer take heed of hypocrisy, that thy voice may not, if
possible, be heard of others, nor thy meltings and weepings perceived by
others, also of customariness come out of sense of thy wants, else, if thou
keep thy hours thou will perform prayer either with listlesness or slightness.
Also take heed of profaneness to put off secret prayer till thou be moved by
the Spirit, by this delusion some have not prayed alone for some months. It is
a fit season to pray when the Spirit moves, but not the only season.

Father which is in secret] Here Is the object of our Prayer, viz. God as a
Father; Who is a Father, 1 By creation, hence called the Father of spirits,
Heb. 12.9. 2 By Regeneration, 1 Peter 1.3. Who has begotten us again to a
lively hope, which also is called Adoption, Gal. 4.6. hence,

1 Call upon this Father. One of the first things in nature is for a Child to
call Father, so it should be the first thing in grace, Matthew. 7.9.

2 Honor this Father, Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father, where is mine honor? and
live so that others may honor him, Matthew. 5.16.

3 Imitate your Father, as children do their father, in love, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. In
doing good to Enemies, Matthew 5.44. In holiness, 1 Peter 1.14.

4 Patiently bear his corrections, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 8.

5 Sort our selves with Gods children, 2 Cor. 6.14.

2 Comfort to Christians in sundry respects, as,

1 That God will bear a tender respect to us in all Troubles, as a Father loves
his child, as well when sick, as well; nay, he is then more affectionately
tender to him, the father then sets the whole house a work for his recovery,
some going for Physicians, others for Friends, others tending of him; so when
souls are sick, God sets Christians to pray for them, Preachers to comfort
them. Yea, suppose thou have broken some resolutions, and been overtaken, yet
what father would take the Forfeiture of a Bond of his son, especially when he
forfeits it against his will? much less will God, who is infinitely more a
Father to his Children.

2 In desertion. A father solacing himself with a child steps aside into a
corner, that the child may dearlier prize the fathers presence; so our
heavenly Father, by restraint of his influence in shining upon us, inflames our
love toward him.

3 In respect of sustentation in trouble. A father sets his child upon its
feet to try whether its able to stand alone, but withal he holds his arms on
both sides, to hold it up if it incline either way, so does our heavenly Father.

4 In respect of provision. The child takes not care what it shall eat or
wear; so should Saints cast all their care on their Father, 1 Peter 5.7. Your
heavenly Father knows ye have need of these things, Matthew. 6.32.

5 Against total falling away. A father will not cast off a fatherly affection
to his son; how hard it is for a father to cast off a rebellious son, we see in
David to Absalom, 2 Samuel 10.5. Hosea 11.8. Luke 15.18. Much less will God cast
off his children who desire to please him, Mal. 3.17. I will spare him as a man
spares his own Son.

6 In respect of our bold access. If it be a privilege to come into a Princes
presence chamber, what is it to come into the presence of God? A child comes
boldly to his father, though strangers and servants keep a distance, Heb. 4.16.

7 In respect of imperfections. A father calls two of his children, one of
three years old, the other of thirteen, they both make all the haste they can,
and though the elder outgo the younger and comes first, yet the younger comes
wadling as fast as he can, the father accepts of the endeavors of the younger
as well as of the faster going of the elder, so does our heavenly Father.

8. In case of disinheriting, because we will not touch this or that unclean
thing, our parents casts us off, well, says God, in this case, I will be your
Father, and you shall be my sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.17.

3 Exhortation to perform reverence, Mal. 1.6. and obedience, Jer. 35.16. and
confidence.

Thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly] Christ stirs up the
faith of his petitioners by a twofold Argument.

1 From the omnipresence of God: wheresoever we are, even in the most secret
closet, God is there present hearing prayers.

2 From the goodness and mercy of God, who will not suffer such prayers to be
in vain, but will grant the things at present wanting, and hereafter shall give
a Reward openly. Only know it is a Reward of Grace, not of Debt, for what
desert can a Beggar allege?

V. 7. But when ye pray use not vain Repetitions as the Heathen do, for they
think they shall be heard for their much speaking.

Christ comes to show the third sin of the Pharisees, which is vain
Repetitions, (...), do not speak vain things as Montanus translates it, or
speak not much as Erasmus: the word is derived of Battus a Poet, who was an
egregious Babbler. As the Heathens thought they should be heard for their much
speaking, so did these Pharisees. As Rhetoricians by their flanting style think
to move the Judge to acquit the guilty, so did these. Yet does not Christ
condemn a frequency and continuance in prayer, but he shows the grace of God is
not obtained by the vain flowing of many words, but the sighs and groans of the
heart are the arrows that pierce Heaven.

Quest. Whether are all Repetitions in Prayer vain?

Answ. No. Solomon often uses them, 1 Kings 8.30, 39, 43. Hear thou in Heaven
thy dwelling place. Nehemiah uses Repetitions, Nehemiah 1.6, 7. and so does
Daniel cap. 9.5. We have sinned, we have committediniquity, and done wickedly.

Repetitions are lawful, 1 When they come from pinching necessity, so Christ
cried, My God, my God: and three times uttered the same words, Matthew. 26.39,
42, 44.

2 When they come from holy affections, Psalm 72.19. Let the whole earth be
filled with his glory, Amen and Amen. Repetitions in prayer are sometimes
Echoes of strong cries of the Spirit. Blessed be his holy Name for evermore,
Amen and Amen, Psalm 89.50, 51. So Abba Father, Mark 14.36. 1 Kings 18.39. The
Lord he is God, the Lord he is God.

3 When they come from love, as Holy, holy, holy, Isai 6.3. Rev. 4.8.

4 When used though the second time, yet they are accompanied with holy
affections, and renewed desires of the same thing formerly in the same prayer
requested, Psalm 80.3. Cause thy face to shine upon us and we shall be saved;
this saying is thrice mentioned, as v. 3. v. 7. and v. 19. So Psalm 67.3, 5.
this saying is twice mentioned, Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the
people praise thee.

5 When used to stir up our dullness, Psalm 107.8, 15.21.31. Four times the
Prophet says, O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare
his wonderful works to the children of men. Psalm 47.6. Sing praises unto our
God, sing praises; sing praises unto our King, sing praises. There is twenty
six times mention made of the Lords mercy enduring for ever, Psalm 136.1. to
the end.

6 Sometimes the heart of a child of God exceedingly runs upon some one
desire; and so he may vent it more than once in prayer without vain repetition.
So David, Psalm 119. more than once.

Repetitions in prayer become sinful, 1 When affected, as strains of eloquence
and Rhetoric, as he that cried Hyperbolical God, thou that dwell in the
third Heaven of Hyperbolees.

2 When empty, frothy, and impertinent, wherein is no spiritual life or heat,
so those worshippers cried from morning to noon, O Baal hear us, 1 Kin. 18.26.
Not only those that are directed to Idols, but those directed to Saints, as
those in the Papacy, Holy Paul pray for us, holy Peter pray for us, mentioning
thirty or forty Saints in this manner; yea even repetitions of this kind
directed to God, as in the common prayer book, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ
have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us, so in the Letany, Good Lord
deliver us is eight times mentioned, and one and twenty times there is
mentioned, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

3 When men, from want of holy notions of the word in their hearts, through
which the Spirit would convey it self, are forced to use the same repetitions,
these in some measure disparage the spirit of prayer, and had need be humbled
for their seldom reading of the word, and meditation thereof, from whence comes
this strangeness and forcedness of repetitions.

4 When men have an itch to pray as long as others, that because an other has
praid an hour, perhaps from a true enlargment, they will pray as large as he;
hence some persons use vain repetitions, when the spirit ceases from assistance
and indisposition prevails, its our wisdom and humility to give out.

For they think they shall be heard for their much speaking] Christ sets forth
a ground why the heathens used vain repetitions, because they thought they
should be heard for their much speaking, by gentiles he means the heathen or
nations, whereas the jews were called by the name of people, and so they are
contradistinguished twice, Act. 26.17, 23. These profane nations thought, that
because they wearied themselves with the irksomness of a long prayer, that
therefore God would hear them: because they would say many things they must
needs say what is already spoken, but when in prayer there is nothing spoken
but that which is needful, such an one ought not to be accounted a much speaker.

Quest. Whether or no are long prayers and much speaking unlawful?

Answ. 1 Long prayer may be upon extraordinary cases, Moses continued a whole
day in prayer, Ex. 17.11, 12. and Christ a whole night, Luke 6.12. nor are
carnal men fit judges in this case, who snuff at any small time spent in Gods
service, Mal. 1, 13. crying, When will the Sabbath be gone? Amos, 8.5. nor is
the unregenerate part of Godly men a fit judge, but before I answer hereto, I
must premise some things.

1 The heart is not easily or suddenly gotten upon the wing, yet in that does
the life of prayer consist, it is a lifting up of the heart, Psalm. 25.1. Many
weights of dullness, hardness, heartlesness, strangeness, unbelief, (from whence
arises dumbness, discouragement and listlesness) are upon the heart, which are
not easily removed; now motion is a cause of heat, hence to bring the soul to
sensibleness, there may be the longer essaying.

2 If prayer have its due growth in the several parts of it, con^ession,
petition, intercession and thanksgiving, it cannot be very short.

(...) O^ manifold wants to be supplied, and benefits to be acknowledged,
import that our prayer usually cannot be very short.

But to answer, 1 We are to abominate all long prayer which is performed for
any carnal end or pretense, whether to get an opinion to be men of parts, or to
seem religious, and get applause, or because others so pray. The wicked scribes
for pretense made long prayers Mat. 23.14.

2 See that your length of prayer arise from a true enlargment of heart, and
from a gracious quickened frame, which if it be, your petitions will be free and
not forced. Power out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord, Lam.
2.19. that is, thy petitions will come freely as water powered out, thy lips
will drop as the honeycomb which needs no squeezing. Song. 4.11. they will be
also pat and seasonable according to occasion, wherein the heart often will be
put into an holy melting frame. After this manner Christ prayed, Heb. 5.7. and
such a frame of spirit is promised, Zach. 12.10. these enlargements the people
of God have more often in closet prayer then elsewhere, because they can there
more freely rip up their hearts, and can most insist upon those petitions that
will make the soul bleed and yern.

3 In long prayers see that your hearts be able to hold out as well as your
tongues. Our worship must be with our spirit, Joh. 4.23. Romans 1.9. Paul served
God with his spirit: a short prayer made with servency and devotion prevails
with God, Jam. 5.16. more then long prayers which are but lip labor, Esa.
29.13.

4 Gods people have upon extraordinary occasions usually used long prayer, as
Solomon at the consecration of the temple, 1 King. 8. so when under agonies and
great troubles, Psalm. 102.1. the overwhelmed soul powers out his complaint, it
comes like a flood, so when the spirit comes to visit the soul with
enlargement, the soul in this case is wont to pray long, and loath to let the
Lord go, Genesis 32.26. when we have the breathings of the spirit upon our hearts,
its not our wisdom to give out, Longa hora, brevis mora, Bern. God's long a
coming and his tarryings are not long. Shall we be watchful for wind, and
tide, and shall we not take the gales of the spirit? moreover afflictions are
wont to awake the soul, hence the soul being awakened prays with more
earnestness and length: Jacob when he feared death and destruction from Esau,
he cried to God all night long, Genesis 32. when the Church is in hazard of ruin
also, so Hester and the Church, Act. 12.5.

5 In long prayer we must have respect to them that join with us, as to our
selves: when the mouth of him that prays is enlarged, the rest are like to
hold out the better, yet we must have respect unto them, and consider whether
their hearts be like to hold out so long as thy heart who have the enlargements
of God upon thee. As in preaching we must have respect to the hearers ability
in bearing of it, John 16.12. so must we in prayer. Christ spent a whole night
in prayer, but it was not his usual wont.

6 As there may be occasion of long prayer, so may there be occasion for short
prayer, as in ejaculatory prayer, also when we have but little time, also when
some prevailing business falls in which cannot be dispensed with, only herein
pay the Lord another time for the time thou have taken from him. Sometimes a
mavelous indisposition comes upon the soul, occasioned by weariness in our
callings, sleepiness, journeying. Sometimes we want vital spirits, in these
cases we may be short. And it is wisdom usually so to pray with sick persons,
that they may not lay aside attention, nor be weary of the duty. Also in the
closing of Church exercises when much time has been before spent in prayer.
Only let this shortness of prayer be upon due occasion and not usual. 1
Because in these short prayers the soul can be but little drawn up to God. 2
The soul in them gets little answer, for as soon as the heart begins to be up,
the prayer is done. 3 Short prayers argue either strangeness from God, persons
not using to hold long discourse with strangers, or irreverence toward him, in
that being a God of such greatness, we can so slightly take our leaves of him.

V. 8. Be ye not therefore like unto them, for your Father knows what things
ye have need of before ye ask him.

Be ye not therefore like unto them] Two Reasons, first from unprofitableness
of such Prayers, neither in unprofitable babbling and speaking superfluous
things, as in the Papacy, who mumble over a great many prayers without any
devotion, thinking they are heard ex opere operato, merely for saying words, so
many Lords Prayers and Ave Mary's. This they do often with such volubleness of
tongue that they cannot understand themselves, and with such distraction of
mind and irreverence of body, that the Heathens dare not so call upon their
gods, nor mortals pray unto their Prince.

2 Neither be ye like them in much speaking, as if your God did not know your
wants unless you told him of them and made long stories unto him.

For your Father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask him] A
second Argument why we should neither use Battology or vain speaking, nor much
speaking in prayer is from the all-knowledg and goodness of God, he knows what
we have need of, therefore we need not tell him of them in many words. Yea
sometimes he prevents our prayers. Yet this does not hinder that we should not
be sensible of our wants, and from the sensibleness of our misery call on God.
The Heathens thought God did not understand their miseries unless they told him
of them, but your God knows your wants, and knows how to help you, and is ready
so to do, 1 Peter 5.7. casting all your care on him, for he cares for you.
Deuteronomy. 4.7. What nation is there that has God so near unto them as the Lord is
unto you when you call upon him? Isai 65.24. Before they call I will answer,
and whiles they are yet speaking I will hear.

Object. But if God know our wants before we ask, what need is there to tell
our wants to him that knows them already?

Answ. We do not call upon God, as if he (...) us, or as if we would put him in
mind of any (...) us for our prayers, or as if we would move him of hard to
become gentle, but we come to him in the duty of prayer, as an ordinance
wherein he will be found, and (...) promised to convey good to us.

2 Though he know our wants before, ye^ be will (...) us sensible of them, as
in the case of the blind man, Mark 10.51. who Matthew. 20.33. begged mercy of
Christ, but got none, till he was sensible what mercy he lacked, even the
recovery of his sight, which no sooner was he sensible of, but Christ granted
his Request.

3 God will be called upon because he will have this glory given to him, that
he is the author and giver of every good thing. James 1.17. Every good gift
comes from the Father of Lights.

4 That we may unburden our cares into the bosom of (...) 37 5.55.16, 17.
compared with v. 22.

5 That1 we may come into familiarity and acquaintance with God, Job 22.21.
Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace. Psalm 73.28. It Is good for me to
draw near to God.

6 That we may better prize blessings when we have got them by prayer, Psalm
116.1, 2. I will love the Lord because he has heard the voice of my
supplication.

7 For the venting of their holy affections they have to the Lord, as faith in
his faithfulness, James 1.6, 7. love to him for his goodness, Song 4.16.
desires and breathings after God, Psalm 42.1. Joy in their interest and
property in God, Psalm 116.7.

8 From the prevalence that praying Saints have with God, as Moses, Hezekiah,
Jehosaphat.

Object. God has in his eternal counsel determined what he will do for us,
which all our prayers cannot alter, Ephesians. 1.11.

Answ. It Is a sign God has determined to do us some good when he stirs up our
hearts to be earnest for it, Jer. 29.12, 13. When the Lord was about to bring
his people out of captivity he stirred up Daniel to be earnest to seek him,
Dan. 9.4. as God has determined what to do for us, so has he determined to do
it in the use of prayer. Ezekiel. 36.37.

We are not commanded to inquire into Gods secret counsels, which cannot be
found out, but to his revealed will which requires us to seek him for every
good thing, and reproves the neglect hereof.

V. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in Heaven.

After this manner pray ye] Where we see, 1 Prayer is a duty we ow to God. 2 We
must pray in a right manner.

1 Prayer is a duty, Call upon me in time of trouble, Psalm 50.15. Ask and ye
shall have.

2 We must pray in a right manner. Now that we may so pray.

1 Pray in Christ's Name. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he will
give it you, John 16.23. Our prayers are not heard for any excellency in them
but for Christ's sake. When a Servant comes for Wares in his own name, the
Merchant will not deliver them, but if he bring a Ticket from his Master, the
Merchant will deliver what Wares the Servant asks for: so when the soul comes
in its own name it speeds not, but if it come in the name of Christ it speeds.
It Is an Argument we come in Christ's Name, when we come with a reverend
boldness and confidence, but when we are doubting, timorous and fearful, it is
a sign we come in our own names. Christ has a golden Censer, wherein is much
Incense which he offers with the prayers of all Saints, Revel. 8 3. as the high
Priest of old did, who put Incense on his Censer when he made an atonement for
the people, Numb. 16.46.

2 Pray with the Spirit. We have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we
cry Abba father, Romans 8.15. Also v. 26. The spirit makes request for us with
groanings that cannot be uttered. The groans of the spirit are strong cries,
which so fills heaven and earth, that besides it God hears nothing, says
Luther. If in tentation or trouble we shall only sigh to God, and say, Jesus
Christ come and help me, or else I am undone for ever, we shall find often
ease hereupon. All the sons of God have the spirit of his Son in their hearts,
crying Abba, Father. God grants not that often which is in the top of the heart
and in the froth of words, but according to the depth of the sigh, to which
often words answer very barely or not at all.

How many worldly wise men are there, that might they have a world to continue
one quarter of an hour in ripping up their hearts in conceived prayer, they
were not able to do it? Some short wishes they have, as, God be thanked for his
blessings, God send us rain.

Others there are who have learnt the art of prayer or the gift, but they have
not the grace of prayer, they pray artificial prayers, and give artificial life
to them, as if the spirit accompanied them, but in the mean time their hearts
are neither warmed nor melted.

But those prayers wherein God delights are stirred up by the holy Ghost, Jude
20. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying with all supplication in the spirit. Without this spirit
we may speak of God, but not unto God; indeed the best of our prayers are but
as the stammering voices of infants begging bread or meat at the Table, yet
these chatterings or stammerings coming from the spirit, he that searches the
heart must needs know what they mean, because he makes intercession for the
Saints, now he intercedes not by way of merit, as Christ does, nor by way of
supplication, but by stirring us up to cry to God, Romans 8.27.

Do the bowels of a father yern toward an infant, groaning and panting and
unable to tell where his pain is, and will not God be moved with the sighs and
groans of his children? When Moses spoke never a word, yet he is said to cry to
God, Exo. 14.15. Hanna's voice was not heard, 1 Samuel 1.13. yet she is said to
power out her heart, v. 15. the sighs of the godly are as so many beams of the
spirit, which tyrants cannot hinder from ascending heaven though they should
cut out their tongues. Asaph groaned when he could not speak, Psalm. 77.4.

Now that this praying with sighs and groans comes from the spirit appears,
because when the spirit ceases from working upon our hearts we become dull and
heavy, and weary of the duty, that it becomes a very penance to us, the soul
then is like a becalmed ship. All Saints that pray aright, even Paul himself,
pray by this spirit, Romans 8.15. By this spirit we present such sighs as cannot
be expressed, and utter such words as are not able to be repeated. The sighings
of the needy God hears, Psalm. 12.5.

Now though carnal men sometimes groan and that to God, yet are these groans a
fruit of nature, as the bruits do, under feeling of a pressing weight: the
groans of saints come not only from feeling of pain, but from sorrow for sin.

2 The groans in Saints lifts up their hearts to heaven, and brings back
chearing and sense of Gods love.

3 There Is usually a sweet satisfaction comes in those groans, which does not
in the groans of wicked men.

Those that have this spirit of prayer they have many ejaculations amidst their
callings. Nehemiah when he was speaking to the King prayed to the God of
heaven, Neh. 2.4. they frequently dart out many broken sighs to quench the
sprowtings of lust, as pride, unclean desires, revenge, etc. and have many
invisible springings of heart upon the receipt of blessings on themselves or
others. Many zealous wrastlings for removal of corruptions and supply of grace.
To power out the soul out of sense of spiritual wants in that form or phrase
which groanings and meltings of the spirit does indite and frame, is beyond the
ordinary reach of unregeneration. Yea thus to pray is the hardest of all works,
because it cannot be effected without the spirit.

This spirit of prayer is of more worth then the world, especially when a
Christian has by any scandalous sin, or relapse, or sin against conscience
turned away Gods favor, for hereby he has restitution into Gods favor, and
the return of Gods countenance, Jon. 2.4, 7.

Infinite more fruits the spirit of prayer works, as many secret exultations
and rejoycings, spiritual ravishments, strong though silent cries, passionate
meltings, unutterable groans, zealous longings, which are riddles to profane
men, but known to the children of God.

3 Thirdly, the person must be righteous. Hear my prayer for I am holy, Psalm.
86.2. The prayer of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. A holy
man may make a carnal prayer, as when the flesh gets the upper hand, but a
carnal man cannot make a spiritual prayer, I mean a prayer prevailing for
spiritual things, Jon. 9.31. God hears not sinners, but if any man be a doer
of his will him he hears. The righteous cry and the Lord hears, and
delivers him out of all his troubles, Psalm. 34.15. The prayer of a righteous
man avails much, Jam. 5.16. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye
shall ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you, Joh. 15.7, 8.
Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and do
those things which are pleasing in his sight. 1 John 3.22. The spirit of prayer
is called the spirit of grace, if thou have not the spirit of grace thou can
not pray, Zach. 12.10. yet know the righteousness of a person may consist with
variety of passions, as he instances in Eliah, Jam. 5.17.

In all begging it is a great matter who it is that begs: if it be a sturdy
beggar we have nothing for such; so in prayer if a wicked man pray for any
spiritual blessing, says God, I have nothing for you, but if it be a believer,
Christ says, be of good cheer to such, Luke 8.48. if thou prepare thy heart,
and stretch out thy hands toward him, if iniquity be in thine hand put it far
away, Job 11.13, 14. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, Psalm.
145.19.

Contrary when a man inclines to wickedness in his heart, the Lord will not
hear him, Psalm. 66.18. The Pagans had so much divinity as to say, the gods must
be honored with purity, therefore they wrote upon the doors of their Temples,
Let none having a guilty conscience enter this place. A bad conscience can
never hope well.

Obj. But do not we find wicked men in Scripture have had their prayers heard?

A. Yes, when they have sought for temporal things, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu
was a wicked man, 2 Kin. 13.2. yet when the nation of Israel was delivered into
the hands of the Syrians, Jehoahaz besought the Lord and the Lord hearkened
unto him, for he saw the oppression of Israel, and the Lord gave Israel a
Savior, v. 4, 5. So Ahab seeking obtained the removing of the judgment until
his sons days, 1 Kin. 21.27, 28, 29. So when men of all sorts are in danger by
storms at sea, they cry to the Lord in their trouble and he delivers them out
of their distress, Psalm. 107.28. So prisoners that lie in irons, v. 13. and
sick men that draw near to death, v. 18, 19. If thou afflict a widow or
fatherless person (whether godly or ungodly) I will surely hear their cry,
Exodus 22.22, 23. Ishmael was a wicked person, a persecutor, yet God heard the
voice of the Lad, Genesis 21.17. Uzziah sought God in the days of Zachariah, and
as long as he sought, the Lord God made him to prosper, 2 Chro. 26.5. yet was
he wicked, as we see, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. compared with 2 Chronicles. 26.4.

Besides, God bestows praying abilities upon unregenerate men, therefore they
may improve them: the not calling upon God is charged upon wicked men as their
sin, therefore the performance of it is their duty. The Prophet proves the
Jews to be under sin, because there is none seeks after God, Psalm. 14.2. Also
Psalm. 53.4. wicked men are branded that they call not upon God, Psalm. 10.4.
they are taxed for this both Pastors, Jer. 10.21. and people, Hos. 7.7. Zeph.
1.6. and all flesh are said to come to God in prayer. O thou that hear
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come, Psalm. 65.2. An unbeliever may be
underpreparing grace, though he be not yet come to saving faith, and in this
estate he may have many good desires which God may hear.

To reconcile these to the former speeches, know that God hears wicked men in
temporal things, which indeed often is only the cry of their cause not of their
person, as he is said to hear the cry of the ravens, Psalm. 147.9. so the young
Lions are said to seek their meat from God, Psalm. 104.21.

Quest. But what would you have us to do with our children and servants?

Answ. You may bid them call upon God in the general, and if you speak to them
to call upon God for saving grace, as pardon, etc, you must speak to them as
Peter to Simon Magus, Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps
the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee, Act. 8.21. First, he bids him
repent, then pray God.

Quest. But what should we do for joining in prayer with others?

Answ. If the person with whom you are to eat, and who is to give thanks, be
visibly wicked, either forbear his table, or declare that you desire liberty of
conscience, without which grant you cannot partake of his meat, which doubtless
was practiced by the believers when they went to the unbelievers table, 1 Cor.
10.27. we must not wound our consciences for good cheer, nor to gratify a
friend, but where no such wickedness does apppear, my opinion is that charity
must carry us to judge the best, yet must we remember that this is only a
privative sign. Positive signs of a good man, being either Church Communion,
or some thing that is equivalent, if you will follow conscience herein, I know
you must be content to lose some fat morsells.

4 We must pray in says (...) faith in prayer ought to be certain of hearing,
but we must wait for the time when, the place where, the manner how, and the
person by whom God will work. Now to pray in faith there is command, Matthew.
21.22.

1 Faith in God, How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
Romans 10.14. And this God to be looked on as a father, Matthew. 6.9. Heb. 11.6.

2 Faith in the attributes of God, as his omnipresence, that he is every where,
Esa. 6.31. in his omniscience that he knows all our wants, and all our hearts,
hear thou in heaven and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart
thou know, 1 King. 8.39. in his omnipotence, thus Jeremy grounds his prayer,
thou have made heaven and earth, and there is nothing too hard for thee, Jer.
32.17.4. in his mercy, Nehem. 1.4, 5. in his all sufficiency. Of the object in
prayer James speaks as I suppose, Jam. 1.6, 7. let him ask in faith nothing
wavering, for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind
and tossed, let not that man think he shall receive any thing of the Lord.
James speaks not of a partial or particular unbelief in the subject, but of an
universal and total unbelief in respect of the object.

3 There must be faith to set before us the worthiness of the Mediator, Heb.
4.15, 16. and not barely his worthiness, but also our union with him, Joh.
15.7, 8. If ye abide in me ye shall ask what you will, and it shall be done
unto you.

4 Faith grounded on the promises, Psalm. 119.49, 50, 147. remember thy word
unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to trust. To pray in faith is
to go as far as the promise goes to believe that God is a father, and being a
father he will not keep any good thing from his child: A beggar never goes from
an house keepers door, so long as he believes he shall have an alms, no more
does a believing soul go from the throne of grace so long as he believes God
will hear, but if he leave off the words of prayer, he does not leave off the
suit of prayer.

Had we a particular promise, as Eliah had, we were bound to believe in
particular, as Eliah did, concerning the not raining for three years and six
months.

And as faith looks on other promises, so in particular such promises as
concerns the souls present condition, so Jacob, Genesis 32.9, 10, 11, 12. Thou
saidest return into thy country, and I will deal well with thee, and thou
saidest I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea,
deliver me from the hand of my brother Esau. There is scarce any case but the
Scripture affords promises which speak to that very case, had we wisdom to
store them up as David did. Psalm. 119. also Heb. 13.5.

5 Faith grounded on former Experiments. Thou art my trust from my youth, leave
me not in old age, Psalm 71.5, 9. When we thus pray in faith, we have a bold
access into the presence of God, notwithstanding all our unworthiness and
imperfections in prayer, Ephesians. 3.12.

5 Pray with fixedness of spirit. When David's heart was fixed on God he was
ready both for prayer and praise. Psalm 57.7. The sense of the Lords greatness
should keep us close in the duty, yet when we have done the best, distractions
will be in prayer.

1 From corrupt nature.

2 From nature curbed, as a Bird in a Cage keeps a great flutter, because it is
curbed of its liberty.

3 From Satan, so he stood at Joshua's right hand, at Job's right hand. As
Abraham drove away the Birds that hindered him in his sacrificing, so must we
do wandering thoughts.

4 From sluggishness. He that prays drowsily must needs pray distractedly.
Baal's Priests will rise up against such, who cut themselves with Knives and
Lancers to make them pray more strongly. When a Malefactor is at the Bar
crying for his Life, will his mind be on his pleasure and companions? The
sense of Gods greatness should keep our hearts close to him, and aw us that we
rove not in duty. Our attention in prayer should not only be to God we call
upon, and to the business we request, but also to our hearts, that they cleave
close thereto.

6 Pray with fervency. I cry with my whole heart, Psalm 119.145. Ye shall find
me, when ye shall seek me with all your heart, Jer. 29.13. Lukewarm prayers
they are like lukewarm water that boils not out the blood. We must cry mightily
to God as the Ninivites, Jon. 3. Mugire ad deum, Tertul. de Poen. Our prayers
avail not unless fervent, James 5.16. Neither is a natural fervency sufficient,
which is in every creature when it is pinched, Hosea 7.14. They howled unto God
for Corn and Wine, yet says God, They cried not to me. But spiritual fervency
is that, that the desires be sharpened after holiness and communion with God.

Opposite to this are those cold, lazy prayers, yawning prayers, when persons
pray half asleep half awake; he had need be deeply awake that prays; as a
Beggar when he begs is all awake, head, hands and feet; hence Deborah when she
was going to praise God, says, Awake, awake Deborah, utter a Song, Judges
5.12. How can we look God should hear us when we do not hear our selves?
Contrary Epaphras, Col. 4.12.

7 Pray with melting spirits, humiliation arising from the sense of our own
unworthiness is a great furtherer of our prayers, as we see in Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. and the Prodigal, Lu. 15.21. We are too apt to applaud
ourselves and others in a devotion void of humiliation. Christ prayed with a
melting spirit, Heb. 5.7. so did Hezekiah, Isai 38.5. and Job cap. 16.20. his
eyes poured out prayers and tears. David Psalm 6.8. God heard the voice of his
weeping, hence he prays Psalm 39.12. Hold not thy peace at my tears. The
servants of God have often had this frame of heart, so that God not only
promises to lead his people with weeping prayers, Jer. 31.9. but also promises
blessedness to them that weep, Luke 6.21. Ezra weeping in prayer affected the
whole Congregation, Ezra 10.1. so the soul overwhelmed prayed, Psalm 102.9. On
a day of humiliation God requires it of his people, Joel 2.12. to turn to him
with weeping.

Quest. Seeing some naturally have an aptness to weep, how may we know that a
soul weeps from a saving Principle?

1 Answ. That some naturally have an aptness to weep is certain, even from
natural passion, as some men and women, so Abraham for the death of Sarah, Genesis
23.2. and Joseph sought where to weep for his Brethrens afflictions, Genesis 43.30.

2 Afflictions are apt even to soften the hearts of those that have no grace in
them, as Esau, though a profane person, sought the blessing carefully with
tears, Heb. 12.17. and Hezekiah's Ambassadors of peace, when they saw the
wicked carriage of Sennacherib, wept bitterly, Isai 33.7. so the Jews at the
desolation of Hieru salem wept sore in the night, and their tears were on their
cheeks, Lam. 1.2.

3 We have seen not only gross Hypocrites thus weeping, as Ishmael Jer. 41.6.
who having slain Gedaliah and his company to get the Crown of Judah, himself
being of the Seed royal, there coming eighty men with their clothes rent to the
House of the Lord, bewailing the desolation made by the King of Babylon, he
feigns himself also to weep for the same misery and destruction, that thereby
he might have a better opportunity to slay them, supposing them to be of
Gedaliah's party, which matter through his hypocritical tears he effected,
slaying seventy of them, but even profane persons, Number. 11.10, 13. Isai 15.2.
yea, even gross Idolaters. There were women weeping for Tammuz, Ez. 8.14. This
Tammuz Hierom thinks it to be Adonis Venus Paramour, supposed to be slain by a
Bore, but proved after to be alive; this Feast sundry Jewish women kept,
sorrowing when they lost their Love, but rejoicing as Venus did when they found
him again. Calvin understands Osiris to be Tammuz, which was an Idol of the
Egyptians, at the Festival whereof both men and women showed their secret
parts, which the Jews so near the Egyptians might probably learn from them.

4 It Is possible for the soul sometimes to be like Marble, which weeps, yet
remains hard. So did those women, Mal. 2.13. who being oppressed by their
husbands, covered the Altar of the Lord with tears, their husbands divorcing of
them causlesly, as appears v. 14. Eccles. 4.1. Behold the tears of such as were
oppressed.

5 It may be supposed that some persons by reason of the dryness of their brain
cannot weep, yet if thou can weep for other things and can not weep for
sin, it argues a bad temper.

But 2 To know when our tears come from a saving Principle, we may know it,

1 By the frame of spirit accompanying it, which is either self-abasement, as
in Mary who stood behind Christ weeping, Luke 7.38. or apprehension of the
loving kindness of the Lord, and the souls ill requital of him.

2 When these meltings come from a saving Principle, the heart is affected as
well as the eye, there is a suitable inward working according to the outward
melting, as in David, Psalm. 6.8. and Jacob Hesea 12.3, 4. and Josiah 2 Kings
22.19.

3 There Is an inward rejoicing and refreshment of soul, wherein the soul more
delights than in all the pleasures of the world, this is called the Light of
Gods countenance, Psalm 4.6. Sow in tears, reap in joy, Psalm 126.5.

4 When they come from a saving Principle the soul pours them out in secret, as
well as before men, yea much more in secret, Psalm 6.6. I water my couch with
my tears.

5 By the enlargement of heart that usually accompanies these meltings, and
where there is more enlargement there is more speeding.

6 Saving meltings have a groaning under, and hatred of the prevailing
corruptions of the heart; so the poor man cried out with tears, Lord, I
believe, help my unbelief, Mark 9 24.

7 When the meltings are saving the soul is troubled in the absence of them,
when it prays unrelentingly, and so much the more if there be any long absence
of these accustomed meltings.

8 Earnest longings after the Lord are wont to accompany saving meltings. Mine
eye, mine eye, runs down with water, because the comforter that should
relieve my soul is far from me, Lam. 1.16.

9 Saving meltings flow from love to God. How came Mary to weep in such
abundance that she washed Christ's feet? why at the same time she loved much,
Luke 7.38. compared with v. 47.

10 When saving meltings come there is an holy cheerfulness wrought in the
heart, and sadness removed from the countenance, as in Hanna her countenance
was no more sad, why? she prayed and wept sore, v. 10. compared with v. 18. As
God did sometimes accept sacrifices without sending fire from Heaven to burn
them up, so sometimes he showed his acceptance by sending fire to consume
them, 1 Kings 18.38. 2 Chronicles. 7.1. Fire came from Heaven and consumed Solomon's
burnt offering, and so David's Prayer for the ceasing the Pestilence, 1 Chronicles.
21.26. was answered by fire. So though God do sometimes answer his people
without meltings, yet in holy persons these meltings usually are crowning
answers and tokens of acceptance.

11 We may know our meltings flow from a saving principle, by comparing the
meltings we had when we forsook some great enjoyment for God, and got victory
over some strong lust with those meltings at present: when we forsook some
great enjoyment, as country, liberty, estate, friends and relations, how did
God come in at those times, so that we found an hundred fold with persecutions,
Mar. 10.29, 30. mightily softning the heart, and filling the soul with joy and
with the holy Ghost, Act. 13.51. as Paul was when persecuted, so when we
overcome some strong lust God gave us hidden Manna, white stone, new name, Rev.
2.17. which were the incomes of God into the soul by softning of it, and
pouring in joy in prayer after the conquest; now we finding the meltings and
softnings of our hearts at other times suitable to those we found then, know
them to come from the Spirit, or from a saving principle, and not from natural
passion and softness.

12 The meltings that come from God may be something discerned by the time when
given, as 1 When afflictions are sanctified, then the soul powers out it self
amain, Esther, 4.3. when the kings decree came to put the Jews to death there
were great weepings and wailings: ordinarily wicked men cry not, when God binds
them, their spirits are bound up, Job 36.13.

2 Upon the remove of some sad desertion, and after some foregoing straitnings,
or some very close walking with God, or the bringing home of some word of
promise to the heart, these meltings use to be given. Psalm. 51.8; 12. Make me
to hear the voice of joy and gladness, restore unto me the joy of thy salvation.

3 By the putting forth the strength of the soul in duty, Hos. 12.3. Jacob
wept, and made supplication, and found the Lord in Bethel: how came that? why
by his strength he prevailed with God; that is, he put forth all his strength
in the duty.

4 Fom the time: its often given even after an holy preparation of heart by
meditation, Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear, Psalm. 10.17.

8 Pray with perseverance, not to give over, Ephesians. 6.18. Many use prayer as a
medicine, which after two or three usings finding no success, they leave off,
God puts off his children with delays.

1 Because souls are not fit for such a mercy, as the Physician puts off the
patient from such a thing as he desires. The ten tribes, Judge. ^0.26. cried for
victory against Benjamin, but God saw them not fit for it, they yet trusted in
their multitude, being four hundred thousand, and their enemies about seven and
twenty thousand, also they were not humbled enough.

2 For trial of our faith, whether we will yet depend on God, so Christ put off
the Woman of Cana, Matthew. 15.28. and Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8.

3 That his mercies may be more sweet when we get them; things hardly got are
prized.

4 That we may see our sin in delaying God; he called and thou would not
hear, therefore it is just that thou should call and he delay thee.

5 To inflame our desires the more. God purposed not to destroy Israel, Exodus
32. yet when Moses prayed he seemed not to regard his Prayers, but this was
only to make Moses more earnest for the people.

6 For the trial of our Patience. David was in an horrible pit, in great
danger, and God let him lie for the trial of his patience, and in the end
brought him out, Ps 40.1, 2. Many are like that king, 2 King. 6.33. who said,
Saul. 1 Samuel ^.28.15.
because he had not present help, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? Yea
Saints have been impatient, because their prayers have not been answered at
first, Lam. 3.8, 44. We must not only have a dependence on God for his
promise, but for the time when he will fulfill it. As the husbandman wa^s long
after seed time for a harvest, the corn has many a sharp blast and nipping
frost before he reaps, so ought we to wait for our prayers, though things seem
worse afrer then before. Long did the Church wait for Peter before they got him
out of prison, Act. 12.5. in the end he was given to them, neither must we
limit God to such means, Psalm. 78.41.

7 That we may seek him more importunately; so did Christ withold himself
from the Church for this end, Song 3.1, 4. As a Beggar, when a passenger comes
by, begs of him, the passenger goes on as if he took no notice, but the Beggar
goes on and follows him till at last he gets his desire.

8 For to humble the soul; suppose thy servant wrong thee thou say thou will
pardon him, but first thou will make him humble himself to thee; he shall and
must know that he has wronged a good master, so God is willing to pardon thee
and to heal thee, but he will make thee know thou have sinned against a good God.

Obj. But God calls me to other duties of my calling, how am I then to continue
in prayer till God hear me?

Ans. We may give over the words of prayer, but we may not give over the suit
of prayer. A poor Beggar comes to a housekeepers door but none hears him, he
falls to other employments, as mending his clothes, etc. then anon he begs
again: though he do not always continue begging, yet he always continues his
suit, Oh that some within would give me an alms! so should the soul at the
throne of grace.

Persevering prayer is the building of the soul toward heaven. Holy men should
pray as builders build, first they lay the foundation, next day make the walls,
the next day he sets up timber-work, and so goes on till the house be finished;
so a godly soul reaches higher and higher, till at last the prayer reaches unto
heaven, 2 Chronicles. 30.27. the prayer of the godly Priests came up to his holy
habitation, even unto heaven.

We should do with our hearts in prayer, as in the winding up of a bucket, if
two or three windings will not fetch it up, we will wind it higher and higher
till it do come up; so our hearts should not be at the same pin, but we should
wind them up higher and higher, so though we get not the thing wholly that we
desire, yet we should get our hearts nearer God.

Contrarily hypocritical men will not, cannot pray perseverantly, Will he
always call upon God? Job 27.9. q. d. he will not. Hence their prayers are,

1 Endless. That for which a thing is, that is the end of a thing, now the end
of prayer is to speed with God, therefore he whose prayers speed not with God,
his prayers are endless. Thou prayest against Covetousnes, Pride, and Passion,
and yet remains so still: to what end are all thy prayers when thou enjoys not
the end of thy prayers? to what end is thy servants work if thy business be not
dispatched?

2 Fruitless. To what purpose is a Beggars begging, if he be gone before the
alms be bestowed, so if thou go away from the throne of grace, before the grace
be given thee, thy begging is fruitless. The blind man said, Joh. 9.31. We
know God hears not sinners. How do you know that? may some say, Why, by
experience, and example. A drunkard prays against drunkenness that God would
heal it in him: all the world may see that God does not hear his prayer,
because he does not cure him, but lets him go on in his sin. See thou a man
go on in his sin? thou may see God hears not his prayers. If a man lie upon
his deathbed, and send for all the Physicians in a country to come to him, yet
we know he is not cured so long as his deadly disease remains upon him, so when
I see a man's malice, pride, etc. lie upon him, ordinarily and usually,
notwithstanding all his prayers, I know God hears not his prayers.

For application, see then that you pray perseverantly. Imitate the woman of
Cana who would take no manner of denial or repulse from Christ: sometimes he
was silent, sometimes he did as it were deny her, I am not sent save to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, imitate that man, Lu. 11.5, 6.

Properties of perseverant prayer.
1 It wrastles with God by arguments, Job. 23.4. I will fill my mouth with
arguments. Men when they are perseverantly earnest for a thing, will bring all
arguments to effect their end, so will a believer to obtain his end; Lord it is
a grace of the covenant, thou art my father, whom should I go to but thee? this
is for thy honor, and what will thou do to thy great name, Esa. 63.16. I am a
poor creature, consider my frame, remember I am dust, Psalm. 103.14, 15. Our
near approach to death when we can no more call upon God, Job 7.21. Why do
thou not pardon my sins, for now shall I sleep in the dust, Psalm. 115.17. So
from our own extremities, Be not silent to me, lest if thou be silent to me, I
become like one that goes down to the pit, Psalm. 28.1. Save me for the waters
are come into my soul, Psalm. 69.1. from our own helplesness otherwise, Ps.
22.11, Be not far from me, trouble is near, and there is none to help. Jer.
3.23. Esa. 63.5. from the greatness of scruples and tentations that lie upon
our souls, from the overwhelmings of spirit by sins and sorrows, from the
necessity of such a blessing for the discharge of our callings, from the
command of God that bids us ask, Jer. 33.^. from the promise of God who has
engaged his faithfulness, Genesis 32.9, 10, 11. from our confidence in him. Psalm.
143.8. from former experiences, Psalm. 44.1. O God we have heard with our ears
the great works thou did, from the low condition of Gods people, Psalm.
44.9, 10, 11, 12. from their constant adherence to his truth, ver. 17.18, 19,
20. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgot thee, from our own not
living in sin, Psalm. 86.2. hear my prayer for I am holy, from our perseverance
in prayer,, Psalm. 86.3. be merciful unto me, for I cry unto the daily. From the
plentiful mercy and goodness in God, Ps. 86.5.

2 Property: perseverant Prayer is striving. Romans 15.3. I beseech you for the
Lord Jesus sake, that ye strive together in your Prayers to God for me. So did
Jacob wrestle with God, Genesis 32.24. Especially for those to whom we are
related, a pastor for the flock, a father for his children, a master for his
servants, an husband for his wife, etc. as if we were to wrastle-with a strong
man, we put to all our strength. As a father that has an apple in his hand,
the child first opens one finger, and then another, till the apple drop out,
so let us open one finger, and then another to get sincerity, till we get all
the graces of Christ upon us.

3 It Is a proceeding Prayer: though a godly man do not get the thing totally
that he desired, yet he is nearer God than he was at the first beginning, he
grows better every day by his Prayers, Job 18.9. The upright shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands shall grow stronger and stronger.

4 It Is a prevailing Prayer, I will not let thee go except thou bless me, Genesis
32.26. Shall not God avenge his own elect that cry unto him day and night? I
tell you, he will avenge them, and that right speedily. Luke 18.7. That very
Parable of the unjust Judge and poor Widow was spoken that men should pray
always and not faint, Luke 18.1, etc.

Motives to pray perseverantly.
1 The continual intercession of Christ in Heaven in our behalf, there to
present our Requests, Heb. 4.14.7.25.9.24. So that sooner or later they will
speed, or else it is more expedient for us that the thing be not granted.

2 The greatness of those things we pray for, which concern our everlasting
estate, hence we had need put forth all our strength to beg them, Col. 4.2.
Continue in Prayer, (...), the word is derived of (...) strength, by the
transposition of a Letter, so that the word signifies to ply some laborious
thing with all our might, till we have brought it to an end.

Object. But I have prayed long, and find no benefit by my praying, Job 30.20.
I cry unto thee and thou do not hear me, I stand up and thou regardest me not.

Answ. 1 God sometimes answers the Prayers of his Servants before they perceive
it, Dan. 9.23. At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came
forth, yet for three Weeks he chastened himself by Prayer and Fasting, cap.
10.2, 3. v. 12. From the first day thou did set thy heart to chasten thy self
before thy God thy words were heard; yet Daniel knew not of it, else would he
not have further supplicated, but have given thanks for it. Sometimes through
heedlesness and negligence persons look not after their Prayers. Sometimes
anguish of heart makes persons not perceive it, Job 9.16. If I had called and
he had answered me, yet would I not believe that he had hearkened to my voice.

2 Look upon it as a great affliction, to cry and not be heard, Lam. 3.44.

3 God takes notice of the Prayers of his people, Acts 9.11. Behold he prays,
yea delights in them, as men do in the smell of sweet Odours and Incense, Psalm
141.2. Revel. 5.8. and if not yet answered, wait, for sooner or later they
shall be answered; They shall not be ashamed who wait for God, Isai 49.23.

9 Pray with watchfulness, Col. 4.2. Continue in Prayer and watch. Watch and
pray, Matthew. 26.41. Take heed, watch and pray. Mark 13.33. Be sober and watch
unto Prayer, 1 Peter 4.7. Watch therefore and pray always, that ye may be
counted worthy to escape all these things, Luke 21.36. There are two sorts of
Watchings.

1 Proper. 2 Metaphorical.

1 Proper. this was practiced, 1 Under the Old Testament, when holy men being
compassed about with many cares, distractions and business, could not sometimes
find fit access to God on the day time, hence were forced to take part of the
night: caeteris paribus, the thing is lawful now, if a Christian unavoidably
hindered on the day time, do take part of the night for Prayer; thus David,
Psalm 22.2. I cry unto thee in the night season and am not silent. Psalm 6.6.
All the night make I my bed to swim. Psalm 119. At midnight I will rise to give
thanks unto thee. Or if a soul not content with Prayer in the day time, shall
have an impulse to pray in the night, thus Christ Matthew. 26.38. Tarry ye here
and watch with me, says Christ. So the godly Levites, Psalm 134.1.

2 Under the New Testament there were night-watchings: the Christians in the
Apostles times were compelled when they would either hear the Word publicly,
or pray, to meet in the night, Acts 12.12. Peter in the night came to the house
of Mary, where many were gathered together praying, Acts 20 7. John 20.19. Now
they met in the night because of the Pagans among whom they lived, to avoid
their fury. Afterward when Emperors became Christians, whether for solemnity,
custom or devotion sake, I know not, Christians still retained the custom of
wakings, and these Wakes they kept when a solemn Feast or Holy Day came on,
which Wake they spent in Prayer and in the Word, that so they might be more
fitted to partake of the Supper of the Lord; hence Tertullian lib. 2. to his
Wife, brings a Reason why Christian women should not mary heathen Husbands,
even from these Wakes, for says he, Quis Ethnicus nocturnis convocationibus,
etc. What Heathen would willingly endure his Wife to be from his side at these
night assemblies? What man would endure without trouble that his Wife should go
abroad in the night at the Solemnities of Easter? wherein it is like they had
diverse Wakes. From this custom have the popish Wakes continued in the Nations
to this day, but quite altered from their primitive institution, being now
only kept as Festivals for the most horrid drunkenness, dancings and
licentiousness.

2 There is a metaphorical watchfulness. This is,

1 Against drowsiness, that we do not come before the Lord with sleepy Prayers.
Thus Peter, James and John fell asleep even as Christ was at Prayer, Matthew.
26.40. They had a willingness to have watched with Christ, but drowsisiness
seized on them through fleshly weakness, v. 41. See also v. 43. A sleepy spirit
scarce speaks sense to God in Prayer. How do you think that God should hear
drowsy Prayers which your selves do not hear? Will Gods ears be delighted with
nonsense? Should thou offer such blind halt services to the Prince would
he accept them? Mal. 1.13. It Is a shame to speak what many men do in secret,
which they have confessed after conversion, yea and it were well if Christians
were not guilty herein. If it so fall out with thee that thou go late to
Prayer, and thine eyes and spirit prove drowsy, be humbled and be short, lest
thy whole Prayer be a taking of Gods Name in vain. Make the Lord amends some
other time when thy heart is in a better temper. Let us be like Musicians that
first tune their Instruments, and then play. Or like Mariners, who having a
good Gale of Wind set up all Sails. Psalm 57.7.

2 Watchfulness against distractions. I have before showen the causes of them
under another Head, only I Will add that a worldly frame of spirit is a great
cause of them, for when the heart comes immediately out of the World from
pleasures and worldly business, no wonder if the soul be full of wandering
thoughts in duty. Also disorderly affections of fear, joy, desire, grief,
anger, vain hopes, will be ready to interpose in Prayer. Besides, a spirit of
slothfulness, when we do not press our hearts to the Prayer in hand, will open
a door for distractions; besides, abundance of vain impressions upon the
imagination, with the absence of holy impressions there, help forward
distraction. Besides, many remaining lusts draw away and entice the soul.

Remedies against these Distractions.
1 Be humbled for them and desire God to cleanse thee, Psalm 19.12.

2 Keep thy heart with diligence, Prove. 4.23.

3 Practice preparation of heart, that thou may not come rushing into the
presence of God, Job 11.13.

4 Remember the greatness of that majesty before whom thou presents thy self.
The Angels cover their faces before him, Psalm 6.2. The Mountains quake at him,
and the Earth is burnt at his presence, Nah. 1.5.

5 Keep thine eye from gazing. How many distractions come through the eye? That
the Prophet might keep his heart close in the duty, he desires the Lord to turn
away his eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm 119.^7. The eyes and ears are as the
gates of the City, keep them well, that the Enemy enter not.

6 Trim thy soul. There Is a twofold preparation.

1 Habitual: thus the wise Virgins had Oil in their Lamps, hence get a
Principle of Grace in thine heart, from this holy motions arise in thy soul.

2 Actual, as the wise Virgins had not only Oil in their Lamps, but also
trimmed them, so must thou do, act every grace, faith, love, joy, fear, grief,
upon a right object.

7 Get an heavenly frame of heart, Psalm 45.1. My heart boileth up good matter,
Eructat. Hence the tongue is as the Pen of a ready Writer which scantly makes a
dash. Where the heart is heavenly, the heart will be heaving uptowards Heaven;
such hearts converse in Heaven and dwell there, Phil. ^.20. Revel. 13.6.

8 Bring a feeling of thy wants, the more thou feel'st them, the more fixedly
thou will look unto God for supply. God will not have the Prayer of a sinner
that feels not his sins, because he does not understand nor will the thing that
he prays for. Luth. Tom. 4.380.

9 Fear repulse for thy careless, cold and slothful calling upon God, and this
will quicken up thy attention in the duty. Fear is a very wakefull affection,
as being conversant about danger; hence in our service we are bid to bring
fear, Psalm 2.11. Psalm 5.7.

10 Get love to God, this makes the soul follow hard after God, Psalm 63.8.

Quest. Whether do distractions in Prayer nullify the acceptance of it?

Answ. There are two sorts of distracted Petitioners,

1 Unregenerate men, who voluntarily, usually and contentedly admit roving
thoughts in duty, Prove 5.14 I was almost in all evil in the midst of the
congregation and assembly, Ezekiel. 33.31. These despise their ways and shall die,
Prove. 19.16.

2 Regenerate men, who groan under these distractions, Romans 7.15, 16. these do
not nullify the fruit of Prayer to them: regenerate men herein make usually
resistance, it matters not whence they come, whether from Satan or corruption,
(as it is a thing very difficult, if possible to distinguish them) provided we
resist them and mourn under them, they are not imputed to us. Yet may even
Saints sometimes pray so carelessly, drowsily, and distractedly, that they may
lose the comfort of this or that particular Prayer, as when the distraction
arises from sloth and carelessness. But if the distraction arise from Satan,
bodily distemper, or pain, God is very pitiful in this case, as a father to
his child, Psalm 103.14.

Quest. Whether may not the Devil and corruption distract the soul in Prayer
sometimes with unseasonable good motions, I mean such motions as are for the
matter good, but not good at that time?

Answ. Yes, we see it in that Pithonesse, Act. 16.16, 17 when Paul and his
company were going to prayer, she cries out, these men are the servants of the
most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation: this was a good motion
but injected by Satan, that his lies might be believed, and the Saints
disturbed in prayer, Zach. 3.1. Satan by these motions intends diversion or
turning away the soul from what the soul is upon, but motions that tend to
further intention in the duty, and attentness and further enlargement, are of
God. The spirit moves not to draw us out of the way but to put us into it, and
being in it to move us to keep on, Romans 8.14, 15. Esa. 30.21. These motions of
Satan are like misplaced words and letters in a Printers press, which spoil the
sense.

10 Let thy prayer be full: prayer is a pouring forth of the heart before God,
Psalm. 62.8. 1 Samuel 1.15. yea we are to power them out as water before the face
of the Lord, Lam. 2.19. It may be thou powrest out thy prayer like tar out of
a tar box, half sticking by the sides, but when thou prays thou must power
out all before God, provided there be time and no hindrance, power out all thy
wants, be humbled for all thy evils, when thou give thanks remember all Gods
benefits, Psalm. 10^.2. Many men make quick dispatch because they are eager to
be about their business, hence they gallop over their prayers, but thy prayer
must have its full growth, that is, when convenient time affords, we must power
out supplications confessing our sins, petitions desiring pardon, healing, and
new dispositions of heart, intercessions to turn away judgments from others,
and thanksgiving for benefits on our selves and others, 1 Timothy 2.1.

11 Pray with frequency. Its bad when the soul contents it self with seldom
approaches to God. If David Psalm. 55.17. and Daniel, cap, 6.10. could find
time to pray three times a day, what shame for us who come so seldom before the
Lord? sometimes David praised God seven times a day, Psalm. 119.164. Anna
continued in prayer night and day, Luke 2.37.

12 With assurance of obtaining whatsoever things ye desire: when you pray
believe that you receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark. 11.24. Matthew. 7.7.
ask, and ye shall have; Matthew. 21.22. Doubt not of your prayer, but know when
the word is gone out of your mouth, your prayer is writ in the eyes of God, so
that that shall be done which is desired, or its expedient not to be done. The
Lord is like a most bountiful king, that signs all petitions with a fiat quod
petitur, Oration sinelaude dei, est thuribulum sine prunis. Luth. Tom. 4.124.
let that be done which is desired.

13 Join praise with prayer, Phil. 4.6. In every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God.
Prayers are the seeds of praises, when we have sown we may look to reap, what
we receive as a a fruit of our prayer is more sweet then what we receive of
common providence. Praise is that employment we shall have in heaven when
prayer shall be no more, mean time join we them together whiles we are here on
earth, and so much more in that we have but a drop of affliction and a sea of
benefits.

14 Break through all hindrances and use all furtherances, as 1 hindrance is
multitudes of business: what business so great almost but should give way to
this?

2 Brokenness in expressions, why God hears sighs.

3 Dumbness and barrenness, if this come from unacquaintance with God, be
humbled for thy coldness, and by stirring thou may get warmth, if dumbness
come from overwhelming temptations, it is no otherwise with thee then it was
with Asaph, Psalm. 77.3, 4. Green wood with long blowing will be made dry and
take fire, so motion in prayer fits for the duty.

4 Our own unworthiness. Who acknowledged his own unworthiness more then
Daniel? Dan. 9.7, 8. However thou art unworthy, yet must thou pray, for God
hears thee, not for thy own worth, but of his mere mercy.

5 Prayer will take up much of our time; to this I say remember the comfort
that will redound to the conscience in time so spent. We think not long of the
time spent in the refreshment of our bodies, why should we think long in the
time spent in refreshing of our souls? of four and twenty hours can we not
afford God one or two? who took more time in prayer then David and Daniel, and
who did prosper better? Time spent in this brings a blessing on our affairs.

6 That many do well enough that never pray, as those do that use to pray: to
this, know, they only receive temporal things, as the shining of the sun, and
the falling of rain, Matthew. 5.44, 45. But the Saints receive the Spirit in
prayer, Luke 11.13. Neither can prayerless men be sure to have earthly things
when they want them, nor to hold them when they have them, Job 21.15, 16. What
profit is there that we should pray unto him, seeing we have earthly things?
ver. 16. Lo, their good is not in their hand.

7 Because the soul has lately been in passion of anger; to this I say lay
aside passion, and then come, 1 Timothy 2.8. Lift up holy hands without wrath;
pray for the party with whom lately thou have been angry, and that is a sign
thou comes with a new disposition.

8 Take heed of Satan's temptations, who will be ready to propose businesses
then to hinder thee.

2 Use furtherances for prayer, as 1 when the spirit bespeaks prayer and puts
the soul into a frame to long to be alone to vent it self to God, when the wind
and tide serves its good then to hoyse up sails, Psalm. 27.8. Seek my face, thy
face will I seek.

2 The second furtherance is when the soul is in tribulation. Tribulation sets
an edge on prayer, hence Psalm. 50.15. we are bid to call on God in the time of
trouble, no better master to teach a man to pray, next to the spirit, then
necessity. In trouble the grace of prayer is much revived, Esa. 26.17. Lord in
trouble they have visited thee, they powered out a prayer, when thy chastning
was upon them. Look upon Passengers in a storm and arrived at the haven, look
upon persons in prison and at banquets, compare persons on beds of sickness,
and the same persons in strength of health, and abounding with outward
comforts, in the one estate they are full of contempt of God and security, in
the other prone to cry earnestly for mercy. Hezekiah when Sennacherib came
against him very much given to prayer, when he was delivered from his enemy
ready to be lifted up. David in adversity gave himself to prayer, Psalm. 109.4.
in prosperity falls to number the people.

3 A third furtherance, is, calmeness of spirit, when the spirit is neither in
a hurry of passion, nor a hurry of business; for unfinished business is apt to
run in the mind and to disturb at that time, the soul having so many bussings
in its ear, can neither hear it self speaking to God, nor hear God speaking to
the soul.

4 In Gods approaching to our soul, Lam. 3.57. Thou drewest near in the day
that I cried unto thee, thou saidest fear not. Esa. 55.6. call upon him while
he is near. Noble Princes in their progress are wont to grant petitioners their
suits; its wisdom then to petition the Lord when near to us. Psalm. 145.18. one
time or other God's near to every holy heart, therefore then call on him, Psalm.
34.18. Quicken us and we will call upon thy name. Psa. 80.18.

5 When promises are near fulfilling, Psa. 102.13. Thou shall arise and have
mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come, meaning
of seventy years. This is some good hope that Christ's coming is near, because
the Saints are stirred up so generally to pray for it. The reading of Jeremies
prophecy, Jer. 29.10. that God would visit his people after seventy years, put
Daniel upon praying for the accomplishment thereof, Dan. 9.2, 3, 4.

Object. I would thus pray, but I find I am so straitened that I cannot pray.

Answ. It is so with the best of Saints sometimes, that their souls are bound
up, they are like poor Infants that feel pain, but cannot tell where their pain
lies, hence Psalm. 51.15. Lord open thou my Lips. By grieving the spirit we
become straitened, for when the spirit is withdrawn we are like Mills that want
Wind or Water, and cannot grind. In such times it is persons are backward to
stir up their souls to take hold of God, Isai 64.7. To help us against
straitnings,

1 Use holy motion. Motion is the cause of heat, motion brings a benumbed
member to feeling; let us make essays even when deadness is upon us, yea when
most straitened, a gracious heart is to stir up it self, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up
the gift of God which is in thee, Exodus 35.21. They came every one whose heart
stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing to bring the Lords
offering.

2 Complain of thy straitness; say, Lord I am in Prison and cannot come forth,
I would willingly display all my wants to thee but cannot, weep over my
unbelief but am not able. Why withdrawest thou thy self? Why art thou so far
from helping me and from the words of my roaring? Psalm. 22.1, 2 Isai 63 17.

3 Beg enlargement of God, Psalm 119.32. I will run in the way of this
Commandment as well as other, but when? when thou shall enlarge mine heart.
Isai 35.6. The tongue of the dumb shall sing, when waters break forth in the
wilderness.

4 Take heed thou straiten not thy self neither for time nor place. For time,
persons often causlesly put themselves into the compass of so little time, that
they cannot enlarge, persons frequently inuring themselves to straitning, in
the end begin to like it well enough. So for straitness of place, they do not
use their voices because they cannot use them without being heard of others:
let it be your wisdom to choose such a place wherein you may not be straightened,
as to your voice or otherwise.

5 Consider what a dangerous thing it is to (...) taken with a Palsy in the
tongue, that a man cannot tell where his pain lies. All Imprisonment is
comfortless, but this the worst; in other Imprisonment we may perhaps have much
access to God, but not in this; many men have enlargements of all sorts of
blessings upon them, as Liberty, Estate, etc. only as it was said of the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.12. They are straitened in their own bowels, for Prayer
and Praise, and yet little lay it to their hearts. Such kind of straitnings
when they are long they are dangerous, for persons that have lain long under
straitnings are ready to lay aside endeavors for their liberty, because they
have often used it to no effect.

6 Usually read the word before thy closet prayer, and meditate of it, in the
use whereof the fire kindles; besides those good things which thou did
read out of the Word will remain in thy thoughts, and conduce to season thine
heart.

7 Walk humbly under straitnings, especially when they are of any long
continuance; so the Church, Song cap. 5. v. 5, 6. I sought him, but I could not
find him, I called unto him but he gave me no answer. Job 30.20. Job cries
out, I cry unto thee, but thou do not hear me, I stand up, but thou regardest
me not.

Quest. But seeing Saints are sometimes straightened in Prayer, as well as carnal
men, wherein is the difference?

Answ. Godly persons, though sometimes they have straitnings, yet have they
also enlargements now and then, Lam. 3.44. compared with v. 57. One while the
Church says, The Lord compassed himself with a cloud that her Prayer could not
pass through, anon she says, Thou drewest near in the day that I cried unto
thee, thou said, Fear not, Psalm 31.22. I said, I am cast out of thy sight:
here was the Prophets straitning, nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplications: here was his enlargement, see Psalm 6.1. compared with v. 8.
Jon. 2.7.

Carnal men they may sometimes have enlargement of words in Prayer, but never
of holy affections, as the face of God was hid from Cain, Genesis 4.14. so from
all carnal men. As Haman's great misery was that he was covered from beholding
the Kings face, Esther 7.8. so it is with these.

2 The godly mourn under their straitnings, Isai 63.17. Why have thou hardened
our hearts? Psalm 13.1. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, how long will thou hide thy face from me? but wicked men are not sensible of their
straitnings, because they never had any holy enlargements.

3 The godly are wont to rejoice in the removing of their straitnings, as a man
that was a close Prisoner is glad when he gets his liberty. Psalm 6.8. Carnal
men never have them removed, therefore they can never rejoice therein.

Use. For application. 1 Be exhorted to pray. 2 To pray in a right manner.

Motives to Prayer.
1 The readiness in God to hear our Prayers, Psalm. 65.2. and his readiness to
help our wants, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee.

2 The manifold relations Christ stands related to us, he is our Advocate, 1
John 2.1. He is the great Favorite of Heaven; if we had a Brother so near
related in a Princes Court, we should be emboldened to present our Petitions to
that Prince: why, Christ is our Brother, and he appears at the right hand of
God for us.

3 The former speedings that our selves and others have had with the Lord, as
Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, etc.

4 Our own wants. A Beggar's necessity makes him full of expressions, Psalm
28.1.143.7. Luke 15.17, 18.18.13.

5 Our hope of speeding. Where a Beggar hopes to speed he begs earnestly, but
if the Beggar be persuaded that he shall get nothing, this blunts his begging,
and makes him give over his suit: so will it do with the soul when it prays
without hope, as we see in Judas, Matthew. 27.5. Judas had no heart to pray for
mercy, because he thought it impossible to get it. There Is a twofold Despair,

1 Of extremity, as a Soldier when he sees nothing but kill or be killed, this
makes him fight eagerly; so when the soul sees its extremity that it is in the
deeps, Psalm 130.1, Out of the deeps have I cried, that it must either get
grace or be damned for ever, this makes a man pray eagerly.

2 There Is a Despair of Infidelity, when a man becomes heartless in Prayer and
thinks it is all to no purpose; this takes away endeavors, this is a secret
soul-murderer.

These discouragements are hideous cases in Prayer, and a man may perish and go
to Hell that has them, yet they are signs that a man does look toward God a
little, else he could not know what they mean.

Nourish then your hope in Prayer, Psalm 42.11. Let thy mercy be upon us
according as we hope in thee, Psalm ^3.22. only know, that sometimes gracious
hearts may in temptation cry, their strength and hope is perished from the
Lord, and yet after find grounds for their hope, as we see the Church did,
Lam. 3.18. compared with v. 21.

6 Prayer sets God awork for us, and God sets all the Creatures awork. I will
hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall
hear the Corn and Wine, and they shall hear Jezreel, Hosea 2.21. Many when in
trouble set their Friends to work, and their wealth to work, but few set Prayer
on work. Hezekiah gave to the King of Assyria three hundred Talents of Silver
and thirty Talents of Gold to depart from the City of Jerusalem, 2 Kings 18.14.
yet did it not help him, for in a short time he came and besieged it again, but
when he sought to God by Prayer God did utterly remove him.

7 In the Ordinance of Prayer God is wont to meet his people both to the
turning away of judgments, and to the obtaining mercies. To the turning away
judgments, Psalm. 106.23. Had not Moses stood in the breach to turn away his
wrath he had destroyed Israel, compared with Exodus 32.10, 11. Ezekiel. 22.30. in
Ezekiels time God sought for a man to stand in the gap, and to make up the
breach, but found none, therefore Gods wrath was powered on them.

So to the bestowing of mercies, Jer. 33.3. Call unto me, and I will answer
thee, and show thee great and mighty things, Philimo^ 22. I trust through your
prayers I shall be given to you. Matthew. 7.7, 8. Psalm. 4.4. I sought the Lord,
and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears, also v. 6. in prayer God
gives the spirit, Luke 11.13.

8 In prayer we have intercourse and communion with God. If it be a privilege
to have communion with Princes, what is it then to have communion with God?
Psalm, 73.28.

9 The desperate cases wherein persons have been heard; the Jews delivered from
Hamans cruelty, Peter brought out of prison, Acts 12.5. Daniel brought out of
the Lions den, Jonah out of the Whales belly, David when the pestilence raged
very hot, 2 Samuel 24.10. Jehosaphat, when in great straits, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
compared with v. 15, 17.

10 The delight God takes in his peoples prayers, Prove. 15.8. The prayer of the
upright is his delight. As Princes have their delights so God, Song 2.14. he
loves the voice of his own spirit in the hearts of Saints.

11 We are worthy to miss good things, if we will not ask them; Spare to speak,
spare to speed. When God bids us ask and have, how unworthy are we if we will
not ask?

12 The dangers we expose our selves to when we do not ask. Such prayerless
persons are fit objects for the vengeance of God, Jer. 10.25. Power out thy
wrath upon the Nations that have not called upon thy Name, Ezekiel. 23.30. There
died 14000. of the Plague, Numb. 16 49. but had not Moses and Aaron stood
betwixt the dead and living to intercede, the whole Congregation had been
consumed in a moment, v. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49.

13 In the exercise of prayer, our graces are exercised to send out a sweet
smell in the nostrils of God, our faith in eying Christ, our love and desires
in breathing after him, our repentance in bewailing sin, our thankfulness in
acknowledging benefits, our expectation in waiting for answers. As sweet
perfumes when rubbed send out a fragrant smell, then the spirit blows upon the
soul that the spices thereof may flow out, Song. 4.11. to the end especially,
v. 16. these graces are compared to the smell of sweet flowers in a garden, and
to the smell of perfumed garments, and to the smell of oil of Spik^nard,
Calamus, Cynamon, Frankincense trees, Myrrh, and Aloes, and all chief spices.

14 Prayer is the way to be enabled to all other duties, and to become
successful in them. Eleazar, having first prayed, prospered in getting a wife
for his masters son.

15 Prayer is the abridgement of divinity; therefore to call fervently on the
name of the Lord is to be a godly man, Rom, 10.13. whosoever shall call on the
name of the Lord shall be saved; it includes repentance, humiliation, joy in
Goods goodness, 1 Pet. 1.17. Psalm. 72.20. the prayers of David are ended, that
is his instructions, his thanksgivings, his confessions, his humiliations.

16 Its thy self gains by prayer, God gets nothing thereby; and if thou omit
it, or carelessly perform it, thy self have the loss thereby, Job. 22.3.

17 Its one of Gods titles to hear prayer, Psalm. 65.20. Thou that hear
prayers, or, thou that art hearing prayers, as some translate it, as if it were
a continual work in God to hear prayers, princes will not lose any part of
their title, but if thou calls not on God, thou do do what in thee lies to
deprive God of one of his titles.

18 Prayer is in some sense a Christians utmost refuge; though a man have been
a grievous sinner; yea a relapsed sinner, yet if he can pray there is hope: A
beggar that has nothing to live by but begging, had need beg hard, so we have
nothing to live on but praying, I mean nothing to be done on our part to obtain
mercies; the promises of God, and the sense of Gods love are made over to us in
the use of prayer. When a man has nothing to maintain himself, his wife and
children, but his fingers ends, will he not be toyling all the day? Prayer is a
Christians fingers ends.

19 Its the hardest of all works, harder then preaching, expounding, etc.

2 Be exhorted to pray in a right manner: but how is that?

1 By fixing our faith aright upon God, as 1 behold him invisible, hence he
used a voice but showed no similitude, Deuteronomy. 4.15. because a voice was such a
thing as could not be pourtrayed, Esa. 40.18.

2 Beholding the Father subsisting in the Son, and the Son in the Father, and
the Spirit in the Father and in the Son, John 14.7, 8.

3 Apprehend the fullness of the Godhead to dwell in Christ bodily, Col. 2.9.

4 That we may direct our prayers either to Father, Son or Spirit, according
as our necessities shall require, yet we are to worship the Trinity in Unity,
and Unity in Trinity, they are Eternal, Almighty, and Incomprehensible, yet are
there not three Eternals, Almighties, or Incomprehensibles. There is one God,
of this are all things known, known in Father, Son and holy Spirit; for why
did the Father beget the Son of his own substance, and out of the same brought
forth the Spirit, which partake of one and the same essence, and are esteemed
worthy of one and the same godhead. But some will say does not that which begets
differ from that which is begotten and that which proceeds from that whence it
proceeds? because the Father is not begotten from whom the Son is begotten, and
the holy Spirit proceeds, therefore the Son and Spirit are not the same with
the Father. The unbegotten and begotten and proceeding are not names of
essence, but the manners of existence, and the manner of existence is denoted
by these names, Justin Martyr, expos. fidei, p. 292. We are to look upon the
Father that he is made of none, neither created, nor begotten, the Son is of
the Father alone, not made, nor created, but begotten. The holy Ghost is of the
Father and Son, neither made, nor begotten, but proceeding, Joh. 15.26. So
there is one Father not three Fathers, one Son not three Sons, one holy Ghost
not three holy Ghosts. And in this Trinity none is before or after another, none
is greater or less then another, but they are coeternal, and coequal,
co-essential, and concausal, and though there be three subsistences yet is
there but one essence. We are to profess one God, the knowledge of whom is in
the Father and Son and Spirit, wherein the Father, Son and Spirit, are
acknowledging the existences of one godhead, but whereby God does understand
the communion of existences, according to nature and essence, for the unity is
understood in the Trinity, and the Trinity is acknowledged in the unity, but
after what manner that is, I will neither ask it of others, neither can I
persuade my self the manner of these hid and unspeakable things that I dare
speak them with my filthy flesh. Ib. 297. 1 Jo. 5.7. These three are (...), one
thing or essence, not (...) one person.

5 Do not so direct your prayer to any subsistence in the Trinity, as to
exclude the other, but to include them.

6 In singling out any one subsistence in the Trinity, we are to pitch most
usually upon the Father, as he to whom we direct our prayers through the
mediation of Christ, and by the help of the Spirit, Joh. 16.23. 1 Pet. 1.17. If
you call upon the Father, etc. not in respect of any superiority of power or
glory, but in respect of his firstness of order in subsisting. Yet even then
will it be very safe to look upon the Father essentially, rather then
personally, yet in respect of order the Father is first mentioned, Matthew.
28.19. 1 John 5.7.

7 Forasmuch as Christ promises to grant the requests of his people, John
14.13, 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will do it, (it is twice
repeated for futher confirmation) hence we may call upon Christ. The Saints are
described by this note, that they call on the name of Christ, Acts 9.14. 1 Cor.
1.2. Acts 7.59.

8 Forasmuch as we are baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19.
and he it is that sanctifies us, Romans 15.16. and renews us, Titus 3.5. and
makes the covenant of grace with us, Heb. 10.15, 16, 17. and is not a bare
motion or inspiration, but a willing working subsistence, who powrs grace into
our hearts, Romans 5.5. who sends forth Apostles, Acts 13.2, 4. and binds the
conscience, Acts 15.28. and gives his gifts as he pleases, 1 Cor. 12.11.
inabling so many to speak with tongues which they had never learned. We may
also call upon the Holy Ghost. Thus did the Seraphims, Esai 6.1, 3. Holy, holy,
holy, is the Lord of hosts, also Psalm. 95.7, 8. compared with Heb. 3.7. him
whom Paul calls the Holy Ghost, in the Psalm is called God, and the Prophet
calls, Come let us worship and kneel down before the Lord our maker, Revel.
1.4, 5. John prays to each subsistence in the Trinity, Grace and Peace be to
you, from him which is, and was, and is to come, and from the seven spirits of
God, and from Jesus Christ. The Spirit is called by the name of seven spirits
from his manifold gifts and operations: by spirits cannot be meant Angels who
still refused worship, Apoc. 19.10. Rev. 22.8, 9. Besides the Spirit has
incommunicable properties of God, as to search all things, yea the deep things
of God, yea to know the things of God, as the spirit of a man knows the things
of a man, 1 Cor. 2.10.11. also the Spirit is said to be omnipresent, Psalm.
139.7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? The Spirit is extended as far as the
presence of God, and therefore is every where. Yea, this one Spirit dwells in
all the Saints where ever they live, Ephesians. 2.18. as in a Temple, 1 Cor.
3.17.6.19. The Spirit dwells not only by gifts but in respect of substance, he
does not so give his gifts that he should be elsewhere, but he is present to
the gifts of his creature, by preserving, governing, adding strength, Luth.
Tom. 4. page 402. Yea the actions proper to God are ascribed to the Spirit, as
to create, Job 33.4. Psalm. 33.6. and to inspire the Prophets and Apostles
penmen of Scripture, Acts 28.15. the Holy Ghost spoke by Isaiah the Prophet,
yea, Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Yea the Spirit is said to be one in essence with the Father, hence the Spirit
is to be called upon.

9 This God whom we eye in prayer, we are not to imagine subject to composition
or division, as though the Father had one part of the godhead, the Son
another, and the Holy Ghost a third, but the whole entire godhead is
communicated from the Father to the Son, and from Father and Son to the Holy
Ghost, so that there is no division but only a distinction without separation,
Matthew. 3.16, 17. The Spirit like a Dove lighted upon him, and a voice from
heaven said, This is my beloved Son.

2 We must rightly apprehend Jesus Christ, that as in the Creed of Athanasius
we believe our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, Romans 8.3, 32. so we
believe him to be God and man, God of the substance of the Father, begotten
before the worlds, and man of the substance of his mother, born in the world,
perfect God and perfect man, of a reasonable soul and humane flesh subsisting,
equal to the Father as touching his godhead, Phil. 2.6. and inferior to the
Father touching his manhood; who although he be God and man, yet he is not two
but one Christ, one, not by conversion of the godhead into flesh, but by
taking of the manhood into God. One altogether, not by confusion of substance,
but by unity of person, for as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God
and man is one Christ, who died and rose again, and appears at Gods right hand
in our behalf, Heb. 9.24. After the union of the light with the body of the
Sun, no man can separate one from another, to call this severally the Sun, and
that severally the light, but we call one Sun the light: so after the union no
man will call this the Son the word of God, this the Son, to wit man, but will
understand both to be one and the same, as one light and one Sun: now as one
light and one Sun are two natures, one of the light and another of the body of
the Sun, in like manner this Son, and Lord, and Christ, and Only begotten, is
one, but the natures are two, one which is above us, the other ours. Just.
Mart. expos fidei p. 302. Through this Lord Jesus we have access with boldness
to come to God, Joh. 14.6. Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.22. The Sun shines alike to all
every day, but they that are quick of sight receive more of its beams, but they
that have weak eyes by reason of their weakness cannot behold it; so the Sun of
righteousness communicates his substance equally to all, as God near at hand,
but we being blinded with sins, by reason of our blindness, cannot endure the
presence of his light. Just. Mar. ib. 305.

2 We must pray in a right order, first for spiritual blessings and then for
temporal, first for pardon of sin, then for removing of judgment, 2 Samuel
24.10. first for the Kingdom of God and it is righteousness, and then for other
things, Matthew. 6.33. first for the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4.6. then
for corn and wine.

3 Keep your heart always in a praying frame, 1 These 5.17. Pray continually,
that is, if any present occasion shall offer it self you may be fit for the
duty, hence have your hearts so set upon the world, that whenever there shall
be need you may call them off from the world.

4 Come with shame and abasedness of spirit into the presence of God. Ephraim,
Jer. 34.19, 20. the Prodigal, Luke 15.17, 18. the Publican, Luke 18.13. Ezra
9.6. Ezra blusheth and was ashamed when he came before the Lord in prayer.
Nehemiah much confounded for his own sins and the sins of his fathers house,
Neh. 1.6, 7. David often, Psa. 51.2, 3. Psalm. 130.1, 2, 3.143.2. God is wont to
fill such empty souls with comfort, Luke 1.48. Job 22.29. the soul is then in
the most praying frame when most abased, then does the soul most go out of it
self and magnify grace.

Matthew. 6.9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name.

After this manner therefore pray ye] As it is not enough for a Gardener to weed
out evil weeds, but also he plants good plants and flowers; or for a workman to
pull down a ruinous house, but he must also set up a firm house; so Christ does
not only tax the faults that were committed in prayer, but also prescribes a
right manner of prayer.

Q. But seeing you have laid down a manner of prayer, and Christ sets forth
another, and there is but one manner of calling upon God aright, how can this
manner, and the manner laid down be consistent together?

A. In the manner of prayer already prescribed, prayer has been handled as to
the particular requisites and qualifications thereof, which Christ does not
here insist upon at all, or if at all, it is in very generals, which I have
endeavored to digest into particulars already laid down: But here Christ sets
forth the manner of prayer as to order and end. 1 To order, first to ask those
things which concern the glory of God, as in the three first Petitions, and
then the things which concern our good in the three last. 2 To end: there are
two ends of prayer, 1 That God may be honored of us, 2 That we may obtain of
him the good things needful for this life and the life to come.

Q. Whether did Christ use this prescription about the manner of prayer twice?

A. It Is likely, forasmuch as Matthew and Luke set forth diverse occasions, that
Christ delivered it twice; here it is set down to rectify prayer from the
Pharisees corruptions, there it is set down upon the request of a certain
disciple, who said, Lord, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples, Luke
11.1, 2.

2 Q. Whether did Christ prescribe this as a rule after which our prayers are
to be squared, or did he prescribe it as a form that must be used and no other?

A. Christ prescribes it as a rule according to which our petitions are to be
directed, not as a form to the continual use whereof we are obliged. I will not
take upon me to condemn all forms, seeing we read of sundry in Scripture, as
Psalm. 102. v. 1, etc. Esai 63.15. to the end of cap. 64. ult. Numb. 6.24. Yet
to use a form does argue thou art a very babe, who go by a form because they
cannot go alone, and to use a form, when thou art able to power out thine own
heart more and better then any form can teach thee, is to to offer to the Lord
a corrupt thing, when thou have a male in thy flock. Thou art a very babe till
thou art able to express thy wants in conceived prayer: what man is there that
is sensible of his wants that cannot declare them to man, and can thou not
declare them to God? Christ has given us this breviary of prayer as a
looking-glass to see our wants. Himself never used it, nor could he in truth
say, Forgive us our trespasses, seeing himself had none. We never read the
Apostles used this prayer, but only framed their petitions according to it,
Acts 1.24. Matthew. 26.39.

We ought then to look upon this as a pattern without which we might have
wandered in our requests, often asking things hurtful for us, we ought then
hence to draw the matter of our prayers.

This form or pattern is usually divided into three p^rts,

1 A Preface, Our Father which art in Heaven.

2 Petitions, which are six, or according to some of the Ancients, seven.

3 The Conclusion, For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

1 The Preface, Our Father which art in Heaven. We call him Father, 1 To show
that we are not to look upon him as a Tyrant, or a Stranger that knows us not,
or as an hard Master but as a Father.

2 To embolden us to come unto him.

3 To show his readiness to do you good, Luke 11.13. If evil fathers will do
good to their children, will not our Father do good to his children?

4 To show that we believe our Election and Adoption.

5 Assurance of his readiness and willingness to help us, whereas formerly we
durst not lift up our eyes to Heaven, Luke 15.18.

Our] 1 This word [Our] teaches that however we believe for our selves, yet
Charity teaches us to pray for others.

2 To denote unto us a Communion of Saints, how that they are so joined
together, as if the want of one were the want of all, 1 Cor. 12.26. If one
member suffer, all the members suffer with it.

3 That we may not disdain the meanest Christian from being our Brother in
Christ, if God have adopted him for his, Ephesians. 4.5. yet may a Christian in
private say, My Father, Matthew 26.39.27.46.

4 To keep us from arrogating to our selves above others, remembering we are of
the company of sons. On earth some Saints have more noble fathers than others,
but to the Father in Heaven all Believers are alike related.

5 To encourage the weak, that they may believe that God is no less their
Father, than the Father of Peter, Paul, etc.

6 That we should not only pray for our own necessities, but also for the
necessities of others, James 5.16. applying in private Prayer that common
Fatherhood to our selves. And this Father we call upon we may look upon some
times personally, Ephesians. 3.14. 1 Cor. 8.6. sometimes essentially, for Father,
Son and Spirit; so Christ is called the everlasting Father, Isai 9.6.

7 To teach us mutual sympathy, 1 Cor. 12.26. If one member suffer all the
members suffer with it, Heb. 13.3.

8 To teach us unity and agreement with our Brethren, as members of the same
body; hence before we bring our gift we are to agree with our Brother, Matthew.
5.24.

Which art in Heaven] 1 To show that how ever earthly parents have a good will
to help their children, yet want power, yet our Father being in Heaven, and
being the God of all might, has power to do for us above all that we can ask
or think. Ephesians. 3.20. Psalm 115.3.

2 To take away erroneous conceptions of God, wherein carnal men are ready to
think of him like earthly parents.

3 To denote unto us his special presence he has in Heaven, there his power,
wisdom, goodness do most shine forth, and from thence are manifested to us.
Psalm 19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God.

4 That when we come before him we should come with reverence, and lifting up
of heart, Lam. 3.41. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the
Heavens, where God is not circumscriptively, as the body of man bounded by such
a place, nor definitively as the Angels, but repletively, filling all place,
for the Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain him, 1 Kings 8.27.

5 To show to us, that though God be every where, Psalm 139.7, 8, 9. Whither
shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven thou art there, if I
make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there, if in the uttermost parts of the
Sea thou art there. Amos 9.1, 2, 3. yet he is said to dwell in the Heavens,
Psalm 2.4. Hear from Heaven thy dwelling place, 1 Kings 8.30. there his majesty
and glory most shines forth, Psalm 112.5.123.1. yet does he dwell in humble and
holy hearts, Isai 57.15. 1 Cor. 3.16. As the soul of man which is wholly in the
whole, and in every part, yet is said to be in the head or heart, more than
elsewhere, because there more than elsewhere it exercises his power and
effects, so though God be essentially every where and in all places wholly, yet
he works not grace and gifts equally in all parts, but he works in Heaven more
than in Earth, in the godly more than the wicked, and in one of his children
more than in another, in the Saints in Heaven (...) than in the Saints on
Earth, and in the humane nature of Christ more than in any creature.

Hallowed be thy Name] This is the first Petition, and Christ his meaning is, 1
That Gods glory be every where magnified, it is put in the first place, because
Gods glory must be preferred before all things, Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made
all things for himself. Thus must every one do that calls God Father. So that
if our credit or profit come in competition therewith we are willing to
renounce, not only them, but every thing else for the Lord.

2 That the Name of God which is God himself, be magnified. The Name of God is
not so many Letters but God himself. Holy and reverend is his Name, Psalm
111.9. It was the speech of the men of Bethshemesh, Who is able to stand before
this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6.20. God is glorious in holiness, Exodus 15.11. The
Trinity is said to be holy. Isai 6.3. Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Hosts. The
Father is holy, John 17.11. The Son holy, Luke 1.35. Acts 4.27. The Spirit is
holy, Ephesians, 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God. God is not only holy,
but holiness in the very abstract, Amos 4.2. The Lord has sworn by his
holiness, that is, by himself. Saints are holy, 1 Peter 2.5. And Angels are
called holy, Mark 8.38. but there is none holy as the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.2. Saints
and Angels are holy with a derivative holiness, but in God it is essential.
Holiness in the creature is a quality, in God it is his being and nature; in
the creature it is finite and in such a measure, in God it is infinite and
without measure. Being then so infinitely and essentially holy, let us
sanctify his Name by,

1 Acknowledging him to be the true God, Psalm. 103.1. The gods of the Heathen
were impure Lechers.

2 By being abased when thou come into his presence: after Jobs eye had seen
God, he abhorred himself in dust and ashes, Job 42.5.6. Peter out of the
apprehension of that great vileness in himself, and holiness in Christ, says,
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord, Luke 5.8.

3 By extolling and praising this holiness in God. Glorious in holiness and
fearful in praises are joined together, Exodus 15.11. Psalm 30.4. Give thanks
at the remembrance of his holiness. Without Gods holiness what were his wisdom
but subtilty? his will but wilfulness? his power but oppression? his love but
dotage? his justice but terror? but his Holiness declares the perfection of
all his Attributes.

4 By removing all causality of sin from God, he can no more be a cause of sin,
than the Sun of darkness? Shall not the Judge of all the World do right? Genesis
18.25. God may will the being of sin, but man the nature of it, as in a Chain
that breaks none is in fault but that which breaks, so in the concurrent causes
of sio, none is to be faulted but the immediate cause, the will of man. God
withdrawing his restraint, which he is not bound to give, corruption boils out,
and the creature sins necessarily but voluntarily. He that drives a lame Horse
is the cause of his going not of his halting, God is the cause of the actions
of the sinner, for in him we live and move, Acts 17.28. but not of the corrupt
turning of the will.

5 By avoiding all profanation of his holy name. When a man and his father
went in to the same maid, they profaned Gods holy name among the heathen, Amos
2.7. so the Babylonians seeing the unholy lives of the Jews, cried, These are
the people of the Lord, and so Gods holy name was profaned, Ezekiel. 36.20. A
small impeachment to the name of a Prince, stirrs him up to arms, and will not
the Prince of Princes be jealous for his holy name? See Ezekiel. 36.2^. Ezekiel.
39.25. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, Psalm. 96.8.

6 By imitating God in holiness; be ye holy for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. as a
little white is like a great white, differing only in degrees, so let our
holiness be like Gods. Are we not Gods temples wherein his spirit dwells, and
were not temples severed from common uses? Was Belshazzar so punished for
abusing a material temple, and shall thou escape if thou prophanes a spiritual
temple? The lives and families of too many proves that they live the lives of
heathens under the name of Christians: some cry out as Corah, Are not all the
Lords people holy? Numb. 16.3. others think there is none holy but glorified
Saints: but there is a people who are called to holiness, and who so walk,
making holiness their Element wherein they live, as the birds in the air, and
fishes in the water. Hereunto were we elected that we should be holy, 2 Thessalonians.
2.13. we cannot climb up into heaven to behold our election, yet may we read
it in our sanctification. Without holiness we cannot prove our justification,
seeing the water and spirit witness with us as well as the blood, 1 John 5.8.
Ere long heaven and earth will be on fire: holiness at that time will be like
pure gold which will not be consumed by the fire, 2 Pet. 3.11.

3 Gods Name is his Attributes, which name God proclaimed, Exodus 33.19.
compared with cap. 34 6. I will proclaim my name before thee, and the Lord
passed by and proclaimed, the Lord, merciful, gracious, etc. the name of God is
every thing which is truly affirmed of him. Thou shall fear this glorious and
fearful name, the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.58. to derogate from any attribute of
God, as to tax his justice, to limit his power, to question his faithfulness,
to ascribe that to fortune which is due to providence, is a profaning of the
name of God.

4 Gods Name is his ordinances, Mal. 10.14. as the word, Psalm. 138.4. Prayer,
Act. 9.14. The supper, 1 Cor. 11.29. There ought to be a discerning of the
Lords body: so baptism, Matthew. 28.19. Baptizing them into the name of Father,
Son and Spirit, only God magnifies his word above all his name, Psalm. 138.4.

5 Gods Name is taken for the honor of God, and credit of Religion, Romans 2.^4.
My Name is blasphemed every day through you, that is, you Jews who profess my
name and live loosly, Ezekiel. 36.^0. the loose Jews in Babylon profaned Gods
name, when the heathens reported, These are the people of the Lord, Esa. 52.5.

Hallowed be thy name] To hallow is taken, 1 for the making of a person or
thing that was unholy to become holy, 1 Cor. 6.10. thus we cannnot hallow Gods
name. 2 For the declaration or for an appearing to be holy, so God will have
his name appear to the whole world that he is an holy God, not only by a
reverend speaking of his essence and Attributes, avoiding all swearing,
cursing, etc. but also by a holy conversation. Thus we are to sanctify God in
our hearts, 1 Pet. 3.15. and in our lives, 1 Pet. 1.16. Be ye holy for I am
holy. We by our holiness should show forth the glory of Gods holiness, that if
there be so much holiness in poor Saints, how much is there in God?

3 For the publishing of a thing to be holy, so we are to publish the name of
God to be holy, Ps. 105.3.111, 9. Holy and reverend is his name, Psalm. 30.4.

4 For the manifestation of Gods holiness in a way of judgment, when sinners
will not show forth his holiness in a way of practice; so when God destroyed
Nadab and Abihu, he says, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh unto me.
Levit. 10.3. so God was sanctified in the destruction of Zidon, Ezekiel. 28.22. so
God will be sanctified of God in the eyes of the heathen, Ezekiel. 38.16, 23.

Thy kingdom come] There Is a twofold kingdom, 1 of grace, 2 of glory.

1 Of grace, this kingdom we desire may come, 1 By casting down the kingdom of
Satan in us, 2 Cor. 10.4. 2 By setting up Christ to reign in every one of our
hearts; thus the kingdom of God is said to be within us, Luke 17.21. governing
us by his Word and Spirit. 3 By stablishing all means toward the building up
of this Kingdom, as the preaching of the Word, which is called the Gospel of
the Kingdom. 4 That all hindrances that stand against this Kingdom may be
removed, as sin, etc. Romans 6.15 sin shall not have dominion over you, Romans
6.12. 5 That those things going before the glorious Kingdom of Christ may be
fulfilled, as the fall of Antichrist, the conversion of the Jews, and the
bringing in of the fullness of the Gentiles. 6 That Christ would gather,
preserve and increase his Church, and rule therein, Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set
my King upon my holy hill of Sion.


2 There is a Kingdom of glory; we desire this may come, This is 1 Temporary.
2 Eternal. 1 Temporary on earth, 1 By hastening and longing for his final
appearance, 2 Timothy 4.8. that he may reign and all his Saints with him, Zach.
14.5. The Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee; Concerning
which King dome observe, 1 The beginning of it, which will begin at Christ his
second appearance to judge the world, 2 Timothy 4.1. He shall the quick and the
dead at his appearance and his Kingdom. 2 For the end of this Kingdom, it
shall be after the sum of a thousand years, Revel. 20.4, 5. Then comes the
end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.
and it shall not be after the second resurrection, for it is bounded with two
resurrections, the first resurrection being the beginning thereof, and the
second the conclusion thereof, Revel. 20.5. for then it shall be delivered up,
1 Cor. 15.24. 3 The gloriousness of this Kingdom set down, 1 By similitudes of
glistering stones, Saphires, and Carbuncles, Esai 54.11. streets of pure gold,
Revel. 21.18. of a Bride trimmed for her husband, Rev. 21.8. for that is meant
of a Kings o^^e on earth, because this descends out of heaven. This Bride shall
have her wedding garments on, Rev. 19.8. all that are called to this marriage
are blessed, Revel. 19.9. Rev. 21 5 6.


2 By clear Scriptures: peruse Esai 11. Esai 30.26. Esai 54.11. to the end,
Esai 60. throughout, Zach. cap. 13, 14. Rev. 20. also cap. 21.

3 The excellent things therein, as 1 The restitution of all things in order,
as at the beginning before the fall, Acts 3.21. Whom the heavens must contain
till the time of the restitution of all things, Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22. Wait for
manifestation: in heaven glory is hid from creatures, but the creatures shall
be restored from vanity brought on them by man's corruption to serve man in
perfection, the creature and Saints are distinguished, v. 22, 23.

2 The subjects of this Kingdom shall all be holy, not only professionally,
but really, Esai 35.8.60.21. Zach. 14.20, 21. Rev. 21.27. Dan. 7.27. The
Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high.

3 The exaltation of these subjects; thrones shall be placed, Dan. 7.9, 10. and
the Saints shall sit on them, compared with Rev. 20.4. Matthew. 19.28. They that
have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit upon his
throne, they also shall sit upon thrones.

2 Judgment shall be given to them, Dan. 7.22. compared with Rev. 20.4. 1 Cor.
6.2.

3 The Saints possessed the Kingdom, Dan. 7.22. or as in the Revelations, cap.
20.4. the Saints reigned with Christ a thousand years.

4 The place of this Kingdom. It is this world that now is, formerly divided
into many Kingdoms, shall, upon the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, become
the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. and this is just when
the time of the dead is come that they should be judged, v. 18. he speaks not,
they shall be Christ's in respect of his Diety, for so they were always his, but
in respect of his manhood also, Rev. 5.10.

5 From the length. It shall continue a thousand years. They lived and reigned
with Christ a thousand years, Rev. 20.4. the life of regeneration cannot here
be meant, for here 1 They all begin to reign at once, not so in regeneration. 2
The reign of regenerate persons in heaven is for Eternity, this is only for a
thousand years and that upon earth.

6 From the quietness and peace that shall be in this Kingdom, as 1 Satan
bound up, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. for the space of this thousand years, 2 A general
peace over the world, that they shall beat their swords into Plow-shares and
spears into pruning hooks. Esai 2.3. Mic. 4.2. 3 Antipathies taken away, the
Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid,
Esai 11.6. none of these ever was fulfilled. 4 Antichrist thrown down and
destroyed, 2 These. 2.8. 5 Universal peace, Ps. 72.3, 7. Esai 65.25.

7 A putting down of all rule, authority and power in the Empires and
Governments of the world, 1 Cor. 15.24. subjecting all enemies, v. 25. see Dan.
7.14.

8 From the victories that Christ shall have in this Kingdom, 1 At the battle
of Armagedon, Rev. 16.16 when the Kings of the earth are gathering together
from all parts and were conjoined therein before they could make their general
randezvouse, Christ makes his appearance, and slayes many of them, Esa. 66.16.
Joel 3.14. Rev. 19.21. In this battle are not only the remainders of the
Papacy, but even Turks and Idolaters.

2 At the end of the thousand years, Satan being let loose to deceive the
nations, gathers Gog and Magog, an innumerable company, to battle, whose
design will be to compass the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved city,
and fire comes down from Heaven and devours them, Rev. 20.7, 8, 9. And the
Devil that deceived them was cast into Hell, ver. 10. upon which follows the
judgment of small and great, see ver. 12.13, 14.

2 There Is an eternal Kingdom of glory, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. When after the
Saints reign and expiration of these thousand years, and after the delivery of
this Kingdom into the Fathers hands by Christ as Mediator, 1 Cor. 15.24. God
shall be all in all, ver. 28. Christ as Mediator administers this Kingdom.
Now as Viceroyes or deputy Princes, give up their power to Emperors or Kings
that send them, so at the end of the thousand years shall Christ give up this
Kingdom to the Father, that is essentially considered, and then, 1 The Son
himself shall be subject unto him that put all things under him, 1 Cor. 15.28.
That is the humane nature of Christ shall be a glorious creature, in the
beholding whereof part of our glory will consist. 2 Then God will be all in
all, 1 Cor. 15.28. All things shall be full of God, the Saints shall be as it
were united unto God, as the beams of the sun to the body of the sun; in the
glorious aspect of him, God will be all in all by being instead of all things
to the Saints, as life, glory, honor, peace, plenty, yea the very wish or
rather satiety and satisfaction of all our desires. Now God is not all in all,
but part in every one; for example, goodness in David, wisdom in Solomon,
patience in Job, zeal in Phineas, but then all Saints shall have all graces,
God being all in all. Then God shall be all in all in the praises of glorified
Saints, they shall not so praise one another as praise God, there will then be
no need of the Sun or of the Moon to shine there, for the glory of God will
enlighten it, Revel. 21.22. Thus with his fullness will he fill all in all,
Ephesians. 1.23. He will be a perpetual Light without interruption, Isai 60.19. 3
We shall then be for ever with the (...), 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Where there will be
fullness of joy, and p^^os^r^s for ever more, Psalm 16. ult. Which eye has not
seen, ^or ^ar heard, nor has entered into the heart of man to conceive, 1 Ger.
2.9.


I might have shown other properties of the former Temporary Kingdom, as, 1 The
universality, The stone cut out without hands filled the whole earth, Dan.
2.44, 45. See Dan. 7.26, 27. Revel. 11.15. Isai 24.21, 22, 23. and no Monarchy
shall be after it, Isai 2.17. See Zach. 14.9. the Lord, i.e. the Lord Christ
shall be King of all the Earth. Then de facto all will be the Saints, 1 Cor.
3.22. Revel. 217. they shall inherit all things. 2 Removing of miseries, as, 1
Sin, Isai 35.8. Isai 60.21. Zeph. 3.13. 2 Peter 3.13. In this new Heaven dwells
Righteousness, Revel. 21.1, 2, 3. compared with v. 27. 2 Sorrow. Isai 14.1, 2,
3. Isai 25.8. Tears wiped from all faces, Isai 54.13, 14. Isai 60.14, 20. The
days of thy mourning shall be ended, Isai 65.19. Revel. 7.16, 17. 21.4. These
things never yet fulfilled. Isai 65.19. Isai 35.9, 10. 3 Fear. None shall make
them afraid, Jeremiah 23.3, 4. Jeremiah 30.10. Ezekiel, 28.24. Mic. 4.1, 2, 3.
Zeph. 3.13, 14, 15. 4 Death. This shall then be swallowed up in victory, Isai
25.8. Hosea 1^.13, 14. Paul cites both these places upon this occasion, 1 Cor.
15.54, 55. Hence there will be no sickness, nor procreation of children,
because no Marriage, Luke 20.35, 36. 5 No need of political or ecclesiastical
Government, because free from sinfulness, yet shall Kings bring their glory
hither, Rev. 21.24. 6 No wants, either 1 Of Meat or Drink, Revel. 7.16. 2 Nor
of Gods presence, Revel. 21.4. 7 Freedom from Temptations, as Christ after his
Resurrection was never tempted, so our bodies shall be like his, Phil. 3.21.
Satan is bound up that he should not seduce the Nations any more. Some render
the word Seduce to wander up and down, for the word (...) is to wander, as
Planets. Then that Promise will be fulfilled, Romans 16.20.


3 The obtaining of Privileges, as, 1 Revelation of Mysteries, Revel. 11.19.
The Temple of God was opened, and there was seen in his Temple the Ark of his
Testament. This was after the seventh Trumpet sounded. That is, God in Christ,
who is typified by all Temples, both that in Ezekiel and elsewhere, opens his
mind, and mysteries to the Saints, which formerly was shut up as the Book of
the Law was in the Ark. Christ now opens something to us by his Spirit in
faithful Teachers, and by the fallings out of things, but then will be teach
us in plainness to conceive Mysteries. They shall be all taught of God.

2 Union of Saints throughout the World both in affection and judgment, Zach.
14.9. There shall be one Lord and his Name one, Zeph. 3.9. They shall serve the
Lord with one consent.

3 Estimation of holy persons and things, Isai 60.13. The Church shall be as
the Stones of a Crown lifted up, Zach. 9.16. That is, highly esteemed as the
Jewels in a Princes Crown.

4 Glorious contemplation of God in Christ, Rev. 22.4. beholding his face
accompanied with great H^ll^^^^^hs of Praise. Revel 19.1. to v. 9. For this see
Doctor Holms his elaborate Discourse, where you will see much of this
additional, yet with diverse abbreviations and alterations I have finished this
discouse.

Of this twofold Kingdom forespoken of, Justin Martyr says, The holy Prophets
have foretold his twofold coming. 1 One given, as of a man despised and subject
to passions. 2 When he shall come from Heaven with glory and with his angelical
Host, when he shall raise up the bodies of all mortals that ever were, and
shall cloth the worthy with a nature void of all corruption, but shall send
the unrighteous with the Devils into everlasting fire, Apol. 2. page 68. also
in his Book against Tripho, page 19^. Tripho having alleged that sundry
Scriptures, as that of Daniel the seventh, compelled him and others to look for
an illustrious and great one, who from the ancient of days, as the Son of man,
is to receive an everlasting Kingdom, he your man who is called Christ was so
without honor and glory that he fell into the utmost curse of the Law of God,
for he was crucified; to which Justin answers, There was a twofold coming, one
when he was pricked of you, another when ye shall acknowledge whom ye have
pricked, and your Tribes shall lament, the women by themselves, and men by
themselves.

Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven] In this is required, 1 A denying
of our own corrupt wills, Matthew. 16.26. Hereby we deny our selves, Gal. 5.16.
Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Matthew.
6.24.

2 That we take up any cross the providence of God shall lay upon us without
fretting or murmuring, 1 Samuel 3.17. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good. Job 1.21. The Lord gives and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name
of the Lord. Acts 9.6. Matthew. 16.23.

3 That we follow the Lord in doing what he shall command, Mic. 6.8. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is the will of God, even
your sanctification. Also the will of God is for us to believe on his Son, John
6.40.

Grounds to do the will of Christ.
1 It Is a good will, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 1.5. Whatsoever God commands is grounded
upon righteousness, yea upon most perfect reason. 2 It Is a known will. Had God
kept his mind in his own breast we might have pleaded for our selves, and
might have had a cloak, John 15.22. but now we know it, therefore our sin will
be great if we do it not, John 9.41. Luke 12.48. That servant that knew his
Lords will and did it not, was beaten with many stripes. 3 It Is an acceptable
will. The Lord only knows what will please himself, Romans 12.2. Voluntary
services, though never so seemingly glorious, are not regarded of him, because
not commanded, Esai 1.11, 12, 13. Esai 66.3. Amos 5.22, 23. 4 The pattern of
Christ, who was still ready to do his fathers will, Father not my will, but
thine be done, Matthew. 26.39, 42. yet was it in a most hard case, even in the
enduring the cursed death of the cross. Yea, says Christ, I do always those
things which please him, John 5.30.8.29. 5 Possibility of doing Gods will. Some
men are hard to please, that do what you can you can never content them, they
are so humerous, but it is not so with God. If there be a willing mind and an
holy sincere endeavor, God accepts it, 2 Cor. 8.12. If God should require
obedience in rigor we could not please him, Psalm. 130.3. but he requires
obedience on easy terms, even Gospel obedience, and if there be some slips the
Lord will be well pleased for his righteousness sake, Esai 42.21. Matthew. 17.5.
6 It is a duty suitable to our consciences, for when we do the will of God, how
does conscience approve of it, and how does the conscience fill us with comfort
herein? 2 Cor. 1.12. when Paul's conscience witnessed that he endeavored in
godly sincerity to do Gods will, it filled his soul with rejoicing. 7 No formal
professions are regarded of God, how glorious soever, unless we do Gods will,
Matthew. 7.21. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, but he that does the will of
my Father which is in heaven, Mat. 21.29, 31. The Father there had two sons,
one said he would go work in the Vineyard, and did not; the other said he would
not, and yet did, and he is said to do the will of God. Hence Christ says,
Whosoever does the will of my Father, the same is my father and mother, sister
and brother, Mark 3.35. 8 It Is an everlasting duty. When we come in heaven we
must still be doing the will of God, let us begin it then on earth. Some duties
cease when we die, as prayer, repentance, mortification, but this duty still
continues for ever, Ps. 19.9. Pray we that God would grant us his grace, not as
to the wicked, to do his will in being unwilling to do it, but as to his
children, at leastwise to be willing to do it even in not doing it. Du Ples. c.
13. of Christ. Relig. 9 This is the way to be stablished in conscience. What is
the will of God when we inure our selves to do it? John 7.17. whereas others
are wavering and uncertain. 10 It has been the commendation o^ Christians,
that they have done the will of God. It was Enech's praise that he pleased God,
Heb. 11.5. It was the praise of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6. They walked in
all the Commandments of God blameless; for this Epaphras prayed, that the
Celossians might stand perfect in all the will of God, Col. 4.12. 11 To do Gods
will is the way to have our own will; bring your will to Gods, and so you shall
always have your will. Because wicked men will not bring their wills to Gods
they shall eternally suffer that they would not.
In earth as it is in heaven] Though it may be interpreted of the course of the
Stars that in a continual motion obey God, yet Christ means it of the Angels,
Psalm. 10 ^ 22, 21, Praise him all his hosts, ye ministers of his that do his
pleasure. We need not be ashamed of doing that our betters will do. Herein we
desire that we may serve the Lord on earth, as the Angels in heaven serve him;
they do his will 1 Universally. 2 Out of love. 3 With cheerfulness. 4
Perpetually, so ought we; this is to converse in heaven, or to dwell in heaven,
to be like the Angels of heaven. 5 Speedily, as in the Angels sent to destroy
Sennacheribs host, and the seventy thousand in David's time, and young and old
in Ezekiels time, cap. 9.4.

6 Faithfully. The Angel tells the Lord, I have done as thou have commanded me,
Ezekiel. 11 9. We should endeavor to be ^^ke them, not that we can attain such
perfection, but that we should follow after without setting any measures or
sc^^^^ings to our holiness.

In order to which patterns of holiness, let us not only look upon the Angels
who are ready to serve us, because the Lord bi^s them, for they all are
ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. but we must use all means whereby we may more
and more come to such an end, which are the leading of the Spirit, Romans 8.14.
and the guidance of the word, and frequent prayer, 2 Cor. 10.5.

From all this four inferences, 1 That not only Angels but men ought to take
notice of Gods will; God ought not only to rule in heaven but in the world. 2
To mourn under our natural rebellion, and long that God would heal it, Romans
7.15, 16, 17, 23. 3 Pray to know the whole will of God, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me
to do thy will, O God. And that God would incline your hearts to do it. It was
Solomon's prayer, 1 Kin. 8.58. that God would incline the peoples hearts to walk
in all his ways. 4 That it is not enough to do Gods will, but we must do it like
Angels, we must do Gods will by being humble in conversation, steadfast in
faith, gracious in words, righteous in deeds, exemplary in manners, living
peaceably with brethren, enduring the wrongs of enemies, and not retaliating.
To love God soveraignly and dearly, to awe him reverently, yea we must do it as
Angels, with an as of simitude, though not of proportion.


Give us this day our daily bread] Now we come to ask things which concerns our
selves. This Petition shows, 1 That we must have a continual dependence upon
the providence of God for earthly things, Psalm. 145.15, 16 The eyes of all wait
on thee, and thou give them their meat in due season, as the Israelites had
for Manna. 2 That we are only to pray for necessities, not for superfluities;
to pray for silk garments, gold rings and jewels, etc. we have no command, but
only for bread and clothes, 1 Timothy 6.8. Having food and raiment be content,
but if God make our cup run over, we owe more to God and his people the more we
receive. Prove. 8.9. Feed me with food convenient for me. Therefore some
Translations render (...), agreeing to our substance, or the bread of want.
Jacob desired food to eat, and raiment to put on, Genesis 28.20. 3 Christ would
caution us herein against a carking solicitude for to morrow, Matthew. 6. ult.
yet may there be a lawful care; (...) comes of (...), which signifies the
following day, day after, and under day is not meant only one day, but after
the manner of the Hebrews, the time of our life to come, so that Christ would
have us to commit the care to God, that so long as life lasts he would give us
nourishment. Christ herein would remove from us, as distrustfulness, as not to
doubt of Gods care of us, so greediness, whereby some pretend the expectation
of old age for their covetousness. So that Christ means, give me sufficient for
all my life following, if thou please not to give yearly, give monthly, if
not monthly, give daily bread, and what ever thou give more, comes in over
and above. 4 Under bread is meant health, peace, and all temporal blessings,
Genesis 3.19. 2 Kings 6.22. Job 42.11. houses, strength. 5 It shows all our pains
and care is nothing, unless God give a blessing, Psalm. 127.1, 2. 6 To bridle
our immoderate covetousness. 7 That we should not take that which is another,
but that which is our own, either left us, or got with honest labor, Psalm.
128.2. 8 To acknowledge our own beggary and want, Psalm. 104.27, 28. Acts 14.17.
and that what we have becomes ours by Gods gift, Jam. 1.17. 9 To put us in
mind of our frailty, in that every day we are a new to beg for bread.


Obj. But I am rich, what need I ask daily bread?

A. The greatest heaps you have without Gods blessing will not profit. Deuteronomy.
8.3. Man does not live by bread only, but by Gods word. In vain put we meat
into our stomachs, unless God give meat power to nourish, and the stomach
ability to digest.

10 In that we are only to pray for bread, we are to learn contentment in any
little that the Lord shall send, Phil. 4.12.13. and not greedily to pray for
wanton abundance. Only know that this bread is to be measured according to
men's several callings and charges, as if a man be a public person, a
Magistrate or Preacher, a beggarly maintenance makes their callings
contemptible, so where there is great charge of children there is need of more,
and the reason why abundance is not to be prayed for, is, because in abundance
we are apt to forget God, Deuteronomy. 8.12, 13, 14. See it in Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
32.26. David, 2 Samuel 24.1. 1 Timothy 6.17. In respect of our proneness to abuse
plenty, a competency is the safest estate to pass through this world.

11 It denotes to us that we must pray every day for the good things we want,
if God give us good things this day for to morrow, let us to morrow pray for
supplies for the 3d. day.

Give us] He says not me, but us, 1 To show that we must not only regard our
selves in our estates, but be also mindful of others; many covetous persons
instead of praying for a supply of their brethrens wants, cry, give me all,
give them none.

2 We are hereby taught so to use our portion, that others may have part with
us. God makes rich men Stewards for the poor. Eat the fat, and drink the sweet,
and send portions for them for whom nothing is prepared, Neh. 8.10. Stewards
receive sometimes the wages of the whole family, not to keep them, but to
distribute them. Job 31.17. Job did not eat his morsels himself alone, but the
fatherless did eat with him also, v. 19.

And forgive us our trespasses] By trespasses Christ means sins, Luke 11.4.
Because sin is the greatest debt. Hence no man is without sin, contrary to the
Pelagians, who said righteous men pray for pardon of sin for others, not for
themselves, or if they said so, for themselves, it was not in truth but out of
humility, and modesty; but to say that which is false is not humility, but
Hypocrisy. Now we see there is none so holy but needs pardon, and pardon of
sins from Christ's advocation and intercession is a continued act in God. This
word [Forgive] is a metaphor taken from creditours, who upon occasion forgive
debts.

And though God in the new covenant forgive our sins, Heb. 8.12. and has
promised so to do, yet would he not deliver us from eternal death, but upon
these terms, that whiles we are in this life we should humbly acknowledge
before God, our sins past, and persevere in asking pardon for them. The Lords
prayer teaches us that we are daily sinners, and always sin, and that our
whole life is a repentance, Luth. Tom. 1.301.

Under sins Christ means original and actual sins.

Obj. But these are all forgiven to Gods children, Romans 8.1. There Is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ. Why then should they ask pardon?

Answ. Because there is not a justified person that sins not, Psalm.
130.3.143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant. David committed
Adultery and Murder after justification, and Peter denied Christ.

This petition is put next to the former of begging daily bread, that after we
have got a natural life, we should seek for a life of justification, when God
pardons our sins we are thus alive; as malefactors that have obtained pardon
from the Prince are then said to be alive. Besides we could not beg pardon of
sin, if God should not continue our natural life, and this petition is joined
to the former, to show that all the bread or outward things in the world are no
comfort to us, if together with them we obtain not pardon of sin.

In desiring forgivenness we see, 1 There must be an acknowledgement of our
sins, Psalm. 32.5. I said, I will confess my transgressions and thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin; David first confessed, saying I have sinned, and then
Nathan says, the Lord has put away thy sin, 2 Samuel 12, 13. He that confesses
and forsakes shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.8. If we confess our sins
he is faithful and just to forgive us them. The sick sinner, Job. 33, 26.
confesses, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited
me not, then follows, ver. 58. he will deliver his soul from going into the
pit. And this according to Christ's preaching, Mar. 1.15, Repent ye and believe
the Gospel. To preach remission of sins to faith without repentance is a
dangerous doctrine, seeing both of them are together in the soul, Zach. 12.10.
They shall look on the Lord as crucified, and mourn, and in that day when there
is such mourning (which always includes confession of sins in it) there is a
Fountain set open for sin and for uncleanness.

1 As to obtain pardon there must be the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.22. without
shedding of blood there is no remission, and with the blood of Christ the whole
Church is purchased, Act. 20.28. Rev. 1.5. Rev. 7.14. so must this blood be
applied to every individual soul that has the power of believing; this blood
washes white, yet must there be washing before whiteness. Pardon must be had,
not only from bloodshed, but from blood sprinkled. See Esa. 52.15. Ezekiel.
36.25. Heb. 9.13, 14.10.22.12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2. Yet as the Spirit must besprinkle
thee, and apply this blood to thee, so must thou by faith wash and besprinkle
thy self, Rev. 7.14. They have washed their robes and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb. God has fore-appointed Christ to be the propitiation for
our sins, yet is it not before believing, but through faith in his blood. Romans
3.25. Faith is the hand of the soul, and the soul by faith puts her hand into
Christ's blood, and so washes off its guilt, Zach. 13.1. Christ's blood is
resembled to a Fountain opened for sin and uncleanness, but its not standing by
the Fountain, but the washing with the water thereof that will cleanse, hence
Luke 7.49, 50. Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.

2 To obtain pardon there must be repentance. As there is a faith unto life,
Joh. 6.47. A justification to life, Romans 5.18. So is there repentance unto
life, Act. 11.18. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. With Gods sprinkling clean water, there is a
taking away the stony heart: where God gives repentance he also gives
forgiveness, and appoints his Appostles to preach repentance and remission of
sins together, Luke 24.47. Some doctrines of these latter times suppose a
forgiveness, not only before repentance, but also before the sinner was born,
nay some go as high as to say from eternity, if it was so, to what purpose was
it then for Christ to preach repentance and remission together?

Reasons why pardon follows upon repentance.
1 Faith that looks on Christ's blood shed for us, looks at the same time on its
own sin, as the cause of its shedding, and every believing sinner is at the
same time a repenting sinner, Zach. 12.10. Thou say thou have faith that
apprehends pardon and applies Christ, if thou do this rightly, thy faith is
a repenting and a mourning faith, Zach. 13.1. There Is a Fountain set open in
that day, in what day? not simply in that day when they see him, but when they
see him and mourn for him.

2 God walks by his own rule: now Christ bids that upon a brothers repentance
we should forgive him, Luke 17.3, 4. So upon our repentance God will forgive, 2 Samuel 12.12, 13.

3 From the rule of justice, it stands not with justice for God to forgive sin
to a man that goes on in a purpose of sin, therefore at the time God gives
pardon he gives repentance.

4 The want of assurance of pardon does greatly disquiet, as well as the want
of pardon. Suppose a person upon believing have his pardon, yet is it but dim,
he cannot lightly be assured of it until he do repent, upon repentance God
gives the assurance, and seals it to the conscience, Zach. 2.3, 4. As the Lord
takes away the filthy garments from Joshua, so to Joshua's conscience hespeaks,
I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee. Preachers must take heed, they
do not preach remission to faith without repentance.

The sum of the Gospel is, that whereas we are all dead men in Adam,
remission of sins is tendered to all that do believe and repent, this is
signified in baptism and the supper, which are signs on Gods part to confirm
unto us his faithfulness in remission, and signs on our parts to bind us to
believe and repent.

We see in this petition, 1 who forgives, even God. He to whom a debt is own
can only forgive it, Esa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy sins
for my own Name sake. Others may remit the wrongs that concern themselves, or
they may remit declaratively, they are to preach deliverance to captives, Esa.
61.1. Luke 4.18. The state of a man unpardoned is like the state of a man
imprisoned, as the words, shutting and opening, and keys, Matthew. 16.19.
import: now when persons repent, preachers say to souls, as Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.7. The Lord has put away thy sin. The Lord has done it, I only
declare it. Christ spoke to his Apostles, whose sins ye remit, they are
remitted, but first he said, receive ye the Holy Ghost, for it is the Holy
Ghost puts away sin, and not you.

God only forgives authoritatively. Christ gave the power of teaching to his
Disciples, but kept the power of forgiveness to himself. Now for the ground
upon which pardon of sin is founded, it is the mere mercy of God, its for his
own Name sake, the graces that are in us are not causes that God forgives fin
to us, but evidences thereof, for the only groundis mercy, which is seen, 1 In
that he has found out and appointed a way to satisfy his justice, even
Christ's satisfaction, Romans 3.25. Esa. 53.6. 2 In his acceptance of that
satisfaction, and not requiring the debt of us, Esa. 53.11. 3 In giving us to
Christ, Joh. 6.37. 4 In giving us grace to receive Christ so tendered in the
Gospel, Joh. 1.12. 5 In that there was nothing in us to move him thereto but
our misery, so that as tender hearts show mercy to persons in misery, so did
God. What was there in Paul when he was going to Damascus to persecute?


For Application, 1 beg forgiveness of sins of God. Reprobate men may have
other mercies, this only belongs to the elect, Esa. 33.24. The people that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. Though Saints have prayed for
removing judgments, yet have they specially prayed for pardon of sin, 2 Samuel
24.10.

Grounds of begging pardon.
1 From the painfulness and anguish that is in unpardoned sin lying on the
conscience, compared to a thorn in the flesh, Ps. 38.3. There Is no rest in my
bones because of my sin: to a heavy burden, Psa. 38.4. To the breaking of the
bones, Psalm. 51.12. To a Serpents sting, 1 Cor. 15.56. Yea to the stinging of
an adder. Prove. 23.32. To a scorching heat. Psalm. 32.4.5. Freedom from wrath,
law, sin, death, are easily spoken, but to feel the fruit of it in agony of
conscience, and to apply it to a man's self, is very hard. Luth. Tom. 4. Fol.
149.

2 The comfort and content that is in the soul when sin is pardoned; it is as
if you should take off a talent of lead or a heavy weight from the soul, Matthew.
9.2. Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. Look upon a poor debtor that
ought a thousand pound and was ready to be cast in prison for it, the creditor
shall not only forgive the debt but cancel the bond: how does this cheer the
debtor? so did Christ for us. Col. 2.14. Blotting out the hand writing of
ordinances that was against us, he took it out of of the way and nailed it to
his Cross, so that it can never be pleaded against us. Hence when God would
comfort Mary Magdalen weeping, he does it from this ground, because her sins
were forgiven, Luke 7.38, 9, 49, 50. Matthew. 9.2. To the Palsy man Christ
says, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. Esa. 40. Comfort ye my
people, but how? tell them their iniquity is pardoned.

Object. But drooping souls cry out; Hence I doubt my sins are not pardoned,
because I have so little peace in my soul.

Answ. 1 Though comfort arise from pardon, yet must God make us to hear the
voice of it, Psalm 51.8. Make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness. God
makes the voice to speak higher or lower as he thinks good.

2 The more even the soul walks without back sliding, the more does the Lord
speak peace to the soul, Psalm 85.8. The Lord will speak peace unto his Saints,
but let them not turn again to folly; as if he should say, If they relapse or
turn to folly, their peace will be interrupted.

3 Observe whether thy conscience speak truly or scrupulously; If thy trouble
come from thy conscience witnessing that thou live in sin, as Cain's
conscience did, Genesis 4.13. this must needs destroy all comfort and peace, but
if thy conscience speaks only scrupulously in time of temptation, as David's
conscience did, Psalm 31.22. I said, I am cast out of thy sight. Be not
discouraged when thou know the constant tenor of thy life to be holy.

4 According to our care of keeping our Evidences clear; so peace and comfort
is wont to abound in the soul, and fears and doubts are wont to vanish, Isai
48.18. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy peace been
as a River, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. By Righteousness the
Prophet seems to mean the manifestation of righteousness, Isai 32.17. The work
of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness shall be
quietness and assurance for ever.

5 Pour out thy soul to the Lord in melting Prayers, for in such God in wont to
come in with comfort, as in Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.18. David, Psalm. 6.8.

6 Consider what it is that turns the conscience out of its peace, and removes
it, as sometimes thou slightest Prayer. It may be some injustice is upon thy
conscience, committed by thee in thy natural state, for which thou have not
made restitution, confidence in thine own righteousness, conscience calls upon
thee to do some duty, and thou will not for fear or shame do it: to find out
what that is and to remove it is the way to rejoicing, Gal. 6.4. but if upon
search thou can find nothing, then chide thy heart for thy causless fears
and doubts, and say, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me? Psalm. 42.11.

3 The third ground to be earnest in begging pardon of sin, is taken from the
evils of sin, which are, 1 General, as, 1 Filthiness of it, it is compared to
Excrements, as to a Dogs vomit, 2 Peter 2.22. to a menstruous cloth, to
loathsomness, Prove. 13.5. 2 Guiltiness; this twinges the soul like so many
Furies, whiles it binds over the soul to punishment. Guilt is compared to a
Dart that strikes through the Liver, Prove. 7.23. Guilt pursued Adam, Genesis 3.10.
it is like bodily sickness which will never let a man be in ease, till it be
expelled, Isai 48.22. 3 The wearisomness of it, Jer. 9.5. Hab. 2.13. what a
weariness to be under the slavery of covetousness, pride, uncleanness, and
sometimes to have contrary lusts domineering in us that the soul knows not
which to satisfy? 4 The punishment of it both here and hereafter. Here it
brings sickness, poverty, disgrace, crosses in wives, children and servants,
now when God forgives he forgives all. Papists mistake to think that God
forgives the sin, but the sinner must suffer the punishment, which is changed
by Christ only from an eternal to a temporary punishment, which must be
suffered here or in Purgatory: but we see the contrary, the King frankly
forgave all that the Debtour ought, even though they were ten thousand Talents,
Matthew. 18.32. that is, both sin and punishment. And though God chasten his
People for sins after Pardon, as David's child born in Adultery died, 2 Samuel
12.13. also God forgave the Peoples sins, but took vengeance of their
Iaventions, Psalm 99.8. yet these punishments were not satisfactions to divine
justice, but cautions to themselves and others, that whiles they smarted so
bitterly for their sins, they might not dare to commit them, 1 Cor. 11.32. 5
The particular evils in it, as, 1 It Is the greatest evil, because if not
pardoned it deprives of the greatest good, even of God himself, Isai 59.1.


2 Sin is more filthy than the Devil, because sin made the Devil to be what he
is, being formerly a glorious Angel.

3 Sin is the cause of all inward and outward troubles.

4 Sin turns away the good things that we have, and withholds the good things
that we want. See Jer. 5.25.

5 Sin is that that takes away all the content of the soul, and fills the Soul
with discontent and amazement.

6 The bitterness of sin after commission is infinitely more than the sweetness
thereof in and at the commission of it, Job 1.20.12.13.

7 The shame of sin, sinners are ashamed, as a thief is ashamed, Jer. 2.26. See
it in Adam, Genesis 3.10.

4 Ground, pardon of sin eats out the slavish fear of death. That death which
is as the king of terrors to ungodly men, Job 18.14. becomes less and less to
pardoned persons, Heb. 2.15 Luke 2.29. Psalm 91.5, 6. Not afraid of the arrow
that flies by day or night. Death to Saints is like Sampson's Lion out of which
came sweetness. No preparative for death can be like this, hence Job 7.21. Job
says, Why do thou not pardon mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the
dust. Thou would willingly have nothing trouble thee when thou come to die,
O get then thy sin pardoned and nothing then need trouble thee.

5 Ground, the suddenness and inexpectancy of death, by it men are taken as
birds in a snare and fishes in a net, Eccles 4.12. Now what a fearful thing is
it then for to die in thy sins? John 8.21, 24. It Is a fearful thing to die in
a Goal, yet a man so dying may go to Heaven, but if he die in his sins the soul
goes to Hell.

6 Till thou gets thy sins pardoned thou art in a cursed and woeful condition,
Gal. 3.10. Consider how dreadful sin unpardoned was in the conscience of Judas
and Achitophel, so will it be in thy conscience when thou come to die, if it
be not pardoned. I say, if conscience be enlightened or awakened, for its
possible for some men from a stupid and ignorant estate, though their sins be
unpardoned, to dye in peace, because they know not their danger, Psalm. 73.4.
there are no bands in their death. Ignorance of a danger, and a deliverance
from a danger breed a like confidence but not a like safety. A man would wonder
how any soul that is awakened can dye in his right wits, when he knows nothing
of the pardon of his sin, seeing the day that he dies he goes to Hell into
utter darkness, Matthew. 22.13.

7 Pardon of sin sweetens all other things, 1 Comforts to us. I have wife and
children, and credit, etc. but what are these without a reconciled God? what
comfort has a condemned man in friends, relations, lands, dwellings, till he
get a pardon? Psalm. 32.1.

2 It sweetens crosses. If a man be to dye at a stake, as Steven was, and can
behold Christ by faith as his, what cares he for the stones thrown at him? so
the thief on the Cross, Paul and Silas when they were in the stocks, praised
God when their sins were pardoned, Act. 16.25.

8 If we get not pardon of sin now, we shall never get it. There Is no
forgiveness in another world. There Is no place of repentance, there is no effect
of satisfaction then, as Cyprian says: for that place, Matthew. 12.32. Cont.
Demetrium.
Whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, nor in that which is to come, therefore some sins are
forgiven in the world to come.

Answ. Mark expounds it that such a one has never forgiveness. Mark. 3.29.
Matthew, to aggravate the sin against the holy Ghost, uses a Periphrasis, as if
we should speak of a sick man, he can sleep neither day nor night, that is
never, or as if we should say the grace of faith can never be bought with money,
neither in this life nor in the life to come, that is never.

For that place, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. Being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit, by which also he went to preach to the spirits in
prison, which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah: therefore, say some, the Gospel was preached in
the world to come for forgiveness, there is a misunderstanding of three things
in this text. 1 the Word (...), by which they understood the soul of Christ, as
by flesh his body; the body they held to dye, but the soul to remain alive, in
which soul, say they, he went and preached, but by the flesh of Christ is meant
his humanity, according to this he is said to be put to death, but by his
spirit is meant his divinity, Joh. 4.23. By the power of this spirit and
divinity he was raised from the dead, 2 Cor. 13.4.

A second word misunderstood is this [to the Spirits in prison] Where the Word
[are] is to be understood, or the word being they understood [were or had been]
which words are referred to those men that in the time of Noah were
unbelievers, and were then in the world, now in Peter's time their souls were in
Hell, for by the prison is meant Hell, Rev. 20.7. There they are kept to the
day of judgment.

The third word which almost deceived all, was the word [Going or went] which
they understood of his going out of the world into Hell, when it was meant of
his going out of Heaven into the world, and speaking then by his spirit in the
ministry of Noah to these rebels that were now in Hell in Saint Peter's time.
Now that no sins are forgiven in the world to come, appears,

1 Because in this life only are tenders of grace 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold now is
the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. When the master of the house
has shut to the door of this life, and ye stand without and knock, and say,
Lord, Lord, Christ will say, Depart from me, I know you not, Luke 13.25. The
gate of grace was wholly shut unto the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.11.

2 The time betwixt this and death is the time for repentance, patience, and
constancy, and after death is the present receiving of the crown. Rev. 2.10. Be
thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of life. The godly
lamented Stephen at his death, but never prayed for him, Col. 1.14.

9 The grievousness of that prison whereinto unpardoned sins will cast us. 1 We
are afraid to be cast into a stinking prison for debt, yet may there be hope
one way or other to get out, by satisfaction, or compounding, or the creditours
pity, but none of these can befall thee if thou dyest in thy sins, and be cast
into that prison: thou can not come out by satisfaction, because that is of
force only by Christ his satisfaction in this life, Act. 13.39, 40. Col. 1.13,
14. nor yet by composition, for thou must lie there till thou have paid the
utmost farthing, Luke 12.59. nor by the creditours mercy, because after death
the wicked shall have judgment without mercy, Jam. 2.13.

2 There will be no running away from this prison, because the prisoner is
bound hand and foot, Matthew. 22.13. Bind him hand and foot and take him away and
cast him into outer darkness. Kept in everlasting chains, Jude 6. Psalm. 49.
Like sheep that are driven into the fold, so are they driven into Hell, ver.
14. Luke 16.26.

3 In other prisons we have friends come to visit us, but here not only
friends, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
but also all other comforts shall be removed, yea the damned shall be deprived
of the presence of God. If the deprivement of the sight of God by faith be so
grievous, how grievous will the deprivation of the beatifical sight in glory be?

4 The perpetuity of it: to be condemned to perpetual imprisonment and that in
some loathsome dungeon, is terrible, yet death may set us free thence, but from
the prison of Hell there is no getting out. The worm never dies, nor the fire
never goes out. Mark. 9.44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Its five times set down [the fire
that never shall be quenched] which are not idle repetitions, but to ascertain
us of the perpetuity of the torment. If the damned had hope after some millions
of years to have their torments ended, it were something, but the burnings are
everlasting, Isai 33.14. Isai 30.33. the Worm everlasting, Isai 66.24. the Fire
everlasting, Revel. 20.10. the contempt everlasting, Dan. 12.2.

Object. But by what right will God punish temporary faults with eternal
punishments?

Answ. 1. Sin is committed against an infinite Majesty, and so deserves
infinite punishment; now because man is a finite creature, and cannot suffer
for it at once, therefore he must suffer for it successively to all eternity.

2 Because in unpardoned sinners so dying there is a wicked habit, that should
they live ever they would sin ever, the sinner sins in his eternity and God
punishes in his eternity.

3 Punishment is to be measured, not by length of time the offense is in
committing, but by the greatness of the offense: Murder and Adultery are soon
committed, shall the Offender be no longer punished than the offense is
committing?

4 As we are to look upon the perpetuity of this Prison, so upon the darkness
of it. Jude 6. the rebellious Angels are reserved under darkness, chains of
darkness, 2 Peter 2.4. to the wicked the mist of darkness is reserved for ever,
2 Peter 2.17. Light is most comfortable, but in Hell there is fire without
light, (...) quasi (...), because the damned see not.

10 Together with pardon come all other blessings, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. I will
sprinkle clean water, what more? the cleansing from filthiness, a new heart,
the putting of the Spirit within us, writing the Law in the heart. Power over
sin follows pardon of sin, Romans 7.15.8.2. yea all good things here, Romans 8.32.
and glorification in Heaven hereafter; Whom he justified, them he gloried, Romans
8.30.

11 True happiness consists in forgiveness of sins: the World counts them happy
that have great Estates, that have the Princes ear, but the Lord tells us those
are happy that have sins pardoned, Psalm 32.1. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. I am covered under the
shadow of the wings of Christ, and live secure under the most broad heaven of
Remission of sins which is spread over me, Luth. Tom. 4.76.

Now that happiness consists in forgiveness appears thus,

1 Sin exposes us to all misery, both in this life and hereafter, Romans 3.23.
now it is a happiness to be freed from this misery.

2 The blessing cannot come upon us, till the curse be removed, Gal. 3.1^, 14.
now we are not freed from the curse till our sins be forgiven.

3 Where God forgives there is none can condemn, Romans 8.1.33.34. now it must
needs be a state of happiness to be free from condemnation.

4 Without forgiveness there is no reconciliation, now we can never be happy
till God and the soul be reconciled. That reconciliation goes with forgiveness,
appears, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them.

2 Use. Trial whether God has forgiven thy sins.

1 There will be then a writing of Gods Law in thy heart, because the branches
of the new covenant are inseparable, Heb. 8.10, 12. where God remembers sin no
more he so writes Gods Law in the heart.

2 The sealing of the Spirit manifested to Gods people in Prayer, Ephesians. 1.13.
After ye believed ye were sealed. Every comfortable answer in Prayer does help
to clear up pardon to the soul.

3 A thankful frame of heart in the receipt of this privilege, Psalm 103.1, 2.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, why? who forgiveth all thy sins. Hezekiah praises
God for this mercy, Isai 38.17. Behold for peace I had great bitterness, but
thou in love to my soul have delivered me from the pit of corruption, for thou
have cast all my sins behind thy back. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15.

4 With pardon there is a subdument of the reigning power of sin, Mic. 7.18, 19
Romans 6.14. Romans 8.1, 2. Jebusites will dwell in the Land whether you will or
no, only they are conquered and become tributary, Josh. 17.11, 12.

5 Pardon of sin is accompanied with sanctifying grace: as the Lord took
Joshua's filthy garments off, so he gave him change of raiment, Josh. 3.3, 4.
Ezekiel. 16.9, 10, 11. There Is ever a love goes to the Lord. Luke 7.47. speaking
of Mary Magdalen he says, Her sins which are many are forgiven her, for she
loved much. Her love was not the cause of remission, but a declarative sign
thereof: the Pharisee finds fault with Christ for suffering a sinner to be so
familiar with him, Christ answers, She is no sinner, he proves it, because her
sins were forgiven her, but how proves he that? why, she loved much.

And as it is accompanied with the grace of love, so with the grace of fear,
Jer. 32.40.

6 Repentance and Forgiveness goes together, Luke 24.47. Acts 2.38, 39. Acts
3.19. Acts 5.31. Therefore whatsoever evidences Repentance evidences
Forgiveness.

7 Pardon of sin is accompanied with sovereign love to God, 1 John 4.19. We
love him because he first loved us, and for the degree see Matthew. 10.37. so
Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.38. compared with v. 47. Love is in true Faith as the
Fruit in the Root.

8 Peace of Conscience is an evidence, Romans 5.1. being justified by Faith we
have Peace with God. I mean such a Peace as arises after trouble or deliverance
from danger, and frees the soul from slavish fears.

9 A desire of more and more assurance. This is an Argument that we have tasted
the sweetness of Pardon in some measure. There are three things proper to
Saints, they think they can never be humbled enough, nor thankful enough, nor
assured of Gods love enough. Hence David, after Nathan had come to him and
assured him of pardon, prays, Psalm 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice, and not being satisfied herewith
v. 12. he prays, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. Only if the
evidence of the Spirit show not it self always in the same measure, we must
have recourse to those Evidences God gives sometimes, knowing that these
Evidences which come from the Spirit, as a cause, and the fruits of
sanctification, as effects, are occasional refreshings for the soul in its way
to Heaven, but not daily food for the soul to feed upon. Feasting is not for
every day, except the Feast of a good Conscience, that the Conscience witnesses
we live not in the omission of a known duty, nor in the commission of a known
iniquity.

10 We know it by these three witnesses, the blood of Christ pacifying the
conscience. 1 John 5.9. the witness of water altering our natures, and the
testimony of the Spirit saying, I am thy salvation, thy sins are pardoned: such
testimonies ought to be carefully kept, even as a malefactor carefully keeps a
pardon under seal, which he means to produce for his life at the next assizes:
between the Lord and a true believer, there is as it were a mutual contract,
Faith sets to its feat that God is true in that he promises, Joh. 3.3^. And
God by his Spirit seals unto the believer that he shall be undoubtedly brought
to the salvation he has bel^^^ed.

11 When thou can produce some promise that does discharge (...), which the
Spirit ^^th made over to thy soul, as that Esa. 43.25. Joh. 3.16. Its not bare
remembering promises is so comfortable, as those promises made over to thy soul,
wherein thy soul rests and received comfort. If a man have paid his debts, he
is able to produce his acquittance that they are paid. When we have such
promises so made over to produce, they are as it were acquittances under hand
and seal. Suppose that without the in-come of the Spirit in the promise thou
should believe (which I doubt of) yet through the in-come of the Spirit in
the promise thou may know that thou do believe. As the pipes of a conduit
convey water hither and thither, so does the Spirit in the promise believed
convey grace and comfort into our hearts. Yet some think that when God gives a
particular promise, it is not to measure our condition by, but to uphold the
soul in the condition of desertion or temptation. Hence though Hezekiah had a
particular word for deliverance, the three children had not.

3 Use, to believe the forgiveness of sins, and labor after assurance thereof.
Wherefore came Christ into the world? Wherefore has he carried our nature into
heaven and there appears for us? Why has he given us his oath? Heb. 6. Why
has he given us the signs of the Covenant? Why have we so many commands to
believing and so many reproofs of unbelief? Why have we, besides the sealing of
the promise with the blood of the testator, the sealing with the spirit of
promise, as a pledge, a pawn and an earnest, but only to urge us to believe?
Though we will not believe a man's word or bond, yet upon sufficient pawn we
will deal, though the man be but weak, and shall we not trust God for that for
which we have so good a pawn as his Spirit?

And in order to this thy assurance of thy pardon get more and more earnest of
the Spirit. Men that deal in great matters love to get as good earnest as they
can; the fuller earnest the more security. Again, people keep and esteem an
earnest more then other money, because it has reference to further matters
which other money has not: So should we esteem the Spirits testimony as sealing
us up unto the future inheritance in heaven, at which day it shall cease to be
any further an earnest, as earnest money ceases to be earnest when the whole sum
is paid. Mean time till we come into that glory, the Spirit though it do not
always confirm us to present sense, yet does it confirm us to present
experience from the former workings thereof which we have felt, as the former
movings of the infant in the mothers womb confirm the mother that she is with
child, though at the present she feel no moving at all thereof.

Obj. But the heart is deceitful.

Ans. The Spirit in us is too holy to deceive, and too wise to be deceived.
When there is an object to be seen, and an eye to see, and light to discover
the object to the eye, sight must needs follow, so in a believer there is grace
to be seen, and an eye of faith to see it, so is there a light of the Spirit
discovering that grace to the soul.

Obj. But some, as Papists and others, think there can be no assurance of
remission of sins and of salvation.

A. That we may be assured herein, appears,

1 The Word bids us make our pardon and salvation sure: 2 Pet. 1.10. Heb.
6.11.10.22. which were in vain if such a thing could not be.

2 The Saints have been assured hereof. Job says, c. 19.25. I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that I shall stand up with him on the earth at the last
day, and I shall see him, not with other, but with the same eyes. 2 Cor. 5.1.
Paul says, We know if our earthly tabernacle were dissolved we have a building
of God. Abraham, Romans 4.21, 22. 1 John 3.14 1 John 5.14, 15. We know we are
translated from death to life; we know we have the petitions desired. 1 Pet.
5.1. I am also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed. Peter speaks of
himself in this life.

Obj. But what these Saints had they had by special revelation.

Answ. No. For the Saints Peter writes to, had obtained like precious faith
with himself, 2 Pet. 1.1. And Paul says, I am persuaded that neither life, nor
death, -- shall be able to separate us from the love of God. See he names other
believers as well as himself. Romans 8.38, 39.

2 All the Saints have the same Spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. though not in the
same degree. Timothy says, I know whom I have trusted, 2 Timothy 1.12. See there
is a certainty in knowledge. The Hebrews knew in themselves they had a better
and enduring substance, which was the ground they not only patiently suffered,
but also joyfully endured the spoiling of their temporal substance, Heb. 10.34.
They did not only conjecture it, but knew it in themselves. Peter when Christ
asked him whether or no he loved him, he did not answer, Lord thou know we
cannot tell truly, whether or no we love thee, but appeals unto Christ saying,
Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee, John 21.15, 16, 17.
Peter mentions it three times, showing the undoubted assurance he had thereof.

3 The Scripture bids us prove our selves as concerning our estate to God ward,
Gal. 6.4. Let a man prove himself that he may have rejoicing in himself alone.
1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself and so let him eat. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether you be in the faith. This bidding us search our
conscience according to the rule, and the declaring that rejoicing follows
thereon, does denote unto us that assurance of remission of sins may be had. It
is ridiculous to think that the Spirit should bid us search for that which
cannot be found.

4 That certainty and assurance of salvation may be had, appears from the many
signs and evidences the word of God sets down of our being in Christ, of our
having the Spirit of our regeneration, uprightness, confidence: to say that he
that has these graces is not sure whether he have them or no is a great
mistake, for do not I know that I love the Lord better then any thing, that I
love my brother, yea mine enemies, that I combat against all sin, hunger after
righteousness, that my heart closes with every command of God, that I hate
all sin? do not I know that I have comfottable answers from God in prayer, when
I have them? Comfortless is the assurance of hope arising from humane
conjecture allowed by Papists, and differs from Theological or divine hope
arising from faith.

5 The doctrine of doubting of remission of sins, or conjectural hoping for
salvation is a comfortless doctrine, for,

1 It kills our joy and thankfulness; for how can I joy in, or be thankful to
him, who, for ought I know, may damn me another day; and how can I joy in a
thing which I know not whether I shall have or no?

2 This doctrine of doubting stuns and hinders our proceeding in a godly
course. How can a man have a heart to go on, when he cannot tell whether all he
does will come to any thing yea or no? The Scripture ordinarily exhorts to duty
from the knowledge we have that our labor will not be in vain, Gal. 6.9. Be
not weary in well doing, knowing in due season you shall reap, if ye faint not,
1 Cor. 15.28. Be ye always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you
know your labor will not be in vain.

3 The doctrine of doubting must needs fill the conscience with much anguish
and anxiety. A man that is condemned and has no way to escape but by a pardon
must needs be in perplexity of mind till he know of his pardon, so must the
soul needs be, that sees its own lost estate, and knows nothing of the pardon
of his sins.

6 From experimental feeling; when I trust to a person promising to give or
lend me any thing, I know I trust to him and rest on him, for what he has
promised, and shall I by faith rest on Christ and know no such thing?

7 From the testimony of the renewed conscience, for our spirits regenerate
witness our good estate, Romans 8.16. Yea even this is witnessed, even in weak
Christians, though with some fear of the contrary, the poor man cried out,
Mark. 9.2^. Lord I believe, help my unbelief. How could we say we believe, if
we could not know it? we cannot speak that truly whereof we can have no
certainty.

8 From the seal of the Spirit witnessing with our spirits, Take heed of
expecting such inward witness of the spirit as some expect. viz. a discovering
of your adoption without first discovering the signs of it, as if by an inward
voice he should say thy sins are pardoned.
Romans 8.16. 2 Cor 1.22. Ephesians. 4.30. Its not enough only to have a general
foundation laid, that God and Christ bare good will to all believers, but the
Spirit comes and says, Christ has a special good will to me, and stirrs up in
me a liking to him again, and a willingness to take him with the parting with
every lust and enjoyment. And to this there follows, after we have gone on in
believing a while, a further sense of the Spirit, which is sometimes
interrupted after sealing thereof, (through remaining unbelief and practical
weakness) so far as to question our condition, but in some this seal of the
Spirit is so clear and strong that the soul questioneth not its estate in grace
ever after: conscience of unkindness to such a friend should much trouble us.

Now we may know this voice of the Spirit from delusion because it is given to
us when the soul is humbled and melts in prayer, or forsakes some dear
enjoyment for God, and it leaves behind it a holy self abasement in respect of
our unthankfulness and our ill requiting the Lord, and a lifting up the head to
think upon death and judgment as days of redemption.

We see then that besides the acts of faith, which is to take Christ and to
cast our selves upon the mercy of God, there is the fruit of faith to be
assured hereof: in order thereto the Spirit first gives us those graces and
workings which are our evidences, then helps us to feel those evidences in our
selves, and then raises comfort in the soul upon those discoveries.

Obj. But does not the doctrine of assurance breed security, looseness,
presumption?

Answ. The favor of God believed breeds love of God: where there is love
there is a fear of every thing that may divide betwixt the soul and God.
Nothing more quickens a soul to cheerful obedience, then the assurance of Gods
love, 2 Cor. 5.1. compared with ver. 15. He is a graceless child that will
venture to offend his father, because he knows he neither will nor can
disinherit him. So graceless should we be, if knowing of Gods love to our
souls, we should presume to sin against him, Romans 6.1. compared with ver. 15.
Shall we sin because we are under Grace? God forbid.

2 Those that are sure of salvation, though they need not fear damnation, yet
may they fear to bring upon themselves wrath, as sickness, trouble of
conscience, etc.

Obj. But we cannot be sure of perseverance, without which what is assurance?

Answ. Yes, from these promises, Joh. 10.28, 29. None shall pluck them out of
my hands, Joh. 10.28, 29. and from Christ his prayer, Luke 22.31, 3^. God will
not suffer us to be tempted above the power of grace to unsettle any habit,
though to the unsettlement of some act, Romans 8.38, 39.

4 Use Seeing God forgives sins, 1 pray for sensibleness and sight of thy sins,
Lam. 3.39. For daily we fall into, not only sin, but sins.

2 For humiliation under them, 1 Cor. 11.31.

4 For forgiveness of others. Ephesians. 4.32.

5 Seeing God forgives sins, 1 Take notice of Gods patience, that bears with
our sins from day to day, 2 Pet, 3.9.

2 Note that humane satisfactions can be of no force.

3 That we should not only have a care of our own salvation, but of the
salvation of our brethren, in asking pardon for them, if we see them sin a sin
that is not unto death, 1 John 5.16.

4 That even righteous and justified persons stand need of being justified
still, Rev. 22.11.

5 That our sins being called debts, we may see that all sorts of punishments
are owing unto us for our sins, till God forgive them in Christ, and the sin
being forgiven the punishment also is forgiven; hence that which Luke calls
Sins, Luke 11.4. Matthew calls Debts.

6 Seeing God forgives sins and assures thereof, do not you from Satan's
temptations misdoubt those Evidences which you have seriously examined and
found to be true. Suppose your Friend give you an Inheritance, and good
Evidences to assure you of it, and a cavilling fellow shall come and tell you
your Evidence is naught, will you upon his prattle judge your Title nothing? So
the Lord has forgiven your sins, and you have good Evidences thereof, will you
then upon Satan's cavils judge your Evidences nothing? When I die, I descend into
Hell, I am undone, what shall I do? no help remains besides the Word, I believe
in God, etc. We were created of the Word, and it behooves us to be returned into
the Word. Luth. in Genesis 37.

9 If we have not this assurance, we shall be in no better condition than
Heathens, who have no hope, 1 Thessalonians 4.13. Ephesians. 2.12. So Justin Martyr speaks
of Socrates these words, Now is the hour of going away at hand, for me to
death, for you to a longer life, but whether of us go to a better estate is
unknown unto all, save to God. Cohort. ad Graecos, page 26. How much better
spoke holy Luther? The Devil in the hour of death will show thee all thy wicked
life, do not despair (which Satan desires) but believe, and say, I know all my
life is damnable, if it should be judged, but God has commanded me to trust,
not in my life but in his mercy. This wisdom we ought to follow in the hour of
death, there the flesh trembles that it must go into a new life, and doubts of
salvation, if thou follows these thoughts thou art undone, here thine eyes are
to be shut, and say with Stephen, Jesus, into thine hands I commend my spirit,
then certainly will Jesus be present with his Angels, and be the guide of the
way. Bernard, when sometimes he was sick to death, sounded no other thing than
this, I have lost my time, because I have lived wickedly, but one thing
comforts me, thou will not despise a broken and a contrite heart. Also, Lord
Jesus, thou holds the Kingdom of Heaven by a double right, 1 Because thou art
the Son of God, 2 Because thou have purchased it by thy Death, this thou
keep for thy self by right of nativity, that thou give me, not by the law
of works, but of grace.

As we forgive our Debtours] This is a motive, or, as some call it, a sign,
because we frankly forgive our Debtours, therefore we desire God to forgive us.
From hence learn,

1 That unless we pardon the wrongs done to us, we desire Gods vengeance
against our selves.

2 That wrongs done by others to us make them Debtours to us, which though, in
respect of the sin against us, we are bound to forgive, yet in respect of the
damage we sustain in our Estates, we may require satisfaction.

3 It Is an evidence that God has and will forgive us, if we do freely without
exercising private revenge forgive others, Col. 3.13. Forgiving one another, if
any man have a quarrel against any, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.
In nothing do we more resemble God, than in forgiveness of offenses, and so
much more when we do it readily, Psalm. 86.5.

4 See a motive to pray to God for pardon with confidence; because we find our
hearts inclining to pardon others who have damnified us in our Bodies, goods
and Reputation.

5 This word [As] does not denote the cause, degree, price or equ^lity, but
only the kind of remission, as Faius well observes, or it is a Law whereto he
will have all men bound, that (...) for pardon from God. For Christ is the
cause of remission. It Is a qualification wherewith the children of God must
come before God in Prayer, if they would have pardon of God they must bring a
mind to pardon others.

6 We may see our natural proneness to revenge, in that as often as we desire
forgiveness of God, we must bring forgiveness of our Brother.

7 It Is a way to true peace to obtain forgiveness of God, and to forgive
others; there is therefore a necessity of union among Christians, without which
we can never open our mouths to God.

8 That there must be universal forgiveness of all wrongs how great soever,
for, if we keep some one wrong in the corner of our hearts, we desire that God
would do the same against us, which if he should, how woeful would it be for
us. It Is to be feared by the carriages of many, that many who profess to
forgive and shake hands, wait only for an opportunity to vent their malice,
hereby calling for the vengeance of God to fall upon them.

Quest. But are we absolutely commanded to forgive all wrongs?

Answ. As Christ in the fifth of Matthew, commanding to give like for like,
informs his Disciples of their private duty, so here he does not bid us forgive
civil or natural Debts. If a man take away my goods or the life of my friend, I
may prosecute against him, laying aside private and club-like revenge, except
when public good, or right reason require it.

Quest. Whether are Suits in Law here condemned?

Answ. 1 Such as proceed from malice, and private revenge, Romans 12.19, 20.

2 Such as tend to scandal, as to go to Law for trifles, 1 Cor. 6.1.

Contrarily we may go to Law, 1 In Justice and Charity, to get our own right,
provided it be not for trifles. We read of Zenas a Lawyer, a good man, who was
never bid to change his calling.

2 That the party offending may be chastized and brought to repentance for his
fault.

3 Law must be the last remedy, as Physicians use desperate Physic when weaker
will not serve, or as War is the last Refuge in a State.

4 If Paul appealed unto Caesar, who was a wicked Tyrant, much more may we to
Judges, who though not so good, yet perhaps not so bad as he.

Use. For application. Learn heartily forgiveness of offenses done against you,
for,

1 It Is a matter of great difficulty; hence when Christ proposes this duty,
Luke 17.13. to forgive trespassing brethren, the Disciples pray, Lord increase
our Faith. As if they should say, without faith we can never do it.

2 All the Ordinances are profaned unto thee, if thou come to them with a
revengefull heart. The Corinthians having strife among them, came together for
the worse, 1 Cor. 11.17. Wrath and Revenge in Prayer condemned, 1 Timothy 2.8.
hence Christ says, When you stand praying, forgive, Mark 11.25.

3 There can be no forgiveness with God, unless we forgive our Brother, Matthew.
6.14, 15. Matthew. 18.24, 28, 29, 33. q. d. if thou forgives, I will forgive, if
thou do not forgive, I will not forgive.

4 Our selves stand in need of daily forgiveness, both from God and men; from
God, for we sin against him daily; from men, Col. 3.13. Forgiving one another,
as he stands need of thy forgiveness, so do thou of thy Brothers.

5 Unless thy forgiveness of thy Brother be from thy heart, God respects it
not, Matthew. 18.35. so likewise shall my heavenly Father do, if ye from your
heart forgive not every man his Brother his trespasses. Neither will it serve
the turn, that perhaps thou never usest this Petition in any of thy Prayers,
for fear of calling vengeance upon thine own head, yet still the Sentence of
God remains firm, that if ye forgive not men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will not forgive you.

Object. But who are my Debtours whom I am to forgive?

Answ. Any one in the World thou have a quarrel against, that is, a just cause
of complaint, as Paul tells us, Col. 3.13. yea even civil Debts, when men ow us
Money, if they cannot be required without the destruction of our Neighbor, we
are to forgive them, and so much more readily when the Debtour is cast into
this poor condition, not through sloth, prodigality, or vicious practices, but
merely by the Lords hand. Cursed is that speech when the Creditour shall say,
he will make Dice of such a Debtours bones.

6 It Is a victory of an high nature to forgive offenses. Many think they are
bound to revenge themselves in point of honor; whiles they study to retain the
name of Gentlemen, they fear not by God to be branded for Murderers, being
ready to revenge even wrongs of a small nature by Duels, etc.

V. 13. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

And lead us not into temptation] In this Petition Christ teaches us to pray, 1
That we may not be brought into temptation; we know not what weakness we may
show therein. God leads into temptation, 1 By bringing us where there are
occasions of sin and objects, through the corruptions of our hearts that become
temptations, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. A false Prophet works a sign to draw to strange
gods, but thou shall not hearken to him, for herein the Lord thy God proves
thee. The Lord set Wine before the Rechabites to try whether they would obey
their fathers command, Jer. 35.5. 2 God removes Impediments that kept from sin,
so he removes such a friend that was an example of good, or a reprover, to
dissuade us from sin, such a Magistrate, such a Father.

Obj. But James, c. 1.13. says, Let no man say, I am tempted of God, for God
tempts not any man.

Answ. It Is one thing to tempt, another thing to be led into temptation. God
tempts not to evil; For 1 it is our own lusts that tempt us, v. 14. 2 Every good
gift comes from God, therefore no evil, v. 17. Now to counsel, persuade or
advise to evil were sin; neither does God tempt us by pouring in wicked
thoughts, nor by inclining our hearts to wickedness.

2 To be lead into temptation is an act of God, whereby he, by his providence,
leads us where there are objects and occasions of sin, without any
solicitation from God thereto, so that Gods leading into temptation is nothing
else, but a proof whether we will stand in our obedience, or no. So God tempted
Abraham, whether he would part with his dearest comfort for God, Genesis 22.1. of
this Exodus 16.4. Deuteronomy. 8.2. Judge. 2.22. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. God left Hezekiah to
try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.

2 We in this Petition desire that if God do lead us into temptation we may not
be overcome of it, nor caught by it. Many are like fishes and birds, which
when a bait is set before them, fall to nibling at it, and so are ensnared in
the net; for when God leaves the creature to a temptation, the creature sins
necessarily but voluntarily. If God take away his restraint and assistance,
corruption boyls out and we are ensnared and taken. It Is dangerous upon
presumption of our own strength to desire temptations, but rather pray against
them, but if we cannot prevail so far, but that we must encounter with them,
then that God would not leave us to be overcome of them, and Christ herein both
warns us of our own weakness, and cautions us not to throw our selves into
temptation.

Temptations are, 1 Good, when God by proving a man makes manifest unto him
what is in his heart, Jam. 1.2. Job 23.10. 2 Evil, which is a motion to sin, as
in straits to use unlawful means.

There Is a twofold temptation, 1 Of trial. 2 Of seducement.

1 Of Trial, so God rained Manna upon the people, to prove them whether they
would walk in his Law or no, Exodus 16.4. Thou shall remember the way that God
led thee in, to humble thee and to prove thee, and to try what was in thy
heart, Deuteronomy. 8.2.

2 Of Seduction; Thus Satan tempted David, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. and thus corruption
tempts, Esai 44.20. a deceived heart has turned him aside that he cannot say,
Is there not a lie in my right hand?

The former of these ways both God and Satan tempts us. Gods temptations of
Trial are, 1 By abstaining, when an object is set before us, that may be an
occasion of sin, whether we will refrain from that occasion: and so Joseph
being tempted by his Mistress withstood it. Peter refused Magus his money, Acts
8.20.

2 By enduring and suffering, when though we be tempted with threatenings of
banishment, imprisonment, loss of goods, yet we will not violate our
consciences for the escaping any such evils, Rev. 2.10. the devil shall cast
some of you into prison ten days, that ye may be tried, But be thou faithful
unto death and I will give thee a crown of life, Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man
that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive a crown of
life, Heb. 11.35, 36, 37.

Now God in trying of us does it not to better his experience of us, but 1 that
the luster of our graces may shine forth to others, so Abraham, Genesis 22.12. and
Job.

2 That a man may see what is in his own heart, and so Hezekiah was tempted to
show his treasures to the Ambassadors of Babylon, that he might know all that
was in his own heart.

3 We know not the measure of our graces, nor the measure of our weaknesses,
till God discover them by temptations. No man is so good but God will let him
sometime fall into evil, for his further humbling, as we see in Josiah; and no
man so evil but God conveys goodness into him for his greater condemnation,
Greenham grave Counsels, p. 7.

4 Moreover, this trial of us arises from the mixture of grace and corruption
in regenerate men; for the purging away the dross of our natures, and for more
and more purifying the principle of grace in us, we are cast into the furnace
of temptation. It will be our happiness in heaven that we shall there have no
trials, because there will be nothing to purge out.

5 This also is the end God has in our trials, that we being foiled in our
trials may get ground of our corruptions by our falls, as we see in the foils
that befell David, Hezekiah, Peter, and others, and after we have got ground
more and more to come to that measure of refinement that God would have us to
come to; we may come to that state of glory where there will be no fear of
being miserable, because no possibility of being sinful. Temptations are Gods
embraces, without which we should not seek God; but these temptations are so
heavy to the flesh, that often they force tears, Luth. Tom. 3.489.

And as God tempts for trial, so does Satan, for could he know our thoughts
(which are only known to God, 1 Kings 8 39.) he would come directly upon us,
but because he knows them not, he frames his temptation according to our
temperatures and inclinations; the choleric man he tempts to wrath, the
phlegmatic man to sloth, the melancholy man to sadness, the sanguine to mirth
and jollity. He notes our callings, and tempts us with suitable baits, the
learned man he tempts to vainglory, the poor man to distrust, the rich man to
pride, the mighty man or prince to oppression, the subject to tumultuousness,
the single man to lustful desires, the married man to carking cares, the
sincere Christian, from by-ends in duty, to judge himself an hypocrite. If we
do good, he tempts us to be proud of it, if we do evil he tempts us either to
slight it, or to be discouraged under it. Satan's temptations are like the
assaults of soldiers that storm a City in several places at once, where he
espies any weakness of defense, and though he have been once and again driven
back, yet will he give a further onset: sometimes he assaults the senses,
sometimes the reason, sometimes the understanding, sometimes the judgment,
sometimes the fancy, and whenever he assaults any of these faculties he does
withal assault the will.

The scope of all Satan's temptations is, to draw us away from our duty, as we
see in those temptations wherewith Satan assaulted Eve, Genesis 3.1. and David, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. and Christ, Matthew. 4. and Ananias, Act. 5.3. and Judas, 13.2.

Besides temptations arise from men both wicked and godly: Christ was tempted
by Peter, Matthew. 16.22. and from ungodly men, Prove. 1.10. 1 by wicked examples,
1 Cor. 8.10. 2 by wicked persuasions, Prove. 7.13. to ver. 22. Moreover we are
tempted from our own corruptions, Sam. 1.14. 2 Cor. 12.7.

Now in this petition we desire, that God would either keep temptations from
us, whether they come from himself or others, or keep us from being tempted
above our strength, according to that promise, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Remedies against temptations.
1 Our Lord Christ was tempted in all points like as we, yet without sin, Heb.
4.15. Matthew. 4.3, 4. and one tempted Christian is more profitable then a
hundred not tempted, Luth. in Genesis 27.

2 That Christ is not only able to succor tempted souls, Heb. 2.18. for that
he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted, but also is willing and ready, Luke 22.31. Satan has desired to have
you, that he may sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, Romans 16.20. His
promise is, the God of peace shall shortly tread Satan under your feet. Now he
succors us, 1 by letting the soul see that what the soul is assaulted with is
nothing else but a temptation.

2 By bringing in some promise to stay the soul, as Genesis 3.15. The seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head, this is as an anchor and cable in a
storm, Heb. 6.18, 19.

3 By rebuking the tempter, Zach. 3.2. The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, yea the
Lord rebuke thee.

4 Comforting the tempted, making over some Scripture to stay the soul against
the temptation, 1 Pet. 5.8.

5 By causing the temptation to grow less and less, till it be quite gone; as
in temptations of blasphemy, self-murder, etc. in the children of God.

3 Set faith on work, to believe that Angels, nor principalities, cannot sever
you from Christ, Romans 8.38.

4 Make resistance, Jam. 4.6. Resist the Devil and he will fly. Were we in a
city besieged, and knew that relief were near at hand, who would not stand it
out? Satan besieges, but our God has promised to be a present help in trouble.

5 Beware in time of temptation of concluding against your souls, as if you
were not the Lords, because tempted; who more holy then Christ yet who more
tempted? Peter tempted, Luke 22.30. Paul tempted, 2 Cor. 12.7. Yea these
afflictions of temptations are accomplished among all Saints, 1 Pet. 5.8. Satan
lets many wicked men go without temptation, because he has them sure.

6 Make no preparations for temptation, neither by running your selves into
harms way, nor into wicked company, as Peter did in the High Priests Hall, nor
in time of Satanical temptations to go into places or conditions wherein you
may give advantage to the tempter, either by being solitary, idle or ill
employed. Many persons by not acting their graces, as faith in the promises,
and hope in the thing promised give way to temptations.

7 Be not discouraged with the length of the temptation; for this Satan does to
weary poor souls, he shoots his darts again and again, hoping in the end to
weary us. As we see in Christ tempted three several times, and yet when all
came to all, Satan left him not altogether, but only for a season, Matthew.
4.10. Every temptation is an affliction, Gal. 4.14. And in affliction we ought
to be humbled, but not to be discouraged, how long soever it remain upon us.
Never say, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord.

8 Keep in the compass of your callings; for want of this Peter was tempted by
a silly maid. We may look for protection in the ways of our calling, Psalm. 91,
^1. Not out of those ways, but in them, have the Angels charge to keep us.
Whereas it is said, 1 John 5.18. A godly man keeps himself, and the wicked one
touches him not, its meant either when he is in holy ways, or if he then
touch him, it is not to a prevailing.

9 Consider what Satan by himself and his instruments aims at in temptations,
which is, the surprising of our faith: when Satan combated so with Job, what
did he aim at? was it Jobs goods? nay, it was to make an onset on Jobs faith.
The like he did with Christ, Mat. 4. First Satan tempts us to break Gods
commands, and then tempts the soul to unbelief, as if there were no pardon for
such a sinner. Satan knows if he can overcome our faith he has taken our
armor from us, 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians. 6. Hence sometimes he draws souls away from
the means of faith, if he cannot prevail so far, then to question the truth of
what is spoken, if he cannot prevail to this, then he strives to bring souls to
put off promises, as belonging to others and not to themselves, and to take all
comfortable places of Scripture from us in an hour of temptation.

Remember, not only Satan is resisted by our stedfastness in the faith, 1
Peter 5.8. but also Christ has prayed that the Faith of Believers fail not,
Luke 22.30, 31. Faith is that piece of Armor which before all others we should
hold, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all taking the Shield of Faith, by this Shield we
shall hold out against all temptations arising from imperfection of obedience,
the weight and number of our sins, the want of outward things, etc.

Satan's temptations are compared to fiery or poisonous Darts, whose Poison lies
burning in the flesh, till they have destroyed a man, if they be not cured;
even so do Satan's temptations, as we see in Judas, Matthew. 27.5. To keep off
these Darts we must have a Shield, and, as they are fiery, the Shield of Faith
in Christ, drawing strength against them from Christ his Death, Resurrection
and Intercession.

10 Labor to discern a temptation to be a temptation, and that it is not the
true state of thy soul which Satan tells thee: he will tell thee thou have no
grace, because thy grace does not grow to a hundredfold, that thy Prayers are
not heard, because they are not every time evidenced to be heard, that thy
faith fails, because thou have sometimes intermitted the acts thereof, though
the habit remain; sometimes he pretends to release thee from all thy troubles.
Satan does as Fowlers, who in Frost and Snow show Meat to the Birds that they
may come to their own destruction. So Satan endeavors to bring souls out of
poverty by injustice and deceit, out of trouble of conscience by self-murder,
out of Prison by denying the Truth, or deceitful distinguishing thereof. When
a tempted soul can see no way of escape, let him shut his eyes and answer
nothing, but commend his cause to God.

11 Complain to God against them, and pray for patience and power against them.
If you cannot pray away the suggestion, yet strive to pray away the consent and
delight. Condemned men make not suit to the Jailour but to the Judge, so in
temptation go not to Satan but to the Lord, in whose hand is the entrance, the
continuance, and the issue of the temptation. When Satan and his messenger came
against Paul, he besought the Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12.7.

12 Take heed of security; sometimes Lusts tempt when we are secure, as Lot to
drunkenness, when gone from Sodom. So does Satan, when the Husbandmen slept the
Enemy sowed Tares. As in civil affairs nothing more exposes a State to danger
than security, as we see in the affairs of diverse States and Cities, so nothing
more exposes the soul to danger than security. Security has overcome them
whom the opposition of temptation could not overcome. Our whole life is a
temptation till we come in Heaven, therefore be not secure. Travelers are in
continual danger to fall into the hands of Thieves, therefore not secure, so
should we. While Noah, David, Peter have through security been so overcome, let
us fear always, Prove. 28.13. Blessed is the man that fears always. It Is yet a
day of Battle, not of Victory; we are yet at Sea not in the Haven.

13 Take heed of spiritual pride, which is ordinarily cured with a spiritual
Fall. Hence the Devil prevailed against Eve, Genesis 3.5. When David grew proud of
his Multitude of Subjects, he was left to fall to numbering them, 2 Samuel 24.
When we fall to admire our selves, whether parts or graces, we are near a Fall.

14 Set against the motions that come from corruptions, and the suggestion that
comes from Satan severally and apart, before they join their forces together,
and that you may do this take the temptation in the beginning. United Enemies
become more hard to resist.

15 Be well informed in the methods and devices of sin and Satan, 2 Cor. 2.11.
The Devil methodizes his temptations: when he came to the first Adam, Genesis 3.
first he comes to the Woman not to the Man, next he tells her by eating the
forbidden Fruit she should be as God, next breeds a jealousy that God meant
not so well to her as he, and next by the desirableness to the eye and taste he
tempts her to eat thereof. And as he has methods so has he devices, he is
like a crafty man that with a Plum or a Counter will cozen a child of all he
has. And so has corruption devices; this is a little sin, thou must do this
or else thou can not live in the World. First corruption drew Peter into a
place of temptation, into the high Priests Hall, then to deny Christ:
corruption drew David to sloth, then to wanton gazings, then to carnal
lustings, then to Adultery, and then to Murder. Had corruption tempted David to
Murder at first he would have trembled at it. Besides our corruptions are like
Touch-wood and Tinder that presently takes fire.

16 Strive to get a distaste of temptations, they seldom or never prevail
against a soul that distastes them; so long as the soul distastes them, the
will is averse unto them, and where the will is averse they can do us no hurt.
As Christ said to Satan, Get thee behind me Satan, Matthew. 16. so let us.
Distasted Meats and Drinks are seldom received, no more will temptations when
distasted.

17 Put on Christian Armor, even the whole Armor of God; why? we wrestle not
only against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, Ephesians.
6.11. as,

1 The Girdle of Truth, that is a sincere purpose of heart in opposition to
hypocrisy, which as a girdle binds our clothes to us, which else the wind
would blow about, so sincerity holds together our graces which else would be
carried away in time of temptation, Luke 8.^3. Unsound men in time of
temptation fall away.

2 The breast plate of righteousness, that is of a holy conversation, this has
three branches. 1 For time past a testimony of conscience excusing us, that our
conversation has not been in fleshly wisdom, but godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1,
12. 2 For time to come, a purpose to avoid all evil, and do that which is good.
Psalm. 119.106. Act. 11.23. 3 For time present, an humiliation in respect of
daily wants, when Satan tempts us to sin, we being covered with this breast
plate his temptations fall down. Though there be armor for the breast, yet is
there none for the back, run-aways that fly from the cause of Christ and duty,
are cut down by Satan and wicked men.

3 Get your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel, that is, get an
intention to confess Gods truth, notwith standing sufferings, this is called a
preparation of the Gospel, because by it a Christian is prepared to repel all
temptations to the denial of Christ.

Now because sufferings are to our souls, as stones, thorns, and gravel are to
our naked feet, let the affections of our souls be shod with this preparation:
as leg-harness is useful in war, where the enemy sticks stubs of iron, or iron
harrows in the way, so is this intention of confession of Christ needful, as
part of our armor, where Satan in our way to heaven sets so many pricks and
crosses, as reproaches, persecutions, loss of goods, liberty and life.

4 The shield of faith, that is a lively faith trusting on God for
justification, sanctification, and earthly things, Psalm. 84.11. Also faith
eying threatenings, promises, and commandments; this is called (...) of (...) a
door or gate. It Is a long broad shield like a door, which was to cover the
whole body from pushes, darts, and arrows, such must our faith be against all
temptations: this raised up to Jesus Christ, and acted aright against the
tempter, is like a cordial to a fainting soul.

5 The helmet of salvation, (...), it covers the head all about; now when the
head is well fenced we fear not arrows nor darts. Such is Christian hope to the
soul, when Satan shall tempt thee to discouragement, and tells thee thy sins
are unpardonable, because so great and many, and tells thee it will never be
otherwise then at present it is, and tempts thee to wish thy self dead, and
tells thee thou art cast out of Gods sight, and that thou shall never overcome
this lust, nor get out of this desertion, nor be delivered from this
temptation, all that I do will but further my damnation, I have no mind any
longer to use the means; against all these hopeless, hartless voices raise up
thy hope in God, hope for day though at present it be midnight.

6 Get the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, which as an armory has all
sorts of weapons in it. Were we to go where enemies were, we would not go
without our sword, only think not to out-brave Satan by saying a piece of
Scripture in an hartless manner, but produce it believingly.

18 If temptations be violent, confer with some Christian friend, wise, and
faithful, and able to retain a secret both from their wives and others, and
discover to them that which perplexes your conscience; and such a person will
be ready to discover to you the same, or like temptations: and this is meant by
confessing our faults one to another, Jam, 5.16. Only if we can have ease from
God, we need not confess our temptations to men. God sometimes speaks by a poor
brother.

19 Make good your ground against the tempter, you must be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil, and having done all to stand, Ephesians. 6.11, 13. As
soldiers stand orderly in the fight, and neither run forth to danger, nor
retire cowardly, so do ye. Cowards in battle are most commonly cut off, and
there will be no mercy in Satan, if he overcome, nothing less then the blood of
your souls will serve him; in order to this resistance, beg help of the spirit
who infuses good motions, and excites the soul therewith, as Satan does to evil.

But deliver us from evil] That is from the evil of the temptations which the
Devil, World, or flesh, works against us.

Hence observe, 1 That deliverance from evil arises not from our own power or
might, but from the Lord, 2 Cor. 1.10.

2 Our own weakness; we are not able to deliver our selves in temptation, but
Gods grace is sufficient for us, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. For his strength is made
perfect in our weakness.

3 To learn watchfulness against Satan's temptations, and against all
temptations, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like
men, be strong.

4 See the providence bridling tempters and temptations, that though they come
never so violently upon us, they cannot prevail further then God permits: for
Satan's temptations, see Luke 22.30, 31. Satan has desired to have you, that he
may sift you, but I have prayed for thee, Job. 1.12. Rev. 2.10. And as Gods
providence bridles Satan's temptations, so does it the temptations of wicked
men, 1 Cor. 10.13.

5 We do not only pray against Satan, who is the great artificer of
temptations, and is called (...), the wicked one, 1 John 2. 1 John 5. but also
against every thing that may either draw us to sin, or hinders us from
godliness, Satan is (...) the great Burgomaster of Hell.

6 We are here taught that we are not yet in that estate, wherein we shall be
free from all temptations: it will be the happiness of Heaven that we shall
neither have Devil nor lust to combat with.

7 That God would temper all temptations according to the strength we receive,
either by increasing our strength, or lessening the force of the temptation,
Rev. 3.10. I will keep thee from the hour of temptation. 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly in time of temptation, for want of which
assistance unsound men in time of temptation fall away, Luke 8.13.

8 See who are most apt to be tempted, even Gods children, who call him Father.
The devil has carnal men sure, and so never tempts them, Luke 11.21. When a
strong man armed keeps his palace his goods are in peace.

9 See what a filthy nature we have which is ready to betray us to every
temptation: If God withdraw his grace we are presently ready to fall, as the
staff does when it is forsaken of the hand that held it. We see it in Gods
children, Sampson, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Peter, Noah, Lot. Nay they
forsaken of God not only fall into sin, but lie in it: how much more wicked
men?

10 That as we desire to be delivered by God from the evil of temptation, so it
should be our care not to run into provocations and occasions. Joseph, Genesis
39.10. though Potiphars wife tempted him from day to day, yet he hearkened not
to lie by, or to be with her, so not to go into houses hanted with the devil
upon any pretense of the strength of our faith. This is as if we should go
within the reach of a Lion or mad Dog. Remember the sons of Sceva, Acts 19.14,
16. who going in the devils reach without a call, the devil both tore off their
clothes, and wounded their bodies, and therefore if godly people shall be
invited to pray in such a place, let them know they have no call to it.

11 We desire not only to be delivered from evils of wicked things, but that
even good things, as riches, strength, health, beauty, friends, may not become
a snare to us.

For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever] These
words are the conclusion, not expressed by Luke.

It contains three motives or encouragements to come to God in prayer, as,

1 Thine is the Kingdom, that is, all Kingdoms are thine, the Kingdom of
providence or government of the world, the Kingdom of grace and glory, as if
it were said, Thou, O Lord, have all Kingdoms in thy own hand, and therefore
thou art able to give all good things to thy subjects, whether grace or glory,
even all things necessary for soul and body, and to deliver them from all
evils, and to bring them to eternal redemption. Under the name of Kingdom is
meant the power of right.

Now the Kingdoms are Gods, 1 Proprietarily, that none can lay claim to it in
this manner but himself, also efficiently, Psalm. 95.3, 4.

2 Derivatively or hereditarily, so the Kingdoms of the world are given to
carnal men, Dan. 4.25. and the Kingdoms of grace and glory to Saints; so Satan
is called the Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2.2. because devils are
suffered there to rule and tempt, and to speak to our spirits, but yet with
subordination to the Lords providence.

The power] Here Is another argument to strengthen our faith in prayer, as his
fatherly affection on the one hand, so his kingly power on the other may assure
us that he is both willing and able to grant our requests. There is such power
in God that there is nothing too hard for him: thou have not only potestas or
authority of all things as a King, but thou have power, that is a working
power, thou alone can grant us these things and no other can grant them, thou
hindering them, therefore we come to thee for them. Also saying, Thine is the
power, we learn that his power is not derived from any other: the power of
creation is thine, and the power of sustentation of all things, Heb. 1.3. and
in particular the power whereby he sustains his Church, 1 Chr. 29.11, 12.
Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and power, thou raignest over all, and in thy
hand is power.

The power of God is seen in these things.

1 In making Heaven and Earth, Psalm 124.8.

2 In that he made it without matter. Man cannot work without matter, God made
the World of no matter that does appear, Heb. 11.3.

3 In making them so easily, even by the word of his mouth, Genesis 1.

4 This power in God is seen in raising up the Body of Christ, and the bodies
of Saints, which rose with him, and the bodies of Saints which shall arise,
John 5.28. Ephesians. 1.

5 In bringing over a soul to believe. Ephesians. 1.19. God inclines our wills
whither he wills, having them more in his power than we our selves. A man may
sit under Ordinances all his life and not be converted if this power put not
forth it self.

This power in God is twofold, 1 Absolute, and that is twofold,

1 Independent, in that none has power to call him to account, Job 33.13. He
gives not account of any of his matters. None has power to ask him why he
makes one crooked another straight, why he calls one and passes by another, why
he gifts one and not another, why one is a King and another a Slave, this power
is authority.

2 Infinite and unlimited, whereby God is able to do more than he does: he
never so puts forth his power but he could put it forth further if he pleased,
Matthew. 9. God is able of stones to raise up children to Abraham, he has made a
World and could make more if he pleased, Matthew. 26.55. Think thou not that I
could have prayed to my Father, and he would have given me more than twelve
Legions of Angels?

2 There is an actual power in God whereby he is able to do whatsoever he will,
as to beget a Son equal to himself in all things, and could he not do this he
were not omnipotent, this he does, 1 Immediately, Psalm 115.3. 2 Mediately,
using the means of his own appointing.

Use. For application. 1 To blame our darkness that cannot conceive this power
of God.

Object. But if there be such a power in God, why do we not perceive it as we
do bodily force?

Answ. Because it works invisibly, as the influence of the Heavens does upon
the bodies of men and beasts.

2 The brightest Light while it shines in a thick Cloud is not beheld, so the
power of God whiles it works in our weakness is not beheld so powerful as it
is in it self.

2 To tax them who limit this power, Psalm 78.18, 19, 20. Israel angered God,
saying, Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? Can he give Bread? Can he
provide Flesh? They did not say, he could not, but only questioned his power,
They limited the Holy One of Israel, v. 41. This was Moses sin, Number. 11.19. to
24. when God said he would feed 600000 men with flesh a whole month, he could
not believe it. Martha could not believe Christ was able to raise up Lazarus
being dead four days, John 11.39. So when Elisha prophesied of such a plenty,
next day, the Nobleman said, If the Lord would make Windows in Heaven, might
this thing be? 2 Kings 7.19, 20.

2 Information, 1 That there is nothing too hard for God, Genesis 18.14. He has
brought Light out of Darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6. Good out of Evil, Genesis 50.20. Men
may make good out of natural evil, as out of poisonous Ingredients, but not out
of moral evil. We are too apt to draw a scantling of God by our selves.

3 Consolation to Gods people, 1 In straits, Genesis 22.10. When Abraham was ready
to slay Isaac God appears to him out of Heaven and bids him hold his hand, Genesis
22.14. When Esau came against Jacob, Gods power was seen in turning his heart
to Jacob, Genesis 33.10. I have seen thy face as the face of God, that is, I have
seen God in thy loving looks. So in Queen Hesters time. God still puts forth
his power in behalf of upright men, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

2 In sad and forlorn conditions. Are you in danger? He is a present help,
Psalm 46.1. Are you indisposed to good? He that can bring beautiful flowers
out of ground seemingly sapless in Winter, can do so in grace. Are lusts
strong? God can subdue them, Mic. 7.18. Are Enemies potent? God can make them
Friends, Prove. 16.7.

4 Terror to wicked men that have such a powerful God against them. God can
arm all creatures against thee; Worms to eat up Herod, Acts 12.23. Flies and
Lice to infest Pharaoh, Though hand join in hand the wicked shall not be
unpunished, Prove. 11.21. See Judges 2.15. Whither soever they went the hand of
God was against them for evil, but especially in another World, Rom 9.17, 22.
There God will make his powerful wrath known, Psalm 90.11.

5 Exhortation, 1 To make this powerful God thy Friend. Men strive to make
powerful men their Friends, make God thy Friend, Psalm 27.1. Isai 51.12, 13.
and fear to offend him. We are afraid to offend men of power, much more fear
to offend this powerful God. See a notable place, Josh. 4.23, 24.

2 To go about all your actions in the power of God. In this power Asa went
against a million of men, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. It Is all one with thee to save,
whether with many or few. Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. We know not what to do,
but our eyes are upon thee against spiritual Enemies: also be strong in the
power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. Phil. 4.13. Psalm 71.16.

3 Labor to know this power. We love to know the strength of persons or things
to which we trust, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have trusted.

4 Believe this power, without belief hereof we cannot believe the Creation of
the World, the forgiveness of sins, Resurrection of the Body.

His power is seen,

1 In that he can do whatsoever is possible to be done. An Angel can do what
belongs to an Angel, an Ox or Horse what belongs to them, but they cannot do
the works of a man, but God can do what is possible.

2 He can do what he will, Psalm 115.3. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did
he, Isai 46.10. Matthew 8.2.

3 He can put forth his power more in one than in another, as he puts forth his
power more in scalding Oil, that it burns more strongly than scalding Water,
the Fire is more in the Oil than in the Water, so the power of God is more in
Saints than wicked men, more in one Saint at one time than another, more in
Paul than in the rest of the Apostles, more in some part of a duty than another
part of it.

4 His power is not tied to means. He works without means, at the blowing of
Rams horns the Walls of Jericho fell, Josh. 6.20. Judges 6.12. Gideon by three
hundred men overcame an Army of above an hundred and twenty thousand, yea, he
works against means, bringing his people through the Red Sea, Exodus 14.21.

5 Whatsoever he does he does it without labor or weariness, Isai 40.28. The
Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not, neither is weary.

6 He is always powerful. Princes are powerful but they may die, or their
power be diminished or resisted, not so with God, Deuteronomy. 32.39. None can deliver
out of his hands.

7 All the power that any Creature has is in God, whether power of authority,
or power of force, John 19.11. Thou could have no power, neither of authority
nor force, unless it were given thee from above, said Christ to Pilate. When an
Enemy lifts up his hand to hurt us he has the power of his strength from God;
if we saw a Bear or Lion in the hand of our father we need not be afraid.

8 His power can frustrate and annihilate all other power, as the
Babel-builders. The Egyptians, God took off their Charet-wheels, Exodus 14.25.
and the Sea overwhelmed them, v. 26. Haman's combination against the Church,
all power coming against God, his cause, and people is as if a Pitcher should
rise against a stone-wall, or as if the Thorns and Briars should put themselves
in arms against the Fire, Isai 27.4. Job 9.4. 1 Cor. 10.21.

Object. But I doubt not of his power but of his will.

Answ. His will is seen in his promise. If we be confirmed of his power and
believe his promise, you need not be troubled.

Object. But if this power be so comfortable, how should I know it?

Answ. Believe it. Christ would not show miraculous power where unbelief
hindered, Matthew. 13.58.

2 See God in the Glass of his Word, Jer. 32.17. and works, as in making the
World, Romans 1.20. in binding in the Sea, Jer. 5.22. by the Sand.

3 Pray God to open thine eyes to behold it, as Elisha prayed for his Servant
that he might behold Gods power, 2 Kings 6.15, 16, 17.

4 Look on thine own weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. Col. 1. ult.

5 Have recourse to experience when this power helped us in a fatherless and
friendless condition, Psalm. 27.10. When father and mother forsook us he took us
up, delivered us from a Bear and a Lion, 1 Samuel 17.34. to 38.

6 Get into covenant with God. When persons are so in covenant together then
follows their power to be employed for one another, as in Ahab and Jehosaphat,
I am as thou art, my people as thy people.

7 If we would have Gods power improved for us we must serve him with all our
power, 1 Chronicles. 29.2. David says, I have prepared with all my might for the
house of my God: he improving his might and power for God, God assisted him in
all his Battles with his power and might.

8 Consider the belief of the power of God is a means to stablish us in the
belief of the promise; if a man promise never so much to us, if he have not
power, we regard not his promise: hence when God would strengthen Sarahs faith,
he says, Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis 18.14.

Object. But my case is like no man's, I am in Prison and cannot come forth.

Answ. 1 Thou art not yet in the Lions Den, nor in the Whales Belly, nor fiery
Furnace, others have been lower than thou.

2 What is not that God able to do, that is able to make a World?

3 Persons that have been at the point of despair, have been helped, 2 Cor. 1.8,
9, 10. Some that have lost their Estate, and Health, and Friends, and Children,
as Job, cap. 6.9, 10. others that have lost their credit, as Joseph, and David,
1 Chronicles. 29.28.

And the glory] Here Is a third argument or motive for God to grant the things
we pray for, viz. because it makes for his own glory, q. d. thou alone ought
to be worshipped and called upon: children should seek their fathers glory, thy
glory is perfect in it self, but thou requirest that we hereby declare it by
acknowledging thee the fountain of all our happiness.

We may see, 1 To refer all things to Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. Romans 11.31.
Rev. 4.9.

2 To stir up our Faith in prayer, that God will grant what we ask, because it
is for his own glory.

3 See that as it is the glory of God to hear the prayers of his people, Psalm.
65.2. O thou that hear Prayers, so should we give him the glory hereof.

4 To ascribe all glory to him, as a God of such power and majesty, and not to
glory in our selves, or any thing we have, whether wisdom, strength, or
wealth, Jer. 9.23. 1 Cor. 1.29, 31. 2 Cor. 10.17. give him the glory of his
faithfulness, as Abraham did, Romans 4.20. and of his mercy and free grace, which
we behold in the glass of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.18. and of our parts, 1 Cor.
4.7. which we have received from him.

For ever and ever] This shows 1 That God has, had, and shall have all glory
due unto him from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90.1.

2 To distinguish the glory of God from the glory of earthly Princes, that
shines for a few years and then the light goes out and is removed to others,
and withers like a flower, but this is everlasting.

Amen] For this word see my observations on Matthew. 5.22. It Is as it were a
desire whereby we desire these things to be done and our selves to be heard.
It Is a profession of our confidence that God hears our prayer. Also a wish that
thus it may be what our tongues and heart has requested. The Septuagints on
Psalm. 72. ult. render this word (...), let it be done, as our desires were
formerly expressed: so here is our seal whereby we believe the grant of them in
gene^^^, and to each of them in particular we also set our seal. Hence prayer
should be in a language that we understand, that all may say Amen, 1 Cor.
14.16. Yea there ought to be care in him, that is the mouth, not to power out
any requests of his private spirit and principles, but that to which all
believers may say Amen, and prayers being so powered out, let us all say, Amen,
with a loud voice, and therefore none should pray in a Church but those that
know how to power out requests aright for matter.

V. 14. For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you;

V. 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly
Father also forgive you.

Christ shows here that pardon of sin is given and continued unto us, upon the
condition of repentance and new obedience, one branch whereof consists in
gentleness in forgiving wrongs, which men do against us, and so much more
because we are ready to aggravate other men's faults, as slow to confess our
own; therefore that we may be pitiful herein Christ bids us set our own faults
before our eyes. Christians ought greatly to endeavor after peace, that they
may not offend one another, or if it fall out that they do offend one another,
that they be ready to forgive.

This command does not destroy the discipline of families toward children and
stubborn servants, nor does it hinder Magistrates from punishing Malefactors,
though in all execution of judgment gentleness should appear, but the Lord
herein would have our hearts free from revenge, Deuteronomy. 19.13.
so that we should never desire justice of the Magistrate, nor of God to
satisfy our revenge, but rather do these enemies good and pray for them, as
Christ bids, Matthew. 5.44. Luke 23.34. and Stephen, Acts 7.59, 60. and Joseph to
his brethren.

Now this remission of men their wrongs is not a cause, or price, or merit of
our remission at Gods hand, but a sign or testimony of our remission, and in
some sense an antecedent, though in other sense a consequent of remission: it is
a consequent or an effect, because we cannot forgive any man his sins till we
be warmed with the sense of Gods love to us in forgiveness, and it is an
antecedent to continued and renewed forgivenesses which we have daily through
Christ his advocation in heaven. Christ does not receive us to pardon, but on
this condition, that we forgive men their offenses. Men that will not forgive
do what in them lies to make God implacable toward them. Our forgiveness is
not a cause but a condition.

That therefore we may lay aside our revenge, Christ brings two reasons,

1 From the profit, If we forgive, God will forgive, v. 14.

2 From the danger or loss. If we forgive not, neither will God forgive.

To conclude, our forgiveness of men is not a cause of Gods forgiveness of us
but a condition, hence the words in the text are not, Because you forgive men
their trespasses your father will forgive you, but, If you forgive men their
trespasses.

Obj. But, if forgiveness of our brother be a condition of our forgiveness with
God, then the merits of Christ are not the alone condition upon which
forgiveness depends.

Answ. There is a twofold condition, 1 Antecedent, which goes before
justification. Christ's merits are this condition. 2 Consequent, which follows
after justification, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you.

Or 2 there is a twofold condition, 1 For which we are forgiven, this only is
Christ's righteousness, and thus we say neither repentance, restitution,
forgiveness of men, nor universal obedience are conditions, that for these we
do obtain pardon.

2 There is a condition without which, so Christ says not, you shall live for
your repentance, but, Unless you repent you shall dye, Luke 13.5. If a King
offer to thee, both a poor man and his enemy, both his grace and Kingdom for a
gift, requiring some things of thee, viz. that thou will be sorry for the
wrongs which thou have done to him, and that thou would forgive others which
have offended thee, and if thou have offended any one that thou ask them
forgiveness, will you say that this King has forgiven you your offenses and
given you this Kingdom for your deserts or of his mere grace? surely of grace.
So is it in this case.

To conclude, we must consider forgiveness two ways, 1 As it was a secret
agreement betwixt the Trinity that Christ his atonement should be for the sins
of such and such persons: this is before our forgiveness. 2 There is the
forgiveness in our conscience, before this our forgiveness may go.

But I rather incline to the first, that pardon of sin is held to us upon
condition of repentance; now that person that has an absolute purpose of
revenge against his neighbor does not repent, because he goes on in a purpose
of sin, and so no pardon can belong to him; neither is there any true faith in
any such soul where there is a purpose of sin.

V. 16. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance,
for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast.

Here Christ reforms a third corruption of the Pharisees, wherein, 1 A
reprehension of their fasting, 2 A direction to a right fasting.

Christ here treats not of public fasts, but of private. Grotius observes that
some of the Pharisees fasted two days in a week, some four days, and did not
eat any thing till the setting of the Sun, and then they only fed upon herbs
or eggs: they lay hard in their beds. Now forasmuch as they aimed at the glory
and praise of men herein, Christ does not disallow their fasting, but only the
vainglory therein sought for.

That is not fasting when a person out of poverty suffers hunger, or by reason
of sickness cannot eat, nor to refrain from flesh is fasting. But the word
(...) fasting, is derived of the privative particle, (...) and (...) not to
eat, so that to fast is, not to take meat; or to refrain from meat, that we may
serve God in spiritual services. Without which holy end, or the like, as the
weakening of the flesh, etc. it comes under the kind of bodily services which
profit not, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8.

So that Christ condemns not fasting as a Levitical cereremony, being several
times practiced in the New Testament, Matthew. 17.21. Acts 14.23. 1 Cor. 7.5. 2
Cor. 11.26. but only taxes the superstition and hypocrisy of the Pharisees,
who did not refer fasting to its right end, but either rested in it, as
counting godliness to consist in pinching and pining the body, and referring it
to their ambitious ends, to gain an opinion of holiness, and not to stir up
fervency in prayer, or to chasten the flesh.

When ye fast] Christ establishes fasting. Christians, that prayer may be more
fervent, may and ought to use fasting.

Be ye not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance] (...) of (...) sad, and
(...), that is, in countenance.

Fasting dryes up the body, and makes men melancholic, but eating makes men
sweet and pleasant; therefore they that would persuade hard things to others,
do not go to them fasting, but after dinner, because then they are pleasant and
merry, now these hypocritical Pharisees would put on a sad countenance that
they might seemto have fasted, but Christ warnes them to lay aside all such
disfiguring, whether by bending their brows, hanging down their eyes, or
blacking their faces, and that they would show pleasant countenances, which was
a token of mirth. The word used for disfigure is (...), in English they darken,
by affecting severity, paleness and grief in their countenances. Carnal men will
give much bodily service to God, yet will they not part with their sins, so they
may but retain their sins they will do any thing. So that Christ his meaning
is, not that on a fasting day, we should carry our selves as on a feasting day,
Esa. 22.12, 13. Neither means he that in private fasts we should carry the
matter so closely that none of the family should know it, for that can hardly
be, but Christ means that when God calls to fasting we should be far from
seeking praise of men herein, as if we were not at all about such a business.

V. 17. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face, that
thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy father which is in secret, and
thy father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy head and wash thy face] Against the
Pharisees boasting of their fasting, Christ shows that our gestures in a
private fast are so to be composed that men may not mark us to fast: he names
these gestures of anointing the head from the manner of that country, Ruth, 3,
3. Ruth anointed her self when she went to Boaz, Psalm. 23.5. Thou anointest my
head with Oil. Luke 7.46. My head with Oil did thou not anoint. Much less
must we think as if fasting under the New Testament consisted in pleasures and
delights, or as if pride could not lie hid under mean apparel.

Not as if indeed we should anoint our head, but that we should avoid all
boasting in fasting, and that we should do as they who anoint their head, who
rather hold forth mirth and gladness, then grief and sadness.

The scope of Christ herein is to teach us to conceal our private fasts from
men, and to approve our hearts to God in our fasting, and as all other
exercises of devotion betwixt God and us ought to be kept private, so ought
this.

Thy father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly] These words are a
reason of the performance of the duty, i. e. thy Father sees in secret, and
will one day acknowledge thy sincerity. Esa. 38.3, 5. He saw Ezekiahs tears,
and Cornelius his prayers, Act. 10.4.

2 As he sees thy secret fasting, so he will reward thee openly, not by way of
desert, which is only proper to Christ's obedience, but he by his Spirit will
in the sincere performance of this duty stir up in thee mortification of the
flesh, and affliction of the Spirit, together with a devout intention in the
exercise of repentance, and we shall understand this, not only at present, but
specially at the day of judgment. Mean time know, God is not a debtor to thee,
for thou can deserve nothing at his hand, Luke 17.10. Romans 11.35. The same
way that a reward is given to him that prays, it is given to him that fasts,
but the reward is promised to him that prays, of grace, not of desert,
Therefore so it is given to him that fasts, and that not simply to him that
fasts, but to him that joins prayer with his fasting.

Thus we see how Christ reprehends the Pharisees Hypocritical fasting, who did
institute their fasts as to the outward part of it, in imitation of the Fathers
and holy people, who were wont to sit on the ground, and to be covered with
sackcloth and ashes, which were signs of their true sorrow, but to the inward
part, which was hearty grief for sin, and an earnest breathing after
reconciliation, this the Pharisees altogether omitted.

From the words thus expounded,

Observe, that Gods people ought, as in other duties, so in fasting, to avoid
corruptions, and to perform it in a right manner.

I will open, 1 The kinds, 2 The manner.

There Is a twofold fast, 1 public, which is when Gods people meet together,
either to desire pardon for some great sin committed, or to turn away
judgment, as in Jezabels time they met together in respect of a supposed
blasphemy, so when the men of Ai had smit thirty six men, Joshua and the elders
of Israel fasted, Josh. 7.6, 7. So the men of Israel having lost two set
battles against the men of Benjamin, Judge. 20.26. fasted until the even; so
when there was a famine coming, the Lord calls to the Priests to gather all the
people of the land to fasting and prayer, Joel. 1.14. so when Moab, Ammon and
Mount Seir came against Jehoshaphat, he seeks to God by prayer and fasting, 2
Chr. 20.3.

2 Private when we humble our selves, for some evils lying upon our persons or
family. So David humbled himself for the child, 2 Samuel 12.16. Of this Christ
speaks, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them then shall they fast,
Matthew. 9.15. So when in private we humble our selves for some evil lying upon
the Church, so did Nehemiah, cap. 1.4. for the affliction of the Jews. And
Daniel sought the Lord for the Jews, that God would bring them out of their
seventy years captivity, Dan. 9.3. Sometimes one friend fasts for another, so
Jobs friends, Job. 2.12. sometimes for enemies, Psalm. 35.13. And so David
fasted for the recovery of the health of his enemies.

2 The manner of fasting, 1 it must be with preparation to get off the hardness
of the heart; as in all prayer preparation is to be used before it, so much
more in this solemn duty, Levit. 23.29, 32.

2 It must be with humiliation and affliction of Spirit, Psalm. 35.15. Levit.
23.29. Ezra. 8.21.

3 Removed from hypocrisy. Anoint thy head, and wash thy face. As in the text.
Thou art not to be proud, because thou have been humbled, but to be humbled
because thou have been proud.

4 Free from censoriousness of others that fast not when thou fastest. John's
Disciples when they fasted censured the Disciples of Christ for their not
fasting, Mat. 9.14. In the same family one may have cause of fasting when
another has cause of rejoicing, 1 Cor. 7.5.

5 In performance of reading and expounding the Word. Nehem. 9.3. one fourth
part of the day was spent in reading the word and opening the same. Baruch on
the fasting day read the Word of the Lord by Jeremiah, Jer. 36.6. Another
fourth part of the day they spent in prayer, wherein confession of sins was
most insisted upon, Neh. 9.3.

6 In separation of the soul and body from sundry comforts, wherewith at other
times we do refresh our selves, as from stately apparel: the King of Niniveh
laid aside his princely robes, Jon. 3.6. Such apparel is fittest at a fast as
most shows the abasement of our Spirits, only let it not be affected, also
then refrain from pleasures which are then both unlawful, Esa. 58.3. Joel.
2.16. The bridegroom then must go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of
her closet, also they are unsuitable; God complains that when he called to
weeping, mourning, and girding with sackcloth, then behold joy and gladness,
Esa. 22.12, 13. Yea on a fasting day we are to refrain from the ordinary works
of our calling, Esa. 58.3. Behold, in the day of your fast ye exact all your
labors.

Also abstinence from Meat and Drink, 2 Samuel 3.35. David did not taste Bread or
ought else till the going down of the Sun. Only note this abstinence is so far
forth requisite as it helps forward our inward humiliation. If the forbearance
of food prove an hinderance to humiliation it is not to be used, and such as
cannot abstain, though through weakness they cannot keep a fast, yet may they
keep a day of humiliation and prayer. Only,

1 Beware of a pretended necessity instead of a true, for if it be pretended
God finds out pretenses, Prove. 24.12. Does not he that pondereth the heart
consider? If it be a real necessity, then God will have mercy rather than
sacrifice.

2 Though thou can not abstain wholly, yet abstain from so much as usual, or
from food of such a kind. Daniel ate no pleasant bread for three weeks, Dan.
10.3. A tanto, a toto, or a tali, in such bodily abstinence we judge our selves
unworthy of the creatures.

7 Consider the petitions you would commend to God in prayer, and the sins you
desire to acknowledge, and the judgments you desire to have removed, and the
mercies you desire to obtain, and insist especially upon them; when the Church
would have a blessing upon Paul's Ministry they used fasting, Acts 13.2. so for
a blessing upon stated Elders, prayer and fasting was used. Ezra to have a
right direction for the people in their coming from Babylon, sought God by
fasting and prayer, Ang. ad Casul.
Ezra 8.21. in all these fasts they insisted upon the matter in hand. When
Peter was to encounter at Rome with Simon Magus, the Roman Church on the
Sabbath Day fasted. Augustine when he saw his City besieged by the Vandals gave
himself to prayer and fasting, and died in that Siege, as Possidonius mentions.

8 Beware that thou turn not thy fast into a matter of penance. Persons when
they do penance in formal and idolatrous Churches are glad when it is over,
though they never show any true repentance; so persons are glad when the
fasting is over, though their hearts have never melted throughout the duty. The
end of a thing is that for which a thing is, the end of fasting is to get off
hardness of heart, and to get a melting frame and communion with God: now to
what end is thy fasting, if you attain not the proper end thereof?

9 Beware of the Rocks thou may dash thy self against in thy fasting, as,

1 To think thy fasting any satisfaction to divine justice, as some Hypocrites
seem to make it, Isai 58.3.

2 Beware that thou make not that a matter of gain which God has made a matter
of punishment, hence what thou savest from thy family give to the poor. Isai
58.6, 7. The fast that God has chosen is, To lose the bands of wickedness, and
to deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house.

3 In thy fasts look not primarily at the removing of judgments and obtaining
of mercies, but primarily look at the return of Gods face and favor to thy
soul, and then at these benefits in the second place.

4 If God in thy fasting shall at any time give thee enlargement of heart,
beware thou be not lifted up with it, and so thou grow careless, and thine
heart harden upon a presumptuous conceitedness that thou have found favor with
God. This was Hezekiah's case, 2 Kings 19.15. compared with 2 Chronicles. 32.25.

5 Think not fasting to be enough without turning from thy particular iniquity,
Isai 58.6. Thou must loose the bonds of wickedness. In not turning from sin
with thy fasting, but retaining it, thou must look to be plagued as Jezabel was
after the fast in Jezreel, 2 Kings 10. who profaning such an Ordinance came to
have a more seared conscience and hardened heart after her fasting than before.

6 Beware of feeding thy self without fear, before or after a fast, for Satan
may lay snares both ways.

7 Seen not to men to fast, but to thy Father who sees in secret, and will
reward thee openly, by granting thee that which thou prayest for, and a Crown
of Glory hereafter.

8 Do not forbear the duty because of the painfulness of it when God calls thee
to it. Augustine says, What Storms are merchants exposed to to get wealth?
what Heats, and Colds, and Dangers do Hunters suffer, from Horses, Ditches,
Precipices, from Rivers and wild Beasts? what hunger and thirst? what straits
of most mean meat and drink that they may take the beast? and sometimes the
flesh of the beast proves not fit to eat. To what torments almost of daily
strokes is the tender age of boys subject? with what troubles of watching and
abstinence are they exercised in their Schools, not for to learn wisdom, but
for wealth, that they may learn numbers? he means figuring and cyphering. I
say, if men will suffer such hardships for earthly things, shall not we follow
the Lord in painful duties? Aug. de verbis Domini. Sermon. 9.

V. 18. Lay not up for your selves treasures on earth, where Moth and Rust does
corrupt, and where Things break through and steal; but lay up for your selves
treasures in heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where
Thieves do not break through nor steal; for where your treasure is there will
your hearts be also.

In the words two things, 1 A prohibition, v. 18. Lay not up for your selves
treasure upon earth. 2 A precept, but lay up for your selves treasures in
Heaven. For both which there are three Reasons,

1 From the corruptibility of all earthly things: Rust and Moth corrupts them,
and Thieves steal them.

2 From the incorruptibility and certainty of heavenly things, neither Moth nor
Rust does corrupt them, nor Thieves steal them.

3 From the proneness of the heart to be where the treasure is, v. 20.

Lay not up for your selves treasure on earth] Not as if Christ forbad the
enjoyment of riches, household stuff, apparel, but he here condemns, 1 A love of
earthly things immoderately, either by setting the heart upon them, Psalm.
62.10. If riches increase set not your heart upon them, or delighting, Job
31.25. and rejoicing in the bare possession of them, Luke 12.19, 20. or
tenaciously holding from good uses, as the rich man that fared sumptuously
every day, but had nothing for Lazarus, or through unbelief, not disposing them
to good uses for fear our selves or ours should come to want.

1 Where moth and rust does corrupt] Here Is the first reason why we should not
there lay up treasure on earth but in heaven, because earthly treasures can
hardly be kept, but heavenly treasures will easily be kept; earthly things can
hardly be safe there are so many casualties to destroy them, rust, moth,
thieves, Jam. 5.2, 3. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments moth eaten,
your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you.

But lay up for your selves treasure in Heaven] That is God, and Christ, and
good works, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Ready to distribute, laying up in store a good
foundation against time to come, Luke 12.33. Sell that you have and give alms,
provide for your selves bags that wax not old, a treasure in the Heaven that
fades not. It Is a folly for a man to lay up treasure there whence he is to go,
and not to send it thither whither he is to go.

It will appear that our treasure is not on earth, but in Heaven, 1 when our
consciences witness with us that we love God soveraignly, Psalm. 73.25. Whom
have I in heaven but thee? whom is there on earth I desire in comparison of
thee.

2 When the heart is ever and anon at spare hours running after God, Psalm.
73.28. It Is good for me to draw near to God.

3 By the dissatisfaction the soul has in any thing without God, but when God
comes into the soul, the soul as it were runs over, Eccles. 5.10. He that
loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, give such a man all the
world he is not satisfied till God come in: the souls of good and bad men rest
in their treasures.

4 By the tendency of our endeavors, as carnal men are still laying up one
pound after another, one field after another, so a Christian is laying up one
good work after another, fruits that may abound in the day of account, Phil.
4.17. And these not one or two, or a few good works, but many, for a treasure
is made up of much riches heaped together.

5 By our vast desires after God: when we can never have enough of him, we
never are satisfied with assurance enough, we never have answers of prayers
enough, we can never have communion with God enough. Carnal men have vast
desires after the world, because their treasures are there, Psalm. 42.1, 2.

6 By the consolation the soul takes in God and heavenly things. Psalm. 4.6.
Wordly men say, who will show them any good? But a gracious heart says, Lord,
lift up the light of thy countenance upon me. As carnal men draw their chief
comfort because they have so much goods, so much in gold and silver, so much in
Bills and Bonds, so a Christian draws his comfort from his spiritual treasure.
I (says he) have so many answers from God, such a measure of the spirits
sealing, so much peace of conscience, such and such promises made over to my
soul.

7 By your pains in getting, care in keeping, and fear of losing. Gods people
spend much pains to get this heavenly treasure, Joh. 6.27. They labor for the
food that endures to everlasting, they will take pains with their souls and
bodies, they go from strength to strength till they appear before God in Sion,
Psalm. 84.7. Also they have a care to keep this treasure, as men hide here and
there, and put lock upon lock for to guard it. Achan he hid his two hundred
shekels of silver and wedge of gold in the earth, Josh. 7.21. So Saints
carefully keep their consciences pure, carefully nourish communion with God,
carefully eschew sin, Psalm. 119.11. called the hidden man, 1 Pet. 3. So they
are afraid of losing their treasure, lest any lust should rob them of God or of
peace of conscience.

8 By the longings of the soul. Whatsoever is the souls treasure the heart
longs after it, whether it be riches, honor, praise; so if heavenly things be
thy treasure thy soul will vehemently long after them; if the Lord be thy
treasure thy soul will long for him. Psalm. 63.1. My soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee, in a dry and barren land wherein no water is. The whole
earth is as a barren land when the soul cannot enjoy God.

9 By the references of the soul. Men usually make all their references serve
for their treasure, their buying, selling, chopping, changing: so if heavenly
things, as Christ, (...) grace, be thy treasure, all will be referred to these,
Romans (...), 8. 1 Cor. 10.^1.

10 Treasures are preferred before all other things. In any straits or
difficulties persons are careful to preserve these, though with the loss of
all their goods, so if Christ and grace be thy treasure, thou will sell all for
him. Matthew. 13.44. The Kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field,
the which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof goes and
sells all that he has and buyeth that field. Paul counted all things dung in
comparison of Christ. Phil. 3.8. Gal. 6.14. God forbid I should rejoice in any
thing save in the cross of Jesus Christ.

11 By the contentation the soul finds in it. Whatsoever treasure the soul
has it is contented in it, and not without it, so if the Lord and heavenly
things be thy treasure, thou will be content with him and them, Psalm. 16.3, 4.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and my cup, thou maintainest my
lot: the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly
heritage. See how contented he was in having God for his treasure, Lam. 3.24.

2 Use, And as it serves for Trial, so, 2 for Caution, not to lay up treasures
on earth. Not that earthly treasure is simply unlawful, Pro. 21.20. There is
treasure to be desired in the dwelling of the wise, but a foolish man spends
it up. Christ had his bag, which Judas bare. There was treasures in the house
of God, 1 Kin. 15.18. We find sundry godly Princes have had treasures, as
David, 1 Chro. 29.3, 4. and Asa, 1 Kin. 15.18. There was a treasury into which
the poor Widow threw her mite, Luke 21.1. the Wise men that came to Christ had
treasures of gold and other precious things: But Christ here taxes the
inordinate treasuring up of earthly things, as, 1 an unboundedly immense and
exceeding large multiplying of earthly things. The Prince himself was commanded
not greatly to multiply to himself silver and gold, Deuteronomy. 17.17. much less must
private persons, that have not half those wants that Princes have. Jam. 5.3.
Some rich men had so much gold and silver lying by them, that it cankered and
rusted, yea they heaped up treasure together to the last day. Some persons
having but one or never a child heap up earthly things in as great a measure
as if they had twenty children.

2 The loving of earthly things soveraignly, as the young man who left Christ
rather then his estate, Matthew. 19.22. and Demas, who forsook Paul to embrace
this present world.

3 When we shall seek earthly treasures primarily, Matthew. 6.33. First seek the
Kingdom of God.

4 When we treasure them up ultimately or restingly, as that wherein our souls
rest. The Glutton thus filled his Barns and his soul rested in them, Luke
12.19. Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry. The Apostle bids, love not the world, 1 John 2.16. The
word is, (...), of (...) and (...), greatly to rest in it.

5 When we treasure them up unnecessarily; for we are only to desire things
necessary for the state and condition wherein God has placed us for us and
ours, for the present and for future, 1 Timothy 6.8. Having food and raiment let
us therewith be content. Against this the Wise man speaks, Eccles. 4.8. There
is one alone, and there is not a second, yea he has neither child nor
brother, yet is there no end of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied
with riches, neither says he for whom do I labor and bereave my soul of good?
Men that thirst for abundance can hardly keep conscience pure.

6 Lay not up treasures on earth with neglect of spiritual graces and comforts.
The wicked had abundance of wealth, Job 21.10, 13. Hence v. 14. Therefore they
say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

7 When we only lay up treasure to our selves. Men that labor with their
hands are not only to treasure up for themselves and families, but also to
give to him that lacks, Ephesians. 4.28. much more others. Men that lay up treasure
to themselves and theirs only are called fools, Luke 12.21. so is he that
lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God. We ought to have
the cause of God, and poor Saints, and godly uses to lie upon us as well as
family wants: the same commandment of God that ties us to our children, ties
us to the poor and to other good uses, though not in the same measure of
ministration.

Grounds why we should not lay up treasure on earth.
1 Those that have had the most of them have confessed a vanity in them, Eccles.
2.8. Solomon gathered Silver and Gold, and had peculiar Treasures, yea v. 9. he
was increased more than all that were before him in Jerusalem, yet v. 11. he
says, All was vanity and vexation of spirit.

2 Earthly Treasures are liable to consume and perish, Thieves, Moth, Rust
consume them. It is not our calling them Fee-simples, Inheritances,
Perpetuities, or the Conveyance of them to us and our heirs for ever that will
make them durable. They are like fugitive Servants which often run from one
Master to another. For all the Babylonians had Gates of Brass and Bars of Iron,
to defend their Treasures, yet says the Lord to Cyrus, I will break in pieces
these Gates, and cut asunder these Bars, and I will give thee the Treasures of
darkness, and hidden riches of secret places. Isai 45.2, 3. If your treasure be
in Silver and Gold, Thieves may spoil them, if in Garments Moths may eat them,
if in Ships Sea may swallow them, if in Cattle Rot may seize them, if in
Buildings and Furniture Fire may burn them, if in Lands War may dispossess
them, when a War comes if you fall not on the right side your Lands are gone;
besides cracked Titles, Inundations of Waters spoil some men of their Lands. Job
says of goods in the general, that they flow away in the day of Gods wrath,
Job 20.28.

3 From the inability of earthly things, as, 1 They cannot bring us sundry
goods, not pardon to the soul, nor health to the body, nor a good nights rest,
not a good repute in the hearts of good men, they cannot redeem a soul, nor
give to God a ransom for it. Psalm 49.7. A man may gain the whole world and yet
lose his soul, Matthew. 16.26.

2 There are many evils they cannot remove. Earthly treasure can neither drive
away diseases from the body, nor disquiet from the conscience, nor can they
secure against poverty, as appears in Adoni-bezek, and other Princes, who have
come to poverty before they died: yea, when not sanctified, earthly treasures
drown the soul in perdition, as the Ship when it is overladen sinks, unless
unburdened of some of its lading.

3 Use. Exhortation to lay up treasure in Heaven. Consider, 1 The excellency of
the object. As it is a man's misery to have his treasure here below, to be like
Eels mudling in mud, so it is the souls happiness to mount up to have his
treasure in Heaven; as the Sun draws up the vapors, so should the glorious
things of Heaven draw up our hearts. We should be like those fishes that having
fins swim above the water. Amor meus pondus meum, illuc feror, quocunque feror.
My love is my weight, thither I am carried where ever I am carried.

2 The unchangeableness of it; neither Moth nor Rust corrupts it. Grace is
incorruptible, the hidden man of the heart is incorruptible, 1 Peter 3.4. and
so is the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Peter 1.4. and so much more is God himself, Heb.
1.12. They shall wax old as does a Garment, but thou art the same.

3 The eternal wofulness to be mistaken in the chief treasures. Persons reflect
upon their folly when they have been cheated to think they have had treasure
from Witches, and it has proved nothing but Leaves and Chips: what will it be
then to be mistaken in this treasure? yet it is the misery of all worldly men.
See Psalm 4.6. Who will show us any good?

4 The exceeding happiness of having God for our treasure. When Friends fails,
life fails, he knows where to go for comfort, and he being our treasure can
make up all our wants.

V. 20. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Heart is taken, 1 For the desire of the heart, Deuteronomy. 24.25. The hireling sets
his heart upon his hire, that is, his desire.

2 Heart is taken for the affections of the heart, as love, joy, delight, and
so here, Psalm 57.1.

3 Heart is taken for the light of the understanding and consent of the will,
Joel 2.12. Turn to me with all your heart, that is, not only that you
understand what is your duty, but that you consent to give your wills to me.

4 For the devices of the heart, Isai 32.6. the Prophet says, A wicked man's
heart works wickedness, that is, the devices of the heart are for it.

5 For the thoughts of the heart, Psalm 139.23. Try me, and know my heart,
search me and know my thoughts. Sampson told Dalilah all his heart, that is,
all his thoughts, Judges 16.17. Psalm 45.1. My heart is inditing a good matter,
that is, the thoughts of my heart are inditing.

6 Heart is taken for the purposes of the heart, 1 Kings 8.17. It was in the
heart of my father David to build a house for the Name of God, that is, it was
in the purposes of my heart.

The meaning is, if God and Christ be our Treasure, then our desires, yea the
whole stream of affections will be for him, as our love, joy, yea our
understandings to conceive, and our wills to make choice of him as the chiefest
good, yea the contrivances of the heart will run Heavenward, yea the thoughts
of the heart will be often with God, and the purposes of the heart always with
him.

But if the World, or some darling lust be our chief Treasure, the stream of
the will and affections, devices, thoughts and purposes will go after that.

V. 22, 23. The light of the body is the eye, if thine eye be single thy whole
body shall be full of light;

But, if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

The words are an Allegory.

Quest. What is meant by the light of the body.

Answ. Some by eye understand the light of reason, and by the body all the
actions of the body, then the sense will be that we should not in a blind
course follow only our sense but act according to right reason.

Others by eye understand a sincere intention eying God, and singling out God
from all other objects, if that be right the whole body will be full of light,
but if thy intention be hypocritical and wicked, thy whole body shall be full
of darkness.

Others by eye understand an enlightened understanding. Look as the body is
guided by the eye, so are all the actions of the soul by an enlightened
understanding, but where the understanding is vicious, all a man's practice is
corrupt; a corrupt understanding is as a false Looking-glass. If the mind be
blinded with earthly things, as Gold, Silver, treasures, etc. to think them the
chief good, then will men think that to be lawful which is unlawful, and that
to be profitable which is hurtful.

Others by eye understand the judgment, and by the body understand the mind,
if this Light be dark, blind affections, and unbridled passions, and corrupt
actions must needs follow such a judgment. I take it the two last are here
meant, where the understanding is enlightened to discern aright of heavenly
treasure, that it is the only precious and incorruptible treasure, and the
judgment determines and gives sentence herein, there follows an holy and
heavenly conversation, but where the understanding is clouded, and the judgment
misguided, all our actions are full of darkness. We should have no less care to
have a clear discerning understanding and judgment, than to have our natural
eyes kept clear, for as we cannot go without stumbling, if we want bodily sight,
no more can we go in the way of salvation unless our understandings be
enlightened.

Obs. An enlightened understanding, and a sanctified judgment are of absolute
necessity to guide us in an holy practice, without these we cannot discern the
excellency of heavenly treasure above earthly treasure, without these we shall
make Martha's choice and not Mary's, Luke 10.41. Mary has chosen that good
part.

Reas. The Reason is, 1 Because without these we can neither see sin nor grace
in their right colors, we shall be ready to call evil good and good evil, we
shall put darkness for light and light for darkness, bitter for sweet and sweet
for bitter, Isai 5.20. we shall be ready to call sanctification singularity,
zeal preciseness, holiness hypocrisy, sincerity scrupulousness.

2 Because an enlightened understanding and a sanctified judgment do not only
propose unto us duty, but also direct us to the practice thereof; hence it is
compared to the guidance of the eye to the body, and without these we know not
whither we go, John 12.35.

Use 1 Pity those who want both an enlightened understanding and a sanctified
judgment; so Christ was moved herein, Matthew. 9.37.

2 Beware you follow not in your practice false guides, the light that leads
most men is mere darkness: in their religion they are led by the examples of
others, Joh. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? Or by
the laws of the land and command of the Prince, Dan. 3.7. As soon as the King
commanded they all fell down to worship, in their eating and drinking they are
led by their cheer, in buying and selling led by their gain, others are led by
their good meanings, Joh. 16.2. They meant to do good service when they killed
his Saints, sometimes by opinion, 1 King. 18.21. Paul meant well when he
compelled persons to blaspheme Christ, Act, 26.9. Oh then get an enlightened
understanding, and in order to it study the Word, which when thou go it
shall lead thee, when thou awakest it shall talk with thee, Prove. 6.22, 23. Its
resembled to a lantern which shows us the way, Psalm. 119.105. and to a
counselor, Psalm. 119.24.

3 Follow after an enlightened understanding and a sanctified judgment,
without these we can no more guide our course toward heaven then the sea
travailer can guide his course without his compass, or the land travailer
without sun or moon. For want of these many men are like a Millhorse that goes
round round, thinking he is in the rode way when he is but where he was:
without this illumination we are ready to think all things alike lawful, as in
the King of Moab who sacrificed his Son, and in Manasses who built altars to
all the host of heaven, 2 King. 3.26. 2 Chronicles. 33.5, 6. Its the wisdom of the
prudent to understand his way. Prove. 14.8.

4 Cease to wonder why so few wise and learned men seek after heavenly things,
1 Cor. 1.26, 27. They want an enlightened understanding and a sanctified
judgment. As the bruit beasts knowing no higher then things suitable to their
own nature and so savor only such, so do Carnal men, they savor only the
things of the flesh, because they know no higher, Romans 8.5.

5 Learn a rule how to lay up your treasure aright, both here and hereafter,
get an enlightened understanding and a sanctified judgment, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
without this we shall be ready upon pretense of lawful cares to be swallowed up
of the world.

6 Join to an enlightened mind a discerning judgment, in order to a regular
government of your conversations. Job. 6.30. Cannot my taste discern perverse
things? that is godly men have an ability to discern holy actions from perverse
and crooked actions. A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment,
Eccles. 8.5. without this sanctified judgment, notwithstanding all brain
knowledge, we shall never be able to discern spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for want of these both Christ and his ways are condemned of the world, Job,
21.13, 14. and by these chosen of Christians, Phil. 3.7, 8.

Motives.
1 This enlightened understanding and sanctified judgment will be as useful to
thy practice as a bright shining light, whether torch or candle, will be to thy
footsteps, which keeps thee from stumbling, Luke 11.36. If thy whole body be
full of light having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when
the bright shining of a candle does give thee light: for want of light we are
apt to stumble, Joh. 11.9. but where we have this light there is none occasion
of stumbling because we abide in the light, 1 John 2.10. Wisdom is rightly to
understand the knowledge of faith and doctrine of Christ, understanding is to
take heed of the snares of the devil, heretics, etc. and all deceits proposed
under the name of the word, Luth. Tom. 4.324.

2 The woeful falls we are exposed unto; being without this light, we stand at
the devils mercy. Judge what the great world would be were it deprived of the
light of the sun, so forlorn are our souls deprived of this spiritual light.
Original sin has done with us as the Philistines with Sampson, who put out his
eyes, and then led him to the basest drudgery, and this is the case of all till
a new light be set up in their hearts.

3 The gradual proceedings both of light in the mind, and discerning in the
judgment, alas they are at first very small; we see the things of God, as the
blind man, Mar. 8.24. who saw men like trees, hence the Apostle prays for the
Ephesians, who had these in some measure, that they might have more of them,
Ephesians. 1.17, 18. so does he for the Philippians, cap. 1.9, 10. the sight of an
infant is not so strong as the sight of a grown man, so the light in weak
Christians is not so strong as in grown Christians.

Means to inlightning.
1 Remove the hindrances: the devil and world casts dust in our eyes that we
cannot see, 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this World blindes many, the glory of the
World dazles our sight, clouding mists, distilling humors and skins growing
over, hinder sight, so do mists of ignorance and hardness of heart hinder sight.

2 Cry mightily to God for light, Psalm 119.18. Prove. 2.4, 5, 6. and be wail
thy ignorance, as Hagur, I am more brutish than any man, Prove. 30, 2.

3 Be often asking questions. A good Scholar must be (...) a questionist. The
woman of Samaria perceiving Christ's abilities asks him diverse questions, Joh.
4.19. People should be like the Queen of Sheba who posed Solomon with hard
questions, 1 Kin. 10.1.

4 Cast up thy gains thou have made, when ever thou hears or reads the Word;
look as you do when you have been at a market, you consider what you have got.
Good hearers should be like sieves that lets chaff go but retains the wheat.
Many are a like a sieve in the water at hearing or reading, when in the water
its full, when its out of the water nothing remains in it.

5 Meditate of what thou reads or hears, so do godly men, Psalm. 1.1. So did
Joshua, cap. 1.8. and David, Psalm. 119.15.148. Those that read and hear much,
and meditate little, are like those that have a sharp appetite after food, but
by reason of a cold stomach they cannot digest it. Meditation is to the soul as
digestion to the stomach, for want of which the word heard is as a writing writ
in the sand, which the first blast of wind does utterly deface.

6 As the light of the sun or some other light must meet with the light of the
eye before sight can follow, so in order to spiritual light God must shine in
our hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. Besides the light of wisdom in the soul, there must be
the light of divine revelation. The inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding, Job, 32.8. I will make known my words unto you, Prove. 1.23.
Matthew. 16.17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven.

V. 24. No man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one and love
the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other; ye cannot
serve God and Mammon.

Christ to the end of the chapter sets down 2 things, 1 a dehortation from
worldliness and carking cares, from ver. 24. to ver. 33. 2 an exhortation to
true carefulness, ver. 33.

For the dehortation, it is confirmed by diverse reasons, the first is from the
impossibility of serving God and the world, or loving God soveraignly, and the
world soveraignly.

No man can serve two masters] Mammon, as Aretius and many others observe, is a
Syriack word, and signifies wealth, or as Hesichius interprets (...) a
treasure. This Mammon or wealth is said to be a Lord or Master, not as if it
were so by nature or in deed, but only in the estimation of men, and because
it possesses the chief seat in the hearts of earthly minded men. Not as if it
were unlawful to have Mammon or wealth, for Christ bids us make to our selves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, Luke 16.9. But he bids we should not
make an Idol of it, to serve it as covetous men do, who set their hearts upon
their wealth and make a God of it. Abram, Isaac, David, Solomon, had wealth,
but set not their hearts on it.

We may see what it is to serve Mammon, by considering what it is to serve God.
To serve God is to acknowledge him, to reverence him as our Lord and Savior, to
obey him, to trust in him alone, to lift him up in our hearts above all
creatures and enjoyments, when he and they shall come in competition, to seek
and promote his glory only; all or most of this covetous and earthly men
ascribe to wealth, now God will be worshipped alone or not at all.

Now whereas covetous men object, we can serve God and the World together, we
can have leisure for Gods worship and our own gain. I confess I am eager to get
wealth, but I will not omit the worship of God. To this Christ answers, No man
can serve two Masters, for either he will love the one and hate the other. This
Proverb means it of Masters in the whole, as the Lawyers say, there cannot be
two Lords or Masters of one and the same thing.

2 No man can serve two Masters, that is, commanding contrary things at one and
the same time, for else we may serve diverse Masters subordinate one to another,
as the Council here and those that derive power from them, and those who derive
power to them. 1 Peter 2.12, 13. and two Masters that are in equal power.

Besides immoderate love of the World will alienate the heart from God, yea,
getting a reign in our heart it will throw God out of government there.

Ye cannot serve God and Mammon] Irenaeus derives Mammon of Mum, that is, a
spot, and Hon, that is, Riches; so that Mammon is the spot of Riches, such is
covetousness, which hides Riches up that they are eaten up of Rust and Moth.

From the words I Will gather one Observation.

Obs. The love of God and the love of the World cannot in any sovereign and
eminent degree be in one and the same soul at one and the same time, James 4.4.
O ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God? 1 John 2.16. If any man love the world the love of the
Father cannot abide in him.

Reas. 1 From the contrariety of one to the other.

2 Because God, among all the affections of the soul, challenges our love,
Matthew. 22.38. yea, and that in a sovereign degree, Matthew. 10.37. therefore the
World cannot have it. When we give up our sovereign love to him, then he gives
us back some of it that we may bestow it upon Wives, Children, Estate; with
this intention, that we love them subordinately to himself.

3 From the absurdity of placing God and the World in one and the same Throne.
It Is all one as to join light and darkness together, which cannot have
communion, 2 Cor. 4.14. To be translated out of the World, and to love the
World cannot be together in one and the same subject; it is an argument a
repugnantibus.

Use. 1 For information. See how far they are from Christianity whose hearts
are knit to any earthly thing more than God.

1 These earthly things thou so affects are not able to fill thy soul. God
only fills the soul, Eccles. 5.10. He that loves Silver shall not be
satisfied with Silver. He spoke like a Fool that said, Soul take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry. You may as soon fill a Chest with Grace, as a Soul
with Gold.

2 Consider for whom God placed the affection of love in thee, was it not for
himself? As the eye was made for color, so was our love for God. To fall in
love with the World and not with God is as if a man having a beautiful,
virtuous, noble and rich virgin offered him, he should slight her and fall in
love with some base and beggarly strumpet.

3 The love of the World will eat out the love of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. Lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God. The more love to God the more remiss about
earthly things, and the more love to earthly things, the more remiss to God and
his service.

4 All earthly things thou so affects are not the true good, Matthew. 19.17. Why
call thou me good? there is none good save one, that is God. Christ himself,
though nearer to good than any creature, yet if men had set their affections on
him as a creature, they had done amiss. When worldly men say, who will show us
any good? meaning from Corn and Wine, the Prophet judging these not to be the
true good, says, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, Psalm 4.6,
7. as if he should say, The Lord and the light of his countenance is only the
true good.

5 Earthly things cannot make us happy, but God can. That God can make the soul
happy appears, Psalm 16.11. In his presence is fullness of joy. Psalm 17.15. I
shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness. Psalm 30.5. In his favor
is life. Acts 2.28. Thou will make me full of joy with thy countenance. Now
fullness of joy must needs procure satisfaction.

Now earthly things cannot make us happy. 1 They cannot free us from misery.
Belshazzar, Dan. 5.6. for all he had wealth and honor in abundance, yet seeing
the handwriting he was startled, his knees smote one against another. When the
rich man's Barns could not hold his Corn, the Devils carried his soul to Hell.
So the rich man Luke 16. who lived like a Gentleman yet died and went to Hell;
and for temporal evils, there are some evils earthly things cannot turn away,
as War, trouble of conscience: suppose they turn away some evils, what avails
it to have one evil turned away, and another as bad lying upon us?

2 Earthly things are not proportionable: nothing fits the ear but sounds,
nothing fits the smell but odours, nothing is proportionable and fit for the
soul save God. Hence God to Abraham, Genesis 15.1. I am thy exceeding great
reward. Men that have the most of earthly things, God puts sometimes a secret
disproportion betwixt them and their estates, that they have no comfort therein.

3 They are not everlasting: nothing can be called happiness which is not
everlasting. Now earthly things are like a flock of birds in your backside
which on a sudden take wing, Pro. 23.4, 5. Crowns and scepters are not for
ever, Prove. 27.24. Riches are not for ever, and the crown does not endure to
every generation. Adonibezek, Belshazzar, and many others have lost their
kingdoms: he that rides the multitude rides a skittish horse that knows not how
soon it may fling him. The world passes away and the lusts thereof, 1 John
2.17. (...) the word is, like a swift flowing river. That all earthly things
are perishing food, Joh. 6.27. appears in Hamans honor, Jobs riches and
Aegypts pleasures, called only pleasures for a season, Heb. 11.25. and such
are all your pleasures and delightful acts, any of you have had in uncleanness,
revenge and drunkenness, for not only the world passes away but the lusts
thereof, 1 John 1.17.

2 Reprehension of the inordinate love, men have to the world, seen,

1 In their exceeding joy in the having of them, and their exceeding sorrow in
the loss of them. Laban when he saw the bracelets and earrings Eleazar had put
on Rebekkahs arm, says he to a stranger he never saw before, Come in thou
blessed of the Lord, Genesis 24.30, 31. Job did not thus rejoice in his goods,
cap. 31.25. thus to rejoice is to rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos. 6.13.
like Jonas in a gourd. We have a command for remisseness of joy herein, 1 Cor.
7.30, 31. These excessive joys procure excessive sorrows. Jobs wife having lost
her goods falls to rating her husband for his uprightness, and provokes him to
curse God.

2 In that they can rejoice to see their children worldly, to see them inclined
to any other vice they are grieved at it, not for this.

3 In their eager pursuit of earthly things. How eager was Balaam for the
rewards of divination for Balaks gold? such were those wicked teachers, Jude
ver. 11. who ran greedily after the error of Balaam: now what is this wealth
men so run after? What is gold and silver but white and red earth called thick
clay? Hab. 2.6. What are Diamonds but the beams of the sun (as some think)
enclosed in a piece of earth? What are Margarites but the excrements of
shell-fishes? What is purple but the blood of a fish of that name called
purple? What is silk, but only the spinnings and webs of worms? Bern. Balaam
had a denial from God to curse the people of God, yet the desire of gold so
transported him that he would make one essay more, to see whether he might
curse Israel, Numb. 22.10, 11, 12. compared with ver. 18, 19, 20.

4 In their penurious pinching and scraping, as the Emper Vespasian, who made a
gain of urine: hence came the proverb, sweet is the smell of gain, that comes
from any thing. Some call such men cuminoprestas, that is such as will not give
a whole cummin seed, but divide it in two. These persons basely withhold from
themselves and families; There is a man (says Solomon) that wants nothing
for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat
thereof, Eccles. 6.2. How much more do such withhold from good uses? The Lord
has need of their ass, but they will not let him go, Matthew. 21.3. The poor
want their dues, Prove. 3.27. but they are like unfaithful stewards that keep
the servants wages in their hands.

5 In their multitudes of employments above the reach of, 1 their capacity: no
man in the world, his parts never so large, is able to go through that business
which some one man of meaner parts has, and retain communion with God; how
then can he of mean parts retain his communion? Every man's soul is like a
vessel which being once full is able to hold no more.

2 Above the reach of their time, as Pharaohs seven lean kine did eat up the
fat, so their time for worldly employments eats up the time due for Gods
service. As he is a lover of pleasures more then a lover of God, who suffers
pastimes to devour his time for holy duties; so he is a worldling, who suffers
worldly employments ordinarily and usually to hinder him from religious
exercises. Such were the old world, and the Sodomites, Luke 17.27, 28. They did
eat and drink, they married and were given in marriage, they bought, they sold,
they builded, they planted. Why? are not all these things lawful? Yes, but when
men's hearts are swallowed up of these, when men follow these with the exclusion
of religious duties, as they did the preaching of Noah and Lot, then they
become unlawful and forerunners of great hardness and destruction.

3 Above the reach of Christian liberty. The utmost of Christian liberty is
that we provide for us and ours in reference to an everlasting life, having our
hearts remiss and loose to earthly things, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30.

6 In their sollicitous cares for living: one says what shall I do when I am
old? another says, husband, what shall I and my five children do when you are
dead? what shall I do in a dear year, and from hence to be set on work to
provide excessively? some have but one child or two, yet are they as full of
carking, as if they had twenty; nay some have never a child, yet are they more
scraping and more full of carking cares, then many that have a charge.

3 Use To diswade us from inordinate love of earthly things.

Grounds to diswade you.
1 This inordinate love makes means of grace become fruitless. When the King
had made his feast, farms and Oxen kept the persons invited from coming. Luke
14.18. when Ezekiel preached unto miracle, that his voice was as the sound of a
Musical instrument, Ezekiel. 33.31. yet his hearers profited not by it, because
their hearts ran after their covetousness, the thorny ground hearers brought no
fruit to perfection, why? the thorns of earthly cares sucking out the state of
their hearts choked it, as weeds let among corn suck out the state of the
ground, Matthew. 13.22. Yea worldliness makes men scoff at the Word. Luke 16.14.
The Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things, and they derided him,
or blew their noses at him, as the Word signifies. Yea though they hear the
Word, and consent both to the truth and goodness of it, yet worldliness keeps
men from closing with it, in the great duty of self-denial, as in the young
man, Math. 19. who went away, being sorry he could not keep Christ and his
possessions together.

2 It makes us dis-relish heaven and heavenly things, and this is a woeful
frame of heart, Romans 8.5. Contraries cannot subsist together in any eminent
degree in one and the same subject.

3 It pierces the soul through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. pinching the
poor, griping the widow and fatherless, getting wealth unjustly or holding it
unjustly, these pierce the soul as if a dagger went to a man's heart: How did
Judas thirty pieces gall his conscience? This especially in an evil day,
Eccles. 5.17. he has much sorrow with his sickness. Such men in the day of
death are like a carriers horse, which having carried gold and silver all the
day, is disburthened of them at night, and put into the stable with a galled
back: so shall thou be in death disburthened of all thy gold and silver, and
cast into hell with a galled conscience.

4 Love of the world inordinately will make us cast off religion in time of
trial. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.10. That some, having coveted after money,
they have erred from the faith: the word is (...), have erred like wandering
stars from the faith, and so Jude calls them: how difficult, nay impossible, is
the command of self-denial to a worldly heart? how would such turn to any
religion to save their estates, as one Ecebolius, that in the reign of
Constantine was a Christian, under Julian an heathen, under Jovinian a
Christian. God being a Christians end, whatsoever intercepts communion betwixt
God and the soul is to be cast off.

5 Inordinate love of the world exposes a man to many lusts and tentations, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich they fall into a snare and temptation, that is
the snare of tentation: they will be rich, its their only study, hence they
fall into many foolish and hurtful lusts, as stealing, witness Achan, lying as
Gehezi, Ananias, Saphira, Prove. 21.6. hence called Mammon of unrighteousness,
deceitful riches. Every creature naturally fears the snare, and shall not we
fear such a condition as will ensnare the conscience? Earthly things are
compared to thick clay, Hab. 2.6. As our feet are apt to stick in the clay, so
are our affections on earthly things.

6 These things thou loves so inordinately cannot stand thee in stead in
another world. When thou comes at Christ's Tribunal, what will it profit thee
that thou have left so much for every child? or that thy children ruffle up and
down in silk and satin? or that thy posterity have stately houses, rich
furniture, fare deliciously, and have a mighty train? will this mitigate thy
torments when thou art in Hell? Perhaps they drink wine every day, and thou
can not get a drop of water to cool thy tongue. Might thou carry thy
baggs, thy lands, thy all into another world, it were something; but as a
certain Martyr in Queen Maryes time, when some offered her money, she refused
it, saying, I am going to a country where money will bear no price, 1 Timothy
6.18, 19. Paul bids us to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate,
laying up in store, or as the word is, They treasure up unto themselves a good
foundation for time to come. Works of mercy are called a foundation, because as
the one is hid, so is the other; and as from the foundation the house rises up
on high, so from these good works proceeding from faith the crown arises so
much the higher.

7 Thy life consists not in these earthly things thou do so inordinately
affect, but in God, Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness, for a
man's life consists not in the abundance of things he possesses. Thy temporal
life consists not in them, for thou shall not live a day the longer, because
thou have a vast estate; nor thy spiritual life consists not in it, for what
duty is it but thou may do without them. Thou say thou can not show
mercy. Largeness of affection rather then large gifts shows what the heart is,
as in the widow that cast in two mites into the treasury. Thy eternal life
consists not in them, for all the treasures in the world will not bring a soul
to heaven.

Nay by these earthly things many times life is shortened, especially if gotten
by indirect means, Jer. 17.11. As the Partrich sits upon Eggs and hatcheth
them not, so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the
midst of his days, and in the end shall die a Fool. The abundance of the rich
will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5.12. Taking away sleep they take away
life, and thus are riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt, v. 13.

It is with worldly men, as with the Bee^, that goes from flower to flower to
gather Honey, which when they have gotten they carry it to the Hive, in fine
the Husbandman comes to take the Hive and Honey, and drowns all the Bees or
some way destroys them. So the sons of men are as busy as Bees in sucking
earthly things, in fine death comes and takes them, and another enjoys the
Honey.

To conclude, thy life and happiness then is in God, thy wealth is in and from
God. What is thy wealth without God, but Rust and Canker? Thy honor without
God, but an heavy burden, which in the day of account will press thy soul? Thy
ease without God, but a future destruction? Ease slays the wicked, Prove. 1.32.
All the good and comfort that is in any worldly enjoyment is from God, as the
light of a candle is from the fire, or as a cistern of water is from the
fountain. He that has God wants not any good thing, Psalm. 84.11. In having God
we have all things, because we have him that has all things, without whom the
whole World, if you had it, is like the Air without the Sun, a darksom,
comfortless body: to enjoy good in any thing we must enjoy God: for every
creature is good to us only as God comes in with it, not otherwise.

8 Thou shall never find rest in affecting earthly things inordinately. Rest
is the center at which all intellectual natures, as well as natural bodies,
aims at; but worldly men find no rest. Other sinners sometimes find rest from
their lusts, the Drunkard is not always drunk, nor the unclean person always
commits uncleanness, but the worldling is still in the World morn and night;
the desires of such are compared to Hell, Hab. 2.5. It Is there spoken of the
King of Babylon, who though he had gathered to him all nations and people, yea
and their treasures, Esa. 10.13. as one gathers eggs that are left, yet was
his desire enlarged as Hell, and could not be satisfied; a true character of
the worldlings desire, which is boundless and endless.

Quest. But may we not lawfully desire earthly things?

Answ. I Will show how far we may desire them, 2 How far not.

1 We may desire them with a desire of reference, so far as they may be
furtherances of us in our journey to heaven, as Mr. Tindall the Martyr said, I
desire these earthly things so far as they may be helps to the keeping of thy
commandments. As a passenger when he comes to a river, he desires a boat, not
simply for it self, but to pass over, for could he pass over any other way he
would not regard a boat. As the travailer desires his Inn, not in reference to
his Inn, but to his home, and as the Patient desires Physic, in reference to
health, so we may desire earthly things, in reference to God and a good
conscience, and that we may have more freedom to Gods service, and that we may
bring up our children as hopeful plants, and that we may do more good to the
Church of God.

2 With a desire of subordination. Lord, says the gracious soul, give me
earthly things, yet not my will but thine be done. God as a wise Physician
thinks it expedient to keep his patient with a short diet in order to cure his
disease, so the Lord sometimes keeps his people low to cure their pride and try
their faith.

2 We may not desire earthly things, 1 In reference to our lusts, Jam. 4.3. Ye
ask amiss that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Some desire them in reference
to the lust of pride to bear down others, to have what they will, and do what
they list, that they may have sumptuous buildings, and magnificent titles, or
in reference to revenge, to crush those that shall affront them, or in
reference to excess and delicacy, that they may fare deliciously every day.

2 We may not desire them with vehement desires. Many are so a Gog for the
world, as Balaam was for Balaks gold, and Ahab was for Naboths Vineyard, such
desires are often granted in fearful judgment, as the Israelites had the
quails which they lusted after, He gave them their hearts desire, but sent
leanness into their soul, Psalm. 106.15. They were not estranged from their
lusts, but while their meat was yet in their mouths the wrath of God came upon
them, Psalm. 78.30, 31. Such desires stand need of purging, not of satisfying.
This is a woeful frame of heart. Of such the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 6.9. that
they will be rich. The rich has nothing of his riches but what the poor asks
of him, food, and raiment; but I eat dainties, the poor eats base, but are not
both filled, the poor with base meat as the rich with dainties? But, says the
rich, mine rellishes better: thou knows not how that savours which hunger
inflames. I say not this to compel rich and poor to eat alike; rich men use
choice meats, because thou have been accustomed thereto, use thou
superfluities, give necessaries to the poor, Aug. de verbis Dom. Ser. 6.

3 We must desire necessities to superfluities. Pro. 30.8, 9. Give me neither
poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me. 1 Timothy 6.8. Having
food and raiment, let us therewith be content; but in this provision we may
have respect to the condition wherein we are set, as Magistrate, Prince,
Gentleman, etc. yet if God shall add superfluities, as the Prophet says the
Lord did to him, Psalm. 23.5. Thou anointest my head with Oil, and my cup runs
over, as liberal Hosts in Judea were wont to entertain their guests; we may
receive these superfluities with thankfulness, and are bound to do the more
good therewith: and withal know, that many a gracious heart that only desired
necessities from God, God in just ways has given superfluities to him.

Quest. But what remedies against this love of the world?

Answ. Taste the sweetness, 1 of God, 2 and of the water of life.

1 Of God: all comfort is primarily, causally and originally in him; in the
creature its effectively, secondarily and derivatively, Hab. 3.16. Though the
Fig Tree should not blossom, etc. Yet will I rejoice in the Lord. The cause
why men step out to every creature, is because they see not a fullness in God,
they are eager to lay up treasure here, because they see not treasure there.
The creatures, if God come not along with them, are but as a member cut off
from the body.

2 Taste the sweetness of the water of life, Joh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of
the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; He means not a natural
thirst, but a thirsting after the things of the world, that is so greedily,
savorly, and unboundedly as worldlings do. A man that thinks he has his sins
pardoned, and cannot be content therewith, it is a question whether ever he had
it. Mary having tasted the sweetness of grace grew remiss to the world, Luke
10.40, 41. Was Solomon content with wisdom, and we not content with grace? and
yet though God has not promsed to make any individual man rich, yet sometimes
he casts in a portion of wealth to better the bargain. You found your selves
companions in the way, he carries nothing, thou art overburthened, give him of
that which thou have, and thou lessens the weight, Aug. ibid.

2 Look upon the uncertainty of worldly things. Solomon left Rehoboam a
flourishing Kingdom, in a matter of three or four days time he lost about two
parts of three or more. Eli was a rich man, a Priest and a Magistrate, his
Posterity was driven to crouch for a piece of silver, and a morsel of bread, 1 Samuel 2.36. Men come to the world as to a lottery, there is many blanks for one
prize; for one man that gets the things of the world, ten miss.

3 Beware of Satan's temptations, who is wont to let us see the glory of the
world, but conceals the cares and troubles that attend outward things; so he
did to Christ, Matthew. 4.8. All the glory of the world, as building, furniture,
retinue, brave apparel, Princes Courts, are but as the flower of the grass, or
like the transfigured glory upon the mount, which the disciples beginning to
affect, were overshadowed with a cloud. How many fine houses, pleasant gardens,
and costly apparel has the late cloud of war overshadowed? Esa. 23.9. The
Lord has stained the pride of all glory, and brought into contempt all the
honorable of the earth. But could Satan give the glory he pretends, yet should
you have it upon exceeding hard terms. He said to Christ, Fall down and worship
me, and all shall be thine.

4 As the Lines meet in the center, and the beams of the Sun in a
burning-glass, so let your scattered affections meet in God. Solomon having let
his affections go out to pleasures, mirth, wine, buildings, vineyards, gardens,
pools of water, possessions of cattle, treasures of gold and silver, music,
etc. Eccles. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. came to see the vanity, and to center
himself in the fear of God, and keeping his commandments, Eccles. 12.1.

5 Consider, the things of the world which are suitable to others, God can make
them disproportionable to thee. Ahab had a Kingdom, but could take no comfort
in it, but was sick for one poor Vineyard. Haman had wealth, honor, and the
favor of the Prince in abundance, yet the want of a cringe from Mordecai, (a
small matter one would think) made all bitter. If inferior causes can bring
forth contrary effects, as the Sun can soften Wax and harden Clay, cannot the
highest cause much more produce it? Many have vast Estates, but an unequal
yoke fellow, or the reproach of some sin they have committed, or a guilty
conscience, takes away the comforts of them.

6 Consider, it is a Christians duty always to have a disposition to leave all
for Christ, Luke 14.26. Now how can we perform this duty, if our hearts be set
upon the World? Thou say thou can not leave thy stately dwelling and
accommodations, thou do in effect say, I cannot be a Christian. Paul says,
Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice, save in the Cross of Christ.

7 Be convinced of the vanity in all earthly things. Practice often follows
conviction; there is a mask upon riches, pleasures, honors, which is false
opinion, which must be pulled off. How was Achan cozened with a Wedg of Gold?
and Gehezi with two Talents of Silver?

The Labors of worldly men are not unfitly by some resembled to the sports of
children, their buildings to the houses children make of cards and trenchers,
their gathering wealth to the others gathering sticks, their immoderate sorrow
in the loss of them, to the cry of children when their houses are cast down.

Whether it be a thing more to be laughed at or pitied, I shall not determine,
to see man that has an eternal soul and eternal objects to look at upon the
terms of highest necessity, his eternal weal or woe, to spend the strength of
his spirit upon earthly vanities. We count them mad men who leaving serious
things, are disposed to play with pins and straws, such are worldly men. The
Prophet said, He saw an end of all perfections, Psalm 119.96. May we not say
the same, we have seen an end of all perfection, of beauty, save of Gods image
Holiness, of all perfection of pedigree, save spiritual adoption, of all
perfection of wealth, save of riches laid up in Heaven, of all perfection of
buildings, save of that City whose Builder and Maker is God, of all perfections
of joy, save the joy of a good conscience, which is a continual feast?

8 Beware of being deluded by worldly pretenses, as, 1 the hardness of the
times; in hard times let us be less worldly, then should we open our hands
freely.

2 The greatness of their charge; true, we are to provide for our charge, else
we are worse then Infidels, but thou provides for thy self, being loath to part
with any thing, till death put thy children in possession whether thou will or
not, nay if God take half their charge away, they are not more lib eral?

3 The great necessities of the Church, a fair pretense, if true; but
consider, what have thou done for the Church, do not thy proportions come
short, not only of others but also of thy own ability? we read of some, who
parted with all for the Church, but they were not men of this temper, Acts
4.34, 35.

9 Be much in prayer, that God would cure thy worldly frame of heart; say,
Lord, I can savor nothing, but oxen and farms. If any man speak a word of any
heavenly discourse, it is unsavory: I have a heart just like the Inn at
Bethlehem, room enough for others, none for thee. Be large in thy confessions;
say, Lord, this is a sin that makes me sometimes neglect duties of religion,
and commonly chop them off: that makes me so many times in a week go to bed
prayerless, and abroad in the morning prayerless. This sin has often exposed me
to lying, overreaching; for which I doubt I have not made full restitution; my
own interest has made me seek the ruin of the whole; this has made me take a
bribe in my office, to sell justice in my magistracy, cheat in my weights and
measures, flatter in my ministry, sell things unlawful to be sold; as the
Christians in Tertulian's time, sold images to the heathens. As a Landlord I
have rackt my Tenants, grinding their faces, because I knew they must have my
farms: as a labourer I have extorted, because I knew they could not get
another: As a servant I have cozened my Master now and then of a penny; as a
Master, I have griped my Workmen, making them take so much in commodity at a
racking price, because I knew thy were tied to my Work: these confessions when
they are feeling and not historical, will much take off the heart from the
World.

10 Set your affections in Heaven: when a man is upon an high Pinnacle, things
below seem very small; so get your spirits up on high, and the things below
will seem small: The Christians in Justin Martyr's time (in his Epistle to
Diognetus) inhabited their own countries as strangers, they had all things
common with others as Citizens, but suffered all things as strangers; every
strange country is their country, and every country is strange to them; they
live in the earth, but have their conversation in heaven. That which is the
soul in the body, that are Christians in the World; the soul is dispersed
through all the members of the body, and Christians are dispersed through the
Cities of the World; the soul dwells in the body but is not of the body, so
Christians dwell in the World but are not of the World.

Then are our affections in Heaven, when the soul is longing after the presence
of God; the soul is not so much there where it lives as where it loves. The
soul, looking upon better things than the World, can easily bid adieu unto the
World. It was a Christian speech of a certain Bishop mentioned by Augustine,
that when the Goths had taken the City and spoil, he said, I am not sorry for
my Gold and Silver, thou know where my treasure is.

11 Believe the promises, in which God promises, that nothing good for us
shall be wanting unto us, Psalm 34.10.37.3.84.11. Matthew. 6.32. 1 Timothy 6.8. Heb.
13.5. God knows what a charge of children you have, how hard the times are, how
dear commodities are. Either earthly things are good for thee, or not; if they
be good, God has promised them; if they be not good, why do thou cark for
them, nay, why do thou not pray against them? that every thing that hinders
the perfecting of thy inward man may be removed. Besides, is not Gods
faithfulness as fully engaged for things of this life, as for things of a
better? If we believe his faithfulness for eternal things, we tell an apparent
Lie if we believe him not also for temporal things, wherein his faithfulness is
no less engaged.

4 Use. Trial, whether our hearts go out inordinately after the World, only I
will lay down some cautions,

1 That there is too much worldliness in the best of us; hence John writes to
young men, old men, that they should not love the World, 1 John 2.16.

2 It is a very difficult thing to distinguish worldliness in the relics,
from wordliness in the reign, because of the necessary cares and provision for
us and ours required, and because of diverse virtues that entrench upon it, as
frugality, thrift.

3 That tender consciences may not be scrupled, know that though there may be
too much worldliness in thee, yet when thou mournest under it, and groanest to
God against it, and prayest earnestly for, and hungers after a liberal and an
heavenly mind, this wordliness in thee is only in the relics not in the
reign.

Trials hereof.
1 A constant and usual savouring of earthly things, with a constant and usual
disgusting and disrelishing of heavenly things, Romans 8.5. They that are after
the flesh do savor the things of the flesh, and they that are after the Spirit
do savor the things of the Spirit. Such men are presently jaded in thinking of
heavenly things.

2 A disposition to hold the things of the World, notwithstanding duty and a
good conscience call us to leave them; such was the young man, Matthew. 19.22.
the stony ground, Matthew. 13.21. The stony ground, though they had not a purpose
to leave Christ when tribulation came, yet they had not a purpose to stick to
Christ, if tribulation should come.

We often, upon false grounds, count men worldly, as because we see them
laborious in their callings, when our selves are idle, when we see them have
much business when our selves have little, or when they use moderation and
frugality in their apparel and house keeping, when perhaps our selves are too
profuse, or because they will not bestow upon such objects as we would have
them, or because they have a diligent hand to provide for them and theirs; but
these are not signs of a worldly heart, but contrarily when a man clasps his
heart about his estate, and says, I will not leave thee, I will not go from an
high condition to a low, this argues a worldly heart: for as he is an heavenly
Christian who has a disposition to hold Christ though he lose all, Phil. 3.8.
So he is an earthly man, who resolves to hold what he has, though he lose
Christ.

3 By the hearts running habitually upon the world, Phil. 3.19. Whose end is
destruction, who mind earthly things. Some men so mind earthly things, that
their end will be destruction. No speech but of the world, no delight but in
the world, Amos, 8.5. Even on the day of worship they cried, when will the
Sabbath be gone, that we may sell wheat? Their hearts run upon bargains, upon
purchases, high places, etc. Ahabs heart still ran on Naboths Vineyard, Hamans
heart ran upon honor, he thought he should be the man whom the King would
honor, Hest. 6. 1 John 4.5. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the
world. Thus the glutton, Luke 12.19. his soul ran upon his goods, thinking he
had much goods laid up for many years. A poor condemned man should not be
thinking so much of meat and drink, as how to escape the sword of the
executioner; Thou comes into the world a condemned man; though thy thoughts may
be of thy particular calling, how thou increases or decreases, yet specially
should thy heart run upon heavenly things, and how thou may escape the wrath
to come.

4 When the heart is exercised in covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2.14. Cursed
children, and an heart exercised with covetous practices are joined together,
as if he should say, such men, how ever magnified of men yet are cursed
children. Thou thoughtest perhaps God would never have given thee riches, had
he not loved thee; oh! but if ye be covetous, you are cursed children, and God
abhors you. Now the covetous practices of these men are many, as 1 haling and
tearing away from others by any indirect means, as Ahab and Jezebel, Achan,
Judas, and those Jam. 5.2. Who defrauded those of their wages who reapt their
fields, Hab. 2.6. Woe to him that increases that which is not his.

2 By ordinary saving: when God calls them to spend, they will give good words,
be warm, be filled, but give not those things which are needful to the body,
Jam. 2.15, 16. as their hands are shut up, so are their bowels, 1 John 3.17.

It was a speech of Chrysostom, Hom. 34. to the people of Antioch, Whatsoever
thou have above necessary relief for thy self and family (and Godly moderate,
not unsuitable and endless care) of providing honestly for our families, (which
who so does not is worse then an Infidel) is not ours now, but the goods of the
poor, and who so depriveth them of it, is a thief and a murderer. I will not
deny nor maintain this assertion, but leave it as I found it, but this I say,
Its a sign of a covetous heart when thou have superfluities, and thou shuts up
thy heart to him which is in necessities, yea, which is worse, to him that is
in extremities.

Another covetous practice is, making bargains, so that still they will have an
hole to creep out at.

Another is in their entertainment of others. Eat and drink say they, but their
heart is not with thee, Prove. 23.7, 8.

Another is witty carnal excuses to save their purses, as that they cannot get
in money owing to them, they have such poor relations lying upon them, they
have had such losses, such a charge, a hard farm, they have done as much as
others, the parish or Church must look to them, thousands of excuses people
have. So that as the liberal heart devises liberal things, and by liberal
things shall he stand, Esa. 32.7, 8. So these covetous churles devise covetous
devices, and by his covetous devices shall he fall in the day of account.

5 When the heart is full of carkings how to live here, but few or no cares how
to live eternally. What shall I do in old age when my limbs are gone; when a
dear year comes? many souls are so haunted with these cares that they can take
little comfort in any thing they have, and these carkings are so much worse,
when they are in them who have either a competency, or abundance. This does not
directly prove the reign of worldliness, but is a ground for the heart to
suspect it self.

Against these carkings oppose the care God has for beasts and fowls, and much
more for men; he that cares for his enemies will much more care for his friends
and children, if for his children when they sought him not, much more when they
seek him and find him. Carke not for future times, this day may conclude thy
life.

On the contrary I Will give you some signs this sin reigns not.
1 When we hunger and thirst after an heavenly frame of heart, and groan under
the frequency of earthly thoughts, and fewness of heavenly; here worldliness
reigns not, but the soul may be blessed, though it be too worldly. Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, Mat. 5.6.

2 When, though we have too much worldliness in us, yet upon serious
examination we find an habit to part with all lands and goods for the Lord, if
they come in competition. Thus the disciples, Matthew. 19.27. But the Young man
could not do this, ver. 22.

3 When we can come cheerfully and willingly to a work of mercy, to the ability
God gives us, 2 Cor. 8.2, 3. The Macedonians were ready, to and beyond their
power, praying Paul with much entreaty to take the care hereof.

4 When our sovereign affection and conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20. Col.
3.1. In all our conversings let Saints look to heaven as the city whereto they
belong. All earthly things are desired by such in reference to Heaven and a
good conscience.

5 When we disaffect Worldly affections. The flesh sometimes puts a godly man
upon too eager pursuement of earthly things, and sometimes upon some unworthy
covetous prank, or penurious scraping; now when we can go to God and pray
against these affections with a real hatred of them, as David did, Psalm
119.36. Incline not my heart to covetousness, here worldliness reigns not.

6 When we desire to be convinced of the Quantum or measure that God would have
us to forgo, for such a godly use or good cause; for example, in such cause of
Religion, as to the late Distresses of the poor Protestants in Piedmont, I part
with so much as my proportion comes to and the generality of godly people give,
yet, could I be convinced that God required a greater proportion of me, I would
cheerfully let it go even to the last Groat; and what though my children have
so much less, yet Gods blessing is enough for them, and I will not damn my soul
in the omission of any known duty to make them rich. Moreover, the same command
that binds me to my children, ties me to other relations, to succor them,
though not in such a measure.

Matthew. 6.25. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on.
Is not the Life more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment?

Here is a second argument against worldliness and carking cares, taken from
the greater to the less; he that has given the greater will give the less; now
your Father has given you the greater, he has given you your life and body,
therefore will he give you the less, which is meat and raiment. He gave the
greater without thy care, therefore without thy carking he will give the
latter. Withal Christ puts us in mind of the Author of our Life and Body, we
are to look beyond our Parents.

We are not to think as if Christ forbad here a provident diligence and labor
to procure things needful for us and ours, as the ancient Euchites, who would
always pray, but never work; but he forbids a fearful distrustful
heart-dividing care, Psalm 34.9, 10. Fear the Lord, ye his Saints, for there is
no want to them that fear him, Psalm 84.11. 1 Timothy 4.8. Hence Christ uses the
word (...), because (...), because the desire of gathering riches divides the
mind, and as it were distracts it, and cuts it into diverse thoughts. This is
that Luke calls (...), to hang like a Meteor in the Air, to hang betwixt Heaven
and Earth.

In the words also there is a silent Objection thus.

Though I must not labor for superfluities, yet must I labor for things which
nature desires, and which must serve me for my life, and then when I have got
that I will be no more desirous of outward things. To this Christ answers, You
think too meanly of Gods goodness, he both can and will provide us of things
needful though we should only by the by look at those things we want, and
should give our minds wholly or for the greater part to godliness, John 6.27.

Obs. Christians ought to lay aside all distrustful heart-dividing carking and
solicitude for the things of this life.

Reas. 1 Because we have God that cares for us, 1 Peter 5.7. Casting all your
care upon him, for he cares for you. Children cast their care upon their
fathers, who lay up for their children, 2 Cor. 12.14. So let us, Phil. 2.20,
21. Thus is it done with us in all our life, we sleeping and being quiet and
secure, all things are given us; we caring and being sollicitous nothing is
given, Luth. Tom. 3.383.

2 From our experience we have had of Gods goodness: he that has given us the
greater will also give us the less, he has given us a body, therefore he will
give us meat to sustain it, and raiment to cover it from the cold. The
allegement of maintenance for life is but too often a specious pretense for our
covetousness.

Object. But there are lawful cares we must have.

Answ. True, there are, 1 For spirituals, such a care had Mary, Luke 10.41.
Paul had the care of all the Churches upon him, 2 Cor. 11.28. The Philippians
had care to minister to Paul, Phil. 4.10. A godly Bishop is to take care of the
Church, 1 Timothy 3.5. yea every Christian must be full of care to maintain good
works, Titus 3.8. yea this care is a fruit of repentance, 2 Cor. 7.12. None so
full of these cares as a Christian, 1 Cor. 7.32. Who cares for the things of
the Lord.

2 There are cares for temporals, 1 Cor. 7.33. He that is married cares for the
World, how he may please his Wise. Joseph took care to provide Corn for Egypt.
If we have not a lawful care, we are worse than Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8. God
teaches us this care from the silly Pismire, Prove. 6.6. Who provides her Meat
in the Summer and Harvest.

Quest. But what cares are they which are unlawful?

Answ. Distracting heart-dividing cares. Paul would have us attend upon the
Lord without distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35.

These distracting cares consist in three things.

1 In a doubtfulness of the success, notwithstanding we use lawful endeavors;
the Promise is, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy steps,
Prove. 3.6.

2 When earthly cares shall crowd in in holy duties, Luke 8.14. The cares of
the World choke the Word, or cause us to neglect holy duties, as in Martha,
Luke 10.40.

3 When we shall be immoderately thoughfull for livelihood for us and ours, so
that our hearts become troubled with fear of want.

Use 1 Humiliation to Saints who have so many distracting cares upon them.
Would we compare our few cares for Heaven, and our many cares for a livelihood,
how should we be clothed with shame? These seize on us in the morning and go
to bed with us at night. God takes care of thee, who made thee, who cared for
thee before thou wast. We care for our selves, as if he that made us presently
went away, leaving us in our own hands. Aug.

1 These dividing cares of thine arise from remainders of unbelief in thee, for
men of eminent faith have been little troubled therewith, Dan. 3.17. We are not
careful to answer thee, O King, in this matter, if it be so, our God whom we
serve is able to deliver us, said the Three Children.

2 Whatever burden thou have thou art commanded to cast it upon God, Psalm
37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass. Thou art not to take Gods work from him; thy work is dependence, Gods
work is provision. Psalm 55.18. Cast thy burden on the Lord, he shall sustain
thee.

3 The care and provision God makes for all creatures, Psalm 104.10. to v. 31.
he sends Springs into Valleys, causes Grass to grow for Cattle, makes Trees for
Birds to nest in, the Rocks and Hills a Refuge for Goats and Conies. Lions seek
their Meat from God, v. 27, 28. These wait all upon thee that thou may give
them their Meat in due season; that thou give them they gather, Psalm 147.9.
He gives to the Beast his Food, and to the young Ravens which cry. Matthew.
10.29, 30.

4 It Is Gods good pleasure to give you the Kingdom of Heaven, much more will he
give you things of this life, Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, it is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

5 The vanity and mischief of distracting cares: the vanity of them is seen,
because all our carking will not better our condition. Do what thou can thou
shall not be rich, whom God will have to be poor, Luth. Tom. 3.266. And their
mischief is seen in that they surcharge the heart, as Meat and Drink
immoderately taken do the stomach, Luke 21.34.

2 Exhortation. To endeavor the riddance of these sinful cares.

Means.
1 Commit all your endeavors to God in Prayer, to be prospered and succeeded
by him, Phil. 4.6. In nothing be careful but in every thing let your request
be made known to him. When you have commended the matter to God in Prayer, then
let the peace of God keep your hearts, v. 7. Prove. 16.3. Commit thy work unto
the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established.

2 Exercise faith in the promises, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee, 1 Timothy 4.8.

3 Covet not multitudes of business, for much business creates many cares, and
so much the more when thy charge is but little.

4 Consider, though God takes care for all creatures, Psalm 104.27. 145.15.
147.8, 9. He gives to the beast his food, and to the young Ravens which cry,
yet his care for them not comparable to the care he has for his children. 1
Cor. 9.9. Does God take care of Oxen? Yes he does, but not comparatively. See
Deuteronomy. 11.12.

5 The vanity and unprofitableness of all our carking cares; which of you by
taking thought can add one cubit to his stature? Matthew. 6.17. Psalm. 127.2.
It Is in vain to rise early and go to bed late: Except the Lord build the house,
and except the Lord keep the city the watchman waketh but in vain.

6 Consider the uncessancy of Gods care for us. The Land whither ye go to
possess is a Land of Hills and Valleys, and drinks water of the rain of
Heaven. A Land which the Lord thy God cares for, the eyes of the Lord thy God
are always upon it from the beginning of the year unto the end of the year,
Deuteronomy. 11.11, 12. Psalm. 40.5. Thy thoughts which are to usward they cannot be
reckoned up in order unto thee. If I would declare and speak of them they are
more then can be numbered, 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting not only some, but, all your
care upon him, why? He cares for you.

V. 26. Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barnes, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much
better then they?

Here Is a second Argument to dissuade from carking care, from the less to the
greater; your Father nourishes the fowls, much more will he nourish you. Behold
the fowls of the Air. He makes a distinction betwixt poultry and house fowls
which are cared for by men, and fowls of the Air which are not cared for by
men, Psalm. 147.9. Job, 39.3. Luke instanceth in the Ravens, which men are so
far from caring for, that they hate them, Luke 12.24. Christ compares men, not
to Oxen but to Birds, that he may teach us as birds to fly from earth to heaven.

They neither sow, nor reap, nor gather into barnes] They neither sowing, nor
reaping, are directed by the providence of God where there is food, and they
thrive more then those which are nourished by the care of man. Yet is this no
ground to patronize idleness, that because the fowls neither plow nor sow,
therefore we must not, for the proportion is not in this, that they labor not,
but in this, if God take care for more base creatures, much more for those
which are more excellent.

In all likelihood the fowls making no provision in summer, should starve in
winter, yet experience teaches that they are fatter in winter then in summer.

Obs. Its our duty now and then to look upon the creatures.

2 Its no disparagement to the providence of God to have a care of the fowls of
Heaven, Matthew. 10.29, 30.

3 As the care of God reaches to the fowls of heaven, so much more to his
children, for he that is their Creator, is thy Father.

V. 27. Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit to his stature?

Here is a third reason against carking care taken from the vanity of all such
carking: we by all our caring cannot add any thing to the stature of our body,
no more can we add any thing to the measure of our estates which providence
has appointed us to come to.

Besides, men through their pride are ready to ascribe all their gettings to
their care and diligence, hence Christ shows that all our care without Gods
blessing is as vain as if a dwarf should think to add to himself the stature
of a tall man. As God has measured every man the measure of the stature of his
body, so has he measured to every man the stature and measure of his estate.

By taking thought] Thought-taking or solicitude is the sickness or
disquietness of the mind by immoderate thinking.

Can add to his stature one cubit] A cubit is the length of the arm from the
bending of it to the end of the middle finger: now every man rightly formed, as
some observe, is four Cubits of his own Cubits high, and four Cubits broad: if
he stretch forth himself in breadth, he is as it were four square, now by all
his carking he is not able to add a fifth.

Obs. 1 God has set down the measure of estate which he has appointed for us.
Prove. 22.2.

2 We by all our carking cannot go beyond this measure, Psalm. 75.6, 7.

3 Immoderate carking thoughts do not better us as to our outward condition.

V. 28, 29, 30. And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the Lillies of
the field how they grow, they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet I say
unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of little
faith?

A fourth reason against carking, which is, God has no less care of clothing
us then of feeding us, therefore let us not carke. Christ proves it from the
Lillies and flowers which are beautifully adorned, not by their own care or
labor, for they neither toil nor spin, yet are they yearly new clad. Therefore
will he much more cloth his children. If he cloth the grass so, which is made
to grow only for the cattle, or for the oven or fire, or for dung, how much
more will he cloth man, which is born to great things, to worship God, to hold
forth his name, and to have an everlasting life? Note Christ speaks not of
garden Lillies and flowers, which have man's industry bestowed upon them, but of
field Lillies.

Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these] Meaning when he
sat upon his Ivory Throne covered over with gold, 2 Chronicles. 9.17, 18.

1 Because Solomon's glory was artificial, the raiment of Lillies and flowers
was natural. Christ mentions Solomon's garments, because probably it was white
and pourtrayed with Lillies, for Princes used to wear white garments, Eccles.
9.8. and for sculpture of garments with Lillies, see it in Pausanias in
Eliacis, cap. 5. Marcellinus, lib 14. So that Christ preferrs the beauty of
Lillies before Solomon's cloth of silver garments which were woven with Lillies,
because the one was natural and the other artificial. Art is only natures ape,
now as an ape imitates a man, but can never do actions so perfectly as a man,
no more can art equal nature. Art is as it were the point or shadow of nature.

Besides, what has such an orient color as some kinds of gilly-flowers, and
Tulips?

What Purple comes near the Violet, and what so white as the Lilly? What
Princes garments like the Peacocks ta^l?

But that wherein all artificial things come short in is that they want life.

So excellent does Christ judge these, that he compares himself to the Rose of
Sharon and Lilly of the Valleys. Song 2.1. By the way Christ lets us see what
mean things, silken, golden and purple Garments are; wherein many pride
themselves.

Shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of little faith] q. d. If he cloth
such base creatures with such glorious array, will he not then cloth you? And
therefore it argues your faith to be weak that so much cark about these things;
seeing Gods promise is no less true concerning food and raiment than concerning
remission of sins.

Quest. Whether from Christ his vilifying of Apparel it be lawful to wear any
costly Apparel, such as Solomon did?

Answ. If these ornaments might not be worn, why has the Lord given them? for
persons of great quality it is. Joseph had a ring on his finger, and a chain of
gold about his neck, Genesis 41.42. Mordecai was arrayed in violet color, as the
margin reads it, and white, and with a great Crown of gold, and with a garment
of fine linen and Purple. Esth. 8.15. Daniel was clothed with Scarlet, and
with a Chain of Gold about his Neck, Dan. 5.19. Also they that are in Kings
houses wear soft clothing, Matthew. 11.8. The Angels appear in shining Garments,
Luke 24.4. Christ in the Transfiguration, Matthew. 17.2.

We must not therefore throw down distinctions of degrees, yea even among
Christians.

Whereas the Apostle seems to forbid Gold, Pearls and costly array to
Christians, it seems to me not as if these things were universally unlawful,
but,

1. Because many hereby are disabled from works of mercy.

2. Costliness above their degree, when Tradesmen are as fine as Gentlemen,
Maidservants as their Mistresses.

3. Unsutableness, for Christians in those times, 1 Because mostly poor, 2
Because the wants of the Church did exceedingly call for Relief, 3 Because
Christians in those times were exposed to Persecution, and consequently
unsuitable for such times to the Worlds end, when Christians are exposed to the
like condition.

4 All array is costly in some measure, if a man cloth himself in Leather,
therefore the costliness here meant must be high-prized Apparel, the costliness
whereof must be judged from the person that wears it and the In-comes he has
to maintain it, and the place and station he has that wears it.

5 Look to expediency, as well as lawfulness.

Now whereas some bring Reasons for Saints to put upon their Garments no
superfluous Trimmings and Ornaments, as,

1 From the present wants and straits of Saints, the feeding of whom is the
feeding of Christ.

2 By their plainness of Apparel they would convince the World and adorn the
Doctrine of Christ.

3 Else instead of honoring God with their Substance they will honor
themselves, Prove. 3.9.

4 Costly Apparel exposes to the temptations of Covetousness, Deceit and
Injustice, with other Snares of Pride, as stately Houses, rich Furniture,
whiles they endeavor to have every thing suitable. And hereby Christian
assembling together and visiting is neglected, and much time is spent in
providing and putting such Garments on.

5 The present affliction of the times wherein God calls to girding and
sackcloth, Isai 22.12, 13. Amos 6.5, 6, 7.

6 Pride is a reigning sin in the Land, which Saints are to witness against,
which they cannot do but by a contrary practice.

7 From the scandal and offense which such costly Apparel gives to some Saints,
in which case Paul would not eat flesh, nor drink Wines, 1 Cor. 8.13. Romans 14.2.

I hold these Arguments very considerable to persuade all Christians to great
moderation in Apparel, and likewise I acknowledge Pride in Apparel is a very
great sin in many Professors, and that against many all the cited Arguments
fight, who hereby give offense and justify Pride of Apparel by their proud
Examples, and are hereby much disabled from works of mercy.

1 But these Arguments seem not to me to take away my Assertion, which is, that
Apparel is made, not only to fence us from the cold, but for distinction of
Degrees, and that persons may wear Apparel suitable to their degree, provided
they be not proud of it, and that it be not to the disablement of them to any
work of mercy: only in case of scandal I incline to think that Ornaments and
fine Apparel are to give place, and I much desire all Christians to show much
moderation herein, that they may not become offensive, neither to those that
are within or without: for the abuse herein my soul is grieved as well as the
souls of others.

2 The excess of Apparel in Christians has given advantage to the deluding
Quakers,

1 By having so visible an evil to reprove, as there is in too many Professors.

2 By a seeming mortification of Apparel to delude ignorant people, whiles the
pride of their words and carriages declares to judicious Christians the
unmortified pride of their hearts.

Object. But what are the Superfluities you would persuade to?

Answ. The abatements of Superfluities, as to Ribbons, silver Laces, etc.

Obs. 1 God has as great a care to cloth us as to feed us.

2 For immoderate thought-taking for earthly things we cannot comfortably give
a Reason to the Lord.

3 It Is an Argument that our Faith is but small to be very sollicitous and
anxiously careful for outward things.

4 That there are degrees of faith, little and great, Matthew. 8.10, 26. Matthew.
15.26. Matthew. 16.8.

1 Little or weak faith, which is when a man goes out of himself to lay hold on
Christ's righteousness, yet not without some doubtings about remission of sins
and outward things, Mark 9.24. As there are differences of bodily stature, some
are big some little, so in the stature of grace.

This weakness arises, 1 From weakness of knowledge, Romans 14.2. Some from
weakness of knowledge feed upon herbs only.

2 From a weak apprehension of promises of forgiveness, Mark 9.24. Lord I
believe, help my unbelief.

3 From infancy in Christianity or conversion. A Babe cannot be strong as a
grown person.

4 Want of experiences of Gods dealings, for experience breeds confidence, 2
Cor. 1.10.

2 Great or strong faith is when a man is full of knowledge of the Scriptures,
and strong to apprehend Gods love and to resist temptations, and to cleave unto
God in difficulties, 2 Chronicles. 14.10, 11. Hester 4.14. Dan. 3.17. Psalm
23.4.27.1. Matthew. 8.10. Matthew. 15.28. Romans 4.20.8.9. The growth of this strong
faith is like the growth of a strong man, which is by degrees, after a good
continuance and use of the means, after frequent witnessing of the Spirit,
after many experiences of the truth of our own hearts to God in resisting
pleasing and profitable sins, and doing painful and costly duties constantly,
and such as often we had no thanks for of men.

The least degree of faith is that which makes us willing to take Christ
notwithstanding all crosses, losses and persecutions. Now if a man stand
questioning whether he had best take Christ or no, this is not faith.

Now faith admits of degrees in six respects.

1 In further persuasions of truths. I have Reasons to persuade such things are
truths, and these overcome me, yet may I be further persuaded by more Reasons.
We see an object by the light of one candle, but when more candles come, we see
it the plainlier.

2 In the difficulty of things to be believed. As for Abraham to believe he
should have a Son, and after to believe that God was able to raise him up from
the grave, as from a dead womb. Martha could believe the general Resurrection,
but not the particular Resurrection of Lazarus.

3 In respect of means, when a man has but little means and yet believes much:
so the Centurion, Matthew. 8.10. and Nathaniel John 1.48.

4 In respect of things revealed. The Apostles when Christ was on earth had a
degree of faith, but when Christ was ascended, they grew to an higher, not
only because the habit was then more increased, but because the revelations
and objects were more.

5 In the the fruits of it, as sense of Gods love, power to subdue passions,
patience and joy in tribulations, conquests over temptations.

6 In respect of assent and consent in closing with Christ; as in the act of
Marriage, two Women take two Husbands, yet one takes an Husband with greater
greediness according as her understanding closes with his proportionable
fitness.

Use. Exhortation to grow from a weak faith to a strong. Nicodemus first came
to Christ secretly, after witnessed truth openly. The least degree of Faith is
Faith, as a little man is a man as well as the greatest; a little water is
water as well as the Ocean; the least bud draws sap from the root, as well as
the greatest branch, so does weak Faith as well as strong draw sap from Christ.
It Is not the strength of Faith that saves, but the truth of it, nor the
weakness of Faith that damns, but the want of it. We are not saved by the worth
or quantity of our Faith, but by Christ who is laid hold upon by a weak Faith
as well as a strong. All that looked on the Brazen Serpent were healed, yet
some looked with a strong eye, some with a weak, in like manner do we behold
Christ, John 3.14, 15, 16.

Obs. But if a little Faith be so good; what matters it for a great?

Answ. Though none are rejected for it, yet some are reproved. It Is a blemish
to have little faith after great means. A weak faith gets to Heaven, but it is
with difficulty, especially if God send great trials. Two men go up an hill,
one of them in a Consumption goes up pantingly, the other without panting; two
ships come into a haven, one tattered and weather-beaten ready to sink, the
other with full sail: so weak faith brings to Heaven, but with many doubts and
fears. Besides, we may have greater temptations than yet we have had, even
fiery trials. What then will a weak faith do? Finally, the more we grow in
faith the more we shall grow in peace and joy, Romans 15.13. and have a fuller
audience in Heaven.

2 Use. Labor after a strong faith. Weak faith is a precious Jewel, 1 Peter
1.7. but strong faith carries a man through the World as a Conqueror.

Quest. What notes of it?

Answ. 1 It contemns the temptations of multitudes, customs and examples. Let
never so many be contrary-minded it moves not him. Eliah stood against four
hundred.

2 Strong faith is not shaken with the apostasy of great men, though
Professors, Preachers. Paul was not moved from the faith a jot, though all
they of Asia turned away from him, 2 Timothy 1.15. and though at his first answer
before Nero all men forsook him.

3 Holy boldness in time of danger, Psalm 3.5, 6. I will not fear ten thousands
that have set themselves against me, Psalm 27.1, 2.46.1, 2.

4 A mighty spirit of Prayer that will take no denial from God, Matthew. 15.28.
The Woman of Cana would take no denial from Christ, hence Christ says, O woman
great is thy faith.

5 A comfortable apprehension of Death and Judgment, which days are feared by
weak Christians, Luke 2.29. Phil. 1.23.

6 To have a clear manifestation of Gods love without any questioning of his
Estate, Romans 8.38, 39. and thereupon to triumph in Gods love over all both sin,
Satan, and afflictions, Romans 8.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.

Quest. Whether may not a man of great faith so decline that his faith may
become weak?

Answ. As some of weak have become strong, so some of strong have become weak,
Heb. 11.34. Asa had a great faith that he feared not a Million of Ethiopians,
yet after became weak. See 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 8. yea, so weak that we might
question his grace, did not the Scripture say, His heart was perfect with God
all his days, 1 Kings 15.14. This is caused, partly from want of the means of
grace, or disuse of them, as want of Preaching, Prayer and good company. Shut
up a strong man from food and diet him thus, and his strength will decay.
Partly from falling into some sin against conscience, Psalm 51.10, 11. or a
frequent giving way to ones daily corruptions without lamenting and reforming
of them, and partly from love of the World and multitude of worldly businesses;
hence many who have shown much forwardness in their youth, have decayed in
their affections to the Lord and to his people.

V. 31. Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we
drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed?

32 For all these things do the nations of the world seek after.

Here is a fifth argument against earthly solicitude, or carking, because this
inordinate carking for meat, drink, and apparel is proper to heathens, which
are ignorant of God and his providence, and not to Christians who acknowledge
and experience both. The word is (...) which signifies a certain vehement
desire. As ye my disciples differ in your profession from the Gentiles, see
that ye differ also in your practice; they are still carking what they shall
eat, drink, put on, but let your questions be, how shall we live for ever? Few
of the heathens look for any happiness after death, and therefore no wonder
they are so eager after the things of this life; but you are born to better
things, and called out from them, therefore though you have great charge, and
perhaps but little means to maintain them, though you have now and then a cross
in the world, do not you distrustfully say, as they say, What shall we eat, etc.

For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things] This
is a sixth argument against earthly solicitude, taken from Gods fatherly care
of you; he knows what your means and charge is, what the hardness of the
times; the contingent charges that befall you; he is a Father, and therefore
will not neglect his children, an heavenly Father, and therefore will give you
the best of blessings: he is also your Father, one in whom you have a property,
what need you then doubt? what child is there that casts not his care upon his
father? It Is the fathers reproach if he either will not or cannot provide for
his children: will it not redound to Gods reproach when we shall be carking for
our selves, as if we had no God to care for us, Psalm. 23.1. The Lord is my
shepherd I shall not want.

If we could conceive God were our Father and we his children, the world would
be base to us, with all its glory, wealth, and pleasures, we would not be
sollicitous for livelihood, we would not be so confident earthly things being
present, nor cast away our confidence, they being taken away. Luth. Tom. 4.127.

V. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.

We have heard of Christ's dehortation from worldliness and carking, now
follows the exhortation to true care, but seek ye first the Kingdom of God.

In the words, 2 things, 1 a duty, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God. 2 The
promise, All these things shall be added.

Seek ye first] Threefold firstness, 1 of time, 2 of estimation, 3 of
opportunity. He that forsakes opportunity, shall be forsaken of it. Opportunity
is like a ship under sail, to which you must call presently, else it is gone.
Hannibal when he could, would not destroy Rome, after he could not when he
would. Though we are to give God our youth, Exodus 22.29. Thou shall not delay
to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, Prove. 3 9. Honor the Lord with the
first fruits of thy increase. Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the days of
thy youth, And those that have been most eminent in grace, have been wrought
upon young. Obadiah feared the Lord from his youth. Samuel was called when a
child, Timothy and many others, and it is a man's honor to begin to know God
betimes: Yet this firstness is not all, but we must understand a firstness of
dignity and estimation, that we prize spiritual things above temporal, those
temporal things are to be sought in order to the Kingdom of God. Carnal men
say, seek money first, and virtue afterward: But Christ says, seek grace
first, if not, we shall be as foolish virgins who too late sought for oil, Mat.
25. So that here is a seventh argument against distrustful care, viz. all
temporal good things are the rewards of godliness, therefore cark not for them,
Psalm. 34.9, 10. There is no want to them that fear him, they that seek the Lord
shall not want any good thing, 1 Timothy 4.8. Earthly things are added over and
above, alluding to that, 1 Kings 3.11. Because Solomon asked an understanding
heart, and not long life, riches, or the lives of enemies, God gave him that
which he did not ask over and above riches and honor.

The Kingdom of God, and his righteousness] The Kingdom of God as the mark,
righteousness as the way. So Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom
of God. He that seeks the Kingdom of God above all other things, and all other
things for it, need not be sollicitous for other things, for they shall be
added.

Also by Kingdom of God, understand right and title to the Kingdom of God.

And his righteousness] which is, 1 Imputative righteousness of Christ, which
is also called the righteousness of God, Romans 1.17. Romans 3.21. Romans 10.3.

2 The righteousness of sanctification, as integrity of love, hunger and thirst
after doing Gods will, innocence, charity, and all other graces. Now that
sanctification is called righteousness, appears, Deuteronomy. 6.25. It shall be our
righteousness if we observe to do all these commandments, Job 27.6. My
righteousness I hold fast and will not let it go. That is, my sanctification
and uprightness: but in this sense righteousness is only an intentional
conformity to the law of God, and no satisfaction to divine justice. Many seek
the Kingdom of God, but few seek the righteousness thereof: but it is said of
Joseph of Arimathea, he was a good man and a just, and he waited for the
Kingdom of God, Luke 23.50, 51. and Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.

And all these things shall be added unto you,] The word (...) signifies, shall
be added as over measure. Godliness has the promises of this life, and that
which is to come, Mark 10.30. 1 Timothy 4.8. It Is a metaphor taken from cheap
things which are given in in the buying of costly things, as paper and
packthread are given in by Shopkeepers, when we only buy Stuffs or such
commodities, Psalm. 111.5. He has given meat to them that fear him, he will
ever be mindful of his covenant.

Quest. But we see diverse Godly persons are scanted as to outward things.

Answ. God has promised outward things to us, but its only when they are good
for us. Psalm. 34.11. They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing;
sometimes God sees outward things in any measure not so good for us: as a
Physician that has seen our water, or felt our pulse, takes away such and such
meat from us, because he sees it not good for us, so does God; or as a father
takes away a knife from his child, because he sees he is in danger to cut his
fingers therewith.

2 Gods people sometimes abuse his blessings to pride, prodigality and excess:
such children of God may justly fear to be pinched. God does not by promise
bind himself to give us outward things when we shall spend them upon our lusts,
for so God should bind himself to unjust things; but though we beg such things
of him, he denies them, Jam. 4.3.

3 All promise of outward things is with the exception of the Cross; so the
cause of God standing need of witnesses, and for the exercise of the faith and
patience of his people, sometimes precious Saints of eminent holiness have been
scanted, Heb. 11.37. Such of whom the world was not worthy, wandered about in
sheep skins, and Goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, but their
wants have been made up abundantly with inward comfort. See Mar. 10.30.

4 Unbelief (as to Gods promise for outward things) sometimes straitens Gods
hand. We are bid to pray in faith for daily bread, now how can we do this
unless Gods promise be certain and absolute. According to the faith of men it
will be unto them, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy
bread. As it was a threatening and a command, so was it a promise, that we
sweating and taking pains shall eat our bread. The persons that are beggars and
extreme poor are wicked persons, who join not themselves to any Church but are
dissolute in life.

5 Though for abuse of mercies, God sometimes pinches his children, yet usually
he keeps them from famishing, for the absoluteness of his promise in temporal
things, which are no less absolute then spiritual things (as I judge, leaving
others to their light herein) as we see in sundry temporal promises which are
set down without any restriction. Psalm. 1.3. Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord and
do good, dwell in the land, and in truth and stableness thou shall be fed, as
the Margin out of the Hebrew reads it. See also ver. 25. Romans 8.32. How shall
he not with him give us all things also? First mary Christ, then have all
things with him. See many absolute promises, Psalm. 84.11. No good thing will he
withold from them that walk uprightly, Prove. 28.10. The upright shall have
good things in possession, and see the three large promises in the New
Testament, this in the Text, and that, 1 Timothy 4.8. and that Heb. 13.5.

Quest. But what will you say to poor Christians? will you conclude them
unbelievers?

Ans. In no wise, but rather conclude they have failed in the condition, in the
belief of the absoluteness of temporal promises, or else they have failed in
their duty, not working in their youth, but being negligent in their callings
after they have been converted, or else they had an high mind and God was
forced to pull them down, or else they have lived out of a calling, or been
idle therein, and as God would not have his Church to relieve them that will
not work, so neither will he himself relieve them, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. If any man
will not work neither shall he eat.

Use. Reprehension of those who say they trust God with their souls, but dare
not trust him with their bodies, but they will use indirect means, but why are
they so confident? Surely because their faith is not so assaulted as to
spirituals, as it is to temporals; were their faith to be tried as to the
Trinity, Resurrection, belief of the Creation of the World, a Virgins bringing
forth a Son, the day of judgment, etc. they would no less show their unbelief
of Gods Word herein, then they do of his Word as to temporal things.

2 Exhort; To have outward things, set your hearts to seek heavenly things, the
other then will be added, when you know rightly to value spiritual blessings:
depend on God for temporal things. So long as the ark was in Obed-Edoms house
God prospered it, 2 Samuel 6. Joseph was a good man and God made all that he did
to prosper in his hand, Genesis 39.3.

The contrary practice is that of the world who first seek earthly things, and
think that upon their faint wishes when they are upon the bed of sickness,
death or other distresses, heavenly things will be added unto them, contrary to
Solomon's counsel, to remember our Creator in the days of youth, think that old
age will be a fitter time, and profane Esau like, prefer a mess of pottage
before a birthright and blessing.

V. 34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

Here is another Argument to take us off from carking for the morrow, that is,
for all future time: because to morrow or future time will have cares therein.
It is not a part of wisdom to trouble our selves with caring for those things
which must be cared over again to morrow. Christ alludes to the gathering of
Manna, Exodus 16.20. Some out of carking would keep of the Manna until the
morning, and it bred worms and stank.

Future time or to morrow will have its trouble, therefore we need not gather
the cares of two days into one, which being divided we shall more easily bear:
we complain of many troubles and cares which our selves create, yet in
forbidding care for the morrow he allows cares for the present. Not as if all
care for the future were unlawful, for the disciples of Antioch cared to send
relief to the brethren of Jerusalem, hearing of a famine, Act. 11.29. And, if
we should not care for to morrow, we should neither plow nor sow, build nor
plant; therefore Christ forbids here, 1 care that flows from unbelief and
distrust. Heb. 13.5. Exodus 16.20.

2 That care that hinders us from seeking heavenly things, Luke 8.14.

3 That care of earthly things which goes before our care for heavenly things
and Gods Kingdom, which we ought to seek in the first place, Heb. 12.16, 17.

4 An a fflicting care concerning future events, which are uncertain, and can
neither be foreseen nor hindered, and its well for us we cannot foresee them;
for could we foresee all future cares our souls would be swallowed up of them.
Besides we know not whether we shall live till to morrow, and why then should
we so care for it? Prove. 27.1. Boast not of to morrow, for thou know not
what a day may bring forth. We know not what may be in the womb of the morning,
or what it will bring forth, Jam 4.15, 16.

5 A troubling and disquieting care. Christ did not blame Martha for that she
was careful to provide, but that her care was so overmuch that it troubled her
that she could not attend upon Christ's preaching, Luke 10.41, 42. Martha,
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is
needful. As if he should say, Martha, thou neglects a needful thing for a
needless thing.

Use. Let every day have its due proportion of care and prayer. Lay not to
morrows cares on the present day. As Samuel said to Saul, 1 Samuel 9.20. that he
should not set his mind upon his asses that were lost, when a kingdom was
befallen him; so let us not set our cares on transitory things when we have
great things to think upon.

2 Prepare for new troubles and cares every day of thy life. Earthly businesses
come upon us like waves of the Sea; this day has cares, and to morrow brings
cares, and hardly will a day of thy life be free, Genesis 47.9. All the days of
Jacobs Pilgrimage are said to be evil.

3 Learn that, instead of immoderate thought taking, to commend thy matters to
God in prayer: look unto him for blessing, success, and direction: as the
Mariner has his eye upon the pole star, as well as his hand upon the helm,
so should we acknowledge God in all our ways, and he will direct our steps,
Prove. 3.5, 6. Psalm. 123.1, 2, ^. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that
dwell in the heavens, Psalm. 37. Commit thy way unto the Lord (how difficult
soever) and he will bring it to pass, ver. 5. Psalm. 90.17. Unburthen all thy
cares into his bosom. Jer. 10.23. The way of man is not in himself to direct
his steps.

CHAP. VII.
CHrist in this Chapter proceeds in giving precepts conducing to faith and
godliness.

V. 1 Judge not, that ye be not judged] This is the first precept; not as if
Christ did go about to take away judgments and Courts of Justice, either in
Church or Commonwealth, which is established, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. Romans 13.
but he only speaks against rash judgments.

Rash judgment is a determinate opinion concerning the evil of another upon
insufficient grounds; though the thing be true that we judge, yet if the
grounds upon which we judge be insufficient, our judgment is rash judgment.
Such was that of Eli, 1 Samuel 1.13, 14. who judged Hanna to be drunk, because
her lips moved when she was praying in her heart. Against this the Apostle
speaks, Who art thou that judge another man's servant? Romans 14.13. also, 1
Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time. Jam. 3.1. Be not many Masters. Only
know that the reasons may be too light to persuade an ill opinion of one man
that may be weighty and just concerning another. And those that may be too
light to a firm assent, may be sufficient to stir up a suspicion, whereby the
mind stands in doubt, and inclines to neither part.

Grounds to take us off from rash judgment.
1 It Is contrary to that principle, Matthew. 7.12. To do as we would be done by.

2 Every man has right to a good name, as to a good laid up in the heart of
another; now by censorious judgeings this is taken away, and the person judged
made contemptible, and so made unfit for offices and benefits.

3 Rash judgment takes away Gods office, in that we will take upon us to judge
those things which belong only to God, Romans 14.4. 1 Cor. 4.5.

4 Rash judging it feeds only our own and other men's flesh, in that we raise
up to our selves an over-weaning conceit of our own goodness, or flatter others
in a supposed goodness by speaking of other men's evils, Gal. 6.4. Things that
are doubtful we ought to interpret for the better part.

5 Thou can not judge aright of other men's actions, being ignorant of many
circumstances concerning them; for thou know not with what mind, or to what
end the action was done, nor upon what temptation.

6 Sometimes thou thy self have greater faults then those thou judges: yea in
the same kind wherein thou judge, he has a mote, thou have a beam in thy
eye.

7 Those that are most apt to judge others, usually are least inspective into
themselves. Our own weakness should make us slow in judging others.

8 The uncertainty of our judgments. We can only look on the outside and not
on the inside, and sometimes persons minds are better affected then their
lives show.

9 The safety of the error on the side of charity in judging persons to be
better then they are, rather then worse. This way is safe and the other
dangerous, and he is not wise that will go a dangerous way when he may go a
safe.

10 From the Law of like for like; For with what judgment ye judge ye shall be
judged, and with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again. The
words are a Proverb, as in other sins God gives like for like, Exodus 22.22, 23.
1 Samuel, 15.33. Esai 33.1. Judge. 1.6, 7. 1 Kings 21.19. so in this, 2 Samuel 16.22.
Its just that others should do so to us, as we have done to others.

11 If we judge not others our selves shall not be judged: he means it not by
God, as if our not judging were a mean or merit to hinder Gods judging, but of
men, as Luke c. 6.38. neither can God be overtaken with any rash judgment, to
judge us as we do others. But the meaning is, that God will requite our
charitable moderation toward others with the same moderation of others toward
us. This is (...), for the most part, not always; for though Christ judged no
man rashly, yet was he judged by Pilate and the Jews most unjustly.

Many think to purchase to themselves an opinion of innocence by darkning the
reputation of others by rash judgment, and suppose that the detraction from
another man's reputation is an addition to their own, but Christ here tells them
the contrary.

Use. Caution against rash judgment. Beware we neither lessen things well done
or well spoken, nor interpret doubtful things in the worse part, nor aggravate
light infirmities, nor be ready to receive scattered reproaches.

Obj. But is all judging here condemned?

Answ. No: to judge a tree by the fruits is lawful. It Is not the mind of
Christ that his Disciples should be blind toward the evils of others, and not
to censure and punish them, but that we bridle the corruption of our hearts
which is much inclining to rash judgment. Our hearts are like crooked rules
that are ready to pervert straight things.

Neither is credulity here commended; such as was in Jacob, who erred in too
much charity, thinking the wild beasts had devoured Joseph, when his sons only
showed him a blooded Coat which Joseph wore.

Neither the judging in Churches, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 12. or in Commonwealths, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. is forbid.

Neither the judging of private persons betwixt brethren, 1 Cor. 6.5. is forbid.

But that judging is here condemned, which arises;

1 From pride and domination, Jam. 3.1.

2 From spleen, discontent, envy, passion and hatred, whence men's narrow
inspection arises.

3 From hypocrisy, when men endeavor to cover their own vicious practices by
judging others; so the Pharisee, Luke 18.12, 13.

4 To judge finally of any man's reprobation, having not committed the sin
against the Holy Ghost.

5 To be Lord and Lawgiver to and of another man's conscience, Jam. 4.12, 13.
There is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy, who art thou that
judge another? thus the strong and weak did, Romans 14.3, 4. Thou art only a
fellow servant, therefore not a judge.

6 That judging which is used to get an opinion of holiness.

Obj. But we find even godly men and professors to judge others?

Answ. It Is possible even for godly men to judge amiss, as Abraham, Genesis 20.10,
11. and Eli, 1 Samuel 1.14. and to insult too much over unregenerate men, but
usually either 1 They judge themselves, or 2 To preserve themselves from being
accessory to other men's sins, by a secret invisible allowance of them. 3 Lest
Knaves should go for honest men. 4 When men merely civil, or formal, or such as
live in some sin are cried up by some time-serving flatterer, for good men;
here a godly man may pass his judgment of this wicked man, lest ignorant
persons hearing him so commended might gather such a dangerous principle, viz.
That a man may be a good man, and yet live in some way of wickedness.


That silence is no less sinful which suffers a profane man to carry away the
repute of a godly man, then that silence which suffers a godly man to be
charged with hypocrisy, provided there be time and place for a wise and
charitable contradiction.

V. 2. For with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged, and with what
measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again.

The second reason why we must not rashly judge others, because God by his
providence will afford us the like.

V. 3. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye? and
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

Here Is a third reason against rash judging, taken from the adjunct. Such
persons have beams or gross sins in themselves, who are prone to censure motes
or infirmities in others. Self love blindes many that they cannot see gross
sins in themselves, but can see supposed sins in others.

V. 4. Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye, and behold, a beam is in thine own eye?

A fourth reason taken from unprofitableness and dishonesty, such judgings do
not tend to the amending but to the hardening of the sinner. He that will judge
others had need examine himself.

Quest. Whether may not a Judge condemn those sins in another which he knows
himself to have committed, or at present knows he lives in?

Answ. Yes, because every Judge is bound to judge according to Law, where evils
are prosecuted and witnessed in any outward Court of men, but not where they
are prosecuted and witnessed in the inner Court of conscience, for that Court
only belongs to God: and though the Apostle Romans 2.1. say, that such men are
inexcusable who judge others for those things themselves do, it is meant only in
the Court of conscience, or the Court of Heaven, not in the Courts of men,
which looks upon all men as innocent, against whom there is no witness of guilt.

Besides, how will thou say to thy Brother? that is, with what face? upon what
ground of conscience or honesty will thou say? Let me pull out thy Mote, when
thou have the Beam of a reigning sin in thee, Luke 13.14, 15.

Obs. All sins are not equal; some are reigning sins, some are sins of
infirmity.

2 Many persons, though guilty of great sins, yet are not sensible of them;
some have beams yet see it not.

3 Men that would reform small sins in others must first reform great sins in
themselves.

V, 5. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye, and then
thou shall clearly see to cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers Eye.

The words are an Answer to an Objection. It seems then I need not care how my
Brother lives, whether well or ill.

Answ. Yes, thou must.

Hence Christ adds v. 5. that we should perform toward them the duty of
admonition. See Levit. 19.17. But Hypocrites, upon pretense of admonition,
sometimes exercise a masterly power of judging, contrary to the Rule of
Charity, which requires with all tenderness that we inquire into, and deal with
the weaknesses of our Brethren with a desire of healing of them; but this
cannot he do who has greater faults of his own. Thy Brother whom thou reproves
cannot learn a better amendment by thee than that he sees in thee. Reproof is
so to be ordered, that not only the faults of our Brother be blamed, but that
reproof may attain the true end thereof, to wit, the amendment of the sinner,
which will be brought about the better when thy life reproves him as well as
thy words.

As it is impossible for him that has a beam in his eye, to pull out a mote out
of another man's, because the beam blindes him that he cannot see the mote; so a
man blinded with any reigning sin, he cannot see infirmities in others to amend
them.

Object. But what Beam is it that is to be cast out?

Answ. 1 Reigning sin, Romans 6.12.

2 The beam of scandalous sin. This was in David's eye when he so severely
judged him to death that took the the Ew-lamb, 2 Samuel 12.5, 6.

Quest. But how shall we come to see the greatness of our sins that they are
beams?

1 Consider the infinite majesty against whom committed. 2 Consider the great
knowledge thou have sinned against. 3 The length of time thou have lived in
them, Hosea 8.3. 4 Upon what small temptations thou have committed them. 5 That
thou have been instrumental to carry persons to Hell by thine evils, Acts
26.11. 6 That thou have caused persons to turn away from the way of truth by
thine evils, 2 Peter 2.1, 2. and caused them to turn to evil by thy example, as
Jeroboam who made Israel to sin. 7 The sore punishments God has inflicted upon
persons for committing such sins as thou have been guilty of, 1 Cor. 10.7, 8,
9, 10, 11.
Quest. But how must we cast out this beam?

Answ. 1 Believe that there is pardon for great sins in Christ, and bathe thy
soul in Christ's blood. Do as they that were stung with fiery Serpents, John
3.14. 1 John 1.7.

2 Repent and turn to God with all thy heart, Joel 2.12. Let thy repentance
appear in the three parts of it, 1 Confession, 1 John 1.8. 2 Humiliation,
Jerem. 13.17, 18. 3 Reformation, Hosea 14.2. Take away all iniquity. Prove.
28.13.

And then thou shall see clearly to cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers eye]
See who is to be admonished, even a Brother, Lev. 19.18. Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17.
1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. whether he be of our own or of another Church, if
our Brothers Ox or Ass straying are to be brought home by us, Deuteronomy. 22.1, 2, 3,
4. much more himself, yet may others that are not Brethren be reproved, because
reproof is a kind of spiritual alms that ought to be given to all, as well as
bodily alms where there is hope of amending.

V. 6. Give not that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before
Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.

Clemens Alexandrinus mentions that among the Chaldees, Egyptians, and Hebrews,
their Professors were wont to deliver their Precepts in Proverbs, and so does
Christ, as before, so here and elsewhere: it is a demonstrative kind of
teaching practiced by Solomon, Eccles. 12.10.

In the words two things, 1 A Precept, Give not that which is holy to Dogs. 2
The Reasons, 1 Lest they trample them under their feet. 2 Lest they turn again
and rend you.

1 The Precept. Give not that which is holy to Dogs. Some by Dogs understand
Unbelievers, as if the Word, Baptism and Supper should not be given to them.
For Baptism and the Supper it appears they ought not to be given, as being not
converting Ordinances, but signs and declaratives of conversion already
wrought. Were they converting Ordinances they should actively, effectively and
operatively produce the grace of Regeneration, and after a physical manner work
upon the soul, whereas they work only in, by, and through the understanding,
and therefore must be administered on those believers that have understanding to
receive them; but for the Word, it being Gods means to bring persons from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to Gods Kingdom, Acts 18.26. it
ought to be offered to all.

Therefore by Dogs is meant the stubborn and professed Enemies of the Gospel,
who having formerly been convinced of the truth of it are now apostatized, and
cease not to rail and persecute that truth. Acts 19.9. when diverse spoke evil
of the way of God before the multitude, Paul departed from them.

Others more pertinently restrain that which is holy, to admonition, whereof he
had spoke; this ought not to be given to Dogs and Swine, of which Prove. 9.8.
Reprove not a Scorner lest he hate thee, reprove a wise man and he will love
thee. Prove. 23.9. Speak not in the ears of a fool for he will despise the
wisdom of thy words; only we must not forbear the duty of admonition to them,
that it may do some good to, upon this pretense, as if they were Dogs or Hogs,
when we perceive no such thing by them, for our hearts are but too backward to
perform this duty, because we see it so unwelcome to most men.

By dogs Christ means contradictors and blasphemers against admonition, whether
publicly in the ministry of the Word, as the Jews of Antioch did, Acts 13.46.
who hereby adjudged themselves unworthy of everlasting life, and the Apostles
upon their contradiction turned to the Gentiles, See Matthew. 10.14, 15.
so did Paul in the like case, Act. 19.9. depart into the school of Tyrannus
upon the contradiction the Jews made against his doctrine. Such were those
circumcision teachers whom Paul calls dogs, Phil. 3.2. Beware of dogs, and
perhaps those, Rev. 22.15. without are dogs, are here meant, and also Christ
means private admonition, Prove. 23.9. When persons shall rage against it, the
Lord provides for the safety of his servants, least for their good will they be
rent in pieces by the ungodly.

By holy things and pearls then Christ means public and private admonition:
they are called holy because the persons that give it are holy, and because the
subject matter, even the admonition is holy, and because of the end, which is
the sanctification of souls.

They are called Pearls for their preciousness and excellency. Psalm. 141.5.
Admonition is compared to an excellent Oil.

By hogs Christ means they do not contradict, but by the uncleanness of their
lives they show their contempt of your admonitions.

Its one thing to tread holy admonitions under our feet, as hogs do and those
that wallow in their sins, and another thing to bite and rend him that reaches
holy admonitions to us as dogs do: such an one was Crescens the Cynick
Philosopher, from whom Justin Martyr expected his death. As Christ would not
have public and private admonition to be given for their sake, so would he not
have it altogether kept silent for their sake. Of this sort of dogs are many,
who stir up, not only Magistrates but the common people against the professors
of truth, because the truth such hold forth is contrary to their profit and
praise, as we see in Christ and the Apostles.

The reasons of this are, 1 The unprofitableness and unworthiness. Your labor
will be spent in vain, they will trample these precious things under their
feet. Things that are slighted and counted nothing worth are trod in the mire,
as pearls, etc. to them that know not their worth.

2 Your own safety; they will turn again and rend you, they will prepare fire,
sword, prisons and banishment against you; and therefore as no man will meddle
with a mad Dog for fear he be bit by him, so should we beware of such Dogs.

There are some wicked men though they be not cured yet are they curable; to
these admonitions may be given; but some are incurable, to whom they are not to
be given.

And though we are to give a reason of the hope in us to every man, yet is it
only to them that ask a reason thereof, which Hogs and Dogs do not.

So that as in the former Verse Christ shows who and what kind the reprovers
should be, such as were free from beams or gross evils, so here in this Verse
he shows who the persons to be reproved must be, not Dogs nor Hogs, but such
as will receive an admonition.

Q. How may we give admonitions that they may be received?

A. Something must be done by the reprover, something by the reproved.

1 The reprover must reprove in love. Its horrible wickedness if any should
cover hatred or revenge under such a duty, 1 These. 2.11, 12. We charged you, as
a father does his children, that ye would walk worthy of God. Never set upon
reproof unless your conscience tell you, you do it out of love.

2 Be sure there be a fault committed. If you take up groundless reports, you
your self will come under reproof, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. 1 Cor. 5.1.

3 Let reproof be applied to the quality of the person reproved; if an inferior
more boldly, if a superior more modestly, so Nathan to David, 1 Timothy 5.1. and
to the quantity or quality of the sin, Tit. 1.13. Rebuke them sharply. If a
person be so high that because of his greatness he will not be reproved, he is
to be reproved because he will not be reproved.

4 With observation of fit time and place, so Abigail to Nabal when the drink
was out of his head, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. Prove. 25.11.

5 With zeal, that so the sinner may see his sin and Gods wrath due for it; not
as Eli to his sons, but as John Baptist, Matthew. 3.7, 8, 9. Matthew. 14.4.

6 With meekness, considering thy self may be tempted, Gal. 6.1.

7 To give it to a person hopeful, not incorrigible, not a Dog or Hog, Prove,
23.9.

8 With patience. If a person be admonished and repents not, yet wait a while;
if he still mend not, take one or two that may be helpful, either to bring him
to repentance, or to witness his stubbornness, Matthew. 18.15.

2 Something must be done by the reproved, as

1 To pray for honest reprovers, Psalm. 141.4, 5. Let the righteous reprove me
it shall be an excellent oil.

2 Take the reproof with humility and patience, and not to storm, saying as
that Israelite to Moses, Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge over me? Exodus 2.14.

3 Judge that it comes from love till the contrary appear, and so it will be
better digested. We are not offended at him that shows us the spots on our
clothes, why should we be at him that shows us the spots of our life.

4 Amend by thy reproof, whether it be a sin thou have been guilty of, or a
duty thou have fallen short in; if not guilty, let it caution thee for time to
come, Prove. 9.9. If thou after reproofs amend not, thou art near destruction,
Prove. 29.1. Motive 1. He that rebukes a man shall find more favor afterward
then he that flattereth with his tongue, Prove. 28.23. else we are in danger to
partake with others men's sins, Ephesians. 5.11.

V. 7. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you.

V. 8. For every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to
him that knocks it shall be opened.

In this command Christ stirs us up to prayer. There are two things that hinder
prayer, to wit sloth, and unbelief; against sloth Christ bids us ask, seek,
knock, and against unbelief Christ says, whosoever asks receives, and he
that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. Nothing more
stirs up a soul to prayer then a confidence of being heard, and nothing makes a
man more heartless then the contrary.

Now for the things believers should ask they are the Spirit, Luke 11.13.
heavenly wisdom, Jam. 1.5. both which Paul conjoyns and bids us pray for the
spirit of wisdom, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. also, increases of grace.

These three, ask, seek, and knock, signify most fervent begging of God, or a
begging with perseverance; they signify we should pray believingly,
diligently, fervently, and perseverantly. If men use to give being so
importuned, how much more will God? As Christ shows in the following verses.

For every one that asks receiveth] Psalm. 81.7. Thou calledst in trouble and
I delivered thee, Psalm. 50.15. The words seem to be taken out of Jer. 29.12,
13. Then shall ye call upon me and I will hearken unto you, and ye shall seek
me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. See Luke 15.4.

This promise is to be understood, that we ask according to the qualifications
before laid down, as that we ask in faith, etc

Use. It Is encouragement to us to come to God in all our wants. While they
speak I will hear, Esa. 65.24. Every believer may say of himself and others as
Moses said of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 4.7. What Nation is there that has God so nigh
unto them as the Lord our God is in all things that we call unto him for?

Only you must ask things that God has promised, or at least commanded us to
ask for, not hurtful things, as to ask riches to spend them upon our lusts;
not curious things. The mother of Zebedees sons desiring that her sons might
sit one at Christ's right hand the other at Christ's left hand in his Kingdom,
was repulsed.

2 Exhort to patient waiting if God answer not at first, Luke 18.1. God long
waited for us, Song 5.1. Revel. 3.20.

V. 9, For what man is there among you, which if his son ask him bread, would
give him a stone?

V. 10, Or if he ask a fish will he give him a Serpent?

V. 11. If ye then that are evil know how to give good things to your children,
how much more shall your father which is in heaven give good things to them
that ask him?

The words are an argument from the less to the greater. Fathers, though bad
men, will give good things to their children, much more will God being a good
father, give good things to his children when they ask them of him. Mark,
Christ argues only for giving good things to Gods children, not to others: to
his children God will give, and more liberally, then men will to theirs.

When a son asks bread if the father should give him a stone it would be
unprofitable for him, and if he should ask fish and the father should give him
a serpent that is like a fish he would give him that which is hurtful, and
would poison him; surely then God will not give his children those things which
are either unprofitable for them, or hurtful unto them: God in mercy sometimes
hears us not, but denies us that which we ask, that he may give us that which
may do us more good.

If ye being evil know how to give good things] The Apostles and holy men are
said to be evil, 1 Comparatively, in respect of God, Job 15.14, 15, 16. the
heavens are not pure in his sight, as the Moon is dark in comparison of the
Sun, or 2 Because of the unregenerate part remaining in godly men, Romans 7.18. I
know that in my flesh dwells no good thing. He does not mean his flesh properly
so taken, in which the Spirit of God dwelt, who was good, yea goodness it self,
but his unregenerate part.

Obs. There is a natural proneness in parents, though wicked, to do good unto
their children, 2 Cor. 12.14.

2 What good thing we obtain from God we must look to get it in the use and
exercise of prayer, Psalm. 50.15.

3 The bowels of God toward his children are infinitely more then the bowels
of an earthly father toward his, Psalm. 103.13.

V. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

In this command Christ warns us that we should do as we would be done by. The
Emperor Severus had this sentence which he had received from Christians or
Jews, quod tibi non vis alteri ne feceris, what thou willest not to thy self
thou shall not do to another.

Self-love does so blind us that to judge rightly we must change the person.

This is the foundation of all equity, that we would not do to any what we
would not suffer. If you look upon him him as unrighteous that offers you
wrong, look upon your self as unrighteous that offer wrong to another. You
would not that another man should overreach you, or take the advantage of a
mistake of you, nor withold any due right from you or your children, you
would that every man should love you, do you so to others. This is a short sum
of all righteousness. You would not any man should hurt you, do not ye hurt
others; let this rule be in our buying, selling, etc.

Therefore] This Illative Conjunction has respect to the foregoing precepts of
this Sermon, as for giving alms, and loving our neighbor, and not judging
rashly, and does conclude from them, and so Luke carries it, and does not
conclude from what went immediately before, as some carry it, you would that
you should be heard asking just things of God, therefore you must hear your
neighbor asking just things of you; which though it be a truth, yet is it not
the propper inference, because Christ speaks not of our acting toward God but
toward men. Though some think this word therefore to be redundant.

This precept is to be understood only in just things: for else a drunkard may
reason, because I make him drunk, let him make me drunk, or an adulterer may
say, I lay with my neighbors wife, and let him lie with mine, or to give
railing for railing.

For this is the Law and the Prophets] The words are the reason of Christ's
command, because all the Scriptures aim at this, not only the Old Testament
but the New, Romans 13.8. Gal. 5.14. Love fulfills the Law in respect of parts
not in respect of degrees, but justification by the Law is not unless it be
fulfilled both ways; Charity being imperfect, the operations of it must needs
be imperfect. In those places Paul says the Law is fulfilled, in this thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, this is the sum and scope the Law and
Gospel propounds as to men, and therefore to love our neighbor as our self is
to do to him as we would have him do to us, were we in his case, for it seems
to me that those two Scriptures and this of Christ aim at one thing. You would
not have your wealth, wife, name taken from you, do not you take it from
others. Now Christ says not, this is the whole Law and the Prophets, for
Matthew. 22.38, 39. The law stablishes the loving of God with all our heart, as
the chief commandment, and love, and justice to our neighbor as the next. We
are apt to require righteousness from our neighbors to us but backward to
return it. Subjects, Princes, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants should do in
their relations as they would be done by, if they were in the correlation.

V. 13. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.

V. 14. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be which find it.

In the words, 1 A Precept, Enter ye in at the strait gate.

2 The Reasons, 1 The wide gate and broad way leads to destruction, 2 Because
the way that leads to life, and the gate that enters into it is strait and
narrow.

3 The fewness of those that find this strait gate and narrow way, and the
multitudes who enter in at the wide gate.

Or thus, Christ sets down two things, 1 The end, eternal life. 2 The means
thereunto. A Metaphor from Passengers, who first set down the place they go to,
and then think of the way to it.

The scope of Christ is that we should not be offended at the fewness of those
that follow Christ, and the multitudes that follow the manners of the World.

The occasion Luke sets down, cap. 13.22. One of Christ's hearers asked this
question, Are there few that shall be saved? To which Christ answers by an
implicit Affirmation, Strive to enter in at the strait gate. q. d. You may
think that I have straitened the way by my Precepts, but I have only showed
you what it is.

Enter in at the strait gate] That is, the gate and way of holiness, called the
way of Gods testimonies, Ps. 119.3.14.32. It Is called a strait gate, 1 Because
in its own nature it displeases flesh and blood.

2 Because of the strictness of commands, Matthew. 5.28, 29, 44.

3 Because of the circumspection and care which must be used in walking in it,
as in a way from which by the narrowness a man may easily decline, Ephesians. 5.14.
Prove. 4.23. Deuteronomy. 5.32.

4 Because there must be a great deal of stooping and condescension: a man must
be humbled and abased in the sight of his own vileness, Luke 15.18, 19.

5 Because there must be much striving to get in, Luke 13.23.

6 Because there must be stripping of our selves, 1 Of our Lusts, even of every
darling sin, Matthew. 5.29, 30. 1 Pet. 4.2. 2 Of our enjoyments, Luke 14.33. to
forsake all for Christ; Lands, Livings, Friends.

7 Because of the Impediments in the way, as 1 Pleasures and Honors, 2 Mocks
and Reproaches, Heb. 11.25, 26. 3 Many tribulations, Acts 14.22.

For wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction] This is
the first Reason; by wide gate and broad way Christ means the way that ungodly
and sinners walk in, Psalm 1.1, 6. called our own way, Isai 53.6. or the way of
our own heart, Isai 57.17.

It Is called a broad way, 1 Because it is a way of liberty to the flesh, that a
man may run any course in it, whether uncleanness, pride, worldliness.

2 Because every man naturally walks in it, and in no other, Romans 3.16, 17.

3 Because in this way there are no conditions or restraints put upon a man by
corruption, but he may do what he pleases.

4 Because of the abundance of several sorts of sinners walking in it, as it
were, without touching one another; the drunkard, swearer, worldling.

Many there be which go in thereat] We are not to follow multitudes. Noah and
Lot would not; four hundred false Prophets against one Eliah. All the Jews
cried Crucify him. All the World wondered after the Beast, Rev. 13.3. All
Nations, Kindreds and Tribes fell down and worshipped the golden Image, except
Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego. For 4000 years all Nations walked in their own
ways, Acts 14.15.

Divide the World in thirty parts, nineteen parts are Idolaters, six are
Mahumetans, one Jews, and four Christians; and of the Christians I judge that
at least there are three Papists for two Protestants, and of the Protestants
that seem to be, take out the Atheists, profane, worldlings, formal, how few
are there, that go in the narrow way? So that the world looks like a great heap
of chaff wherein here and there a wheat corn lies hid. One good man among
multitudes of bad.

So that as Chrysostom said of a great city (wherein were at least a hundred
thousand souls) it was Antioch, Chrysostom. Hom. 40. ad pop. Antioch.
How many think you in this great city may be saved? what think you of a
thousand? and concludes, I think in all this great city not above an hundred
persons will be saved, and I doubt of some of them too: which amounted to every
thousanth man.

In the Type only Caleb and Joshua entered Canaan, to denote that few even
among professing people shall enter into heaven. Many are called, few chosen,
Matthew. 20.16. One of a city and two of a Tribe, Jer. 3.14. The godly in Isaiahs
time were so few, that they were signs and wonders, Isa. 8.18. Of all the
seventy two Rulers only Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus owned Christ. Christ
his flock is a little flock, Luke 12.32. Among multitudes there were three
only who resisted the worshipping of the golden Image. Constantine the Arrian
the Son of Constantine did upbraid the Orthodox, that Athanasius with four or
five more troubled the peace of all the world: to whom Liberius Bishop of Rome
said, the word of faith is not diminished by my aloneness, Theodoret, lib. 2.
Hist Eccles. cap. 16. Augustine, lib. 4. Cont. Crescent. cap. 53. compares the
Church to a barn floor, wherein is more chaff then grains of wheat, what may
we then compare the world to? the righteous are scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.

Now, for the broad way, how many go therein? Young and Old compassed Lots
house. Rev. 17.15. The waters which thou saw where the whore sits, are
peoples, and multitudes, nations and languages. Small and great, rich and poor
take the beasts mark in their right hands and foreheads, Rev. 13.16. All the
Asian professors that were at Rome fell away at one time, 2 Timothy 1.15. See
Matthew. 7.22. Many will say to me in that day, etc.

Use. 1 Comfort against discouragement, because of the fewness of them that
look toward God. Christ has foretold it.

2 Admire the grace of God, that among the few that shall be saved God should
cast his love upon so contemptible a creature as thou art.

3 Strive to enter in. In the Baptists time the Kingdom of heaven suffered
violence, Matthew. 11.12. The violent took it by force. Christ says, strive to
enter in. The Greek word is (...), which signifies to strive like wrastlers,
who put forth all their strength when they vvrastle, as for life if they do
overcome, or for death if they be overcome. So run that ye may obtain, strive
to be temperate in all things; if vvrastlers for a corruptible crown, let us
for an incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. For this cause the first Christians
willingly offered themselves to Martyrdom, and Origin had a saying, that if
there were but one man in the world that were to be saved he would strive
to be that man; how much more when there is more?

But oh the luke warmness and indifferency of many, who think it an easy thing
to come to heaven, and never take pains herein! contrarily Saints, 1 Pet. 4.18.
2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 4.1. Heb. 6.12.12.1, 2.

4 Caution. Beware of making multitudes your precedent for the things of God.
It was no Argument for Noah to corrupt his ways, though all flesh had
corrupted theirs.

V. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves.

Christ warns his Disciples here to take heed of false Prophets: where a fold
of sheep is there will the Wolf be walking.

There Is a two fold watchfulness against these false Prophets, 1 That which is
by the Elders, Act. 20.28, 29. Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock,
for after my departure shall grievous Wolves enter in among you. Song. 2.15.
Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, which spoil the vines, for our vines have
tender grapes. By which the Spirit means false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.40. Israel,
thy Prophets are like the Foxes of the deserts. Now Elders are to discover
false Prophets that all men may see their folly, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. 1 By confuting
of them, Titus, 1.9. An Elder must be able to convince gainsayers. 2 By
warning brethren against them, Gal. 5.7, 8. 3 By denouncing the censures of the
Church against them, for want whereof the Angel of Thyatira was reproved, Rev.
2.20. 1 Timothy 1.20.

2 Brethren are to take heed of them, 1 By avoiding their company, Romans 16.17.
I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary
to the doctrine which ye have heard, and avoid them, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.

2 If providence unavoidably cast us into their company, be sure you do not
hear them, that is yield not to their persuasions, Prove. 19.27. Cease, my Son,
to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge.

3 By not receiving them to your houses. 2 Epistle of John, ver. 10. If there
come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your
houses, neither bid him God speed.

Grounds why we should beware of false Prophets.
1 Because they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. And in order thereto they
have dice, cogging slights, as the Word (...) signifies and much cunning
craftiness.

2 Because the persons whom false Prophets endeavor to seduce are commonly
weaklings or young beginners in the faith, Gal. 1.2, 3. No sooner had the
Galatians received truth, but false Prophets were ready to seduce them, Song.
2.15. Take us the Foxes, why? our vines have tender grapes; that is our
believers or members are but tender or young in the faith, and so are least
able to make resistance against them. We see how busy false Prophets have been
at Antioch, Act. 15.5. and at Coloss, cap. 2.7, 8. at the first planting of the
Churches.

3 Because of the great multitude of such, 1 John 4.1. There are many false
Prophets gone out into the world.

4 Because a Leprosy in the head, or a seducement by a false Prophet, may
prove as dangerous as a scandalous practice; hence false Prophets are said to
bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.2.

Use. 1 Try the Spirits, that is the doctrines, because many false Prophets are
gone out, 1 John 4.1. False Prophets take advantage of seducing by the
lightness of men's minds. As all should try them, so especially governors,
Princes and great persons, for whom such lie in wait, Act. 13.6.

2 Take heed of such deluders; for this purpose, 1 Get a love to truth, for
want whereof many are given up to delusions, to believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.

2 Take heed of lightness of mind: many are taken with every new fangled
whimsie; as the Galatians were soon removed, so are they, Gal. 1.6.

3 Take heed of their fair tongues, Romans 16.18. With good words and fair
speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple, they promise liberty but allure
to wantonness, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19.

4 Converse not with such false Prophets, 2 Epistle of John, ver. 10.

5 Consider the danger of their doctrines.

They come in sheeps cloathing] Here Is the danger of them, they come in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly are wolves. Lether or sheepskins was the habit of true
Prophets, Heb. 11.37. Under this kind of habit we are to understand all outward
show of innocence, testified by countenance, words or Apparel. The Prophets
wore sometimes hairy garments, as the Baptist, Matthew. 3.4. And the false
Prophets wore these to deceive, Zach. 13.4. As a flock of sheep is in danger
when there is among them a Wolf covered with a sheep-skin, so is Gods flock in
danger by these false Prophets.

Quest. But what is this sheeps clothing?

Answ. Extraordinary appearance of Zeal, Pretended inspirations of the spirit,
seeming sanctity without the power of godliness, plainness of Apparel,
pretended self-denial, mortification and humility, even to the neglecting of
the body, and sometimes even of relations, pretended harmlesness, Allegations
of Scripture in a flourishing way, but not in truth, pretense of being called
by men, so did the Scribes and Pharisees of their being called; A readiness to
endure prisons, banishment, etc. for the tenants they hold, Laborious
painfulness in going from one Land to another to gain Proselytes, Matthew. 23.15.
Denunciatory damnations against those who will not believe their dreams.

Inwardly they are ravening Wolfes] They are like Wolfes, 1 For greediness,
Esa. 56.11. they are strong of appetite, as the word is varied in the Margin,
they can never have enough, they look all to their own way, every one to his
gain.

2 For subtilty. The Wolf is very subtle, the Evening Wolf though it eat some
of the flesh when it takes the prey, yet hides the rest, he gnawes not the
bones till the morrow, see Zeph. 3.3. so false Prophets are very subtle,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, Ephesians.
4.14.

3 For mischief. One Wolf will mischieve a great many Sheep, so these.

4 For watchfulness. The Wolf watches if the Shepherd be gone to catch the
Sheep, Joh. 10.12. so do false Prophets, they watch to catch the Sheep and
Lambs of Christ in the absence of the Shepherd.

5 Wolves do not enter in by the door, but climb over some other way, getting
over pales or hedges. So do false Prophets, they do not come in at Christ's
door, which is the lawful call of a Church, but some other way, as pretense of
presentation, institution, induction, commendums, dispensations, etc. John 10.1.

6 For fierceness and cruelty; they presently tear out the very entrails of a
creature. Hab. 1.8. The Chaldeans are said to be more fierce then the Evening
Wolves; so these. Acts 20.29. Grievous Wolves shall enter in among you not
sparing the flock. False Prophets are cruel to the souls of men: yea and to
their bodies too. Zedekiah the false Prophet struck Michaiah, (...) Kings
22.24, 25, 26. Pashur put Jeremy in the stocks and smote him, Jer. 20.2, 3.
Ananias commanded Paul to be stricken, Acts 23.2.

Use 1 Caution against the feigned pretenses of false Prophets. Learn to be
wise as Serpents against them, Matthew. 10.16. If they be Wolves and Serpents to
circumvent you, be ye Serpents to prevent them.

2 Learn to hear and obey the Lords faithful Prophets, Joh. 10.4, 5. Heb.
13.7, 17.

V. 16. By their fruits you shall know them.

Christ gives a note whereby to try false Prophets, viz. By their fruits, that
is, by their fruits of iniquity.

Obj. But you said before they had a seeming sanctity.

Answ. True, but feigned things soon return to their nature, no man can long
carry a counterfeit person.

Q. But what are their fruits?

Answ. They are many, 1 Usually they fly sufferings, especially where praise
does not accompany it.

2 They allure unto themselves men that live in sin, especially the richer
sort, and promise them peace how bad soever. Even such as have been cast out of
Churches, without requiring any thing of their repentance.

3 They move questions not any way tending to godliness, but either curious, or
captious questions, they dote about questions and strife of words, being full
of perverse disputings, 1 Timothy, 6 4, 5. full of revilings against the faithful
servants of Christ, and those which are the most eminent instruments of his
Church.

4 Also they go to preach without any call, either of a true gift, or of a true
Church, or Pastor, Acts 13.2, 3, 4. Also, Acts 14.23. True Prophets have
usually had a call by those who have had a greater measure of the spirit to
judge then the person called. Only men that are likely to be useful this way,
may be tried. The Lord complains that the Prophets prophesied without his
sending, Jer. 14.14, 15. Jer. 23.21, 22. I have not sent these Prophets yet
they ran, I have not spoken to them yet they prophesied.

5 Also they think to make people forget the name of God by their pretended
inspirations, Jer. 23.27. They think to cause my people to forget my name, by
their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbor, as their fathers have
forgotten my name for Baal.

6 Also they are full of confident blasphemous boldness, to say, God says,
when God says not, Jer. 23.31. I am against the Prophets that smooth their
tongues, and say, he says, The word of the Lord, to this Judge, this Teacher,
See Ezekiel. 13.6.

7 Also a bold pretending to know and search hearts, which is only proper to
God, 1 Kings 8.39. Thou, even thou only know the hearts of the children of
men; they will tell a man they never saw before, that he is an hypocrite and
wicked.

8 Also sadding the hearts of the righteous, and gladding the hearts of the
wicked, Ezekiel. 13.22, 23.

9 Also to build up and comfort souls with a false peace, Ezekiel. 13, 10, 11. one
cried peace when there was no peace. One false Prophet by his flattery built a
wall of carnal confidence, and another daubed it with untempered mortar. This
is called a sowing of Pillows, v. 18. telling persons on their deathbeds you
have kept your Church, and been good to the poor, and peaceable among your
neighbors.

10 Vainglory also is a fruit of a false Prophet, John 7.18. He that speaks of
himself seeks his own glory. Contrarily faithful Teachers preach not
themselves but Christ Jesus the Lord, 2 Cor. 4.5. John 3.30.

11 Also dissimulation is a fruit of a false Prophet; he endeavors to make
persons to believe otherwise of things then he himself does, as of the
Scriptures, that they are of God, but yet only for such a time, not for a
constant rule of faith: he believes the resurrection, but he means a spiritual
resurrection, not a bodily, of the same body committed to the earth.

12 Also bitter invectives against instrumental teaching, that they may draw
Disciples after themselves, Acts 20.30, 31.

13 Also they carry you from the light of the Scriptures to the light within
you, contrary to Esai 8.20. to the law and to the testimony. If they speak not
according to that, it is because there is no light in them. Thou have no light
within, who carriest persons from the Scriptures; how can the light within thee
check thee for any thing but from the light of Gods word? The Word used thirty
times in the New Testament for Conscience, is (...), which signifies, a
knowledge together with: this conscience together with God witnesses all our
purposes, words and actions, whether good or evil, Romans 9.1. But whence does
it witness for or against us? even from the light of the Word. A man might
commit idolatry and persecution every day, and yet not be troubled at it if he
do not know the Law of God. Unless the knowledge of Gods word be in our minds,
the conscience cannot exercise its judicial act in determining of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of our actions. Hence, when the Scripture would stir
up a man's conscience, it appeals to his knowledge, 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 19. 1 Cor.
9.23, 24.

14 Also the denying of Ordinances, upon pretense of immediate communion with
God. These false Prophets cast off the Ordinances wherein God and the soul of a
believer have communion, they throw down Christ's ordinances and institutions,
that Satan's inspirations and revelations may be instead of them. Because there
are some Allegories in the Scriptures they turn all into Allegories, that they
may carry us into a Wood whence we may not find our way out, and all to
stablish these fooleries; and yet these men judge themselves to have come into
a state of perfection, judging others to be children who use ordinances. But,
that they may not seem to be mad without reason, they bring some arguments, as
1 The distinction put betwixt the Law and Gospel, called Letter and Spirit, 1
Cor. 3.6. by Letter is meant the Law, by the Spirit the Gospel. The Gospel is
called Spirit comparatively, because there is a greater pouring out of the
Spirit now then formerly. Some by Letter understand the Law, and by Spirit the
gifts of the Spirit, as tongues, prophecy, etc. but I lean to the former,
because so expounded, Romans 7.6. where, by oldness of the Letter, the Apostle
understands a principle of natural conscience, and, by newness of the Spirit, a
principle of regeneration. For these Ordinances of Baptism and Supper, God
appointed them as helps to our faith, through which is livelily held forth a
crucified Christ for remission of sins to a believing soul: for not diverse
things but one and the same is signified in both those ordinances of Baptism
and the Supper, to wit, remission of sins to believers and repentants.

For the duration and perpetuity of ordinances till the end of the world, take
these reasons:

1 Because there has been since the Apostles times throughout all ages a
Church, therefore Ordinances, Ephesians. 3.22. Unto him be glory in the Church
throughout all ages: therefore in every age there will be both Church and
Ordinances.

2 Because there is a command of our performance and observation of them to the
end of the world, and a promise of Gods presence with us in so doing, Matthew.
28.19, 20. Make Disciples in all Nations -- Lo I am present with you to the end
of the world, 1 Cor. 11.26. So often as ye eat this bread and drink this Cup, ye
show forth the Lords death till he come. What warrant have any believers to
make a change till the Lord come? No more warrant to put an end to Baptism then
to making Disciples, or the teaching the observation of Christ's Commandments.

I can well nigh trace this delusion to the beginning. In the year 1644 diverse
Books were printed against Infant Baptism, the arguments whereof prevailed
against Infant Baptism that many Commanders in the Army were against it, but
the Parliament and times being much for it, these Commanders were troubled to
keep in with conscience and with the times, sundry persons disputing that these
Officers were bound to take up the Baptism of Believers. In this juncture of
time comes a Chaplain to the Army, who being forced out of the County of Kent,
was in the same condition with these Gentlemen; he comes and preaches a
doctrine that Baptism and the supper were only carnal ordinances and types,
and that they ended in the first age, or to that effect; so this doctrine being
received with great applause, this preacher, formerly of little acquaintance,
came in one month to be one of the most eminent preachers in the army, and
these Gentlemen formerly troubled might now by the arguments of Mr. J. S.
easily bundle the times and their principles against infant Baptism together,
whiles hereby they were kept from the principles of the Anabaptists. Though the
said Mr. J. S. had formerly conferred with me to Baptize him, which I was
willing to do, only through worldly prudence he desired a place to be dug
first in his own house, to escape the odium of the times, but at the end of
four days when he had appointed me to come to dispense it, he came to question
the power of the dispenser, so I departed home and left him. About six months
after I being with him reasoned so far, that in one afternoon I answered his
arguments and wifes, being many, till they had no more to say, save this, they
were convinced, but they must stay till God did persuade, after which time he
speedily went into the Army, the product and spawn of whose preachings and
printings were these delusions about denying ordinances, which groundedly may
be suspected was both to speaker and hearers the punishment for dallying with
truth, and denying submission to it after conviction. My conscience tells me
that the thing I write of him was truth, and he was my intimate friend, whom I
should in no wise have cited so public, but that conscience to God for the
undeceiving of others urges me.

15 The last sort of fruits by false Prophets is that the Scriptures have their
period and time of expiration, and that every less light is swallowed up by a
greater; the light of Moses by the light of the Prophets, the light of the
Prophets by the light of the New Testament, and the light of the New Testament
by the light of the Spirit. The Scriptures they acknowledge were Gods Word, and
the Penmen inspired by God, but it was to endure for a time; hence they allege
2 Peter 1.19. We do well to take heed to the Scriptures, as to a light shining
in a dark place, till the day dawn and the day star arise in their hearts.

Be astonished, O ye Heavens at these, be ye horribly afraid. The horridness of
this Delusion wants tears of blood sufficiently to bewail it, that apostate
Professors the authors of these Delusions, should labor as it were to kill
God and his Word with his own Weapons. I might wave all Scripture-reason with
these that deny the Scripture, and reason with them only as Philosophers, also
I might let the Reader see that this damnable error is an epitome of all
error. But to answer that place 2 Peter 1.19. Peter shows that if these
dispersed Jews attended to the Scriptures of the Prophets they would have a
light to guide them in their darkness, till the day at last appear, and the
morning star, the sign thereof, scatter their darkness; that is, till the light
of the Gospel clearly manifest unto you this mystery of godliness which ye have
begun to receive.

Some interpret thus, that Prophecy is the Night or Darkness, the Gospel is
the Light or Morning Star, the sight of God in Heaven is clear Day: so the
sense is, Attend unto the reading and study of the Prophets, that ye may be
strengthened by them in the faith of Christ, until the Day Star, that is, a
more clear knowledge of the faith of the Gospel, shine unto you, that ye being
confirmed therein may thereby be brought to the blessedness of Heaven. The
sight of faith in comparison of the sight in Heaven is but as the Dawning of
the Morning to the Light of the Sun at Noon. And as the Morning Star is a
Middle betwixt Night and Day, so is the Doctrine of the Gospel a Middle betwixt
the dark Doctrine of the Prophets, and the clear sight in Heaven. So that by
Day Star is not meant Christ whom these believing Jews had already received,
but their going on and increase in the faith, whiles by little and little their
knowledge became more certain concerning the Mysteries of Christ, that no doubts
or scruples concerning the Christian Faith or any point of it might be any
longer in their minds.

Some by Day dawning and Day Star understand the sight of God in Heaven; our
Life of Misery in this World being like Night, the Life to come will be like
Day, when all shadows of mortality, error and ignorance shall vanish away. See
Song 2.17.

This word [Untill] favors this Interpretation, because we need Prophecy and
the Scriptures all our Life long till we come in Heaven. But both
Intepretations are to be taken in, and then the sense will be, Take heed to the
Scriptures of the Prophets, and Gospel, as to the means for your going on in
the Faith, and building up, until you come to the beatifical vision of the
glory in Heaven.

But never did the Apostle or Spirit mean that the written Word should have its
period and time set to last, beyond which it is useless and improper to attend
unto it.

The second place is, 1 John 2.20, 21, 27. But ye have an Unction from the Holy
One, and ye shall know all things -- but the anointing which ye have received
of him abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you all things.

From this Scripture, they argue thus, they that have the Teachings of the
Spirit have no need of the teaching of the Letter, but they have the Unction of
the Spirit that teaches them all things, therefore they need neither the
teaching of the Letter, nor the teachings of men.

Answ. Three things to be opened, 1 What is meant by Unction?

Answ. By Unction is meant Christianity, for as a Christian in Greek is the
same that Anointed is, so Christianity is the same that Anointing is; now
Christianity is the Doctrine, grace and wisdom of Christ, which from the
inspiration of the Spirit is given, whereby we are instructed in all the
believables and duties of a true Christian which pertain to Christian faith and
life, and to fly heretical and Antichristian tenants. Now this heavenly Light
is compared to Oil, because the principal use of Oil is to maintain Light; it
has other virtues, as to cool, to cheer, to heal, but this is the principal;
so that by Unction he means the Oil of holy Doctrine or Truth.

2 Quest. What is meant by this anointing teaching us all things?

Answ. By all things are not meant every individual truth, for the Apostles
themselves knew only in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. therefore we must understand it
restrictively to the matter in hand. Ye know all things, that is, concerning
the shunning of Antichrist and holding the Faith.

2 Or by all things he means all things he had formerly taught them, so that he
rather remembers them and admonishes them of things that he writ, than delivers
any Principles which were new unto them: therefore v. 24. he bids that that
might remain with them which they had heard from the beginning.

3 Quest. What is meant by this Phrase, Ye need not that any man teach you?

Answ. The Apostle does not cry down ministerial teaching, for then should he
have cried down his own teaching, and nullified many other Precepts wherein
Preachers are commanded to preach the Word, in season and out of season, 2 Timothy
4.1. and the Ministry is given for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11,
12. but only warns them against false Teachers, who taught them contrary
Doctrines to those, wherein by the Doctrine of Truth they had been informed;
these errors the Apostle calls Lies, v. 22. as being most abominable Lies to
deny Jesus to be Christ.

So that the sense is, Ye have the Light of the Word wherein you have been
instructed to teach you all things needful for your salvation, so that you are
not to listen to any Impostours that teach you the contrary; but from hence to
deduce, that because you have the Teachings of the Spirit, that we need not the
Teachings of men, is a grand Delusion.

A third Argument is, The Elect shall be all taught of God, John 6.45. So that
they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother,
saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest,
Heb. 8.11.

A. There is a twofold Teaching, 1 Notional, 2 Affectionate. Of the later of
these the Scripture speaks. The Lord teaches the Elect or Children of the new
Covenant, as no man can teach with the like, he gives them a relish of good
things, but because the Lord teaches after this way that no man can teach, it
follows not that therefore the Apostle excludes the teaching of man, for then
why would Christ send out his Apostles and the seventy Disciples, and why does
he establish a Ministry in his Church, one essential property whereof is that
he must be apt to teach, yea does not Christ bid us pray to the Lord of the
Harvest for such Laborers. Christ also shows us that from the Lords teaching
as a principal cause, the Ministry of man becomes effectual, 1 Cor. 3.7.

There are many other fruits of false Prophets, as the soothing and flattering
of Princes, 1 Kings 18.6. compared with v. 1^.

The mingling of Truth and Error together, or at least truth and corrupt
affections, from which the Apostle clears himself, 2 Cor. 2.17.

There are many other notes of false Prophets, which by a frequent reading of
the Scriptures, and begging of the Spirit, we may attain to know.

V. 16. Ye shall know them by their Fruits. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or
Figs of Thistles?

Look as of Thorn-trees men do not gather Grapes, nor of Thistles men do not
gather Figgs, so from false Prophets there is no good and sweet fruit gathered,
but the harsh and corrupt fruit of Error and Heresy.

V. 17. Even so every good Tree brings forth good Fruit, but a corrupt Tree
brings forth corrupt Fruit.

Christ here comes to confirm unto us further that men do not gather good
fruits from bad trees, and makes a reddition to the former Proposition laid
down interrogatively.

By good and bad Trees in general the state of the regenerate and unregenerate
man may be understood, Matthew. 12.33. Carnal men cannot please God, Romans 8.8.
Abel's person was first respected, then his offering, Genesis 4.4.

In particular Christ means the Prophets, when good they bring forth good
fruit, when corrupt they bring forth corrupt fruit; when good, they handle the
Word of God uprightly, 2 Cor. 2.17.4.2. when corrupt, they handle Gods Word
deceitfully, Ephesians. 4.14.

Such false Prophets are not known by the leaves or flowers of an outward
profession, but by their fruits.

V. 18. A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree
bring forth good Fruit.

Christ amplifies what he had delivered, showing that a good will from the
habit of grace in the soul brings forth good things ordinarily and usually, and
an evil will from the habit of sin in the soul brings evil things. But Christ
means first, the man must be changed that his works may be changed. But who is
found good of the Lord, seeing Christ died for sinners, therefore he found us
all bad Trees, but gave us power to believe on his Name, Aug. de Verb. Domini
Sermon. 12.

But if we carry it to Teachers, we must understand it so far as he is a good
Teacher (for even good Teachers have been mistaken in some things) they cannot
bring forth corrupt Doctrine, nor can a corrupt Teacher, so far as he is
corrupt, bring forth good Doctrine. It Is usual that the actions of the body are
suitable to the qualities of the mind, Matthew. 12.34, 35. A good man out of the
good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good, an evil man out
of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is evil.

If we understand it of men, we must understand it of men as in their natural
estate. But as a Tree when it is transplanted brings forth good fruit, though
naturally without transplantation it could not; so when persons are
transplanted out of their natural estate into Christ, they bring forth good
fruits, John 15.4, 5. though in their natural state they could not.

If we carry it to Teachers, as Christ means both, then the meaning is, if
these Prophets were true lovers of godliness, as they would seem to be, they
would not usually commit such things as are directly contrary to godliness as
they do.

V. 19. Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast
into the fire.

V. 20. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Here Is the punishment of false Prophets. The words are a similitude taken from
an Husbandman, and are denounced against all Hypocrites in general, who have
the leaves of profession, but want the power of godliness, and in particular
against hypocritical false Prophets. John 15.6. If a man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a Branch that is withered, and men gather them and cast them into
the fire and they are burned: as the Husbandman casts fruitless Branches into
the fire, so will Christ cast such as bring not forth good fruit into the fire
of Hell. See Matthew. 3.10. In particular, false Prophets bring upon themselves
swift destruction, Their judgment lingers not, and their damnation slumbers
not, 2 Peter 2 1, 3.

Is hewn down and cast into the fire] They are now at present hewn dow by the
threatenings of God, and shall hereafter be thrown into Hell.

Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them] Christ here concludes thus, q.
d. seeing men usually teach things suitable to their manners and practices, by
such kind of corrupt Teachings you may suspect these Prophets before they
instill or drop in their opinions into you, for such as the Masters are such
will they make the Scholars, such as the Tree is such will the Fruits be.

V. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.

Christ from reprehending false Prophets, comes to reprehend all hypocritical
Formalists, whether teachers or hearers, who pretend the faith and doctrine of
Christ in a great show of holiness, but deny it in their works. They prophesied
in the Name of Christ, and wrought miracles, but did not do Christ his will.

In the words two things, 1 An exclusion of hypocritical Formalists, or formal
Hypocrites, out of Gods Kingdom. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, etc. A
name without a thing is nothing. It Is as an ornament in the clay, or a jewel in
the mire.

2 A reception of those who have a sincere purpose to obey God, But he that
does the will of my Father. To do the will of God is, 1 To believe on Christ,
John 6.40. This is the will of the Father, that every one that sees the Son and
believes on him, should have everlasting life.

2 To declare our faith by a sanctified course of obedience, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. This
is the will of God, even our sanctification.

3 To have a purpose for all Gods commands without excepting of any, Psalm.
119.6, 106. Col. 1.10.4.12. Heb. 13.20, 21.

But he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven] and consequently my
will; for I and my Father are one, Joh. 14.7. and the Father is in the Son, and
the Son in the Father, but Christ as he is man for modesty sake, names the will
of the Father, and not his own.

From the words thus opened observe.

Obs. 1 That in the visible Church there are many men are only formal
professors; such were the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.1. Such was he Eccles.
8.10. So I saw the wicked buried who had come and gone to the place of the
Holy, Tit. 1.15. Profess they know God, but in works deny him. A name to live,
but are dead, Rev. 3.1. Ezekiel. 33.31. Romans 2.17, 18, 19. Such was Judas, Magus,
Saul. The consciences of these men would not have been quiet had they not given
some outward service to God. Formal professors do with their consciences, as
men do with children; men give them some small matter, as a pear or plum, to
keep them from wrangling and crying out.

Use. 1 Believe not every one that has only a profession, Joh. 2.23. How
forward was the stony ground, that it received the Word with joy: Matthew. 12.21.
and yet for want of root, as soon as tribulation came, it withered?

2 Caution against formality; rest not in professional faith because thou have
the name of professor, because of duties of religion in family, or because in
Church Communion. They that are found not to live as Christ taught, let them
know they are not Christians, although they profess the doctrine of Christ with
their tongue; for not the professors only but the confirmers of their works
shall be saved. Just. Mart. Apol. 1.49. This formality, how ever it be
plausible with the world, yet is it loathed with God, Rev. 3.15, 16. God will
spue out such Laodiceans.

3 Trial, whether thou art a formal man or not.

1 When thou have not grace to overcome every lust, but Satan holds thee under
some insnaring lust; so Herod. Eccles. 8.10. So I saw the wicked buried that
had come and gone to the place of the Holy.

2 When thou have not faith to suffer for God or a good conscience, Matthew.
13.21.

3 When thou art only careful to cleanse the outward man, but careless of the
inner man; so the Pharisees, Luke 11.39, 40. The Pharisees made clean the
outside of the cup and platter, but their inward part was full of rapine and
excess. Contrarily powerful Christians are most troubled with the inward man.

4 When, though thou performs duties of Religion, yet 1 Thy soul is not
nourished by them, nor built up, 2 Timothy 3.8. Ever learning, but never able to
come to a practical knowledge.

2 Or else thou see not Gods face in duty, Job, 13.16. He only is my
salvation, but a Hypocrite shall not come before him.

3 Or else thou do not groan under thy dead-heartedness. Contrarily powerful
Christians groan under their fits of deadness, and pray earnestly for
quickening, Psalm. 119.25, 37, 88, 107, 143, 154, 156, 159.

5 When men turn in their Religion as states turn; so did all Nations and
Tongues, Dan. 3.7. except the three children. Its a plain note of a formalist
to profess a Religion before God work it in the heart.

6 When thou performs duties of Religion from art and not from life; as thou
prays perhaps from wit and memory, but not from the Spirit; thou hears the
word, but its either for victory of wit, quiet of resolution, ability to
discourse, but not with an intent to practice; thou receives the supper, not
because of any sweetness of Christ thou have tasted there, but because persons
would note thee should thou absent thy self. So thou gives alms, not out of
any cheerfulness, or because thou Sympathizes with Christ or his members, but
because natural conscience calls thee to do something.

2 Obs. Men that are mere formal professors must expect to be excluded out of
heaven, as well as other gross sinners.

2 Things to be considered, 1 What formality is. Answ. It Is a show, Image or
similitude of godliness without life or power, as a wooden Image has the
likeness of a thing, as of a man or beast, but is no such thing, a shadow has
likeness of a body but is a shadow.

2 There is even too much formality and overliness in good men in the services
they perform to God, but they mourn under them.

Use. Reprehension of those who rest in an outward form of Religion, without
the power, Ananias and Sapphira, Demas; Nay, they deny the power of Religion, 2 Timothy 3.5. When the power of Religion would pull a Carnal man from his lust, he
denies it; when the question is put whether Christ left or lusts, he denies
Christ for to enjoy his lusts, as the young man, Matthew. 19.22. when preachers
exhort to reconciliation, these deny, for this power formal men have, Joh.
5.40. I would, and ye would not, Matthew. 23.37.

Quest. But why do formal men deny the power of Religion?

Answ. 1 Because of the difficulty whereto the power of godliness calls men, as
1 To part with every lust, Matthew. 5.29. A right hand, and right eye, and every
enjoyment for Christ, Luke 14.33. without which we cannot be Christians.

2 Because of the painfulness that must be used in the power, 1 Timothy 4.8, 9.
Whereas any slothful performance will serve in a form.

3 Because of the reproachfulness of it; the power of Godliness exposes persons
to reproach, when they will balk no duty, nor commit no known sin: for this was
Moses reproached, Heb. 11.26.

4 Because the power of godliness seems folly in the eyes of Carnal men, 1 Cor.
2.14.

5 Because they are bound with the cords of present sinful pleasures, Job,
20.12, 13. compared with Prove. 5.22.

2 Exhortation, 1 Press toward the power of Religigion.

2 Show forth the power of it.

1 Press toward the power of Religion.

Means hereto.
1 Draw near to God with thy Spirit, as well as body, Isa. 29.13. Remember that
thy heart is open before him, Heb. 4.13.

2 Receive not any thing in Religion upon any temporal ends, either of credit,
profit, relations of friends, command of Princes, etc. but merely, because the
force of truth prevails upon thy understanding. Some such ends prevailing with
Judas and Demas they became mere formalists.

3 Go not away from the duties of Religion, as prayer, etc. till your hearts be
nourished therein, so Jacob, Genesis 32.26. Hos. 12.3, 4.

4 Strengthen your selves in the power of Gods might, 2 Timothy 2.1.

5 Get a gracious frame of heart: as there is a natural force that puts forth
it self in Drugs, Plants, Precious stones, so there is a supernatural power
that puts forth it self in a principle of grace, to the resistance of, and
victory over corruption.

2 Show forth the power of Religion, 1 In the duties of thy particular
relation, as Master, Husband, Father, Pastor. Its to the reproach of Religion
to see professing children disobedient, professing servants contemptuous of
their Masters, 1 Timothy 6, 1. Negligent ey-servants, like stage players, acting
only to please men.

2 In being vvilling to do or suffer any thing for God, Act. 9.6.21.13.

3 In having our conversation suitable to our profession, Phil. 1.27. Only let
your conversation be as becomes the Gospel.

4 In resistance of sinful temptations, so Joseph, Genesis 39.10. and those
Saints, Heb. 11.35.

5 In a patient bearing of crosses, which in themselves are very contrary to
our stubborn wills, 1 Samuel 3.18. Levit. 10.3.

3 Obs. He that in sincerity does the will of God, in the purpose of his heart,
and actions of life, shall enter into heaven. I put in both these, because many
hypocrites may have an outward seeming reformation, as Joas, Herod, the
Scribes, Luke 11.39. Therefore we must look to inward reformation in the
purposes of the heart.

Use. As we look for blessedness, so let us endeavor to do Gods will, Jam.
1.25. He that is not a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work, which God
requires, this man shall be blessed in his doing: a bare pretense to do Gods
will is not enough, to say as he in the Gospel, I go, Sir, into the Vineyard,
but went not, Matthew. 21.29, 30. First do Gods will, then receive the promise,
Heb. 10.36.

Means to do Gods will.
1 Labor to know it, Ephesians. 5.17. Be ye not unwise, but understanding what the
will of the Lord is, Col. 1.9. 2 Beg instruction of God herein, Psalm. 143.10.
Teach me to do thy will for thou art my God. 3 Desire that your will may be
brought over to Gods will, Matthew. 26.39, 42. Father, not my will but thine be
done, Acts 21.14. Phil. 2.13. 4 Get the Law of God within your heart, Psalm.
40.8. I delight to do thy will, O God, yea thy Law is in my heart. Hence it was
as meat to Christ to do the will of the Father, John 4.34. My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, Ephesians. 6.6. Heb. 10.7. 2 Cor. 8.3. 5 Have an eye to
every part of Gods will, Psalm. 119.6. I shall not be ashamed when I have
respect to all thy Commandments. Acts 13.22. I have found David a man after
mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will. Epaphras prayed that the
Colossians might be complete in all the will of God, Col. 4.12. 6 Consider the
equity, perfectness and holiness of Gods will, Romans 12.2. Proving what is that
perfect, holy, and good will of God. 7 Consider how dear thou art to Christ if
thou do his will, more then mother, sister or brother, Mark 3.26. 8 Persevere
in doing Gods will; all that is past is nothing without perseverance, Matthew.
24.13.
V. 22, Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many
wonderful things?

V. 23. And then will I profess to them, I never knew you: Depart from me ye
that work iniquity.

Christ comes to amplify the rejection of carnal Professors in the day of
judgment, from the vanity of their pretenses and allegations they allege for
themselves. Their pretenses are three, 1 That they prophesied in the name of
Christ. 2 Cast out devils in Christ's name. 3 Did wonderful things in Christ's
name; as healings, tongues, and hereby witnessed thy power.

They reason thus: It Is unjust to cast out of heaven those that have prophesied
in thy name, and cast out devils in thy name: but we have done so; therefore,
etc. See the horrible pride of formalists, who will dare to reply against the
Judge, see Matthew. 20.12. These last have wrought but one hour and thou have
made them equal with us.

There are some gifts formal hypocrites may have; Balaam prophesied, the
Magicians of Egypt did miracies: miracles are no note of a Church, as Papists
would make us believe, but were done by professors of Christianity for the
conviction of unbelievers, see Mark 16.17. 1 Cor. 14.22. Tongues are a sign to
them that believe not. Caiphas prophesied, John 11.49.

True miracles are the alone work of God given for the confirmation of Teachers
come from God, and were in the primitive times seals unto them, John 3.2. We
know thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man can do these miracles thou
do, except God be with him. See Heb. 2.4. Yet all were not thus confirmed,
John Baptist did no miracle, John 10.41.

Yet sometimes not only wicked men have done miracles, Matthew. 24.24. 2 These.
2.9. but even wicked Teachers, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. And in the primitive times all
Christians could not do miracles, 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all workers of miracles?
When miracles were done they were done by the will of God, not when the
instrument that did the miracle would, Heb. 2.4. for then would not Paul have
left Trophimus sick at Miletum, 2 Timothy 4.20. but would have wrought a miracle
to have raised him up. And sometimes uncharitable men have wrought miracles, 1
Cor. 13.2. Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have
not charity, I am nothing.

And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me ye workers
of iniquity] Here is the sentence against these formal professors, they are
sent to hell as well as other gross sinners. I never knew you, that is, I never
approved you. So to know is taken, Psalm. 1.6. I never knew you, i. e. I reject
you, 1 Cor. 8.3. 2 Timothy 2.19. I never knew you, I knew you as Prophets and
Teachers, but never knew you as children and friends: though I know all things,
and consequently know you with a knowledge of speculation, yet I never knew you
with a knowledge of love and affection. You have professed me to be your Lord,
but you were never yet my servants, I must acknowledge you to be my creatures,
but must profess you are none of the members of my body, Romans 8.9. I know you
with a general knowledge, as I know all things, Psalm. 139.2, 3. but I know you
not with a special knowledge, as I know mine Elect and Sheep, John 10.14. your
lusts are your lords and not I.

Depart from me ye that work iniquity] The words are taken out of Psalm. 6.8.
they are the sentence of Christ's sending formal hypocrites to hell, as Matthew.
25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Oh terrible sentence!
thou formalist shall not only be severed from thy estate, relations, and all
earthly comforts, but also from the presence of the Lord. See 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
never to behold him any more. By workers of iniquity he means such as live in
sin, Romans 16.21. which in John's phrase is called the commitment of sin, John
8.34. Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, called walking in
darkness, 1 John 1.6. See also 1 John 3.8, 9. He that commits sin is of the
devil, whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, v. 9. called also walking
after the flesh, and living after the flesh, Romans 8.1.12.13. Learn therefore
either to depart from thine iniquity, or else be assured thou shall depart from
Christ, Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn from your iniquity, so iniquity shall not
be your ruin. Also v. 31. It Is called also the reign of sin, Romans 6.12. and
dominion of sin, v. 14. the service of sin, v. 17.

Obs. The number, not only of profane multitudes, but even of professing
people, that shall be damned, will be great.

2 Outward Privileges, as prophesying and doing miracles will not stand us in
stead at the Day of Judgment to move the Judge to have mercy upon us. O then get
something else to stand thee in stead at that Day, even Christ his
Righteousness where with Paul then desired to be covered, Phil. 3.9. 2 Cor.
5.3. 2 Peter 3.11.

3 There are many persons whom Christ knows with a general knowledge, whom he
never knew, nor will know, with a special knowledge of love and affection.

4 That man that lives in a purpose of sin, is in Gods account only a worker
of iniquity.

5 That man that lives in any sin and dies therein, must look at the Day of
Judgment for ever to be severed from the presence of Christ.

V. 24. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I
will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon the Rock.

Christ coming to conclude his Sermon tells his Auditory that there are two
sorts of professing hearers, 1 Bare hearers. 2 Doers as well as hearers: to the
bare formal hearing Christ threatens destruction, but to the doer he promises
life and salvation.

This he sets down, 1 Plainly, v. 24.

2. By way of similitude, comparing these two hearers to two builders, one of
which built upon the Sand, and the other built upon a Rock, the one, when
assaulted by temptations, fell, the other in the midst of greatest storms stood.

Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine] By hearing he means the
whole profession of Christianity, Romans 2.13. in general, and hearing properly
taken in particular. Denoting that there may be and are abundance of hearers
that are no more but hearers, as the stony ground, thorny ground and highway
side hearers. Seeing themselves in the glass of the Law of God, they go away,
and forget their shape, as men do that take a glance of the glass and are gone,
James 1.23. but good hearers are like some Women that look long in the glass,
that they may form themselves by it.

And does them] As if he should say, I have hitherto taught you how you may
lead your lives holily, and have showed you the way to the Kingdom of Heaven,
therefore if ye do these things I have taught you, ye will be like unto a wise
man that built his house upon the Rock or upon a sure foundation, knowing that
else all his cost and labor will be in vain; now the foundation of a Christian
is faith and a godly practice, 1 Timothy 6.19. Laying up in store a good
foundation for time to come.

Obs. Hearing and doing in godly hearers go together. Such persons are blessed,
John 13.17. Luke 11.28. James 1.25. By doing Christ means a purpose of doing.

Learn we to join doing with hearing. 1 Hereby we shall be able to stand
against all storms and tempests.

2 This will be the testimony of the honesty and integrity of our hearts, Luke
8.15. The good ground with an honest and good heart having heard the Word kept
it, and brought forth fruit with patience.

3 Such persons are blessed, James 1.25. If you know these things, blessed are
ye if you do them. No other knowledge save the knowledge of Christian doctrine
(though we had all knowledge of Histories, Laws) will stand in stead, nor this
neither without practice, not the bearing of Christ in the womb, nor giving him
suck with the breast, is comparable to this. See Luke 11.27, 28. Yet in
opposition to carnal men, who upon pretense of crying up practice cry down
knowledge, Christ tells that first there must be a knowledge before a practice.
And in this practice Christ intends the command of believing on his Son as the
first and chiefest command, without which we can never appear to comfort in the
sight of the Judge.

4 By joining doing with hearing God is honored and glorified, Matthew. 5.16.
John 15.8. And by the contrary God is dishonored. See Romans 2.17. to v. 25. The
Jews resting in the knowledge of Gods will, and approving things that were
excellent, and in being guides of the blind and not practicing what they knew,
they caused the Name of God to be blasphemed, v. 24. 1 Timothy 6.1.

5 At the Day of Judgment we shall receive, not according to what we have
known, but according to what we have done, 2 Cor. 5.10. Revel. 22.12. Matthew.
25.34. Ephesians. 6.8. Matthew. 16.27.

6 Our knowledge will only serve to justify Gods damning us with the heavier
condemnation, if we do not practice what we know, Luke 12.47. 1 Peter 4.17.
What shall become of them that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Romans 2.7,
8, 9. 2 Peter 2.20, 21.

7 Our comfort and crown will abound at the Day of Christ, according to our
care and conscience in the discharge of our duties, and our misery if we do the
contrary, Matthew. 25.20, 21. Well done good and faithful servant, enter into
the joy of the Lord; but to the slothful and unprofitable servant Christ
says, Bind him hand and foot and cast him into utter darkness, v. 26, 27, 28,
30.

8 Practice joined with hearing wins upon others, 1 Pet. 2.12. The Heathens
beholding the good works of Christians glorified God in the day of visitation,
1 Pet. 3.1. The Heathen husbands were won to look after the truth by the
conversation of their wives, whiles they beheld their chaste conversation,
coupled with a fear of sinning against God. A holy conversation steals into the
hearts of them that behold it insensibly, to build them up many times to
salvation, as a scandalous carriage does into the hearts of others to build
them up to damnation.

9 An holy practice mightily blunts the rage of Persecutors, 1 Pet. 3.13. Who
is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? Tit. 2.7.
In all things showing thy self a pattern of good works; why, what then? When
your lives and speeches are well ordered, they that are of the contrary part
will be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.

10 All thy hearing, knowledge and parts, and common gifts will come to
nothing, and thou will be deprived of them, unless thou join an holy practice
to them, Matthew. 25.29. Take the talent from him; From him that has not (to wit
a fruitful practice) shall be taken away even that which he has. It is with
Religion as with other trades that bring no gain, unless diligently followed.

11 Thou have no interest in the mercy of God unless thou remember his
Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103.19. Many remember Gods commands to speak of
them, but few remember them to do them. It was wittily spoken of one, If God
had given us his commandments only to preserve, he might have committed them
to iron Coffers; if only to talk of them, better to Geese and Parrots; if
only for contemplation, to Owls in Ivy-bushes, or to Monks in Cloisters. Gods
scope was not to make trial of the wits of men, who could sharpliest conceive,
nor of their memories, who could faithfulliest retain, or of their eloquence,
who could roundliest discourse, but of their wills, who would most obediently
do them; this being his chief honor to have his throne and command, not in the
head and brains, but in the strong hold of their hearts and lives. David did
not only delight in Gods commands, but he lifted up his hands to them, Psalm.
119.47, 48. for to do them.

I will liken him unto a wise man which built his house upon the rock] That is
upon a rocky ground, taking away all the loose mold that covered the rock. A
Christian when he builds, digs deep; and casts out the loose earth, to denote
that believers, knowing there is much falsehood and hollowness in their hearts,
therefore when they have heard the Word, they suspect their own hypocrisy and
formal receiving of the Word, hence they dig up their hearts by soul-searching
humiliation to find out the prevailing iniquity of their hearts, which keeps
them from an even and constant walking with God. How much greater weight of
building any man intends to build, so much deeper he digs the foundation, and
the fabric when it is built rises on high: but he that digs the foundation is
pressed down below, therefore the fabric is made low before the height, and the
top is raised up after the humiliation, Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 11.

Carnal professors, on the contrary, have all their building above ground, and
therefore he thinks he has done enough if he do only talk a little of good
things, he spends no time in digging and searching, that is in grieving and
lamenting for his corruptions, nor in reforming what is amiss. Hence Luke adds
these words which Matthew omits, viz. He dug deep and laid the foundation on
a rock, Luke 6.47, 48.

By the building the house upon the rock, is meant the placing our faith upon
Christ, as the prop of our salvation, for Christ is called a rock, 1 Cor. 10.4.
As an house built upon the sand is an hypocritical formal profession or
temporary faith, so the house built upon the rock is saving, justifying faith,
which, as it pitcheth on Jesus Christ, so it shows it self by all gracious
fruits, and universal observations of all Christ's commands. It pitches on
Christ as the foundation. See Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 3.11. 1 Pet.
2.5.

V. 25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and
beat upon that house, and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock.

The words seem to be taken out of Prove. 10.25. As the whirlewinde passes, so
is the wicked no more; but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.

By the rain, floods and winds, are meant inward and outward temptations,
which true and sound faith will be able to endure; upon this rock Christ builds
his Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18.
much less shall any of Satan's temptations, of blasphemy, self-murder, etc.
which Satan darts into the soul, nor any persecutions, banishments or
imprisonments, which the instruments of Satan stir up against true believers,
prevail against them. This Advocate on whom the faith of believers pitcheth,
prayed for us when he was on earth, Luke 22.31. Satan has desired to have You,
that he may sift You, but I have prayed for thee, and consequently for other
believers, that your faith fail not, and now he intercedes for us in heaven.

No other foundation save Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. can any man lay, without
believing on whom we must look to die in our sins, John 8.24. other foundations
of wealth, honor, and earthly greatness, will not be able to make us bear up
against the stream of temptations. Interest in God, through Jesus Christ, is
that which keeps up the soul in the midst of greatest storms. See Psalm. 3.5,
6.27.1, 2, 3.46.1, 2. Dan. 3.17, 18. Acts 27.23, 24, 25. Prove. 18.11. Psalm.
112.7.125.1.

Christ does not say that believers shall be without trials and temptations;
nay these above all other must look for storms and tempests, Acts 14.22. but
they do not fall by them. See Heb. 11.35. Whosoever will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Trial and temptation shows what
men are. Every man is that in truth out of temptation, which he shows himself
to be in temptation. A wise builder is wise before storms come, but how will
that be known? by the standing of his house in the time of a storm. Professors
generally seem to stick alike to Christ, till a temptation come, but unsound
men in time of temptation fall away, Luke 8.13. The carnal Professor is like
Orpah to her mother Naomi, the sincere Professor like Ruth. Unsound Professors
are usually drawn aside by earthly enjoyments on the one hand, as the young
man, or by storms of persecution and suffering on the other hand: contrarily
Moses, Heb. 11.25, 26.

We may judge of our patience what it is, when we have a wrong offered us; of
our temperance what it is, when we are at a great feast; of our love to God
what it is, when some great thing is to be left for a good conscience; of our
sincerity what it is, by what we do when no man sees us; of our liberality what
it is, when God presents an object of mercy to us. It was sweetly instanced by
a reverend Preacher; Peter was a good house, Judas was an ill house. When a
storm came Peter lost a slate or two, as the best house may, yet the foundation
and the side walls stood firm, but Judas, when Christ rebuked him, he was full
of wrath, and when the Priests offered him money he was full of covetousness,
so thinking to gain more by selling Christ then by serving him, he betrayed him
to his adversaries, and Joseph being good under his fathers government,
continued good under the government of Infidels, where he had all means of
damnation but none of salvation. The same he was in his fathers house he was in
Potiphars house, and in the prison, and after in Pharaohs Court, which was the
most dangerous temptation of all, being a young man, a ruler, and a rich man,
in which three considerations there were many snares, as appears from that
young rich Ruler, Luke 18.18. who left Christ rather then his enjoyments.

Obs. It Is a great point of wisdom to join doing to our hearing. Christ
likens such to a wise man. A Sermon is but half heard when it is heard from the
Preachers mouth. Be ye like John's hearers, desirous to know your own duty with
intention to do it, Luke 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 4.6.

2 Sooner or later Professors must be exposed to the storms and tempest of
great and violent inward and outward temptations.

Use 1 In times of peace prepare for storms; do as Mariners who in calm weather
make all their tacklings firm.

Means.
1 Clear up all scruples till the conscience has nothing to say against thee;
so David, 1 Kings 2.5. he had some scruple on his conscience for not putting
Joab to death, who had murdered two or three persons; he could not well do it,
being Joab was General of David's Army, hence he gives Solomon command
concerning him.

2 Buckle on all thy Christian armor, Ephesians. 6.10. especially uprightness of
heart, and so shall not thou be afraid of evil tidings, Psalm. 112.4, 6, 7.

3 Be clear in the assurance of remission of sins, Psalm. 32.6.

4 Go to God to hide thee, Psalm. 27.5.32.7. He has chambers to hide in, Esai
26.20. Come, my people, enter into thy chambers.

5 Build upon the rock, even on Christ, resolving in Gods strength that no
storms and tempests shall separate betwixt Christ and thee, neither sin, nor
suffering, Romans 8.33. to the end of the Chapter.

6 Get looseness of affection to earthly enjoyments; so those worthies, Heb.
10.34. that took joyfully the spoiling of their goods in a storm of persecution.

7 Get patience; hereby Job's heart was quieted when storms took away his
children, stock, and servants, Job 1.21.

8 Store up the witness of a good conscience against such a time. See Paul,
Acts 16.25, 27.23.24.

3 Obs. That man that means to stand amidst the storms and tempests of inward
and outward temptations must be sure to lay a good foundation.

Sooner or later God will discover the hypocrisy of unsound men, 1 Timothy 5.24,
25. They that are otherwise cannot be hid.

Q. But what foundation must we lay?

A. There Is a threefold foundation, 1 The foundation of satisfaction, Esai
28.16. 1 Cor. 3.12. Acts 4.12. Secondly the foundation of revelation, or
publication, or manifestation, so the doctrine of the Apostles is called a
foundation, Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 1.14. Heb. 6.1. 1 Cor. 3.10.

3 The foundation of evidence, 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 Timothy 6.19.

Use. 1 Comfort for thee against Storms, when thou have laid a good Foundation
and built upon a Rock. Storms and Temptations do not make those that are good
to become bad, but only tries what every one is. Fire does not make Gold leave
the purity, but only tries it. When David built upon a Rock see how
comfortable, Psalm 23.4. 27.1. 46.1, 2, 3. 61.2. so will it be with thee. What
if a Nation be ready to go together by the ears? What if Invasions come? What
if thy Family be afflicted with infectious Diseases? What if the Pilots of the
Commonwealth be at their wits end? What if Exilement for Religion, what if
sudden fears come? yet to those that build upon a Rock it shall be well with
them, Isai 3.10. What if Devils rage? they cannot pluck such out of Christ's
arms, John 10.28, 29, 30.

2 Trial whether thou builds upon the Rock, 1 Some time or other God will try
thee with Storms, 2 Timothy 3.12. but in what kind thou know not. 2 In such
times of trouble the conscience is apt to be awakened; so Joseph's brethren when
in Egypt, Genesis 42.21. 3 How woeful will thy condition then be to be without
Christ? Isai 10.3. Hos. 9.5, 6, 7. Being without Christ and being without hope
are put together, Ephesians. 2.12.

Properties, or if you will, Trials of a man that builds upon a Rock.

1 The Gates of Hell or Death, or Courts of men which were kept in the Gates,
cannot prevail against such a man habitually to make a false confession of
Christ's truth, Matthew. 16.18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

2 He that builds on a Rock cannot be undermined nor blown up; so a Christian
that builds on Christ will not be blown up with preferments and proffers that
shall be made to him in secret, Act. 8.20. Thy money perish with thee, said
Peter to Magus.

3 A Rock is a sure foundation to build upon, so is Christ, Esa. 28.16. 1 Pet.
2.6. For trials of a Christians estate to Godward, see at large in my Catechism.

4 When no weight or pressure of the fabric will make the foundation to give
way. Let Christians have never so many pressures lying upon them, yet does the
Rock Christ uphold them, Ephesians. 3.16. Phil. 4.13. Where the foundation is a Rock
the building in every part is held up.

V. 26. And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man which built his house upon the sand.

Here are the second sort of hearers, such which hear and do not; which is the
formalist, who builds upon the sandy foundation of an outward profession.

An outward powerless profession is like unto sand;

1 As sand is moveable, so such a profession, 2 Timothy 1.15 4.16.

2 As sand is scattered with the wind, so such a profession, both by the wind
of Heretics, Ephesians. 4.14. Carried about with every wind of doctrine, and the
wind of persecution, Matthew. 13.21.

In general also is meant all confidence in creatures, whether Princes, Honor,
Riches, which are not props to uphold the soul in trouble, Psalm. 146.3. Psalm.
62.8.

Obs. There are some hearers that hear the Word unprofitably, they hear but
they do not.

Causes hereof are,
1 Carelessness of what is spoken, Mark, 4.24. Take heed what you hear.

2 Forgetfulness of the word, Jam. 1.24, 25. in hearing full as a sieve in the
water, but after all is forgot.

3 Unbelief, Heb. 4.2. The Word profited not, because not mixed with faith.

4 Want of meditations. Meditation does as it were cover the seed that the
fowls pick it not up. Prove. 6.21. Bind them continually upon thy heart, Deuteronomy.
32.46.

5 The badness of the ground. Where the ground is not good, let the best seed
be sown it comes not to any good; where the ground was good there the seed grew
up and brought forth fruit, Luke 8.15.

6 Want of preparation of heart: there must be preparation of the ground before
seed be sown, Jer. 4.3. Break up your fallow grounds, and sow not among thorns.

7 Want of rain from heaven and want of the Lords blessing, Esa. 53.1. Lord who
has believed our report? to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? One profits
not another, because God manifests himself to him. Joh. 14.22. and not to the
other, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7. Act. 11.21. When the unbeliever was convinced God was
in the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.

8 Misapplication. We apply that to others which belongs to our selves. This is
as if we should apply the food and Physic which is given to us to another.
John's hearers did otherwise, who cried, What shall we do? Luke 3.13, 13.

9 The not heeding God in the preacher, but looking only on the weak
instrument, Act. 10.33. Cornelius tells Peter, We are all here before God, to
hear all things that are commanded us from God. Cornelius, to breed awful
reverence in himself and other his fellow hearers, looks upon all the commands
as coming from God, and so must we do, not only with the commands but with the
promises and threatenings. The Thessalonians received the Word of God, not as
the word of men but as the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

10 The not understanding the Word, Matthew. 13.19. Such were the way-side
hearers, from whom the wicked one catched away that which was sown. Hence
preachers must preach words easy to be understood, 1 Cor. 14.9. Many seeing
see not, Matthew. 13.15. They have not an eye given them to see, an ear to hear,
nor an heart to understand, Deuteronomy. 29.4. In order to the Disciples profiting by
the word Christ opens their understandings, Luke 24.46. Matthew. 13.23.

11 Cares of the world and immoderate pursuit of riches choke the Word, Matthew.
13.22.

12 Filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, Jam. 1.19. Lay aside all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, that is all filthiness of soul, yea
every kind of sin, which like so many weeds possess the field of our hearts
hindering both the rise and increase of the good seed. Its a Metaphor from
husbandmen, who gather out of their fields to be sown, or already sown, all
weeds, stones, and stuff.

Use, Exhortation. Labor to hear for thy good, Job 5.27. Pity so much of the
precious Word of God should fall to the ground. That thou may be a
profitable hearer observe these rules.

1 Ponder and weigh the words that are spoken, Luke 2.19. Mary kept all those
things which she heard, and pondered them in her heart. Deuteronomy. 11.18.

2 Come with a purpose to obey every thing commanded from God, Act. 10.33. Else
thou art no better then Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel. 33.31.

3 Call over the truths you have heard by repetition, that your hearts may not
be leaking vessels to let truths slip, Heb 2.1. There was a great growth in the
families of professors in times past when this was done. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These
words which I command thee thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children,
and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house. This would make
children and servants be attentive in hearing, as being to be called to give
account.

4 Bring a wakeful spirit, and herein be sober in the use of meat and drink:
drowsy hearts let many precious truths slip away. A spirit of slumber in
hearing is threatened as a sore judgment, Romans 11.8. God has given them the
spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear. Yea it is a judgment to have the heart made heavy in hearing, Esa. 6.9,
10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy.

5 Have a love to the preacher, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Where prejudice and want of
love is, what is heard, how sound soever, is but too much slighted. I know
there may be degrees of love, as there are diversities of gifts, and as a
ministry is blessed to conversion in general, and to your conversion in special;
yet must we have a love to all, in order to profit by all Romans 10.15. How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things! and beware we do not admire and praise one, to the
dis-respect, slighting and contempt of another, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. Let no man
glory in man, for all things are yours, whether Paul, Apollos, or Cephas.

6 Come with a desire to be informed: so Cornelius, Act. 10.33. Carnal men they
desire not the knowledge of Gods Laws, Job. 21.13, 14. And this will lie one
day heavy upon them, that they would not hear, Matthew. 10.15.

7 Hear with attention. Luke 4.20. The eyes of all that were in the Synagogue
were fastened upon Christ when he preached. Prove. 4.13. Take fast hold of
instruction. It was the praise of Lydia, that she attended to the things which
were spoken by Paul. Act. 16.14. The ears of all the people were attentive to
the book of the Law when Ezra expounded it, Neh. 8.3. See Job, 57.2. Prove.
4.1.20. Luke 19.48.

8 Hear with discretion, and examine doctrines whether they agree with the
Scriptures; so the Bereans, Act. 17.11. They searched the Scriptures whether
those things were so. Its no disparagement to the ablest preacher to have his
doctrine tried, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good,
that is, prove all the doctrines spoken by the Prophets, of whom he spoke, ver.
20. and whatsoever is agreeing to wholesome doctrine hold that, especially when
any new doctrines are brought by the preachers which have not been tried, 1 John 4.1. this will make us boldly to stand to the truth, both in persecuting
times and in time of temptation; yea beget a good opinion of the Teacher,
finding what he speaks to be truly alleged.

9 Desire satisfaction in things wherein you are not clear. See for this John
16.19. Christ's Disciples were desirous to ask him about his Doctrine, and he
encourages them in it; so the Disciples, Matthew. 13.36. Declare unto us the
Parable of the Tares of the field. See cap. 19.10. Benefits hereby.

1 It would make Preachers very cautelous in what they deliver, 2 Timothy 1.15.
Jer. 23.28. knowing that their words, in comparison of Gods, are as Chaff to
Wheat, where they leave the Word of God, Titus 2.8.

2 It was no other than was practiced by Christ himself, Luke 2 46. Christ sat
in the midst of the Doctors in the Temple, both hearing them, and asking them
questions:

3 It was practiced of Christ's Disciples to him, Matthew. 17.10.

4 It tends to the clear Information of the hearers, being hereby doubts will
be cleared up, and questions cleared.

5 Hereby we may witness against destructive Doctrines, if any such shall be
delivered, and we not be guilty of silent denial of Christ.

6 Hereby we shall be guiltless of the seducement of a whole congregation,
whiles too often gross errors are swallowed down, all being silent.

7 As the Preachers lips should preserve knowledge, so should they herein seek
the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7.

8 For the want of this duty people are apt to go away and mis-report Doctrine,
Romans 3.8.

Object. But if there be such Reply made it will set all the Congregation in a
Tumult.

Answ. Such Tumults arise partly from the pride of Teachers, who will not have
any thing they deliver questioned, and yet Christ in his Ministry permitted it;
partly from the ignorance of rude multitudes, who think the examination of
Doctrine to be an affront to the Preacher, and to the Word, which is only
duty, 1 John 4.1. partly from the passionateness and pride of Protessours and
Church Members, who possibly may in a masterly way call in question upon
pretense of Liberty the clearest Truth, James 3.1. My brethren be not many
masters.

2 If any such Tumults shall be, it is the duty of Elders to silence it.

Rules in replying. For this Doctrine will through pride, etc. Be apt to be
abused.

1 Let it not be in Circumstantials but in Fundamentals, either of faith or
practice. So when Peter walked not with a right foot, but dissembled, Paul
opposed him before all the Church of Antioch, Gal. 2.11, 14.

2 Let it not be in such points which the Preacher shall cite as doubtful,
wherein he shall only show his opinion.

3 Let it be with modesty and humility, not in a proud magisterial way, that it
may appear the desired satisfaction arises merely from conscience, and not from
humor.

4 With a care to preserve the authority and reputation of the Teacher, Titus
2.15.

5 Upon due satisfaction given, to sit down and hold your peace, and not for
the defense of your own opinion and credit to violate peace and holiness. See
Acts 11.18.

6 To avoid all words that may force strife, that the hearer may go away and
report, that God is among this people, whiles they can peaceably debate of the
things of God, 1 Cor. 14.25. See 2 Timothy 2.23.

7 Be sure that what you have to reply against any thing delivered be of moment
and strength, else your selves who shall reply will suffer reproach and scorn
herein, and come under the name of a gain-sayer, Titus 1.9.

8 In case, words tending to no profit but to the subverting of hearers shall
be brought, the Preacher is to charge them before the Lord, That they strive
not about words to no profit, 2 Timothy 2.16. Also v. 14. Shun profane and vain
bablings, for they will increase unto more ungodliness, and their word will cat
as a Canker, as Hymenaeus and Philetus who denied the Resurrection; so Quakers,
Antiscripturists are thus to be charged. For the time will come when men will
not endure sound doctrine, but will turn away their ears from the truth, and
shall be turned into fables.

9 Sometimes apostate Professors stirred up by the Devil this way as well as
others may make great resistance against the words of a faithful Preacher, 2 Timothy 2.14. Alexander the Copper-smith greatly withstood the Apostles preaching:
and it may be suspected that some will be apt to abuse this Liberty, proudly
opposing sound Doctrine for mere trifles.

10 Herewith rejoicing. Jer. 15.16. Thy words were found, and I did eat them,
and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. Psalm 119.162.
David rejoiced in the Word as one that finds great spoil, Acts 2.41.

Object. But the stony ground received the Word with joy, Matthew. 13.20.

Answ. So they did, and it was well that they did; but,

1 Hypocrites joy in some part only, but right hearers joy in every part;
hypocrites joy in the promises not in the precepts.

2 Hypocrites joy in the notion only, but the right hearer joys in those
truths, as having an interest in them. We rejoice in the sight of a Diamond,
but joy more in the property.

The joy of one is like the joy of a man that is glad to see a fine field of
Corn, the joy of the other is like the joy of him that is the owner of this
field of Corn.

3 Hypocrites joy in the Word after the outward man, as apprehending most of
the duties equitable and reasonable, and many of them advantageous to a man's
Estate, credit and relations, but a right hearer delights in the Law of God
after the inner man, Romans 7.22.

4 True joy is accompanied with fear, Psalm 2.11. Rejoice in him with
trembling; and also righteousness, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God consists in
righteousness, peace and joy of the Holy Ghost. It Is otherwise in hypocrites,
their joy is accompanied with love of some Lust.

11 Practice Christian conference, Mal. 3.16. The godly when they met together
spoke often one to another, of the providence of God. The two Disciples going
to Emaus communed together, and reasoned of what they heard from Christ, Luke
24.15. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13. In
speaking of the good things we have heard we do not only warm others but our
own hearts also.

12 Retain and hold fast the Word, 1 John 3 9. The seed of God abides in him.
Cares, pleasures, will be apt to steal away the Word. Else the fowls of the air
will devour it, Luke 8.5. For as many fowls follow the Seeds-man to pick up
what is sown, so do many Devils follow Sermons to pick up the seed. Devils are
called Fowls of the Air, both for the nimbleness of their motion, in a little
time they will compass the whole earth, Job 1.7. and from the place of their
habitation, which is the Air, Ephesians. 2.2.

13 Avoid all cavilling objections against the Word, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. we ought to
consent to the Doctrine according to godliness without any cavilling. It Is one
thing to make an objection in order to Christian satisfaction, and another
thing to cavil from pride and conceitedness. Cavillers in Paul's time were out
of Churches, 1 Cor. 1.23. Where is the disputer of this world? Take we heed
they be not now in the Church. It was the wickedness of the Jews that they were
gainsayers, not only their ears but their hearts, Romans 10.21. against Gods
truth; I have stretched out my hand to a gainsaying people.

14 Practice meditation, Deuteronomy. 32.46. set your hearts to all the words I
testify among you this day. As a plaster works not unless it be bound on to
the sore, no more does the Word, unless meditation bind it on the affections.
Unclean beasts contrarily chew not the cud. As the ground cannot be quickened
with fruit unless it receive the seed, no more can our hearts be quickened with
the Spirit and fruits of it, till by the use of hearing and meditation we have
taken in this seed. Many are so far from meditating, that they are like
children, when schooling time is ended, glad who can first get out, and think
not of what they have learned.

15 Consider the benefits you shall have in the preaching of the Gospel when
rightly received. As, 1 The graces and comforts of the Spirit conveyed in the
beginnings and increases thereof, even as Conduit-pipes carry water hither and
thither, Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts burn within us, whiles he talked with
us by the way? Gal. 3.2, 5.

2 Therein glad tidings are conveyed, Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the feet
of them that bring good news! Upon the hearing of it we feel as it were new
spirits to return to us, how much more when we hear tidings of reconciliation
from God? how should our hearts abound in comfort? shall other news revive us
not this?

3 The excellency of the ministry we are under, it is the ministry of the
Gospel, far more excellent then that of the Law.

1 In the Law they saw darkly, we with open face, 2 Cor. 3.18.

2 The one is the ministration of death; but the Gospel, is the ministration of
righteousness and life, v. 7, 8, 9.

Obj. But may not the Gospel also be called a ministration of death?

Answ. Yes, by accident not directly; when souls will not obey the Gospel, it
turns to their condemnation. As a Princes pardon cannot kill any one of it
self, but being despised it doubles the guilt, and brings to a more hasty
destruction; so the pardon of God in the Gospel kills not any, but being
despised causes more heavy destruction. But the Law of its own nature holds a
man under condemnation, and cannot of it self bring any to life.

16 The intolerable misery of those who receive not the word; it will be more
tolerable for Sodom then such, Matthew. 10.14, 15. 1 Pet. 4.17. Such ground as
receives seed and brings not forth fruit is nigh to cursing, Heb. 6.7, 8.

17 Take heed of loathing the Word: To this they are tempted, who are puffed up
with the persuasion of their own knowledge: contempt of the Word follows
loathing, and this contempt makes God to take away his Word. Luther in his time
said, heretofore I preferred one Psalm well understood before all the wealth of
the world, but the heaven was then brass, and the earth shut up, but now the
cataracts of heaven are powered out we begin to loath it. Luth. Tom. 3.344.

V. 27. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

Christ here shows the woeful condition and punishment of such as build not
upon the rock Christ, but content themselves with bare hearing without faith
and repentance; as soon as they come to be assailed with rain, floods, and
winds, inward and outward temptations, they fall, how much more will they fall
in judgment? Psalm. 1.6. The wicked shall not stand in the judgment, when a
fire shall go before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him,
Psalm. 50.1.

And it fell] Here Is the ruin of those who build upon sandy foundations,
whether civility, self-righteousness, great friends, large estates,
professional sanctity, self comparisons, good meanings, moral righteousness,
such in time of trial fall.

And great was the fall of it] They fall into sin, shame, and punishment. Their
fall was great,

1 Because it made a great noise, as things that fall from high; so Professors
who profess to draw near to God, but do not in truth, their fall is heard far
and near.

2 Because they fall finally and totally. Good men sometimes like
Nebuchadnezzar, fall fearfully, but they have a stump in the ground which
sprouts forth again, Dan. 4.26. The seed of God abides in them, 1 John 3.9. But
carnal Professors they fall wholly.

3 Because the devil will be sure to hold such faster, by how much he saw they
had well nigh got out of his clutches. As a Jaylour will be sure to lay bolts
enough upon a prisoner that had well-nigh made an escape, Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man (by an outward profession) the
devil seeks rest there but finds none; but when the devil sees such a man is a
mere outside professor, then he says, I will return into my house whence I
came out, then goes he and takes with himself seven spirits more wicked then
himself, and they enter in and dwell there.

4 Because they fall into the condemnation of the devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. To fall
from riches to poverty, from honor to disgrace, is great, but it is a far
greater fall from being lifted up to heaven to fall down to hell, as Capernaum
did, Matthew. 11.23.

Obs. It Is an insufficient foundation for a soul to build upon any thing
without Christ; it is only a sandy foundation.

2 Sooner or later men that are unsound must look to be assaulted with
temptations, Prove. 10.9. He that perverts his ways shall be known, Number. 32.23.
But if ye will not do so, be sure your sin will find you out.

3 When unsound men are assaulted with temptations, then they fall and show
their rottenness, as Achan, Joas, Saul, Jehu, Ananias and Saphira.

4 The fall of professing hypocrites will be a great and a fearful fall. If the
falls of godly people, when they fall only from the comforts of the Spirit,
and measures of their graces into decays and discomforts, be so fearful, how
fearful will their fall be, who like the rebellious Angels, Having left their
first estate, are reserved in everlasting chains? Jude 6.

V. 28, And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at his doctrine.

V. 29. For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes.

Here is the effect of Christ his sermon, that the hearers were astonished at
his doctrine. Doctrine has sometimes that effect among hearers that are not
soul-savingly wrought upon, Matthew. 13.54. the people were astonished and cried
out, Whence has this man this wisdom? Is not this the Carpenters son? Christ
is not compared with the old Prophets whom they had never seen, but with the
present Scribes, the interpreters of the Law, whom they heard daily. These
taught frivolous trifles and vain rites of washing pots and cups, and Corban,
but Christ taught with authority.

1 He taught serious things, as how to be builded upon a solid foundation, when
storms came, who were blessed persons, etc.

2 Christ taught by his life, as well as by his doctrine. It is a long way to
holiness by precepts, it is short by example. As we speak the Gospel so let us
live it. People loath doctrine when the man that preaches it is wicked, people
say if it be necessary to live as he says, why does he not live so himself.

3 Christ taught with a mighty zeal and fervor, and not coldly: such teachers
were Elias, 1 Kings 19.14. John Baptist, Who came in the Spirit and power of
Elias, Epaphras, Col. 4.12. There is in doctrine not only the light of the
Word, but the fire of the Word. The Word is called a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
John Baptist was a burning and a shining light, John 5.35. when he taught, the
people they cried out, What shall we do? And so did the soldiers, Luke 3.12,
13. And so when Peter preached, Acts 2.37. the people cried out, what shall we
do? The Word is fire, he that delivers it coldly delivers it otherwise then it
is. Were it not ridiculous, when an house were on fire, to say, Friends we had
best get water to quench it, or else all our goods will be burnt; but when a
house is a fire, we cry fire, fire, for the Lords sake bring water, bring
Ladders, Buckets, untile the House, cut down the Beams, etc. Here Is the
affection of the Word; so should a Preacher stir up the people, the fire of
Gods vengeance is coming, oh bring the tears of repentance. The affection of
the truth must be delivered, as well as the body of the truth; the Word is
compared to fire, which is the most piercing element of all.

4 The Scribes taught as the interpreters of the Law, but Christ as a Prophet
sent from heaven; as when a Constable comes in the name of the Prince, I charge
you in the Princes Name, so Preachers when they speak to men, should speak to
their consciences, I charge you in the name of the God of heaven that you leave
off your pride, lying, uncleanness, etc. Preach Christ crucified in a crucified
phrase, not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of
none effect. Besides, the wit of man hides the power of the Word, and he that
receives the Word upon eloquent enticement, will be drawn to leave it when he
hears greater eloquence persuading thereto. It Is the misery of the times, that
Aristotle the deluder of wits, should in most Universities be heeded rather
then Christ the Prophet of his Church.

5 Christ came home to the Consciences of men, and so Paul; We commend our
selves to every man's conscience as in the sight of God. He speaks with
authority that speaks to the conscience. Know ye not the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6.9. Matthew. 23.33. O generation of vipers,
how can ye escape the damnation of hell?

6 Christ came with authority, not only as an interpreter of the Law of God,
but as being himself a Lawgiver come from heaven, John 3.11. We speak that we
do know, and testify that we have seen. Also v. 31, 32. He that comes from
heaven is above all, and what he has seen and heard, that he testifies.

7 Christ came with authority, in the convincing of souls for sin. It Is one
great work of the Spirit of Christ, Joh. 16.10. Hence Micah 3.8. I am full of
power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare
unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin. Hence he spares neither
Prince, Prophet or Priest, v. 9, 10, 11, 12. The Word should come as a
thunderclap to the heart of the sinner, Act. 8.21. Peter to Magus, I perceive
thou art in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity: ye have been the
betrayers and murderers of the Son of God, Acts 2.36. As Nazianzen, Orat. 20.
said of Basil, His word was like thunder, his life like lightning.

8 He taught with authority, in preaching to the life; as a picture is well
drawn when its drawn as to life, so a preacher must preach as to life: to
preach of heaven, hell, death and judgment, as if they were before us, to
preach out the wrath of God that the sinner may apprehend it as a burning fire,
to set forth the ugliness of sin that it may appear as black as hell, to set
forth the particular excellencies of Christ that the soul may say, Whither is
thy beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee? To set forth the terribleness
of judgment, that the sinner may be afraid to live one hour in such a
condition as he would be afraid to dye in.

9 In not sparing persons of the greatest quality, as Herod, Pilate, the High
Priests, Lawyers, Scribes, and therefore Christ denounces woe upon woe upon
them; Woe unto you Pharisees, woe unto you Scribes, woe unto you Lawyers, Luke
11.42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52. Nor did he fear the faces of the Mighty,
Jer, 1.10, 17, 18, 19.

10 He taught with authority, not only in pressing powerful doctrine, but also
did move upon their hearts by the working of his Spirit, that their hearts were
all on fire in hearing of him, Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts burn within us
while he opened to us the Scriptures? So Paul. 1 Cor. 2.4.

11 Christ taught with authority, because himself was deeply affected with
the things which he taught. It is not a thundering voice, nor vehement
enforcements from natural strength that proves povverfulness of doctrine, but
it much tends to authority, both in prayer and preaching, that the heart of the
preacher be first wrought upon, either in private betwixt God and his soul,
or in public: affections in the preacher beget affections in the hearer, and
after an unperceiveable manner dravv them over. So Christ when he preached to
multitudes, sometimes he put on bowels of pity, Mat. 9.37. sometimes grief and
weeping, Luke 19.41. compared with ver. 48. Joh. 11.35, 38. compared with
ver. 45.

12 Christ taught with authority, because he knevv none could charge sin upon
him; so shall a teacher that lives a blameless conversation, and knovvs that no
man can charge evil upon him, he has authority in his doctrine; but if he be
covetous, or proud, or vain, he looses that authorative power (which God has
given him) in the hearts of hearers, Titus, 2.15. Rebuke with all authority,
let no man despise thee, q. d. if thou do any thing unvvorthy to render thy
self despicable, thy authority will be lost.

13 By a vehement pressing and urging the commands upon the consciences of men,
vvithall denouncing threats against the ungodly, as Mat. 7.26, 27. Luke 6.21.
to ver. 27. so should a preacher press the commands upon persons, I command you
in the name of the Lord Jesus, that you be not proud, passionate, greedy after
the world: So John Baptist, Matthew. 3.8, 9, 10. Now the ax is laid to the root
of the tree, bring forth fruit, else you will be thrown into the fire.

Use. See a duty in faithful preachers, 1 To teach with authority remembering
whose Ambassadors they are, Matthew. 28.18. 2 Cor. 5.20.

2 To maintain the authority which the Lord has given unto them, 2 Cor. 10.8.
maintain it both by life and doctrine, by preaching povverfully and living
holily. How powerful was the Apostle Paul in his preaching? See Gal. 1.6,
7, 8, 9, 10.

3 To the Brethren to obey that Word that comes with authority to their
consciences, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, etc.

And not as the Scribes] Whose teaching was either traditionary, as the washing
of pots, and cups, and hands, building the tombs of Prophets, making broad
phylacteries, but for things tending to mortification they spoke not at all, or
very superficially, or their teaching was formal. When they spoke of the love
of God and other duties, they spoke of them without zeal and feeling, and
therefore they were not like to affect others when themselves were not first
affected. The Orator that moves his hearers must first be moved himself.

Or their teaching was hypocritical, binding heavy burdens upon others, they
themselves not touching them with one of their fingers.

Or their teaching was in generals, and confounded.

Contrarily Christ, 1 For matter, he teaches weighty points, as concerning true
blessedness and the qualifications of them that mean to attain it, concerning a
holy life free from scandal, concerning love to enemies, alms, prayer, fasting,
placing treasure in heaven.

2 For manner. Christ speaks with fervency and affection: fire begets fire, the
burning affection in Christ which he had in speaking, makes the hearts of his
Disciples burn in hearing, Luke 24.32.

3 For method. Christ speaks distinctly, first to one point and then to
another, whereas they confounded what they spoke. Method is the mother of
memory.

4 Christ in his doctrine was impartial, he spared none. Many speak truth to
the common people suffering all things, not to them whom they fear will
persecute them, to whom especially it is to be spoken. He that looks upon men's
persons will be terrified with the show of titles and dignities.

5 He preached fearlesly: he feared no man's angry looks. Let not faithful
Preachers expect glory but ignominy and contempt, not wealth but poverty,
violence, prisons and death, as Michaiah and John Baptist, and when others
shall be cast into hell, such shall have place in heaven. As Caesar has his
Electors, the Turk his Princes, so our King has his Ministers. Augustine is a
Prince Elector, so Irenaeus, Quadratus are Princes and Counts, Luth. Tom.
3.495. let us not then fear the opposition of men: how great opposition did
Noah suffer in his ministry for hundreds of years? A Preacher must be vir
rixarum, a man of strife.

6 He was not vainglorious, but still sought the glory of his Father, Joh.
6.38, 39. so let faithful Preachers, Joh. 7. say, I began not to preach the
Gospel that the world should honor me, and I will not cease from preaching
because of the worlds reproach.

7 He was in his Ministry convictive of gainsayers, yet did he not, according
to the guise of the times, tie up his convincing arguments to syllogisms in
mood and figure, but he brought unanswerable reason. Without this gift Churwill
be wasted and scattered. See Titus 1.9.

CHAP. VIII.
SOmetimes Christ goes from miracles to doctrine, but here, having laid down
his doctrine, he comes in this Chapter to confirm it by miracles. Before he
began his sermon, he healed all sicknesses and diseases, Matthew. 4.23. that he
might make way for his doctrine. For doubtless the miracles Christ and his
Apostles did, were a great cause why their doctrine in so great measure was
believed, Acts 8.6. The people with one accord gave heed unto those things
which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. And now
Christ, when his sermon was ended on the Mount; he went down and the multitudes
followed him, before whom he wrought sundry miracles.

V. 1. And when he was come down from the Mountain, great multitudes followed
him.

These multitudes were of diverse humors, hence upon diverse ends they followed
Christ; some followed out of love to his doctrine, the sweetness whereof they
had already tasted; some out of curiosity, that they might hear some new thing;
some out of desire of confirmation, that they might be assured of his doctrine,
whiles they saw it confirmed by miracles; some to be cured of their maladies,
some for loaves, John 6.27. Christ has multitudes of followers, but few that
follow him for a right end. Look we to the end why we follow Christ, whether it
be for glory and earthly praise or profit, or whether it be for himself, in all
conditions, even in adversity, persecution, Matthew. 16.24. Let him deny himself
and take up his cross and follow me. Virgin souls follow the Lamb whither
soever he goes, Rev. 14.4. yea though to prison, banishment, death: the world
pretend to follow Christ, but it is at a distance, always with the exception of
the cross.

V. 2. And behold there came a Leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

We have here Christ his first miracle set down, wherein three things.

1 The Lepers devotion, set down in two branches, 1 He worships Christ. 2 He
acts faith in Christ, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

2 Christ's compassion, v. 3. I will, be thou clean. Amplified first from the
efficients, 1 From the instrumental efficient cause, Jesus put forth his hand
and touched him. 2 From the principal efficient, I will, be thou clean. 3 From
the effect, Immediately his Leprosy departed from him.

3 Christ his direction, which was, 1 Silence, See thou tell no man. 2 To show
himself to the Priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded.

V. 1. And behold there came a Leper] Luke c. 5.12. says, It was in a certain
City, that is, near to a City, for Lepers for fear of infection were put out of
Cities, Levit. 13.46. 2 Kings 7.3.

Leprosy is abundance of burnt choler and salt phlegm diffused from the Liver
all over the body, breaking out into a filthy scab or scurf. There are other
evils besides accompany this disease, viz. the hairs fall off, the nostrils are
widened, the bones are eaten into by it, the tongue swells, the breath stinks.
It Is an universal Gangrene which is incurable, and hereditary, and abounds most
in hot countries, as in Judea, Egypt, etc. This disease Physicians call
Elephantiasis. It Is used ordinarily as an Emblem or Looking-glass to express
our natural defilements, Isai 1.6.

And worshipped him] The manner of the worship Luke sets down, which was, he
fell on his face, cap. 5.12. So that he touched Christ his feet, as the word
(...) signifies, not kneeled, as the word is translated, Mark 1.40. So that he
lay at Christ's feet, imploring and beseeching him, as a Dog at his masters
feet, as Zanch. de Red. renders the word, which shows that this Leper looked
upon Christ more than a Prophet, or a holy man, and that believing he was God,
and so able to heal him if he would; he gave him religious worship. He came to
know Christ was God, partly by inspiration, partly by the miracles which Christ
did, cap. 4.20. He does not say to Christ, Lord if thou will pray to God or to
thy Father for me, I shall be whole, but, Lord, if thou will, I shall be whole.
He acknowledges the Leprosy curable by Christ, which he and all men knew was
incurable by others, which was a plain argument of his faith: for though the
Psora or scabbedness may be cured, yet that which is called Lepra Physicians
acknowledge incurable; for if a particular Cancer cannot be cured, much less can
an universal Cancer, as Avicen observes. Yet in a miraculous manner some Lepers
have been cured, as Miriam, Number. 12.14. Naaman, 2 Kings 5.14.

Saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean] Here is the profession
of his faith. Of no Prince or Potentate can this be affirmed, save of God
himself, no nor of any Disciple or Apostle, for they did not do Miracles when
they would, but when God would. Heb. 2.4. only of God is that true which Job
speaks, cap. 42.2. I know thou can do every thing. Genesis 18.14. Is there any
thing too hard for the Lord, Romans 4.21. Heb. 11.19. How great soever is the
will of God, so great is his power, Psalm 115.3. Whatsoever the Lord pleased
that did he in Heaven and Earth; yea, he can do more than he will do. See
Matthew. 3.8, 9. Matthew. 26.53. However God deal with us, give him the glory of
his power.

If thou wilt] See his resignment to the will of Christ under affliction. So
Eli, 1 Samuel 3.17. So Christ, Matthew. 26.39. Not my will but thine be done. The
Brethren, Acts 21.13. When Paul would not be persuaded, they cried out, The
will of the Lord be done.

I will, be thou clean] I will both as I am God and Man. Ambrose in 5. Luke 12.
says, Christ says I will for Photinus, he commands for Arrius, he touches for
Manicheus. Photinus taught that Christ was mere Man and not God, whose will
only is omnipotent; Arrius taught that Christ was less than the Father, and
therefore did not command, but only received the commands of the Father;
Manicheus taught that Christ had not true but only imaginary flesh, and
therefore could neither touch nor be touched. Christ confutes all these in
these words.

Be thou clean] Here Is the Divinity of Christ: men are wont to command actions,
but to make things to be by commanding them to be, is only divine, Genesis 1. Let
there be Light, and there was Light; Let the Earth be created, and it was so.

Immediately his Leprosy was cleansed] With a touch of Christ's hand, and with
a word of his mouth; he touched him, that the cure might not seem to come by
chance, but that it only came from himself.

2 To show the mercy and condescension of Christ, that did not disdain to touch
a leprous person, much more in taking Leprosy of sin on him, and making us one
body him.

In that this Leprosy was cured immediately, there came came no space of time
nor no outward mean, betwixt the command of Christ and the work of Christ.

V. 4. And Jesus says unto him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, Show thy
self to the Priest, and offer the Gift that Moses commanded for a testimony
unto them.

See thou tell no man] There are sundry causes why Christ enjoins him silence.

1 Christ did not forbid him to tell it at any time, but that he should not
tell it till he had showed himself to the Priests, lest the Priests hearing of
the cure should maliciously report that the Leper was not truly healed,
according to the Law, Levit. 14. wherein the Priest was to judge of Leprosy,
and therefore in the Text it follows, Go show thy self to the Priest. This
Miracle fell out in Galilee, Mark 1.39. and the Priests were at Jerusalem; the
Priests were called out of the City that they might judge of the Disease.

There were other causes, as, 1 For modesty sake, and to avoid boasting.

2 For not speaking forth that in word which spoke forth it self in deed, in
his whole body the Leprosy being removed.

3 Because the fit time was not come; therefore the Lepers zeal was disorderly
in publishing that Christ would have kept silent, Mark 1.45.

4 Lest hereby Christ should stir up the envy and hatred of the Pharisees
against him, and so be forced to go from the City, not having an opportunity to
preach the Gospel. Mark 1.45. So that Christ could no more openly enter into
the City, but was forced to remain in desert places.

But go thy way, show thy self to the Priest] Christ bids him show himself to
the Priest, 1 Because the ceremonies were yet in force. Now the ceremonial
command was, that the Leper should show himself to the Priest, Levit. 14.2.

2 That the healed Leper might test fie his thankfulness to God for so great a
benefit, by bringing a thank-offering, Levit. 14.1, to 9.

3 To draw the Priests either to faith in Christ, and repentance for their
opposition against him, or else that they might be inexcusable: hence these
words follow, for a testimony unto them.

4 To get a testimonial of his cure.

And offer the gift which Moses commanded] See what this was, Levit. 14.3, 4,
5, 6, 7. It was an oblation or thank-offering to God for his cleansing.

For a testimony unto them] As 1 That they might be inexcusable if they would
not embrace Christ for the Son of God.

2 That the receiving of the gift may be a continual testimony against the
Priests that the Leprosy was perfectly healed; if they through malice, should
in time to come go about to deny it, they could not say such an one was not
cured, for whom they had offered a thank-offering to God. Christ would have
them that were his adversaries to be the first witnesses of his miracles.

Besides it was that he might be restored to the society of men, from whose
company he had been severed.

But that from hence Papists may wire-draw the Law of their confession, making
Leprosy to be allegorically sins, and the Priests the knowers hereof, is a
vain thing; for what Honor those Priests had Christ alone challenges to
himself, who alone knows spiritual Leprosy, and is worthy to whom we should
offer the gift of our cleansing.

Indeed sin is like Leprosy, 1 For loathsomness, Prove. 13.5. Ezekiel. 16.5. 2 For
smell; a Leper from such corruption of humors cannot but smell. So sinners
stink, though perhaps not one to another, as nasty prisoners in the goal, yet
to those that come out of the fresh Air; so though wicked men stink not one to
another, yet to God and Saints they do, Psalm. 14.3. They are altogether become
stinking, as the margin renders it.

3 For Hereditariness as the Leprosy is conveyed from Father to Son, so is
original defilement, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5.12.

4 For excommunicableness. Leprosy separated, not only from divine service,
but also from society with men; so sin lived in separates betwixt God and us,
and separates from communion of Saints, Isa. 59.1, 2. Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17.

5 For contagion. Leprosy was very infectious, so is sin, 1 Cor. 5.6. A little
leaven leavens the whole lump. Only here is the difference, the Leper
proclaimed his uncleanness that men might take heed of being infected by him,
Levit. 13.45. which sinners will not.

6 Leprosy creeps from one place to another till the whole body be overspread
with it; so does corruption or sin, it creeps from the heart to the members of
the body, and faculties of the soul, so that from the crown of the head, to the
sole of the foot there is nothing but wounds, and swellings, and putrefying
sores, Isa. 1.6.

Though in a tropological sense sin may thus be resembled to Leprosy, yet
Leprosy properly taken is meant, and no Popish inference of Priestly power can
thence be deduced.

Obs. No person whatsoever, how vile soever, by bodily distemper is hereby kept
off from worshipping God.

2 He that believes that God will do him good, must also be convinced of the
power of God, that God can do him good.

3 All cleansing from bodily diseases proceeds from the will of God as the
primitive cause thereof. I will, be thou clean.

4 Diseases however in the use of second causes they are hardly cured or
incurable, yet by the power of God they are and have been healed. Immediately
his Leprosy departed.

5 From these words, See, thou tell no man, Obs. Disobedience unto the commands
of Christ, though upon the most specious pretenses, cannot excuse it from being
a sin.

6 Show thy self to the Priest, and offer the gift. Obs. The external and
ceremonial part of worship, when, and so long as it is instituted by God, onght
not to be slighted or neglected.

7 For a testimony unto them, Obs. Persons that at present are opposite to
Christ and his truth: we should use the best means we can to convince them,
that they may believe and repent. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

V. 5. And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a
Centurion, beseeching him,

V. 6. And saying, My servant lies at home sick of the Palsy, grievously
tormented.

In this story, 1 We have, 1 The Centurions petition for Christ to restore his
servant, ver. 5, 6.

2 Christ his grant. ver. 7. Jesus says, I will come and heal him.

3 The Centurions reply, set down, 1 From the sense of his own unworthiness,
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.

2 From the fixed confidence he had in Christ, Speak the Word only, and my
servant shall be healed. ver. 8. Which he amplifies by the inferiority of his
own person and power, compared with Christ; My soldiers obey my word, though I
am under the authority of another: how much more should I believe and obey thy
word, who art under the power of none?

4 Christ his commendation: he marvelled at it, saying, I have not found so
great faith, no not in Israel, v. 10.

Amplified from a threefold effect, 1 A prophecy of the calling in of the
Gentiles, of whom this Centurion was as a first fruit, v. 11.

2 The rejection of the Jews, ver. 12. The children of the Kingdom shall be
cast out.

3 From the success. As thou have believed, so be it unto thee; and his servant
was healed the self same hour.

And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum there came unto him a Centurion] The
former miracle was done near to Capernaum, this in the city. A Centurion was
one that had a hundred soldiers under him, or sometimes more.

Came unto him] Obj. Luke 7.3. V. de
Its said that he sent unto Christ the Elders of the Jews to beseech him to
heal his servant.

Answ. After the Centurion had sent the Jews and his friends to supplicate
Christ, then lastly himself came to him to meet Christ, whether for Honor
sake, or the danger his servant was in; unless we answer that he came and
supplicated, not by himself, but by his messengers; for that which is done by
the authority of another he himself is said to do it, Matthew. 11.3. so Christ is
said to Baptize and not Baptize; to Baptize, Joh. 3.22. not to Baptize, Joh.
4.2. which may easily be reconciled: he Baptized by his Disciples, though he
did not Baptize in his own person. We say such a man built this house, though
it was not built but by his servants. Hence Luke 7.10. its said they that were
sent returning to the house found the servant whole that had been sick. That
which Matthew more hastily sets down, Luke does more fully, the Spirit
intending to make one perfect History out of the four Evangelists. So that this
is the same story with that in Luke, as appears by the agreements in many
things, and the few diversities.

In that he was a Centurion, see that no man's calling hinders him from being
godly. This Centurion, his faith was seen in acknowledging one God, in building
the Jews a Synagogue, which could not be without much envy and hatred, and in
his care of his servant, and in his believing profession he made to Christ.

My servant lies at home sick of the Palsey] The Palsy is the loosening of
the sinews; one half part of the body is unloosed, motion and sense being
intercepted from them. When this is in one part of the body it is called a
Palsy, when it is in the whole body it is called an Apoplexy.

My servant] A lesson to rich men not to turn away their servants when they are
sick, but to seek the best way they can for their relief. See a judgment of
God on the contrary, 1 Samuel 30.13. A certain Amalekite turned away his servant
because he fell sick, and this servant so cast out, God made instrumental to
discover the Amalekites, so that David destroyed them. Yea, which is more, to
seek the recovery of their servants. By such care Masters show to their
servants they will not only do things just and equal, having a Master in
heaven, (for it is equal that the servant serving his Master sincerely in his
health, the Master should keep him in his sickness) but also they will let
their servants see, that they do not only respect their own good, but their
servants benefit, Deuteronomy. 15.12, 13, 14, 15. especially if they shall withal
have a care of their servants spiritual good, whiles they are more offended
for their sins against God, then for the neglect of duty toward themselves.

Which care of Masters, servants should endeavor to requite; 1 By avoiding
eye-service, Ephesians. 6.6. Col. 3.22. 2 Working for them in the singleness of your
hearts, as you would do for your selves, Ephesians. 6.5. Genesis 24.33, 34, 35. 3 By
praying for thy Master, Genesis 24.12. and giving thanks to God for any blessing
and success granted to thy Master; so did Eleazar for Abraham, Genesis 24.27, 48.
4 By having a care of thy Masters goods as if they were thy own, Mat. 7.12. 5
By showing thy self cheerfully tractable and obedient to all their lawful
commands; for if they command unlawful things, or endeavor to compel you in
matter of Religion, they have no such power, for they are only Masters of your
flesh, not of your consciences, Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22. Only note that he that
pretends conscience must be able to give a reason of his conscience, otherwise
it is humor, prepossession not conscience; nor must a servant obey his Master
in any sinful action, as lying, swearing, etc. to gratify a Master, 1 Cor.
7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men. 6 By having an
inward and an outward reverend respect toward their Masters, 1 Timothy 6.1. Not
despising them because they are brethren. 7 By bearing with their Masters
infirmities, without whispering secretly or blazing openly the same to their
reproach. As charity covers sin in others, so especially in such relations, 1
Pet. 4.8.


Grievously tormented] Ready to dye, as Luke 7.2. therefore his Palsy in
likelihood was an Apoplexy, or a Convulsion or a drawing back of the sinews,
which cause grievous pains.

V. 7. And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal him.

Here is the humility and condescension of Christ, that he disdained not to
come to visit a poor servant, we should not disdain to visit the meanest, John
13.14.

V. 8. The Centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof, but speak the word only and my servant shall be
healed.

V. 9. For I also am a man under authority, etc.

The Centurion spoke this to Christ by his friends, Luke 7.6. after by himself,
as Matthew sets down, for civility required that he should go to meet Christ
hearing of his coming. The humility of a servant is more dark, but when a King,
a Nobleman, a Teacher, a Rich man is humble, their humility shines as the Sun
and Moon. Let such a Magistrate say, Ah who am I? Why should I set my self
before others? unless that a heavier burden of government lies on me, and
therefore a greater account of my Office is to be given. Luth. in 41. cap. Genesis

Here was one effect of his faith, that whereas soldiers are naturally so
lifted up, he was so humble: so we find sundry of the Saints, the more
gracious the more humble. Abraham, Genesis 18.27. Jacob, Genesis 32.10. Agur, Prove.
30.2. Isaiah. c. 6.5. John Baptist, Matthew. 3.11. Peter, Luke 5.8. Hence the
Centurion says, neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee, Luke 7.7.
It Is like, partly because his conscience told him he had been a worshipper of
false Gods, partly because the Jews refused communion and company with him, but
especially because he saw the vileness of his own corrupt nature, and the
exceeding glorious holiness in Christ, hence he says I am not worthy. Where
there is most grace commonly there is most sense of unworthiness and true
humility, the show of that this man had in truth more deceives the world then
any thing else.

But speak the word onely] The Centurion having heard of the fame of Christ,
Matthew. 4.23. when he healed many, and also of the cleansing of the Leper, who
published abroad the cure, he says, speak the word only.

My word is the word of a man, thy word is the Word of the Son of God; my word
has power over men under me, thy Word has power over all sorts of diseases,
yea such as are incurable, yea over death, I am under the power of another,
thou art subject to no power; being thou art God therefore speak the word only.

As his wisdom was seen in that he saw the Godhead lying under the veil of
flesh, his humility, that he judged himself unworthy that Christ should come
under his roof, so here is his faith, that he says, speak the word only:
learn that our faith go upon a word of God, Psalm. 119.49. Heb. 13.5, 6. thou
being absent can cure him by a word of thy mouth, therefore there is no need
of thy bodily presence, but speak the word only and my servant shall be whole.
God speaks impossible things, lying things, foolish things, weak things, things
to be abominated and devilish, if thou consult with reason (meaning carnal
reason) but faith sacrifices reason, and kills that beast which the whole world
and every creature cannot kill, Luth. Tom. 4.74.758. Now the Word upon which
faith looks, is either the Word of command, Genesis 1. Let there be light, Psalm.
105.31. 148.8. Isaiah 55.11. The word that goes out of my mouth shall not
return unto me void, but shall accomplish that whereto I send it. Look as in
the governments of Commonwealths, Armies and Families, many things are done by
a word of command, much more can thou bring about the healing my servant by
the word of thy command. Examples fetched from nature are useful for
illustration, when they agree with what the rule speaks; so similitudes are
taken from the compassions of mothers, Esai 49.15. and fathers, Psalm. 103.13.
to set forth Gods pity, so from a servant, Romans 6.18. from a man's testament,
Gal. 3.15. 2 Faith goes upon the word of promise, Romans 4.18. John 2.22.

I say to this man, Go, and he goes, and to another, Come, and he comes, and
to my Servant, Do this, and he does it] See the duty, both of Soldiers to
their superior Officers, unless they know their Commander shall put them upon
some things directly contrary to Gods command: also the duty of Servants to do
what their Masters and Mistresses bid them, Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22. Obey in all
things your Masters.

V. 10. When Jesus heard it, he marvelled and said to them that followed,
Verily, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.

Here we have the commendation of the Centurions faith; [He marvelled] Christ
did not marvel as God, for no new unexpected thing can befall him, but it may
befall Christ in his humane nature, having like affections with us. There were
some things the humane nature of Christ was ignorant of, as of the Day of
Judgment, the time of Figs, etc. Marvel is when our expectation is exceeded.
Christ marvelled at all his graces, as his Humility, Devotion in building a
Synagogue, his Faith. Christ does not admire the buildings of the Temple,
Matthew. 24.1. nor the Princes of the World, but the graces of the Spirit in one
that had so little means. Though some think Christ being the Author of these
graces did seem to admire them, not as being ignorant of them, but to teach us
to admire them.

I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel] The greatness of his faith
is seen, 1 That he believed so easily upon so small means. 2 That he believed
Christ's Word; 1 His Word of Command. 2 His Word of Promise. 3 That he believed
without a Miracle, John 4.48. Miracles have been sometimes done to give
testimony to the Word, Acts 4.29, 30, 31. 4 In a man of that calling and a
stranger from Israel. 5 In that we read of no doubtings with his faith in this
particular. Jairus does not say, Speak the word, but, Come quickly ere my
Child die, John 4.49. Nicodemus he reasons, How can these things be? Martha
says, Had thou been here my Brother had not died; as doubting whether the
power of Christ could reach every where, but the Centurion says, Speak the
word only.

6 In the difficulty of the things to be believed; for to believe that a man
near to death could be recovered by a word of Christ's mouth, I mean not by
syllables and pronunciation, but that Christ will be present to his own
Ministry.

7 Comparatively with the common Jews, and particularly those which were
ordinary Hearers to Christ.

Now when he says, I have not found so great faith in Israel, he means not all
Israel, for Abraham, Moses, David, had greater faith, but he means it from the
time of his beginning to preach.

V. 11. And I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and West, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.

V. 12. But the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter Darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

From the occasion of the Centurions coming in to believe, who was a Gentile,
Christ foretells the calling of the Gentiles, and rejection of the Jews. [Many
shall come] Not all. Aug. in loc.

From the East and West] That is, whereas the Jews thought the Lord was only
bound to the Kindred of Abraham, Christ says, They shall come from East and
West, which is put for all remote places without the bounds of the Kingdom of
Judah, not only near adjoining Heathen, as Syrians, Egyptians, etc. but remote
Gentiles, Isai 43.5, 6. I will bring thy Sons from the East, and gather them
from the West; I will say to the North, Give up, and to the South, Keep not
back; bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the Earth. Luke
13.28, 29. They shall come from East, West, North and South, as this Centurion
came from far. You are of this people, O then come in.

Shall come] That is, to me and to the faith of this Centurion, being called by
the Word of Christ, and drawn by the Spirit of Christ: even all that are given
to Christ shall come, and he that comes shall not be rejected, John 6.37.
compared with 44.

And shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven]
Metaphor from a Banquet wherewith we shall be satisfied when Christ shall
appear, Psalm 16.11. 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures.
Luke 14.15. Blessed are they that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of God. See
Luke 22.29, 30. Revel. 19.9. This was signified by the Parable of the Marriage,
Matthew. 22.2. Luke 14.16. The things of grace and glory were like a well
furnished Feast or Banquet set before Jews and Gentiles, but the Jews cavilled
at it, and railed against it, and persecuted it, but the Gentiles that had but
a Crum they embraced it, so that this Banquet is the glorious things of the
Gospel, and the Inheritance of Heaven.

With Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven] He names these three,
1 Because he styles himself their God, Exodus 3.6.

2 Because the promise of Canaan, a Type of Heaven, was made to them.

3 For their faith and holy examples, these shall as it were sit at the upper
end of the Table, and the Gentiles shall come to sit down by them, for there is
one Communion of all Saints. There being a common Inheritance it supposes a
common Faith. So that the sense is, as this Centurion and stranger being
persuaded of divine power in me, has obtained health for an afflicted body, so
very many of the Gentiles flying unto me by like persuasion shall obtain grace
here and eternal salvation hereafter.

Besides, whereas the Jews think themselves so holy, that they will not eat
with a stranger, many strangers shall eat Bread with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
(the Jews Ancestors, whose names they brag of) the Jews being shut out.

But the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness] The
children of the kingdom are they to whom by privilege of covenant the kingdom
was appointed before others, unless themselves withstood it.

2 Because the word of the kingdom, the doctrine of salvation, was sent unto
them, Act. 13.26. Children of the stock of Abraham, to you is the word of this
salvation sent.

3 Though they were not the kingdom to whom the inheritance was promised,
Matthew. 25.34. Yet because they possessed a place in the visible Church, they
are called the children of the kingdom.

The Jews could have borne it that the Gentiles should have been planted in
with the Jews to be one body, but that the Jews should be cast out and the
Gentiles taken into an empty place they could not bear this.

Shall be cast into outer darkness] Here Is a commination and punishment against
the ungrateful Jews. If a King should make a sumptuous feast for his courtiers,
and they should not only despise it, but rail upon the King, and persecute him
for it, would not the King not only keep them from his Table, but cast them
into a most filthy prison? so these Jews refusing Christ his banquet, they have
blindness, hardness and extreme outward calamities here, and hell hereafter.

Into outer darkness] Its called outer; to understand this, know, that formerly
people were wont to eat very sparingly in the morning, and then to satisfy and
cheer themselves at supper, giving themselves to their business on the day
time, hence they used to have their feasts at supper, Mark 6.21. John, 12.2. 1
Cor. 11.20. See Clem. Alex. 2. Paedag. 2. Athenaeus de Caenis sapientium. See
for this 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. Matthew. 22.2. Luke 14.16. Rev. 19 9.
Now when they had supt they had plenty of light in the house where the feast
was, but without it was darkness; so these that partake not of this glorious
supper whereof Christ had before spoken, they shall be cast into outer
darkness: such as believe not on the Son of God, shall not partake of this
supper with the blessed, but be cast out into outer darkness; thus he that
wanted the wedding garment was bound hand and foot, and cast into outer
darkness, Matthew. 22.13. Such persons when they shall see Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in the kingdom, themselves shall be cast out, Luke 13.28. the door shall
be shut against them, Luke 13.25. The contrary is promised to believers and
conquerors, Rev. 3.12. Rev. 22.15. Without are dogs, wicked men are still said
to be without, 1 Cor. 5.12. Col. 4.5.

These damned souls shall not only have inner darkness, whereby their minds
shall be deprived, not only of the light of mysteries which Saints shall
have, the Tabernacle of heaven being open to them, and of the beatifical sight
and light of Gods countenance, and all inward comfort, but also they shall be
punished with outward sensible darkness which excludes sensible light.

1 Concerning curious questions, as 1 Whether in hell there be fire without, or
whether the fire of hell shine so far that the damned can behold their own and
others torments, I leave it undetermined.

2 Where the place of hell is, whether in the center of the earth, which is
judged to be from the superficies three thousand five hundred miles, if so, the
so great darkness in the earth must needs cause great darkness in hell. Some
think its without this visible world and the region of the blessed, to which
I^ncline.

So that the damned in hell shall not only be punished with an obstinate
blindness, to hate God and holiness, and all good, because God torments them in
hell, and to love all evil out of their rage against God and despair of their
own salvation: but also with sensible darkness, Jude 6.

They are reserved in everlasting chains of darkness to the judgment of the
great day. And mark who the persons are who are thus punished, they are the
children of the kingdom, fruitless and carnal professors. Let such as have a
form of godliness without the power tremble at this, that they shall have the
sorest place in hell, even outer darkness, which is the furthest removed from
light, whereas they that have a great faith, as the Centurion had, shall have
chief place in heaven, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob.

Where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth] Metaphor from
prisoners, who, partly from the hunger, cold, and nastiness they endure, and
partly from the fear of the stroke of death ready to surprise them, weep and
wail, and gnash their teeth, or as men in great torments weep and gnash their
teeth, so shall the damned, they shall have the worm of conscience eternally
gnawing of them, Isa. 66.24. Mark, 9.44. Moreover men gnash their teeth out of
indignation, Psalm. 35.16.37.12. so shall the damned out of indignation against
God for their torments.

Quest. Whether in hell there is weeping?

Answ. It seems not, 1 Because the fire of hell will presently dry up those
tears. 2 Because to these tears, that are to endure for ever, infinite rivers
would not suffice: by weeping Christ means sighs, sobs, and howlings.

2 Quest. Whether in hell there is gnashing of teeth.

Answ. Yes, for this arises from the extreme bitterness of punishment, as
appears in those who are upon the rack, who gnash their teeth for pain.

V. 13. And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have
believed so be it unto thee: and his servant was healed in the self same hour.

Here Is a third effect, which is the healing the Centurions servant.

Go thy way] That is, return glad home to thy house. Christ does not bid him
change his calling, but go his way, as granting what was desired.

As thou have believed so be it unto thee] We may see why Gods hand is
sometimes straightened toward us, its merely for unbelief; As thou have believed
that though I were absent I could heal thy servant with a Word of my mouth, so
let him be cured.

His servant was healed the same hour] A testimony of Christ's omnipotence, and
that he was God.

V. 14. And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wives mother
laid, and sick of a Fever.

V. 15. And he touched her hand, and the Fever left her, and she arose and
ministered to them.

In the words three things. 1 The patients sickness, Peter's wives Mother was
sick of a Fever.

2 The Physicians cure: Amplified, 1 From the manner of his healing, which was,
he touched her hand.

2 From the issue of it, the Fever left her.

3 The evidence or manifestation thereof, viz. She arose and ministered to them.

4 The effect which followed thereupon, which was the inhabitants thereabouts
brought unto him many that were possessed with devils, and he cast out the
devils and healed the sick, v. 16.

5 The end or final cause, which was the fulfilling the Prophecy of Esaias,
which says, That himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.

Jesus came into Peter's house] That is, the house whereinto Peter and Andrew
were wont to betake themselves, as often as they were at Capernaum, Mark 1.29.
hence called the house of Simon and Andrew. It Is likely it was Peter's wives
mothers house, seeing Peter and Andrew lived at Bethsaida before they followed
Christ, Joh. 1.44. and this was about half an hours journey from Capernaum.

Saw his wives mother sick of a fever] A fever is an excessive bounding of
praeternatural heat, partaking of the nature of fire kindled in the heart, and
diffused through the veins and arteries into the whole body, hence called
(...), of (...), that signifies fire, as Febris a fervendo. There are diverse
effects of it, as 1 It Is repugnant to natural heat. 2 It takes away the
temperature of the humors. 3 It stirs up thirst. 4 It vitiates the taste. 5 It
deforms the body. 6 It will not let a man rest, nor be quiet, which way soever
he turns. 7 Its usually known by the pulse and urine. 8 One fever sometimes
turns into another; some have applied these to the burning fevers of the mind,
but because a fever properly taken is meant, I shall not so apply it.


And he touched her hand and the fever left her] That is, he came and took her
by the hand, and lifted her up, as Mark sets it down c. 1.31. Where Physicians
heal, feverish persons are not presently raised up, but Christ presently raises
her up. Christ has several ways of healing; before he healed with bare
touching, here with the touching of lifting up.

She arose and ministered to them] Making them a Supper. Thankfulness well
becomes persons that receive benefits from Christ; when Christ once touches our
hands let us be doing. In this unthankful age let us be provoked to
thankfulness, not one of ten are scarcely so qualified, Luke 17.15, 16, 17, 18.
She does not only arise as a sick person may, but ministers in a serviceable
way, as a sound man or woman does, she makes ready meat, and looks to provide
what was needful, brings in and carries out.

I might observe how Peter was married, seeing his wives mother was sick, 1 Timothy
3.2. James and John had wives, 1 Cor. 9.5.

V. 16. When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed
with devils, and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that
were sick.

Here is the effect that followed upon Christ his curing Peter's wives mother.
There were in Christ his time many possessed with devils, that the power of
Christ might be seen in healing of them, he cured them by laying his hands on
them, Luke 4.40.

Now if you ask what these persons that were possessed with devils were?

Answ. It was in likelihood no other but madness, John 10.20. He has a devil
and is mad; so that these persons labored not of simple dotage, but of raving
madness. So also lunatic persons that had the falling sickness monthly
afflicting them, Matthew. 17.15. Have mercy on my son, because he is lunatic,
for often times he falls into the fire, compared with v. 18. Jesus rebuked the
devil and it departed out of him; so it appears this lunatic man was a
daemoniak. See Luke 9.39. Speaking of the same Lunatic person, he says, lo a
spirit takes him, and it teareth him that he fometh also, v. 42. The devil
threw him down and tare him, and Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed
the child.

Besides, it is strange how these Daemoniaks should abound in Jury, when we hear
of none such in other nations. These the Heathens called Larvati, q.d. Larvis
acti, moved or affrighted with devils, also Cerriti quasi Cereriti, smitten of
Ceres, who was the goddess of Corn, in plain English a drunken man, who was mad
drunk or lion drunk, and therefore when Menechmus in Plautus feigns himself
mad, the Physician who was sent to cure him asks, whether he were larvatus or
cerritus. And so Justin Martyr 2. Apol. ad Antonin. counts Daemoniaks and mad
men all one. See Medes works vol. 1. page 83, 84. where sundry other
authorities together with these are cited.

Healed all that were sick] That they being cured in their bodies might seek
unto him for their souls. We see he healed all that were sick, none excepted,
if they came to him; also all sorts of diseases, as Leprosy, Palsy, Bloody
flux, etc. Now Christ did this to prove himself to be the Messiah. Matthew.
11.4.5. Go show John what ye see and hear; the Blind receive their sight, the
Lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed: and though the Apostles wrought strange
cures on the bodies of men, Acts 19.11, 12. so that diseases departed from the
sick by their aprons and handkercheifs: 1 Yet Christ cured diseases by his own
power, Matthew. 8.3, 4. but the Apostles did what they did by the power of
Christ, Acts 16.18. 2 Christ had this power at all times, to heal whenever he
would, so had not they, Heb. 2.4. for then would not Paul have left Trophimus
sick at Miletum, 2 Timothy 4.20. 3 The miracles the Apostles did were sometimes
for the hurt of men, as Peter in the destruction of Ananias and Sapphira, and
Paul in the smiting Elymas with blindness, but all Christ's miracles and cures
tended to the benefit of men.


Obj. But Christ bade the devils go into the Gadarens Hogs.

Answ. It was only a permission whereby Christ kept back the power that was
able to hinder them, not a command.

This should embolden us in all our maladies to come to Christ. He that had
such bowels on earth is not without bowels in heaven; he that would do so much
for Malchus, one of them that came to take him, Luke 22.51. who set on his ear
and healed him when Peter cut it off, will he not do as much or more for his
children in their maladies?

V. 17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying, himself took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses.

Here is the final cause, to wit, the fulfilling the prophecy of Esaias [He
took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses]

1 The diseases of our soul, to which Esaias has respect, Esai 53.4. He bore
our griefs and carried our sorrows, 1 Pet. 2.24. He himself bore our sins in
his own body on the tree, Esai 53.6. John 1.29. He takes away the sins of the
world, Col. 2.14.

2 The diseases of our body which flow from sin; Christ bore these, not by
taking them upon him, for Christ was never sick; he took not the passions which
were proper to this or that man, but those which were common to the whole
nature. Christ was never sick; sickness arises from the unfit or unequal
temperature of the humors, or from intemperance of labor, study, but none of
these were in Christ, he had no sin and therefore no sickness, so that Christ
took not our sins by taking them upon him, but out of compassion he took them
away and restored the sick to health. The end why Christ cured the bodily
diseases of persons, as, Matthew. 9.2. was that they might seek to him for the
healing of their souls, as in the blind man, John 9.5, 6.

So that as the living Goat had the sins of the children of Israel laid upon
him, and carried them into a Wilderness and land not inhabited, Levit. 16.21,
22. So Christ took our sins and the punishments flowing from them, and carries
them into a Land of forgetfulness.

In that Christ took our weaknesses, learn, 1 To bear the weaknesses of others.
1 As in journeys strong Travelers bear the burdens of the weak, so should we,
Romans 15.1. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak.

2 All infirmities are burdens to a gracious heart, Gal. 6.2. let them be part
of thy burden also.

3 Many infirmities may be in a dear child of God, Cant. 5.2. Mark 9.23.
as passion in Jonas, unbelief in Thomas, fearfulness in Peter, to keep us
from admiration of their persons.

4 As thy brother is overtaken to day, so may thou be to morrow, Gal. 6.1.
As often as we behold sinners we had need to bewail our selves in them, because
we have fallen or may fall into the like if God leave us. God has suffered
many great men to fall, from Adam to this day, to show man's weakness, and that
they might not become lovers of their name.

5 If envy did not blind thee, thou might see many good things in him as
well as infirmities.

6 If any man shall raise his comfort from other men's failings, to seem to
himself holy because he sees imperfections in his brethren, this will be no
true comfort in a day of trial, Gal. 6.4.

7 Beware of having a mean and base esteem of any of the Saints of God, because
of their infirmities, so as to set them at naught, Romans 14.10. No man casts
away his nose because it abounds with impure phlegm, and is as it were the sink
of the brain; so the weak in time of weakness are part of Christ's Kingdom, who
therefore are not to be cast away, but to be healed and raised up. Luth. in
Psalm 90.

2 See the goodness and mercy of Christ that took our infirmities, Psalm 130.3.
If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who should stand?
but there is compassion that he may be feared. Matthew. 12.20. He will not break
the bruised Reed, nor quench smoking Flax. The Principle of grace in the soul
does not waste corruption all at once, but by degrees, John 15.2. 2 Cor. 4.16.
Hence God is gracious in purging the soul to bring forth more grace and less
sin, and renewing the inward man every day.

3 Trial, whether thy sins be Infirmities, as, 1 When they are committed
against the purpose of the heart; so Peter in his denial of Christ, what hope
had we, if Peter had not denied Christ and all the Apostles been offended, if
Moses, Aaron, David, had not fallen? by these Examples God comforts sinners. If
thou have fallen, return, the gate of mercy is open for thee, thou that know
no evil by thy self, do not presume, but let both trust in my grace and mercy.
Luth. in Genesis 38.

2 When we disallow the evil we do, and groan under it, Romans 7.15. when others
hearts are hardened under evil, thine is sensible.

3 When though thou fallest into sin thou walk not in any sinful course,
Romans 8.4. though there be many Imperfections in holy Duties and sudden
breakings out of the heart into evil, yet is it not allowed.

4 When a soul is fallen into sin and has lost Gods countenance, he cannot be
quiet until the Lord return with the sense of his love, Psalm 51.8, 12. there
can be no sins of infirmity properly, but where grace is, for the sins of
unregenerate men are Presumptions. Good men, having tasted the sweetness in
God, they will not change their portion, nor rest content without God. Saints
infirmities, as David's sins, complaints, fears, more comfort me than their
heroical actions, as his killing Goliath, the Bear and Lion: I cannot imitate
these, but the other greatly comfort me. Luth. in Genesis 28.

4 Comfort to Saints under Infirmities. There are some invincible Infirmities
cleaving unto Saints in this World, as dullness, forgetfulness, privy pride,
self-seeking, unprofitableness, wanderings in duty, backwardness to Christian
provocation, inordinate care, hardness of heart, vain fears, slightness in Gods
service. Saints, partly from divine light shining in them, which, like the
light of the Sun, shows the smallest mote, partly from tenderness of conscience
renewed, smiting them for the smallest sin, are upon sight of their infirmities
apt to be discouraged. Now to comfort thee remember Christ took thy
infirmities; all thy self-sufficiency, crookedness of heart, failing in holy
duties, Nehem. 13.22. are taken away by Christ, that they shall never be
imputed to thee. Such persons also are invited to come to Christ, Matthew. 11.28.
Satan in all weaknesses is wont to present God as a Tyrant, or hard Master, or
a severe Judge, but let us in Christ apprehend him as a Father, Psalm 103.13.
and Christ as a gracious Mediator. And though a cloud of indignation may
appear to the soul under a temptation, yet tarry a while and the cloud will be
over. Yea, Christ also heals our infirmities, and that even by our falls, as
Poison is driven out by Poison; for when he sees his fall he is ashamed and
confounded, crying out, O wretched man that I am, etc.

Object. But if Christ only took my infirmities and weakness, what will become
of my presumptions.

Answ. Christ took both, and though the Word only signify weakness, yet must
it be taken in a large sense, comprehending all wickedness.

5 Terror to ungodly men that have all their sins lying upon them; Christ took
not thy sins: as the greatest evil done by a child of God shall not be charged
upon them in the day of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.8. so the least evil, yea, every evil
wicked men do, shall be charged then on them, Eccles. 12.14. Christ will
destroy all such as give not the kiss of love, reverence, and subjection unto
him, Psalm 2.12.

V. 18. Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to
depart unto the other side.

Here Is another story of Christ, wherein two things.

1 His command to make all things ready to carry him to the other side, that
is, over the Lake of Genesareth from Capernaum, occasioned by the multitudes
that pressed upon him, whether to eschew vainglory, or whether (which I
incline to) to preach the Gospel unto other Cities.

2 The occurrences that fell out by the way, which were,

1 A certain Scribe or covetous Lawyer, thinking Christ to make a gain of his
Miracles follows him, upon hope to learn the art of doing Miracles, that
himself might make a gain or trade thereby, as Magus did, to whom Christ
answers, The birds of the air have nests, etc. v. 20.

2 Another Disciple of Christ desires leave to bury his father, to whom Christ
says, Let the dead bury their dead, v. 21, 22.

3 Occurrence, a great Tempest, v. 24. so that the ship was covered with waves,
which is set forth from five circumstances.

1 From Christ his being asleep in the storm, till the Disciples awaked him, v.
24, 25.

2 From the danger and fear of the Disciples, Lord save us, we perish, v. 25.

3 From Christ his reprehension of them for their unbelief, Why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith, as to think that a ship wherein I am can be
drowned?

4 From Christ his reprehending the Wind and Sea, and making a great calm, v.
26.

5 The admiration of the passengers, v. 27. What manner of man is this, that
even the Winds and Seas obey him?

V. 19. A certain Scribe came unto him, saying, Master, I will follow thee
whither soever thou go.

The large profession of this Scribe arises from the mistake of the person;
many closing in an outward comformity with Christ, when they see themselves
mistaken in the person, they fall off. He pretended to be taught of Christ as a
Disciple of his Master, but his intention was to get Riches by Christ; the
profession was such as might befit the holiest: those Virgins Revel. 14.4.
Follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. And Abraham, Heb. 11.8. He went out
after God, not knowing whither he went. But Christ sees what his intention was.
He that will universally follow Christ, must not be mistaken in him, he must
take Christ and Banishment, Reproach, Imprisonment as well as Christ, and
Riches, Honor.

V. 20. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son
of Man has not where to lay his head.

Christ lets this Scribe see his mistake, q. d. thou thinks one way or other I
can make thee rich, but thou may know I abound not with worldly wealth. Men
that are brought up in delicacy and Riches are not fit to follow me. Christ, in
not having a certain dwelling place, shows what his Disciples should prepare
for. Obj. But Christ having so many persons whom he cured, and did good turns
for, why does he say, The Son of Man has not where to lay his head? Answ. Lest
this Scribe should expect some great Reward from him, as a rich Master, Christ
shows that what he had was from the kindness of others, and should not enrich
him as he expected. This should bridle that inordinate desire after Riches,
whereunto even Professors in this day do incline, to learn to see that Christ
is Portion enough if there were nothing with him, and nothing will satisfy thy
soul without him, Eccles. 5.10.

Now, Christ being thus poor, it was not to commend to us voluntary Poverty, as
if it were a state of Perfection, but to teach us contentment in low conditions
if cast thereunto.

2 To take off our hearts from seeking great things here, to which our hearts
are inclining, Jer. 45.4, 5.

3 To enrich us with his Poverty, 2 Cor. 8.9. He became poor, that we through
his peverty might be made rich.

The Son of Man] That is, Man of Man, or the Son of the Virgin. Man is the
Common of Two Gender, as the word Homo, and the Greek (...). Besides, he is the
Son of Man, that is, of Abraham and David, to whom he was promised, besides he
was descended of the first man Adam, and so Ezekiel is called the son of man,
cap. 2.1.

Besides, by the Son of Man is meant a man of low condition, in opposition to
the sons of Nobles and Princes: so Ezekiel was called, to put him in mind of
his frailty. Christ his humility is set forth, who disdained not to come of so
mean and corrupt a sinner as Adam was, also his love and familiarity that he
disdained not to take our nature upon him; besides, hereby Christ signifies he
was true man, and distinguishes his humane nature from the divine.

And as Ezekiel was called the son of man, to distinguish him from Angels (with
whom he conversed) who appeared in the shape of a man, so Christ because he was
God, and the Son of God, when he speaks of himself as Man, calls himself the
Son of Man.

Where to lay his head] He dwelt in Capernaum, either in his own hired house,
or else lodged with some of his Disciples.

Obs. 1 Many profess the following of Christ, who when once they come to see
the dangers and straits in following of him, fall off.

2 In pretending to follow Christ, we must look to the grounds that move us to
follow him, that they be right.

3 Christ when he was here on earth was exposed to a low and mean condition. 1
Learn then to come down from our heights. 2 Study condescension to low
conditions, James 1.10. 3 Rest content in thy condition; so Christ here, and
Paul, 1 Cor. 4.11. Phil. 4.13. If at any time we are taken by poverty, let us
rest contentedly therein; living in abundance, take heed ye fall not by proud
boasting; and living in want take heed ye be not supplanted, with sorrow of
heart, one and the same countenance appearing. Just. Mart. ad Zenam, p. 391.

V. 21. And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go
and bury my Father.

V. 22. But Jesus said unto him, follow me, and let the dead bury their dead.

Suffer me first] Here is another of Christ his Disciples who would follow
Christ, but it must be when his father was dead. Christ here shows that nothing
should be put before the observation of his commands, as being a matter of
eternal concernment, nor must we use delay herein. See Exodus 22.29. Psalm.
119.60. Nor must we prefer service to relations; as probably this man might
pretend to serve his Father while he lived, or to bury him now dead, for some
think his Father was now dead, and Christ comes to him at this time to comfort
him in the want of that relation. However Christ called him to follow him, Luke
9.59. and he makes this excuse: some think his father was old, and it would not
be long first before he were dead.

It was a moderate request to go and perform the last office of love, but
Christ knew others could do it, and then matters of salvation are to be
preferred before matters of comeliness and decency.

But Jesus said unto him, Follow me] That is, let thy love be so to thy
relations, that if Christ call thee thou may leave all for him, Matthew. 4.22.
Matthew 10.37. The end why he followed Christ, was ^o preach the Gospel, Luke
9.60.

And let the dead bury their dead] By dead in the former place he means those
who are dead in sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. Ephesians. 5.14. 1 Timothy 5.6.

Bury their dead] Christ does not condemn burying their dead friends, who, if
godly, are buried in hope of a comfortable resurrection, but hereby tells us
that whatsoever hinders us from a right course, savours nothing but death, and
that the unbelieving Jews, who were dead in sins, might serve to bury this man
when he was dead, he had some brethren or kindred who might do it also.

Obs. When God calls us to do duty, we must not use delays, Genesis 22.2, 3. Many
sinners are like him that cried, a little more slumber, Prove. 6.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Heb. 3.7, 8, 13.
Prove. 27.1.

2 Service to relations is not to be preferred before service to Christ.

3 Every unbelieving man is no other then a dead man, Joh. 5.24. Romans 5.6. Not
like the man that fell among the thieves dangerously wounded, but quite dead;
dead we are by the sin of our first parents, not only temporally, Romans 5.12.
but spiritually, as unable to do spiritual actions, as dead men are to do the
actions of living men, Col. 2.13. As in natural death there is a separation of
the soul from the body, so in spiritual death there is a separation of God from
the soul.

For the seat of this spiritual death, It is in the understanding, John 1.4, 5.
Ephesians. 5.14. It is in the will, Romans 6.13. It Is in the conscience. Heb. 9.14.
It Is in the affections.

Obj. But if men be naturally dead, why do you preach to them?

Answ. 1 The word spoken is a mean to bring them to life, Joh. 5.24. When the
Spirit of Christ accompanies it, the ministry of the word is appointed to turn
persons from darkness to light, Acts 26.18.

2 Though men be naturally dead, yet, 1 Are they not without reason to consider
what is spoken, and upon what grounds. 2 Though they be dead, yet they may
offer themselves to the means.

Obj. But there are some inward workings in the hearts of natural men, as sense
of sin, fear of punishment, thoughts of deliverance, wishes for heaven,
therefore they are not dead.

Answ. These and much more may be in natural men, yet are they dead. As, in the
generation of man, there are many foregoing dispositions, which go before the
induction of the form; so there are many foregoing actions preceding spiritual
regeneration, as we see in those converts, Acts 2.36, 37, 38.

Obj. Man has some relics of knowledge, how then is he dead?

Answ. Every knowledge does not suppose life, but that only which affects the
heart with affiance and love, John 17.3. The devils know much, remaining devils
still. Besides man's natural knowledge makes him inexcusable not salvable.

Obj. Natural men have many excellent virtues in them, therefore they are not
dead.

Answ. As the evil actions of good men redound not to their persons to make
their persons evil, so the good actions of evil men redound not to their
persons to make them righteous. Good works do not make a good man, but a good
man makes or does good works: evil works do not make an evil man, but an evil
man makes evil works. So that it behooves the person always to be good before
all good works, and good works come from a good person, Luth. Tom. 1 Cat. fol.
469. Their virtues are like pictures without life. There are many natural men
fine Scholars and Gentlemen, too good to go to hell, yet not good enough to go
to heaven, for they being in the flesh cannot please God; because they are not
good trees they cannot bring forth good fruit; all their virtues are like
flowers upon a dead man's carcass, that may adorn it, and keep off the stink
thereof, but cannot give life thereto.

As in the flesh of a beast some part of it is sold at a great price, other of
it is cast away or little regarded, yet all is flesh, so some works of the
natural man are abominable, and some are commendable, but all are but flesh.
There are several sorts of madness, some light and foolish, some more sober
and solemn, yet all is but madness; so in spiritual madness the lives of some
natural men are sober, grave, serious, the lives of others are wild and
ranting, yet all are dead and mad.

Obj. Natural men are not dead, because they have some signs of Gods image in
them.

Answ. There Is a twofold image, 1 Natural, standing in immortality,
immateriality, mentioned Genesis 9.6. He that sheds man's blood by man shall his
blood be shed, for in the image of God made he him.

2 A supernatural image, consisting in righteousness and holiness. Col. 3.10.
You have put on the new man, which is created in knowledge after the image of
him that created him. The former image may be in natural men, not the latter.

Use. Try two things, 1 Whether thou art dead, 2 Whether thou art alive.

Trials of a man dead.
1 When he lives in sin, Romans 6.2. How shall we that are dead to sin live any
longer therein? 1 John 3.6. He that abides in him, sins not, that is, lives not
in a purpose of sin, Prove. 19.16. He that despises his way shall dye, 1 Timothy
5.6. She that lives in pleasure is dead, Luke 15. ult.

2 Want of feeling. A man may be alive and want all other senses, as seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, but if once he loose his feeling he is dead; so
when a man shall be past feeling of sin, Ephesians. 4.19. or past feeling of the
miseries of a Christian, he is a dead man, 1 Cor. 12.26.

3 Separation from the living. As when persons shall voluntarily separate
themselves from Churches, Jude. 19. These be they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the spirit, or when Churches shall separate men, whom they
judge to live in sin, from their Communion.

4 Stiffness and wilfulness in sin, Jer. 44.16. The Word which thou have
commanded in the name of the Lord we will not do. Joh. 8.44. The works of your
father the devil ye will do; as dead bodies are unbendable so are dead hearts,
Luke 19.27. We will not have this man reign over us.

5 Dead men move not, so when thou have not spiritual motion toward spiritual
duties in the compass of thy calling, as to prayer, to do good to poor Saints,
to promoting the glory of God, to gain others to the faith by thy holy example,
art not thou dead? They which live, live not unto themselves, Romans 14.7, 8.

6 When men are loathsome. A dead body how adorned soever is loathsome, yea
though our nearest friend. Abraham when Sarah was dead said, Bury her out of my
sight, Genesis 23.4. so are all dead men to God, Prove. 13.5. so are they to Gods
people, so far as they are renewed.

7 When a soul is plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. Twice dead plucked up by the
roots; not only dead in the state of Gentilisme but of Christianity, so that
he is severed from the root Christ, Joh. 15.5. and so can do nothing, no more
then a tree plucked up by the roots, nor can bring forth any fruit. Many men are
not only plucked up from the power of religion, but also from the very
profession.

2 Trial whether thou have spiritual life in thee.

1 Love to the means which maintain it, 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire
the milk of the word. As young ones by natural instinct run to the teats of
their dams, every life loves that which maintains it, the natural life loves
meat, and drink, and Apparel, the sinful life loves that which maintains it, so
does the spiritual life.

2 Life is seen by breathing; so, if thou be spiritually alive, thou will
breathe after God, Psalm. 42.1, 2.28.1.63.1.143.7.

3 By contending; as we contend to the utmost for saving temporal life, so for
preservation of spiritual life the soul will contend to the utmost. It will let
lusts go, friends go, enjoyments and country go. As the body endeavors to
expel poison or hurtful things by vomit! so Saints sometimes shame themselves,
even by confessing, not only to God, but to men, some lust that holds in
combat.

4 Groaning under deadness and complaining against it, Psalm. 119.25, 37, 50,
93. This very sensibleness of deadness helps to prove life.

5 Where life is, there will be a conveyance of a life of sanctification,
whereby the soul will be quickened up to all the ways of God, Romans 6.13.
together with the life of justification, which is nothing else but the
obtaining of a pardon, Romans 5.18. a Prince may pardon a malefactor, but he
cannot put a principle of love and fidelity in him; but Christ conveyes a
principle of love, Luke 7.47. and holiness.

6 It stays upon a promise, Psalm. 119.49, 50. Joh. 6.37. Heb. 7.25. Yet grace
growing sometimes unperceivably, as in young converts who have been bred
religiously. See Mark. 4.26, 27. We must not be too strict to limit young
converts in their professions (to a right judging of the work of grace) either
to the time of their conversion, to declare that, or to the promise that
sustained them in the hour of conversion. Promises in the hour of conversion
made over to the solu, are rather supports against temptation, then absolute
sole measures to judge of spiritual life, as the trials sine qua non; as if the
soul, not remembering the promise that first staid him, were to be put by, as an
unconverted person; what if from preaching in general promises the soul came to
see the worth of Christ, and to close with him, with a disposition to part with
all for him, whether lust or enjoyment, is not this enough?

Yet where there are promises made over to the soul in the hour of conversion,
which the soul well remembers, and wherein it found the sense of Gods love in
pardon, it tends so much the more to manifest spiritual life; which if they
were truly so made over, and were not delusions, they were accompanied with the
forenamed disposition of parting with all lusts and enjoyments for Christ.

7 Condescension in indifferent things, with an unmovable resolution in the
things of God: you will not bate any thing of the peace of your consciences for
any man's pleasure. If they take away goods, liberty, let it go; but if they go
about to take away our faith, here we are to give way to none.

Means to spiritual life.
1 Get union with Christ, the members must needs be alive being united to a
living head, 1 John 5.12. Christ is a head over his Church, by way of provision
and dominion, but this is most comfortable that he is a head by way of union.
He that will work well, let him begin, not from working but from beliving. What
makes a person g^ood, but faith? or evil but unbelief? Luth. Tom. 1. Fol. 469.
The Angels are united to Christ by knowledge and love, but we by faith and the
Spirit; that member is a dead member that draws not quickening from the head. As
the sea fills all vessels yet is not emptied thereby, so does Christ fill all
in all, Ephesians. 1.22. Yet has not he less.

2 Set faith on work to draw life from Christ. Christ is compared to a garment,
but to have benefit by him we must ut him on by believing, Romans 13.14. to
bread, but to have nourishment by him, we must feed on him by faith, John 6.50,
51, 53, 54. As we cannot have the strength of Bread, unless we eat the
substance of it, so in this case.

And as the soul by virtue of sight does join it self with the body of the Sun,
though the Sun be in Heaven and we be on Earth, so the eye of faith enlightened
by the Spirit, does join it self with Christ, though he be in Heaven, and the
believer on earth, and from him draws influence, John 1.17.4.10.7.38, 39. And
as there are degrees of light from the Sun, according to the clearness or
dimness of the eye that beholds it, so there are degrees of union with Christ
and inhabitation, according to the clearness or dimness of the eye of faith.

3 Hear the voice of the Son of God, John 5.25. The dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. This is not bare hearing of
Christ preached, but hearing the voice of the Spirit speaking to us, as to
Lydia, Zacheus, Lazarus, etc.

Quest. But how shall I know my faith draws any quickening from Christ, or that
the Lord speaks to my soul?

Answ. 1 Repentance and displicense against sin goes with it, Zach. 12.10.
compared with, chap. 13.1. when they look upon the Lord by an eye of faith,
they then mourn, and then a fountain is set open.

2 Thy faith will draw healing, as well as pardon, Mich. 7.18, 19. Romans 6.14.
where ungodliness is turned from the soul, that soul is turned from
ungodliness; Is. 59.20. compared with Romans 11.26. Act. 3.26.

3 Thy faith will bring quiet and peace, Luke 7.50. Romans 5.1. Romans 15.13. from
the true knowledge of escaping danger, which is not like the peace of the
world, who are secure because they know not their danger. It was not amiss said
of one, that this peace of believers is as if a millstone or Talent of lead were
taken off from a man's neck, which must be understood of the first coming of it
to a soul, formerly perplexed with guilt and horror.

4 By the present nimbleness we have in Gods ways since believing, which we had
not before, Romans 6.13.

5 By the reflection of love back again to Christ, Gal. 5.4. Faith works by
love. Luke 7.47. To whom much is forgiven (as it is to every believing soul)
the same loves much.

Motives to live a spiritual Life.
1 The perpetuity of it, John 4.10, 14.6.27. How precious would our natural
Life be, would it last for ever? As it is impossible for Leaven mingled with
Paste to be severed from it, because it has changed the nature of the Paste;
so it is impossible for Christians to be plucked from Christ, because the Leaven
in them is Christ, so imbodied, that it is one Body, one Lump. Luth. Tom. 4.341.

2 The certainty of it. Some cannot be convinced there is any such Life, if the
soul lives another life when the body is laid aside, why not in the body?

3 The excellency of it; it is the life that God and Angels live, which must
needs be the best of lives.

4 All the actions thou do in thy profession of Christianity are mere
counterfeits without it, mere painted Duties. There Is difference betwixt
painted fire and true fire; thou have a picture of zeal, of prayer, of love,
but for want of life what are they?

5 God has no delight in any service that is done with a dead heart, Prove.
15.8. Were there a dead stinking carkase in presence, would we delight in it?
No more does God in a dead carkase of duties. See Isai 66.3.

6 All the service of God will be tiresome and wearisome which is offered to
God with a dead heart, Mal. 1.13. The carnal worshippers snuffed and cried, O!
what a weariness is it? Amos 8.4, 5.

7 We cannot tell whether we shall stand among Sheep or Goats, whether we be
elect or reprobate, till we have this life in us.

8 No living thing can abide that which is dead. The bruits startle at a dead
carrion, our dearest friends we put them from us when once they are dead, and
will God smell any savor of rest to thy dead services?

9 The many calls you have thereto; both motions from the Spirit, Cant. 5.2.
Open to me my love. Revel. 3.20. If any man will open to me, I will come and
sup with him. Should a Physician tell you such a Disease were growing on your
body, you would thank him and make use of it; do so in this case.

10 All our motions in Religion are merely artificial without this spiritual
life, as in Joas so long as Jehoiada lived, and Jehu when Jonadab looked upon
his zeal, both of them seemed to be forward; and many others when buoyed up
with praise and benefits of profit, pleasure, etc. so Sichem in receiving
Circumcision; so many men do many things from conviction of natural conscience,
fear of Hell, shame among men, expectation of death, which are like wheels set
a moving by a spring, which when the spring is down the motion cease.

11 The satisfaction and contentment that is in this life. Paul had this life
and little else, yet in all conditions was content, Phil. 4.13. It must needs
be so, because God, a proportionable object to the soul, comes in, Prove. 3.17.
All her ways are peace; not some but all, that is, they end in inward and
everlasting peace.

V. 23. And when he was entered into a Ship, his Disciples followed him.

V. 24. And behold there arose a great Tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the
Ship was covered with waves, but he was asleep.

Here Is a third occurrence in Christ's journey over the Lake of Genezareth, that
a storm arose; this Lake is called a Sea for the greatness of it.

This storm came, 1 To show forth the power of Christ in asswaging it, who
hereby showed himself Lord of winds and storms.

2 To awaken the Disciples of Christ, who though not bodily asleep, yet might
be too secure. Secure persons are much awakened in a storm at sea, Psalm 107.26.

3 That thereby Christ might take occasion to reprove their unbelief.

4 That the Disciples and Passengers might, from his commanding the storm, the
more believe in him.

This storm may allusively point out the storms in the hearts of Believers and
in the Churches, which it is our wisdom, by casting out any thing that hazards
the Ship, or helps on the storm, as Jonahs Mariners did, whether lust or
enjoyment. Storms commonly arise against Christ and his Disciples, the Devil
and World are the Sea that stirs up these Tempests. And as the Ship here was
covered with waves, so it is the end of the Devil and World to sink the Church.

But he was asleep] 1 By reason of his labor in preaching and journey he
slept. 2 To show forth the truth of his humane nature. Some think the Devil
stirred up this storm, hoping thereby to drown Christ and his Disciples, as he
had destroyed Jobs children: but Satan has no power save what is given to him,
though his will was full enough for such a mischief.

Yet though he slept in his humane nature, he was awake in his Deity, that the
Disciples being in danger might cry unto him more fervently, and be helped.

V. 25. And his Disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us we
perish.

Here was the weakness of their faith, to think that they could be drowned
having Christ with them. Mark has it, Carest thou not that we perish? Luke
has it, Master, Master, we perish. It Is true, danger stirs up fear, but to
have overmuch fear, having a good God and a gracious Christ, argues weakness of
faith: yet it is commendable in them that they go to Christ in their distress,
Psalm 56.3. What time I am afraid I will trust in thee: Fervent prayer we see
is wont to excite the Lord to help us in our distress. Jesu Christ fer opem
aut actum est de salute mea, was a saying of Luther, which I have often used to
the Lord, saying, Jesus Christ come and help me, or else I am undone for ever.
This is according to the promise, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble and I will deliver thee, Psalm 12.5.

We perish] They lay open their misery before Christ. Psalm 142.1, 2. I poured
my complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble, Isai 26.17. 2 Chronicles.
20.12, 13. They cry not to the heathen Neptune, nor Aeolus, which Heathens
thought gods of Winds and Seas, but to Christ, Psalm. 89.9. nor cry they to
Nicholas, Mary, Barbara, and Christopher, to whom Papists think government of
waters is committed. Chem. in loc.

The grounds why in trouble we lay open our misery to the Lord is, 1 Because of
our own helplesness. Hosea 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, Psalm 108.12. Give us
help from trouble, for vain is the help of man.

2 Because of the fullness of salvation in God, Psalm 3.8. Salvation is of the
Lord, Psalm 44.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

3 Because of the insufficiency of all outward helps in time of danger; Psalm
142.4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and behold, refuge failed me, then cried I
unto thee, O Lord.

4 Gods peoples extremities are Gods opportunities for deliverance and
salvation, Psalm 102.18, 19. From Heaven did the Lord behold the Earth, to
loose those that are appointed to death. Judges 20.26, 27, 28.

V. 26. And he said unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? then
he arose and rebuked the Winds and Seas, and there was a great Calm.

Here is a third circumstance in the journey. Christ reproves them, Why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith? Much fear argues little faith. Faith foresees
evils before they come, and opposes Christ against all. Prove. 22.3. The prudent
man foresees the evil and hides himself, so that he is not afraid of evil
tidings, Psalm 112.7. Not as if Christ condemns little faith, but reprehends it
in them who had great means of a strong faith, and had seen many of Christ's
miracles, and heard many of his Sermons. Little faith brings to Heaven, but not
without doubts and fears.

Their faith was little, 1 In that they did not so fully believe his divine
nature, Joh. 14.1. Also, 2 In that they did not believe in his providence, as
they ought, from the experiences they had of him. 3 That they thought Christ
being asleep in his humane nature, could not help them in his divine nature. 4
In that they doubted of Christ his care of them, 1 Peter 5.7. Casting all your
care on him.

Quest. Whether is all fear contrary to faith?

Answ. No; true filial fear is duty. Blessed is the man that fears always,
Prove. 28.14. It springs from faith, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah was moved with
fear; but perplexing and solicitous fear, when in times of danger we cannot
rest on God with quiet and confidence, which is so much more, because God will
keep him in perfect peace whose heart is staid on him, Isai 26.4, 5. This
perplexing fear does not declare we have no faith, but that we have a weak
faith.

Obs. Persons may be Believers and yet be fearful, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm 55 4. My
heart is sore pained within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me,
Heb. 12.21. Moses exceedingly feared and quaked. 2 Cor. 7.5. Without were
fightings, within were fears. These terrors are compared to Soldiers set in
battle array, Job 6.4. The arrows of the Almighty stick in me, the terrors of
God do set themselves in array against me. Yea Christ was not exempted from
these sears, Mark 14.33. He began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy.

There Is a twofold fear, 1 Natural, with this was Christ affected. This was in
Moses, Heb. 12.21.

2 Sinful, this is, 1 Perplexing. 2 Discouraging.

1 Perplexing. Job, 9.34. Let not his fear terrify me. 2 Cor. 4.8. Perplexed
but not in despair. Esai 7.2. The people of Judah by reason of Israel and
Syria's coming against them, were moved as the trees of the Wood are moved with
the wind. This is a sore judgment, Deuteronomy. 28.65. The Lord shall give thee a
trembling heart and sorrow of mind, and thy life shall hang in doubt before
thee, and thou shall fear day and night: in the morning thou shall say, would
God it were evening, and at even thou shall say, would God it were morning, for
the fear of thy heart wherewith thou shall fear.

2 Discouraging, Heb. 12.13, 14. Lift up the hands which hang down, and the
feeble knees; Now this discouraging fear is, when a soul looks upon the
approaching evil above it is strength, not looking on the strength of God; as
when a man meets with a Lion, or a subject contests with his Prince, both
tremble in their spirits, because the strength of a man is not comparable to a
Lion, nor the strength of a subject to a Prince. Thus the Spies were
discouraged looking on the sons of Anak, and comparing themselves with them,
Number. 13.28.

The mischief of discouraging fear is this, that a man has no heart to put
forth his strength in time of danger. The Israelites, being dismayed with
Goliath, durst not make head against him, but fled before him, 1 Samuel 17.11.24.
hence when God gave Joshua his command, he bade him not be afraid nor dismayed,
Jos. 1.9.

Use 1. Raise up your hearts, if not above perplexing fears, yet above
discouraging. Luke 21.9. Christ bids the Disciples when they should hear of
wars and commotions, not to be terrified. These discouraging fears are a great
judgment, Levit. 26.36 I Will send a faintness into their hearts, and the sound of
a shaken leaf shall chase them. These Disciples were affected with perplexing
fear, and a little spice they had of discouraging fear.

3 Grounds against discouraging fear.
1 The promise of Gods assistance in all troubles, Esai 41.10. Fear not, for I
am with thee, be not dismayed for I am thy God. Heb. 13.6. We may boldly say,
The Lord is our helper, and not fear what flesh can do unto us.

2 From the respect God has to the strength of his people, 1 Cor. 10.13. He
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, Jer. 46.28. Yea the
cup, what ever it be, comes from a fathers hand, Joh. 18.11.

3 Because there is no troubles can make a Christian truly miserable, because no
troubles can sever him from the love of God, Romans 8.35, 38. We are troubled on
every side, yet not distressed, or straightened, but that a door of deliverance is
opened; we are perplexed, or void of counsel, and troubled with fear, yet do we
not despair, as Judas and Achitophel did, cast down, like a man by his
adversary, but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8. because God comes for our rescue,
persecuted of men, but not forsaken of God.

Suppose the evil be imprisonment; how comfortable was Paul and Silas in it? If
burning and martyrdom, God will either abate the fire, or give thee strength
to bear it, as a Martyr once comforted himself and others.

2 Be exhorted that you be not swallowed up of fears. This has been the
portion of the ungodly, Jer. 46.5. Pashur had fear round about, Jer. 20.4.
Zedekiah in his fears goes from chamber to chamber to hide himself, 1 Kings
22.24. The hearts of the men of Jericho melted for fear when the men of Israel
came against them, Jos. 2.9, 10, 11. so that there remained no more courage in
any man. The men of Benjamin when they saw the City on fire on one side, that
they could not retreat thereto, and the men of Israel turning upon them, were
amazed, Judge. 20.40, 41.

We live in a time of fears and dangers. Sometimes men's hearts failing them for
fear, looking on those things that are coming on the earth, Luke 21.26.
Sometimes our hearts trembling. because of the Ark of God, 1 Samuel 4.13. as Eli
his heart did; Sometimes fearing under the sense of our unworthiness. Now to
quiet our hearts under all fears consider,

1 That all the evils men or devils can cast upon us cannot reach the soul,
Matthew. 10.28.

2 Get out the sting of sin by obtaining pardon. When this sting is taken away
the soul will be courageous, 1 Cor. 15.57. O death where is thy sting? then
death will be like a serpent without a sting. Without this the heart cannot be
free from terror.

3 Look on grounds of encouragement; as thus, I have Christ's righteousness for
mine, I have a disposition to part with all for the Lord, I have comfortable
answers in prayer, I have a good conscience in all things, I find in my self a
through change, I endeavor in all things to eye God. Discouraging fears will
not be cast out without supporting reasons. The soul being reasonable must
needs close with reasons.

4 Fore-think of evils before they come, and set Christ against all. So Moses,
Heb. 11.26. In the worst of times no enemy can take away Christ from me.

5 Get Gods fear. This will much eat out false fears, Matthew. 10.28. as the true
Serpent ate up the false. See Esai 8.12, 13, 14.

6 Exercise confidence in the promises of God, Psalm. 56.3, 4. In God will I put
my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. What time I am afraid I
will put my trust in thee, when thou go through the fire, and through the
water I will be with thee, Esai 43.1, 2.

7 Get God on your sides. Psalm. 118.4. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear
what man can do unto me. A Christian should be like a rock in the Sea, which
though the waves break themselves against it, yet it remains firm. Romans 8.31.
If God be for us, who can be against us? viz. to hurt us, for else no man has
more enemies then a Christian. This made Paul so courageous at Corinth, Acts
18.9, 10. Be not afraid, but speak, for I am with thee, and no man shall set on
thee to hurt thee. Yea this made Paul not to fear, when the Ship was every
moment ready to be cast away, Acts 27.23, 24. The Angel of God stood by me,
whose I am, and whom I serve, saying, Fear not Paul. This made David not to
fear though an Army of men were coming against him, Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. See Psalm.
46.1, 2, 3, etc.

Motives to rid the heart of these fears.
1 They procure great torment to the soul, 1 John 4.18. Hence Ezekiel setting
forth the misery of the people, says, They shall eat their bread with quaking,
and drink their water with carefulness, trembling and astonishment, Ezekiel. 12.18.

2 It Is the end of our deliverance to serve God without these slavish fears,
Luke 1.75. That we being delivered out of the hands of all our enemies might
serve him without fear.

3 These fears are sometimes worse then the evils themselves feared, 2 Kings
7.5, 6, 7. The Syrians in a vain fear ran away from the Camp, and left it to
the plunder of Israel. Psalm. 53.5. There were they in great fear where no fear
was.

4 Many persons have their slavish fears come upon them. Saul feared David
would get the Kingdom, and he sought all means basely to prevent it, but could
not, the Jews feared the Romans would come and take away their place and
Nation, if they let Christ alone, yet when they had slain him, the Romans came
and took all from them.

5 These carnal fears are full of mischief, as 1 To exalt creatures in the
place of God.

2 They expose us to a snare, Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare, so
does the fear of hell; many dare not do duty for fear they should lose their
lives and go to hell.

3 These fears bereave us of the comfortable enjoyment of good things we have;
fear of loss of estate, liberty, life, takes away the comfort of it. That good
has the truest content therewith, for the loss whereof we are habitually
prepared, rather then lose Christ and a good conscience.

4 Though these fears may sometimes put a man upon self-reformation, yet
usually this reformation that arises from these fears lasts no longer then the
fear remains, Psalm. 107.26. as we see in Mariners in a storm. Job 41.25. When
he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid, and by reason of breakings they
purify themselves. We see how in time of fears men reform, but see how unsound
it is, lasting no longer then the danger lasts. Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36. When he
slew them then they sought him, nevertheless they did but flatter him with
their mouth.

Then he arose and rebuked the Wind and the Sea, and there was a great calm]
Not in a feigned way, as the Heathen Aeolus rebuked the winds, but in a real
way as the Lord of winds and sea. Hence Mark has it, Peace and be still, Mar.
4.39. He reproves the wind and sea, as if a Master should reprove a servant;
here is a plain argument of Christ's Godhead. Who can command wind and sea save
God alone? As his power was seen in quieting the storms of the sea, (...) the
same power can quiet the storms in the Churches, and among good men, and the
storms that Satan's temptations shall stir up in the hearts of Saints. So when
there are passionate storms in our hearts, the command of Christ should make a
calm. It Is a comfortable thing in a storm to be in covenant with him whom
winds and seas obey. Christ speaks alike to winds and storms, diseases and
devils, he quiets them with the word of his mouth, and so can he quiet storms
in the Commonwealth, Psalm 65.7. Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise
of their waves, and the tumult of the people. Only in these times of
confusions let us awake the Lord by our prayers, Psalm. 93.3, 4.

And there was a great calm] See the obedience of the mightiest creatures to
God; how will this condemn our disobedience? See how winds yield obedience,
Psalm. 107.26: compared with 29. See the seas obedience, Jer. 5.22. Let not the
wind and sea overcome you in overcoming the storms of the mind.

V. 27. But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even
the wind and sea obey him?

Here Is a fifth circumstance, they reason thus. He whom winds and seas obey
must be greater then all mortals, but they obey this man, therefore he is
greater then all men. This should stir us up to confidence in the Son, Joh.
14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me;
q. d. I am God as well as my Father, therefore believe on me. So that as it is
said of the Lord, Psalm. 89.9. Thou rulest the raging of the sea; when the waves
thereof arise thou stillest them; so also does Christ at this time. The
creatures are Gods executioners to punish man for sin; when they exceed herein,
the Lord reproves them, as a father does a schoolmaster when he sees him
unmeasurably to chastise his son. The greatness of which miracle, which made it
more admirable, was, that whereas usually in storms, when the wind ceases the
sea is not calm till a good while after, but here both wind ceases and the sea
is calm together, in an instant, showing it came from a miracle, not from
nature. For the calm was called (...) of (...), which signifies to laugh, to
note that the weather and sea smiled on them with a clear countenance.

All expositors make the Church an arbitrary Antitype of this tossed ship; as
this ship was poor, a mean fisher boat, not to be compared to the great
Merchant ships and men of war, so the poor Church is not to be compared, for
outward glory, with the kingdoms of the world. And as when the proud Scribe
leaves Christ, the poor disciples accompany Christ through the sea; so, when
rich and great men leave Christ, the poor disciples accompany Christ through
the troublesome sea of this world. Again as this ship was in danger, so has
the Church been often; in Egypt, Babylon, in the ten persecutions, and Popish
Tyranny, ready to be swallowed up of waves, but the Lord seasonably appears,
either by cutting off Tyrants, as he did Pharaoh, Exodus 14.25. and Herod, Act.
12.23. Or by putting a hook in their nostrils, as he did to Sennacherib, 2
King. 19.28. or by turning the hearts of persecutors, whereby the Churches have
rest, as he did Paul, Act. 9.31.

This Church so tossed is not the Roman Church, as the Papists paint the Pope
to be the steers-man sitting at the helm, and the Cardinals, Bishops and
Priests to be the Mariners, but its a company of Saints, who because they will
live godly, suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. With these it is that Christ is
present in the signs of the covenant, and in the word of promise, and with his
supporting presence in time of storms: they pretend they have no schisms nor
contentions, but perfect unity; but this proves them not to be the true Church,
because the ship wherein Christ was, was exposed to storms, and Christ came not
to bring peace, but a sword, Matthew. 10.34.

And if unity among them might prove them a Church, then might it prove the
Turks and Jews to be Churches, who have more of unity then they.

V. 28. And when he was come to the other side into the country of the
Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs,
exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.

In these words to the end of the Chapter, is set down what befell Christ when
he was gone from Capernaum over the lake of Genezareth into the country of the
Gerasens.

1 He is met with two men possessed with devils. The devils are described, 1
That they came out of the tombs, 2 By their exceeding fierceness, that no man
might pass that way.

2 The complaint they make, which is twofold, 1 Disclaiming their interest in
Christ, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou son of God? ver. 29. Thou art
the savior of men not our Savior.

2 Their fear of a present torment; Art thou come to torment us before the
time? ver. 29.

3 Their petition; If thou cast us out, suffer us to go into the herd of swine,
v. 31.

4 Here Is Christ permission of them to enter the hogs, he said unto them, Go,
v. 32.

5 Here Is the devils execution of their mischief, having once obtained a
permission, the devils entering into the swine the whole herd went down a steep
place and perished in the waters, v. 32.

6 The report hereof that was brought to the city, v. 33.

7 The issue and effect; the Gadarens being offended for the loss of their
hogs, desired him to depart out of their coasts.

And when he had come to the other side into the country of the Gergasens]
Matthew calls them Gergafens, Mark and Luke Gadarens; but there is no
difficulty, for Gergessa or Gerasa and Gedara were towns near thereto, Joseph.
lib. 2. de bello, cap. 2. mentions both Gerasens and Gadarens. These were the
remainders of the Canaanites, as Grotius writes, and as it appears, Genesis 10.16.
The remainders of the people whose Land was given to Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.1.
supposed to be the Geshurites and Maacathites, Jos. 13.13.

There met him two possessed with devils] Mark and Luke mention only one, but
the answer is easy, the one was more famous then the other, being possessed of
a whole legion of devils, Mar. 5.9. Luke 8.30. and so was more cruel; Mark and
Luke prosecuting the history of the man possessed with a legion of devils, do
omit the mentioning the other Demoniak.

Coming out of the tombes] They came out thence, and abode there to affright
men with fear of death; their abode and dwelling was among the tombs, Mark 5.3.
Luke 8.27. Now they might easily dwell in the tombs, because they were hollow
places dug out of a rock, as Christ's Sepulcher was, Matthew. 27.60. whereinto
John and Peter entered, Joh. 20.6. and those three women that brought spices,
Luke 24.3. or else they were made of stone or brick, and covered over. Now if
it be asked why they dwelt there? it was because one of the Demoniaks being
possessed with a cruel devil, or rather a legion of them, no man would receive
them to their house; they being excluded from humane society resided in old
Sepulchers. One of these Demoniocks ware no clothes, and was bound with chains,
and sometimes broke them, Luke 8.27, 29. Matthew adds they were exceeding
fierce, and that they were so troublesome to passengers that no man might pass
by that way. Mark adds that no man could tame him, and that he was day and
night in the mountains and tombs, crying and cutting himself with stones, Mar.
5.5. which shows that they were mad, else would they not have thus cut
themselves; now they being so troublesome, no man would receive them into their
houses.

And in that Satan met Christ, it appears he is not omniscient, for he would
not have suffered the possessed to have come that way, had he known Christ to
have been so near, nor did Satan know whither Christ would send him, whether
into the wilderness, or into the hogs, or whither else.

So that no man might pass that way] We have no call to go where Satan is, not
upon pretense of any strength of faith in us. Doubtless there were some
believers living, but none would go that way; and note, Christ makes the devils
to meet him whether they will or not: see the greatness of Christ his love and
mercy, who out of compassion to these two poor men crosses the sea to cast the
devil out of them.

V. 29. And behold they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus
thou Son of God, art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

What have we to do with thee] Here Is the devils complaint; what have I to do
with you? That is, why do you trouble me? 2 Samuel 16.10. what have I to do with
you, ye sons of Zerviah? See Judge. 11.12. Pharaoh Necho says to Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.21. What have I to do with thee, thou King of Judah? Now this speech
of the devils or of the legion in the man, was after Christ had bid him or them
come out of the man, Mark 5.7, 8. Luke 8.29.

Besides, What have we to do with thee, may signify, what evil have we done
thee, that thou castest us out? though we have hurt others, we have not hurt
thee.

Quest. Whether did the devils know Christ to be the Christ?

Answ. Not before his temptation, for, had they known him so to be, they would
not have tempted him, but afterward they knew him to be the son of God, Mark
1.34. Christ suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him, Luke
4.41. Devils came out of many, crying, Thou art Christ the Son of God; and he
rebuking them suffered them not to speak, for they knew that he was Christ. But
for the mystery of the death of Christ, it is like Satan knew it not, for had he
known it, he would not have put it into the heart of Judas to betray him; he
was hindered by God from knowing that, which of his own nature he might have
known.

Art thou come hither to torment us before the time] The devils do not allege
for themselves, nor refuse to be cast into bell at the day of judgment, Jude
6. so that they may have liberty in the mean time to vex and torment. The (...)
think it a torment when they cannot do that mischief they would, also they were
afraid of being sent back to the prison of hell, for the devils are glad to be
in the air, because then they have liberty to wander up and down into diverse
Provinces, and someth^^^ they have power to stir up storms and pestilences:
Hence Luke faith, The devils besought him that he would not command them (...)
the deep, abyssum, Luke 8.31. Yet are not the (...) out torment at present, for
besides that it was a (...) for them to come out of them they possessed, they
(...) the torment of a guilty conscience, and a fearful expe^^^tion of
indignation and wrath; hence they desire they (...) not be cast into abyssum,
into hell, so taken, Rev. 20.3. Abyssus is the same with Tartarus, hell, not
(...), the unseen world of good and bad.

Us] He means the Legion of devils in the two possessed persons, Mark 5.7. A
Legion was a Roman Brigade, consisting of 6666 men, as Hesychius; according to
Suidas, they were six thousand. Varro counts 12500 soldiers to a Legion; as in
Brigades now adays they are sometimes more, sometimes less: so then the devils
acknowledge they were many, which appears, because when they went out of the
man, they possessed two thousand hogs. These devils cruelly tormented the
possessed persons, that they cried out day and night, and cut themselves with
stones, An Emblem of natural men, who are Satan's slaves, to do what he will
have them, 2 Timothy 2.26. Joh. 8.44.
and gave their members to the devil to fight against themselves, and tears off
their clothes from them to expose them to scorn and laughter, and what he does
to these he would do to others, yet he thinks Christ an unjust Judge to torment
him before the time. They complain of torment when them selves do so much
mischief.

Before the time] Not as if the devils knew the time of the judgment, for the
good Angels know it not, nor the humane nature of Christ, only they knew the
judgment was not yet come, and therefore they complain they were tormented
before the time.

V. 30. And there was a good way off from them an herd of many Swine feeding.

About two thousand Swine. If they were Jews they brought them up to sell them
to the Gentiles, but if they were the remainders of the Canaanites (as before
is proved) then might they keep them and eat them.

V. 31. So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to
go away into the Herd of Swine.

We see the power of Christ is greater then the power of a Legion of devils, he
is stronger then that strong one and binds him. Luke 11.21, 22. about this
power of Christ we may observe sundry circumstances.

1 That Christ silences Satan, and would not suffer him to speak, Mark 1.25.

2 That against the devils will he makes them meet him, and to adore him, not
with religions veneration but with extorted humiliation.

3 That they could not go into the Swine, unless Christ permitted them. The
power of the devil is not so great as it seems to be, he is compelled to leave
the fishes in the Rivers, the fowls in the air, men and cattle in Cities. Luth.
in Genesis 32. To cast the devil out of the man was the work of Christ, but for
the going of the devils into the Swine was the bare permission of Christ. The
devils by their own power could do that, if they were not hindered by a greater
power; Christ therefore did not act in the devils entering into the hogs, but
only withheld his power which was able to have hindered.

4 In that he tames these devils which no body else could tame: they brake all
chains, no man durst go that way for fear of being wounded or killed, for the
devil had a great wrath, knowing he had but a short time, Rev. 12.12. but
Christ here binds these strong devils:

1 Learn we then to acknowledge the power of Christ to be greater then the
power of the devils. All power in heaven and earth is given to him, Matthew.
28.19. Also in Hell, Revel. 20.1, 2. Christ makes the Devils come creeping to
him, Luke 8.28. When he saw Jesus he cried out, and fell down before him, and
with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God most
high? I beseech thee torment me not, and v. 31. They besought him that he would
not command them to go out into the deep; by which Luke means Hell, as the word
Abyssus is sometimes taken. Though many carnal hearts are so hardened that they
will not tremble, yet Devils tremble, James 2.19.

2 Learn not to fear the Devil too much.

Suffer us to go into the Herd of Swine] They desired this,

1 That they might not be compelled to go to Hell, Luke 8.31.

2 That they might stir up the Gadarens to impatiency, because of so great a
loss, as the loss of their Hogs, and so not to receive Christ.

V. 32. And he said unto them, Go: and when they were come out, they went into
the Herd of Swine, and behold, the whole Herd of Swine ran violently down a
steep place into the Sea, and perished in the waters.

Here is Christ his permission to the Devils to go into the Swine, which was, 1
That all men might see how mischievous the Devils would be, should the Lord
permit them, they would destroy all mankind in one hour, yea all living
creatures, should God take away his restraint from them; so that as the safety
of Sheep is not in the clemency of the Wolf, but in the Shepherds eye, so our
safety is only in the Lord who binds up Satan.

2 For the further publication of the Miracle, had the Devils only been cast
out and no more, the Miracle might have been but little taken notice of, but
the Devils going into the Hogs all men must needs note it, and the whole
country have information herein.

3 That these two possessed persons who were freed from these Devils might see
the greatness of the mercy, to be freed from so many Devils as a whole Legion,
and so mischievous and bloody who will destroy all they can destroy; and also
what they might have expected from the Devils if God had not kept them, when
they see the Hogs run headlong into the Sea.

And behold, the whole Herd ran violently down a steep place into the Sea, and
perished in the Waters] viz. Into the Lake of Genezareth, which for the breadth
and length is called a Sea, which, according to Josephus, was fifty furlongs
broad and an hundred furlongs long. We may see what Satan's bloody rage is, we
see what his cruelty was, who when he had commission given to punish Job,
destroyed his children, and did what mischief otherwise which he was permitted
to do, Job 1.13, 14. to v. 20. Satan made no delay, Job 2.6, 7. As soon as Job
was in Satan's hand he smote him with Boils.

V. 33. And they that kept them fled and went their ways into the City, and
told every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the Devils.

It Is like they went to excuse themselves that the loss of the Hogs came not
through any carelessness in them; besides, they tell of the good that Christ had
done, as well as of the losses which befell. The blessings that come by the
Gospel, as well as the losses are to be published; many poring too much upon
what they may lose by Christ, and not considering what they may gain by him,
are apt to fly off from Christ.

V. 34. And behold, the whole City came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw
him they besought him that he would depart out of their Coasts.

The Gadarens, having heard the report, they go to see the men out of whom the
Devils were cast, and they saw them clothed and in their right mind, Mark
5.15. Luke sets down that he sat at Jesus feet, which the Scripture sets down
to be the posture of a Disciple. Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Acts
22.3. and Mary at the feet of Christ, Luke 10.39. For Teachers were wont to sit
in a Chair, or in a more high place, and the Hearers stood round about at their
feet, Ezekiel. 33.31. This man fitting thus proves himself to have a sound mind.

The effect this Miracle wrought on these Gadarens was, that they were taken
with great fear, Luke 8.35, 37.

1 Because they saw the dead carcasses of their Hogs swimming up and down,
probably before the Swineherds could bring them news.

2 Lest Christ should punish them for their murmuring against him, and should
permit the Devils that were gone into the Hogs to come out of the Hogs into
themselves.

And they besought him that he would depart out of their Coasts] They should
have given thanks to God, for these two men delivered from the Devils, and that
not only they, but all the Country were so well rid of such a multitude of
Devils, but partly out of Distrust and slavish fear, lest the presence of
Christ might do more mischief unto them (thinking that to be done by Christ
which was only permitted by Christ, but done by the Devils) and partly because
they saw Christ was a Jew and an holy man, and themselves wicked Gentiles, they
feared lest Christ for their wickednesses, and also for difference of Religion,
would punish them more sorely than yet he had done, that as their Hogs were
destroyed, so in a short time their Sheep, Cows, and Oxen, and Children might
be destroyed, hence they beseech him to depart out of their Coasts.

Now the persons who besought him to depart, were not only all the Citizens of
Gedara, but the whole multitude of the country round about, Nemine
contradicente, no man desiring the presence of Christ. A fearful sign of
Christ leaving a People; when all consent to his departure, then Christ had no
Message to declare.

Here were two great sins more. 1 Universal Ingratitude, when Christ came
through a dangerous Storm for their good to cast out Devils, to make the ways
safe for Passengers, when before none durst go that way, and would have
tendered means of grace had they not resisted, yet they unworthily reject all.

2 Horrible covetousness, preferring Hogs before Christ. 1 Timothy 6.5. There are
many Gergesenes, who, when they know better, for gain-sake do worse.

3 Contempt of means of grace, how woeful will their condition be in the day of
Christ?

In Christ are two graces considerable, 1 That he does not render evil for
evil, but good for evil, sending back one of these healed men to preach to the
Capernaites: the word is (...), Luke 8.38, 39. He bids him preach how great
things God had done for him, which he did not only there, but through
Decapolis, Mark 5.20. he preached the Doctrine of grace.

2 That he peaceably departs from them back again, and goes into Galilee,
Matthew. 9.1. The Gospel needs not be forced but when refused; Preachers have a
call to depart, it being refused universally, as here it was, Matthew. 21.34.
Acts 13.46.

In the man healed observe three things, 1 That he sat at Christ's feet as a
Disciple. 2 That leaving his own country he was willing to go with Christ,
Luke 8.38. 3 His obedience, when Christ sent him back again to his own country
and kindred he was willing to go, trying whether that effect of Doctrine which
could not be by Christ, might by him, being one of their own country, become
effectual: withal in sending him thus, Christ shows that an active life is to
be preferred before a contemplative, first the body must be exercised in
labor, and then be refreshed by contemplation.

CHAP. IX.
V. 1. And he entered into a Ship, and passed over, and came into his own City.

V. 2. And behold, they brought unto him a man sick of the Palsy, lying on a
Bed. Jesus seeing their faith, says to the sick of the Palsy, Son, be of good
cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee.


WE have in this story, 1 The return of Christ from the country of the
Gergesenes into his own City, Capernaum, whence lately he came, v. 1.

2 His miraculous power, in not only healing a man sick of the Palsy, but
also forgiving his sins, v. 2.

3 The cavil of the Scribes against him, charging him with blasphemy for his
forgiving the Palsey-man, v. 3.

4 Christ his vindication of himself, together with his asserting his power to
forgive sins, 1 By his knowing their thoughts, Why think ye evil in your
hearts? v. 4.

2 Because he was able to do the thing which was more hard, therefore he was
able to do that which was more easy, v. 5, 6. Whether is it easier to say, Thy
sins be forgiven thee? or to say, Arise and walk? q. d. You think it harder to
heal a Palsy man, than to forgive sins; now you have seen me do that which you
think harder, therefore can I without blasphemy do that which is easier.

5 The effect this Miracle had among the Multitude, they 1 Marvelled, 2
Glorified God, who had given such power to men, v. 8.

He came into his own City] That is, of Capernaum, called his own, because
usually he dwelt there, and preached more Sermons and did more Miracles there,
than elsewhere. That Capernaum is meant here, appears Mark 2.1. Matthew says,
cap. 4.13. Leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum.

They brought him a man sick of the Palsy lying on a bed] A palsy is the
dissolution of the sinews of the body, which are the instruments of motion,
without which a man cannot move or walk. Hence this Palsy man was born of
four, Mar. 2.3. For charity requires that the well and healthy succor the
sick. Luke sets down there was so great a multitude came to the house where
Christ was, that no man could come in. Hence those that bore the Palsey-man
uncovered the roof, and let down the Palsey-man to Christ, though doubtless the
rubbish did fall down, yet was not Christ offended. Herewith learn we to take
all opportunities to come to Christ, and to bring others to him.

Jesus seeing their faith, says to the sick of the Palsy, Son, be of good
cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee] Christ seeing both the faith of the
Palsey-man, and of those that brought him, speaks thus, not as if another man's
faith can profit to the forgiveness of our sins, but hereby Christ applies
pardon to the Palsey-man, and to so many as believed, who helped to bring him
to Christ.

Thy sins be forgiven thee] Nothing will cheer the soul unless forgiveness of
sins go along with it, not to have a disease removed. Christ is not only the
Physician of diseases, but of sins; first he forgives the sins, and then heals
the Palsy, to show that sin is the root and fountain of diseases. Whereas the
conscience of former evils might perplex the Palsey-man, that he should not
obtain healing, Christ tells him that sin, the cause of sickness, was pardoned,
and therefore he might comfortably expect healing. This was not faith of
miracles, which is a confidence of a future miracle, but faith of
justification, which if the Palsey-man had not before, by Christ his speaking
it was wrought in him, but it seems he had it before, in that Christ calls him
Son.

Quest. Why did Christ first forgive his sins before healing of him?

Answ. 1 Because sin was the cause of sickness, and to remove the effect, there
must be first a removing of the cause. Palsy and other diseases arise rather
from sin, then from natural causes.

2 That forseeing the calumny of the Pharisees against Christ his miracle,
Christ might prove his Godhead first by this, that he knew the thoughts,
secondly by this, that he had power on earth to forgive sins.

We may see Christ's bounty, that he heals the whole man, Joh. 7.23. Learn we
from our afflictions to reflect upon our sins as the cause of them.

V. 3. And behold, certain of the Scribes said within themselves, This man
blasphemeth.

Here Is the calumny of the Scribes and Pharisees against Christ, which was
this: he that is not God but takes upon him power to forgive sins, he
blasphemes; but Jesus the Son of man is not God, and yet takes upon him power
to forgive sins, therefore he blasphemes.

The proposition was most true, 1 Because none can forgive offenses against
God, but against whom they are committed. 2 Because to forgive sins in God, is
not only to forgive the guilt but the punishment and curse; but the Pharisees
erred in the assumption. Hence Christproved himself by two reasons that he was
God.

Within themselves] Not among themselves as if they had been murmuring one
among another of Christ's doings; hence Matthew says not, v. 4. Jesus knowing
their words, but says, Jesus knowing their thoughts.

Now that they said within themselves was, as Mark tells us, cap. 2.7. Who can
forgive sins but God alone? Isa. 43.25. I am he that blot out thine iniquities.
Mic. 6.18. Who is a God like unto thee, forgiving iniquity, transgression and
sin. Jer. 31.34. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sins no
more. Its like the Scribes remembering these and such like places, and not
considering what was spoken out of the Old Testament concerning the Messiah,
conceived these murmurings in their hearts.

This man blasphemeth] Omitting the acceptions of this word, as else where it
is taken, here it signifies to arrogate that which belongs unto God unto a man's
self. The Lawyers or Scribes thought this power (mentioned, 2 Samuel 12.7. Nathan
to David says, The Lord has put away thine iniquity) was incommunicable; now
Christ, in token that he had this power, 1 Works a miracle. 2 Searches their
hearts, which is only peculiar to God, 1 King. 8.39. Thou only knows the
hearts of the children of men, Jer. 17.10, 11. I the Lord search the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord looks upon the heart. Romans 8.27.

Yet was the arguing of these Scribes of no weight to reason thus; God never
gave the power of forgiveness of sins to any man hitherto, therefore he cannot
grant it; none of the Prophets could do it, therefore the Messiah shall not be
able to do it.

V. 4. And Jesus knowing their thoughts said, Why think ye evil in your hearts?

Jesus knowing their thoughts] Here was one note of his Godhead, to know the
thoughts, 1 Cor. 2.11. What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of
man which is in him? He must needs be God which did this, 1 John 2.24, 25.
Jesus did not commit himself to them, because he knew all men, and needed not
that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man. He did not know
their hearts by outward gestures, as by whispering, laughing, but he knew their
hearts without signs, when they sat quiet and still, nor did he know them by
the revelation of another, as the Prophets did, 1 King. 14.3, 4. as the Prophet
Ahiah did the wife of Jeroboam, but by his own power, as being the searcher of
hearts, which God only is.

And needs must he know the thoughts, because he created the heart, Psalm.
94.10, 11. besides else how should he make manifest the counsels and secrets of
the heart? Romans 2.16. 1 Cor. 4.5.

Why think ye evil in your hearts] That is false, malicious and blasphemous
things, as if I were only a man, when I am God. These thoughts were evil, 1
coming from the devil and their wicked hearts, 2 In respect of matter, as being
derogatory to the majesty of Christ. From this two observations.

1 The thoughts of men are known to Christ.

2 The consideration of this, that our thoughts are known to Christ, should be
a check unto us from thinking evil in our hearts.

Obs. The thoughts of men are known to Christ.

1 Because he is God, now all thoughts are known to God, Genesis 6.5. God saw that
every imagination of the heart of man was only evil continually. Job 21.27. I
know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfully imagine against me. Job
42.2. No thought can be withholden from thee, yea God perceives and knows the
inward thoughts of the heart, Psalm. 49.11. Their inward thought is, their
houses shall continue, Amos 4.13. he declares unto man his thought, Psalm.
139.23. Try me and know my thoughts, Psalm. 50.22. 1 Cor. 3.20.

2 Because he is the searcher of the heart, Rev. 2.23. All the Churches shall
know that I am he that searches the reins and the heart; now the thoughts
being a great part of the heart he must needs know them. Luke 9.47. When the
Disciples were thinking which of them should be greatest, Jesus perceiving the
thought of their heart took a little child and set him before them, Matthew.
12.24, 25.

3 Because he has discovered to men their thoughts, as here to these Scribes,
and to Judas before he acted any treason, Luke 5.32. Luke 24.38. when the
Disciples were affrighted Christ says, Why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
The woman of Samaria, John 4.29. He told me all that ever I did.

Use 1 To confirm unto us the Godhead of Christ, why? because he knows our
thoughts.

2 Beware, 1 Of vain thoughts, which is, 1 For matter, when we shall think on
foolish things, Prove. 24.9. The thought of foolishness is sin.

2 For manner, when we shall think of God and good things in an unholy manner,
either irreverently, or idolatrously, Psalm. 50.23. Thou thoughtest I was such
an one as thy self.

3 For order, when we shall think of good things disorderly. If a Printer print
never so well, yet if one word stand where another should, it will quite spoil
the book.

4 For end, when we shall be thinking of good things for a bad end, as to be
thinking of the Scriptures how to color over some sin, to be thinking of God
in extremities that he might deliver us out of this or that trouble, resolving
still to follow our lusts. 2 Beware of wicked thoughts, Prove. 30.32. If thou
have thought evil in thy heart, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, Esai 55.6, 7. Let
the righteous man forsake his thoughts, Acts 8.22. Repent of this thy
wickedness, and pray God if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven
thee.

5 Though they think of God they delight not to think of him, Romans 1.28. they
think of God, but they know not how to shun it.

Obj. But thoughts are free.

Answ. In Courts of men they are, because man cannot make a Law that can reach
the thoughts, but not in the Court of heaven, Jer. 6.19. I will bring upon them
the fruit of their thoughts.

Obj. But we cannot hinder wicked and vain thoughts from arising in the heart.

Answ. We cannot hinder them from being, but we may hinder them from lodging in
us, Jer. 4.14. We cannot hinder persons from coming to our house, but we can
hinder them from lodging in our house; we cannot hinder a Bird from flying over
our heads, but we may keep it from making a nest in our hair.

Q. Whence come these wicked thoughts in the heart?

Answ. 1 From Satan, who inspires and injects evil motions. These sometimes are
discerned by the suddenness, coming like a flash of Lightning; by their
violence. It Is a sad thing to have the devil Lord of our imagination, as in
Judas, John 13.12. By their strangeness, being thrown in, as Joseph's cup in
Benjamins sack. By their unnaturalness tending to destroy, so to Christ, Cast
thy self down.

Thus Satan suggested to David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Some think
it more sad for the devil to run away with our thoughts then estates.

2 From corruption, Matthew. 15.19. Out of the Heart proceed evil thoughts, Jam.
1.14, 15. Now whether they come from Satan or corruption they shall not be
imputed to us, if we disallow them.

Obj. I disallow them.

Answ. If thou do, they will be burdens to thee, and thou will complain to
God in prayer against them, and strive to turn thy imagination from them to
God, that the thoughts of God may be the possessions of thy heart.

3 Try what thy thoughts are, whether they be good or bad. Trials. 1 When they
come from a good principle within. A good man has a good treasure in his
heart, Matthew. 12.35. and from thence he brings forth good things, hence his
purposes are only good, Prove. 11.23.12.5.

2 When good thoughts are not only cast into the soul, but we study them. Many
think, because they have some thoughts of death, judgment, heaven and hell, of
repentance, God and Christ, therefore their hearts are good, but these thoughts
are only the hauntings of the spirit, to leave them more inexcusable.
Contrarily godly men strive to study good thoughts, Psalm. 119.59.

3 Whether are the good thoughts thou have transient, or permanent and abiding?
Genesis 6.5. The Lord saw all the thoughts of men's hearts were vain.

Obj. They had some good thoughts, how could this be?

Answ. They were vain for want of duration.

4 Whether are thy thoughts brought forth into act? Godly men act the good they
think of, Psalm. 119.59. I thought upon my ways, what then followed? I turned
my feet into thy testimonies. Luke 15.18. The Prodigal thought of his misery,
what followed? I will arise, and will go to my father, etc. Wicked men think of
leaving their formality, revenge, but are never better; they think of hell but
consider not it will be their portion.

5 It Is no good pulse of soul when the heart is presently tired with good
thoughts, but never weary with worldly thoughts, Romans 8.5.

4 Exh. Rid thy heart of evil thoughts. Thou can not abide a spot upon thy
apparel, because man beholds it, and will thou endure spots upon thy heart
which God sees? I know we cannot keep evil thoughts out of the heart, but let
them not be quiet there. The Mariner cannot hinder water from leaking into the
ship, yet he may so pump it out that it shall not drown the ship. Prove. 30.32.
If thou have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.

6 Grounds of this Exhortation.
1 Thoughts must one day be laid open, 1 Cor. 4.5. God will make manifest the
counsels of the heart, Eccl. 12.14. Romans 2.16. Luke 12.2.

2 Holy men will not suffer wicked thoughts to have a quiet lodging in the
heart, Matthew. 5.8. hence called pure in heart, because still they labor to
purify themselves.

3 Wicked thoughts, if not repented of, will bring destruction, Acts 8.21. Pray
God if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee, for as yet thou
art in the gall of bitterness, Phil. 3.19. Whose end is destruction, who mind
earthly things, Esai 59.7.

4 Wicked thoughts, besides their own pollution, Intus existens prohihet
alienum.
will keep out good thoughts. Pr. 1.22, 23. Whiles the scorner loved scorning,
and the simple one simplicity, they could not hear the Lords exhortation,
saying, Turn you at my reproof.

5 Evil thoughts allowed or permitted will bring forth evil words, Matthew.
12.35. An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil
things; yea and evil actions. Hamans cruelty against the Church was first an
evil thought, Esth. 3.5.

6 Thou art not yet washed in the blood of Christ, if thou suffers vain and
wicked thoughts to lodge within thee, Jer. 4.14.

7 Remedies against wicked thoughts.
1 Get thy heart washed in the blood of Christ that it may be enabled to think
good thoughts, Acts 15.9. purifying your hearts by faith, till the heart be
washed, evil thoughts come from it, Matthew. 15.19.

2 Be persuaded of Gods knowing thy heart, Psalm. 139.1, 2. O Lord thou have
searched me and known me, thou understandest my thought afar off. Heb. 4.13.
All things are anatomized before the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Psalm.
90.8.94.11. Job, 31.1, 4.

3 Get Gods fear in your hearts; this grace is clean, Psa. 19.9. By this grace
Joseph kept himself from filthiness of flesh and spirit, Genesis 39.10. and so
David, Psalm. 119.11. Thy testimonies have I hid in my heart, that I might not
sin against thee: fearing the Lord and thinking on his Name are joined
together, Mal. 3.16.

4 Inure your heart to holy meditation, and pray God to help herein, Psalm.
45.1. My heart is inditing of a good matter: and forasmuch as the heart will
hardly come to this duty, pray, that the meditation of your hearts may be ever
acceptable, Psalm. 19.14.

5 Apply the command against wicked thoughts; It Is one property of the word
that it does not only cast down reasonings and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, but also brings into captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ, though by thought here I judge the purpose of the
heart to be meant, seeing not the holiest man living has every individual
thought brought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. however it remains
a Truth, that the application of the command helps against wicked thoughts,
Psalm. 119.113. I hate vain thoughts, but I love thy Law. Against unclean
thoughts apply Matthew. 5.28. He that looks upon a woman to lust after her has
committed adultery already in his heart; against proud thoughts apply Prove.
16.5.21.4.28.15.

6 Use watchfulness against them, Deuteronomy. 15.9. Beware that there be not a
thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The year of release is at hand, and thou
give not to thy poor Brother.

7 Study good thoughts, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are pure, holy, and of
good report, think on these things, Psalm. 48.9.

Motives to look to the thoughts.
1 Thoughts are the declaratives of the soul, as the Sun, Fire, Honey, Gold,
show by their effects what they are, so does the heart show what it is by the
thoughts. When the thoughts are worldly, proud and revengefull, it argues the
heart is such, Romans 8.5. They that are after the flesh mind the things of the
flesh. The thoughts are the immediate acts of the heart, Mark 7.21. From
within, out of the heart of man, proceed evil thoughts. We do not judge of a
Fountain by the Waters that run from it many Miles off, but by the Water that
flows immediately therefrom.

2 Thoughts are the souls servants, as the Centurion said to his Servant, Go,
and he goes, Matthew. 8.8. So bid your thoughts think upon grace, or sin, they
will do it. Send them a hundred Mile off they will go, send them into Heaven
they will go, and talk with God and Christ by faith, and with your selves by
reflection.

3 Thoughts are the symptoms of the soul. As we know the state of the body by
the symptoms, so may we know the soul, Col. 3.1, 2. If ye be risen with Christ
seek things above, set your affections on things above. Romans 8.5. They that are
after the flesh do savor the things of the flesh, etc.

4 The thoughts are the acts of the soul. 1 They are the freest acts; a man
sometimes speaks not as he would, works not as he would, but he always thinks
as he will; now if you would judge of a man, judge of him by what he does freely,
and not by compulsion. Peter though he denied Christ, he denied him not in
heart, therefore the heart shows what it is by the thoughts.

2 Thoughts are the continued acts of the soul. We are not always praying and
reading, but we are always thinking, that is, thy God thou art always thinking
on.

3 The univocal acts of the heart. The univocal act of light is to enlighten,
the univocal act of a dead carrion is stink, so the univocal act of the heart
are thoughts; if they be proud and unclean, so is the heart.

5 Thoughts are Gods tribute, Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thy heart. If thy
neighbor come for fire thou can not give it him, if thou take away the
heart thereof; so thou can not give God thy heart and withhold thy thoughts.

6 Thoughts are a man's companions. A man will be careful what companions he
has; you never go out nor in, but your companions go along with you, nay they
will accompany you to another World.

7 The Law of Retaliation calls for our thoughts to be for God, because he has
so many thoughts toward us, Psalm 40.5. Thy thoughts which are to us ward they
cannot be reckoned up, they are more than can be numbered. Psalm 139.17. How
precious are thy thoughts, O God, unto me! How great is the sum of them! Every
hour, yea every minute, God think of us, let us then be often thinking of him,
saying with David, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth I
desire in comparison of thee. Psalm 73.25. saying as a certain holy man, who
when he was bid to have his thoughts in Heaven, answered, I am there already.

8 If thou forgets to think on God, thy soul will be in a withering condition,
Job 8.11, 12, 13, 14.

3 Use. Consolation to Saints. 1 When condemned by men, Job 16 19. My Witness
is in Heaven, and my Record on high.

2 When we have upright intentions to bring about things for God, but cannot at
present effect them. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12.

3 In all acts of uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29.17. Thou triest the heart, and have
pleasure in uprightness; that is, in upright intentions, when we sigh to him he
knows our sighs and groans, Psalm 12.5. Romans 8.26. this comforted Peter, John
21.17. that the Lord knew his thoughts were affectionately set for Christ; Thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee.

4 Terror to all wicked men who allow wicked thoughts in them. God knows how
thou smothers thine own conscience and go against it, what thoughts of
denying Christ and temporizing are in thee, what tricks thou have to keep off
conviction, what heartlesness in duty, what rovings in prayer. Thou would be
ashamed if a man saw the wickedness of thy thoughts, how much more when God
beholds them? Nay, the Lord sees thy thoughts afar off, even before thou
think them, Exodus 3.19. He knew Pharaohs thoughts that he would not let the
people go, he sees thou have an intention to deny him, if a temptation come.
Mark 14.30. This night, before the Cock crow twice thou shall deny me thrice.
So the Lord knew Hazaels thoughts, 2 Kings 8.12. which was to rip up women with
child. He knew Israel would go a whoring from God when Moses and Joshua were
dead.

And does he not then know thy present wicked thoughts? Psalm 50.21. Thou
thoughtest that I was such an one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set
them in order before thee, or catalogize them, (as I take it some renders the
word) He sees God is not in all thy thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. Yea he knows thy
unclean and revengefull thoughts, which are abomination to him, Prove. 15, 26.
And though thou diggest deep to hide thy counsel from the Lord, yet shall not
thou be able, Isai 29.15.

V. 5. And whether is easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say,
Arise and walk?

Christ brings a second argument to prove he had power to forgive sins, viz.
Because he was able to do that, which in the opinion of the Pharisees was more
hard, therefore he had power to do that which was more easy. It was more to
forgive sin then to heal a disease, but because the healing of a disease was
visible, and the forgiveness of sins was invisible, therefore healing the
Palsey-man seemed to the Pharisees to be the more difficult work: yet is
forgiveness of sin the harder work, 1 Because no disease is contrary to the
nature of God, but sin is. 2 Healing a Palsy is a natural work, but
forgiveness of sins is a supernatural work.

Christ applies his speech to their capacity, who, being mere natural men, were
moved with outward signs more then with the spiritual power of Christ. So
Christ reasons, John 5.28. Christ proves the effectual power of his voice to
quicken dead souls, because the same voice of Christ shall at the day of
resurrection be able to quicken dead bodies. Besides this miraculous healing
was a sign to confirm the other, that he had power to forgive sins.

V. 6. But, that ye may know the son of man has power on earth to forgive
sins, then says he to the sick of the Palsy, Arise, take up thy Bed and walk.

V. 7. And he arose, and departed to his house.

Christ here positively proves that he had power on earth to forgive sins,
because miraculously by a word of his mouth he causes the Palsy man to walk,
so that he arose and departed to his house immediately.

Power on earth to forgive sins] That is authoritatively. Preachers forgive
only declaratively, as Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.7. The Lord has put away
thy iniquity, John 20.23.

Then says he to the sick of the Palsy, Arise, take up thy Bed and walk] That
so this cure Christ wrought might appear to be a perfect cure, Christ bids the
Palsy man, 1 Arise. 2 Take up his Bed and carry it on his shoulders. 3 Walk.

V. 8. But when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God, which
had given such power unto men.

Multitude saw it they marvelled] Here Is the effect of this miracle, all
(saving the Pharisees, who had accused Christ of blasphemy) wondered at the
miracle, and so broke forth in praising God. They wondered at it having never
seen any such example of such a thing in former times. The tendency of their
wonder and praises was, that persons with more confidence should submit
themselves to the doctrine of Christ, whiles they believed he was able to
pardon their sins.

V. 9. As Jesus passed from thence, he saw a man named Matthew sitting at the
receipt of custom, and he said unto him, Follow me: And he arose and followed
him.

We have in this story, 1 Christ calling Matthew, v. 9.

2 Matthew his yielding obedience to the call of Christ, v. 9.

3 We have Matthews thankfulness in making Christ a Feast, v. 10. Amplified
from the Guests that were there with Christ, they were Publicans and sinners,
v. 10.

4 Here Is a question moved by the Pharisees hereupon, which was, why Christ
would eat with Publicans and sinners, v. 11.

5 Here Is Christ his answer to this charge, 1 Apologetical, that he conversed
with them, as a Physician to heal them, not as one that practiced like
wickedness with them.

2 Reprehensory, taxing the proud conceitedness of the Pharisees, who thought
themselves whole and that they had no need of the Physician.

3 Defensory, v. 13. Go and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice: as if he should say, That ye see me do is a work of mercy and
charity, in calling sinners from their sins to repentance, that they may be
saved, therefore I doing what God commands, your calumnies are not to be
regarded.

Saw a man named Matthew sitting at the receipt of custom] Christ passing from
thence toward the Sea, Mar. 2.13. saw a man. This was that Matthew who penned
this Book in the Hebrew tongue, supposed to be him whom Mark and Luke call
Levi, and the circumstances of the History tend much thereto, yet does not
Matthew at any time call himself Levi, nor Mark and Luke does at any time call
Levi Matthew. And Grotius speaking of one Heracleon who lived next those times,
names Matthew, Philip, Thomas and Levi, to whom opportunity of giving public
testimony to Christ among the powers of the earth was denied, where Matthew and
Levi are distinguished one from another.

Sitting at the receipt of custom] That is at the Table of the Publicans, where
Caesar's tribute was brought and paid. Matthew names his condition of life,
that he may confess to all what a great sinner he had been, and also
acknowledge Gods grace in calling him home, as Paul did, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16, 17.
For the Publicans hired Caesar's tribute at a certain rate, and under pretense
of taking tribute did wretchedly extort, and became thereby very infamous. We
may learn from him to show forth Gods goodness to us, who, notwithstanding the
vile ways we walked in before conversion, was pleased to cast his love upon us.

And he said unto him, Follow me] Leave the Customhouse, if it be weight to
thee, Heb. 12.2. Let us lay aside every weight. Leave thy sinful gain and
follow me. So does Christ call all his Church from wicked and carnal ways. Song
2.10. My beloved said unto me, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away.
Song 4.8. Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, look from the Lions dens, from
the Mountains of the Leopards. That is, come from the wicked of the world which
are like Lions and Leopards.

Now, when Christ bade Matthew follow him, it is like he used more words to him,
and gave him reasons, which, together with the miracles he saw from Christ,
prevailed upon him; for it is not enough only to call a person to follow
Christ, but we must endeavor to convince him by reason that he may follow
Christ, as that else we cannot be Christ's Disciples, Matt. 16.24. else we do
not abide in Christ, 1 John 2.6.

And he arose and followed him] See the power of Christ's call, which makes
Matthew thus ready to follow, so that as the Loadstone draws iron, and the Sun
vapors, so did Christ's call draw him. We must leave office and gain, and all
for Christ, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that we should rejoice in any thing more then
in the cross of Christ. Phil. 3.8. Yea I count all things loss for Christ.
Where we see plainly our call is from God, let us be sure to follow him, Gal.
1.15. Judge. 6. and this is the note of all the sheep of Christ, that they
follow Christ, and not strangers, John 10.4, 5, 27. We must not only follow
Christ in his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Leaving us an example that we should follow
his steps, but we must also follow him in his commands; so did Abraham, Genesis
12.1. and Matthew, yea every soul redeemed from the earth follows the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14.4. Such as thus follow Christ in the
regeneration shall be crowned with him, and sit with him on thrones, Matthew.
19.28. they followed Christ upon white Horses, Rev. 19.14.

V. 10. And it came to pass as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many
publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples.

We see Matthew out of gratitude to Christ carries him from the custom house
to his own house, and makes him a feast, where he invites the Disciples of
Christ, and the publicans, who its like had heard him preach at the
custom house, where we are taught not only thankfulness to our benefactors,
but may fee the lawful use of feasting, practiced both by Abraham, Isaac, and
others; even Christ was present at such a feast, Luke 14.1. to ver. 7. Joh. 2.

Publicans and sinners] Publicans were they who gathered the public ttibute,
who were odious to the Jews, because the Jews, looking upon themselves as the
people of God, thought they were not to be subject to the Romans, and much less
to pay tribute to them being Idolaters. Sinners were dissolute Jews, who
slighting the Jewish Religion were conversant among the Gentiles, and would eat
and drink with them.

V. 11. And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his Disciples, Why eats
your master with Publicans and sinners?

Before the Pharisees were offended at the miracles of Christ, now they are
offended at his life, why he did eat with Publicans and sinners. There is no
remedy against the biting of a Sycophant, as the Proverb is, they cavil at a
good action. Matthew, in token of thankfulness to Christ for the benefit of
regeneration and being to leave his former profession, that he might give an
account to his fellow Publicans thereof, that either they might by his example
leave their employments, or else might deal justly and mercifully therein,
makes a feast for Christ and these Publicans.

Hereupon these Pharisees propound this question, not for satisfaction, but
detraction, that they might calumniate Christ: they seem to reason thus, No
Godly man can eat with Publicans and sinners, but Christ eats with Publicans
and sinners, therefore he is no Godly man. The proposition, according to the
Pharisees teaching, not according to the doctrine of Christ is true, but its
false according to the doctrine of Christ, for sinners are to be shunned where
there is danger to be infected by them, they are not to be shunned when there
is likelihood we may gain them by our example and admonitions. Besides Matthew
might think Christ would utter Godly speeches at this feast to work on his
fellow Publicans. Nothing is more troublesome and absurd then a dumb feast, for
speeches are the true sawces of meat; one word is sharpened by another, and not
only is the belly fed with meats, but the mind with doctrine. The conferences
of the Godly refresh the mind, stir up Faith, kindle Charity, and many ways
instruct. Luth. in Genesis cap. 18.

Quest. Whether may Christians eat with unbelievers, or go to a feast with them?

Answ. Yes, reserving liberty of conscience, that you do not give thanks with
him, to make him your mouth, or to put off your hat and practice external
worship when the wicked man gives thanks, 1 Cor. 10.27. If any of them that
believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set
before you eat.

Yet when they went, they were not to worship the heathen Gods by thanksgiving.

Obj. But the person we give thanks with worships the true God in a right
manner.

Answ. His person being wicked, his prayer is abominable, and so is thy prayer
who joins with him, Prove. 15.8. Unless such wicked man offer only requests for
temporal things (which it seems to me he may pray for) which to be sure he will
not be limited to.

Quest. Whether may we keep company with sinners, or is it unlawful.

Answ. 1 Its lawful to trade with them, so did Abraham with the sons of Heth,
Genesis 23.16.

2 When our place, office or calling calls us to be with them, else we must go
out of the World, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10.

3 Courtesy and civility toward wicked men is not forbid, Genesis 23.7. Abraham
was so to the sons of Heth. We are to salute Enemies, Matthew. 5.47.

4 The Lord does not nullify any divine, moral, or relalative Bond, as that
the Husband should leave the Wife, the Master the Servant, upon pretense that
one of them are wicked.

5 We are not by an unwarrantable retiredness to exasperate the minds of
wicked men, but so far as we can with a good Conscience observe them, as by
salutation, courteous speech, etc. that if we cannot make them hearty Friends,
which is impossible, we may yet make them moderate Enemies.

2 How far it is unlawful, as, 1 To make them our intimate Friends and
Familiars: acquaintance we may have with such, but not familiarity, Psalm
119.63. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee. To have familiarity with
them is all one, as if a man should have correspondence with a foreign State,
who is at enmity with our Commonwealth, this is as dangerous in Spirituals, as
the other is in Politics. 2 It Is unlawful to associate with them in
wickedness, Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them.

Object. But Christ kept company with them, and why may not I?

Answ. Christ kept company with them as a Physician to heal them, but thou do
it because thou would walk loosly.

2 Christ could not be infected with sin, and therefore might boldly converse
with sinners, but the wicked behavior of wicked men steals upon thy heart.

3 In stead of converting wicked men thou drinkest in their Poison.

Object. But wicked men I converse with are my kinsmen and alliance.

Answ. So much more dangerous. We are apt to take a Cup of Poison from the Hand
of a Friend. God bad Abraham go from his fathers House, Country and Kindred,
Genesis 12.1. Why so? God would rather have him go to an idolatrous place, where
he should be a stranger, than to remain in an idolatrous place with his friends.

Object. But the company I keep are civil wel-carriaged men, no Drunkards, nor
Enemies to Religion.

Answ. The nearer they come to a Form of Religion, the more dangerous to steal
away our Hearts, 2 Timothy 3.5. From such turn away. Gross sinners vex our souls,
and make us cry to God; godly men, they quicken our graces, but in civil and
formal men there is neither sin enough to vex our souls, nor grace enough to
quicken our grace.

Object. But say wicked men, How can you tell men are carnal and wicked, why do
you judge us, and make our acquaintance refrain our company?

Answ. We may know who are carnal, else why should we be commanded to have
nothing to do with such, Prove. 9.6. Acts 2.40. Ephesians. 5.11. If we did not know
who they were, God would give us an impossible command. Psalm 15.4. In a godly
man's eyes a vile person is contemned; How shall we contemn them if we know them
not? Ephesians. 5.7. We are bid not to be companions with them in sin; How can this
be, if we know them not? The more Holiness thou have the sooner will thou
discern such. When we see men rail on goodness, will be drunk, and are Faith
and Troth-men, etc. We may plainly see they are carnal, because they practice
gross evils contrary to the nature of Holiness, or despise their ways in small
things, contrary to that threatening, Prove. 19.16.

Object. Abraham lived among Heathen Nations, and Lot in Sodom.

Answ. Abraham had a command for what he did. Lots soul was greived during his
abode among them, to see their filthy conversation; if he went thither rather
out of the pleasantness of the place, than out of a desire to convert them, and
to plant true Religion among them, it was his weakness.

Object. 1 Cor. 5.9, 10. I wrote unto you, not to keep company with
Fornicatours, yet not altogether with the Fornicatours of this World, or
covetous, for then must ye needs go out of the World: therefore, etc.

Answ. The Apostle does not prescribe this as if it were always and every where
lawful, but because the necessity of that time did require it, because the
greatest part of men were unbelievers: so much appears in these words, Else
must ye go out of the World, as if he should say, When you cannot live without
them, you are compelled to converse and trade with them, but now such
necessity is taken away.

Object. Princes suffer wicked men to live in their countries, why may we
not then converse with them?

Answ. They also permit leprous and plaguey men to do the same, yet do we not
shun their company?

Quest. But sometimes we are inevitably cast among such, what should we then
do?

Answ. 1 Lose not your piety by them, nor suck infection from them, Psalm 1.1,
2. Psalm 26.4, 5. Hence take a counter-poyson against their infection, as you
use to do against infectious Diseases.

2 Propose holy ends where you are so cast, as,

1 Their good; so did Christ here with the Publicans.

2 Thine own safety by a wise behaving thy self among them, that thereby thou
may abate their rage, if not make them thorovv friends.

3 Take heed of furious zeal, Acts 26.11.

4 Take heed of denying Christ, whether by speech or silence, Revel. 2.13.
Nebuchadnezzar would not endure to hear any to blaspheme the God of Daniel.

5 Reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. if not in word, because they are not capable, or
else are Dogs and Hogs, Matthew. 7.5. yet in gesture or countenance; but if you
reprove them in words, bring solid Reasons which strike the matter in the
head, by vveak Reasons you strengthen them, and expose your Reproof to scorn.

6 Bevvare you be not bewitched with their learning, parts, vvitty jests,
sociableness, affability, etc. and so conjoyn your selves with them. This was
the sin of Jehosaphat, condemned, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou love them that
hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee.

7 Consent not unto them in sinful temptations, Pro. 1.10. as they are
importunate, do you resist importunately. The Bait of their Temptation is
baited with the Worm of Conscience.

8 Do not sooth nor flatter them in their sin; call not evil good, left you
bring a vvo on your head for so doing, Isai 5.20. Condemn not good, nor praise
evil. Micaiah would not sooth up Ahab, nor speak as the false Prophets spoke.

Object. But I am already acquainted with wicked persons, what should I do?

Answ. 1 Dissolve and unglue the friendship by degrees, rather than break it in
pieces all at once.

2 Get the Image of God stamped on thee. As when the Sun shines gloriously all
men keep at a distance from it, so when holiness is stamped on thee, carnal men
will forbear thy company. If thou be sober, zealous, heavenly, etc. the
drunkard, luke warm and earthly person will not care for thy company. Godly men
are said to be a people near to God, Psalm 148.14.

3 Convince them with thy carriage, that when a carnal man is in thy company,
his Conscience may fly in his face, and tell him he does not so. Acts 2.42, 43.
Fear came upon every soul, why? the forwardness and zeal of the Brethren made
others fear. A child of God may so live, that a wicked man will not care to
come into his company, or, if he come, he will bite in his sin.

4 Be constant in ways of holiness and carnal men will have no delight in thy
company; but when godly men will break sinful jests, carnal men love this, for
they reason, Such a godly man will do this, and why may not I? Psa. 119.115.
Away from me ye wicked. David bids them depart, but how? He resolves to keep
Gods commandments. I suppose he did not say so with his mouth, in point of
manners, but the actions of his life said so.

5 If you would be rid of wicked men, close not with them, hold them off at
staves end, and they cannot for shame come in, Psalm. 101.4. David by
strangeness to wicked men made them depart from him. The ground of all closing
is when we meet with a man of the same temper with us, but when the spirit is
contrary they cannot close.

6 Reprove them and they will not endure thee. But in three cases,

1 When thou reproves them slightly. Reprove, 1 in word. 2 In life, Ephesians. 5.13.
q. d. the light of thy holy life will make their evil appear.
Tell a swearer of the third Commandment and he will thank thee, but reprove
him soundly and he will none of thee.

2 When thou reproves them for such sins as they can find in their heart to
leave. A covetous man will bear reproof for his swearing, but not for his
covetousness, Ephesians. 5.11. q. d. If thou reprove them they will have no
fellowship with thee.

3 When thou reproves them laughingly. This rather strengthens then weakens sin
in others.

7 Get good companions, and so wicked men will have no delight in thy company,
because of them, Psalm. 119.63, 97.

1 Good companions are most suitable to thee; as we would have other things
suitable, as diet, apparel, so should we have our company.

2 Most faithful companions. Wicked men in their greatest love treasure up that
which may mischiev others. When we lay our selves open to such and they do not
fall foul upon us, it is rather Gods restraint then our wisdom. Jonathan was so
faithful to David, that he would not betray him for a Kingdom. Yea all good
men are called by the name of faithful, Psalm. 12.1.

3 Most pleasant companions. In other company though something delight us, yet
something offends us, but the company of such Saints is usually without
offense. Speaking of things for matter or manner of speaking, good, telling of
Gods providence of several sorts, etc.

4 Most profitable companions, 1 Pet. 3 1. Husbands without the word are won by
the conversation of their wives; besides, if there be any honest dealing in the
world, it is among such, hence some carnal persons that never cared for such in
their life, have desired to commit their children to them in their death.

5 They must be our everlasting companions. As it is a ground to part from
wicked men, because we must be everlastingly parted, so should we begin our
fellowship with them on earth, with whom we hope to reign everlastingly in
heaven, 1 These. 4, 17.

6 Communion of Saints is an Article of the faith. Many are heretical in faith,
saying they believe communion of Saints, and know not what it is, these believe
a lie: others are heretical in practice, saying they believe a communion of
Saints, but have wicked men for their familiars, and not Saints.

Motives or grounds to get rid of wicked company.
1 The danger of infection. The rot is not more dangerous among sheep then
rotten manners to infect men, 1 Cor. 15.33. Evil communication corrupts good
manners: And whereas we think we can commonly converse with such and not be
tainted, the Apostle gives a caveat, Be not deceived, evil communication
corrupts good manners: As good men endeavor to make others like them, Prove.
13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise, breathing forth holy
instructions and giving godly examples, so wicked companions will endeavor to
make thee like themselves, Pro. 1.11, 12, 13, 14. Cast in thy lot among us, we
will all have one purse. As by walking in the Sun we become insensibly tanned
by it, so we come insensibly to be drawn away by wicked company; hence some
have compared every man to a coal; if he be a living coal he will heat him
which is next, if he be a dead coal he will sully and black him. Hence Lot was
afraid to dwell in Zoar. Hence Isai says, c. 6, 5. Woe is me I am undone, why?
I am a man of polluted lips, and dwell among a people of polluted lips.

2 Our salvation much depends hereupon, Acts 2.40. Save your selves from this
wicked generation, q. d. your salvation depends upon it. Prove. 9.6. Forsake the
foolish and live, q. d. you cannot live without forsaking such, Ps. 119.115.

3 The contrariety of dispositions and manners betwixt godly and wicked, they
abominate one another ways, Pro. 29.27. The unjust is an abomination to the
just, and he that is upright in his way is abomination to the wicked. 2 Cor.
6.14. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? No more then
Christ and Belial, light and darkness. If men that look toward God did not
dissemble their godliness, and seem worse then they be, wicked men would
abominate them as much as they secretly abominate the manners of wicked men.

4 In such company we shall always find something to grieve us, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
Lot vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with the filthy conversation of
the Sodomites, Psalm. 120 5, 6. Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with
Meshech, and to have my habitation among the Tents of Kedar! What good got
Peter in the High Priests hall? Moses was so sensible of this, that He chose to
live with the poor people of God in affliction, rather then to live among the
wicked Court of Egypt.

5 We have peremptory commands to withdraw our selves from such persons and
companies, Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the way of the wicked, and go not in
the way of evil men; Avoid it, pass not by it, as you do avoid an infected
house, turn from it and pass away. The reason hereof is, Prove. 22.24, 25. With
a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his ways. Another command is,
Prove. 14.7. Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in
him the lips of knowledge. As we are commanded not to keep company with wicked
men in general, so not with idolaters in special, Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. Thou shall not
give thy daughter to his son, nor take his son to thy daughter.

6 The fearful Apostacies and declinings which professing people have fallen
into by such company, Neh. 13.26. Strange outlandish women caused Solomon to
sin. Rehoboam was carried away by foolish young men, 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18. Joash
when he lost his good acquaintance Jehoiada, and came to be acquainted with
idolatrous young Princes, forsook Gods worship, and wrath came upon Judah.
Sarah seeing the profaneness of Ishmael, Genesis 21.9, 10. was earnest to have
him cast out, for fear he might draw away her son Isaac.

7 Where Gods law forbids any sin, it forbids all occasions thereof; as where
it forbids uncleanness, it forbids wanton gazing, mixed dancing, dalliance. So
friendship with wicked men is an occasion of wickedness, therefore to be
avoided, Matthew. 5.29. If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, by hand is
meant any man or thing that may draw us away from God, as Chrysostom observes
on the place. If we cut a rotten member from the body, lest the rest be
infected, much more may we, nay must we cut off one who is wickedly joined unto
it. Yea though a kinsman or friend.

8 Such wicked company will quench in the thoughts of good, and cool thy
devotion. How cold was Jehosaphat in Ahabs company? 1 Kings 22.8. Though he
justified Micaiah against Ahab, yet was it faintly, Let not the King say so.

9 Such companions are mostly treacherous to their friends and Allies. Ahab
bade Jehosaphat put on his Princely robes, but himself would go disguised,
knowing the Syrian Army had order only to fight against the King.

10 The many snares and dangers among such company, as, 1 Danger of calling
good evil, and evil good, to which there is a woe, Isai 5.20. When they shall
praise wicked men and wicked actions, we shall be apt to sooth them up or at
least to be silent; when they shall decry good men and actions, we shall be apt
not to bear a full testimony.

2 Proneness to learn their ways, Psalm. 106 35. They were mingled with the
Heathen and learned their ways.

3 Hazard of being exposed to Gods vengeance. How near was Jehosaphat to
destruction joining with Ahab. at Ramoth Gilead? 2 Chr. 18.31. Also for joining
in making a fleet to go to Tarshish together with Ahaziah, the Lord broke his
works, 2 Chronicles. 20.35, 36, 37. To what danger was Lot exposed in Sodom, and
Gods people in Babylon? Come out of her, my people, come out of her, Rev. 18.4.
lest ye be partakers of her sins, and so of her plagues.

4 In such company we are in danger either of denying the truth, or of
blushingly confessing it. Peter being in the High Priest's Hall denied Christ.
It Is bad being in harms way, we should desire to be among such persons and
places where we may boldly confess the truth of God, Acts 4.29. Grant unto thy
servants that with all boldness they may speak thy word. We are to witness to
the truth of God in the midst of an adulterous generation, Mar. 8.38. It lies
upon every son of wisdom to justify wisdom, which if we do men will be apt to
fall foul upon us. Though the Samaritans were not altogether so wicked, being
they acknowledged the books of Moses, yet, for these and such like ends, would
not the Jews have dealing with them, John 4.9.

5 Danger. Wicked company will be apt to be hindrances to us in our Christian
course, Psalm 119.115. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the
commandments of my God, q.d. I cannot keep Gods commandments so long as you
are with me. How is it possible to keep the commandment of sobriety among
drunkards, of charity among the contentious, of chastity among the lascivious?

11 The last ground of disswasion is, the singular care Gods people have had to
eschew such company, Psalm. 26.4, 5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither
will I go in with dissemblers. I have hated the congregation of evil doers, and
will not sit with the wicked. He says he has not, nor he will not, though a
man should invite him. Yea good men are thus noted, Psalm. 1.1. That they walk
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in
the seat of the scornful. Woeful then must needs be the condition of wicked men,
when God shall bid his children forbear their company.

V. 12. But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need
not a Physician, but they that are sick.

We have here Christ's second answer to the proud conceited Pharisees concerning
the question put by the Pharisees to Christ's Disciples, viz. Why eats your
master with Publicans.

Jesus heard that] That is, by the relation of his Disciples, for the Pharisees
durst not object it to Christ themselves. Christ therefore hearing of it, both
defends the deed, and discovers their ignorance: he defends it, 1 From the rule
of correlation, sick persons and a Physician are fittest to be together. Sick
persons are the proper object of a Physician, and the end of Medicinal Physic
is the healing sick persons.

They that be whole need not a Physician but they that are sick] The words are
a Proverb, q.d. It Is no disgrace for a Physician to be with sick persons for to
cure them, no more is it for me to be with sinners for their cure.

But for you Pharisees, you are whole in your own apprehension, you were never
wounded in the sight of your sins, but, being full of your own
self-righteousness, think you need not me for your Physician, Romans 7.11.

Not as if the Pharisees were whole indeed, but Christ speaks to them by way of
supposition, q.d. If you be such as you would seem to be, you need not my help,
but indeed you are not such, but they that indeed are wounded for their sins,
to them I am precious, Act. 2.37, 38, 41. Joh. 3.14, 15, 16. Matthew. 11.28. Luke
4.18.

As they that are sick cannot help themselves, no more can sick souls help
themselves without me; now if you ask what that Diacatholicon or universal
Medicine is, it is the atonement of Christ upon the Cross, Heb. 9.12.10.22.
applied by the Spirit and faith, Gal. 2.20. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. For as other
medicines are not effectual, till they be applied and received, no more is
this, Joh. 1.12. As many as received him (meaning into their hearts) to them he
gave power to become the Sons of God, Act. 4.12. He is the true Samaritan who
took care of the wounded man, Luke 10.33. He is not like a covetous Physician
who will not go to any but to those that can pay him.

1 But he is a free Physician who calls all to come to him, without money, and
without price, Isa. 55.1. Matthew. 11.28.

2 He is a sympathizing Physician, and therefore likeliest to do us good. He is
touched with the feeling of our wants, Heb. 4.15.

3 He is an able Physician. How great soever the disease was, if it were
curable, he could cure it, Heb. 2.18. In that he himself has suffered, being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. There Is much talking of
the Panacea, or Universal Medicine, but he has it indeed. Some Physicians are
only expert for some one disease, but Christ is for every disease.

Now for thee who art a patient to Christ, 1 Thou must come to him, Joh. 6.37.
So let thy disease be what it will, he will not cast thee off. He saves to the
uttermost them that come to God by him. Heb. 7.25.

2 Thou must acknowledge thy disease to him, as the patient does to the
Physician, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive them. Not but that Christ knows them well enough, but he will have thee
to be sensible whence thy healing comes. As in the blind man, Matthew. 21.33. who
begging mercy of Christ in general, had it not; but being sensible of his
blindness and desiring sight, Christ gave it him.

3 As it is a good help to the Patient to have a good subordinate confidence in
the Physician; so it is requisite if thou come to Christ to place all thy
confidence in thy Physician, Act. 4.12. as knowing salvation is not in any
other.

V. 13. But go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Christ brings a second argument from the Scripture to justify his eating and
conversing with sinners.

Go ye and learn what that meaneth] Christ upbraids their ignorance, and sends
these doctors to school. So did he Matthew. 12.3.5.19.4.21.16.22.31.

I will have mercy and not sacrifice] That is, 1 not outward ceremonies without
inward obedience. 2 Not sacrifice in comparison of mercy; mercy ought to
overweigh sacrifice, and sacrifice must give place to mercy. Among men, when
two laws are made which interfere, that which tends most to righteousness,
profit and honesty ought to take place. So that Christ shows, that all the
commands of shunning familiarity with wicked men, must be so observed, that
occasions and opportunities of bringing them into the way of holiness must not
be neglected. And therefore when that Christ endeavored to bring back these
Publicans, who were as so many fugitives from God, he was not to be blamed
herein. So that place, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Count him not as an enemy, but admonish
him as a brother; Lest any man should think that when a man was cast out, all
coming to him was forbid, the Apostle adds, they are not to be counted enemies
(as the Jews counted such) but they are to be brotherly admonished. When the
bond of Church Communion, or Christian Communion, is dissolved, yet there
remains a bond of humane nature, and the remembrance of former friendship.

So that Christ by his example and doctrine proposes to the Pharisees to follow
mercy; as if he should say, I had rather have mercy on poor sinners, then offer
many sacrifices with you, and this my practice you may see justified, Hos. 6.6.

Not sacrifice] Obj. But did not God command it? Answ. Yes; but God will not
have Sacrifice, 1 Primarily, 1 Samuel 15.22. To obey is better then Sacrifice.
Psalm 40.8. Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire. 2 Disorderly; he will
not have them but in order to Christ.

3 Abstractively considered from works of mercy and piety, Psalm. 50.12, 13, 14.

4 I will not have Sacrifice after the offering up of my body for sin.

5 I will not have Sacrifice as a ransom, as Carnal Hypocrites thought to
appease God by the work wrought, which was the great controversy, Psalm.
50.13. asserted by Hypocrites, and opposed by the Godly then living. Hypocrites
alleged, Levit. 4.5, etc. where Sacrifices were to be offered for sins.

6 I will not have it as the principal worship.

Obs. It Is not only a work of mercy to succor persons in their outvvard
afflictions, but its also a work of mercy to dravv a sinner from his evil
vvayes to the true fear of God.

For I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance] Here Is a
third Reason whereby Christ defends his action of conversing with sinners, to
wit, his Office of Mediator; I came not to call the righteous but sinners to
repentance. By Righteous he means Pharisaical self-justiciaries, who are drunk
with the opinion of their own righteousness; by sinners are not meant only
excommunicate persons, and such as live a loose and dissolute life, but also
all men out of Christ. Again, Christ taxes them that they made no distinction
betwixt penitent and impenitent sinners. It was always lawful to keep company
with penitent sinners, though not with impenitent.

To conclude, persons called by Christ are called to repentance. Let no man,
upon pretense of his interest in Christ, live in a state of looseness. The grace
of God that brings salvation, teaches us to deny ungodliness, Titus 2.12.13.

V. 14. Then came to him the Disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees fast often, but thy Disciples fast not?

Here are two things considerable, 1 A Question moved by the Scribes and
Pharisees, as the authors, and John's Disciples, as the actours, which was, why
they fasted often but the Disciples of Christ fasted not?

2 Christ's Answer, v. 15. Can the Children of the Bridechamber fast, etc.
which he backs from three Reasons;

1 That they had no cause at present of fasting, but of rejoicing, he the
Bridegroom being with them.

2 That though at present they did not fast and mourn, yet in a short time
they should have cause so to do.

3 The Disciples being young Converts, the duty of fasting was not so suitable,
v. 16. and that the Gospel-doctrine was not so suitable to them, in regard of
their old carnal natures and legal customs, v. 16, 17.

Then came to him the Disciples of John, saying, Why do we, etc.] Mark says,
The Disciples of the Pharisees together with them, propound this Question, Mark
2.18. Luke says, The Scribes and Pharisees asked him, Luke 5.33. The
reconciliation is easy; the Pharisees by their Disciples stirred up the
Disciples of John to ask this Question, so that both asked the Question, the
Pharisees as the authors, their Disciples and John's as the actours: the
Pharisees were afraid to encounter Christ themselves, hence they use
Emissaries; the Devil has a notable art in sowing contention.

Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy Disciples fast not] The
occasion of this Question was some Faste-day which the Pharisees appointed and
kept, wherein Christ's Disciples did eat and drink, by which is not meant a
public Fast, which was to be kept by all the members of the Jewish Church,
and so consequently by Christ, seeing he acknowledges himself a member thereof,
John 4.22. All the Jews upon pain of cutting off were to observe the tenth day
of the seventh month, Levit. 16.29, 30, 31.23.27. this was their only
prescribed Fast: but it was some private Fast to gain glory and praise to the
Pharisees, Luke 18.12. The Pharisee fasted twice a week. But John's Disciples
kept it out of some other end, but Christ's Disciples did use to eat and drink
as at other times.

Besides it is like John's Disciples might propound this Question out of zeal to
their Master, and out of envy to Christ, as in another case, John 3.26.

Now the Pharisees did question in this manner, to hinder Christ's Ministry, and
therefore where ever he went they usually followed him to hinder his Ministry,
and they being silenced in their Objection in the former story, they knowing
John to be much in repute among the Jews, they get his Disciples to propound
this Question.

We may observe, 1 The restlesness of Enemies of Truth, though conquered and
beaten once and again, vet they give not over.

2 See how cunning men, the Enemies of Christ, endeavor to wind others into
their party, so the Pharisees wind in John's Disciples. Young Converts are
ready to be misled through the craft of those who ly in wait to deceive. See
Ephesians. 4.14.

3 See that persons are apt to please themselves with their own customary
service, Zach. 7.3, 5. they had taken up two Fastes in the fifth and seventh
month, for seventy years, and though they had nothing but Custom for it, yet
they send from Babylon to Jerusalem to make the continuance of it a case of
Conscience. Besides, when people have set up a golden Calf they would fain have
others to worship it, and so John's Disciples urge to have their fasting days
observed.

But thy Disciples fast not] That is, they eat and drink, secretly accusing
them of excess and intemperance; probably that place, Matthew. 11.18. alludes to
this. The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and behold a Man gluttonous and
a Wine-bibber: q. d. We are holy and of God, thou art a sinner, whiles we are
fasting thou art feasting.

V. 15. And Jesus said unto them, Can the Children of the Bride-chamber mourn
so long as the Bridegroom is with them? but the days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.

Here is Christ's meek Answer to them, as being weak and seduced, putting
difference betwixt Seducers, and such. Seducing Teachers are to be handled more
roughly, seduced more meekly.

Can the Children of the Bride-chamber mourn] That is, those that were admitted
into the Bride-chamber with the Bridegroom, as Virgins were with the Bride,
Psalm 45.14, 15. The sum of Christ's Answer is, Christ leaving the Pharisees, he
answers only John's Disciples, showing, that the cause why they fasted was not
competent or agreeing to his Disciples, but the time should come when even his
Disciples, losing their Master, should mourn, mean time they had a little
respite of joy and comfort, so long as he was with them. As marriages call for
feasting and gladness not for fasting and sorrow, so did the presence of Christ
with his Disciples, so that Christ his answer consists of two branches,

1 That at present his Disciples had not cause of mourning, because he the
Bridegroom was with them. Observe that Christ is the Bridegroom of his Church,
John 3.29. Matthew. 22.2. Rev. 22.17. who did not only espouse our nature, and
not the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16. but also mary's himself to every believing
soul, Romans 7.4. we are married to him that was raised from the dead. John 6.37.
2 Cor. 11.3. This marriage is made up here on earth in the state of grace,
whereto there is a feast of grace and comfort as the begun solemnities thereof,
Matthew. 2 2.2. and perfected in heaven in the feast of eternal glory, Revel.
19.7, 8, 9.

2 Christ answers, they should have time of fasting and mourning in time to
come. Christ taking away their superstitious fasting, does neither cry up riot
or excess, nor decry fasting, but that Christians must apply themselves to that
condition the Lord sends: When he gives glad times let us rejoice in them, when
he brings sad times let us be humbled and seek his face. Christ does not decry
fasting, as I said, but he would not have it tied to certain times, as the Jews
fondly did, Zach. 7.3, 5. since, such a day of the Month this year may be fit
for fasting, but the next year the same day may call for feasting. Jejuniorum
dissonantia non rumpat fidei consonantiam. For as there were due cases for
fasting under the Old Testament, as when some stroke of God was on a people,
Judge. 20.26. when some judgment hanged over a people, as Nineveh, Jon. 3.5. or
to obtain some singular mercy, Dan. 9.31. Now these and such like causes of
fasting Christ does not take away, but does establish them: yea and the Apostle
practiced them, 2 Cor. 11.25. There Is a tropological sense, that when Christ
our husband departs from us for our sins, we should then fast and mourn, till
we get his return, but the literal sense is to be taken as that which is meant.

V. 16. No man puts a new piece of cloth into an old garment, for that which
is put in to fill it up, takes from the garment, and the rent is made worse:

V. 17. Neither do men put new Wine into old bottles, else the bottles break
and the Wine runs out, and the bottles perish; but they put new Wine into
new bottles, and both are preserved.

Here Is a third reason why Christ does not require his Disciples to fast,
which is their present weakness, which cannot well bear a more strict
discipline; the painful duty of fasting does not well suit with my Disciples,
being but babes, no more then a new piece does with an old garment, or new Wine
that is hot and working to be put into old bottles, this would be a means to
make them fall off from me, and go back to the Pharisees, and therefore I
refrain as yet from it, to avoid offense.

Tertul. l. de orat. c. 1. By the old garment and old bottles understands the
Old Testament, by the new piece the New Testament; for the new reformed the
old, and made it as it were new, but I lean to the former.

Another is this. As a new piece does not agree to an old garment, so your
traditions of Fathers and Elders about your fastings does not agree to my
Gospel-doctrine, these will not warm our hearts, not quiet our consciences, as
the garment of my righteousness does. Moreover the mixture of humane
institutions and godliness or religion, will hazard the loss of godliness and
religion. The ancients kept their Wine in bottles made of leather and Skins, as
we keep it in Casks; now when this is put in old bottles the Wine is apt to
spill; so the doctrine of the Gospel, when it falls into superstitious minds,
is apt to be lost.

The Gospel is compared to Wine, both as Wine glads the heart, Judge. 9. Psalm.
104.15. so does the Gospel; it is compared to new Wine, not because it is new,
being of old preached to Adam, Genesis 3.15. but in opposition to the old Adam, or
corrupt nature in us, q. d. Gospel truths do not agree to a man remaining in
his old nature, but Gospel truths are well agreeing to a regenerate nature, as
new Wine to new bottles.

To communicate Gospel truths to such, is a double loss.

1 Of the Wine, whiles unregenerate men reject the Gospel, because it is
contrary to their lusts, or scandalize that Gospel they profess.

2 The bottles are broken, that is, these men perish, whiles by degrees they
apostatize.

Luke adds c. 5.39. No man having drunk old Wine straightway desires new, for
he says the old is better. As if Christ should say, it befalls my doctrine as
it befalls them who have been accustomed to old Wine, for as they cannot endure
new Wine, because it has a certain fowrness, so ye, being accustomed to old
superstitions and pompous traditions, cannot away with my doctrine which is
humble, sharp and powerful, even to the renewing of the whole man, which when
they are renewed then are they capable to receive the doctrine of the Gospel.
So that the sum is, the doctrine of the Gospel can neither be joined with
ceremonial services nor carnal natures: the Law of Ceremonies is made old like
an old garment or old bottles, by my coming in the flesh, therefore my
Disciples do well that they do not fast according to the Law. Of these three
interpretations I prefer the first and third.

V. 18. While he yet spoke these things unto them, behold, there came a certain
Ruler and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead, but come and
lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.

We have in this story,

1 The request of a Ruler of the Synagogue at Capernaum, whose name was Jairus,
as Mark and Luke sets him down, Mark 5. Luke 8.

Which is amplified, 1 From the time, which was whiles he was speaking to the
Disciples of John, and the Pharisees.

2 From the place, which was Capernaum, where he healed the Palsy man, where
he was feasted by Matthew, and where the Pharisees cavilled with him for not
fasting.

3 From the devotion and submission of the Ruler, he worshipped Christ, v. 18.

4 The thing requested, which was, that whereas his daughter was dead, or at
the point of death, that Christ would come and heal her.

5 The weakness of his faith, in that, in healing his daughter he limits Christ
to such a means, lay thy hand upon her and she shall live.

2 We have the healing of the woman who had a bloody flux. Amplified, 1 From
the length of time wherein she was afflicted with this disease, which was
twelve years.

2 From the means of her healing, which was her faith, she said within her
self, If I may but touch his garment I shall be whole, ver. 20.21.

3 The comfortable absolution Christ pronounces to her trembling soul, who was
not without doubts and fears, because she had closely and surreptitiously
obtained her healing; Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee
whole, v. 22.

3 We have the healing of Jairus daughter. Amplified,

1 From his dismissing the Minstrels and people, and taking the father and
mother of thed amosel in, Mark 5.40. and Peter, James and John, Luke 8.51. who
saw the miracle.

2 The consolation he gives to the mourners who were there wailing, She is not
dead but sleeps, v. 24.

3 The derision that was cast upon Christ's words, They laughed him to scorn, v.
24. knowing that she was dead, as Luke has it, Luke 8.53.

4 The manner of his raising her up, He took her by the hand, v. 25. saying,
Maid arise, Luke 8.53.

5 The effects of this, 1 Her spirit came again and she arose straightway, Luke
8.55. and Jesus bade they should give her meat.

2 The fame of the miracle went abroad into all that Land, v. 26.
notwithstanding Christ charged the damsels parents that they should tell no
man what was done.

V. 18. While yet he spoke these things unto them] That is in Capernaum where
Matthew feasted him.

Behold there came a certain ruler] Called a Ruler of the Synagogue, Mark 5.22.
Luke 8.41. called Jairus. All the three Evangelists put a note of admiration
upon it, Behold. It Is a great thing for a Governor to come to Christ, but most
wonderful for a Ruler of the Synagogue. He was one of the Rulers of the
Synagogue, Mark 5.22. that is of the Synagogue of Capernaum. He was (...),
there were diverse of these, as appears, Acts 13.15. who had an inspection over
or into the Synagogue. Among these there was one that did excel, who for his
ability to instruct, was set over the rest, whose office it was to interpret
the Law and to pray. Just. cont. Triph. of these, Luke 13.14.

And worshipped him] The ruler is set down from his devotion, that he
worshipped Christ. Mark has it, he fell at his feet and besought him greatly,
Mark 5.22, 23. He fell down at his feet and besought him that he would come
into his house, Luke 8.41. whether this worship were religious or civil I shall
not at present determine, howbeit some think it was a bare bending of the knee.

My daughter is even now dead] Christ orders afflictions so that he can make
one or other bring us to Christ, so here the death of a daughter brings the
ruler to Christ. Now that he says his daughter was dead, he spoke herein
conjecturally, considering how sick she was when Christ left her. Its like at
first he cried that she was at the point of death. Now he cries that she was
dead, upon the report the messengers brought, and because when he left her she
was breathing out her soul or near thereto. And so we may reconcile Marks
saying, Mark 5.23. She was at the point of death, and Luke and Matthews saying,
she was dead, so that the messenger that came, seeing the case desperate, bids
him that he would not trouble the Master, that is Christ: Christ therefore
seeing him wavering in his faith and hope, strengthens him, saying, Fear not,
believe only and she shall be made whole, Luke 8.50. so gracious is Christ to
bear with the weaknesses of his peoples faith.

But come and lay thy hand upon her and she shall live] His faith was weaker
then the Centurions. The Centurion believed that Christ, though absent, with a
word of his mouth could heal his servant, but Jairus says, Come and lay thy
hands on her. Here was the weakness of his faith that he limits Christ's power
to laying on of hands, yet are not persons weak in faith to be rejected, but
encouraged, as Christ does encourage the ruler, Luke 8.50. Besides its like he
had seen or heard that Christ had healed sundry persons at Capernaum by laying
on of hands, and therefore he hoped he would do the same to his daughter.
Laying on of hands is an act, 1 Of power or dominion, 2 Of a will ready and
inclining to do good, as to heal and help.

I shall speak a little concerning this doctrine of laying on of hands.

There is a threefold laying on of hands, 1 Curatory or healing. Mark 16.18.
They shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover, Act. 28.8. Publius his
Father being sick, Paul prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him. It
may be supposed the Apostle speaks of this, Jam. 5.14. Is any among you sick?
let him send for the Elders of the Church and let them pray over him, anointing
him with Oil. So Christ Mark 6.5. Mark. 16.18.

2 Ordinatory: there is a laying on of hands in ordination of Elders; this is
acknowledged by all the reformed Churches of what judgment soever. Though
Papists acknowledge this to be an unblottable character, which who so has can
never blot it out again, yet the Protestants acknowledge it only a sign,
pointing out the person ordained, who is commended to the prayers of the
Church. Hence that saying of Augustine is ordinarily produced, Quid aliud est
impositio manuum quam oration super hominem? what other thing is laying on of
hands then prayer upon the man ordained?

Besides these two there is a third way, which I suppose comes nearer to truth,
which is that by laying on of hands in ordination there is a further measure of
the Spirit infused into, and poured upon the person ordained.

Concerning laying on of hands in ordination the Scripture speaks, 1 Of those
who are sent into the world, Act. 13. When they had fasted and prayed and laid
their hands on them, they sent them away. v. 5.

2 On those who are officers in Churches, as deacons, Act. 6.6. The Apostles
first prayed then laid their hands on them. So Elders, Acts 14.23. And when
they had ordained them Elders in every Church, by laying on of hands, (the word
is (...)) and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, 1 Timothy
5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins.
That is by consenting to ordain such.

3 There is a laying on of hands on baptized persons after Baptism; this has
been depraved, 1 By those who have endeavored to make working of miracles a
concomitant thereof, because some persons in the Apostles times after hands
laid on them did speak with tongues, Act. 19.6.7. and prophesied.

2 This laying on of hands has been depraved by the Romanists, 1 By changing
the name from laying on of hands to confirmation.

2 By assigning it an outward matter, viz. Oil and Balsome, and the form of it
to be, I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm thee with the
anointing of salvation, in the name of the Father, Son and Spirit. Chem. exam.
cont. Trid. part. 2. p. 95.

3 That those things they attribute to confirmation they deny to be given and
received in Baptism.

4 That they ascribe an indelible character unto it, as to Baptism and order,
Chem. p ar. 2. cap. de charactere, p. 45.

5 By affixing it on a Bishop. Gratian distinct. 68. Fol. 99. propounds this
question, Wherein Chorepiscopi (by which I suppose he means either rural Deans
or Suffragans) differ from Bishops, answers and gives this as one difference,
that its not lawful for them to give the comforter, the holy Spirit, by laying
on of hands to Baptized believers, or converted Heretics.

3 Laying on of hands has been depraved by the Episcopal party, who, retaining
the popish name of confirmation, and affixing it to a Diocesan Bishop, instead
of prayer for strengthening of believers, 1 Lay hands upon infants or young
children, 2 Supposing them all to be regenerate after Baptism, pray for an
increase of grace on them, 3 Have added hereto Godfathers as they call it.

Now, to prove laying on of hands on Baptized persons is an apostolical
institution, I prove it,

1 Because the Apostle makes it one of the six principles, or the word of the
beginning of Christ, Heb. 6.1. Or the first rudiments or elements of the
beginning of the oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. The words are (...). The Word (...)
is only explanatory, for the principles of all arts are called elements; nay,
which is more, the Apostle calls it a foundation, as well as repentance, faith
and Baptism, now the five others being fundamentals, wherein all converted
persons are to be practical in the belief, how can laying on of hands be
excluded from being so received?

2 If laying on of hands on Baptized persons after Baptism be rejected, then
instead of six principles laid down by the Apostle, we shall receive only
five, but this is absurd.

Obj. but we acknowledge a laying on of hands in the call of ministry,
therefore we acknowledge six.

Answ. And why not as well after Baptism? what reason can be brought that
ministerial imposition should be here acknowledged, and the imposition after
Baptism excluded? nay, it seems, imposition after Baptism is rather meant.

1 Because as faith and repentance go together, resurrection and the last
judgment, so Baptism and laying on of hands go together in the Apostles
joining of them.

2 Laying on of hands upon officers is not herein meant, because this was an
administration the whole Church had received, Act. 8.16. Heb. 6.1. but officers
are not the whole Church.

3 Because this laying on of hands is called milk for babes, Heb. 5.12, 13. but
officers are not babes.

3 Because there is a command for it. 1 It Is called the rudiments of the
beginning, or elements of the beginning (he means not elements of the world, of
which Gal. 4.3, 8. Col. 2.8, 20.) that is, elements wherein persons were
initiated or begun in Christianity, Heb. 5.12. As the elements of the Latin
tongue is the learning of Accidence or Grammar, so this doctrine of laying on
of hands was first to be taught and practiced.

2 Its called an oracle, Heb. 5.12. Now what are oracles in Scripture language
but commands? Act. 7.38. Moses received the lively oracles to give unto us.
This is called the Law, ver. 53. Who have received the Law by the disposition
of Angels, and have not kept it, Romans 3.2. What advantage has the Jew? Much
every way, chiefly that unto them were committed the oracles of God. See Psalm.
147.19, 20. 1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God,
that is, as the commands of God.

3 The Apostle calls it a foundation, Heb. 6.1. so that there is not only a
virtual command, but an actual command: from these three words of rudiments or
elements, oracles, and foundation, I gather a plain command.

3 It appears from absurdity. Is it not absurd to think that one of the six
foundation principles commended to us by the Apostle should cease, and all
others of them to remain to the end of the world? Nay is not imposition after
Baptism placed in the midst, betwixt faith and repentance, the resurrection
and last judgment, so that there is no coming to slight it, being fenced on
every side, but we must renounce faith and repentance on the one side, or the
resurrection and last judgment on the other? Is it not absurd to think the
Apostle would place one temporary principle, which was to last but for a small
time, among five perpetual principles, and yet call them all by the name of a
foundation? yea such a foundationas other things were to be laid after in eodem
genere edificii, in the same kind of building, for the Apostle says, Let us go
on to perfection, now what perfection does he mean? truly a perfection of the
knowledge of Christ, the foundation whereof was already laid. And so he did,
for in the next place he comes to unfold the sin against the holy Ghost, the
doctrine of assurance to the heirs of promise, the doctrine of Christ's
priesthood.

4 All the Churches were under laying on of hands, the Church of the Samaritans
was under it, Act. 8.12, 14, 17. compared. On the same Church of Samaria which
was Baptized, were hands laid. The Church of the Hebrews had this as a
principle first laid, Heb. 6.1.

Object. But how does it follow to all the Churches?

Answ. As we judge all the Churches were under Baptism, though we do not read
of any of the Church of Thessalonica to have been baptized, yet because we
read other Churches, we conclude also they were. So because we find these two
Churches to have been under Laying on of Hands, we conclude all the Churches
also so to have been, because of the unity of the Rule. Now the Rule is plain,
Acts 8.14, 16, 17. When the Apostles heard that Samaria had received the Word
of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, who, when they were come down,
prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost. The emphasis lies in
this Pronoun Relative they, the Antecedent whereto, must be the baptized
Samaritans, whom Philip had baptized, v. 12. also v. 16. it is said, For as yet
he was fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus. So that Imposition of Hands was administered to all the baptized
Samaritans, v. 17. Then laid they their Hands on them, and they received the
Holy Ghost.

5 The first Church should be a Pattern to other Churches, but the first Church
continued in laying on of hands, therefore other Churches ought to continue
herein. The Proposition appears, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14. Ye, Brethren, became followers
of the Churches of God. 1 Cor. 11.16. We have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God.

The Assumption appears, because the Apostle calls it a Doctrine, Heb. 6.2. The
Doctrine of Baptism and laying on of hands. Now the first Church continued in
the Apostles Doctrine, Acts 2.42. of which Doctrine this was part.

Object. But the first Church was scattered, and though there was a Church
among the Hebrews, Heb. 13.7, 17, 24. Salute them that have the rule over you,
and all the Saints, yet was not this Church the same, for Acts 8.1. There was a
great Persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered
through the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles.

Answ. All is often in Scripture taken for a great part, and so I take it here.
No doubt some could not fly, besides they were scattered only a little way,
that is, into their own Country of Judea and Samaria, and could easily return
when times proved peaceable, which by Paul's conversion shortly fell out, for
then had the Churches rest, Acts 9.31. and were edified and multiplied.
Besides, the Apostles were never scattered from Jerusalem, who alone might make
a Church had there been none else, as Tertullian observes in his Book of
Chastity, Ubi tres ibi Ecclesia est, licet Laici, where there are three there
is a Church though Laics, or People, therefore this Church in the Hebrews who
were under laying on of hands and that in the Acts is the same.

6 If laying on of hands were not an Ordinance of God, and of divine
Institution, then the Apostles in Administration thereof had practiced
will worship, nay, which is more, had left a Rule of will worship unto us, Heb.
6.1. But it is absurd to think the Apostles would do either of these, therefore
laying on of hands on baptized persons is an Apostolical Institution.

Object. But many of the Saints have received the Spirit without it, as the
Antiochians, Acts 11.

Answ. So have they without Baptism and the Supper, yet it is no ground to live
without any of them, when we know them to be practiced; besides, they are
Channels to convey more of the Spirit unto us, I mean laying on of hands as well
as Baptism.

7 It appears by the testimony of ancient and modern Writers. 1 Ancient.
Tertul. lib. de Resur. cap. 8. The flesh is washed, that the soul may be
cleansed; the flesh is overshadowed with laying on of hands, that the soul may
be enlightened with the Spirit. Pamelius cites the Canon of Pope Urban, viz.
All believers ought to receive the Spirit after Baptism, by the laying on of
the hands of the Bishops, that they may be found fully Christians. And then he
adds a Constitution of Clement, which was most ancient, viz. We must all make
haste to be born again to God, and at length to be signed by the Bishop, that
is, to receive the sevenfold grace of the holy Spirit, because else a person
cannot be a perfect Christian, if he remain so, (that is, without laying on of
hands) not through necessity, but through carelessness or wilfulness.

Also in his Notes on the same Book, Number. 44. Similiter loquuntur, etc. In like
manner so many as write of Baptism speak, calling Imposition of Hands the
perfection of Baptism.

Tertul. de Bapt. ad Quintillam, cap. 8. says, It Is the fleshly or outward act
of Baptism that we are dipped in Water, the spiritual effect that we are freed
from our sins, then follows Laying on of Hands, the Dispenser calling and
inviting the Spirit of God by Prayer.

And in the same Book he says, To our Flesh rising out of the Water after our
old offenses the Dove of the holy Spirit comes flying, bringing the peace of
God sent from Heaven, where the Church is the figured Ark.

Cyprian in his Epistle to Jubaianus, speaking of the Samaritans who had
obtained a right Baptism, he says, that it was not meet they should be
baptized any further, but only that which was wanting was performed of Peter
and John, that Prayer being made for them, and Hands being laid upon them, the
Spirit of God might be called upon and poured in upon them: he adds, which also
is done with us, that they who are baptized in the Church must be offered to
them who are set over the Church, and by our Prayer and Laying on of Hands they
obtain the Holy Ghost.

Cyprian in his Epistle to Stephen, Epist. 72. speaking of those who came from
Heresy to the true Church, says, Because it is of no purpose to lay hands on
them to receive the holy Spirit, unless they receive the Baptism of the Church.

Hieron. adversus Lucifer. If thou ask why one baptized in the Church
receives not the Spirit but by the hands of the Bishop, which we affirm to be
given in true Baptism? Learn, this observation descends from that Authority
that after the Lords Ascension the holy Spirit came down upon the Apostles.

Eusebius in his History, lib. 6. cap. 35. relates, that Novatus though he were
baptized, yet because he was not confirmed or had hands laid on him after
Baptism, he never obtained the Holy Ghost. His words are, Neither did he get
other things wherewith he ought to have been endued after Baptism, according to
the Rule of the Church, nor was he sealed of the Bishop with the Lords seal
(meaning Imposition after Baptism) which he having not obtained, how could he,
I pray you, obtain the Spirit?

For modern learned men take Gerson out of Hugo, What profits it that thou art
lifted up from thy fall by Baptism, unless thou also be strengthened by
Confirmation?

Estius in Heb. 6.1. says, The Apostle undoubtedly understands that Laying on
of Hands which is wont to be administered to the faithful presently after
Baptism, of which Saint Luke, Acts 8. Acts 19. That is to say, the Sacrament of
Confirmation, whereby the Spirit of God is given to persons baptized, wherewith
they being strengthened confess the Name of Christ undauntedly among the
Enemies of the Faith; and then he concludes, For that Hands were wont to be
laid upon baptized persons after the Example of the Apostles, Universa docet
antiquitas, All antiquity teaches.

Grotius in Heb. 6.1. Hands were laid upon baptized persons to obtain the
strengthening power of the holy Spirit, and on persons ordained to the
Eldership, and on them that were reconciled after sins, and those who were weak
in body, and on new married people, desiring a blessing from the Church.

Erasmus in Heb. 6.1. The first step to Christianity is to repent of our former
life, next that salvation is to be hoped from God, next that we be purged in
Baptism from our filth, next that by laying on of hands we receive the holy
Spirit.

Heming. in Heb. 6.2. Imposition of hands was done by the Bishops and Elders on
persons examined (he should have said Baptized) prayer and blessing being added
thereto, at this laying on of hands the holy Spirit was often visibly given.

Obj. But seeing Baptism and laying on of hands are conjoined, how came they to
be severed.

Answ. When persons with a right Baptism came back from Heretics or
Schismatics to the Church, they were not rebaptized, but received only by
imposition of hands; so the counsel of Arles, can. 8. If any one come to the
Church from the Arrian Heresy, let the preachers of our faith ask them their
Creed, and, if they see they were Baptized into the Father, Son and Spirit, let
them only lay hands on them, that they may receive the holy Ghost. Leo. Epist.
77. He that is Baptized among Heretics let him not be rebaptized, but let him
be confirmed by laying on of hands, with calling upon the holy Spirit. Yet was
not this rite used every where, for Gregory de consecrat cap. 4. says. The
west was wont to receive such as returned to the Church from Heretics by
imposition of hands, but the eastern parts were wont to receive them by the
anointing of Oil. Aug. against the Donatists, lib. 5. c. 23. Gives a reason
hereof, and says, If laying on of hands should not be used to one coming from
Heresy, he would be judged to be without all fault, but for the coupling of
love hands are laid on Heretics amended.

2 When upon necessity any man was Baptized of an ordinary man that the Baptism
might be approved and confirmed, the person Baptized was brought to the Bishop
that he might be confirmed. Council. Eliberitanum. Can. 18. A believer, and, in
case of necessity, one instructed in the Faith, may Baptize, so that if he that
shall be so Baptized shall live, he bring him to the Bishop, that by imposition
of hands he may be perfected.

3 A third reason is mentioned by Hierom, in his Dialogue against the
Luciferians. He says, The custom of the Churches was, that the Bishop being
about to lay hands to the calling on the Spirit of God, he made haste to those
that were Baptized in lesser cities by Elders and Deacons: the meaning is, as
is after expressed, when the Bishop knew they believed rightly and were lawfully
Baptized, he made haste to lay hands on them, and to call upon the Spirit that
they might persevere in that faith.

From all these customs, not only the common people, but also sundry Bishops
long before Hieroms time came to this opinion, as if Baptism were without the
Spirit, and that the Spirit was first given and received when the Bishop to the
calling on the Spirit of God laid hands on the person Baptized, which Hierom
confutes, and proves that Baptism is not without the holy Spirit.

Answer to objections.
Obj. 1 In the laying hands on the Samaritans there were visible gifts
conveyed, Act. 8.18. Simon saw that, through laying on of hands the Holy Ghost
was given, Act. 19.6. When Paul had laid his hands on the twelve, they spoke
with tongues and prophesied, but in imposition that is or shall be by the
Apostles of the Churches, there are no visible gifts given, therefore that
imposition in Scripture and yours is not the same.

Answ. 1 That God did sometimes convey visible gifts after imposition of hands
to honor, it is true, yet were these visible gifts no more parts of the
ordinance, much less essentialities thereof, then Philips sudden surreption or
catching away by the Spirit from the Eunuch, were any part of the Eunuchs
Baptism, Act. 8.39, 40. this miraculous surreption was a confirmation to the
Eunuch. So when the twelve spoke with tongues after Baptism and laying on of
Hands, it was only a confirmation to them of the truth of that Doctrine, and
powerfulness of that person into whose name they were baptized.

2 The Apostles Peter and John, Acts 8.16, 17. would never have come down to
Samaria for to do Miracles, for Philip had there wrought Miracles abundantly,
Acts 8.7. in casting out Devils, healing Palseys, lameness, etc. therefore they
came for some other end, which was, that the Samaritans might receive the
Spirit.

Object. But here were visible gifts given. Simon saw that through laying on of
the Apostles hands the Holy Ghost was given.

Answ. There Is a sight of the understanding as well as of the eye. Simon might
see the Holy Ghost given, whiles he beheld the operations of the Spirit in
Prayer, self-denial, mortification, yet not one gift given visible to the
bodily eye.

But if visible gifts conspicuous to the bodily eye were given, they were no
parts of the Ordinance, but Crowns and Ornaments thereof. The Holy Ghost may be
said to be given, not only in gifts of Tongues and Healings, but also in
meltings of heart, Prophecy, etc.

2 It Is a mistake to say that in the Apostolical Imposition always visible
gifts were conveyed, such as the natural eye could behold, for Paul laid his
hands on Timothy, and had nothing conveyed save inward gifts and grace, 2 Timothy
1.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God
which is in thee, by the putting on of the Hands of me. Paul speaks of such
gifts and graces as were raked up in ashes, as the word (...) signifies, which
the Apostle bids him rake out of the ashes or make alive, as you do fire almost
dead by blowing of it.

Object. But this gift and grace given to Timothy was given by the Presbyters,
when he was ordained an Evangelist, and not by Paul's laying on of hands after
Baptism.

Answ. Paul speaks of such a gift as was given by the laying on of his own
hands, (...), but the Imposition in Ordination to Preaching was by the Hands of
all the Eldership, 1 Timothy 4.14. where the Greek words are (...), signifying a
conjunction of persons, but 2 Timothy 1.6. is, (...), to denote the act of one man.

Object. But the Apostles who laid on Hands after Baptism were such Apostles as
were immediately called of Christ, as Peter, John, and Paul, how will the
Consequence hold from them to the Apostles of the Churches?

Answ. There Is a twofold Call, 1 Immediate or personal. 2 Mediate or virtual:
the Apostles of the Churches, though they act not by an immediate and personal
call, yet they act by a mediate or virtual call of Christ.

2 Matthias, though chosen mediately of the Church, had the same power the
eleven had, who were immediately called of Christ, why may not then Apostles
chosen of the Churches have the same power? For what difference betwixt the
eleven called immediately, and Matthias called mediately, or any others of like
kinds, when they can make their power appear? and so much the more when
persons, whether immediately or mediately called, can make one and the same end
appear in their Office, viz. the work of the Ministry, the perfecting the
Saints, the edifying the Body of Christ.

Quaere. Whether there be any essential difference betwixt the twelve Apostles
and the Apostles of the Churches?

3 If Imposition after Baptism belong only to Apostles called immediately, it
had been in vain to have called it a Foundation, to have conjoined it with
Faith and the Resurrection, since the persons that had the administering of it
were most of them dead, and the rest in a short time would be dead. Ergo, I
conclude that Apostles, whether called immediately or mediately, may lay on
Hands on baptized persons.

Object. But if laying on of hands be an ordinance of Christ, what is conveyed
in it?

Answ. An increase of the Spirit, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift of God which is
in thee by the putting on of the hands of me. So that as the Spirit is conveyed
in the use of prayer, Luke 11.13. and preaching, Act. 10.44. Gal. 3.3, 5. and
Baptism, Gal. 3.28. and supper, 1 Cor. 10.16. so also is it conveyed in the
laying on of hands.

Quest. But what are those gifts of the Spirit which are or may be conveyed in
laying on of hands?

Answ. 1 An increase of all habits of grace, as 1 Boldness to confess Christ.
When Paul bids Timothy, stir up the gift of God which was in him, ver. 7. he
shows what gift he means, even boldness for God, ver. 7. God has not given us
a spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind. ver. 8. Be not
thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of the Lord. q.d. he that has received
the Spirit aright in laying on of hands, has an habitual intention to confess
without blushing against all oppositions whatsoever, or at least it is his duty
so to have.

2 The Spirit is a free agent, dividing to every one severally as he pleases.
1 Cor. 12.11. to one is given a word of wisdom, and knowledge, to another
strengthening grace, to another comfort, to another power to resist temptations,
to another constancy; the Spirit knowing what grace is most wanting to his
people, in a right receiving of an ordinance is wont to help herein. Yet know
that laying on of hands is not all this ordinance, or the principal part
thereof, but prayer is the principal.

So much Melchiades de consecra. did. 5. The holy Spirit gives beauty in
Baptism to innocence, in confirmation he performs an increase to grace.

Chemnitius cites some sentences out of the ancients, as out of Urban. All
believers by the laying on of the hands of the Bishops ought to receive the
Spirit after Baptism that they may be found full Christians, and he the same
person gives to confirmation these prayers, that we may become spiritual, that
the heart may be enlarged to wisdom and constancy, that we may be wise to
discern good and evil, to resist malice, to resist wicked desires, that we
being kindled with the love of eternal life may be able to lift up our minds
from earthly to heavenly things.

Clemens says, a person Baptized receives the seven form grace of the Spirit,
else in no wise can he be a perfect Christian, nor have a place among the
perfect. Although he have been Baptized after, he shows what he means hereby,
viz. a spirit of wisdom and understanding, a spirit of counsel and strength, a
Spirit of knowledge-and godliness, and fill him with the fear of God.

So much the compilers of the Common Prayer Book thought, who after they had
acknowledged laying on of hands ought to be retained, saying, we make
supplication unto thee for these children, upon whom after the example of thy
holy Apostles, we have laid our hands, to certify them by this sign of thy
favor and goodness toward them, come to add, that they apprehended an
increase of grace to be conveyed therein, as in the first prayer of
confirmation appears in these words. Almighty God, who have vouchsafed to
regenerate these thy servants by water and the holy Ghost, and have given unto
them forgiveness of all their sins, strengthen them, O Lord, with the holy
Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them the manifold gifts of grace,
the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and Ghostly
strength, the Spirit of knowledge and true Godliness, and fulfill them, O Lord,
with the Spirit of thy holy fear, Amen. And then the Bishop laying on his hands
said these words:

Defend, O Lord, this child with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine
for ever, and daily increase in thy holy Spirit more and more, until he come
to thy everlasting Kingdom.

And in the rubric after confirmation none were to be admitted to the Lords
Supper till such times as they were confirmed.

Object. But, if the Spirit be conveyed in Laying on of Hands, let us see a
Promise of God for it, that an increase of the gifts and graces of the Spirit
shall be given therein.

Answ. A command of God is enough to receive an Ordinance, though there were no
Promise annexed concerning benefits herein. Now I have before proved a command.

2 Some allege Acts 2.38, 39. Repent and be baptized for remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; as if the Promise did belong to
Imposition as well as Baptism.

3 What Promise is there of the Spirit in laying on Hands on Officers, yet is
it acknowledged of Protestants generally that the Spirit is conveyed herein.

4 We have Examples of Gods conveying the gifts and graces of the Spirit to
Timothy's heart herein, 2 Timothy 1.6. which should encourage baptized persons to
submit thereto, and expect like benefit therefrom.

5 There is a Promise of the increases and additions of the Spirit to the
Prayer of Faith whenever poured out, Luke 11.13. and why not to the Prayer of
Faith when now in this Ordinance poured out?

Object. But if Laying on of Hands were an Ordinance, God would honor it to do
that for which it is appointed.

Answ. Who dare say God does not?

1 That it is an Ordinance, appears, because it is called a Foundation, and
because the first Church was stated upon it, and because it was included in the
Commission, else the Apostles should do that for which they had no command.

Whereas some say Imposition is a Gift not an Ordinance, I answer, what is
contained in it or conveyed by it is a Gift, but the Administration it self is
an Ordinance, else Paul in the administering of it upon Timothy had been a
wilworshipper.

3 God does honor Laying on of Hands for that which he appointed it, which was
to be Vehiculum Spiritus, a Conveyance of the Spirit, in the increases of it,
as he has appointed Baptism and the Supper. But here is a mistake to think
Gods appointment of it was still to convey miraculous gifts, and that therefore
it was no longer in force than such gifts were conveyed, when these miraculous
gifts were only the Crown of this Ordinance.

Object. We doubt not God has made sundry Promises for the increasing of
spiritual gifts and graces in his People, and for strengthening of them by his
Spirit against the Devil and Lust, but whether are these Promises bound to the
Laying on of Hands? so that then when Hands are laid on, and by that mean, the
gifts and graces of the Spirit are conveyed, when the Church Officer, or
Apostle lays on their Hands. And it is no consequence in the Scripture, there is
a Promise, therefore we should invent a mean through which it must be applied.

Answ. 1 In this Ordinance of Laying on of Hands there are two things, 1 The
Prayer of Faith; the Promise is made to the Prayer of Faith, and no more to
that Prayer of Faith than to other Prayers of Faith, wherein God is sought to
for gifts and graces.

2 Through this Laying on of Hands, as a mean, the gifts and graces of the
Spirit are conveyed, when an Apostle lays on his Hands on a fit believing
subject. 2 Timothy 1.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the
gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of the hands of me, as in the
Greek. See he came to some inward gift of the Spirit by the Apostles laying on
of his Hands.

2 Here is no inventing of a mean to convey a Promise, but it is such a mean as
the Lord has appointed to convey his Spirit: by such a mean as the Apostle
calls a Foundation, such a mean as was a Chanel of the Spirit to Timothy. Now
as to the application of the Promise, no man can say that either Baptism,
Supper, or Laying on of Hands apply the Promise. It Is the Spirit and Faith
alone that apply the Promises to the Soul.

3 For Baptism and the Supper, concerning which there is more clearness of
revelation, we dare not say they are means through which the graces of the
Spirit must be conveyed, for God is a free Agent, but means through which the
Spirit may be, and has been conveyed; and the like we say of Laying on of
Hands, as in Timothy's case.

4 There being sundry means and channels of conveying the Spirit in the gifts
and graces thereof to Believers, and this of Laying on of Hands being one, what
should hinder that a Believer may not pray for the conveying of the Spirit in
the increases of it in this Ordinance? And this may in all Ordinances stir us
up to pray for it, because God has promised to pour out his Spirit in the
times of the Gospel, Zach. 12.10. John 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father and he
shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, whom I will send
unto you from the Father. See also John 14.26. John 16.7, 13. Luke 24.49. God
has promised to pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh in the last days. Acts
2.17. these being the last days we may expect it.

V. 19. And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did his Disciples.

We here see Christ's condescension; he does not despise a weak Faith. Had it
not been enough, if Christ had said, Thy Daughter lives? but Christ goes after
Jairus. Let us learn from Christ to be easy and ready to help afflicted
persons. We may see the weakness of Jairus faith; others with a touch of
Christ, or word of Christ's mouth expected health, but Jairus did not expect the
restoring of his Daughter without Prayer and Laying on of Hands.

V. 20. And behold, a Woman which was diseased with an Issue of Blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touchod the Hem of his Garment.

As in Jairus so in this Woman four things considerable,

1 That their misery brings them both to Christ: many would never come to
Christ were it not for affliction, Psalm 50.15. Hosea 5.15.6.1.

2 That they sought help from Christ as a Physician, placing confidence in him,
both for soul and body; so let us, Zach. 1.13. John 1.16.

3 That as the Woman touched the hem of Christ's garment, see that we touch him
by faith. Romans 10.6, 7, 8.

4 The Issue of all this, as Jairus had help, so had this Woman against her
bloody Issue.

Which was diseased with an Issue of Blood twelve years] Mark and Luke say she
had spent all her living on Physicians, and had suffered many things of them.
See the covetousness and cruelty of unskilful and ungodly Physicians.

Came behind him] It Is like, because the Multitude thronged him that she could
not come before him.

And touched the hem of his garment] It Is like by a divine Impulse.

V. 21. For she said within her self, If I may but touch his garment I shall be
whole. I seek one that touches me, not one that presses me; as of Christ, so
of his Church, the faith of few touch it, the crowd of multitudes throng it.
Aug. de verb. Dom. Scr. 6.


She thought Christ was full of healing power, as the ointment poured upon
Aarons head that went down to the skirts of his clothing; but she mistook,
thinking this flowing out was rather natural then voluntary. As if Christ had
acted rather by nature then will.

Yet is this nothing for the worshipping the relics of Saints, for it was not
the touching the garment of Christ, but her faith that made her whole.

V. 22. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter be
of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole; and the woman was whole from
that hour.

Luke adds, some body has touched me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out
of me, as if a man perceived when blood goes out of his veins.

Quest. Why would not Christ have this miracle kept secret?

Answ. 1 To free the woman from scruple, who was troubled in her conscience, as
if she had stole her health.

2 To propound her faith for imitation.

3 To prove his Godhead by his omniscience.

4 To strengthen Jairus his faith whose daughter he was about to raise from
death.

5 That she might know that she was healed, not from the touching of his
garment, but from Christ himself, who knowingly and wittingly healed her; hence
Christ says, virtue is not gone out of my garment, but out of me, Christ does
not give his Spirit to old rags and clouts: had the virtue been in the garment
it would have had the same effect on others that touched it. Christ was touched
by her Faith. Many follow Christ that only press him, but they only touch him
that lay hold on him by Faith, and know that Christ does not as Princes, cast
their alms they know not to whom.

6 That the woman might come forth as a witness. Probably they would not have
believed Christ's testimony of himself, but her confession must needs prevail
with them.

Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole] Christ helps the
weakness of her Faith. Unless her trembling had been faulty, Christ would not
have raised her up. She comes to Christ trembling, Mark 5.33. Luke 8.47.
knowing what was done in her, and tells him all the truth. Persons that do
things privily are wont to tremble, fearing least they be found out, so this
woman. Now Christ encourages her, signifying withal that it was not her
touching his garment but her persuasion of his divine power that conduced to
her healing. Yet does not every faith touch Christ, but that only which is
saving. Now as she got healing, so we remission of sins by such a faith in
Christ, and as she went away in peace hereby, so by faith in Christ we have
peace, Romans 5.1.15.13.

Thy Faith has made thee whole] My power has done it efficiently, I perceive
virtue is gone out of me; thy Faith has done it instrumentally, not by way of
merit, nor as if the (...) credere, or the act of believing did it, but by way
of apprehension, receiving my grace and favor. Poor believers, though they
come trembling to Christ, yet they go from him comforted and supported, so true
is that promise. Joh. 6.37. he calls her daughter, as being by him begotten to
a new life; so when Christ forgave the Palsey-man, he called him Son, Matthew.
9.2.

V. 23. And when Jesus came into the Rulers house and saw the minstrels and
people making a noise:

V. 24. He said unto them, Give place, for the maid is not dead but sleeps.

Jesus came into the Rulers house] Christ goes from healing the woman with the
bloody issue, into the Rulers house, where is seen both his wisdom in deferring
to help the Rulers daughter, till his daughter was dead, and also his goodness
in helping the Rulers Faith by this miracle on the woman, 2 In raising up his
Faith, Fear not, only believe, so Mark.

He saw the minstrels and people making a noise] Who were hired at the Funeral
to sing some sorrowful song, containing the virtues of the deceased; and, to
stir up mourning and tears from friends and neighbors, there were both men
mourners, Eccles. 12. and women mourners, Jer. 9.17. The heathens thought this
a mean to appease the infernal Spirits. Ambros. in Luc. 8. also Marcellinus,
lib. 19. writes they mourned seven days, the Men and Women singing sad funeral
songs: but for piping at funerals it was more late.

Not as if mourning for the dead were unlawful, for Abraham mourned for Sarah,
Genesis 23.3. also Genesis 50.10. Joseph's house mourned for Jacob with a great and
fore lamentation, and himself made a mourning for his Father seven days, the
Egyptians mourned for Jacob threescore and ten days, ver. 3. Israel mourned
thirty days for Aaron. There were great lamentations made for Josiah, Zach.
12.13. Bos bovem requirit, non ego te frater? Amb. One ox lows for another, and
shall not we bewail one another? We are bid to go to the house of mourning,
Eccles. 7.1. Bewail the burning the Lord has kindled, Levit. 10.6. Stephen was
mourned for. Act. 8.2.
but mourning becomes sinful, 1 When it is excessive, Matthew. 2.15. Rachel
weeping for her children and would not be comforted.

2 When it is hopeless. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Sorrow not as others that have no hope.

3 When it is feigned. As in these hired mourners, The mourners go about the
streets, Eccles. 12. Many pretend to mourn for those of whose death they are
glad. 4 When it is heathenish, Levit. 19.28. Deuteronomy. 14.1. the heathens thought
these to be funeral dues to the dead.

He said unto them, give place] 1 Because of the troublesome noise they made. 2
Because they were no fit witnesses of the miracle.

The maid is not dead but sleepeth] 1 Because death to the Godly is as a sleep,
for after sleep we arise refreshed; so in the resurrection.

2 Because, in respect of God, dead men are as if they were asleep; so Lazarus
is said to sleep, Joh. 11.11. All godly souls live to him.

3 She was not absolutely dead, as the multitude thought, as if she could not
be brought back again to life, but only for a while.

4 Though death and sleep are distinguished, yet are they near one to another;
for death seems a continual sleep, and sleep seems a short death. Let us not
fear death, for God can as easily raise up men from death, as men that are
asleep from their sleep.

4 She is not dead in respect of her soul, which is the better part, Eccles.
12.7. the Spirit returns to God.

5 In respect of Christ his omnipotent power; death it self was to him but as a
sleep, because he knew he could as easily raise her to life as any man could
awaken a person asleep; yea more easily, for sometimes we call three or four
times to a man in sleep, though yet she might be dead to others. Hence he
says, Talitha Cumi, i.e. Damosel arise

But sleepeth] The death of the godly is as a sleep. Steven fell asleep, Act.
7.60. Sundry of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.30. Lazarus, Joh. 11.11. David fell
asleep and saw corruption: Act. 13.36. Christ is the first fruits of them that
slept, 1 Cor. 15.20.

Death is resembled to a sleep, 1 Because of refreshment we have thereby; as
the body is refreshed after sleep, so shall we be in the resurrection, after we
have slept the sleep of death.

2 In sleep there is such a binding of the senses, that the body seems to be
liveless, so that it neither moves nor regards any object that is before it,
nor any relation that is next unto it.

Quest. But seeing Christ says that the maid slept, whether do the souls sleep
in the bodies till the resurrection, or are they annihilated till that time?

Answ. They are not annihilated, being they act intellectually, and the souls
being absent from the body are present with the Lord, 2 Cor 5.1, 2. They that
dye in the Lord are pronounced blessed, from henceforth, the word is (...),
from the moment of their departure, Rev. 14.13. Now all blessedness consists in
action, which is contrary to annihilation.

2 They do not sleep; if so, why would Paul have desired to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. why does Paul say, we would not be unclothed, but
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.4. As the
souls of the wicked are at present tormented, so the souls of the godly are at
present in bliss, Jude 7. The souls of the Sodomites in Judes time were
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. So the rich man, Luke 16.24. says, I
am tormented in this flame; Not, I may be, or shall be, but am at present.
Besides the souls under the Altar cry, How long Lord! Rev. 6.9. Therefore
though Saints have not a personal blessedness before the day of judgment, yet
have they a blessedness of soul, the receiving whereof does not exclude full
personal blessedness at the coming of Christ, but is an earnest penny thereof,
as we see in the thief, who was admitted the same day he suffered, not into an
earthly paradise, which by the flood was dissolved, but into a Paradise of
glory, whereinto Paul was taken up, 2 Cor. 12.2. compared with v. 4. That which
ver. 2. he calls the third heaven, ver. 4. he calls Paradise.

And they laughed him to scorn] Being carnal, and not considering the power of
Christ, they laughed him to scorn, as thinking it absurd and impossible that
Christ should restore her to life. Christ rejecting them takes three Disciples
to witness this miracle, Luke 8.51. for they were not worthy to see that they
did not believe.

V. 25. But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the
hand, and the maid arose.

Mark has it, Talitha cumi, Damosel, I say to thee, Arise. Talitha cumi,
Christ did not use these Syriack words to be used by way of enchantment, as
some have done, supposing by the repetition of these and such like, they could
do wonders, but that the power of Christ's words in raising up the dead might be
made manifest. In that he uses the words, I say to thee, Mark 5.41. He puts a
difference bewixt those who raised up others to life by his power, as Peter did
Dorcas, and himself who raised this Damosel up by his own word and power. q.d.
I the Lord of life and death command thee, who though thou art dead as to
nature, yet thou sleeps as to me, I command thee that thou arise and stand up.
The learned say Cumi is a Syriack word which signifies to stand, which is the
posture of men in health, in opposition to lying which is the posture of sick
men.

Took her by the hand] Luke adds, he said, Maid, arise, such a voice after to
Lazarus, Lazarus, come forth. The voice was from his humane nature, the power
from his divinity. It was the omnipotent Word of God and of the man Christ.

Luke adds that her Spirit came again and she arose, cap. 8.55. straightway:
the immortal soul of man is separable from the body; so Eliah stretched himself
upon the child and said, I pray thee, O Lord, let this child's soul come into
him again, 1 King. 17.21. in death the body returns to dust, and the Spirit to
God who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. now when God permits a soul to return to its
body, it is quickened and rises again, as we see in Ezekiels dry bones, cap. 37.7.

Mark cap. 5.42. adds, that her Parents were astonished with a great
astonishment, as such sudden sights are wont to do.

Luke cap. 8.56. adds, He charged them that they should tell no man what was
done: not that he would hinder persons from believing on him through the fame
thereof, but to stop the rage of the Pharisees against him, who were sorely
provoked by his miracles. 2 To teach us from his example to shun all desire of
vain glory, seeing he would have so great a work concealed. 3 That the ruler
and his wife might not be proud of this privilege.

And the maid arose] Mark adds, Christ commanded to set meat before her. cap.
5.53. to show not only that she was alive, but also was well and in health.

V. 26. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that Land.

Lest any man should think the Miracle was feigned, Christ adds, The fame
hereof went abroad into all that Land. The whole Country were witnesses and
doubtless praised the work, as a new unheard of thing, and consequently
acknowledged Christ as the Messiah. There were three Christ raised from death,
this Maid, the Widows so n of Naim and Lazarus.

V. 27. And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying and
saying, Thou Son of David have mercy on us.

In this History three-things, 1 The Petition of two blind men, set down, 1
From their following Christ and crying unto him in the way, v. 27. 2 From their
following him to the house, v. 28.

2 We have Christ his grant, amplified, 1 From the antecedent Question, Believe
ye that I am able to do this? together with the blind men's Answer, They said
unto him, Yea Lord. 2 From the present cure, v. 29. Then touched he their eyes,
saying, According to your faith be it unto you.

3 From the following effect, v. 30. Their eyes were opened.

4 From the Injunction Christ lays on them, v. 30. Jesus straightly charged them,
saying, See that no man know it.

3 The unthankfulness and disobedience of the blind men. They, when they were
departed, spread abroad his fame in all that Country.

Two blind men] These (whether from the reports of his Miracles, or whether
from the Prophecy of the Messiah, Isai 35.5. The eyes of the blind shall be
opened) desire Christ to restore their sight.

The loss of sight is a great loss. 1 Sight is the largest of senses, whereas
the ear only takes in sounds, the smelling takes in odours, but the eye takes
in, not only quantities and motions, but color and figure. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, Eccles. 1.8.

2 Sight is the most comfortable sense. There are many glorious objects in
Heaven and Earth, but little content should we have, had we not sight to behold
them. Hence to behold the glorious objects of Heaven, the eyes shall be raised
up, so that we shall see our Redeemer, not with other, but with these eyes, Job
19.26.

3 Sight is the most affective sense. No sense runs quicker into the spirits of
men. Hence Jacob, though he heard Joseph was alive, yet would go and see him
before he dies, Genesis 45.28. Matthew. 13.17.

4 Sight is the most satisfactory sense. See how greatly the Queen of Sheba was
satisfied with what she saw, 1 Kings 10.4, 7. she had heard of Solomon's glory,
but she did not believe it till her eyes had seen it, then she breaks out, v. 8.
The sight of the eyes is better than the wandering of the desire, Eccles. 6.9.

The affliction of these blind men was the greater, in that they were deprived
of this sense; yet even such sometimes have the want of seeing eyes made up with
sight of mind, as Didymus St. Hieroms Master, who was comforted by a Friend
that came to visit him, that though he wanted the eyes which Mice and Flies had,
yet he had an intuitive mental sight, which Angels had, by which God was seen.

About these blind men consider, 1 Their Importunity. They followed Christ,
and spoke and cried unto him. Sense of misery should make us importunate; so
the Woman of Cana, Matthew. 15.22. and the Widow with the unjust Judge. Luke 18.7.
Acts 12.5.

2 Their faith. Thou Son of David have mercy on me. It was the ordinary style
of the Messiah, for the Promises made to David, 2 Samuel 7.12, 13, 16. I will set
up thy seed after thee, and will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever.
Psalm 89.3, 4. I have sworn unto David my servant, thy seed will I establish
for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations. Psalm 132.11. Hence the
children cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, Matthew. 21.16. Now the People
judged by the great Miracles Christ did, that he was this Son of David, John
7.31. The People believed on him, and said, When Christ comes, will he do more
Miracles than those which this man has done?

As these blind men saw the Godhead of Christ shine forth in his Miracles, so
saw they the humane nature of Christ, in that he was David's Son; and so they
rested on him as the Messiah, both God and Man.

V. 28. And when he was come into the house, the blind men came unto him, and
Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? they say unto him,
Yea Lord.

Christ defers the answering of them to try their faith and patience, hence he
answered them not in the way, till they came to the house where he was, which
was at Capernaum, c. 4.13.

Believe ye that I am able to do this?] Quest. Whether belief of Gods power
without the mercy of God be the object of our faith?

Answ. Christ saw their belief of Gods mercy, because they desired mercy, and
because they acknowledged him, to be the Messiah; the doubt lay only about
Christ's power.

They say unto him, Yea Lord] Where there is a belief of Gods power, there is a
knowledge, in some measure, that we do believe it. Faith is like a Bucket, every
faith draws something from God; the greater the Bucket is the more is drawn at
a time. Yet does a weak faith receive Christ, and his benefits, as a weak
Palsy shaking hand is able to receive a pardon.

V. 29. Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto
you.

That Christ may stir them up to examine their faith, he tells them that they
shall receive according to it, withal puts a difference betwixt the
meritorious cause of their healing, which was himself, and the Instrument
apprehending and receiving this benefit which was their faith.

2 And withal shows that faith does not go empty handed from God. John 6.37.
He that comes to me I will in no wise cast off.

V. 30. And their eyes were opened, and Jesus straightly charged them, saying, See
that no man know it.

Their eyes were opened] Not their ey-lids but their eyes; some skin growing
over, Christ with his touch healed and gave them a perfect power of sight.

And Jesus straightly charged them, saying, See that no man know it] That is,
till I give you leave to divulge it.

The Reasons were, 1 Lest the Pharisees should, being moved with envy, cause
him presently to depart, as shortly they did.

2 That, after his Doctrine had been further preached, this and diverse other
Miracles might come out together, and the matter be so much more stupendous, as
it was in Elizabeth, who hid her self five months, Luke 1.24.

3 To teach us sobriety that we should be ready to do good in secret, though no
present praise should accompany our so doing.

V. 31. But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that
Country.

Quest. Whether did the blind men well herein?

Answ. In no wise. Whatsoever good meanings they might have, of promoting the
glory of Christ, or of satisfying those who questioned them how they came to
their sight, yet ought they to keep close to the command of Christ, Prove. 4.24,
25. No sacrifice is like obedience: they were not called to spread the Name of
Christ to others, hence they sinned. Every soul that spreads the Name of Christ
had need to look to his and their call. Some persons have no call at all.
Wicked persons have no call to take Gods name in their mouth, nor godly men
neither, in these cases wherein they are expressly forbid.

Let not any pretense in the world exempt us from a plain command of God, not
the saving of our liberties, lives, estates, no not the promoting the glory of
Christ. Not to ly for God, Job 13.6, 7. It was a good speech of a late Prince
in this Nation, Sin not against Conscience no not for the sake of the holy
Trinity. The works of Christ are to be published abroad, but not against an
express command of Christ. And so much more cautelous should we be, when we are
straightly charged not to violate this or that command, as the blind men were
here straightly charged or threatened, as Expositors render the word: though all
the commands of Christ are grounded upon reason, yet are we not too curiously
to pry into the reason of the commands, as probably these blind men might do,
as to look to the command it self. If it be interpreted to be sawciness to
dispute the commands of men, who are over us, what sawciness is it then to
dispute the commands of the Lord? Neither can the blind men's good intention
excuse them, for Uzzah had the same, and Paul in persecuting the Saints, Acts
26.11. nor yet their zeal, for the Jews in stablishing their own righteousness,
had the zeal of God herein, Romans 10.2, 3.

V. 32. As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with
a Devil.

In this History we have these things, 1 A dumb man possessed with a Devil
brought to Christ, v. 32.

2 The casting out the Devil by Christ, v. 33.

3 The effects hereof, 1 The multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen
in Israel, v. 34.

2 The Pharisees blasphemed, saying, He casts out devils through the Prince
of the devils.

A dumb man] That is deaf and dumb, for they that are deaf from their birth are
wont to be dumb, for they that cannot hear cannot learn words to express
themselves, There were many persons would not believe there were any devils, as
Sadduces and others: for the conviction of these, when they shall see ignorant
men possessed to speak strange languages, they never learned, as Greek and
Latin, they may see there are devils. This cure amongst the rest has a Behold
put upon it. It Is probable that this man was not dumb from his birth, but made
dumb by the devil, because, when the devil was cast out the dumb spoke.

Now if you ask why God would suffer the devil to possess men? It is to let us
see the power that the devil has in possessed men, for look as when he
possesses the body he makes one blind, another deaf and dumb, and binds a
third that they cannot move themselves, as he did that daughter of Abraham,
Luke 13.16. for eighteen years together, so Satan when he reigns in the hearts
of natural men, he makes them blind, dumb, deaf, and senseless, to all
spiritual things.

V. 33. And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spoke, and the multitudes
marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.

God has given us our tongues to sound forth his praises, and means whereby we
may edify one another; hence those Satan cannot draw to blasphemy, railing,
filthy speaking, he lays snares for to make them dumb, as it is like he did this
poor man.

Christ does not require faith of this possessed man, as he did of the blind
men, because he was dumb and deaf, and being deaf he could neither hear nor
answer; but Christ, upon the entreaty of those who brought him, healed him.
Christ requires of us only acording to the means he gives.

Devil was cast out] For the manner of the casting out of the devil the Text is
silent, it is like Christ commanded the devil to come out of him.

Multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel] Hyperbole, for
Christ had done greater miracles, from which the multitude did not derogate.

1 But the scope of the present wonderment was to stir up one another to look
on him as the Messiah. Wonder was the beginning of Philosophy; Propter admirari
coeperunt homines Philosophari, here wonder was the beginning of salvation.

2 To extol Christ above any of the old Prophets, as Elias, Isaias, Jeremy,
etc. none of whom had done so many and so great miracles. Christ spent a whole
day in doing miracles. Christ did not lay staff upon the sick, nor cover them
with his garment, but cured them with his Word.

V. 34. But the Pharisees said, He casts out devils through the Prince of the
devils.

Look as the Sun, Moon and Stars, according to the variety of the subject, have
variety of influences, the Sun softens wax, hardens clay, they beget one thing
and corrupt another; so the Sermons and Miracles of Christ, which stirred up
admiration and reverence in the multitude, in the Pharisees stir up opposition
and blasphemy. One cause brings forth diversity of effect, as the Word, 2 Cor.
2.15. and also the Supper, 1 Cor. 11.29.

The Pharisees said, He casts out devils] Here was their blasphemy, not far
from the sin against the holy Ghost, if not the very same, out of malice to
ascribe that to the devil which was done by the finger of God. Men that are
maliciously affected will calumniate the most glorious works of God, yea and
speak against Preachers and their Sermons and expositions, how godly soever.

Through the Prince of the devils] The Prince of the devils is the same that is
called the Prince of this world, John 12.31. As there is an order among the
good Angels, so is there among the devils, Ephesians. 6.12. Thus did the Pharisees
blaspheme, Matthew. 12.24. Luke 11.15. against whom Christ sufficiently disputes,
That if Satan cast out Satan, how can then his Kingdom stand? Now this Prince
of the devils is the same that elsewhere is called Beelzebub, the god of Flies,
an idol of the Ekronites.

V. 35. And Jesus went about all the Cities and Villages, teaching in the
Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing every
sickness, and every disease among the people.

We have four things considerable to the end of this Chapter.

1 The merciful and charitable affection of Christ, in that he went about all
the Cities and Villages, preaching the Gospel and healing their diseases,
therein showing mercy to their souls and bodies, v. 35.

2 The motive that moved him thereto, which was his compassion, or his yerning
bowels, v. 36. (...) is the word. Compassion is the feeling of another man's
passion.

3 The object of this compassion, it was forlorn souls who were as sheep
without a Shepherd. For though they had Annas and Caiphas and many others
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who boasted themselves to be Pastors, yet
Christ did not acknowledge them so to be.

4 The remedy Christ propounds for relieving these famished souls, which was,
that Christ speaks unto his Disciples, and in them to all other Christians, who
were potent with God, to pray to the Lord of the Harvest to send forth
laborers.

Two grounds Christ gives for our so praying,

1 The greatness of the harvest, multitudes of hearers not yet converted, and
many converted persons who stand need of building up.

2 The fewness of laborers, that is of such who were able and willing to work
in Gods Vineyard.

Jesus went about all the Cities] Here Is Christ his unweariedness in doing the
Lords work. It appears they had Synagogues both in Cities and Villages, John
18.20. Jesus said, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue,
and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said
nothing. Now Christ went up and down to preach among them. Where people have
any desire after means of grace, some help should be afforded to them, Acts 16.
When Paul in a Vision saw a man of Macedonia saying, Come over and help us,
Paul gathered that he had a call to go thither.

Moreover, because the Apostles and Christ could not go every where, they went
only to the Cities and Villages, that from thence the Gospel might be
scattered up and down in the Country.

And Villages] For even the souls of persons in Villages ought to be precious;
such was Cenchrea a Village and Haven near to Corinth. Many Preachers thrust
together in Cities for outward accommodations, yea even there where their
Ministry is loathed, vvhiles many poor breathing souls in the Villages are
hunger starved. There may be a temptation upon Teachers herein, who are
heartless in preaching, unless they have a numerous auditory to hear; we may
desire to preach to many, because where there are many in likelihood some vvil
be gained; yet not to preach only to many, for where the Gospel comes but now
and then, people are apt to receive it with more relish: as in fishing so in
preaching, in fresh waters where the net is cast seldom there is now and
then the greatest draught of fish, so where the Gospel comes but seldom,
persons often highly esteem it, vvhiles the commonness of Manna begets a
loathing of it.

Besides poor people in Villages have not so much proud arguments against the
Gospel as those who live in Cities have. Let no man think himself too good to
preach in Villages, considering the Lord Christ has gone before herein, and
considering the vvorth of a soul. Christ was both a Catechist of and a
Preacher to poor Country people. Peter and John preached in the Villages of the
Samaritans, Acts 8.25.

Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdome] So called because the subject matter of
it is to hold forth the Kingdom of Grace and Glory. 2 Because it holds forth
the means thereunto. See Matthew. 4.23. Mark 4.11. Col. 4.11.

Healing every sickness and every disease] There Is a distinction betwixt
sickness and disease. Sickness is any distempered inequality of humors,
whereby the body is more or less disabled from its proper service. Disease is
some malady that affects us in one kind, as fever, consumption. Christ healed
all these, 1 That persons might see his divine power, while no sickness nor
disease was too hard for him.

2 That having their bodily maladies cured they might seek to him for their
souls.

V. 36. But, when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion to them,
because they fainted, and were scattered abroad as sheep having no Shepherd.

Moved with compassion] Though they had Pharisees and Lawyers, yet they studied
their own profit, not the good of the flock, eating the fat and clothing
themselves with the wool, but did not feed the flock; the diseases did they not
strengthen, nor heal that which was sick, nor bind up that which was broken,
nor bring again that which was driven away, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. They put on a
pretense of Religion for gain sake, and were distracted into miserable parties.
They professed themselves to be guides of the blind, the light of them that were
in darkness, the instructors of the foolish, Romans 2.17, 18, 19. but they were
not so, for they corrupted the Law, and were partial therein, making void Gods
commands by their traditions.

Now Christ considering all this, was moved with compassion toward these poor
people, whose condition was sad, having none to break the bread of life unto
them. Their sad condition is seen: 1 In what danger is the City when it has no
Seer? the body when it has no eye? It Is not enough for children to have a loaf
of bread by them, but some must divide it unto them. 2 Because of natural
ignorance. Man naturally is like a sheep gone astray, Isai 53.6. which brings
not it self home unless it be sought, Luke 15.4. the Eunuch could not
understand without some guide, Acts 8.30. 3 The flock is in danger to be torn
by Wolves, Acts 20.29.


Use 1. Be exhorted from Christ's example to have compassion to the souls of men.

Grounds hereof.
1 The preciousness of the soul, more worth then a world, because a world
cannot redeem it: A man's soul is himself, Luke 9.26. What should it profit a
man to gain the whole world and lose himself? If thou losest thy soul thou
losest thy self. We have 2 hands, eyes, ears, if we lose one we have another,
but we have but one soul, lose thy soul thou loses thy self. Our bowels yern
to see a boat or ship full of passengers on sinking, how much more to see a
soul sinking into the pit of hell? We weep and sympathize with them who are in
bodily affliction, Job. 30.25. Did not I weep for him who was in affliction?
And shall we not sympathize with soulmiseries? instances of yerning affections
to the souls of men. Samuel for Saul, 1 Samuel 16.1. Jeremy for the King, Queen,
etc. Jer. 13.17. Paul spoke of sundry Professors weeping, Phil. 3.18. Of whom I
have told you often, and now tell you weeping; Christ wept over Jerusalem for
their omission of a day of grace, Luke 19.41.

2 Consider what a loss the loss of one soul is. It Is a remediless loss;
therefore such a love of soul, we should have upon us, that if any pains or
study would save a soul, if any cost or travel would do it, if denying a man's
credit, profit, ease or pleasure, if stooping and laying our hands under the
feet of souls would do it, if prayers, and tears, and sweating our selves to
death would do it, if sacrificing our lives to stinking prisons, howling
wildernesses, and burning flames would do it, we should not think any thing too
much to the saving of one soul.

3 It Is the highest degree of alms. We all yern toward perishing bodies, let
us also to perishing souls; yea it is such an alms as every one can give, as
Peter and John said, Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have give I
thee.

Because they fainted] As the bodies of men faint when nourishment is
withdrawn, so also do souls.

And were scattered abroad as sheep having no Shepherd] As sheep expose
themselves to the prey of Wolves and wild beasts, and cannot bring themselves
home unless the Shepherd gather them home, Psalm. 119.176. I have gone astray
like a sheep, seek thy servant, so it is with men by nature. God must seek them
and bring them back, yea he must keep them in with his Shepherds crook and
defend them. Now this poor multitude had not such Shepherds, but such as only
sought themselves and not the good of the sheep.

V. 37. Then says he unto his Disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but
the laborers are few.

V. 38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth
laborers into his harvest.

The harvest truly is plenteous] By harvest he means multitudes of people who
were ready to receive the Gospel, Joh. 4.35. The fields are white ready to
harvest. They were ready to receive the doctrine of salvation, and so to be
brought into the barn of the Church. Christ hereby inflames the minds of the
Disciples to go out to preach. Herein are two arguments.

1 The good success former Prophets and teachers had that their doctrine took
root and grew up to a harvest.

2 From the easiness of the work; it was in a great measure made ready to their
hand, being come to a harvest. As Corn perishes if it have none to gather it,
so people of good affections if they have none to build them up.

The laborers are few] Obs. 1 The office of a preacher is to be a labourer, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Know them which labor among you and are over you in the Lord,
1 Timothy 5.1. Hence a minister is called (...) under-rowers of (...) under and
(...) a rower, because under Christ the chief Pilot, they row the ship of the
Church toward heaven. Now rowing is a very painful work. Vide Beza. They do
not only labor in the word, but in prayer also, Col. 4.12. Hence have they a
due right to their maintenance. Pharaoh reserved the Priests living, Jezebel
maintained four hundred false Prophets, Micha maintained a Levite: the Levites
had not near the service we have, yet was his maintenance greater then any of
the Tribes. They are Soldiers, therefore to be maintained of them for whom
they fight, 1 Cor. 9.7. To say preachers must have but for bare necessity, is
to no purpose, for how can they then be hospitable?

Are few] Here Is the cause of the sending out the Apostles, of which cap. 10.1.
for only John the Baptist and Christ labored, the Scribes and Pharisees being
given to their pleasures and profits.

Causes why so few laborers.
1 Love of ease; whereas much study is a weariness to the flesh, Eccles. 12.12.
Offer not that to God which costs thee nothing.

2 Inability of hearers to difference betwixt doctrine and doctrine, hence
superficial, raw, indigested notions are as well or better liked then solid and
substantial truths.

3 The discouragement that Preachers in many places find; every man else is
encouraged but they discouraged, partly from the censures that pass upon their
doctrine, and partly from strait-handedness. Every calling, as Physician,
Lawyer is rewarded, only what preachers have in many places is counted as
alms, hence there are but few laborers, and were it not for conscience toward
God there would be much fewer.

4 The strictness of the account, that they must answer for the souls committed
to them, Ezekiel. 5.17. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.26, 27.

5 The multitude of business that lies upon a faithful labourer. What a
business is it to make one soul lie level upon Christ? sometimes full of fears
and doubts for want of comfort, sometimes falling into spiritual pride in the
enjoyment of it, sometimes wrestling with an angry God, sometimes conflicting
with a scrupulous conscience, sometimes a soul thinks all he has done is in
vain, and that he is cast out of Gods sight, Psalm. 31.22. One wants knowledge,
another comfort, another reproof; one is a babe, another a grown man. Now the
work being so weighty, few that know the weight of it are forward to venture on
it, it being a burden too heavy for the shoulders of Angels.

Cyprian complained in his time that persons would not take the over sight of
flocks, but persons betook themselves to be Merchants, History of Trent.
etc. rather then to be thus employed. After his time the ministers by reason
of persecution were so few, that necessity compelled to commend two or three
congregations to one pastor, whence came the corrupt custom of Commendums.

Preaching is counted the easiest business (and as many use it so it is) but to
preach that our words may be as goads to the dull Ox, and as nails to the
fastening of instructions, Eccl. 12.11. to be like a good householder that
brings forth new and old, Matthew. 13.52. to search into the deep things of God,
and to follow a man's work there, where he left it, till a spiritual building be
erected, who is sufficient for these things?

V. 38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he would send forth (or
in the Greek, cast forth) laborers into his harvest.

Christ here propounds a remedy for the want above mentioned, viz. to pray to
the Lord of the harvest, etc. Christ hereby not only informs us of the
backwardness of men herein, but also pricks on the Apostles and others to
accept of such a call.

Moreover here is signified not only a disposing providence to send teachers
to this or that place, but also a bestowing of special power with peculiar
commands and gifts, which well agrees with the call of the Apostles in the next
chapter. As the Ambassadors of Princes are directed to their residence, and
their continuance determined by the Prince how long they shall remain, so are
teachers disposed of God in like manner. He carries them from one place to
another, Jonah from Israel to Nineveh.

Pray ye the Lord of the harvest] It Is the Lords work to send forth laborers,
Act. 1.24. Show whether of these two thou have taken. The holy Ghost bad
separate Paul and Barnabas to the work, Act. 13.2. Yet prayer has been a means
to obtain such teachers, to get them out of prison, Act. 12.12, 13. to get them
from one place to another, Philem. 22. I trust that through your prayers I
shall be given to you.

Strive we then to be fervent with God in prayer herein: as a faithful teacher
is one of the greatest blessings, so the contrary is a great curse. We are
earnest with God for many other things, O strive to be earnest for this. But
because wants set an edge upon prayer, lay open before the Lord thy six or
seven children, and three or four servants, who are yet in the state of nature,
nay there are thousands in their conditions, and therefore for their sakes come
and help.

Grounds of thus praying.
1 Gods command: every command of God is to be obeyed, therefore pray. God
commanding persons thus to pray, does not mean to send them away empty handed
when they do pray.

2 The mischief that comes where such planters and waterers are absent, all
runs to ruin mostly in the want of such. Some places famous for religion, when
such lights have been removed what darkness has been?

3 The multitudes of business that God has for laborers to do. Paul would
have gone to the lesser Asia and Bythinia, but the spirit suffered him not, but
when a man of Macedonia prayed, Come over and help us, they obtained Paul, Act.
16.6, 7, 9. When there is plenty of work and scarcity of laborers, you must
besides paying be fain to pray, so it is in this case.

4 Prayer is a mean to get such teachers, its a mean to obtain every blessing
from God, Matthew. 7.7. therefore this blessing also.

5 It Is a singular blessing unto a people to have their eyes behold their
teachers, and not to have them removed into a corner, Esa. 30.19, 20. The
contrary is a curse, Amos 8.11, 12. To go from sea to sea to seek the word of
the Lord, because of the famine of the word.

God only gives such teachers, Jer. 3.15. I will give you pastors after my own
heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. For this end
Christ ascended into heaven, Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12, 13. In the 68 Psalm 18. Its
said, Christ received gifts; in this place its said, he gave gifts; the meaning
is, Christ has received gifts from his Father, and given them to men.

The benefits of faithful Teachers, as, 1 Conversion. How shall they believe
without a Preacher? Romans 10.14. Acts 2.37, 38. Acts 26.18.

2 Edification, to wit, building up souls converted. Paul perfected what was
lacking in the Thessalonians faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.

3 Direction in difficult Cases, together with satisfaction in scruples, so
that the souls of persons are kept in peace, John 9.3.

4 To kindle affections when souls are dead; how were the affections of the
Brethren at Ephesus, Acts 20.36. and Tire, Acts 21.5. kindled? and the three
thousand pricked? Acts 2.37. The hearts of the Disciples going to Emmaus were
on fire whiles Christ spoke to them? Luke 24.32.

5 Relations kept in the way of duty; fathers, children, husbands, wives,
princes, subjects, masters, servants.

6 Soul watchfulness, Heb. 13.17. They watch for your souls. Isai 62.6, 7.

7 They wrestle with the Lord in prayer, and give him no rest till they obtain
mercy for a people, Isai 62.6, 7.

8 They gather Gods harvest into barns, that is, souls into Churches here, and
into glory hereafter.

That he would send forth Laborers into his Harvest] Seven grounds hereof.

1 The need there is of such Laborers: as a Field will be overgrown with Weeds
if the Husbandman send not Laborers into it, so will the hearts of men where
there are not such Laborers to weed. And as when Corn is ripe it will be apt
to shatter if there be not Laborers to inn it, so people of good affections
are apt to decline where there are not Laborers to perfect young comers on.
The need of such is seen, in that yearly there are so many thousands born
Children of Wrath. And in that the hearts of good men are liable to so many
decays and coolings.

2 The great blessing there is by such Ministry and labor; and needs must it
bring a blessing, because it roots out that which will be the ruin of any
place, I mean sin, Prove. 28.2. Yea nothing does more bless a place than such
Laborers, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. The godly Priests and Levites that came to Rehoboam
strengthened the Kingdom of Judah.

3 Because the Harvest is Gods; it is called his Harvest, therefore it belongs
to him to send forth Laborers into it. Now they that are of Gods sending are
endued with gifts and grace.

4 Because they cannot preach unless he send them, Romans 10.14. How shall they
preach except they be sent? The least degree of sending is to have ability to
divide the word.

This sending is, 1 Inward, when a man having the love of souls stamped upon
his heart is made willing to offer up himself to this work. Isai 6.6, 7, 8.

2 Outward, because too many out of pride and self-conceitedness are ready to
put themselves forward this way: hence God has appointed that persons that are
to go out be first approved by men thereunto appointed. Else Jer. 23.21. I have
not sent these Prophets yet they ran.

5 As the primitive work of sending is Gods, so there is something in sending
which is ours, to wit, that we show our selves willing to be sent. When God had
sent one of the Seraphims to Isaiah with a coal in his hand to touch his mouth,
meaning a burning zeal to Gods glory, and when the Lord asks the question whom
shall I send, and who shall go for us? the Prophet then answers, v. 8. Here I
am send me, Isai 6.6, 7. Men to whom God has given Abilities should be forward
to put forth themselves. Out of love to souls they may desire the Office of a
Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.1. yea they must out of a ready mind take the oversight of
the flock of God, 1 Peter 5.2. Not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy
lucre but of a ready mind.

6 All the success that is in any man's Ministry, how fully soever sent, or how
willing of himself for to go, is from God. So that the force of the Reason is,
he has the power of succeeding and making Ministry effectual, therefore he
has the power of sending. We preach to persons to turn from darkness, Acts
26.18. but God turns them. Isaiah preached a long time, Isai 53.1. yet because
the arm of the Lord, or the power of the Lord, was not revealed to souls, there
were so few converted, that he cries out, Who has believed our reports? yea he
and the children God had given him were as signs and wonders. If God go along
Peter shall at one Sermon convert three thousand. All our Preaching is but as
the rigging of the Sails, which avails not unless the Wind blow. When he opens
none can shut, when he shuts none can open. Rev. 3.7, 8. yet must we in a
patient manner make trial what success God will give us in our Ministry,
imitating Peter, Luke 5.5. who had toiled all night and taken nothing, yet
would at Christ's word further let down the net. And truly persons sent by God
usually have their labors blessed to the converting and building up of some
souls. Jer. 23.21, 22.

7 It is the Lord that maintains them in their work, Acts 18.9, 10. Be not
afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee. He holds the
seven stars in his right hand, Revel. 1.16, 20. now the right hand is the hand
of strength and power, Jer. 1.18, 19. says God to Jeremy, I have made thee an
Iron Pillar and a Brazen Wall, they shall fight against thee, but not prevail.
Seeing God maintains persons herein, it is fit he have the sending of them.

CHAP. X.
WE have in this Chapter three things to be premised.

1 The occasion and coherence, which was, multitudes coming to Christ with
desire to hear the Gospel, he was moved with compassion toward them, cap. 9.7.
Seeing them as Sheep without a Shepherd, he consults to send out his Disciples,
and therefore before he sends them forth, he bids them pray to the Lord of the
Harvest to send forth Laborers, which the Disciples doubtless did; hence as an
answer of their prayers, Christ as the Lord of the Harvest sends forth
Laborers, even his twelve Apostles.

2 That there is difference betwixt this sending and the election of the
twelve, mentioned Luke 6. when Christ chose them that he might instruct them,
that in time to come they might be sent out: Christ will have those whom he
sends out first to be Disciples before he will send them out: he mentions not
here their choosing, but only their sending, because he had chosen them before.

3 That this sending forth of the twelve Disciples or Apostles differs from
that sending forth of the twelve, mentioned Matthew. 28.19. this being only
particular, that they should go into the Land of Judea, that being for them to
go into all the World, and was to continue till the end of the World, Matthew.
28.20. Contrarily this sending may seem to be only temporary, and that the
Commissions here and there do tota specie, in the whole kind differ, and that
that is not an enlargement of this commission but another.

1 Because at this sending Christ impowers them to preach and do Miracles, but
there he impowers them to make Disciples and baptize them.

2 Because these are forbidden not to go into the way of the Gentiles, nor into
any City of the Samaritans, but the twelve sent out Matthew. 28.19. are commanded
to make Disciples all Nations, and to preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark
16.15. these were only to go to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel.

3 Because these were to make no manner of provisions for their Journey, of
Gold, Silver nor Brass in their Purses, but the Preachers in the following
order of the Scripture are required to be hospitable; now they cannot do this
unless they have wherewithal to do it, as Money, etc. also to make all
provisions, Luke 22.35.

4 Because here are only barely named twelve, and no provision for others
after them, as there is, Matthew. 28.19. nor no precept unto any other Preacher
but unto them.

5 It appears from Luke 22.35. When I sent you forth without Scrip, wanted ye
any thing? and they said, Nothing. But now, he that has a Purse let him take
it, and likewise a Scrip, etc. Where the word have sent signifies the command
to be at an end, and the word now imports another different command to be given
to them.

6 The Apostles, when they went to the Gentiles, were not at first received,
till they had seen their Miracles and holiness, and therefore before they
brought them over to the faith they must carry provisions for themselves and
their company, which many times was not small. See Acts 20.4.

7 Aquinas says, It was a custom among the Jews to provide for their Masters,
therefore Christ bids them carry nothing when they went to the Jews, but that
custom being not among the Gentiles they had power to carry provisions.

8 The sufferings hereafter mentioned, from v. 16. did not befall the Apostles
in their first sending: in the first sending the Apostles found no persecution
to fly from one City to another, but all things succeeded according to their
desire, they joying that the Devils were subject to them, Luke 10.17. but in
this sending they are bid to prepare for persecution and death.

Reasons to prove that this sending was perpetual and part of that commission,
Matthew. 28. which was after enlarged;

1 From the providential care which Christ had for these Apostles, that when he
sent them forth without any thing, they wanted nothing, Luke 22.35. And he said
unto them, When I sent you without Purse, and Scrip, and Shoes, lacked ye any
thing? and they said, Nothing. So why will not Christ have the same care of
Gospel Preachers if they durst trust Christ.

2 Because the twelve at this sending were commanded to shake off the dust of
their feet against that house or any that did not receive them, and this was
performed long after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension (and after the giving
of the commission, Matthew. 28.) by Paul, Acts 13.50, 51. when persecution drove
Paul and Barnabas from the City of Antioch and the coasts thereof, they shook
off the dust of their feet against them, as Christ here commanded, v. 14.

3 Because the seventy afterward have the same Instructions, Luke 10.9, 10,
11. that the twelve had.

4 Because the same temptations which Christ fences these Apostles against, to
wit, poverty and persecution, are the temptations which in all ages faithful
Preachers are liable unto.

5 Because these following precepts given to these twelve are of no less
concernment to the Preachers of following ages than to these twelve, viz. Be
wise as Serpents, v. 16. Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to
Counsels, v. 17, etc.

Upon the Arguments on both sides I shall leave the matter, only I declare, I
rather incline to think that this fending was only temporary for the
forementioned reasons.

We have in this Chapter three parts. 1 The sending forth of the twelve
Apostles, from v. 1. to 15.

2 A caution to them thus sent out in particular, v. 16, 17. and in general to
all Christians, for so Luke expounds it, Luke 12.1, to v. 13. That they should
speak what he had spoken to them in the ear, upon the house top, and not to
fear them that can only kill the body.

3 An encouragement of them in particular, and of all Christians in general,
against slavish fear, from v. 16. to the end.

In the sending forth of the Apostles, observe,

1 Their names, v. 2, 3, 4.

2 Their call, Jesus sent them forth and commanded them, v. 5.

3 The place whereto they are designed, to wit the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, But go not in the way of the Gentiles nor into any City of the
Samaritans.

4 Their power, which was, 1 To preach, amplified from the subject matter of
it, The Kingdom of heaven is at hand, v. 7.

2 To do miracles, viz. Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, cast
out devils, v. 8.

5 From their maintenance in their work, set down;

1 Negatively, 1 They should not take any thing for their preaching, nor for
the miracles they wrought, v. 9. 2 They should not provide gold, nor silver,
nor brass in their purses, nor scrip to carry provisions, nor two coats v. 10.

2 Positively, 1 That where ever they wrought the Lords work, they should
expect all due provision, v. 10. For the workman is worthy of his meat. 2 That
there should still be worthy persons that would be ready to receive and give
them harbor, v. 11, 12, 13. 3 The woeful condition of them that should not
receive them and relieve them, v. 14, 15. It should be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for that people.

V. 1. And when he had called unto him his twelve Disciples, he gave them power
against unclean spirits, and to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of
disease.

And when he called his twelve Disciples together, he gave them power against
unclean spirits] Christ sending out his Disciples to preach, furnishes them
thereunto. Besides an ability to preach, he inables them to do miracles for the
confirmation of their doctrine; he makes them of Scholars to be Masters, having
in private first instructed them thereto. The power Christ gave them was not
only Potentia or an ability, but it was also Potestas an authority. Some have
power to do a thing that have not authority, and some have authority that have
not power: the Disciples had a derivative power to do miracles, Christ had this
power from himself.

Devils are called unclean spirits, as being full of pride and hatred of God,
and envy against men, and to distinguish them from the holy Angels, and because
they delight in uncleanness, and make men unclean, defiling with blindness in
the mind, rebellion in the will.

We may see here the power of Christ above Moses and the Prophets. Moses when
he brought his Law did sundry miracles, and so did Christ, but neither Moses
nor the Prophets could give power to others to do miracles, as Christ here
does. Besides Christ had power and gave power over devils, which none else did.

V. 2. Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these: The first Simon, who is
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother.

Names of the twelve Apostles] They were twelve, that as the twelve Patriarchs
were the fathers of the Jews, so these were the fathers of all Christians.
Hence when Judas was dead, Matthias was chosen in his place, and Christ being
about to build his spiritual Kingdom, sets forth the Image of the Jewish
Commonwealth, to denote that the promises of the everlasting Kingdom are
fulfilled in him.

It was also needful for us to know their names, from whose agreeing testimony
the Truth was to be received, many pretending an Apostleship which proved to be
false, 2 Cor. 11.13. Rev. 2.2.

The first, Simon who is called Peter] Not in respect of dignity but order; for
among the Preachers of the Gospel there must be a priority of order, though no
supremacy of Jurisdiction; for Peter disclaims it, 1 Pet. 5.4. Not as being
Lords over Gods heritage.

Yet what is this to the primacy of the Roman Bishop? for how does it follow
that Peter had a primacy of age, and eloquence, and therefore had a primacy of
authority? and how does it follow more to the Bishop of Rome, then to the
Bishop of Antioch and Constantinople?

Peter might be called first, because first called to the Office, though Andrew
was called before him to Disciple-ship, his primacy might be also in respect of
faith and confession, not in respect of honor and degree. Also Gal. 2.9. James
is set before Peter, and at the Council Acts 15. they agreed to James his
sentence. And Andrew, Philip, and Nathaniel did acknowledge Christ before
Peter, John 1.41, 45, 49. did acknowledge him. And though Peter made that
confession that Christ was the son of the living God, Mat. 16.16. yet did he
speak in behalf of all the Apostles. See Joh. 6, 69, 70. We believe and are
sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God.

Simon called Peter] To distinguish him from Simon the Canaanite.

Andrew] So called from his virility and nobleness, in his preaching and
suffering. for (...) signifies manliness or virility.

James the son of Zebedee] Put to death by Herod, Acts 12.2. called the son of
Zebedee to distinguish him from James the younger son of Alpheus, Matthew. 10.3.
He was elder brother to John, hence set before him, though John for his grace
was most dear to Christ.

And John his brother] James and John called sons of thunder, some render the
word to signify gracious and merciful.

V. 3. Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the Publican, James the son
of Alpheus, and Lebbeus whose surname was Thaddeus,

Philip] A Greek word, (...), a lover of horses.

Bartholomew] q.d. The son of Tholmai or Tholomeus. So we read of Bartimaeus
the son of Timaeus, Barjona the son of Jona.

Thomas] Surnamed Didymus, John 20.27.

Matthew the Publican] So called, not because at present he was a Publican, but
because he had been one. The other Evangelists conceal this, but he out of
humility acknowledges it.

James the son of Alpheus] Called James the less or little, so called, Mark
15.40. called so in respect of age or stature, called the Lords brother, Gal.
1.19. because born of Mary the sister of the Virgin Mary, as Jerome, which was
called Mary Cleophas, Joh. 19.25. Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his
Mother, and his Mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas; for it is thought
Alphaeus and Cleophas were all one. This James penned the Epistle.

And Lebbeus whose surname was Thaddeus] Some we read of had two names, as John
whose surname was Mark, Acts 12.12, 25. so this man had three names, one of
them was Judas; for some relate that what name had the four letters of the name
of God in their name, the Hebrews were wont to change that name. And so we may
reconcile Luke, who calls him Jude, and Mark that calls him Thaddaeus. This
Judas was the brother of James, Acts 1.13.

V. 4. Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him.

Simon the Canaanite] Not as if he were a Canaanite, for all the Apostles were
Jews, but because he was of Cana in Galilee. For his zeal called Simon the
Zelot, Luke 6.15. Acts 1.13.

And Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him] So called, quasi, Isch Kerioth, a
man of Carioth, of the Tribe of Juda, Jos. 15.25. Christ chose Judas, though he
knew he would betray him, that he might bring about man's redemption, and to
comfort us if we should be betrayed of our near friends.

Concerning these Apostles, note,

1 They are the foundations of the heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21.19. compared to
twelve several precious stones.

2 Christ joins them together in pairs, as Peter and Andrew, James and John,
etc. that every one of them might not only have help from his companion, but
witness from him, and to commend brotherly love, as among all Christians in
general, so among Preachers in special.

3 These Apostles were sundry of them Christ's kinsmen, as James and John, and
James the son of Alpheus, whom he chose not to enrich with temporal things but
spiritual blessings, and to suffer much hardships in the witness of his name:
to show that as we should endeavor to gain others to the faith, so in
particular our kindred and alliance.

4 In that Christ calls them by two and two, see the benefit of society, Eccl.
4.9, 10, 11. Moses and Aaron conducted the people out of Egypt, Joshua and
Zerubbabel out of Babylon, and the Disciples by two and two are sent to bring
persons from darkness to life.

V. 5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying, Go not into
the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not.

These twelve Jesus sent forth] That is these men of mean quality, Fishermen,
to confound the wise.

Go not into the way of the Gentiles] The scope of their office was to stir up
the Jews to the hope of their salvation now at hand by Christ, and to make them
attentive to hear him: therefore Christ limits them to Judaea, because Christ
was sent from the Father as the minister of circumcision, to fulfill the
promises made unto the Jewish Fathers, Romans 15.8. Therefore Christ at first
would have the doctrine of grace preached only to this people, but after his
resurrection, when the vail was taken away, he would have it preached to all
nations, Matthew. 28.19. Act. 1.8.

Besides, had Christ sent his Disciples to preach to others, as well as to
them, they would have excepted against Christ, from being the Messiah, because
the Messiah was only promised unto the Jews and not unto the Gentiles.

Quest. But was it not unjust to deny means of salvation to the Gentiles?

Answ. No, for God has power to do with his own what he pleases. 2 God is not
bound to give means save where he pleases: gifts are dispensed according to
the will of the giver.

Quest. Why did Christ forbid his disciples to go to the Samaritans and yet he
himself would go to them and convert them? Joh. 4.40.

Answ. It might be because they were in the same condition with the rest of the
heathen, and so the Gospel was not to be given to them at first. 2 Or else
because Christ himself intended to go thither, therefore there was no need for
his Disciples to go thither.

3 Christ did not wholly forbid his Disciples to go to the Gentiles, but only
that the first fruits of their ministry should be given to the Jews. Act. 13.46.

These Samaritans were neither Jews nor Gentiles, but a mixture of Jewish and
Gentile Religion together, 1 King. 17.24.33.

V. 6. But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

To the lost sheep of the house of Israel Christ was sent, Matthew. 15.24. By
these lost sheep Christ means the Tribes of Juda, Benjamin and Levi, who came
back out of Captivity, to whom sundry of the other Tribes joined themselves, or
at least the godly among them: he calls them lost sheep, because they wanted
good pastors and teachers: after his resurrection he tells his Disciples that
they should be his witnesses in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the uttermost
parts of the earth, Act. 1.8. Mean time, they, as all other preachers ought to
do, must contain themselves in the bounds of their lawful calling, 1 Pet. 5.2.
Feed the flock of God which is among you. Feed the flock over which the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, Act. 20.28.

These Israelites were called sheep, Psalm. 74.1.79.13.80.1. They were called
lost, because every man by nature is in a lost condition, Psalm. 14.3, 4. Matthew.
18.10. Sundry of these were reprobates, yet called by the name of sheep,
because they were adopted unto God for a people, and were a national Church.

V. 7. And as ye go preach, saying, The Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Here was the sum of the preaching Christ enjoined these twelve, to wit,
whereas the Jews expected a carnal and temporal kingdom, wherein, by the
driving out the Romans and all their other enemies, the Messiah would place
them, Christ therefore bids his Disciples tell them, that though there were a
glorious Kingdom promised to the Jews upon earth, yet that kingdom being far
off, there was another kingdom near at hand, wherein the Lord Jesus should
throw down Satan's kingdom, and set up his own, translating his people
thereinto, Col. 1.13. and therefore that with a willing mind they should
receive this king, not only by his power and providence ruling in the world,
but also ruling in their hearts, every purpose by true and unfeigned repentance
being brought under his government, which other terms express thus, Luke
24.47. That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name
among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

Neither did the twelve only repeat these words, but under them is expressed
the benefits by Christ, the manner of receiving and applying Christ and his
benefits, the resurrection, last judgment, heaven, hell, the burning of the
world, the denial of our selves both in lusts and enjoyments, the future
punishment that would betide those who refused the present grace offered. But
because faith and repentance was the preparation to this kingdom, doubtless
they insisted hereupon especially. Great is the benefit of faithful preaching,
which makes the kingdom of God which was far from us to be nigh unto us. By
this preaching it is that lost sheep are brought home into Christ's fold.

V. 8. Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, cast out Devils;
freely ye have received, freely give.

Christ shows that his disciples should use the power of doing miracles
together with their preaching, with all freeness and readiness, that they
should not spare their miracles when there was any need thereof, when they were
desired thereto, or their doctrine stood need of confirmation, for hereby they
should not only get authority to their doctrine, but good will to their
persons, and these miracles should supply their want of learning and language.
There are many whom other adjurers, and inchanters, and your witches could not
cure, very many of our men, I say, Christians have healed and do heal, adjuring
them by the name of Jesus Christ Crucified under Pontius Pilate, disarming and
casting out devils from men that have possessed them. Just. Mart. Apol. 1. p.
35. The power of his name Devils fear and tremble, who being adjured by the
name of Christ Crucified under Pontius Pilate obey us. Just. cont. Triph, p.
191. see the same, p. 235. also p. 243. and Justin adds, if you adjure devils
by the name of your kings, prophets, or righteous men, they will not be cast
out. Now as when God sent Moses to Israel to bring them out of Egypt, he
enabled him to do sundry miracles to gain belief to his words, and that the
people might know he was sent of God, so does Christ give his Disciples the
like power for the same end.

Only whereas some of Moses miracles were for terror, the miracles of the
Disciples were profitable and beneficial to those who partook of them.

Freely ye have received, freely give] As if he should say, The scholars of
Physicians get the skill of healing diseases with a great expense of time and
study, and not without great charge of money, but you have received this power
in a moment, without any cost or labor, therefore having received freely, give
freely. You must not make sale of miracles to covetousness or vain glory, for
he well knew how the heart of some of them, to wit Judas, hung after money, and
the seeds of covetousness, as well as other sins were in the hearts of the
rest. So Elisha would take nothing of Naaman for healing his Leprosy, 2 King.
5.16. and Gehezi taking money herein was smit with the same Leprosy. When
Magus would have bought this power, Peter said, Thy money perish with thee,
Act. 8.20.

Reasons why they might take nothing for doing miracles.
1 The selling of them perverts the end wherefore they were given, which was
not to satisfy any man's covetous lust, but to confirm the Gospel.

2 Its absurd for an Ambassador to make sale of the Princes favor, which he
is commanded in the Princes name to bestow upon his subjects.

3 That whiles such Miracles were done freely, the name of God might be more
glorified, and the Doctrine which they confirmed accepted; for men do less
esteem those benefits which themselves in some sort can recompense.

Quest. Whether does this precept, Freely you have received, freely give,
belong to one or both these precepts, or to the latter only, Heal the sick,
cleanse the Lepers?

Answ. Some of the learned think it belongs only to the latter.

Howbeit to covenant for a Reward for such an act, which is directly appointed
to the glory of God, is, say some, doubtless contrary to the glory of God:
hence it had been unlawful, directly or indirectly to compact with any man,
for any Miracle done for him.

Quest. Whether is it lawful for Preachers to take hire? or are they which
take any Reward hirelings?

Answ. 1 There may be times when a man may remit of his Right herein, when
circumstances of times and persons require it. So because of the false Teachers
the Apostle would preach the Gospel of Christ freely at Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.7,
9, 10. I preached the Gospel of God freely, I kept my self from being
burdensome to you, and so will I keep my self; that I may cut off occasion from
them that desire occasion, that wherein they glory (which was their preaching
freely) they may be found even as we. Elisha in a case would take nothing of
Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kings 6.26. nor Abraham would take nothing of the prey
which was got from the Enemies, Genesis 14.22.

2 All agree that to receive gifts for a man's preaching without any compact for
the same has no natural filthiness in it, for some things may be honestly
received which may be dishonestly asked.

3 Under the Old Testament they that took counsel of the Prophets were wont to
give them some small gifts, 1 Samuel 9.7, 8. But, if we go, what shall we bring
the man? and the Servant answered Saul, saying, Behold I have the fourth part
of a Shekel of Silver, 1 Kings 13.9. The man to whom this gift was to be given
was Samuel.

Besides the Priests and Levites under the Old Testament had large portions out
of most of the Sacrifices, besides Tithes they had eight and forty Cities of
Refuge with Suburbs to them, so that the Lord says, Which of you would shut the
doors for naught? or kindle a fire on my Altar for naught? Mal. 1.10. which
Argument the Apostle presses for maintenance for Ministers of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9.9.10.13. where he shows that the Levites who took the Sacrifices of the
People, and killed them, and pulled off their skin, cut them in pieces and
brought them to the Priest, and laid the Wood in order, lived thereon. The
Priests lifted up the Sacrifice, and laid the flesh on the Altar, and burnt it.
The Apostle, when he says, They which minister about holy things live of the
things of the Temple, means the Levites, and they which wait at the Altar are
partakers with the Altar, meaning the Priests, v. 13. Now, if they were so
plentifully maintained, shall Gospel Preachers be the only sufferers, and that
in a time of Light? When the Apostle makes this reddition, Even so has God
appointed that they that preach the Gospel shall live of the Gospel, v. 14.

4 Maintenance is due to Preachers from natural and civil equity. 1 Natural
equity, that as the Soldier that defends the Country lives of the Countries
pay, 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes to warfare at his own charge? or as he that plants a
Vineyard eats the fruit of it, milks a flock and eats of the milk of it, so
Preachers must live of the People they preach to.

2 From civil equity. That Law Deuteronomy. 25.4. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the Corn. The Apostle argues from the less, If an Ox
were not to be muzzled when he rolled a wooden beam over the Wheat, to shake
the Corn out of the ear, shall maintenance be denied to those who thresh in the
Lords Barn? Nay, it was not written for Oxens sake but for Preachers sake, as
the Apostle expounds it, 1 Cor. 9.9. That he that ploweth should plow in hope,
and he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. Where we see it is
lawful for a Teacher to do Gods work rightly, and yet have an expectation and
hope of maintenance for his labor. The hope of the sustentation of his
necessities, and (if the people be able) conveniences from the people, and the
hope of the Reward of his dispensation from the Lord.

5 From Gospel ordinance Gal. 6.6. Let him that is ministered to make him that
ministers partaker in all good things. 1 Cor. 9.14. God has appointed that
they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. 1 Timothy 5.17. Luke 10.7.

6 Because they have power to forbear working in bodily labor, hence by divine
right maintenance is due, 1 Cor. 9.6. I only and Barnabas, have we not power
to forbear working? 2 Thessalonians. 3.8, 9. I wrought that I might not be chargeable,
not that we have not power, but to make our selves ensamples. And when the
Apostle did work with his hands, he calls it an abasing of himself, 2 Cor.
12.7. and numbers this up among the rest of his afflictions, 1 Cor. 4.11.

7 The true note of an hireling is to make hire the end of his work, not the
taking of hire or wages: when for filthy lucre sake a Preacher shall take the
oversight of a people, 1 Peter 5.2. Feed the flock of God, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind. Now for the lawfulness of taking wages, see 2 Cor. 12.8. I robbed other
Churches, taking wages of them; the word is (...), a stipend, such as was given
to Soldiers for their military service, so taken, Luke 3.14. Be content with
your wages, where the same word is used. And military pensions or stipends were
sometimes part meat and part money, now Paul is said to rob or spoil these
Macedonian Churches, taking wages of them, because he had led them in triumph
by the Gospel, as spoils taken in war. See Luke 10.7. The Workman is worthy of
his hire, or reward, the word is (...); so that not the expecting of a reward
from a people, nor the taking of it, makes an hireling, but the making of his
hire or wages the end of his preaching, so that no more pay, no more preach,
neither to that people, nor any other. But for lawful reward promised or
received this does not make an hireling, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. The Apostle bids,
Count the Elders worthy of double honor, and gives this reason, for the
Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, and, the Labourer
is worthy of his reward.

8 We must distinguish betwixt the gifts of the Spirit and the work of the
Ministry. If it were granted that to take money for the gifts of the Spirit
were the sin of Simon Magus, yet it follows not that it is of the same nature
to take maintenance for their work, since every handicrafts man, and labourer,
of what kind soever, is rewarded for his work. Could preaching come as easily
to them as the power of doing miracles came to the Apostles, it were something,
Freely ye have received, freely give; but who knows not that persons that
discharge this duty painfully and faithfully must take much pains therein.

9 Preachers are commanded to give themselves wholly to this work, Acts 6.4. We
will give our selves continually to prayer, and to ministration of the Word. 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to them. Now it is
good reason that a man should be maintained by that which a man gives himself
wholly unto, unless he please of his own accord to remit of his right, or the
people not able.

10 Were these words of Freely ye have received, freely give, meant of
preaching as well as miracles, all that were to be deduced were, that the
things in the Ministry are so great and high, that they are above all price,
and equal recompense. 1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things,
Is it a great matter if we should reap your carnal things? q.d. There is no
proportionable compensation betwixt the one and the other.

V. 9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses:

Christ shows what provision the Disciples were to make for their journey.
Whereas every man provides for his journey things needful, they should provide
nothing for their journey: signifying his providential care over them, that the
persons to whom they preached should supply them with all necessary things.

Withal Christ meets with an objection; If we must take nothing for doing
miracles, but as We have freely received we must freely give, then we must make
large preparations of all things for our journey; to this Christ answers, the
Lord whose message they go upon, will provide them all necessary things: which
that they may see more plainly, he bids them to go out without making any
manner of provisions.

Also Christ commends unto them a speediness, in that within a few days he
would have them to go all over Judea and return again, therefore he would not
have them trouble themselves with luggage, which might hinder and prolong their
journey.

There was three sorts of money, brass, silver, gold; brass money was first in
use, none of these should they provide.

V. 10. Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, neither yet
staves; for the workman is worthy of his meat.

Nor scrip for your journey] Christ means a Portmantue to carry provisions, or
a Knapsack wherein soldiers and Passengers use to put bread and cheese and
other things.

Neither two coats] Those that are content with a little use to be content with
two coats, none but very poor people that have but one coat. The Disciples
might put two coats on their back at once, but not carry double apparel with
them; yea Christ himself had two coats, John 19.23.

Nor shoes] Two pair of shoes, or (as some think) they were forbid shoes
altogether, and wore Sandals (as Mark calls them) which only covered the soles
of their feet from stones and gravel, Mark 6.9. Of these Sandals mention is
made Acts 12.8. Gird thy self, and bind on thy Sandals; these they wore that
they might be so much more ready for their journey.

Neither yet staves] For in journeying sometimes the staff breaks, sometimes it
sticks in some deep bog. They might carry one, but no more then one. They that
have God defending, they need no weapons, only a staff to lean upon. Christ
hereby shows he would have the Apostles carry no superfluous thing, and
therefore Mark says, c. 6.8. save a staff only.

For the workman is worthy of his meat] Christ gives the reason why he sends
them out in this manner. Because wherever they came their hearers would
supply them with needful things, which Christ argues from the rule of natural
right, that the workman is worthy of his meat. God providing you meat and all
sorts of nourishment you shall take it of those to whom you preach. Not as if
this meat were a sufficient reward for the present, or God intended it so for
time to come (for what is a little meat compared with glad tidings of the
Gospel which Preachers bring) but Christ hereby would mightily prevail upon the
Jews with his doctrine, whiles his Disciples would receive no money, but
barely content themselves with meat.

We may see also what Preachers are. They are Workmen, who though they do not
work with their hands, yet they work with their brains, and if God will not
have the laborers wages tarry all night with us. Levit. 19.13. Deuteronomy. 24.15.
and the Lord says, he will be a swift witness against those who oppress in
this kind, Mal. 3.5. Then let not those who detain maintenance from faithful
laborers in the Lords work think they shall escape.

That which is here called meat, in Luke 10.7. is called a Stipend, a Metaphor
taken from good soldiers who war only for the defense of their country; yet
notwithstanding they receive a Stipend, not as the reward of their warfare, but
that they may get things necessary for life, and may continue in their warfare.
For if they receive their pay instead of reward they sell a great matter, even
their lives at a small rate. Now as there are some soldiers who fight only for
their pay and plunder, not for the preservation of justice and the
Commonwealth, so some preachers, whereas they should only or principally
preach for the salvation of souls, and not for temporal things, and should
receive their maintenance that they may continue in the Lords work, and
moderately provide for them and theirs, they prove themselves very mercinaries,
in making their means and in-comes the end of their preaching. Christ himself
did not refuse maintenance of his hearers, Luke 8.3. Persons that are called of
God to preach may hence learn not to be too sollicitous for their living, and
that they should not so make it their aim how to get money as how to win souls,
and that hearers are in equity and conscience bound to sustain and to maintain
preachers, provided they be laborers.

V. 11. And into whatsoever City or Town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is
worthy, and there abide till ye go thence.

Inquire who in it is worthy] That is fearing God, or religiously affected, and
tarry with him. They were not to turn into any wicked man's house or any person
infamous, lest by the infamy of such an host their persons or doctrine should
become infamous, because they were not to tarry long, Christ would have them
begin there where there was some good preparation already wrought.

Now by worthy he does not mean any man deserving any thing of God, by way of
condignity or desert, but such as were privy to their own unworthiness, and
humbled under the sight of God for it; these the Lord counts worthy. For the
Apostles were sent as Physicians to sick persons, as preachers of righteousness
to sinners if they would repent.

Christ would not have them at this first sending to preach in Temples and
Synagogues, but only in houses, because neither the times could yet well bear
it, nor were they furnished with sufficient boldness, till after Christ his
resurrection. Godly men should seek to lodge in godly houses.

And there abide till ye go hence] Lest ye be thought to be inconstant, or
given to delicacy, or least you should offend your host where ye turned in at
first, but chiefly because they were to tarry there but a short time, for had
they tarried long they might have proved burdensome. Besides hereby they
showed their contentedness of mind, and that they were more led with the love
of God and of souls then of their own ease, pleasure or profit. Moreover Christ
shows he would have the publishers of his Gospel maintained in a comely way,
not in a begging way, to be entertained one week at one house, another week at
another. Withal Christ here stablishes the law of Hospitality, as toward
others, so especially toward preachers, Heb. 13.2. Yet must we not receive men
of corrupt minds, pretending whatsoever inspiration from God, 2 Epist. John v.
10. If any man bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house. We may
also take notice that where persons are holy their grace will shine, so that
their neighbors can often times tell who are worthy, Phil. 2.15.16. They will be
known by their just dealing and by being free from scandalous sins.

V. 12. And when ye come into an house salute it.

V. 13. And, if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it be
not worthy let your peace return to you.

The word Salute comprehends wishes and good desires. Its a Hebrew proverb
whereby we wish all happiness unto a house or person, 1 Samuel 25.5, 6. David
sent ten young men to Nabal, and said unto them, Greet Nabal in my name, and
say to him that lives in prosperity, Peace be both to thee, and peace be to
thy house, and peace be to all that thou have. This peace they offer is
ministerial, proffering reconciliation by Christ who is our peace, Ephesians. 2.13,
14. Hence their feet should be beautiful, because they preach glad tidings of
good things, and through their preaching the peace of justification flows, Romans
5.1.

Obj. But Christ when he sends out the seventy to preach, bids them salute no
man by the way.

Answ. Christ means that they should make such speed in delivering the doctrine
of salvation, that they should not be hindered from it by acts of humanity. The
vanity of Quakisme is in this point refuted. Salutations are commanded by
Christ, not only to brethren, but to others, Matthew. 5.47. exemplified by the
Apostle in every Epistle, Act. 21. Paul coming to James his house saluted the
Elders. Mary saluted Elizabeth, Luke 1.40. Paul coming to Cesarea saluted the
Church, Act. 18.22. He saluted the brethren at Ptolomais, Act. 21.7. practiced
by Aristarchus and Epaphras, Col. 4.10.12. Proofs herein are but to light a
candle to the sun. The not saluting argues rudeness, pride, hatred or coldness
of love. True religion does not destroy good manners, whence is that religion
then which destroys principles of morality? but they as is reported, judging
that they have a light within them sufficient to guide them to salvation
without the help of any outward light, and that the Scriptures are not the word
of God, but a declaration of the conditions of them that speak them forth, let
us reason with them as heathens, and convince them in a way of natural reason
or Philosophy. For many heathens are not only in Judea but also with us.

And if the house be worthy let your peace come upon it] That is, if from the
sense of your misery you receive this comfortable tender of reconciliation,
showing your respect to the message by your receiving the messenger, the Lord
promises that what such preachers wish shall rest upon that house, and
therefore Christians must not contemn the prayers of faithful teachers: now
they gathered the house was worthy, if the master thankfully accepted the
salutation and resaluted them courteously, as Boaz did the reapers and they
him, Ruth 2.4. The Lord be with you, said Boaz; the reapers answered, The Lord
bless thee, and withal if the man of the house invited the Apostles to lodge
at his house, but especially they judged the house to be worthy, by receiving
the tender of reconciliation held forth in the Gospel.

But, if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you] As in case of
worthiness and predestination to life, the master and his household received the
grace of Christ, so here is the denunciation in case of unworthiness, in case
the host whither you come refuse the salutation and your good wish, it shall
return to you. The prayers of Godly men if they do not good to them for whom
they are wished, they redound unto the persons who wish them, Psalm. 35.13. When
David's prayer and humiliation took no effect for his enemies, it returned into
his own bosom. In this case the Apostles were to turn in to some other host,
who was willing to receive them, but yet not to curse these who had rejected
them, being messengers of peace. Preachers must be armed with patience, knowing
some of their hearers will be docible and some not, some receive proffers of
grace, some not.

Moreover Preachers by a tender of salvation in a faithful manner have a true
peace redounding to themselves in the discharge of their duty, which the
persons to whom they tendered should have had, had they been worthy; as
Pothinus Bishop of Lions, being asked of the President who was the Christians
God? answered, If thou werest worthy thou should know. Grot. in loc.

V. 14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye
depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

Christ shows whom he judges unworthy, even those who shall not receive the
Apostles nor their doctrine, and to these Christ bids they should shake off the
dust of their feet: whether it were City or Family. The shaking off the dust
signified,

1 That they had nothing common with these contemners of grace, no not the dust
of their feet.

2 That this dust would, in the Day of Christ, witness against these
contemners, that tenders of grace were made to them and they would have none of
them. I would have purged thee and thou would not be purged, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Matthew 23.37. and in the Day of Christ hereby they should know, that a Prophet
had been in the midst of them, Ezekiel. 2.5. Naaman out of reverence would carry
away some of the Jewish earth, 2 Kings 5.17. The Apostles out of abhorrence
would not carry away any of the dust of contemners of grace.

3 By shaking off the dust they declared the fruitlesness of that journey which
they had taken in declaring the Gospel unto them.

4 Shaking off dust declared that they came not for gainsake to them, seeing
they would not have so much as any of their dust cleaving to them.

5 That, as that dust was scattered about before the wind, so should these
wicked contemners of grace, Psalm 1.4.

6 That this dust might be a witness against them, as Luke sets it down, Luke
10.11. so Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.51. who shook the dust of their feet off
against the wicked Jews of Antioch and came into Iconium.

7 This shaking off dust signified that the Inhabitants of that place were so
polluted, that they infected the very earth with their contagion. This was an
usual way of abhorrence, because Christ speaks of it as of a thing known among
the Jews, and the Jews were wont to give some outward signs of the things they
did, as the setting up of a stone, or a heap of stones, Genesis 31.47. Jos. 24.26.

8 To denote that God did despise such contemners of grace, as a man does the
dust of his feet. Also they showed hereby they were free from their blood, and
that their blood was upon their own heads.

Now they shook off their dust by rubbing their shoes or sandals one sole
against another, or rubbing them against some stone or wood: it was an allusion
to that, 1 Kings 13 8. when the Prophet being sent to prophecy against
Jeroboam and the Altar of Beth-el, was bid to go another way than he came, v.
9, 10.

But because Preachers may be ready to go away hastily from a people, when they
have not means enough, nor reverence enough from them, therefore Christ would
have Preachers take notice of three sins before they leave a people. 1
Unthankfulness, if they will not receive the message of salvation.

2 Stubbornness, if they will not vouchsafe to hear them; for if persons will
hear, we are not hastily to be gone.

3 When they shall speak evil of the way of God before multitudes, so that, by
their speaking evil, multitudes become hardened against it, Acts 19.8, 9.
Christ will not have the Gospel thrust upon persons against their will.

V. 15. Verily, I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the Land of
Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, than for that City.

Here is a terrible threatening against those who shall not receive the
Preachers of the Gospel, nor their message; It shall be more tolerable for
Sodom, etc. Christ alleges this example, which by reason of the nearness to
Judea was well known unto them. Their punishment was more terrible in this life
than Sodom and Gomorrah, which were consumed on a sudden, but the Jews were
consumed by degrees, and their punishments have remained long upon them. The
Ephah of their punishments is set upon its own base or foundation, Zach. 5.11.
where, for their contempt of Christ, they have for these sixteen hundred years
been made a spectacle of Gods severity.

Specially these Jews and all other contemners of grace and the Doctrine of
Christ shall be punished at the Day of Judgment.

If there be no escaping for neglect of this salvation, Heb. 2.3. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation? what will befall their contempt, who
say, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. If they
escaped not who refused him who spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape,
if we turn away from him who speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12.25.

Though other sins sorely offend the Lord, 3 Reasons against contempt of grace.
yet contempt of grace does exceedingly offend him, as being committed 1
Against precious mercy. Hence we see how sorely the Jews were punished for
their ungrateful contempt, Matthew. 22.23. who being invited to come to those
dainties the King had provided, went one to his Farm, another to his
Merchandise, and the remnant took his servants and entreated them spitefully
and slew them, whereupon the King sent out his Armies of the Romans, and slew
those Murderers, and burnt up their City, v. 6, 7. and for their contempt the
Gentiles were called in in their stead, v. 8, 9. See also Luke 14.16. to v. 25.
How would a Physician be provoked, if sending a potion to a sick man, the sick
man should dash the Vial against the Wall? Would not the Physician say? Let him
die and perish, I will send him no more.

A second reason why God so sore punishes contemners of grace, is because they
sin against greater light. Sodom had not those means of grace the Jews had,
hence their punishment will be the more grievous. He that knew not was beaten
with stripes, but he that knew and did not, was beaten with many stripes, Luke
12.47, 48.

Now though these Sodomites were sorely punished in this life, yet an heavier
punishment remains for them at the day of judgment, 2 Pet. 2.6. compared with
Jude 7. to which the Evangelist primarily has respect.

Now these Sodomites had only the light of nature, and the admonitions of Lot.
The Jews besides the light of Moses had the preachings of the Apostles
confirmed with so many miracles.

3 There were many sins wrapped up in contempt of grace, unbelief, disobedience,
stubbornness, inhospitableness.

We may also note here there are not only degrees of sins, and torments in
hell, but that contempt of grace is such a sin as might have been shunned, and
that it does not necessarily follow, for then it would not aggravate
condemnation as it does, Prove. 1.24, 25. Because I have called and ye have
refused, I will laugh at your destruction.

Then for that City] Not only a private house, but also a whole City
contemning grace shall be punished, not as if a City should be punished for one
man's particular contempt, unless they connive, justify, defend or some way
partake therein, but to awaken secure sinners, who because they have
multitudes of companions in sin think they shall go free.

V. 16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves be therefore
wise as serpents and harmless as doves.

Christ now comes to give general directions for all Christians, and in
particular to these twelve whom he sends forth in this temporary embassage to
guard them against all fear of danger, to the end of the Chapter. For though it
be here spoken unto the twelve, yet Luke 12.1. to verse 13. Christ spoke it
unto his Disciples promiscuously, an innumerable multitude being then and there
present. Now Christ in this part of the Chapter sets forth, 1 The dangers his
Disciples are and would be exposed to. 2 The directions, and supportations, and
consolations against dangers. The dangers are,

1 The cruelty and subtilty of the enemies of Christians, viz. they are wolves;
and you in the midst of them are in danger, as sheep among wolves, the
direction in this danger, that Christians should have serpents wisdom, and
doves innocence.

2 That they should be brought before Kings and Councils for the witness of the
truth, v. 17, 18. The consolation is, That the Spirit would teach them in that
hour what they ought to speak, v. 19, 20.

3 That they should be hated of all men in general, and of their kindred in
special, v. 21, 22. The consolation is, They should be saved in case they hold
out unto the end, v. 22.

4 Persecution from City, v. 23. The comfort is, God would provide an harbor
for them among the spiritual Israel of God till the coming of Christ, v. 23. 2
It befalls them no otherwise herein then it did to their Master Christ, who was
called Beelzebub, v. 24, 25.

5 The next danger is death, whereunto they should be exposed, in case they
preached what he bade them, v. 26, 27, 28. To this are three consolations, 1
They are able only to kill their bodies not their souls. 2 There is a
providence of God which reaches to the smallest creatures, even to the
sparrows and the hairs of their head, much more to their lives, v. 29, 30, 31.
3 From the promise made to them who confess Christ, notwithstanding threats of
death, and the threatenings made to them that deny Christ upon hope of saving
their lives, v 32, 33.

6 The sixth danger is divisions and variance betwixt near relations for the
sake of Christ, v. 34, 35, 36. The consolation is, that those who think Christ
better then their relations, and will take up other crosses for him, Christ
will think such worthy of him, and what they lose for his sake they shall
save eternally, v. 37, 38, 39.

7 The seventh danger is fear of not receiving, that no man would receive
Christians to house or harbor, being persons exposed to so many dangers. To
this Christ gives three comforts, 1 That in receiving Christians the persons so
receiving receive him and his father, v. 40. 2 That whosoever shall receive
Prophet or righteous man because they are such, shall receive a suitable
reward, v. 41. 3 That the smallest favor done to a Disciple of Christ shall
not be forgotten, if it were but a cup of cold water where a man is able to
do no more, v. 42.

Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves] No creature less
able to defend it self then a sheep. Such are Christians. Wolves are subtle and
cruel, so among the Jews were Pharisees, among the Gentiles Philosophers and
Tyrants, among the Christians Heretics; if one wolf were enough to destroy a
whole flock, how much danger where there are many herds of Wolves? Christ
sends not forth his Disciples as lions, but as sheep, that his power may be
seen in overcoming, and in turning wolves into sheep.

Behold, I send you forth] As of old I sent Eliah and Elisha to Jezebel and
Ahab, Isaias to Manasses, and was present with them to defend them, so will I
be with you. As Absalom said to his servants; 2 Samuel 13.28. so says Christ,
Remember you are in my service.

As sheep in the midst of Wolves] 1 As sheep for innocence, Isa. 53.7, 8.

2 As sheep for gentleness and meekness: handle a sheep never so roughly, yet
it will be gentle.

3 For patience, a sheep is ready to suffer all wrongs, Act. 8.32.

4 As sheep for profitableness: nothing in a sheep but is useful, so should
Christians be profitable, in their conversings, in their examples, etc.

5 For nakedness and inability to defend themselves.

In the midst of Wolves] That is liable to innumerable dangers. If any man
would paint out the Church, let him pourtray a deformed and poor maid sitting
in a wood in the midst of Lions and Wolves. Luth. in Psalm. 129.
So that a Christian must still carry his life in his hand. Shall Merchants
hazard their lives for a little gain venturing through many storms, and shall
not we hazard our lives for Christ? Now Christ exposes his sheep to so many
dangers, 1 To try their patience and obedience, Psalm. 44.22. 2 To crown their
conquests, Rev. 2.17. Rev. 3.11. 3 To conform the members to the head, John
15.19, 20. 4 That they may see his shepherdly care of them. Whence are the
sheep safe amidst Wolves? Is it from the kind disposition of the Wolf? Nay,
but from the shepherds eye: so from Gods shepherdly care, we are safe among
multitudes of wicked men, Psalm. 23.4.

Be wise as serpents] That is, wisdom in taking heed of the wolves of the
world must be mingled with innocence, that we be not afraid to do our duty in
witnessing the truth. For now and then many prudent men become treacherous to
Christ and his truth: As serpents when they see any danger carefully decline
it, so must not believers rashly expose themselves to danger. Now the doves
though exposed to dangers, offer themselves securely to the snares of men, so
Christ would not have Christians through fear to be hindered in their course.

So that Christians must be wise as serpents, 1 In shunning snares. 2 In
defending their head though all their body be wounded, so should we defend our
head Christ and resist unto blood. 3 As a serpent is very quick of sight, so
should a Christian be to spy dangers.

4 As a serpent stops her ears against the voice of charmers, Psalm. 58.4, 5.
whether with her tail or something else, so should Christians stop their ears
against the charms of men's favors, earthly greatness, worldly wealth, and the
temptations of the devil and flesh, and heretical spirits.

Let our vvisdome be seen, 1 In suspicion of snares, as the Wise men, Matthew.
2.12. 2 In shunning of them, as Joseph who was afraid of Herod's snares, and
carried the young babe into Egypt, Matthew. 2.20, 21, 22. 3 In a bold profession
of truth, Luke 13.31, 32. Some bade Christ depart for Herod would kill him,
says he, Go tell that fox I do cures to day and to morrow. Joseph of Arimathea
did vvisely assert his profession of Christ, and went boldly to beg the body of
Jesus, Matthew. 27.58.

Simple as doves] That is, take heed of fleshly wisdom and Jesuitical
equivocations, that in no wise to shun dangers ye violate the peace of your
consciences, Romans 16.19. I would have you wise unto that which is good, but
simple concerning evil, Phil. 2.15. Blameless and harmless as the sons of God
without rebuke, Ephesians. 5.14, 15. Though it be in your power to do harm to your
persecutors yet do it not, do not revenge your selves. Simplicity without
wisdom may easily be deceived, and wisdom is dangerous if it be not
tempered with simplicity, therefore they are to be conjoined according to that
Distich.

If they be serpents for to circumvent us,
We must be serpents too or else repent us:
But with our wisdom join we innocence,
Like harmless doves, not trusting each pretense.
The word simple, is (...), of (...) a horn and (...) privative; that is
without horns or revenge. Others derive it of (...) to mingle and fo privative,
and so it signifies to be without mixture of deceit.

This is seen,

1 In sincere and plain-hearted confessions, without any deceitful
equivocations, Joh. 9.29. We see it in the blind man, when his parents
cunningly evaded, he plainly stood to Christ.

2 In a meek carriage. If men revile us and render us odious, let us not think
to quench wrath by wrath, Romans 12.20. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good.

V. 17. But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Councils, and
they will scourge you in the Synagogues.

Here Is a second danger.

Beware of men] 1 Of insnaring men, who by subtle and perplexed questions shall
lay snares for you, to draw out some words that shall be against the
Governors, or the Laws of the place where you live, Matthew. 22.15, 16, 17.

2 Take heed of feigned and treacherous men, who shall bring you to Councils,
Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.

3 Of enticing men, who shall persuade you by flatteries to deny the faith,
Dan. 11.32, 34.

4 Take heed of all natural men indefinitely. It behooves Christians to stand
upon their guard, seeing all men naturally have an hatred unto them, therefore
must we beware of them, though they be civil and courteous.

For they will deliver you up to the Councils] Not only unto the Council of
three and twenty, but also to the great Synedrium, or the Council of 70. of
which mention was made cap. 5.23. so was Peter and John, Acts 4.7.5.27. and
Stephen, Acts 6.12.

And they will scourge you in their Synagogues] Acts 5.40. Peter and John were
so scourged, Heb. 11.36. For even by Synagogues, civil Courts were meant, 1
Machab. 7.12. Of this mention is made, Acts 5.21. The high Priest came and they
that were with him, and called the Council together, and all the Senate of the
children of Israel. The word is (...), all the Eldership of the children of
Israel. Because the things they acted against the Apostles seemed to be
dangerous to the Commonwealth, they took the voices and advices of the chief
men, herein they joined the Senate of the City with the Senate of the people.
This was called (...), the great Synagogue. So that Christ his speech ascends
higher then before, so that his meaning is, You shall not only be brought
before ordinary Consistories, but extraordinary Conventions and Assemblies
shall be called together to try you. Before this extraordinary Convention the
Apostles were beaten with rods.

V. 18. And ye shall be brought before Governors, and Kings, for my sake, for
a testimony against them and the Gentiles.

And ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings] Christ still ascends
higher in his speech, to wit, that for the witness of his truth they should be
brought before Governors and Kings. By Governors he means Vice roys and
Governors of Nations and Provinces, and also before Kings that depute such
Governors: For the distinction of Governors, from Kings, see 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, whether unto the King as
excelling (the word is (...)) or unto Governors, as to those that are sent of
him. Besides when Christians have been condemned by Councils, the execution of
them has been by secular powers, as in Queen Mary's reign, and now under the
Spanish inquisition. Yea many times Princes have themselves sat in judgment
against Christians, as the Emperor Sigismond, etc. When Christians shall thus
be brought before Kings and Governors, Christ would have his Disciples not to
be dazzled with the glister of earthly Majesty, but to be of undanted spirits
when they come before them, as Paul was before Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17. Thus Paul was
brought prisoner to Faelix, and Festus, Acts 23.24. Peter and James to King
Herod Agrippa. Under pretense of Law, civil judicatories condemn and execute
Christians.

For my sake] Because ye preach me to be the Messiah, and that through faith in
me all that believe shall obtain remission of sins. We should look to the cause
why we suffer, even that we suffer for Christ. Hence Peter and John rejoiced
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name, 1 Pet. 4.14, 15,
16. If any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed. Rom, 8.36. For thy
sake we are killed all the day long. Meaning in one place or other, either
actually or by way of sympathy.

Indeed the Princes and Councils of the world have other pretenses for their
malice against Christians, but the true cause is for the sake of Christ.

But if we be brought before Kings and Governors, let it be only for the sake
of Christ; Let none of you suffer as thieves, and murderers, and busybodies,
etc. 1 Pet. 4 15.

For a testimony against them and the Gentiles] That is, to witness against the
Council and the great Convention of the Jews, and to witness for me against the
Rulers and Kings of the earth. Your imprisonment, whipping and death shall
witness both to Jew and Gentile.

Qu. But how or wherein?

Answ. 1 That you have witnessed the truth before them and therefore that you
are free from their blood.

2 They shall witness your ingratitude in the day of Christ, and their
faithfulness.

3 They shall be inexcusable in the day of judgment, when they shall allege
they knew not Christ. Moses went to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.3. and Isai to a stubborn
people, c. 6.9. so Ezekiel, c. 2.2. to v. 8. That they might be without excuse.

4 They shall be witness against you for not believing their Message. The Lord
will call out Peter, and say, Did not thou warn the Jews? and to Paul, Did
not thou warn the Gentiles, the Romans, and Faelix and Agrippa? he will say,
Yes Lord, but they would not believe, but instead of receiving our Message they
whipped and imprisoned us. Was it so? will the Lord say, and the unbeliever will
then be speechless. What follows? Christ will say, Depart thou cursed into
everlasting fire.

5 As wounds and scars testify the constancy, valor, and faithfulness of
Soldiers to their Prince or General, so Prisons, whippings, torments, shall
testify the faithfulness of Christians to Christ, Luke 21.13.

V. 19. But, when they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak.

Here is a consolation when they should be brought to answer before Kings and
Governors, that the Spirit should pour into their minds what they should
speak.

Take no thought how or what ye shall speak] Not as if we were in this case to
be careless, stupid or negligent, but Christ means we should not be carkingly
careful, or over fearful. The word is (...), Luke 21.14. Settle it in your
hearts before hand not to meditate what you shall answer; in which Christ does
not forbid all foregoing meditation, but that which has a distrust of the
providence and help of Christ. And all laborious preparation, such as is used
in speeches and oratory, and therefore Mark has it, (...), Luke (...). In the
like sense Christ forbad carefulness for the morrow, Matthew. 6.25. that is,
perplexing and distracting carking. Therefore those who are daily in
expectation of suffering in their questions and torments, should be much in
prayer that God would give them wisdom to answer, and courage to suffer.

For it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak] That is, if any
thing be wanting in you, the Spirit shall supply it and suggest it to you. Acts
6.10. The Libertines were not able to resist the Spirit by which Stephen spoke.
Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth and a tongue, which all your adversaries
should not be able to gainsay or resist. And here Christ meets with an
Objection, which the Apostles might make, viz. Whence shall we that are unable
to speak, defend our selves and cause, against Councils, great Assemblies and
Princes, who many times with their presence astonish great Orators? To this
Christ says, I will give you a mouth and a tongue. Christ will not leave his
Witnesses in the midst of danger.

V. 20. For, it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that
speaks in you.

Christ further strengthens his Disciples as to discouragement about their own
weakness: whereas they might object, we are fishermen, though it should be
spoken to us, yet we cannot, being unlearned, be able to speak; to this Christ
says; It Is not you that speak but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in
you. Will a father leave a child when he knows he is in hazard of life for his
fathers sake? and will your heavenly Father leave you in danger for the witness
of his truth? Surely no. And look as the preparation of the heart and answer of
the tongue is from the Lord, Prove. 16.1. so shall the Spirit not only dictate
unto you fit Arguments and Apologies, but also shall form your tongues to
express them, even to the astonishment of your Adversaries. The Council, Acts
4.13. when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they
were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled, Acts 5.27, 28, 29. Acts 7.51,
52, 53, 54.

Now in that Christ says it is not you, it is not meant absolutely but
comparatively; not so much you as the Spirit of God by you. The help of Angels
at such a time to assist is much, but the assistance of the Spirit is far more,
without which in such an hour of temptation the best parts and abilities would
fail. There cannot be a greater assistant than this Spirit, Luke 21.15. This
comparative speech is like that Matthew. 9.13. I will have mercy not sacrifice;
that is, not so much sacrifice as mercy. The force of the Argument is, It Is not
so much your cause as mine and my Fathers, therefore my Spirit and the Spirit
of my Father shall answer for you. As when Balaams Ass spoke it was not so much
the Ass that spoke as the Lord in the Ass, Numb. 22.28. so it was the Spirit
that spoke in the Apostles, Acts 4.19. and in Stephen.

V. 21. And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father
the child, and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause
them to be put to death.

Here Is a third evil to which Christians must look to be exposed to, viz. as
the hatred of all men in general, so of their own kinsmen in particular,
because the hatred they have against you for the cause of Christ is stronger
than the bond of natural affection. Hence it breaks in pieces the bond of
natural love. Hence as it was in Christ's kindred, that not only they would not
believe in him, John 7.5. but also said he was mad, Mark 3.21. so is it in
worldly men, who hate their relations for difference of Religion. Hence Ishmael
hated Isaak, and Esau persecuted Jacob, and Joseph's brethren sold him.
Alphonsus Diazius slew his brother John for the confession of the Gospel,
Sleydan lib. 17.

We see the like History in the Life of Woodman, persecuted by his own brother
in Queen Mary's time.

This should quiet our hearts when we see our friends and kindred rage against
us for conscience sake.

It should also learn us not to be too confident in carnal relations, how near
soever allied to us, Micah 7.5. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence
in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom. He
that is false in his duty to God, how can he be expected to be faithful to
friends?

Learn also in declining times when friends prove false to look to God, Micah
7.6, 7. The son dishonors his father, and the daughter rises up against her
mother, therefore, says Micah, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the
God of my salvation. This unfaithfulness was not only a symptom of those bad
times, but it has been the frame of many carnal hearts since.

V. 22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake; but he that shall
endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

And ye shall be hated of all men] That is, of all unregenerate men that
receive not Christ, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, noble or base, whether
kindred or strangers, old and young. Wicked men hate all good men, if not
actually, because they know them not, yet habitually they do; if they knew them
they would hate them, even for the good in them, Psalm 38.20. which hatred
proceeds from that enmity put betwixt the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the
Serpent, Genesis 3.15. As love arises from similitude, so does hatred from
dissimilitude. The World cannot hate you, but me it hates. John 7.7. Why?
because I testify the works thereof are evil. The World also hates Saints
because they are not of the World, John 15.19.

For my Names sake] That is, for a powerful profession of it. The Gentiles
raged much, as Augustine observes, because they heard that Jesus Christ would
be worshipped alone: now they thought it absurd that they should cast off all
their other gods (continued to them for so many ages) for him alone. Not only
Papists but carnal Protestants rage against the godly of the time, if they will
witness Christ in any powerful manner, and follow the Light of Gods Word
further than the times will bear. I am guilty of such and such evils, said
Bradford, but this is not that mine Enemies persecute in me, but Christ.

Nor is it to be forgotten that, because the word of Christ in the mouth of
Saints urges an union with the hearts of wicked men, hence those who urge
herein are hated, especially if it be any such part of the word as exposes to
some present cross.

Besides, it was the manner for Scholars to be called by their Masters names,
as Aristoteleans, Pythagoreans, so Christians are called from their profession
of Christ, Acts 11.26. and for the profession of living by the rules of their
Masters is it that Christians suffer, 1 Pet. 4.15. If any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, Acts 5.41. Peter and John rejoiced that they
were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.

But he that shall endure unto the end the same shall be saved] Here is, 1 A
duty, 2 A promise. The duty is to endure to the end, to endure all
persecutions, hatreds, adversities, to the end both of the persecutions and of
life. To obtain the crown, it is not enough once and again to overcome, but to
overcome and endure to the end; and this is some comfort, that though they be
long they will come to an end. How many hardships do we suffer in hope of ease?
We suffer an hard Apprentiship in hope of freedom, we suffer a bitter potion
in hope of health, let us endure the cross in hope of the crown. Soldiers
endure much hardships in hope of victory, Revel. 3.5. Here are two graces
commended to us, 1 Patience in tribulations. 2 Perseverance unto the end.

The same shall be saved] Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a crown of life, Jam: 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown. Having the Goal in
our eye we should put forth all our strength to run. For the joy set before him
Christ endured the cross, Heb. 12.2. he bids us do so likewise.

V. 23. But, when they persecute you^ in this City, flee ye into another: for
verily, I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel till
the Son of Man be come.

Christ sets down a fourth danger, to wit persecution.

Three things. 1 The danger, persecution. 2 The remedy herein, viz. flight. 3
The promise of supportance, Ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel
till the Son of Man come.

But when they persecute you in this City, flee ye to another] Some have
pretended the unlawfulness of flight, when, being tied by the lines of their
temporal lots, they would comply to common corruptions rather then leave them;
like some Lawyers who pretend to have a great zeal of justice, when it is only
to advance their own practice, and to gain credit in pleading; as P. Martyr in
his book of flight to the brethren of Luca. Flight is not only lawful but a
command, these rules observed;

1 That a man fly with a disposition and purpose of heart, rather to die a
thousand deaths then deny the truth, in case he should be taken by the
adversary.

2 That we fly with an intent to propagate and spread the truth of God in the
compass of our callings, whither we go: the soldier that flies may fight again.

3 When we see snares are laid for us to take away our lives. So Joseph fled
into Egypt to save the life of Christ being an infant, Matthew. 2.14. so David
often fled from Saul, 1 Samuel 19.11, 12. Eliah from the sword of Jezebel, 1 Kin.
19.3. Christ fled from the men of Nazareth when they would have cast him down
from the brow of the hill, Luke 4.30. so Paul fled by night out of Damascus,
when the Governor endeavored to apprehend him, Act. 9 25. so when the
Grecians went about to slay him, he went to Cesarea and Tarsus to escape them,
v. 29, 30.

4 That our flight be without scandal, and therefore without 1 cowardliness, 2 Timothy 4.16. 2 Without rashness. 3 Without treachery, as hirelings do, who when
they should give their life for the sheep, leave them to the wolf, Joh. 10.12,
13. 4 Without offense to the weak, Romans 15.1.

5 That we fly with a mind, neither wishing death, nor for the sake of Christ
fearing it. Hence Eliah his passion was condemned, 1 Kings 19.4. when Jezebel
persecuted him, he cries, Now Lord, take away my life. If Christ may have more
glory by our living then by our dying, we must not refuse to live. Though death
was more acceptable to Paul, and to be with Christ, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3. compared
with Phil. 1.23. yet for the brethrens sake he desired to live.

6 Consider whether God may be more glorified and the Church more edified by
thy staying, or by thy going, 1 Cor. 10.31.

7 When all means of flight are cut off, then are we called to suffer, as in
the example of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, who; had they had means of
escape, it is very likely they would have taken them.

Yet in these cases, 1 When the cause of God has no witness besides himself in
a place, a man must be very wary in flying lest his heart be troubled herein,
and Gods hand meet him. See a most eminent example, Jer. 26.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
It was Uriah who thus flying was brought back and killed.

2 When God puts a spirit of valor into the soul. When a man is resolved to
stand against all the fury of enemies, he is not to be condemned; Paul knew
that bonds and afflictions did abide him in every City, yet he counted not his
life dear unto him so he might finish his course with joy, Acts 20.24.21.13.
Such was that example of one William Gardener, Some examples are Heroical some
Moral.
an English Merchant in Portugal, who in or about the year 1652. when an high
Mass was at the marriage of the King of Portugals son to the King of Spains
daughter, while the Mass was solemnizing he in the presence of the King and his
Nobles, with one hand took the Host out of the Priests hand, who consecrated
it, and trod it under his feet, and with the other hand overthrew the Chalice,
for the which he was by grace enabled, notwithstanding he knew that many
grievous tortures must needs abide such a witness, which with unspeakable
cruelty were executed upon him. See his tortures, Acts and Mon. vol. 2. p. 746.

For verily I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the Cities of Israel,
till the Son of Man be come] Some think that by this coming is meant, not the
personal presence of Christ, but the pouring out of the Spirit on believers,
mentioned Acts 2.1. which was a certain sign that Christ came as a King with
fullness of power from his Father, and that his Kingdom so long expected was
come, the sending of which Spirit was to be a comfort to them against all
dangers, John 14.18. I will not leave you fatherless, I will come to you. Now
the coming of Christ here meant was only the sending of the Spirit, Acts 2.33.
Being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the
promise of thee Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this thing which ye now see and
hear. So that the sense is, I have told you what evils hang over you, yet do I
warn you to stand to the testimony you have given, and not to be discouraged.
My coming unto you by the pouring out of my Spirit is at hand, yea before you
shall make an end of teaching the Jews within the bounds of Palestina.

Others carry it to the sending of Ministry to the end of the World. For my
self, I rather carry it to the consolation of all persecuted Saints to the end
of the world, whereas the Disciples might be ready to think, if we shall be
under so great hatred and persecution none will receive us, to this Christ
answers, There will be Cities of Israel, that is, Inhabitants in Cities (by a
Metonymie of the subject and a Synecdoche) of Gentiles to be converted, who
will receive you until the second coming of Christ in judgment, of which
coming mention is made Matthew. 24.30. Luke 21.27. for Gentile believers are
called Israel, Gal. 6.17. And in particular it is a consolation to Preachers of
the Gospel, who when cast out by one people will be received by another. I
rather expound this place of the second sending than of the first, because in
the first sending the Apostles were used courteously, Luke 10.17. and they came
rejoycingly, telling Christ the Devils were subject to them. And no such
hardships happened to them that we read of.

We may learn three things, 1 That Saints must prepare for persecution, 2 Timothy
3.12. All godly must suffer it. As he that was born after the flesh persecuted
him that was born after the Spirit, so is it now, Gal. 4.29. If the Son of God
were persecuted, John 15.20. Saints must not look to go free, John 15.20. Hence
in or about the same year Christ spoke this, there broke out a Persecution
against the Church, Acts 8.1, 2. after the death of Stephen.

2 When Gods people see themselves persecuted in one City they have a call to
fly into another City, Matthew. 23.34.

3 There will be some Saints and Cities that will be ready to receive
persecuted Saints until the coming of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.9. Persecuted but not
forsaken, 2 Timothy 3.11. Prove. 14.26.

V. 24. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord.

V. 25. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant
as his Lord: if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much
more shall they call them of his household?

Christ brings here a second Reason why Christians in general, and Preachers in
particular should patiently endure persecution, because herein it is no
otherwise with them than was with their Master Christ, which Christ backs with
a twofold Reason, 1 The Scholar thinks it honorable to be made equal to his
Master. 2 Servants refuse not that condition which their Masters patiently
endure. So that Christ reasons that if he had suffered reproaches and slanders
from the Jews, and looked to suffer greater, even the death of the Cross, then
must you my Disciples prepare for the like. It much tends to patience to know
the evils that hang over us, which Christ has foretold us, and has gone
before us by example in.

All ingenuous Christians are much troubled with reproaches, hereby to be
rendered odious, but it is with them no otherwise than with Christ. It would be
counted an absurd thing to see a General of an Army going on foot, and all the
private Soldiers riding in Coaches and on horseback, so will it be, to see
Christ the Captain of our salvation to lie under the reproaches of glutton,
drunkard, deceiver, devil, and in the mean time we his Soldiers to be in
honor with the world.

If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub how much more shall they
call them of his houshold] Beelzebub was the god of Ekron, 2 Kings 1.3. Is it
not because there is not a god in Israel that ye go to inquire of Baal-zebub
the god of Ekron? See also v. 6. The learned render it to signify the Lord of
a Fly, or having a Fly, because he was worshipped and called upon against a
Plague of Flies, because they believed he expelled and destroyed those Flies
which infested.

And Nazianzen against Julian witnesses that Beelzebub was made in fashion of
a Fly. Hence the Septuagint translate Beelzebub deum Muscam, the god Fly. Now
the Jews, partly out of scorn, and partly out of abomination, called the Prince
of the Devils the god Fly, which name took its rise in this manner. The ancient
Jews with great consent declare, among other Privileges, which God bestowed on
his Temple at Jerusalem, this was one, that when such a number of sacrifices
was daily slaughtered, there was never any Fly beheld in the Temple, which when
Jupiter who was most famous among the Heathens could not do, but always his
Temple did abound with multitudes of Flies, Grot. in loc.
therefore he was called the Jupiter of Flies. Now the Jews, learning from the
Prophets, that the gods of the Gentiles were Devils, and the Predictions they
foretold to be the works of unclean spirits, they called the Prince of the
Devils by that name, wherewith the Prince of the supposed gods was called, as
we see Matthew. 12.24. Now the Pharisees would persuade the people that the
Miracles that Christ did were done by the power of the Prince of the Devils,
therefore most blasphemously they called Christ Beelzebub, as if he were his
Vicar and Deputy.

So that Christ reasons, If they have called me the Master of the house
Beelzebub, much more you of my household. Therefore seeing I patiently bear
their reproaches. See John 8.48, 49. Do you also in like manner. Christ should
not only be to us a Pattern of Holiness but of Sufferings. We may also see the
near relations betwixt Christ and us; he is the Master we his Scholars, he is
our Lord and we are his Servants, he is the Master of the house, Believers his
household.

V. 26. Fear them not therefore, for there is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed, and hid that shall not be known.

The words are an answer to an Objection in the minds of the Disciples, viz.
we could easily contemn the reproaches of the wicked, if our innocence did
appear unto others; now we lie under suspicion, and we have no defense. To this
Christ answers, Fear not their reproaches, your innocence covered over with
slanders shall one day be revealed.

3 So that here is a third Reason. I fear them not in all their reproaches,
malice, blasphemy, therefore do not ye fear them.

4 There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed] Here is a fourth
Reason, your innocence howsoever now aspersed shall be cleared up; the slanders
of the Jews concerning the magical arts of Christ and his Apostles, the
horrible Lies of the Pagans concerning the incestuous Copulations of the
Christians, and their drinking man's blood were in time discovered what they
were.

Obs. Secrecy of sin will not privilege it. David committed Adultery secretly,
but God revealed it before the Sun, 2 Samuel 12.12. Cains Murder, and Jezebels
Murder of Naboth: clouded innocence comes forth, as in Joseph slandered by his
Mistress, and David slandered by Saul's Courtiers. So covered iniquity shall not
always be hid, Psalm. 90.8. Heb. 4.13. 1 Timothy 5.24, 25. Sometimes both innocence
and wickedness are brought forth in this life, Psalm 37.6. He shall bring forth
thy righteousness as the light, and thy just dealing as the noonday. And as
innocence, so secret wickedness, Prove. 26.26. Whose hatred is covered by
deceit, his wickedness shall be revealed before the whole congregation. And as
in this life, so especially shall they be brought forth at the Day of Judgment,
Eccles. 12.14. God will bring every secret thing to judgment, 1 Cor. 4.5. Then
will God manifest the counsels of the heart, 2 Cor. 5.10. Luke 12.2.

Some expound it thus; Fear not to preach my Gospel, though few at present
believe, and it seems to be covered, yet shall it be known to the World in a
little time. But I see no absurdity why both these may not be meant, so that
the words are a consolation to them, both under their reproaches and revilings
of Beelzebub, etc. and under the small beginnings of the Gospel, that what was
now hid should be revealed, and though their Doctrine were at present
reproached, yet time should discover it to be Gods truth.

V. 27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light, and what ye hear
in the ear, that preach ye upon the house tops.

The meaning is, whatsoever Doctrine ye have heard of me, either in this Sermon
preached unto you, or whatsoever Doctrine at any other time I have or shall
declare unto you, in secret, do you publish the same openly, for that Christ
means by house tops, having respect to the Jewish buildings which were flat
upon the house tops with battlements, Deuteronomy. 22.8. Gods truth is not to ly
smothering in our own breasts, but we are to declare it to others, Romans 10.10.
Psalm. 40.9, 10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation.

The World will not endure to have their deeds reproved, hence they come not to
the light, Joh. 3.21. They say to the Seers, See not, and to the Prophets,
Prophecy not, prophecy unto us smooth things, Isai 30.10. Get ye out of the
way, turn aside out of the path, v. 11. yet must the Preachers and Disciples of
Christ speak and not hold their peace, Isai 58.1. Hosea 4.1. Hosea 8.1. yea the
whole counsel of God, which is plain unto Teachers, they are bound, upon pain
of avoiding guilt of soul blood, to declare unto the people, Acts 20.26, 27. so
far as it shall be absolutely needful to their salvation.

We may also see the excellency of the Gospel, that, when preached, it will
abide the Light, which no other Doctrine is able to do.

As these Disciples were commanded to publish the Mysteries Christ declared to
them, viz. the calling of the Gentiles, the end of the Jewish Ceremonies, the
fullness of Redemption in Christ, the new Covenant, etc. so are other Preachers
bound in like manner to publish what the Lord shall reveal to them out of his
Word, as to take up Christ's Cross daily, to repent of their sins.

V. 28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

Here is the fifth danger whereto they should be exposed, if they preached what
he bad them, to wit, that they would be in danger to be put to death. To this
Christ answers, Fear not them which kill the body.

In the words two parts. 1 A forbidding of false fear, Fear not them which kill
the body, backed with a Reason, because they are not able to kill the soul.

2 An Exhortation to true fear of God, but rather fear him, which is backed with
a Motive, because he is able to destroy soul and body in Hell.

Fear not them which kill the body] The sum of Christ's speech is, that we
should not fear the loss of this perishing Life in respect of an everlasting
Life, and that they have no true fear of God in them, who for fear of Tyrants
do suffer themselves to be brought from the Confession of the Faith. As if that
Christ should say, You have immortal souls which are not at the will of
Tyrants, but of God, 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills, and the Lord heals, he
wounds and makes alive. Whence is it that we are affrighted with terrors of
men and deny the Faith, or blushingly confess it, or dissemble it, but because
our bodies are preferred before our eternal souls, and whereas we think to
escape death hereby, shall we not incur a sorer death hereby, even an
everlasting death? Is. 66.24. Christ herein speaks to Christians that they
should not thus fear, Lu. 12.4, 5. I say unto you, my friends, be not afraid
of them which kill the body: and though men may think this is no point of
Friendship to let Christians suffer, yet is it an high privilege to be called
to suffer, Phil. 1.29. To you it is given, not only to believe, but to suffer.
So that experienced Christians have rejoiced herein, Acts 5.41.16.25.

Learn we to contemn our Lives in the cause of God; so did Queen Hester, cap.
4.16. If I perish I perish. The three children Dan. 3.28. yielded their bodies
that they might not worship nor serve any other God except their own God. so
Paul in sundry places, Acts 20.24.21.13. 2 Cor. 4.10, 11. Phil. 1.20. 2 Timothy
4.6. Rev. 12.11, 17. It must needs be grievous for two such dear friends as
soul and body to part, but when we consider it is for the Lord, why do we fear?
when for fear of being killed, we shall not preach and witness Christ his
truth, we may look for every such denial to be cast into hell. We may observe,
1 That after this perishing life is past, there remains another.

2 The truth of God cannot be fully witnessed without peril of life.

3 The disposing of that life to come is only in the power of God, not in the
power of Pope.

Obj. But must we not fear Magistrates, parents, etc?

Answ. Yes, but not when God and they come in competition, Acts 5.29. The
cruelty of Magistrates and parents can only extend unto the body.

But are not able to kill the soul] Whence see, 1 That the soul and body are
separable one from another. 2 That the soul dies not with the body.

But rather fear him which is able to destroy soul and body in hell] Here is a
remedy against slavish fear, even to have Gods fear in us. We more feared the
Pope with his Purgatory then God with his hell; and we more trusted in the
absolution of the Pope from Purgatory, then in the true absolution of God from
hell. Luth. Tom. 4.334. This word [rather] is not a comparative but an
adversative, we should not fear man at all when he comes in competition with
God. So Victorian the Pro-Consul of Carthage, being solicited to Arrianism by
the Ambassadors of King Hunnerick, answered thus, Being assured of God and my
Lord Christ, I tell you what you may tell the King, let him burn me, let him
drive me to the beasts, let him torment me with all kind of torments, If I
consent, in vain am I baptized in the Catholic Church, whom the tyrant
afterward tortured with exceeding great tortures, Victor. Uticens. l. 3. Wandal
Persecut. So the Prophet, Isai 51.12. Who art thou that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall dye, and the son of man which shall be made as
grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker? Moreover you know how afraid you are
to offend a man which can hang you, so that you fear the wrath of a King as you
do the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 20.2. how much more should you fear the wrath
of God. In Augustine's time they went to the Idol Temple, for fear (as they
said) of offending some person greater then themselves, to whom Augustine said,
Do thou fear to offend a greater, and do thou not fear to offend God? De
verb. Dom. ser. 6.

Moreover know that the Lord, being Lord both of soul and body, will not be
contented with bodily service, without the Spirit, as many think who present
themselves at any worships, nor with the service of the Spirit without the
body, as some Nicodemites have thoughts, but he will be glorified both with
body and Spirit, which are his, 1 Cor. 6.20.

3 Things, 1 It Is our duty to fear God. 2 The fear of God, where it is in the
soul, it eats out the slavish fear of men. 3 God is able to destroy soul and
body in hell fire.

1 Obs. It Is our duty to fear God.

1 Because Gods fear is a special mean to empty us of slavish fear of men, Ex.
1.17. The Mid-wives feared God, and did not as the King of Egypt commanded
them, but saved the men children alive. Isai 8.12, 13. Fear ye not their fear,
nor be afraid, but sanctify the Lord himself, and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread.

2 Because he is able to cast the soul and body into hell fire, if we fear men
more then him. Yet, as Luther says, many fear the Pope and his Purgatory
rather then Christ and his hell, so many fear the Magistrates prisons more then
the eternal prison of hell.

3 Did we fear God we needed not slavishly to fear any, neither man nor devil.
See it in those worthies, Dan. 3.16, 17.

Use. 1 See the woeful condition of those who are without Gods fear in three
particulars.

1 This is a note of a wicked man, Romans 3.18. The transgression of the wicked
says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. Wicked
men, Jude 12. are said to feed themselves without fear. When Jobs friends would
prove him wicked they bring this, that he cast off fear, Job 15.4.

2 God rejects the prayer of such as fear him not, Prove. 28.24. Then shall they
call upon me but I will not answer; why? for that they did not choose the fear
of the Lord. Hence Nehemiah cap. 1.11. prays, That God would hearken to the
prayer of thy servant and servants that desire to fear thy name; and
contrarily, he fullfils the desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145.19.

3 If we fear not God we shall be in a continual fear of men, and so
consequently in a continual snare, Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a
snare, so without this fear we shall be in fear of devils.

2 Information. 1 Let us enquire concerning it, wherein consider, 1 The kind.
2 What it is. 3 The causes of it. 4 The degrees of it.

1 The kinds, 1 Servile, which is in slaves, Luke 1.74.

2 Filial, Hos. 3.5.

Q. What is filial fear?

A. When we stand in such an awe of God that upon settled deliberation we will
choose affliction rather then iniquity, Job 36.21. a fiery furnace rather then
worship a golden Image, Dan. 3.16, 17. and withal have an holy jealousy that
in all our carriage and conversation we may not sin against God, from the
apprehension, not only that God is a just Judge, but also a gracious father,
Hos. 3.5.

2 The causes of this fear are two.

1 The love of God. Whatsoever we love we fear, lest any thing should rob us of
that which we love. A man loves his goods, hence he fears lest plunder,
suretiships, storms should take it away. A man loves his life, he fears lest
diseases take it away. A holy man loves God, hence he fears lest any sin should
rob him of his God. He that calls God father, endeavors to spend the time of
his sojourning in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17.

2 The greatness of his strength. Why does a subject fear a Prince, or a Dog
fear a Lion? Because they know they are far above them in power and strength.
We fear not things that are no stronger then our selves, so, why do we fear
God? Because of the infinite power and strength God has above us: hence Israel
feared Goliath, and the Philistims Sampson.

3 The power of any creature is feared when it can do us good or hurt, Isai
41.23. Do good, and do evil, that we may be dismayed and behold it together. So
we fear God because he can do us good and hurt, and no creature without him can
do it, for creatures are mere vials through which God empties himself. What
power is like Gods that is able to cast soul and body into hell, therefore the
Text bids us fear him.

4 The degrees of this fear. In some men it is more then in others. It was the
praise of Hananiah that he was a faithful man and feared God above many, Neh.
7.2. There may be two men both conscientiously fearful of sin, yet one of them
may have a greater fear of God then the other.

2 Use for information. Learn to see the necessity of Gods fear. See it in six
particulars.

1 It Is the best preservative against sin, Psalm. 119.11. Thy testimonies have I
hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Prove. 16.6. By the fear of
the Lord men depart from evil. Prove. 14.16. A wise man fears and departs
from evil, Prove. 3.7. By this it was that Joseph was preserved from Potiphars
wife, Genesis 39.10. and as it prevents other sins, so in particular it prevents,
1 scandalous sins, Neh. 5.9. Ought we not to walk in the fear of the Lord,
because of the heathen who are round about us? Hence Psalm 19.9. The fear of
the Lord is said to be clean, from the cleansing effect which it has in the
soul.

2 As Gods fear prevents scandalous sins, so does it prevent secret sins. Neh.
5.15. Nehemiah durst not extort of the poor Jews as the former governors had
don, because of the fear of God. Job was of the same mind, Job 31.1, 2, 3, 23,
24.

2 Gods fear will make a man faithful in the calling wherein God has set him:
if a Magistrate, Jehosaphat speaks to the Judges he sends forth, Thus take heed
what ye do, for ye judge not for man but for the Lord, wherefore let now the
fear of the Lord be upon you, 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6. also he says, verse. 9. Thus
shall ye do in the fear of the Lord faithfully, as if he should say, ye can
never be faithful in your Magistracy without Gods fear, hence this is one, yea
a principal qualification in a Magistrate, that he be a man fearing God, Exodus
18.11. Genesis 42.18. the Apostle propounds this as a remedy against eye-service
in servants, Col. 3.22. Servants obey in all things your Masters, not with
eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing God. David
giving forth the duty of a Prince, says, he that rules over men must be just
ruling in the fear of God. 2 Samuel 23.3.

3 God is wont to deal well with such as fear him, Exodus 1, 20, 21. God dealt
well with the mid-wives because they feared God. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were
such an heart in them to fear me, that it might be well with them. Neh. 1.11.
Eccles. 8.12. I know it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear
before him, but it shall not be well with the wicked, Why? because he fears
not before God. Mal. 2.5. My covenant was with Levi of life and peace, and I
gave them to him, for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before
my name. Luke 1.50. His mercy is on them that fear him from generation to
generation. Deuteronomy. 6.18. He that fears God shall come forth out of all
trouble, Eccles. 7.18.

4 The fear of God is a special mean to lengthen our days in this world, Deuteronomy.
6.2. That thou might fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes, that
thy days may be prolonged: now the reason why Gods fear lengthens our days,
is, because it makes a man take heed of such sins as would cut off life, Prove.
10.27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of
death; see the contrary threatening to wicked men, Eccles. 8.13. It shall not be
well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days which are as a shadow:
why? because he fears not before God.

5 Gods fear is one of the first graces that shows it self in the soul, hence
called the beginning of wisdom, Job 28.28. and they that have it are said to
have a good understanding, Psalm 111.10. Deuteronomy. 10.12. What does the Lord
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God? etc.

6 God has excellent loving kindness laid up for those that fear him. See
this, 1 in spiritual mercies, as 1 understanding Gods secrets, Psalm. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him.

2 Pitiful affection, as in a father toward his child, Psalm 103.11. so the
Lord pittieth them that fear him.

3 Healing and comfort. Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my name shall the son of
righteousness arise with healing under his wings.

2 See it in temporal mercies, as 1 strong confidence in evil times, Prove.
14.26. in the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, which is grounded upon
promise of deliverance, Psalm 85.9. Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear
him.

2 A special eye of providence for the providing outward things for such, Psalm
31, 18, 19. Behold, the eye of the Lord is on them that fear him, to deliver
their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine. Psalm 34.9. O fear the
Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. Psalm 111.5. He
has given meat to them that fear him, he will ever be mindful of his
Covenant; q.d. Its part of Gods Covenant to give meat to them that fear him;
meat is put for all other provisions.

3 There Is much contentedness of mind comes along with this grace of Gods fear
in them that have it, Prove. 15.16. Better is a little with the fear of the
Lord, then great revenues and trouble therewith. Pro. 19.23. The fear of the
Lord tends to life, and he that has it shall abide satisfied. Psalm 7.16.

4 It Is a mean to obtain riches, honor and life: every man wishes for these
three things, oh then get Gods fear. Pro. 22.4. By humility and the fear of the
Lord are riches, and honor, and life.

2 Use. Trial whether we have Gods fear in us, 1 when we think nothing too good
for God, but will let it go rather then sin. Genesis 22.12. Lay not thine hand
upon the lad, for now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld
thine only son.

2 When we fear to do any thing that is of bad report. 1 Cor. 6.1. Dare any of
you (meaning Christians) go to law before the unjust, and not before the
Saints? Neh. 5.9. Ought we not to walk in the fear of the Lord, because of the
heathen?

3 When we fear not the greatest of men in opposition to God. Exodus 1.15, 16.
The King bad the Hebrew mid-wives kill the male children, but they would not
obey the King; why was it? the Text verse. 17. gives the reason, because they
feared God, they would not obey the King. How did the three children out of
fear to God not fear Nebuchadnezzar his burning fiery furnace. Dan. 3.17, 18,
28. The Parents of Moses hid Moses three months, and they not afraid of the
Kings commandment, Heb. 11.23.

4 When we are fearful of the private and secret stirrings of corruption in
our own hearts, Job. 31.1, 2. Job so apprehended Gods eye, that he durst not
have or harbor a lustful thought, see verse. 4. This fear of God kept him from
lifting up his hand against the fatherless, when he saw his help in the gate,
for destruction from God was a terror unto him, verse. 21.23. Deuteronomy. 15.9, 10.
Gods fear will be opposing proud, revengefull, unclean and hypocritical
thoughts in the soul.

5 When hope or proffer of gain will not make us sin against God. Peter would
not take Magus his money, Acts 8.20. Nor Elisha Naamans talents, 2 Kings 5.
Why? he knew in his conscience it was no time for it. Contrary in Balaam, how
fain would he have been fingring Balaks gold? so Judas, Demas.

6 When we will not deliberately venture upon sin for fear of loss, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great evil and sin against God? 1 Kings 22.13, 14. Micaiah
durst not flatter the King as the false prophets did. John Baptist durst not
forbear Herod's sin, though the Princes favor lay on one side, and the loss of
his life or hazard thereof on the other, Mat. 14.3. Such a man will not be
drawn to sin for fear of offending a wife or husband: where Gods fear is, there
will be a choice of affliction rather than iniquity.

7 When we are afraid of doing any thing with a doubting conscience, Romans
14.22, 23.

8 When we are afraid of the least evil. Carnal men, for shame of the world,
may avoid gross evils, but, where Gods fear is, the soul is afraid of small
sins, 1 Samuel 24.5. even for cutting the skirt of Saul's garment, how much more
was he of hurting Saul's person? 1 Samuel 26.9. Its said of a godly man, that he
keeps his hand from doing any evil, Isai. 56.2.

9 When we are afraid of sinful temptations and occasions, Genesis 39.10. Joseph
would not hearken to his Mistress to ly by her, or to be with her. Prove. 5.8.
Come not nigh the doors of her house. Hos. 4.15. that Judah might not offend
with Isreal's Calve-worship, the Prophet bids them not to come to Gilgal or
Beth-aven, where the Calves were. God will not keep us from sin if we do not
keep our selves from the occasions of it. He that ventures upon the occasions
of sin he has an implicit liking to the sin. If inclining to pride in
apparel, wear plain clothes; if to vainglory, speak not any thing that may
redound to your praise; if to lying, tell no doubtful stories; if to
whispering, speak sparingly of other men's actions, especially of your Enemies.

10 When we are afraid of sinning in secret. Lev. 19.14. Thou shall not curse
the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind, but shall fear the Lord
thy God. The deaf man could not hear the curse, the blind man cannot see the
block thou layest, Oh! but God sees, and his fear must keep thee and me from
secret iniquities. See Job 31.22, 23, 26, 27, 29, 30.

11 A reverend carriage both outward and inward in the worship of God, Psalm
5.7. In thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple, Eccles. 5.2. God is in
Heaven and thou on Earth, therefore let thy words be few; and as in prayer, so
in hearing, Eccles. 5.1. Look to thy foot when thou go into the house of
God. Gods fear in Cornelius made him reverend in hearing Peter, Acts 10.2.
compared with v. 33. We are all here present before God to hear all things
commanded us from God. Jacob says, Genesis 28.16, 17. The Lord is in this place,
and I was not aware of it, how dreadful is this place? Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him: as if he should say, The fear of the Lord
is the best spur to holy service. Heb. 12.27, 28. Psalm 5.7.

3 Exhortation to labor after Gods fear. Where wicked men are most fearless,
Saints are most fearful, to wit, in sin, and where Saints are most fearless,
as in calamitous times, wicked men are most fearful. Most men are like little
children that fear and cry at things not to be feared, as at Bull-beggars, etc.
but do not fear things that are to be feared, to wit, Water, Fire, Knives, etc.
so most men fear those things which are shadows of grief, as Poverty, Disgrace,
but do not fear that which will bring astonishment, and endless misery if not
repented of.

Means to Gods fear.
1 God must put it into our hearts. Jer. 32.40. and man must teach it, Psalm
34.11. Come, ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. We are ready to scatter our fear as well as other affections where it
ought not to be, as on great persons, Prove. 29.25. on worldly troubles, hence
it is Gods work to place our fear on a right object; hence David prays, Psalm
86.10. Unite my heart to fear thy Name.

2 Apprehend Gods love to thy soul, and thou will be afraid to offend him.
Hosea 3.5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. Psalm. 130.3, 4. There is
mercy with thee that thou may be feared. 1 Pet. 1.17. If you call upon the
Father, that is, look upon him as your Father, see that you spend the time of
your sojourning here in fear. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Touch not the unclean thing, and
I will be a Father unto you.

3 Be persuaded of Gods Omniscience and Omnipresence. We would fear to do evil
if the eye of a man were upon us, much more when Gods eye beholds us. Psalm
44.17, 18. Though God smote his people into the place of Dragons, and covered
them with the shadow of death; yet they apprehending and believing God to
search into the secrets of the heart, they durst not lift up their hands to a
strange God, v. 20, 21. What made Job fear to sin? See cap. 31.4. Does not he
see all my ways, and count all my steps?

4 Look upon and believe the greatness of his power, Isai 40.12. Who has
measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out Heaven with the
span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance. All Nations compared with him
are as a drop of a Bucket, compared with the Ocean, or as the small dust in a
balance compared with the greatest weights put therein: all Nations are before
him as nothing, v. 11, 17. Hence the Lord says, Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me?
will ye not tremble at my presence? who have placed the sand for the bound of
the sea, etc. Psalm 76. v. 5. to v. 10. Thou even thou art to be feared, thou
did cause judgment to be heard from Heaven, the earth feared and was still.
Especially behold Gods power in casting the soul into Hell. Job 41.10.
Leviathan or the Whale is set down to be a terrible creature: Job says, Shall
not even one be cast down at the sight of him? v. 9. also v. 10. None is so
fierce that dares stir him up, who then can stand before me? If thou art
notable to stand against one of Gods creatures in thy sins, how will thou be
able to stand before God himself? Besides all other, he has one power to
convey an invisible Horror into thy Conscience, to make thee a terror to thy
self and others, Jer. 20.4. See it in Judas, Matthew. 27.4, 5. if thou will
venture to go on in sin.

5 Believe Gods threatenings against sin. Who would venture upon such a sin, did
he believe the threatenings against it? Heb. 11.7. Noah by faith, being moved
with fear (to wit, of Gods drowning the World) prepared an Ark, etc. Eve
contrarily, mincing the threatening, Genesis 3.3. when God had said, In the day
that thou eatest of it, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.16, 17. she changed it
thus, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it lest ye
die. The threatening being thus lessened, she was drawn away to ruin her self
and posterity. There are terrible threats against sinners. See Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19,
20, 21. Psalm 11.6. Col. 3.6. 1 These. 4.6. 2 These. 1.8, 9. 1 Pet. 4.17. These
and many more, unless they be believed, they will not preserve us from sin.

Quest. But seeing there is a filial and son-like fear; and a servile or
slavish fear of God, how shall we know what our fear is?

Answ. 1 Slavish fear drives from God, Genesis 3.8. Adam and Eve, when they heard
the voice of the Lord, hid themselves from the presence of the Lord. The reason
is rendered, v. 10. because they were afraid. Is. 33.14. The sinners in Sion
are afraid, they look upon God as devouring fire, and as everlasting burnings.
So the Devils believe and tremble, James 2.19. Contrarily, filial fear brings
us nearer to God. Psalm 86.11.

2 Slavish fear leaves the nature filthy, as in the Devils, James 2.19. and
wicked men, Heb. 2.15. through fear of death they are all their life subject to
bondage.

Contrarily, filial fear cleanses, Psalm 19.4. The fear of the Lord is clean.
2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Holy persons serve without
slavish fear, in holiness and righteousness all their life, Luke 1.74, 75.

3 Slavish fear has torment of heart, 1 John 4.17, 18. We see it in Devils,
who believe and tremble, Matthew. 8.29.

Contrarily, filial fear has quiet of heart joined with it. The heart is never
in so good a temper as when it is most fearful of sin. Acts 9.31. The Churches
walking in the fear of the Lord, walked also in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.
Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness appear.

4 Those that have slavish fear would fain be rid of it, 1 Kings 22.26.
Zedekiah goes from chamber to chamber to hide himself; the wicked in fear of
Gods judgment call to mountains and hills to hide themselves, Revel. 6.16.
Contrarily, Saints would still have the fear of God continue upon them; nay if
they find it decaying, they complain, Isai 63.17. Lord why have thou hardened
my heart from thy fear?

5 Slavish fear is from, 1 The sting of a guilty conscience, Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66.
The Lord shall give thee a trembling heart, and thou shall fear day and night.
Saul, 1 Samuel 13.7. when he was near the battle, all the people followed him
trembling. Hypocrites in Sion looking on God as devouring fire, fearfulness
surprised them, Isai 33.15. Paul preaching to Faelix of righteousness,
temperance, and judgment to come, he, living an unrighteous and an intemperate
life, trembled to think of the judgment to come, and was so stung with it that
he was driven to make Paul leave off his preaching.

2 From the expectation of future wrath, Heb. 10.27. they have a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation.

Contrarily filial fear, 1 Arises from faith, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah was
moved with fear, Isai 50.10.

Or, 2 From godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11. Fear was one effect that godly sorrow
wrought in the repenting Corinthians; the soul having felt much inward sorrow
for the evils it has done, is afraid to do the like evils again.

3 From love to God; we are afraid to offend those whom we love; an husband
fears to offend his wife, a good child fears to offend his father, so the soul
that loves God fears to offend him.

Motives to this Godly fear.
1 Gods fear is a perpetual duty. Some duties are but for a time and then at an
end, but this is perpetual. Prove. 23.17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord all
the day long. Yea, We are to pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. 1
Pet 1.17. Psalm. 19.9. The fear of the Lord endures for ever. Hence this duty
is practiced by glorified Saints, who in heaven know evil as well as good, but
by the fear of God in them, their wills are eternally determined to the choice
of good.

2 It Is a principal duty, lying upon Saints above all people in the world.
Psalm. 34 11. Fear the Lord ye his Saints; for God is wont to punish them more
sorely then other men in this world, when they sin against him. Exodus 23.21.
Provoke him not, for he will not pardon your iniquities, Deuteronomy. 32.19. Amos 3.2.
As men that have more to lose then others are afraid to offend Princes, so the
Saints that have more to lose then the rest of the world, should be afraid to
offend the King of heaven; they may, in case they sin, lose Gods face, Isai
50.10. the peace of their consciences, and be smitten with temporal strokes, 1
Cor. 11.32.

3 It Is an honorable Character to be a man fearing God. 1 Kings 18.12. It Is
said of Obadiah, That he feared the Lord from his youth. Job 1.1. Job was a man
fearing God and eschewing evil. Hananiah, Neh. 7.2. Cornelius feared God, and
all his house feared God. Yea a woman that fears the Lord she shall be
praised, Prove. 31.30.

4 The children of God have found much comfort in this grace. Neh. 1.11. Let
thine ear be attentive to thy servants that desire to fear thy Name. Yea, when
they find no other grace in their hearts but this grace, yet are they
commanded to stay their hearts herein, Isai 50, 10. Contrarily they have been
much troubled if they have found either a want or a decay of this grace.

5 Gods fear, as at other times, so especially in evil times, is a principal
treasure to good men. Isai 33.6. The fear of the Lord is his treasure. The
meaning of the place is, from Gods fear arises all prosperity to supply us, as
out of a treasure arises money to supply our needs.

6 Gods fear is the most watchful affection, as being conversant about danger.
How often would temptations captivate us, were it not for this in-dwelling
grace in Saints? Jer. 32.40. This grace does as it were stand Centry for the
soul, Psalm. 119.11.

7 The attributes wherein God stands related to us.

1 His power and justice, Job 37.23, 24. He is excellent in power and judgment
and plenty of justice, men do therefore fear him.

2 The pitiful affection or disposition God bears to them that fear him. Psalm.
103.13. As a father pities his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him. Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him: in what ever
Nation such Saints be (God being no respecter of persons) they are accepted of
God with a favorable respect, Acts 10.35.

8 The relations wherein we stand engaged to the Lord;

1 Of servants. If earthly servants must have a fear of their masters according
to the flesh, Ephesians. 6.5. ought not we to the Lord? Hence the Lord expostulates,
Mal. 1.6. If I be a master where is my fear?

2 Of children. What dutiful child stands not in fear of offending his father?
Heb. 12.9. We gave earthly parents reverence, shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits and live?

9 Gods fear sweetens a low condition. Prove. 15.16. Better is a little with the
fear of the Lord then great revenues and trouble therewith; that is, then great
revenues got with a wounded and troubled conscience, Psalm. 37.16.

10 Such men as fear God are blessed. Prove. 28.14. Blessed is the man that
fears always. They are often blessed in this world (especially when a
delight in Gods law is joined therewith, Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, his seed shall be mighty upon earth, wealth and riches shall
be in his house, etc. Also in the world to come they are blessed, Rev. 11.19.
When the time comes that the dead shall be judged there is a reward to be given
to all that fear Gods Name both small and great.

Come we to the second thing, viz. The true fear of God, where it is, eats out
the fear of men; we see it in Moses parents, Moses himself, in the Mid-wives,
Exodus 1.19. in Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego, Psalm. 27.1.

3 The third point, is, God is able to destroy soul and body in hell. This is
called the second death, Rev. 20.6. called a double destruction, Jer. 17.18.
The bodies of all that are in the graves shall come forth. John 5.28. They that
have done evil to the resurrection of damnation: death and grave gives them up,
and they are cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 20.14, 15.

Qu. Whether there be material fire in hell?

Answ. It seems to me there is, or that which is full as terrible or more
terrible. This fire of hell is often mentioned, as Matthew. 5.22. Who shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire, Matthew. 13.40. At the day of
judgment the tares are burnt in the fire. Into this fire, offending members
are cast, Matthew. 18.18, 19. To this everlasting fire the goats are adjudged,
Matthew. 25.41. In this fire those that worship the Beast are tormented, Rev.
14.10. and the Sodomites at present suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude
7. Yea into this fire are cast every unfruitful branch, which brings not forth
fruit, he is hewn down at present and shall be cast into the fire hereafter,
Matthew. 3.10. Yea every man that lives and dies out of Christ is cast into this
fire. John 15.6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch that is
withered, and men gather them and cast them into the fire and they are burned.

Now for hell fire, it is 1 Unquenchable. Isai 30.33. Tophet is prepared of old,
yea for the King it is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the pile
thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord, like a stream of
brimstone, does kindle it. Mark 9.43, 44, to v. 49. It Is five times mentioned
that the fire is not quenched, that we may not look upon it as an idle
repetition, but a thing much to be noted by us. In this fire the rich man was
tormented, Luke 16.24.

2 It Is most terrible. We read of terrible fires, as that which came upon
Sodom, that which came upon the two hundred and fifty, Numb. 16.35. the fires
that destroyed the two fifties and their companies, 2 Kin. 1.10, 12. but no
fire terrible as this; if it be a terrible thing to see a Martyr to be burnt,
how terrible is it, how terrible should it be, to see millions of souls going
into this unquenchable fire?

3 It Is universal both in soul and body.

Obj. But if it be material fire, how can it not be quenched, seeing that
material fire we see in a while spends it self?

Answ. Do we not find, Exo. 3.2, 3. that the bush burned but was not consumed.
Though all clothes wax old, yet in the wilderness, by Gods power, their clothes
waxed not old; so God can by his power keep the fire of hell unquenchable. See
Isai 30.33. Whereas some say, If there be material fire, how can the souls of
men be tormented therewith, being that bodily things cannot work upon spirits?

Answ. This is to draw things to the scantling of our reason; besides we see
bodily tortures in this life work upon the spirits in the same bodies, and why
not in hell can the power of God make the fire to afflict the soul? Besides
till the day of judgment there is a never dying worm. At the reunion of soul
and body, it is no difficulty to conceive how the wicked shall be tormented in
endless fire.

It is not safe to leave the plain letter of the Scripture to allegorize, and
whether the opinion of metaphorical fire in hell has not been an introduction
of that opinion of the Quakers, viz. That there is no other hell but what is
within us, I leave to your consideration, and so by contraries, no other heaven.

V. 29, Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not
fall on the ground without your father.

V. 30, But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

V. 31. Fear not therefore, ye are of more value then many Sparrowes.

Christ had shown sundry dangers to which his Disciples would be exposed: the
last mentioned was, killing of their bodies, to which Christ gives
consolations, as,

1 They could not kill their souls.

2 That there is a providence that reaches to the smallest creatures, even to
the Sparrowes, much more will it reach to them. If it reach to the hairs of
their head, then will it reach to their lives much more.

Are not two Sparrowes sold for a farthing] Luke 12.6. says, are not five sold
for two farthings, as if one were of no price.

And one of them shall not fall on the ground] Epicures deny the providence of
God; Aristotle shuts it up in the heaven, so do the wicked, Job 22, 13, 14.
look upon God as walking in the circuit of heaven, and that he cannot judge
through the dark cloud. Some have thought this providence has been employed
about universal things, but not about particulars, some have thought it has
been employed about men, but not about beasts, because of that saying, 1 Cor.
9.9. Does God take care of Oxen? which must be understood comparatively, for
God takes care of man as of one of the creatures next to himself, the beasts
are cared for as appointed for the use of man. And that this providence reaches
not only to kinds but to individuals, we see in the Text, in that one of them
falls not to the ground without God.

Shall not fall on the ground] That is, shall be shot or perish. The birds live
and fly in the air; when they dye any way they fall to the earth.

Without your father] That is without the will, decree, providence and
appointment of your Father. God has fore-appointed all men in a certain bound,
when they should be born, when they should dye, by what name they should be
called, and what office they should use, and after we are born he offers those
things present, that so we may use them, Luth. Tom. 3.268. Christ argues from
the less, viz. If God have such care of Sparrowes, how much care will he have
of you? Seeing he is your father, not the father of Sparrowes, therefore he
will not suffer you to be killed by persecutors unless it be to reward you with
an everlasting happy crown, and for the good of others, and there is nothing
without his prescience and providence can happen unto you, therefore do not you
fear the rage of persecutors. Besides, you are redeemed with my blood, which
Sparrowes are not.

The very hairs of your head are all numbred] You that are not only common
men, but in covenant with me, and some of you publishers of my truth. A hair is
taken for the smallest thing. 1 Samuel 14.45. The people told Saul, when he would
have put Jonathan to death, there shall not an hair of his head fall to the
ground, that is, he shall not have the least hurt: Luke 21.18. Acts 27.34. Paul
encouraging the passengers in fear of death to eat, tells them, there shall not
an hair fall from the head of any of them, that is, not the least personal hurt.

Obs. There is not only a general providence in the world, but a special
providence God has to every individual creature.

This providence is, 1 Ordinary, when God governs the world and all things in
it according to the order and Laws set by him in the creation, without taking
advice of any creature. I have often endeavored to prescribe to God certain ways
which he should use in the government of his Church and other things, I said,
ah! Lord, I would have it done in this order, this event, but God did
altogether the contrary, from that which I had requested, then did I think, but
my counsel is not strange from the glory of God, but will conduce much to
sanctify his name. It Is well thought, but doubtless God laughed at this my
wisdom, and said, Go too, I know thee to be wise and learned, but it was
never my manner that Peter or Martin should teach, lead, form, govern me, I am
not a passive God, but an active. Luth. Tom. 4. in Genesis fol. 56.

2 Extraordinary, when God works against or besides his appointed order, as in
dividing the waters of the red Sea.

Reas. 1 Because all things, yea the most contingent things in the world, are
ordered by it, as the falling of a tyle, Exodus 21.13. the flying of the head of
the ax from the helve, and killing a man, Deuteronomy. 19.5. yea the ordering of a
lot, Prove. 16.33.

2 The order of things in the world prove it. 1 Natural order, the motions of
the heavens, the Sun warms the earth, the air moistens it, the earth brings
forth the grass, the beasts feed on it, and man feeds on them. Look on the
fowls, God appoints them their residence, Psalm. 104.17, 18. and so does he for
other creatures. Yea, the fowl knows her appointed time, and changes her
country according to the season of the year. That there is a place appointed for
the waters that they may not overflow the earth, Psalm. 104.7, 8, 9. that there
are springs of waters in the Valleys to give drink to the beasts of the field,
v. 10. that there should be an intercourse of light and darkness, that the
wild beasts should get them to their dens on the day time, that man may follow
his work, that there should be such provisions made for all the inhabitants of
the world, all this proves to us a providence.

2 Politic order. In Courts of Justice one Officer depends on another, as
wheels in a clock, and moves not without the first wheel. How many thousands
are provided for in their several trades one depending upon another? How has
God made the City to depend upon the Country, and the Country upon the City?
how do all creatures move at his command, as soldiers at the command of the
General?

3 From the reasonable actions God puts into unreasonable creatures, Prove. 6.6,
7, 8. the Pismire having no guide, over-seer, nor ruler, provideth her meat in
the summer, Jer. 8.6, 7. the Stork, Crane, Swallow, know their appointed time.
Who has put wisdom in their inward parts? Job 38.36.

4 Should God not take care of things below, it is either because he will not,
or cannot, or knows them not, but to affirm any of these were blasphemy.

5 In his provision he makes for all creatures, Psalm. 145.15. The eyes of all
wait on thee, and thou give them food in due season; thou openest thy hand
and satisfiest the desire of every living thing, Psalm. 104.28. That thou give
them they gather, thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good; v. 30.
Every Spring God renues the face of the earth, Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the
Beast his food, and to the young Ravens which cry, compared with Job 38.41.
See Job cap. 36, 37, 38, 39.

6 In ordering the sins of men for his own glory and good of his Church. The
envy of Joseph's brethren for the advancement of Joseph, and the preservation of
Jacobs posterity. The treason of Bigthan and Teresh for the advancement of
Mordecai. Cyrus his ambition for the Churches deliverance. Titus Vespasian, who
persecuted the Christians at Rome, God orders his passion, that he goes to
revenge Christ's death at Jerusalem. Sennacheribs covetousness and pride to
punish the hypocrisy of the Jews, Isai. 10.5, 6, 7. the covetousness of Judas
and malice of the devil to accomplish the work of our redemption.

7 In a special respect to the good of his people. Besides a general providence
in the world, he has a special providence for their good. 1 Cor. 9.9. He is
the Savior of all, (...), the preserver of all, but specially of them that
believe, 2 Timothy 4.9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of those whose
hearts are perfect with him. Zach. 2.8. He that touches you touches the apple
of mine eye

8 In snaring the wicked in the work of their own hands Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is
known by the judgment which he executes, the wicked are snared in the work of
their own hands. Higgaion, Selah, a thing to be meditated, as Hierom renders
it. When Nebuchad-nezzar in his boasting is bereft of his wits, Herod in his
pomp eaten up of Worms, the Philistims in their jollity have the house fall on
them, Judge. 16.30. who will not say they are taken in a snare?

9 In making wicked men, whether they will or no, to do Gods will, Acts 4.28.
To do whatsoever thy hand and counsel had before determined to be done. As in a
kennel of hounds every one of them runs according to his natural inclination,
yet all of them serve the purpose of the Hunter. And as in an Army of men, one
fights for honor, another for spite, another for pay, yet all of them fight
for victory for the Prince who sent them into the field; so whatsoever
wickedness evil men do, they do but serve Gods providence and fulfill his will.
God sometimes changes their will, sometimes stops it, by offering consideration
of good or ill, danger or profit, so that still he makes their wills serve his
decree.

Use. 1 Acknowledge this Providence in all thy undertakings, God keeps us not
only waking but sleeping; when we know not that we live, then he observes our
dreams; in opposition of that tenent, that God considers nothing but himself,
and is only delighted in the beholding of himself.
in thy appointing future businesses. James 4.15, 16. Go to ye that say, We
will go to such a City, and buy, and sell, etc. Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways
acknowledge him and he shall direct thy steps. So did Eleazar for his Master
Abraham, Genesis 24. that he might get a Wife for Isaac, but yet Eleazar did not
neglect the use of means, he that rightly looks to Gods providence is most
careful to use means. When thou find a treasure in digging of a field, when
thou escapest a fall in walking on a plank, was it not God who brought thee to
the one, and saved thee from the other.

2 Not to fear men to the balking of duty, seeing Gods provicence takes care of
us: this stayed David's heart, when at Ziglag his Soldiers were at the point of
stoning him, 1 Samuel 30.6. He encouraged himself in the Lord. Besides, what ever
evils befall us, God can turn them for our good; as in Joseph's case, he says
to his Brethren, Ye meant it for evil, but God meant it for good. Loss of goods
has proved a gain of grace, Heb. 10.34. Restraint of outward liberty a means
to set the conscience free, Acts 16.25. Disgrace a motive for God to manifest
his approbation, torment an occasion of easing the mind, Heb. 11.35.

3 Look on God, not only as the cause of the being of things, but the cause of
their not being. That the fire did not burn the three men, Dan. 3. nor the
hungry Lions devour Daniel, why men favor us not, and why their hearts are
turned against us, Psalm 105.25. God has a work in men hearts, as in Absalom
who refused the best counsel. Nothing is so high that is above his providence,
nothing so low that is beneath it; nothing so large but is bounded by it,
nothing so little that he overlooks it, nothing so confused but he can order
it, nothing so bad but he can draw good out of it, nothing so wisely plotted
but he can supplant it, nothing so unpolitickly carried, but he can give a
prevailing power to it: both is to be taken heed of. Be not proud of thy wisdom
and counsels, if they succeed not, do not despair, because God governs and
prospers the errors of the godly. I have often committed the greatest rashness
and follies, but I did it not with a desire to hurt, but unwisely desiring to
counsel faithfully, hence I prayed that God would amend my error. Luth. in
Genesis 27.

4 Exhort to resign up all our actions to God in times of suffering, 1 Peter
4.19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of
their souls unto him in welldoing, as into the hands of a faithful Creator.
When we have a Jewel in times of danger, we trust it in the hand of a father,
let us in suffering times leave our souls with God. Let us also in the disposal
of our conditions submit to poverty, disgrace, imprisonment, banishment, death,
even as the Lord in his providence shall please to dispose of us. Even as the
Patient does to his Physician, who has seen his Water or felt his Pulse. All
the afflictions wherewith Saints are afflicted, are no other thing than a
pleasant and sweet play, wherewith God plays with us as a father with his
little ones, whom he bids do something above their strength, which when they
endeavor diligently to do the father also puts to his hand. Luth. in Genesis 43.

V. 32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess
before my Father in Heaven.

Here Is a third Reason not to fear death, because he that confesses Christ,
even to loss of Life, Christ will confess him before his Father. See Rev. 2.13.

Quest. What Confession is here meant?

Answ. Habitual in the purpose of the heart, for it is not enough to confess
Christ in one act only.

2 Seasonable Confession with the mouth. When men shall oppose or deny Christ
and his Truth, or when Tyrants shall examine us of our Faith, we shall
unmoveably and constantly profess our belief in Christ, and our cleaving to his
Truth, even to death and tortures.

Be we exhorted to confess Christ before men.

3 Properties in Confession. 1 Let it be with boldness, Mark 15.33. 1 Timothy 4.16.

2 Plain, without any equivocation. So Peter and John answered the Council,
Acts 4 7.

3 With meekness and fear, 1 Peter 3.15. See this fully in my Treatise of
Denial of Christ, p. 27.

V. 33. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my
Father which is in Heaven.

Christ does not here mean actual denial, for Peter denied Christ, yet is in
Heaven. And so Bilney the Martyr and many others under temptation, so denied
Christ, yet stuck to him in the habit and purpose of their hearts, but Christ
means habitual denial of Christ in the purpose of the heart, when a man for the
saving of his Lands, Liberty or Life, will deny Christ or any part of his
Truth. Actual denial of Christ is dangerous though but in one act, especially
when the soul has time to deliberate, and for such a treachery God is wont to
fill the soul with horror, that a man would give all the world to be eased of
it, as in Spira, etc. how much more dangerous is habitual denial?

Christ is denied, 1 Silently, when persons can hear the Truth spoken against,
his Servants railed on, Idolatry cried up, and they sit still as if the thing
nothing concerned them; against this see these places, Psalm 119.46. 1 Kings
22.8. Matthew. 11.19.

2 Christ is denied expressly, and that, 1 In a vicious Life, Titus 1.16. 2 Timothy
3.5. Jude 4.

2 Christ is denied in word, this is, 1 Publicly, when, being asked by the
Magistrate concerning our Faith, for fear of Prisons or Death we shall not
acknowledge it, Acts 4.8, 9, 10. This also is committed when we present our
selves at worship which our own Conscience judges false for the substance
thereof.

2 In private, when we, conferring with men, shall for fear of loss, or hope of
gain, deny that Truth we inwardly acknowledge.

3 Christ is denied in writing, when we shall subscribe to any thing as truth,
which we are persuaded in our consciences is an error, or subscribe to the
recantation of any truth. Satan may tell you such a thing is soon done, but
know, that is done in a moment, which may be lamented for ever.

4 Christ is denied in worship, when we shall present our selves at such
worship as we loath in our hearts, Hosea 13.2. Let the men that sacrifice kiss
the Calves.

5 There is a denial of Christ in asserting Principles, when for fear of loss
we shall withhold the asserting of our Principles, being thereunto called; this
was Peter's sin, Gal. 2.12.

6 Christ is denied implicitly, when though we do not deny Christ in life,
word or writing, because we are not put to it, yet we would deny him were we
put thereto. We must, to mend this, have the purposes of our hearts right to
forsake all we have for Christ: take we heed we deny not Christ for
Church Communion, John 9. John 12.42.

This denial of Christ, as to the acts of it, is twofold.

1 Sudden, when a man is surprised on a sudden, and denies Christ, so Peter.

2 Deliberate, when a man, notwithstanding reluctations, checks, and
deliberations about confessing some truth, yet for fear, he shall hang back and
deny it. See my Treatise of Denial of Christ, p. 12.

V. 34. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, I came not to send
peace but a sword.

Christ comes to propose another hardship his Disciples should encounter with,
to wit, the contentions and oppositions, not only of strangers, but also of
near relations.

Think not that I am come to send peace on earth] Many thought from the
misunderstanding of that Scripture, Isai. 11.6. The Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall ly down with the Kid, and the Calf and the young
Lion -- they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; these things
being promised at the conversion of the Jews, or at the Reign of Christ here on
earth, they looked to have them fulfilled at his first coming in the flesh, when
in stead of this expected peace all was on fire by wars and persecutions: now
Christ speaks these things to them that they should not be offended, when they
see all things tend to commotion and violence, John 16.4. They shall cast you
out of the Synagogues, and whosoever kills you will think he does God good
service; these things have I spoken unto you, that, when the time comes, you
may remember that I have spoken to you.

Quest. What peace is this we must not think Christ to bring?

Answ. 1 A quiet estate free from persecution and the cross, 2 Timothy 3.12. John
16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace.
If all the world would subscribe to the Gospel, it were easy to be a
Christian, but because the greatest part is opposite to Christ and his Truth,
therefore we cannot confess Christ, but we must be hated and opposed by the
world.

2 Christ did not bring a peaceable agreement in wickedness, Psalm 94.16. Prove.
28.4. There was a peaceable agreement in those who agreed to build the Tower of
Babel, Genesis 11.4. and in Pilate and Herod in persecuting Christ.

3 The peace Christ brings is peace of conscience, John 14.27. Ephesians. 2.17.
Romans 5.1. Christ being the Prince of peace brings peace to the hearts of
Saints. Isai 9.6. Col. 1.20. Ephesians. 2.14. and slays the enmity betwixt God and
us, v. 16. but he brings not peace betwixt the Seed of the Woman and the Seed
of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15.

Quest. What is meant by a Sword?

Answ. War is not meant, but Separation and Division, as Luke 12.51. the word
is (...), that is, disagreement in Faith and Religion, and from thence
opposition and persecution; disagreement of understanding draws with it a
disagreement of will, as an agreement of understanding (especially in the
things of Faith) draws with it an agreement of wills. How came the multitude of
believers to be of one heart? Acts 4.32. Why, because they were of one mind.
Hence 1 Cor. 1.10. that the Corinthians might have no divisions among them, and
might all speak the same thing, he beseeches them that they would be joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment; as if he should say,
unless that be, there will be divisions; now for such an agreement it must be
in very generals, or else no two Saints can agree together. Besides, if there
be a defect in unity of opinion, it must be supplied by a conjunction in the
judgment of charity; if this grace be in us, though there may some light
differences arise, yet, as boughs of the same tree, being severed one from
another by winds they soon come together again, because they are united in one
root: so will dissenting Christians united in Christ and in love to one another
soon come together again.

Quest. How can Christ be said to bring a Sword or contention among men, is not
this a sin?

Answ. The proper end of Christ's coming or the Gospels coming is not to set men
together by the ears (for what a blessed Life should we have would every man
obey it?) but by accident; so Luke 2 34. Christ is said to be for the fall and
rising of many in Israel; so he is called a stone of stumbling and rock of
offense, which is by accident. 1 Peter 2.8.

2 Christ is said to bring a Sword from the necessitated opposition and
separation Saints have to the worlds practices.

3 Christ is said to bring a Sword, from the slanderous calumnies of the World,
because they impute that to Christ which their own Lusts are the cause of. Now
this division arises,

1 From the contrary dispositions in wicked men and godly. Contraries oppose
one another. The Gospel calls for Saints to show humility, self denial, etc.
now the principles of the world are contrary.

2 Neither side can make abatement of their principles; Christ and the Gospel
cannot give ground, wicked men will not, hence arises contention.

3 The Gospel of Christ offers violence to Satan's Kingdom; hence the Devil
rages himself, and inrages his instruments: as the Princes of the world when a
Foreign Prince invades their Territories, arms his subjects against that
Prince, so does Satan stir up instruments against the Saints of God and
Preachers of his word, Acts 14.1, 2, 4. Acts 16.19. Acts 17.4, 5, 6. Acts
19.24. Acts 22.22. Acts 24.5. Acts 28.22. Let the Devil alone, he will let you
alone, Luke 11.20, 21. But if once you assail him, then look for sore
opposition, Psalm 2.1, 2, 3. The nations will rage, and the Kings of the earth
stand up against the Lord: this is the cause why Antichrist makes war with the
Saints of the most high, Rev. 14.7, 8.

4 Saints count the Gospel wisdom, the world counts it foolishness: if thou art
a King, or Prince, or Teacher of Churches, and seriously embracest the word,
the world will count thee mad and foolish, Luth. Tom. 4.140.

Use. To apply this, 1 Think not that to be truth, because all are in peace,
Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophesied falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means, and the people love to have it so.

In a Family or City when all went in one way of profaneness, all were in
peace, but if some of them by Gods grace shall be called home, Oh what a storm
does Satan stir up against them? Peace is a singular blessing, yet better there
should be thousands of tumults and seditions, then that either Satan should
hold the souls of men in peace, or that error and confusion should be
throughout the Churches.

2 Exhort. 1 Wonder not at the factions and divisions in Towns, Churches and
Families, about matters of Religion Christ has foretold it: as Ishmael
persecuted Isaac, Gal. 4.29. so is it now. Christ's kindred thought he was mad,
Mark 3.21.

2 Exhort. Carry wisely under oppositions made against thee for the truths
sake. 1 Arm thy self with patience against their revilings, so did Christ 1
Pet. 2.21, 23. answer their reasons but pass by their railings. If we must not
rail against the Devil, much less against opposers of truth, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

2 Confute their oppositions by the holiness of your lives, Many arguments how
strong soever will not do the cause of God so much good, as one scandalous
practice does it hurt. 1 Pet. 2.12. Let your conversation be honest among the
Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may, by your
good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.

3 Do not unbosome your selves to them who are contrary to you in point of
religion. Many out of love of sinful correspondency make unhappy discoveries
this way. Mic. 7.5. Trust not in a friend, put not confidence in a brother.

4 Beware of purposing to turn back into the ways of error because of the
opposition we find in Gods ways. If once we put our hand to Gods plow we are
not to look back Luke 9.62.

5 Beware of a cowardly giving way to the opposers of the truth. Jeremy
complained there were some were not valiant for the truth, Jer. 9.3. Contrary,
Paul would not give place by subjection to the false Teachers, no not for an
hour, Gal. 2.5. that the truth of the Gospel might continue. If any man should
entrench upon your names, estates, relations, you would contend against them,
and not spare your purses in this case, let us be like minded in matters of
Religion, so Nehemiah, c. 6.9, 11, 15. To this the Apostles exhort, Phil. 1.27,
28. Jude 3. It was well said by Luther, I will not fly (God assisting) nor
leave the word of God in the front of the battle; I had rather burn among the
living coals then stink half alive if not altogether dead. Reason thus, either
the cause is Gods or not, if not, why stir we a foot in it? if it be, why go we
not through with it?

6 Let all that are godly be united among themselves, if not in a same opinion,
yet in a charitable affection, and united conjunction, to oppose wickedness,
and to stand for holiness. Divide and overcome was the old maxim.

There Is a story of a Father that gave a quiver of arrows to his sons, and bad
them break them, being united in the quiver, but they could not; he bad each of
them after to take out a single arrow, and then any one of them could break
them: he made the application, that, so long as his sons were united, none
could hurt them, but when disjoined and severed one from another, they became a
prey to all. I may apply this fitly to all Saints who are the subjects of the
worlds rage. Psalm 133.1.

3 Use. Consolation to saints under much opposition. They in this world have
little peace, but in heaven there remains a rest for them, Heb. 4.10, 11. Rev.
14.13. Yet as the weather-beaten mariner in sight of his Haven is comforted in
the hopes of his arrival therein, where he shall have an end of all storms, so
we being tossed under a continual storm, should comfort our selves by faith and
hope in the haven of our rest. To these contentious persons that obey not the
truth, but oppose the professors of it, there will be tribulation, Romans 2.7, 8.
but to thee, who by a patient continuance in well-doing, goes on, there will be
peace. Christians are apt sometimes to grow passionate under the oppositions of
the world, Jer. 15.10. Woe is me, says Jeremy, that thou have born me a man of
contention and strife to the whole earth, but this is our comfort, 2 These. 1.6,
7. It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels.

V. 35. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.

Obj. But what seems more monstrous then this Text? Christ seems to overturn
all Laws which ordain honor and love of children to their parents, Christ
contrary comes to set them at variance.

Answ. The nearest end of Christ his coming was by his doctrine to unite
hearts, but the separation mentioned here was an accidental end. The world
cannot endure the Gospel, but hate all that receive it; so that the argument
is, he that stirs up strife and variance is guilty of sin, but Christ does so,
therefore he is guilty of sin.

Answ. The proposition is true by it self, the assumtion is true only by
accident; else its false, for what a blessed peace should we have would every
man receive the Gospel?

Obj. Its said of John Baptist, He shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just.

Answ. This is the proper end of the Gospel, if wicked men hindered it not, but
the contrary through wicked men's malice often falls out. Gods children may retort
those words which Eliah did to Ahab, to the wicked of the world, 1 Kings 18.17,
18. Art not thou he that troubles Israel? Eliah answered, I have not troubled
Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the
commandment of the Lord: as Joshua said to Achan, Jos. 7.25. Why have thou
troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day. The cause why the world
troubles the Saints, is, because they witness against their evil, John 7.7. The
world cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of it, that the
works thereof are evil. There Is no bond so strait which the Gospel will not
break in sunder through the corruption of wicked men's hearts. See it, Jer:
12.6. For even thy brethren and the house of thy father, even they have dealt
treacherously with thee, they have called a multitude after thee, believe them
not though they speak fair words unto thee. One part of the trial of Christians
is to be exercised with contentions when the Lord calls his people from the
wicked of the world. 2 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17. Come out from among them, and touch
not the unclean thing, and I will be your God and ye shall be my sons. The
world thinks this an intolerable wrong to make a departure, the mother is angry
with her daughter for it, and the daughter with the mother, yea sometimes a
Church with a member, and casts him out for this, because he will preserve his
conscience pure. Church Communion is an high privilege, but to sin against
conscience is too high a price for it.

V. 36. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

Christ had in part set forth the variance the Gospel brings, not of it self,
for Christ is the Prince of peace, Esa. 9.6. The Gospel of it self is the word
of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. Believers are the children of peace and follow
after it, 1 Pet. 3.11. but by accident, in that wicked men will not suffer
their superstitions and wickedness to be reproved, he comes to close up all,
that a man's enemies shall be they of his own household. The unconverted wife or
servant will oppose the converted husband and master, as Christ had prepared
his Disciples in the former verse against the enmity of kindred and neighbors,
which words were in part taken out of Jer. 9.4. Take ye heed every one of his
neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother, for every brother will utterly
supplant; and every neighbor will walk with slanders. So now Christ prepares
his Disciples against all enmity which shall be in their own houses. Some times
the child is angry with his father, because he keeps him in from profaneness,
the servant is angry with his master and will not tarry with him, because he is
too strict: how often does the husband rise against the wife? for this Jobs wife
upbraided her husband with the business of his integrity, Do thou yet retain
thine integrity? Michal scoft at David for his dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.

V. 37. He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me, and
he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.

Here is a consolation against the former evil, to wit, he that shall leave
relations and friends for Christ, Christ will count such a man worthy of him.
Christ adds these words [above me] least any should think Christ to forbid
love of parents. We may love them but not above Christ, if we do, Christ
will not think us worthy of him, that is, he will not account such in the
number of his Disciples. The sum is, Christ would have his Disciples suffer
all manner of extremities rather then to be taken off from faith and obedience
to him, and he that will not suffer this, is not worthy of him, that is he is
unvvorthy to be called a Christian, neither has he any part in his Kingdom of
grace or glory. Under father and mother he means all relations whatsoever,
whether Magistrates, Masters, Husbands, Kinsmen, Friends, and all the good
things we have or hope to have from them, as Wealth, Honor, Lands. It might
seem very sharp that we must make them who are in the same society with us
Enemies, Christ therefore tells us that upon no other terms we can be his
Disciples, therefore we must see the price of being Christ's disciples. The sum
is, Christ is to be loved sovereignly, and every creature subordinately; Luke
14.26. If our love to any creature hinder us from following Christ, let us
learn to count it dung for Christ, Gal. 6.14. Phil 3.8. When a case comes that
either God is to be denied or a creature, then is a creature to be denied. The
reverence of Parents is to be cast off if it cannot stand with the reverence of
God: the will of God being known we must not dispute of laws or prescriptions,
but we must obey Gods command without any deliberation, because neither the
Pope, parents, or Caesar have this title; I am the Lord thy God. Luth in Genesis
27.

Love is an affection whereby the soul is carried out to enjoy something it
esteems to be good. There are three things in love.

1 Affection, whereby we are inclined to some known good.

2 Desire that we may be united to it.

3 Joy, whereby we rest in that good thing obtained. These three are in every
ordinary subordinate good.

But in the supreme good all the appetites and affections of Saints are carried
soveraignly to him, and with much joy rest in him.

If we love not Christ soveraignly, we love him only as a creature, neither is
it enough to love the Lord Jesus better then many things: if there be any thing
we love above him or equal with him, whatsoever thing we so love we make an
Idol. See my treatise of the love of Christ. To love Christ thus, 1 Beware you
be not ensnared with the fear of men, or any hardships. 2 Nor with favors of
men.

V. 38. And he that takes not his cross and follows after me, is not worthy
of me.

As in the former Verse we were to forgo any thing for God, loving him
soveraignly, so are we required to suffer any thing for him, loving him
undividedly.

He that takes not his cross] By cross he means every affliction that lies in
the way of duty, whether it be an office which cannot be had with a good
conscience, or the favor of this or that man. Many give a lift at the cross,
but finding it heavy they let it fall down again. Others think when they have
taken up some one or few crosses they have done enough, whereas taking up the
cross is a continual duty. Hence it is put in the present tense. And Luke says,
it is a duty daily to be done, Luke 9.23. for what week or month is there, but,
if a man will be true to his conscience, he shall find some cross or other
lying in his way?

Christ does not mean only crucifying, or the death of the cross, which every
Christian for Christ is called to take up, but also Christ means all other
crosses. This death of crucifying was usual among the Romans, invented by
cruelty it self, if Cicero may be believed, among whom the word came to be used
for all kind of disprofit or suffering, as the Phrase abi in malam crucem
denotes, and the Latin word crucior. Now these words of taking the cross and
taking up the cross, mentioned, Luke 9.23. and that of bearing the cross, Luke
14.27. are the words used in the suffering of Christ, Matthew. 27.32. Mark 15.21.
where the word (...) is used as the word (...) is, Joh. 19.17. to show, that
the manner of calling sufferings by the name of the cross was taken from that
suffering upon the cross.

So that to take up the cross is to have a disposition for all manner of
sufferings for Christ, whether prisons, death, or banishment. So Paul, Acts
20.24.21.13. So Peter, though he went in his own strength, yet the bent of his
heart was right, Mark 14.31. Luke 22.33. Lord, I am ready to go with thee both
into prison and to death.

Christ calls these sufferings by the ignominious name of the cross, that
Christians may not expect worldly glory and domination, but rather scoffs, and
mocks, and crucifyings.

Moreover, in that Christ says we must take up the cross, it denotes unto us a
voluntary obedience, that we neither fret at God or man who has been any ways
instrumental in our sufferings: this should something quiet our minds, that as
Christ adjudges all his Disciples to the cross, so does he us to our crosses,
and in that Christ says [his cross] he means not that we should create crosses
for our selves, but only take from the hand of God and bear upon our shoulders
those which the Lord lays on us. We are ready to think our own cross heavier
then others crosses, but if all the crosses of the world were laid on an heap,
and an equal dividend were made of them, I question whether thy share would not
come to more. Some man can bear poverty, but cannot away with infamy or
disgrace. Others will suffer disgrace but not imprisonment, others imprisonment
but not corporal punishment, but a Christian that is worthy of Christ must take
up all.

Means to take up the Cross.
1 Think often of it, resolve with thy self thou must not live always in peace,
but there will a change come when thou must part with thy dearest comforts. 1
Pet. 4.12. Think not strange concerning the fiery trial: be thinking what the
truths of God may cost thee before thou dye. Contrary, when men either think in
their prosperity they shall never be moved, or put off the evil day far off, as
they did, Amos 6.3. how can they take up the cross when it comes?

2 Believe that all things shall work together for thy good, Romans 8.28. and
that they come from the hand of a father, Joh. 18.11. yea even sore sufferings.
God is wont to hide his face and withdraw his hand from Saints, and suffers
them to mourn, to be sold, to be cast in prison, to dye, no otherwise then if
they were the enemies of God. Luth. in Genesis 37.

3 Get low thoughts to all earthly comforts, Pro. 23.5. Will thou cause thine
eyes to fly upon that which is not? As the Margin reads it, that is, it is not
that which it seems to be; riches, honors, preferments are not that they seem
to be. Think of the vanity of credit with men, of great men's favors, etc. what
will these be in the day of death?

4 Look upon the crown. Christ endured the cross, despising the shame, and is
now set down on the right hand of God. What was the ground he endured the
cross? Why, it was for the joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2. Acts 14.22.
Romans 8.18. 2 Timothy 2.12.

5 Look upon the sweet comforts Saints find under the cross; their comforts
abound most then, even as their sufferings also abound, 2 Cor. 1.5. Hence the
Martys found Prisons more comfortable then Palaces. As Princes use to
recompense them who have suffered loss in their service, so does Christ make up
the sufferings of his people with comfort.

6 Beware of having a squint eye upon the issues and events of things before we
let conscience give judgment, but let us have a full eye upon the rule, and
upon the command; so Abraham in sacrificing his son, Gideon in cutting down the
Idol, Paul, Gal. 1.15. consulted not with flesh and blood, when God called him
to preach.

7 Look to Christ who has taken up the Cross before us, Heb. 12.2.

8 We are not esteemed by Christ as his Disciples till we have the disposition
to take up the Cross, whatsoever our profession of Faith may be, Luke 9.23.
Luke 14.26.

9 Beware of indwelling corruption, which still counsels us rather to balk duty
than to expose our selves to the cross. How often does the flesh put persons upon
lying, upon deceitful distinctions to escape the cross? That which lies in the
bottom is, they are loath to lose such gain, to displease a good friend, to
procure the enmity of such a man as may hurt us, to part with such an Office or
Employment. To remedy this hold no man's friendship but in subordination to
duty, and look upon all gain as cursed which is got with the wounding of the
soul, Matthew. 16.26.

10 Consider that herein we express our friendship to Christ, when we will not
let any cross part him and us. Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice in
any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. For one friend upon
choice to suffer for another argues entire friendship, so for us to suffer for
Christ upon choice, and not upon necessity, argues much friendship toward
Christ.

11 Inure not your self to pleasures and delicacy. How hardly will the cross be
born of such? Moses when he was a Courtier he slighted the pleasures of the
Court, Heb. 11.25.

12 Submit to live in a low condition, for want of which frame of spirit many
dare not take up the Cross; they know not how to be poor: it was otherwise with
Paul, Phil. 4.13. I have learned in every estate therewith to be content.

13 Rid thy heart of slavish fear, as fear of Imprisonment, Revel. 2.10. Fear
none of these things thou shall suffer, the Devil shall cast some of you into
Prison. Slavish fear of contempt of multitudes keeps some from duty,
contrariwise in Job, cap. 31.34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did the
contempt of families terrify me? Fear of Excommunication often keeps men from
taking up the Cross, John 12.42. Among the chief Rulers many believed on him,
but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put
out of the Synagogue. Excommunication is much to be dreaded, but when we have
an absolute certainty upon the conscience in the witness of any cause of God,
we are not to dread it, for even Excommunication has sometimes unjustly
afflicted Saints, Isai 66 5. John 16.2. As it is a folly to be afraid of a
painted man drawing a Sword, so it is a folly to be terrified with the name
Church when it is blasphemously used; for it is only a painted Church or
vizard of a Church. Luth. in Genesis 21. The Censure of the Church shall not
separate me from the Church if truth join me to the Church. Luth. Tom. 1. cap.
58.

14 Bear not the Cross, because thou have secondary refuges, but merely out of
conscience of a command of Christ; for example, some men will bear the cross of
outward losses for Christ, when they have got enough to maintain them in the
world, but not before, when as the same thing that was a truth to them now, was
a truth to them then. O but then they were poor, but now otherwise. But is not
duty, duty? and must duty give way to temporal concernments, and not be obeyed
till we can without inconvenience and loss obey it? It Is a usual deceit in most
men's hearts, they will first bring about the ends they desire, and then take up
the cross, but in taking up the cross we are not to take the delay of one day,
Luke 9.23. no nor one hour, Gal. 2.5.

15 Often cast up what Christianity and a good conscience may cost thee. I have
not a stronger Argument against the Popes Kingdom than that it reigns without
the Cross. Luth. Tom. 2.223. Luke 14.28, 29. What man goes to build and
considers not whether he have to finish it? Who goes to sea and prepares not
for a storm? The benefit will be this, to wit, when we meet with troubles, the
soul will say, These are the things that I looked for. Men cast up the easy
part of Religion, but do not cast up the hard part.

16 Be earnest for God to give thee an invincible resolution, that when the
flesh asks you will, you omit no duty though it costs you never so much, you
may answer, no, as Daniel, cap. 6.10. who would no omit praying, though to be
known to pray was a matter capital. Micaiah would not balk the telling of Ahab
a Message from God, though Imprisonment and the Bread and Water of Affliction
was like to befall him. Queen Hester would speak for the Church though she
should perish therein. John Baptist would not forbear to admonish Herod though
Imprisonment and Death should be his Reward. Prisons and Death would not keep
off the Apostle from fulfilling the course of his Ministry, Acts 20.24. yea he
says, He rejoiced, if he were offered upon the sacrifice and service of the
faith of the Philippians, Phil. 2.17. I say, when the flesh shall ask this
question, let thy conscience be able to answer, Whatsoever trouble falls upon
me, in the strength of God I will do duty.

So contrary when the flesh shall ask, will you not commit any known sin though
you gain never so much by it, though by a Ly, or by dissembling you might gain
the favor of such a great man, by denying or dissembling the truth you may
gain or keep such a preferment which else you cannot, by such an equivocation
you may save your life, by marying a carnal person you may gain a great estate,
when at present you are in a poor condition, by taking such an Oath, or
subscribing to such a Subscription which is against your consciences, you may
keep off banishment and sequestration of your estates, now when to these and
such like questions the conscience shall declare, not a conditional resolution,
but an absolute, that come what come will or can, in the strength of God you
will not, you cannot sin, here you are fitted to take up the cross. So Joseph
Genesis 39.10. How can I do this and sin against God? That is, I cannot. 2 Cor.
13.8. We can do nothing against the truth.

Obj. But did not Balaam say, Numb. 22.18. If Balak would give me a house full
of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God to do less
or more: also when Balaam was come to Balak, v. 38. he says, Lo I am come unto
thee, have I now any power at all to say any thing? the word that God puts
in my mouth that shall I speak. Also c. 23. Balaam says, How shall I curse
whom God has not cursed? or how shall I defy whom the Lord has not defied?
v. 8. Also cap. 23.12. Balaam tells Balak, Must I not take heed to speak that
which the Lord has put in my mouth? and all these resolutions were when King
Balaks gold came in competition with the doing of a duty.

Answ. 1 Balaam did not say he would not curse Gods people, but only he could
not, for his will was to commit the sin of cursing Gods people. This could not
appears, cap. 23.20. I have received a commandment to bless and I cannot
reverse it. As if he should say, I would reverse it if I could, to obtain thy
rewards of divination, but I cannot. Also, cap. 23.26. Balaam answered Balak,
Told I thee not saying? All that the Lord speaks I must do. Also, cap. 24.11,
12. Balak said to Balaam, I thought to promote thee to honor, but God has
kept thee back from honor, and Balaam spoke to Balak, Said I not to thy
Messengers, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot
go beyond the commandment of the Lord to do either good or bad of my own
mind; but what the Lord says that will I speak.

Now that Balaams will was to curse Gods people, appears,

1 Because he would enquire of God whether he might curse his people, cap. 22.8.

2 Because when God gave him his flat denial, neither to go with the Messengers
of Balaak, nor to curse Israel, v. 12. though he withstood it at present, v.
13. yet upon the coming of new Messengers, he yielded to make a new enquiry of
God whether he might go or no, v. 20, 21. when he had his flat denial of
permission to go, v. 12.

3 Because Gods anger was kindled against him for his going, v. 22. so that he
was near slaying by the Angel, v. 22, 23.

4 Because Balaam confesses his sin, v. 34. I have sinned, that is, in having a
hankering desire to Balaks gold.

5 In that Balaam goes with Balak from place to place, and from altar to altar,
and that Balaam did not curse Gods people was merely for fear of the Angel of
God.

But contrarily the resolutions of Saints that take up the cross are not
because they cannot, though they cannot, but because they will not, God having
so wrought upon their wills that they will not part with the Lord.

17 That we may take up the cross, let us deny our selves, Luke 9.23. Matthew.
16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross. See, denial of our selves goes before the taking up of the cross. We
must deny our selves in our ease, profit, pleasure, credit, house, lands,
relations, yea deny our selves in our lusts of pride, etc.

And follows after me is not worthy of me] Christ thinks no man worthy of
himself who follows him not. To the taking up the cross we must add this, to
follow Christ. Now to follow Christ is to do whatsoever he commands, without
exception, whether it be to do or suffer, at all times rather then to leave the
Lord. When the conscience hints to us to do such a duty, to witness such a
truth, to forbear such a gain, to restore for such a wrong, to perform such a
duty.

Obj. But the law of Christ is the rule of our life, how then are we to follow
Christ?

Answ. Christ is the example of the rule, as in Grammar there is a rule, and
then there is an example of the rule, so the law of Christ is our rule, but
Christ is the example of the rule.

Quest. Wherein must we follow Christ?

Answ. In humility. Matthew. 11.29. When the multitude would have made Christ a
King, he refused it. He washed his Disciples feet, Joh. 13.14. he took on him
the form of a servant, Phil. 2.6, 7.

2 In patience. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, Isai 53.7. 1 Pet. 2.22,
23. Heb. 12.2, 3.

3 In taking opportunities of doing good, Acts 10.38. Christ went about doing
good, Joh. 4.15, 16.

4 In compassion. Matthew. 9.37. Heb. 7.25.

5 In tenderness. Matthew. 12.20. Not to break a bruised reed.

6 In heavenly mindedness, who took occasion from all visible objects to draw
holy meditations, as from bread, door, light, vine and branches.

7 In public spiritedness, 1 Pet. 2.24.

8 In praying for enemies, Luke 23.34.

Grounds of following Christ.
1 From Gods predestination. Romans 8.29. Whom God predestined to glory he
predestined to be conformable to the image of his son. As Christ was holy by
nature, so must we be holy by grace.

2 From the name of Christian which we bear, Acts 11.26. as the first Adam
begat a son in his own likeness, so does the second Adam.

3 From the bond of union, 1 Cor. 12.27. Ye are the body of Christ, and members
in particular. Now the head and members live one and the same life.

4 From the command of Christ, who commands us to follow him, Joh. 13.14. yea
and gave us an example that we should follow him. v. 15. I have given you an
example that you should do as I have done unto you, 1 Pet. 2.21. leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps.

5 If we follow not Christ, we follow the devil and our lusts, or else we
follow the course of the world, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. the guise of the times.

6 The holy example of Christ has a mighty transforming power to change us.
Sight works upon the imagination of bruit beasts, as when Jacob laid the
party-colored rods before the sheep, much more let us, beholding the glorious
grace of Christ in the Gospel, be changed into the Image thereof, 2 Cor. 3.18.

Use. 1 Be exhorted to follow Christ. You say, you do, you are baptized into
his name; well, but have you put on Christ? Gal. 3.27. As many as are baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ. Can we say a man has put on his clothes that
has never a rag on him, neither doublet, shirt? etc. so when thou have not
Christ in thy words, in thy shop, in thy conversing, in thy company, etc. how
can thou say thou have put on Christ?

A Christian should be like that Martyr, who to all demands answered he was a
Christian; when they asked his name he answered Christian, when they asked his
calling he answered Christian.

To rule over others, to be in a better condition then others, to be rich and
to offer violence to inferiors, is not to be blessed, neither can any man
imitate God in any of these things. But he that bears his neighbors burden,
and being above does good to him that is below, what he has from God, gives it
to them that are in want, he is a follower of God; thou so doing and living on
the earth shall behold God in the heavens governing the earth as a
Commonwealth, then shall thou begin to speak the mysteries of God, then shall
thou both love and wonder at those that are punished, because they will not
deny the Lord, then will thou contemn the error of the world, when thou have
learned to live in heaven; then shall thou begin to be a contemner of that
which is here counted death, and to fear death which indeed is death. I speak
not of strange things, but being a Scholar of the Apostles, I am become a
Teacher of the Gentiles, and what things were delivered to me I deliver to
disciples. Just. Mart. ad Diognetum page 387.

In imitation we choose the rarest pattern, in writing, in building; what
pattern so excellent as Christ to follow? we are apt to admire a picture drawn
to life. No person is so resembled by his picture as Christ is resembled by a
humble, holy walking Christian that has the same graces stamped upon his soul
that were in Christ, though not in the same measure, Joh. 1.17. Phil. 2.5.

Means to follow Christ.
1 Get the spirit of Christ. 2 Cor. 3.18. We are transformed into the same
image, from glory to glory: that is, from one glorious grace to another, but
how? as by the spirit of the Lord, so that as the spirit put a mighty impulse
upon Elisha to follow Eliah, so does the Spirit in Saints to follow Christ. As
in property of speech it is not the eye that sees but the man that sees with
his eyes, it is not the knife that cuts but the man that cuts with the knife,
it is not the ear that hears but the man that hears with the ear, so in the
body of Christ it is no more the man that speaks but the truth of Christ that
speaks in the man. 1 Cor. 2.16. If we be in Christ, Christ speaks in us, thinks
in us, walks in us, works in us. The life of a Christian is not of himself but
of Christ living in him. A Christian lives not, speaks not, works not, suffers
not, but Christ in him. Luth. Tom. 1. fol. 438.

2 Take heed of impediments, as 1 Love of credit, Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe
that seek honor one of another?

2 Slanders, Acts 28.22. As concerning this Sect we find it every where spoken
against.

3 Shame of the world, Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words.

4 Weights, Heb. 12.1, 2. Let us lay aside every weight. Many a man by the
weight of his calling and the weight of earthly employments and estate is so
pressed down, that he cannot follow Christ.

5 The pull-back of alliance and acquaintance. He has a devil and is mad, why
hear ye him? Joh. 10.20. When the Officers began to be acquainted with Christ,
saying, never man spoke like this, and Nicodemus began to be taken with Christ,
how did the Pharisees labor to take them off? Joh. 7.45. to v. 53.

6 The poverty and meanness of Christ and of his Disciples in this world,
Matthew. 8.19, 20. Matthew. 11.6.

7 Mistakes in Christian religion. Joh. 6.66. because Christ had spoken of
eating of his flesh and drinking his blood, many of his Disciples went back and
walked no more with him.

3 Take up the cross: what man can follow Christ without it? Hence Christ
conjoyns them. Many follow Christ as cowardly soldiers do their Captain till
the battle be to be fought, and then they fly. Matthew. 19.27.

4 Get love to Christ, Song 3.1, 2, 3.

Motives to follow Christ.
1 He is our Shepherd, we are his sheep, Joh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice and
they follow me.

2 Its the badge of Christ's redeemed ones to follow Christ, Rev. 14.4. They
follow the lamb whithersoever he goes, they follow him in the regeneration,
Matthew. 19.28. they follow him in glorification, 1 These. 4.15, 16.

3 Our former haltings between Christ and the world. We have walked as a
serving man that follows two Gentlemen, a stranger cannot tell as they walk to
which of them he belongs, Heb. 12.13.

4 Where Christ is entertained we that follow him shall be entertained, Matthew.
10.40. He that receives me receives you, as he that follows a Gentleman is
entertained where his Master is entertained.

5 Its an indispenceable duty; if thou do not follow Christ thou art not
worthy of him, That is Christ will never think thee worthy of him. Many things
may be dispensed with, but duty to God cannot be dispensed with.

7 The perfect example Christ has left us, 1 Pet. 2.22. leaving us a copy, as
the word (...) signifies. Metaphor from Scholars who begin their lines and
make their letters like their Masters, though they cannot write so exactly, so
let us imitate Christ in speaking, acting, etc.

V. 39. He that finds his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for
my sake shall find it.

Christ speaks after the opinion of men, who think they have found their life,
Liberty or Estate, when by denying of the truth they have saved them;
contrariwise they that have parted with their life, Liberty and state, for
Christ sake, carnal men think such men have lost them.

1 But Christ tells the contrary, saying, he that finds his life, to wit with
the loss of his conscience, shall lose it, and he that loses his life, for the
witness of any truth of Christ, shall be sure to save it eternally.

[Findeth his life] To find the life is to invent tricks, and evasions, and
cunning distinctions to escape the danger of death for the profession of
Christ; so Peter to save his life denied that he knew Christ.

[Shall lose it] that is, unless with Peter he repent of his treachery, upon a
sincere repentant purpose to dye in truth for the confession and profession of
the name of Christ: our former treacheries (we believing pardon in Christ and
bewailing them) shall not be charged upon us. Whatsoever men talk of faith we
see none are saved but Martyrs, those that either actually or habitually in the
preparation of their hearts do dye for Christ. Hence sprange those noble
resolutions of sundry of the Saints, Acts 20.24.21.13. Gal. 6.14. 2 Cor. 4.11,
12. Rev. 2.13.12.11. Tertul. in Scorpiaco, cap. 11. says, he has found his
life that has denied Christ by gaining life, but he shall destroy it in hell,
he that thinks in denying to gain his life shall lose it at present, qui
confessus occiditur, he that confesses is killed, but he shall find his life
into an everlasting life. How can we better expend our life, then to lay it out
for Christ which in a short time will dye of it self? how many lay down their
lives for the Princes of the world, and shall not we dye for Christ?

And he that loses his life for my sake shall find it] that is, had rather
dye then deny the profession of my truth and Gospel, they shall find it in the
day of the resurrection, this is not easy as men think. Thy letters pleased
me, not because I smelt in them I know not what spiritual presumption; do not
boast that thou will do and suffer many things, for the word of God, he that
stands let him take heed that he fall not. Thou have not yet fought with death;
Its not so easy a thing as it is easily spoken of it, etc. Therefore walk in
the fear of God, and contempt of thy self, and pray God that he would do all
thy works, and thou do nothing but be a sabbath to Christ, Luth. Tom. 2 epist.
fol. 62. ad Gabrielem Didimum, Pastorem Aldinburgensem. Learn we then to
contemn our life for the witness of Christ's truth. Rev. 12.11. They loved not
their lives unto the death, and so overcame by the word of their Testimony. If
life be to be contemned, much more are estates, friends, and liberties for the
cause of Christ, seeing nothing is more dear unto us then life. Happy is that
day, happy is that death with joy and chiefest thankfulness, if at any time it
fall out that I be apprehended and be destroyed in that cause. Tom. 2.302. When
one Christian is slain, ten are begotten. Luth.

V. 40. He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me.

Here is the last suffering which the Disciples might fear, viz. That no man
would receive them being so miserable: to this Christ says, Look as there will
be those who will receive me and my Father, so will there be those who will
receive you to their houses, and that kindness they do to you I will take it as
done to my self, Matthew. 25.40. What good man would shut out Jesus Christ? no
more will they shut out you. Look as in the receiving of an Ambassador the
King is received in receiving him. Preachers are Ambassadors for Christ, 2
Cor. 5.20. Therefore in receiving them Christ is received. All believers are
members of his body, in the happiness of whom the head is wont to sympathize.
Thus was Paul at first received by the Galatians as an Angel of God, even as
Christ Jesus. Gal. 4.14, 15. They being willing to have given their eyes unto
him.

Preachers and other godly men might in the midst of so much hatred of the
world be ready to think, how shall we do to live, therefore Christ opens the
doors of all godly men to them, to excite them whereto, Christ proposes a great
reward, so that as the Princes of the world reward the kindnesses that are done
to their Ambassadors and friends, so and much more will Jesus Christ.

[Receiveth him that sent me] as if he should say, he that receives my
Apostles receives me, and not only me, but also him that sent me. Now he that
receives God receives everlasting blessedness, much whereof is seated in the
beholding of God.

We may see wherein the Law of hospitality consists, not in keeping open
house for tag and rag, but in the receiving the Messengers and Saints of
Christ, Luke 14.12. They cannot recompense thee, but thou shall be recompensed
at the Resurrection of the just; Heb. 13.2. Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers, for some thereby (as Lot and Abram) have entertained Angels
unawares. Take heed your hearts grudge not at the charge of receiving such, 1
Pet. 4.9. Remember Gaius, who was not only Paul's host but also the host of the
whole Church, Romans 16.23. In receiving such we are fellow helpers to the truth,
3 Epist. of John v. 8. It was the wickedness of Diotrephes, v. 9. That he would
not receive the apostle, nor yet the poor Saints, but cast those out of the
Church that did receive them. When at the day of Christ, Christ shall
acknowledge himself to have been relieved in his Saints, many hard hearted men
will wish they had received him.

V. 41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward.

Here Is a second consolation against fear of not receiving, taken from the
Reward that will redound to such as shall receive good men.

Quest. What is meant by Prophet?

Answ. One that is enabled to expound the prophetical places of Scriptures.
There are three sorts of Disciples here mentioned, 1 Apostles, v. 40. The
second sort are Prophets. 3 Righteous men.

In general, by Prophets he means Teachers of the Gospel, these are in several
places put next to the Apostles. Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets. Ephesians. 3.5. Which in other ages was not made
known as it is now revealed to his holy Apostles and Prophets. Ephesians. 4.11. He
gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.28. First Apostles,
secondarily Prophets. These Prophets are distinguished from righteous men, as a
sort of men abounding in spiritual wisdom, 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Apostles? are
all Prophets? 1 Cor. 14.37. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or
spiritual man. So here in the Text they are distinguished from ordinary
righteous men by the name, and by the reward.

Now for Prophets we find them in several of the Churches, as at Rome, Romans
12.6. He that prophesies, let him prophecy according to the proportion of
faith. At Antioch also, Acts 13.1. there was in the Church that was at Antioch
certain Prophets and Teachers, as Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, Saul. In
the Church at Jerusalem there was Judas and Silas, Acts 15.32. who being
Prophets exhorted, Acts 11.27. the Brethren with many words. So in the Church
of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.1, etc. In the Church of Ephesus, Ephesians. 4.11. gave some
Prophets. In the Church at Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Despise not
prophesying. Yea, we find Prophets in the Church when Babylon shall be
destroyed, Revel. 18.20. Rejoice over her, ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for
God has avenged you on her; he means such Prophets as the Beast made to
prophecy in sackcloth 1260. days, Rev. 11.3.

Now of these Prophets there were two sorts in the New Testament.

1 Those that did foretell things to come: such was Agabus, Acts 11.28. under
this kind came the Prophetesses. Philip had four daughters which were
Prophetesses, Acts 21.9. of this Acts 2.17. This is that which was spoken by
the Prophet Joel, saying, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy; your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams. And of this it is probable, 1 Cor. 11.5, 6.
Every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered, dishonors her
head, and every man prophesying with his head covered dishonors his head;
that is, with his head covered with Ribbons and Garlands after the manner of
the Heathen, and the women prophesied after the manner of the Sybills, with
their hair hanging down, and so dishonored their head Christ. Of which
heathenish custom Lucan in his fifth Book speaks, who lived a little after
Christ's time.

-- Bacchatur demens, aliena per antrum
Colla ferens, vittasque dei, Phaebeaque serta:
Erectas discussa comas, per inania templi
Ancipiti cervice rotat, spargitque vaganti
Obstantes tripodas, magnoque exaestuat igne,
Iratum te Phoebe ferens. --
In English thus.

The frantic Beldam, raging through her den,
Bearing strange necks, the heads of sundry men,
Adorned with Ribbons and with Garlands fair,
To Phoebus honor, flownc'd her ghastly hair,
Wheels here and there through temples empty spaces,
Shaking her doubtful head, here, there, she faces, etc.
These Prophets told things past and future to persons, as Christ did to the
Woman of Samaria, John 4.29. and Elisha to Gehezi, 2 Kings 5.26. Irenaeus 1.6.
says himself had known and heard many Brethren that could discover the hidden
things of men, he means such secrets as could not be known by the power of man's
wit. From the revelation of which secrets it is supposed the Idiot or Heathen
falls down and worships your God, reporting that God is in you of a truth, 1
Cor. 14.24, 25.

2 Those that did expound the prophetical places of Scripture, prophesying
according to the proportion of faith, Romans 12.6. and did apply their doctrines
to exhortation and confirmation, so Judas and Silas, Acts 15.32. to edification
and comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3.

If any man ask whether prophesying be the same with preaching? I answer no. 1
The words in Greeek are diverse, (...), signifying to preach, and (...), to
prophecy. Besides 2 Preaching is to be performed to every creature,
prophesying is to be performed only to the Church, 1 Cor. 14.22.

Now if you ask what these Prophets were? I dare not determine them to be
Officers in Churches, unless I could prove the manner of their call, to make
out which, I can find nothing but that they are put in the order and rank of
men who are called by Office, Ephesians. 4.11. As Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers, which is something in order to prove them Officers, but not
full proof.

Some think them to be grown brethren, such as are called perfect men, 1 Cor.
2.6. Fathers, 1 John 2.13. Clemens makes three sorts of Christians, 1 They that
are turned from the Gentiles. 2 They that are going up toward knowledge. 3
They that are chiefly knowing. It may fall out sometimes there may be some such
knowing men in Churches who are by virtue of a gift as able to teach as a
person in office; pity such gifts should be quenched for want of exercise,
though I doubt not the fault of the times is on the contrary hand, in that upon
pretense of gifted Brethrens prophesying, those that are not gifted in too many
places are pressed hereto, verifying too much that conceit that has been cast
by some, viz. that ignorance, impudence, and a Concordance were all the
accoutrements some had for preaching. I speak not this to quench any gift where
it is real, but to sober those who may perhaps think of themselves more then is
meet. Prophets then, if any such be out of office, they are such as are perfect
or well-grown Christians Heb. 5.14. Strong meat belongs to them that are
perfect: the word is (...), those who by reason of habit have their senses
exercised to difference good and evil. But let Prophets be what they will be, a
Church can no more comfortably be without Ministers, then a body without eye
and hand. Luth. Tom. 4.374.

I shall conclude this with one querie, Whether it be required by the word of
God that a weak Brother that has but a little measure of the Spirit, and so
consequently can pray but weakly, and but weak parts, both in the Analizing,
Explaining and Dividing the Scriptures, and so must needs teach much more
weakly, be required to be a mouth for the Church at a Church-meeting,
especially in a Church where there are Brethren of better parts to be had? And
whether the exercising such weak Brethren be a mean for them to obtain the gift
of prophecy, or whether there be not some other way thereto? As taking
direction from some experienced Preacher, and reading besides the Scriptures
godly books, chosen by the direction of some godly Teacher. For which studies,
as also for the study of their own heart, they are to set time apart, and
whether the company of the faithful are to set times apart on the Week day, and
to meet together on the Lords day, only to help a weak Brother to increase his
gifts, or rather to try whether he can by exercise increase them by our hearing
of him, or whether the faithful (whether Lambs or Sheep) are not to meet, to
hear such persons as are able to feed them with knowledge and understanding, and
whether the faithful come not for that very end unto hearing, to obtain
spiritual nourishment in the knowledge of duty, and to obtain quickening from
their deadness of heart by lively and powerful notions, and also growth by a
higher measure of knowledge and information then hitherto they have had, and
whether such weak Brethren are able to give such information, many whereof are
only babes in Christ, many of the hearers being strong? And whether the best
means of edifying a Church be not to be followed? And whether established
Teachers in Churches reserving the liberty of Prophets and prophecy be not
only more creditable for the honor of the Gospel, and edifying the souls of
believers by many degrees, then the having such weak Brethren to exercise, who
besides that they cannot carry on the Ordinances, with such honor and
comeliness as is meet in so great a work, their words being weak are but in a
small degree edifying, and ready sometimes to flat the spirits of the hearers
instead of quickening of them?

Quest. But is prophecy an ordinary gift in the Churches?

Answ. Yes. 1 Because it was used in six of the Churches.

2 Because Paul says, Ye may all prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14.31. not all
at once, but now one and then one. He speaks not of all Members but of
Prophets, c. 12.29.

3 Because women are not to speak in the Church, but are commanded to be
silent. 1 Cor. 14.34. but in extraordinary prophecy they were not to be
silent, as we see in Hanna, Luke 2.36. also, 1 Cor. 11.5, 6.

Obj. Prophesying is an extraordinary gift, because it is joined with tongues.

Answ. It follows not, for it is also joined with charity.

Obj. There is an injunction of silence to the speaking Prophet, when any thing
was revealed to another sitting by; v. 30.

Answ. In ordinary prophecy due time and season must be observed, neither is
it any disgrace to the first Prophet for the second to speak, the first having
done: part of the mind of God is revealed to one, and part to another.

Object. But I would fain have the gift of prophecy, what should I do to
attain it?

Answ. I am so far from envying any man's gift herein, that I can say with
Moses, Numb. 11.29. Would to God all the Lords people did prophecy, and that
the Lord would put his Spirit upon them. In order whereto I shall propound
these rules.

1 Beg of God to open thy heart to understand the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2.11, 14,
15. Prove. 2.4, 5, 6.

2 Get a guide to direct thee, Acts 8.30. Understandest thou what thou read?
said Philip, the Eunuch answered, How can I except some man guide me?

Quest. What guide?

Answ. Some experienced Preacher, who being desired will deal faithfully with
thee, and show thee thy superfluities and thy defects, and set thee in a way of
method, and prescribe what books are fittest for thee; what Commentators, and
what other books of practical Divinity.

3 Study, 1 The Scriptures. 2 Thine own heart. 3 Fundamental Divinity, whereof
there are sundry Systems in English, as Dr. Ames his Marrow, and his Cases in
English, Ursins his Catechism English, Peter Martyrs common places English.

4 Get the best English Commentators; Mr Baines on the Ephesians, Mr. Elton on
the Colossians, Par on the Romans, Dixon on Matthew, Hebrews, Psalms,
Hutchinson on the small Prophets, Mayer on the Prophets; There are some English
Commentaries on most of the Scriptures, though nothing comparable to the Latin.
It would be a work well beseeming some Prince or great man, to employ ten
Preachers or more, who being painful and studious might abridg the chief Latin
Commentaries, and put them in a short English Commentary, oh how would it make
the way of salvation plain!

4 Consider four things: 1 The scope of the Scripture you would speak to; if
you miss herein you will miserably mangle the Scriptures. 2 The connection or
joining with foregoing and following words. 3 A right Analyze or division of
the Chapter into the parts thereof, marking where the Holy Ghost ceases to
speak to one subject, and where it goes on to another. 4 The explanation or
true meaning of the words.


6 Be careful a while to expound the Scriptures in thy family, in the exercise
whereof thou will be much helped on to edify an assembly. Practice is helpful
hereto, but it is but one help.

7 Expound so that still you may keep to the proportion of faith, Romans 12.6.

8 Consider in the Scripture, 1 The position the Spirit lays down. 2 The
arguments and reasons to prove that position.

9 In reading any Commentary note the remarkable things therein at the first
reading with a pen, and then read over the second or third time what you have
noted, passing by all the expositions not noted?

10 Compare one Scripture with another and strive to expound darker places by
them which are plainer.

11 Strive to be a good Text man. It Is absurd for a Lawyer to speak without a
Text out of the Law, much more for a Preacher.

12 Mistake not to think that a man cannot be a Preacher without Aristotle. In
many sacred mysteries we must not dispute or philosophize, but hear and believe
God to be true, though what he says may seem absurd. Many seeking after
philosophical speculations have sought for an high Mountain to cast themselves
down.

13 Learn to distinguish the Law from the Gospel, and to teach clearly the
doctrine of faith and repentance.

Concerning the way and method how to preach, there are sundry books in print,
as Bernards faithful Shepherd, etc.

In the name of a Prophet] Because he is a Teacher of the Gospel sent from me,
not because he is a kinsman or a Jew. As those that are able ought to do well
to all men, Gal. 6.10. so especially ought they to do good to the household of
faith, and to the Worshippers of Christ, so ought they especially to the
Prophets in honor of their Doctrine and Message of Salvation, Romans 10.15. How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace and bring glad
tidings of good things? Epistle 3. of John v. 6, 7, 8. This seems to be taken
out of 2 Kings 4.9, 10. where the Woman of Shunem speaks to her Husband thus, I
perceive that this is an holy man of God which passes by us continually, let
us make for him a chamber, and let us set him there a bed, a table, a stool,
and a candlestick, and it shall be when he comes to us he shall turn in
thither. So Cornelius received Peter. Acts 10.33. So Obadiah hid an hundred
Prophets.

Shall receive a Prophets reward] There is at the day of Resurrection a
peculiar Reward given to the Prophets, distinct from the Reward given to all
that fear the Name of God, Revel. 11.18. The time is come that thou should
give a reward to thy servants the Prophets, and to thy Saints, and to all that
fear thy Name both small and great. Some think this Reward of a Prophet to be
the Crown of Glory, but this cannot be, because all righteous men receive this;
others carry it to be the revelation of the hidden will of God, which being in
the company of such Prophets, they often hear, this is true, they that receive
such Guests do also receive this Reward. But the Reward of a Prophet is not
only the Prayers and Instructions of such a Guest, but shall also receive an
equality of glory in Heaven with that Prophet so received, according to the
proportion of assistance and help he has afforded that Prophet for the
divulging of the truth, by which assistance he was made able to convert souls,
and without which he could not have done it, this receiving the Prophet being
with a proportionable love which the Prophet had in preaching, the receiver
shall have the same degree of glory the Prophet had. For the measure of glory
hereafter will answer to our measure of love here: for as in humane Laws the
Receiver of a Thief, and Robber, and Traitor, incurs the same punishment with
the Thief: so the receiver of a Prophet shall receive the same reward with the
Prophet. The Elm that upholds the Vine is respected of us as well as the Vine,
without which the Vine could not bring forth fruit, he that tarried with the
stuff and he that went down to the battle did alike share in the spoil, 1 Samuel
30.24. so he that nourishes a Prophet for to preach, when by reason of poverty
else he could not, shall receive the same reward with the Prophet, according to
the proportion of assistance and love wherewith he assists that Prophet. And
some think in like manner they that receive comfort, and nourish the Martyrs of
Christ, shall receive the same Crown with them that suffer Martyrdom, such as
were companions of those who were made gazing-stocks for Christ are taken
notice of, Heb. 10.33.

We may hence see how much God esteems his Prophets, in that he promises not
only a reward, but such a reward to them that receive them, as of old he
valued Prophets and righteous men, Psalm 105.15. Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm; so does he now, not only forbid harming them, but
commands to do them good with a promise of reward.

And he that receives a righteous man] By this, Christ means godly men.

Obs. The Saints of God are truly and properly righteous men.

There is a twofold Righteousness, 1 Imputative Righteousness of Justification,
Psalm 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. This
consists in having Christ's righteousness imputed unto us, and our sins imputed
unto him, 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Paul knew that at the day of Christ he was to be
found in a righteousness, or else he was undone, and therefore he says, May be
found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but the
righteousness of Christ by faith, that I may know him and the power of his
Death and Resurrection, etc. This is one of the first Articles of the Faith,
wherein the Jews being ignorant, did endeavor to make their own righteousness
to stand. The word is (...), but it was no otherwise than if we should set a
dead man upon his legs, who presently falls down, Romans 10.3, 4.

2 There is a righteousness of sanctification or the righteousness of
uprightness, whereby there is a bent or inclination of soul to all the
commandments of God, without reserving any way of wickedness, Deuteronomy. 6.25. It
shall be our righteousness if we observe to do all these commandments as he
has commanded us. This because it is wrought in our own persons, is called
inherent: Job 27.5, 6. Till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, my
righteousness I hold fast and will not let it go. Integrity consisting in an
universal bent of heart to all Gods commands, is here called by the name of
righteousness. Luke 1.6. it is said, Zachary and Elizabeth were both righteous
before God. But how did it appear, why, they walked in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless. Of this Job 29.14. I put on righteousness and
it clothed me; my judgment was as a robe and a diadem. Godly walking or the
Righteousness of Sanctification did adorn him before men, as brave Apparel does
those that put it on, Revel. 19.8. The fine Linen are the righteousnesses (in
the Plural (...)) of Saints: he means, as the righteousness of him who is the
Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. adorns us in the sight of God, and answers
divine Justice, Gal. 3.10, 1^. so does the Righteousness of Sanctification
adorn us in the sight of God. Romans 4.1.2. and of men. Moses his mouth is full
of wormwood, the beginning of salvation is that that thou believe, for that a
new life ought to follow that belongs not to satisfaction but to obedience.
Luth. Tom. 4.198.

As there is a twofold righteousness, so there is a twofold acception of
justification. 1 For an absolution in judgment in opposition to condemnation,
Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both are alike abomination in the sight of God. Matthew. 12.37. By thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned; so
that by considering what condemnation is, we may know what justification is.
Condemnation is the sentence of a righteous Judge adjudging a malefactor to
death for some capital crime whereof he is found guilty in judgment?
Absolution is the sentence of a righteous Judge acquitting an innocent person,
his righteousness appearing in judgment. Thus we are justified by Christ's
righteousness, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect, or frame an indictment against them? the word is (...), seeing it is God
that justifies, who shall condemn? Its Christ that dyed, yea rather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God. As if he should say, through
Christ his dying and rising, we are acquitted from all guilt and punishment, we
believing on him.

2 Justification is taken for the infusion of habitual righteousness, whereby
there is not only a throwing down of the reign of sin in the soul, but there
is also a setting up of a new frame of grace in the purpose and intentions of
the heart. Dan. 12.3. They that justify many shall shine as the stars, as
Junius reads it, they that turn many to righteousness. This is nothing else but
sanctification, if we take the word in a grammatical sense of justus and facio.
Seldom is the word thus taken, and when it is so taken, it does not always
signify an habitual effect in the subject of that quantity or quality the
epithet denotes, with the driving away of the contrary, as in glorify,
magnify, sanctify, etc. we glorify and sanctify God, not by making him of
vile and profane to become glorious and holy, but by declaring him to be such.
Mary magnifies the Lord, not by making him of little, to become great, but by
declaring him to be great. The Peripatetics say, that by doing just and
temperate things we are made just and temperate, but its not so, for being
made just and temperate, we do just and temperate things. Luth. Tom. 2 lat.

Now the justification in the Court of heaven whereby we stand righteous must
be a righteousness whereby we stand perfect in all parts and degrees. This is
twofold.

1 The Righteousness of the law, so if we perfectly fulfill the Law in every
point we are saved from hell by it. Romans 10.5. Moses describes the
righteousness of the Law, that the man that does these things shall live by
them, and live in them. Gal. 3.12. Contrarily fail in one point and be under
the curse. Gal. 3.10. cursed is every one that continues not in all things
that are written, in the law to do them. A sinner is not justified, unless he
be condemned, viz. by the Law, he is not quickened unless he be slain, he does
not ascend to heaven unless he descend into hell. Luth. Tom. 2.57. Thus no man
was ever justified, save Adam in his state of innocence, and Jesus Christ, and
the Angels.

By this righteousness no man living is justified, Job. 9.20. If I justify
myself my own mouth shall condemn me; If I say I am perfect, it shall also
prove me perverse. Also v. 30.31. If I wash my self with snow water, and make
my hands never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and my own
clothes shall abhor me. The meaning is, if I were the purest man alive, and God
should call me to his tribunal; I must needs condemn my self, and whatsoever is
near unto me would condemn me. Psalm 130.3. If thou Lord should be exeream
to mark what is done a miss, who might stand? Psalm 143.2. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no flesh living be
justified. We are not able to fulfill one branch of any command by reason of
indwelling corruption, so that I appeal to the conscience of any man, whether
in the perfectest action that ever he did, he durst stand to Gods severe trial
thereof) much less are we able to fulfill the whole law, and therefore cannot
hope for righteousness by it, as the Prophet says in another case, Esa. 28.20.
The bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, and the covering
narrower then that he can wrap himself in it. So say I of man's righteousness,
We cannot fulfill the whole law, and therefore cannot hope for righteousness
from it. The Law requires a twofold righteousness.

1 Habitual, in the inherent holiness of a man's whole person.

2 Actual, in the exercise of all good works enjoined by the Law and Gospel,
and forbearance of the contrary evil works, both in the thoughts of the heart,
words of the mouth, and actions of the whole life; so that every man in the
world incurs damnation by his deeds, and therefore cannot remain justified by
his habits. Nay, he is more guilty that having an habit of inherent
righteousness, produces acts of unrighteousness, as we see in the fallen Angels
and Adam. What man is there can perform these two commands, to love God with
all the heart, and not to covet?

Yea, look upon man in a state of regeneration, we shall see weakness in his
faith. Mark 9.24. sinkings in his hope. Psalm 43.5. Why art thou cast down, O
my soul. Esa. 64.6. The Prophet doubts not to pronounce of all our
righteousnesses which were inherent in our persons, compared with the
righteousness of God and his law, they were as filthy rags.

Obj. If our best performances be stained, Esa 64.6. Why should we perform any
good work?

Answ. Though they be stained there is some good in them; there is gold in the
oar. There is so much good that God pardons the ill and accepts the good: a
sick man must eat to strengthen nature, though much of what he eats turns to
putrefaction.

This righteousness of works cannot justify us;

1 Because its not so large as the Law of God, so that he that has the
greatest measure of it has much indwelling corruption.

2 Saints ascribe all to the mercy of God in Christ, Romans 5.9. Being justified
by his blood we shall be saved from wrath. See, we are not justified by
inherent holiness but by his blood. Inherent righteousness is not a cause of
our sonship, but only a consequent of it. Gal. 4.6. he says not, ye are
received for sons, because the spirit has stamped upon you inherent holiness,
but, because by and in Christ ye are received for sons, ye are endued with the
spirit and graces thereof.

3 No man in pangs of conscience and agony of death can trust to his own
righteousness, Psalm 130.3, 4.

4 Because the law promises life upon an impossible condition, Romans 10.5. and
so leaves the conscience doubtful and trembling.

2 The second righteousness whereby persons stand righteous, is the
righteousness of Christ, which is, when God declares men who are wicked and
sinners by nature, but by grace true believers, to be freed and absolved from
eternal death, and to have right to eternal life for the righteousness of
Christ, Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 These. 5.9. When that merciful father did see us
to be oppressed with the curse of the Law, he sent his son into the world, and
cast upon him all the sins of all (he means the elect) saying, Be thou Peter
that denier, Paul that persecutor, David that adulterer, that sinner that are
the apple in Paradise, that thief on the cross. Luth. Tom. 4.94. Let the Law
rule over the Flesh and the Promise sweetly reign in the conscience.

Now concerning Justification, consider,

1 The efficient cause, 1 Generally, the whole Trinity. Romans 3.30. It is one
God who shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision
through Faith. Romans 4.5. To him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly his Faith is counted for Righteousness.

In particular the Father justifies us pronunciatively, because we have
imputative Righteousness, and his Justice is thereby satisfied; for a sinner is
not just before God because he is justified, but he is therefore justified
because he is some way or other just, for upon the creatures righteousness the
act of God in Justification proceeds. For upon the beholding of a righteousness
for us the Father justifies us pronunciatively, the Son justifies us
meritoriously, being made unto us of God righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 5.2.

The Spirit justifies us by applying unto us Christ's satisfaction, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

2 The material cause of our Justification was the Blood and Death of Christ.
Matthew. 20.28. He gave his Life a Ransom for many. Luke 22.20. This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood. Acts 2.28. The whole Church is said to be purchased
with the Blood of Christ. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be the
Propitiation for our sins, through Faith in his Blood. When we teach we do no
other thing than that we scatter and divide the virtue of Christ's Blood among
the People. Luth. in Genesis 49. Col. 1.14, 20. In whom we have Redemption through
his Blood, and having made peace by the Blood of his Cross. Also, v. 22. You
that were Enemies has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death.
Heb. 9.12. speaking of the Levitical Priests he says, They entered into the
holy place by the blood of goats, but Christ entered into Heaven by his own
blood, having obtained eternal Redemption for us: yea this bloodshed and Death
of Christ did not only ransom us from wrath, Romans 5.9. and purchase
forgiveness of sins for us, Romans 3.25. but also the same Death purchases Heaven
for us, Heb. 9.15. He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by the means
of Death they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. Heb. 10.19. Having, Brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest
by the Blood of Jesus, that is, into Heaven it self. Contrary to those mistaken
dictates, to wit, that Christ his obedience to the Law purchased Heaven for us
and that his Death and Sufferings only ransomed us from Hell.

2 The Apostle says, There can be no forgiveness without shedding of Blood,
Heb. 9.22. Things figuratively holy were cleansed with the blood of beasts,
then things truly holy must be cleansed with better blood.

Again, Heb. 9.25, 26. Once in the end of the world has he appeared to put
away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. Also Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered
to bear the sins of many. When he came to die he took on him the sins of many,
that is, of all the elect. See also Heb. 10.5. A body have thou prepared me. v.
10. By which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Christ
once for all. Also v. 12. This man after he had offered one sacrifice (both in
kind and number) for sin, sat down on the right hand of God. Also v. 14. the
Apostle gives a Reason why he has no more offering to make, nor no more
suffering to endure, nor needs no repetition of what is done, because with one
offering he has perfected for ever sanctified persons. Also v. 19. he shows
the price of this purchase to be the Blood of Jesus, having boldness to enter
into the holiest by the Blood of Jesus, called also the veil of his flesh, v.
20. Also Heb. 13.20. Through the Blood of the eternal Covenant we are made
perfect. Christ has redeemed us that have been baptized from the most grievous
sins which we have done, by his being crucified upon the Cross, and by the
purification of water. Justin. cont. Triph. 246. he names this purifying as the
outward sign, for page 177. he says out of Esaias, Wash ye, etc. He does not
send us into a Bath to wash away our sins, which all the water of the Sea
cannot, but he shows this wholesome washing will follow them that repent, that
they shall not be washed in the blood of Goats and Sheep but by faith, by the
Blood of Christ and his Death.

Gal. ^.13. The Apostle shows the manner how we are delivered from the curse of
the Law, Even by Christ's hanging on a Tree, and being made a curse for us.

Ephesians. 2.16. Christ reconciles Jews and Gentiles unto God in one body, by the
Cross.

1 Peter 1.18. We are not redeemed with corruptible things, but with the
precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without spot.

1 Peter 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree.

1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin.

Revel. 1.5. Has loved us and washed us from our sins in his own Blood.

Revel. 5.9. Speaking of Christ he says, Thou wast slain and have redeemed us
to God by thy Blood, out of every kindred and tongue.

Revel. 7.14. John showing how the Martyrs came to be arrayed in white Robes,
tells us, it was by washing their Robes, and making them white in the Blood of
the Lamb. One drop of whose Blood was more precious than the whole creature.
Luth. Tom. 4.

What means then that new opinion, that part of the satisfaction is given by
the obedience of Christ, in fulfilling the Law.

Object. Romans 5.18. By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

Answ. The Apostle means not the obedience of Christ to the Law, but the
suffering of Christ, whereby he became obedient to the death of the cross,
Phil. 2.9.

Obj. Christ is made unto us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and we are made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Answ. The Scripture places our righteousness in the death of Christ, for the
righteousness a Christian has, is forgiveness and covering of sins, Romans 4.7,
8.

Quest. But what use is there of the active obedience of Christ to our
redemption?

Answ. Had he not been holy, harmless and undefiled, he could not have been a
fitting Mediator, Heb. 7.25.

2 To be a pattern for us how to walk, 1 John 2.6. we must walk as he walked,
with an as of similitude, though not of equality.

3 The humane nature of Christ is a creature, for Christ is perfect man, hence
as he was man he owed perfect obedience to the Law, Gal. 4.4.

Quest. If the death of Christ be the material cause of our justification, why
is it called by the name of righteousness?

Answ. Because it is equivalent to righteousness, for it is all one to the
Lawgiver, if his Law be observed or the penalty for the breach of it suffered;
now the penalty was death by the consent of the Lawgiver, either eternal death
of us, or temporal death of our surety, now our sin being condemned in the
flesh of Christ, Romans 8.3. the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, v.
4, 5.

2 Where the nature of a thing is, there the name of it may well be, but in
Christ's satisfactory death, there is the nature of righteousness, to wit, a
taking away of guilt and filth. For herein believers iniquities are forgiven,
and sin covered, Romans 4.7, 8. therefore the name of righteousness may be well
given hereto.

To conclude, there is an infinite righteousness in Christ, of which we are not
capable, and there is an inherent personal righteousness to qualify him for a
fit Mediator, Heb. 7.25. and there is a righteousness of satisfaction, this
righteousness consists in forgiveness of sins, Col. 1.14.

Obj. But Christ suffered many other sufferings besides death, inward in his
soul as desertion, sense of wrath, outward in his body as nailing, whipping,
mocking, therefore the death of Christ alone was not the sole price.

Answ. I suppose the death of Christ does comprehend the sufferings of Christ,
which were in and about his death, which, in regard of pain and anguish and
propinquity unto his death were as parts of the whole. Such was Christ's
heaviness, Matthew. 26.37. his agony and drops of sweat like blood, Luke 22.44.

For those other sufferings Christ endured in the course of his life, as
hunger, thirst, flight, fasting, etc. these were not satisfactions to Gods
justice for man's sin, but only paterns of patience.

1 Because the Scripture affixes our justification and reconciliation, not to
his sufferings in general, but to his suffering of death in special, Heb. 2.9.
never mentioning his foregoing sufferings of hunger, thirst, etc. in point of
justification.

If the other sufferings of Christ be part of the satisfaction, why does the
Apostle still insist on the price of his death and on no other thing, and limit
the satisfaction to his sufferings then not mentioning any other?

2 Suppose it were granted that all the sufferings of Christ should concur in
point of satisfaction, which I suppose is difficult if at all possible to
prove, yet it follows not that because all his sufferings through the course of
his life, as well as those in death, did concur in point of satisfaction,
therefore his observation and fulfilling of the Law should also concur as a
part of that price.

Obj. But is it not dangerous to leave out Christ his fullfilling of the Law?
And is it not safe to join it to Christ his death?

Answ. It Is dangerous to add any thing, when the Scripture fixes the
Redemption on the death and sufferings of Christ in and about death. He gave
his own son the price of redemption for us, the holy for them who had
transgressed the Law, the just for the unjust; for what other thing could cover
our sins then his righteousness? In whom other can we unjust and wicked men be
counted just, then in the alone Son of God? O sweet change! that the iniquity
of many should be hid in one righteous, but that the righteousness of one
should cause that many unjust should be counted righteous. Justin Mart. ad
Diognetum p. 386. The conscience may as well scruple, what if I add? as what if
I leave out? for additions are dangerous in this case, especially where the
Scripture speaks so plainly and positively, Gal. 5.4.

3 The third cause of our justification is the formal cause, whereby Christ his
satisfaction and merit is imputed to us as our sin is imputed to him, Isai.
53.6. Romans 8.3, 4. 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ being our surety, Heb. 7.22. and paying
our debt, he rose out of the prison of the grave and manifested his discharge
thereof, Acts 2.22. So that as on the cross Christ blotted out the handwriting
of ordinances, and took them out of the way, and nailed them to his cross, Col.
2. so does the Lord behold the travel of his soul, and rests satisfied
therewith, Isai 53.11.

4 The final cause of a souls justification in respect of God, it was the
declaration of his severe justice against sin, that though in himself he could,
yet he decreed that he would not pass by sin without satisfaction, Romans 3.25,
26. to declare his righteousness that he might be just and the justifier of him
that believes on Jesus. There are many other ends as for the showing forth his
free grace to a sinner, which I shall pass by.

Obj. But how are we said to be justified by God and Christ, seeing the
Scripture says we are justified by faith? Romans 3.28.

Answ. The Lord justifies judicially, as a Judge justifies an innocent person,
or a person, when sued for debt, the payment of the debt appearing.

2 Christ justifies meritoriously, Acts 13.39. Heb. 9.26.

Faith justifies instrumentally, 1 Not professional faith, for then all
hypocrites should be justified; against whom James disputes, Jam. 2.24. 2 Nor
does the (...) credere, the act of believing justify us, as if that were
imputed unto us for righteousness, not for its own merit but for Gods
favorable acceptance, as if God did accept the act of believing, for the
perfect obedience of the Law, as some have held.


The act of believing does not justify,

1 Because no man is saved and justified by an act of his own, Tit. 3.6, 7. Not
by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us. Being justified by his grace, Ephesians. 2.9. not of works. Now to believe
is an act of our own, taking denomination from the next agent.

2 From absurdity; then we should be justified by two righteousnesses, to wit,
the righteousness of Christ and the righteousness of faith; if one be
sufficient what needs another? it tends to thrust Christ out and all his
merits. Faith justifies us objectively, as it terminates upon the redemption in
Christ, Joh. 3.14, 15. as it is the eye to look up to him, typified by the
brazen Serpent. Thou holds diverse sorts of seeds in thy hand, I ask not what
the seeds are with which they are joined, but what the virtue of every one of
them is? Here speak plainly, what faith alone does not, with what graces it is
conjoined, it takes hold of the promise; love and hope have other business,
Luth. in Genesis 15.

This righteousness is called the righteousness of God, because he ^ound it
out, the righteousness of Christ because Christ offers that which was
equivalent to righteousness, the righteousness of faith because faith is the
instrument by which we apprehend it. It Is called our righteousness, Jer. 23.6.
because it is given us of God to be ours by imputation on Gods part, by
acceptance on our part.

First Use for information.
1 For information, 1 See how thou becomes righteous, not by working but by
believing, Acts 13.38, 39. Romans 3 22. Gal. 2.16. Romans 4.4, 5. A man may work
long enough, and yet in fine work himself into hell, if he have not faith in
Christ. Paul had a righteousness even to blamelesness, Phil. 3.6. before
conversion, after conversion he disclaims it, v. 7. The Law of works says, Do
what I command; the Law of faith, Give what thou commands. August. The commands
are sweet when we understand them, not only in books but in the wounds of a
most sweet Savior. Luth. Tom. 1. ad Stanpic. If a good life have not been led,
do not therefore despair; if a good life have been led, do not therefore hope;
that is, as to justification.

2 See the danger of thousands of ignorant persons, who, if you ask them how
they hope to be saved, they will tell you by their good prayers, and well
meanings, and because they deal justly. Many fast, pray, deny themselves,
mourn, deal justly, that God may speak peace to their spirits; this is the
righteousness of the Law, this is a working for life not from life, so they
refrain from evil that they may not be under the curse. In order to
satisfaction of Divine justice there must be a full righteousness, of an
infinite person, these two things must be, because an infinite Majesty is
offended, this can be no other then the righteousness of God in Christ.

Obj. But though the works we do in our natural state do not make us righteous,
yet the works of our regenerate estate do, for they are the works of Christ
which he works in us by his Word and Spirit.

Answ. The personal works of Christ in making atonement for our sins justify
us, 1 Pet. 2.24. but for his other virtual works they do not justify us.

2 The works of regenerate men are so wrought by Christ that they are also
wrought by us, Romans 8.13. If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit,
ye shall live. Hence because of our imperfection they cannot be perfect.

3 Regenerate men in their best actions stand need of sparing. When Nehemiah
had desired the Lord to remember his kindnesses he had done for the house of
the Lord, and the offices thereof, Neh. 13.14. and for the consecration of the
Sabbath, he concludes, Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare
me according to the multitude of thy mercy. See, he begs sparing from God in
his best services. Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy Servant. The
very servants of God cannot stand in judgment by their own righteousness.

4 Paul after conversion desires to be found, Having Christ's righteousness upon
him and not his own at the day of judgment, Phil. 3.9.

The dangers of those who seek to be righteous by their own righteousness, are,

1 So long as thou stablishes thy own righteousness thou will not submit to
Christ's righteousness, Romans 10.3, 4. They being ignorant of Gods righteousness,
and going about to stablish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. In the world the Law and works are so
to be urged, as if there were no promise, but Christians are so to be taught to
live, as if there were no Law. Luth. By grace we are made heirs: the works
which follow do not make us heirs or sons, but are done of heirs and sons to
testify thanksgiving and obedience. Luth. in Psalm. 130. A person will not seek
out for a Phisician till he feel himself sick, Matthew. 9.13. If thou put thy
deliverance from sin and wrath upon the performance of that righteousness the
Law commands as any cause thereof, thou makes thine own righteousness as great
an idol as can be, because thou makes thy righteousness to be that which Gods
righteousness only is, and as thy righteousness will speak thou will have
peace or bitterness, this is in effect to make our own righteousness our
Mediator.

Suppose your righteousness were a fullfilling of the whole Law, one point
excepted, that very failing makes you guilty of the breach of all the rest, and
when men stand guilty before God. Jam. 2.10.11. shall they plead that which is
guilty to find acceptance? In the business of justification no man can enough
remove the Law out of his sight and behold the promise alone, Luth. Tom. 4.103.
Bernard and other Doctors when they are out of disputation, teach Christ
purely, but when they go into the field of the Law, they so dispute as if there
were no Christ at all. Luth. in Psalm 130.

The best righteousness we ever performed is not able as a deserving cause to
turn away the least sin or wrath, or to procure the least favor from God, Genesis
32.10. I am less then the least of thy mercies, said Jacob, only God having
promised these mercies of his free grace, we are in the use of means to seek,
hope for, and expect a conveyance of them.

Quest. But does not our righteousness move and melt the Lord, and prevail with
him to do this or that good for his people?

Answ. No, It was not Hezekiahs prayers and tears, Cornelius his prayers and
alms, Daniel his prayer and fasting, Dan. 9.17. That melted and moved God, but
his own son, hence Daniel prays; Cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary
which is desolate for the Lords sake, verse. 17.

Obj. But if we get nothing by our righteousness then we had as good sit still
and do nothing.

Answ. I overthrow it only in point of satisfaction to divine justice, and in
point of merit. If works alone be taught, as it happens in the Papacy, faith is
lost, if faith alone be taught, presently carnal men dream works are not
necessary without the cause of justification. No man can enough commend good
works. Who can enough declare the profit of one good work which a Christian
does from and in faith? It Is more precious then heaven and earth, therefore the
whole world in this life cannot give a worthy reward for such a good work.
Luth. Tom. 4. fol. 109. But for righteousness, as it is one with uprighness, I
establish it. Psalm 32.11. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, and shout for joy
all ye that are upright in heart. See whom he calls righteous, even them whom
he calls upright. Psalm 125.4. Do good to them that are good, who are they?
even them who are upright in heart, yea further God will crown the
righteousness of his servants. 2 Timothy 4.8. henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, and not to me only but to them also who love his
appearing, yea the righteous shall shine in the Kingdom of their father; Matthew.
13.43. And God has a special eye of providence over such, 1 Pet. 3.12. The
eyes of the Lord are over the righteous and his ear is open to their cry. See
Gods care of righteous Noah, Genesis 6.8, 9. and of Lot. 2 Pet. 7.8, 9.

2 Moreover we ought to look upon our performances of prayer, fasting,
baptism, supper, etc. as the ordinances of God wherein the Lord has appointed
us to meet with him, and wherein he will make good the things he has promised
therein. Esa 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness.
He comes with his handful and poures out that which his own freeness has
engaged him to do for us. Good works are no other thing then thanksgiving; they
are not done for righteousness but for witness, they please not God simply for
themselves but for the person believing. Luth. We do confess our sins to him,
but what is the ground of forgiveness? not our confessions, prayers or tears,
but his own free grace, because he delights in mercy, Mic. 7.19.

3 It Is base selfishness when thou will do no righteousness but for thy own
sake, who if thou should know before hand thy righteousness would get thee
nothing, would sit still and do nothing: quere, whether such a man had not
indeed as good sit still and do nothing.

4 Righteousness of sanctification and uprightness is evidential in point of
assurance; 2 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.

5 To testify our thankfulness. Romans 12.1.

2 Danger by establishing thy own righteousness; thou unthrones Christ of the
principal part of his Office, which is to be the righteousness of his people,
Jer. 23.6. Romans 5.17, 18. By the obedience of one shall many be placed
righteous.
Its Christ's Office to place persons at his Judgment seat righteous, hence
some read it, constituentur. This mystery was shadowed, Exodus 25.17, 18, 19.
The Law or Testimony was to be put in the Ark, and the Mercy-seat was to be set
upon the Ark, v. 21. Christ is this Propitiatory or Mercy-seat. Rom 3.25. 1
John 2.2. Let us not take the Law out of the Ark as our righteousness, but cast
our eye upon the Mercy-seat, which covers the Ark and Testimony.

2 Use. Consolation to the Saints, that, though made infamous by the world, God
counts them righteous: our Principal comfort is, that Christ takes away our
filthy garments, and gives us the righteousness of his Son, Zach. 3.4. That all
accusations that Satan can put in against thee are non-suted, Romans 8.33. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? When God would comfort his
people, wherewith does he comfort them? he tells them their iniquities are
pardoned. Esa. 40.22.

Obj. But my Sins are many, my guilts heinous, how can I take comfort?

Answ. 1 God was in Christ Reconciling the world unto himself; not imputing
their trespasses unto them, and delivered from the curse all that believe on
him. John 3.36. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

2 We must look on Christ's death as able to drown Mountains as Mole-hills. All
the fiery stingings, how great soever, were taken away when they looked on the
Brazen Serpent, John 3.14, 15. God did not only save just Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, but unrighteous Thamar, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, that no man should presume
of his righteousness or wisdom, nor that any man should be discouraged because
of his sins. Luth. in Genesis 38.

3 The Fountain of Christ's Blood is set open for all bleeding and believing
souls, Zach. 12.10. compared with cap. 13.1. In that day they believe and
repent the Fountain is open.

4 All hand-writings of Ordinances of what kind soever, that might testify a
believers guilt, is taken away as to the accusatory and damnatory power
thereof. Col. 2.14. If the Jews rejoiced at the revoking Ahazuerus sentence,
let us much more at this.

5 All the power of Hell is led in triumph by Christ to the faith of the
believer, Col. 2.15. Having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show
of them openly, ( viz. to the faith of the believer) triumphing over them on
the Cross.

6 In his Redemption. Christ had in his eye all the sins that should fall out
to the end of the world, and he paid not only for sins that were at present,
but for those which should come after, though one sin be committed to day,
another to morrow, and another the third day, yet the travel of Christ's soul
gave the Father full satisfaction, Isai 53.11.

Object. Could I believe or repent I could take comfort, but, alas! I cannot,
says many a poor soul.

Answ. All the promises of remission of sins are belonging, and so consequently
to be tendered unto those who believe and repent, not to believing without
repenting, nor to repenting without believing. Luke 24.47. Mark 1.15. Acts
20.21. Paul preached Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, but the promises are to be tendered to both together. Thus we comfort
the afflicted Brother. It Is impossible thou should be so righteous in this
life that thou should feel no sin, and that thy body should be clear without
spots as the Sun, but thou have yet spots are in thee, yet art thou holy, but
thou say, How can I be holy, seeing I have and feel sin? That thou feel
sin and acknowledges it, give thanks to God, despair not. It Is a step to health
when the sick person acknowledges his Disease. But how shall I be delivered
from my sin? run to Christ the Physician who heals the broken in heart, thy
reason being sacrificed believe in him. Luth. Tom. 4.76.

2 Mourning under unbelief, and impenitency, and hardness of heart does usually
argue there is some measure of these graces in thy soul: for whence could a
soul mourn for the want of these graces, but because it has some measure of
these already? those that mourn under wants and hunger and thirst for supplies,
are under the promise of blessedness. John 7.37. If any man thirst let him come
unto me and drink.

2 Every thirsting soul is invited to Christ, Revel. 22.17. Let him that is a
thirst come, and whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of life
freely.

3 Cast thy thy self upon Christ, resolving if thou perishest thou will perish
in his arms. Job 13.15.

2 Use. Righteous persons may draw comfort from the righteousness of
uprightness, though not by way of satisfaction, yet by way of evidence. 1 Chronicles. 29.9. The People rejoiced because they offered willingly, because with
perfect heart they offered willingly. 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is the
testimony of our conscience. Doing judgment is accompanied with joy, Prove.
21.15. Men persecute for righteousness, Matthew. 5.10. Devils rage at it, but
Saints must walk in it, Luke 1.75. Those Heb. 11. first wrought Righteousness,
then obtained promises, v. 35.

In the name of a righteous man] Not because he is a kinsman or friend, or
because we hope to receive like for like, or shall get some gain thereby, or
ingratiate our self thereby unto some men we would be in favor with, but as
before he had spoken, because he was a Prophet, so here because he is a
righteous man, Gal. 6.10. We should principally look to the moving cause that
moves us to do good to Gods Saints, even because we see Christ in them, though
all other considerations were taken away, as of neighborhood, meekness, love
to us.

Shall receive a righteous man's Reward] That is, they shall not only receive
the examples of those holy men they receive, and their edifying speeches,
usually holy, either for matter or manner of speaking, and sometimes their
powerful prayers for them, but they shall also receive the same reward of
eternal glory which the righteous man himself shall receive, for the just shall
live by faith. Heb. 2.4.

V. 42. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup
of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily, I say unto you, he
shall in no wise lose his Reward.

Here Is a third ground against fear of not being received, which the Disciples
and other Christians might expect for the cause of Christ, to wit, that the
smallest kindness done to any of Christ's little ones shall not go without a
reward.

Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold
water] That is, being able to give no more, for if we can give a cup of wine,
and shall put the matter off with a cup of water, Christ will think this but
cold entertainment. The meanness of the benefit shall not make the kindness
less respected with Christ: 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind it
is accepted according to that a man has. He names cold water, as Augustine
supposes, lest any man should excuse himself that he wanted fire, or a vessel
to heat it. By little ones Christ means those who are base and vile in their
own eyes from the sense of their Infirmities, and despised by the proud men of
the world. Against offending and despising these little ones Christ warns,
Matthew. 18.6. 1 Saying, It were better a man had a Millstone hanged about his
neck and he be cast into the Sea, as the Jews were wont to punish some
Malefactors, than offend such little ones.

2 The Angels of these little ones do always behold the face of God, therefore
take heed how ye despise them. God dignifies them with attendance of Angels,
therefore do not ye despise them. If not despise them then must you receive
them, and relieve them, even those who are the meanest members of his body.
Even as Rebecca when she entertained Eleazar, Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.17. and
gave him water, obtained a great reward, so shall those who receive the little
ones of Christ, and give a cup of water to them.

In the name of a Disciple] That is, because he is my Disciple, and cleaves to
my Doctrine, because he believes in me, and belongs to Christ, as Mark has it,
cap. 9.41. This looking at Christ in the intention of the giver does prove the
rectitude and luster of the action, it nobilitates and commends it, so that
it is done to Christ which is bestowed on a Christian, and so Christ interprets
it Mat. 25.40. If you do it upon other account, as because he is your Tenant,
Servant, Kinsman, Friend, though it may be an act of natural mercy, yet does
not Christ esteem it as a kindness done to him. In all our hospitality in
general, and for this in special ought we to eye Christ. Learn we then that our
deeds are esteemed of God according to our mind and intention, provided the
mind of the Intender be enlightened in his duty.

Verily, I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his Reward] The world will
hardly believe that the meanest service done to Christ his Disciples will be
acknowledged, according to the intention and ability of the giver, and that
such action of so small valuation shall be rewarded; hence Christ confirms it
with an Asseveration, Verily, I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his
Reward. Yet shall he not have such a Reward herein as if the same were done to
a Prophet. God has rewards affixt to all the services done for him, but to
some greater than other, yet not by way of merit but of free grace, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.8. Every man shall receive a reward according to his
own labor, which reward flows not from any compact or from any commensuration,
but from Gods free grace. Reward does not always presuppose Merit as its
correlate, but only labor or some preceding action. Sometimes the reward is
inferior to the work, as when a man works hard for a covetous person who
rewards slenderly, sometimes the reward is as much as the work, this reward
presupposes merit, sometimes the reward is far greater then the work, as for a
Prince for an hours service to give a man 10000 pound a year, such is all our
obedience in respect of that superabundant weight of glory. Hence this reward
is called (...), a free gift, Romans 6.23. because all our works, how great
soever, have no commensurate or proportionable value being compared with the
reward. Hence the reward of glory is called an inheritance, which does not
presuppose any desert. The Apostle saying, The wages of sin is death, does not
say eternal life is the wages of holiness, but calls it the gift of God, Romans
6.23.

Observe these things, 1 The meanest service done to the meanest of the
servants of Christ shall be acknowledged by Christ, Matthew. 25.36. Even Goats
hair was not rejected when brought to the Sanctuary.

2 There is a free gracious reward that God has in store to distribute to them
that receive persons because they belong to Christ.

3 The Lord in the actions of Christians looks much upon the sincerity of their
actings, Zach. 7.5. To whom did ye fast, did ye fast to me? God not only looks
upon the sincerity of a King, as Hezekiah, Isai. 38.3, 5. but also of a poor
servant, Col. 3.22, 23. q. d. Deceitful servants have a double heart, sincere
servants have a single heart.

Reas. 1 Because what is done in sincerity is done to God. Zach. 7.5. This was
Hezekiah's end, Isai. 38.3. Rev. 2.13. If I might have my wish I would choose
the basest work of a servant-maid, before all the victories and triumphs of
Alexander and Caesar. Why? Because here is God, there is the devil; the matter
of the work is the same, but the kind and difference infinitely diverse. Luth.
in Genesis 29. He means it of works done in sincerity.

2 Because sincere persons in what they do, endeavor to approve themselves to
Christ. 2 Cor. 2.17. We are not of them who huxter the word of God, but as of
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ. 2 Cor. 4.2.
commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. 2 These.
2.4. So we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, which tries our hearts.

3 That so he may either condemn or crown the action; condemn it, if it shall
only have a pretense, as in Jehu's destruction of Baal, who did it not out of
hatred of idolatry, but to get a Kingdom, See Hos. 1.4 Hence Jehu is charged
with murder. I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, or
crown it when it is done in sincerity, as in Cornelius prayers and alms, Acts
10.2.

Use. Information, what kind of services we must bring unto the Lord, even
such as are sincere. Imitate Nathaniel to be Israelites without guile, Joh.
1.47. If we pretend love to the Lord, let it be in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.22. if
we feed the flock of God, let it be out of love, Joh. 21.15. if we preach or
take the oversight of a flock, let it be willingly, 1 Cor. 9.17. 1 Pet. 5.2.
Think not any thing well done wherein thou can not appeal to God in the doing
thereof: when we come to die those things will comfort us most wherein we have
had most respect to God and least to men. It Is not the greatness of services we
do, but the truth that God accepts, where there is sincerity, though there may
be diverse failings, God knows how to overlook them. See 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19,
20. and Asa, 2 Kings 14.15.

2 Exhort. 1 To strive to be sincere in what thou do.

1 The most glorious actions thou can do are abominable without it. Isai.
66.3. He that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck, why? Because
not done to God. Matthew. 23.29. Christ pronounces a woe on those who builded the
tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the sepulchers of the righteous, why?
Because they did not do it out of love to holiness, to keep the memory of holy
men alive, but to cover their malice against Christ, 2 Cor. 10.18.

2 Sincerity differences the actions of one man from another. Sundry gross
hypocrites have done actions outwardly glorious, as Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
Jehu, 2 Kings 10.28, 29, 31. Those who preached Christ out of envy, Phil. 1.16.
Cain sacrificed as well as Abel. Ezekiels worldly hearers came to hear as well
as others, Ezekiel. 33.31.

3 The conscience is not satisfied in any services save those which are done in
sincerity. Now every man ought to please his conscience; so did Paul in his
preaching, Gal. 1.10. Hence he had comfort, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is the
testimony of our conscience.

4 God is of a spiritual nature, hence we had need look our actings be sincere.
Job. 10.4. Have thou carnal eyes as man, or see thou as man sees? Had we men
only to look upon us we might trifle as we would, but we cannot beguile God,
Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open before the eyes of him with whom we
have to do: man looks upon the appearance, God upon the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7.
Romans 1.9. Paul served God in his spirit. Joh. 4.23, 24. They that serve him
must serve him in spirit and truth: those that are built up a spiritual house
must offer spiritual sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5.

5 There shall be a general discovery of the secrets of all hearts, Luke 12.
take heed of hypocrisy, why? For there is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed, nor hid that shall not be known. The very counsels of the hearts
shall be opened. 1 Cor. 4.5. Eccl. 12.14.

6 The comfort of sincerity at all times, especially in an evil day: at all
times sincerity comforts, when enemies accuse, Psalm. 139.1. The widow had more
comfort in giving her two mites then all they that had given large gifts. One
shilling given sincerely is more comfortable then pounds given vain-gloriously,
Luke 1.75. Especially this comforts in an evil time, Isai. 38.3. Psalm. 112.4,
7, 8. In that time conscience will not so much ask what you have done, as to
whom you have done it. In that day those things wherein we have had most
respect unto God and least unto men will bring most comfort. Hezekiah had done
much for God, but his chief comfort was not, the things done, as the manner of
doing them. Many have received righteous men, but they will have comfort that
have received righteous men as such.

7 Sincerity gives a luster and beauty to the services we do, Luke 1.6. Zachary
and Elizabeth are said to be righteous before God. Paul praises the graces of
the Thessalonians that they were in the sight of God and our father, 1 These.
1.3. Hezekiah is commended that he turned his face to the wall and wept, Isai
38.2. Hence all the duties of worship are required to be in sincerity, as
prayer, Psalm. 145.18. hearing, 1 Pet. 1.2. receiving, 1 Cor. 5.8. yea all our
service in holiness and righteousness must be before him, Luke 1.75. So that as
the varnish gives a luster to the picture, the diamond to the ring, so does
sincerity to our actions. As hypocrisy stains all a man's actions, as the
burning of his body, the parting with all his goods to the poor, so sincerity
adorns them, a Ministers preaching, a Tradesmans dealing, a Magistrates
governing, a Servants working.

8 There Is nothing will carry us through variety of temptations but sincerity,
so that sooner or later we shall discover our selves if we be not sincere; as
Saul, Jehu, Judas, etc. 1 Timothy 5.52. They that are otherwise cannot be hid.

9 God takes pleasure and delight in the sincerity of his servants. Jer. 5.3.
Are not thine eyes upon the truth? Ps. 51.6. Thou desire truth in the inward
parts. Such are Gods delight, Prove. 11.20. Sincere men, whether present with
God or absent from him, labor to be accepted of him. 2 Cor. 5.9. If such souls
pray, God delights in their prayer, Prove. 15.8.

10 The Saints are wont to be jealous of the want of this grace above any
other. Psalm. 139.24. Try me and search me, O Lord, see if there be any way of
wickedness in me. Job 13.23. Make me to know my transgression and my sin.
Saints know the comfort of sincerity is great, the corruptions that hinder it
many, the trials and sufferings to preserve it not a few, hence are they so
jealous of themselves, hence the Disciples hearing that one of them should
betray Christ, all the eleven that were sincere suspected themselves, Master,
is it 1? The ground of this jealousy in sincere souls is, because they find
so much crookedness and falsehood in particular actions, hence they doubt lest
they should be unsound in the main, yea they know their comfort or misery does
in a great measure depend hereon.

11 No Preacher under heaven can speak comfort to a person in an evil day,
unless he be sincere. Job 33.23. The Interpreter one of a thousand declares
comfort unto a sick man, but how does he it? Even by declaring unto him his
uprightness. Afflicted souls send to Preachers in an evil day; we speak peace
to them, if they be upright, Prove. 2.7. He is a buckler to them that walk
uprightly, Prove. 10.9. He that walks uprightly walks surely.

12 All sincere souls and none else have cause to rejoice in God. Psalm. 97.11.
Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Yea all such
are bid to rejoice in God. Psalm. 32.11. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, and
shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. Though they have many
imperfections hanging upon them, and though their grace be sometimes like a
grain of Mustard seed, yet are they to rejoice. Many poor Christians are apt to
be discouraged by their failings, yet know that sincerity may stand with the
having many weaknesses, but not with the allowing, excusing, maintaining,
wilful winking, or denying of any. All sins which we acknowledge and defend
not are pardoned, but the sin which is defended is unpardonable. Luth. Tom. 3.
Lat. 104.

Others are discouraged because of their fruitlesness, let this humble thee,
not discourage thee. Because thou brings forth fruit only thirty fold, and not
sixty, charge thy self with weakness and negligence, not with hypocrisy.

Grounds why sincere souls have cause to rejoice in God.
1 Such have their sins pardoned, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord will not impute iniquity; but who is that? viz. in whose spirit there is
no guile, that is, no allowance of guile, or no reign of guile; for in the
holiest heart there is but too much guile. Isai. 63.8. Surely they are children
that would not lie, therefore was he their Savior.

2 The more the afflictions and disasters of such abound, the more in Gods time
shall comforts abound. Job 8.20. Behold, God will not cast off the perfect man.
Psalm. 97.11.112.4.

3 Such persons have the special presence of God determined unto them. Psalm.
11.7. His countenance does behold the upright. Psalm. 140.13. The upright shall
dwell in thy presence. Job 13.16. he also is my salvation; but an hypocrite
shall not come before him, that is, into Gods special presence, as I do and
other Saints.

4 God has special care to protect such in time of danger. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. The
eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, to show himself strong
in the behalf of those whose hearts are perfect with him. Isai. 33.15. He that
walks uprightly, his place of defense shall be the munition of rocks.

5 In the dispensation of rewards among professing people in this life, God
has special respect to those who are sincere. Psalm. 18.23, 24. I was upright
before him, therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my
righteousness. Look upon the Kings of Judah from David and so along whose
hearts were perfect with God, and see how God made their Kingdoms prosper,
witness Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, etc.

6 Sincere souls may be comforted against all disasters whatsoever. Art thou,
being sincere, reproached? Job being so, comforted himself, cap. 16.19. Behold
my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high. Job 23.10. He knows the
way that is with me, so the Margin. Joseph doubtless had comfort when his
Mistress slandered him. 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. When sundry at Corinth censured Paul,
says he, I regard not man's day, or man's judgment, I know nothing by my self.

So in time of sickness and death, great will the comfort of sincerity be.
Isai. 57.2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds each one
walking in his uprightness. Mark the perfect man the end of that man is peace,
Ps. 37.37. The having the loins girt about with truth is part of a Christians
armor in an evil day, Ephesians. 6.14. Job says, c. 27.5, 6. Till I dye I will not
let my integrity go from me, my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
It will be a matter of comfort in death to write down some of the great actions
or turnings of our lives wherein we have acted uprightly. Hypocrites in
prosperous times are very confident, but when an evil time comes their hope is
as the giving up of the Ghost; but sincere souls when God shall ask them, By
conscience love thou me? They can return this answer, Thou know all things
thou know that I love thee, John 21.15. It was a speech of a godly woman
when she came to die, that she had nothing to comfort her but poor sincerity:
her name was Mrs. Juxon.

Quest. But what is this sincerity which is so comfortable, and whereunto you
so exhort us?

Answ. It is, to do what we do, unto God, having a bent of heart to all Gods
commandments, with an earnest desire to avoid the contrary out of conscience
to God, and from faith and love. 1 Kings 9.4. If thou will walk before me, as
David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and uprightness, to do
according to all that I have commanded thee.

1 See, uprightness and integrity consists in having a bent to do all God
commands. The contrary is unsoundness. See Matthew. 19.21, 22. Col. 4.12. Perfect
and complete in all the will of God. q. d. where there is one the other will be.

2 It must be done unto God, or out of conscience to God, Isai 38.3. Noah was
perfect in his generations: how does that appear? Why? Noah walked with God,
Genesis 6.9. that is, in his actings he made himself present with God, and God
present with him, else to part with any thing, as with life and goods, to give
the body to be burned, and all a man's goods to the poor, and so consequently to
do any command (for these two are the hardest commands) would not argue
sincerity, unless what we do be done out of conscience to God.

3 It must be from faith and love.

3 Use. Trial. Try thy sincerity,

1 At whose eye do you look in all your services? Psalm 16.8. I have set the
Lord ever before me. Hypocrites in some particular actions may set God before
them, as Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. Those that killed the Apostles thought they did
God service in it, John 16.2. The Jews in opposing Christ's righteousness had
the zeal of God in it, that is, they looked at God in it, Romans 10.2. But sincere
persons have a desire to, and purpose for to set God ever before them, yea if
any by-ends come in they are troubled at it.

2 From whom do you expect a reward? hence a conscientious Preacher preaches
with all his strength though people be not gathered, Esa. 49.4, 5. Hence that
Servants may be sincere they are bid to expect their reward from God. Col.
3.23, 24. Why? for ye serve the Lord Christ. Hence a Christian does good to
unthankful, yea to enemies, Psalm 35.12, 13. Luke 6.35, 36. Hence a sincere
soul does duty when it has no reward with men, nay contrarily shame and blame.

3 The doing good and avoiding evil in secret. They do good in secret. Job.
31.18, 19. Esa. 38.3. Hypocrites will do good where there are many eyes to
behold them, Matthew, 6.2. Matthew. 23.5. but very seldom do they any good in
secret; but sincere souls do good in secret. Their alms, prayer and fasting,
they strive that it may be in secret. Matthew. 6.1, etc. So on the other side
they avoid evil in secret. Joseph durst not come near his Mistress, though none
but he and she were in the house. Job durst not lift up his hand against the
fatherless, though he saw his help in the gate, Job 31.21. He eschews hellish
thoughts, and groans under them, crying, Cleanse me, Lord, from secret sins
then shall I be upright, Psalm 19.12, 13. Contrarily hypocrites and wicked men
will venture to do evil in secret; all their care is to cover it from the eye
of man. Hence they stick not to plot mischief in secret. Psalm 64.2, 4. They
will slander in secret, Deuteronomy. 27.24. Moses calls it a smiting their neghbour
secretly. They do secretly accept persons, Job 13.10. In a word, its a shame to
speak of the things that are done of them in secret. Ephesians. 5.12. Yet may they
refrain from open and scandalous sins, and live and dye without any such,
though usually God leaves them to fall into some open sin, that so their name
may rot. Prove. 10.7.

4 The singling out God from all other objects, that come what will come they
will not leave the Lord. Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice in any
thing, save in the cross of Christ. Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? He means both active and passive love, which the Lord has to
us and we to the Lord. Hypocrites on the other side are double minded, their
hearts are divided betwixt God and some lust. James 1.8. A double minded man is
unstable in all his ways. Sometimes they are for God, sometimes for the world,
hence where any soul sincerely turns to God, he purifies himself from double
mindedness. James 4.8, 9.

5 Sensibleness of, and groaning under inward distempers, Romans 7.15, 23.
Troubled under hardness of heart, Isa. 63.17. Unbelief, Mark 9.23. Privy pride,
2 Cor. 12.7, 8. From a principle of tenderness of conscience they have received
and a blessed light God has set up in their hearts they are sensible of such
evils as the world counts nothing, yea they are more troubled for these then
wicked men are for gross evils; they complain of themselves for not striving
with God to keep off his judgments, for their close hypocrysie, heaviness in
the service of God, dullness. Isa. 64.7. There Is none that stirs up himself to
take hold of thee, A sincere soul, though he do duties outwardly plausible, yet
is he not contented unless he find his heart doing of them as well as his
outward man; so though his outward carriage be blameless, yet is he not
satisfied, if there be distempers of pride, revenge, earthliness, etc. within,
till he have in some good measure prayed down these distempers, Psalm 19.12.
saying, Cleanse me Lord from my secret sins.

Contrary unsound men make clean the outside of the cup and platter, Matthew.
23.25. But the inside is full of rapine and excess. Their chief care is to have
a smooth carriage to the world.

6 Sincerity is moved by a command. Other men are moved by credit, profit, but
sincere men, might they have never so much credit or profit, yet having a
contrary known command, they will not move; contrary, where they have a plain
command, though they have no secondary motives of favor, credit, profit, yet
are they moved to act thereby, as we see in Queen Hesters case, who went unto
the King. Abraham, Heb. 11.8. Compared with Genesis 12.1. Yea though to tell a
Prince of Gods wrath, as Micaiah to Ahab, John Baptist to Herod, Gad and Nathan
to David.

Therefore forasmuch as Saints, out of the sight of their indwelling
corruption, are ready to condemn themselves, and so walk heavily, and Satan
labors if he cannot take their uprightness from them, yet to take the comfort
of it from them, they may, by these and such like signs, know their uprighness
which faithful Preachers are to declare unto them.

It is indeed far more dangerous to hope without a cause then to fear without a
cause, yet when an upright soul counts it self not upright, there are many
inconveniences thereby; as he can neither rejoice in living, nor think
comfortably of dying, he is backward to prayer, he can hardly give thanks for
any thing, because he knows not but God may be his enemy in time to come, and
may damn him, he cannot long for the coming of Christ, nor delight himself in
the contemplation of the good things laid up in heaven, hence though these
fears may be let in by God to beat down our pride, yet are they apt to hinder
us in our course.

7 When a man has an open heart to receive every truth of God, though such a
truth may prove prejudicial to his outward advantage. When any truth of God
whispers to an unsound man something that may be contrary to his temporal
being, or may bring him to hazard, he does as Herod did with the Baptist, first
puts it in Prison and after kills it. Contrarily, sincere men are like
Cornelius, Acts 10.33. We are here to hear all things that are commanded us
from God, so far as they can be convinced herein.

But unsound men apprehending the truth will part them from some lusts they are
not willing to leave, that it will be a bar to advantage, and a companion of
persecution, especially in such times and places, that it will lose them
friends and procure them enemies. They say to the Seers, See not, and to the
Prophets, Prophecy not, Isai 30.9, 10. Though they perhaps said not so in
words, they said so in their carriage. Unsound men keep at a distance from
truth, as Travelers do from persons whom they suspect comes to rob them.

8 Universal obedience. Thou art no better than an Hypocrite till thou find
that every Truth thou read or hear in the Word has an authority and
power over thy will, let the command be for doing or suffering, yet art thou
not sincere but shall one day be ashamed, if thou have not respect thereto,
Psalm 119.6. Matthew. 7.24. In something or other the Hypocrite discovers
himself, if not to the observation of others, yet to the conviction of his own
conscience. The Prophet proves himself upright that he did not spare his sin,
Psalm 18.23. which he was most inclined to. Psalm 119.3. compared with v. 1.
Upright men they do no iniquity, that is, not wittingly and knowingly. Isai
56.2. Acts 23.1. Hebr. 13.18. To do some good things, the Master requires does
not argue a good Servant.

9 A sincere man makes conscience of small sins. No Hypocrite almost but makes
conscience of gross and notorious evils, but they hate preciseness in smaller
matters. They count such preciseness hypocrisy, which indeed is so, if it be
in things not commanded of God, Matthew. 15.5, 6. or if it be commanded of God,
we shall make more conscience of them than we do of the weightier points of the
Law. When a man makes conscience only of the great things of the Law, it may
be a question whether conscience to God or credit to men be a mover herein.
Hence sincere men set themselves not only against Murder, but also causless
anger, not only against Adultery of body, but against looking upon a woman to
lust after her. The sons of Jehonadab did not only refrain drunkenness, but
also tasting of Wine, Jer. 35.6. not only they forbear false witness in a
Court of Justice, but also jeasting Lies: he keeps himself not only from
thieving, but from deceiving a penny or two. They do not only refrain from the
more abominable and full-mouthed oaths, but from faith and troth, not only
from abjuring Gods truth before a Magistrate, but from being ashamed thereof.

10 A suffering out of conscience toward God. Hypocrites may suffer out of
praise of men, as some think Alexander did, Acts 19.33. Ananias and Sapphira
parted with their goods, but sincere men, 1 They do not only suffer, which
seldom Hypocrites come to, but they suffer out of conscience to God, 1 Peter
2.19. This is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. As a man will venture the losing of a member for the
saving of his life, so will a sincere man lose all for the saving of his
conscience, as we see in Queen Hester, John Baptist, those Worthies, Heb.
11.35. Daniel, cap. 6.10.

11 An habitual intention to confess the truth of God though with the loss of
all, Matthew. 19.17. Matthew. 10.32. Contrarily Hypocrites have an implicit
intention to deny Gods truth, rather than to own it with sufferings: sincere
persons will stick to Gods truth notwithstanding mocks and scoffs, as David
before Michal, and Nehemiah notwithstanding the mocks of Tobiah, Nehem. 4.1, 2,
3, 4.

Hypocrites may sometimes stand for Justice, and be a while importunate for it,
yet be overcome, as that King that would fain have delivered Daniel and stood
for him to the going down of the Sun, Dan. 6.14, 16. and Pilate would fain have
delivered Christ, John 19.12. but when he saw, if he stood any further for him
that he must be counted an Enemy to Caesar, then he delivered up Christ. The
stony ground entertained the Word with joy, but when tribulation and
persecution arose for it they were offended, Matthew. 13 21.

Contrarily, sincere men they have a purpose to own Christ though to loss of
life, Heb. 11.35. others were tortured not accepting deliverance: they know the
danger of the contrary that if they deny Christ, he will deny them, Matthew.
10.33. they know else we cannot be Christ his Disciples, Luke 14.26, 33. Till
such times as we have a purpose of heart and an habitual intention to leave all
that we have for Christ, and to suffer whatsoever the rage of men shall inflict
upon us, we are not sincere with God, Matthew. 19.17. Luke 14.27.

12 Whom do thou make thy end? A sincere man makes God his end, Romans 14.7, 8.
None of us, that is, of us sincere Christians, that lives unto himself, but
whether we live we live unto the Lord, he does all to Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10.31.
2 Cor. 5.15. Christ died that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves.

There Is a twofold end, 1 Absolute and ultimate.

2 Subordinate and conditional. Hypocrites make God their subordinate and
conditional end, Isai. 66.5. Your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out
for my names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified. They looked at Gods glory in
casting out his Saints. So Jehu he had a zeal for the Lord of hosts, 2 Kings
10.16. but the Lord was not his last end, but his last end was to get a
Kingdom, to which all other ends were subservient.

Contrarily, a sincere man makes God his last end; as he studies, prays,
preaches, labors, but why? surely in order to God and his glory. God is the
end of his ends, his last end whereto all his subordinate ends refer, that is,
an absolute end, which, if all other ends were laid aside, moves a man to do a
thing. The end a godly man aims at, is to be acquainted with his duty, and to
discharge it in faithfulness, all his projects and endeavors are running
heavenward. Slothfulness, carelessness and remisness in the things of God, and
vehemence, eagerness and intentness in our own affairs, argues that the World
is our absolute and last end, and that God is only the subordinate and
inferior end.

3 Caution. If the principal thing that Christ looks at in the actions of
Christians be the sincerity of their actings, then let us take heed of
hypocrisy in all our services.

This is twofold,

1 Gross hypocrisy, which is, when a man knows he dissembles with God or man.
Absalom pretended a vow at Hebron, but intended the Murder of Amnon. Such was
Jezebel in her pretended Fast for Naboth and the Elders of Jezreel. Jezebel
knew that she proclaimed the Fast only to get Naboths Vineyard, and the Elders
did it for fear they should provoke Jezebel.

Such was Judas in his pretending the poor, when he would have had the Ointment
sold, John 12.6. and in his saying, Hail Master, and kissing Christ. So the
Scribes and Pharisees in their praying in the corners of the streets, so the
Pharisees, Mat. 23.15. in their making long prayers and devouring Widows
houses; they were like whited Sepulchers, appearing outwardly beautiful, but
within full of hypocrisy and iniquity, v. 27, 28. these are like those who at
Stage Plays wear a Vizard, they have Eliahs Mantle but not his Spirit. They
know they dissemble with God and the World, and if they had the ends they aim
at, then farewell God and Religion. These persons who for length of time go on
thus are seldom converted.

2 Close hypocrisy, which is when a man thinks his actions are good, and words
and actions sincere, mean time the rot tenness of his heart is known to God,
Prove. 16.2. Prove. 30.12. There is a generation pure in their own eyes, and yet
is not washed from their filthiness. Such was Cain, Genesis 4.3. the Pharisee,
Luke 18.12. Paul in his Judaism, Phil. 3.6. the Jews that went about to
stablish their own righteousness, yea many Papists and formal Protestants and
Professors. The mischief of this close hypocrisy is, that it makes way for
gross hypocrisy, as in Saul who first formalized Gods worship, after grossly
dissembled. Judas first clave to Christ for gain, after betrayed him with a
kiss. Such close hypocrites were the Laodiceans. Rev. 3.17.

Concerning this I shall lay down four things, 1 What it is. 2 Cautions. 3 What
signs of it. 4 What remedies against it.

1 What it is. There are many descriptions given of it; some thus, It Is when a
man will do something in Gods worship, but will not do it thoroughly; for
example, a man is not willing to let the duty go altogether, for then were he
profane, nor will perform it zealously, for then were he holy, but when he
goes betwixt both, does something but will not do it thoroughly.

Others thus. Hypocrisy is when a man does works like unto good works, but are
not, either because not commanded of God, or because not done as he commands,
being done without faith and love, for to deceive others for praise or profit
sake. Polanus l. 8. c. 10. p. 643.

Others, It Is a corruption of the will, Wheatly, Gods Husb. p. 14.
whereby it inclines it self to seem good by doing some good and leaving some
evil for ones own sake.

For the word Hypocrite, some derive it of (...), which signifies under, and
(...), which signifies judgment, because an Hypocite hides his judgment,
whiles his outward man goes one way, his mind another; his tongue speaks one
thing, his heart another.

Budaeus derives it, (...), from counterfeiting, so it signifies one that takes
on him the person of another, as Players do, who on the stage appear sometimes
as Beggars, sometimes as Kings. Translators and Interpreters, fearing the name
Stage Players would not be acceptable to godly ears, retained the Greek word
Hypocrite, Mat. 6.5. When ye give alms pray, be not like these Stage Players.
At the second hand it signifies all others which carry themselves with other
faces then their own, as Stage players do, feigning honesty and godliness in
show, when they are indeed wicked. Herod is an image of the great men of the
world, who seem to favor the word, but privily laugh at it and destroy it, yet
so that they would not seem to have destroyed it, yea they praise John, and
love Christ. Luth. Tom. 4.345.

Hypocrisy is an outward show of goodness not in the soul, What Hypocrisy is.
which a person knowingly or overweeningly takes upon himself for some base and
sinister end, that he may seem good to others, or to himself, mean time
harboring some darling sin that he will not forsake, and shunning some duty he
will not close with.

1 This takes in both gross and close hypocrisy; gross hypocrisy, whiles a
man shall make, 1 an outward show of goodness not in the soul, as Jehu, 2 King.
10.16. Come see my zeal for God: his zeal was primarily to secure a Kingdom,
at the second hand or by accident for God.

2 When a person shall knowingly take up such a profession contrary to what he
knows is in his intent, as Ishmael, Jer. 41.6. Judas.

3 To do this for base and sinister ends, as the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew.
23.29. they builded Prophets tombs to cover malice.

4 He harbors some darling sin, and will not close with some duty. Saul's
covetous heart was loath to destroy so many good things as he could turn to his
own gain, so many oxen and sheep. So Pharaoh and Balaam confessed their sin, yet
Pharaoh would not let the people go, and Balaam would still have cursed the
people, if God would have let him.

5 The end of his show of goodness is, that he may seem good to others, that so
his wickedness may not be espied, as Ananias, Sapphira, Herod, Mar. 6.20.

2 This takes in close hypocrisy, which has these properties, 1 That he does
out of an overweening conceit take upon himself a show of goodness; so the
Pharisee, Luke 18.12, 13. he thought he was in a good condition, because he did
some good things; so do many looking upon their civility, morality, formality,
comparing themselves with others, or themselves at present with themselves
formerly. 2 The end of close hypocrisy is, that a man may seem good to
himself, Prove. 30.12. There is a generation pure in their own eyes, and yet are
not washed from their filthiness. So Paul in his Pharisaical estate. See Acts
26.11. 3 The close hypocrite harbors some secret sin. Ananias and Sapphira
were full of unbelief lest they should come to want, hence they kept back part
of the price. The most refined hypocrite in the world lives in some sin. 4
There is some duty the close hypocrite will not close with, as to let go his
estate for Christ. The young man for all his forwardness startled at this, and
left Christ, Mat. 19.20, 21, 22. In this sin of close hypocrisy, many forward
Professors live, because there is some duty they will not close with. There is
some cross, which because of the weight of it, they will not take up for Christ.


Many a gross hypocrite is also full of this close hypocrisy, as Saul, 1 Samuel
15.13. Yea I have performed the Commandments of the Lord, also v. 20. Yea I
have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and gone the way which the Lord has sent
me. See how Saul, though a gross hypocrite, closely would bear himself in hand
of his good estate.

Now before I come to give trials of hypocrisy, I will lay down some cautions.

1 That even Gods children have but too much hypocrisy in them; 1 But, they
feel it, bewail it, mourn and groan against it to the Lord, and make a
continual resistance against it. They cry out, as August. in another case, why
do thou not put an end to this filthiness? 2 They press daily toward, and
hunger after more sincerity, so come under a promise of blessedness, Matthew.
5.6. 3 They are enabled by the grace of God to do their actions with more and
more sincerity. The Disciples were first asking, Who should be greatest? After
they become so sincere as to refer the matter wholly to God. Acts 1.26. Lord,
show whether of these two thou have chosen.


2 Virtues and vices do not denominate their subject, unless they be therein in
so high a degree as to prevail. As we say it is light, when the light is more
then the darkness, we say a thing is white when it partakes more of whiteness
then of any other color, though it come short of perfect whiteness. So he is a
hypocrite in whom hypocrisy prevails, as it does in those who do not lament
and bewail it. He is sincere whose purpose is to be sincere, and usually looks
at God: no condemnation to such, Romans 8.1. Because he walks after the spirit.

3 That because of the remainder of hypocrisy in them even Gods children in
time of temptation are apt to count themselves hypocrites.

1 Because they do not feel their righteousness of justification as they do
their corruption, whereas that righteousness being in Christ and corruption in
our selves, we must not think to have a sensitive righteousness, as to
justification, as we have a sensitive corruption.

2 Because, when the Apostle speaks of the fruits of the flesh he says they
are manifest, but he does not say so of the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. Yea
grace is called the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4.

3 Their little fruitfulness: this should humble not discourage us.

4 The mixture of by respects with duty to God, but this may comfort, that duty
set thee on work and moved thee to do what thou did, though by-ends came
crowding in.

5 Thy feeling thy hypocrisy to be a burden argues thou art no hypocrite,
Romans 7.15. Psalm 119.80.

6 Sincerity may stand with many evils, though not with the allowing of any.

When we lament it, be we not discouraged. If thou art not fruitful in a
hundred fold yet be in thirty.

4 A man may be an hypocrite, and yet have many good things in him, as, 1 to
God, he may read, hear, pray, come to ordinances. See Esa. 58.2. etc. Herod did
many things, Mark 6.20. He feared John because he was a just man, and an holy,
and heard him gladly, and observed him, and did many things, yea he may write
sermons, and repeat them and show countenance to the Preachers, etc.

2 As to men he may deal justly, be a good neighbor, Matthew. 6.20. And as to
himself he may escape the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2.2.

5 Many Saints have been, and are jealous of themselves, least they should be
hypocrites, Psalm 139.24. Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know
my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me. Psalm 119.80.

Contrary some hypocrites are confident of their good estate, Jer. 3.4, 5. They
called God father, yet did evil as they could, Jer. 42.4, 5. Hypocrites call
God to witness that they would do whatsoever God commanded by Jeremy, and so
consequently, could not but think themselves sincere, whereas they did the
clean contrary to what they professed. Jer. 43.2, 3.

6 After examination of thy estate, be not always questioning whether thou be
sincere, or a hypocrite, but be not too hasty in determining of either, but
when thy conscience has given judgment of the truth of thy heart after
several examinations thereof, hold fast this conclusion, that though thou have
many failings, yet thou art not an hypocrite. So Job. c. 27.5, 6.

7 Though it be very difficult to distinguish betwixt sincerity and hypocrisy,
because of the many counterfiets that look like grace but are not, as the
common graces in hypocrites, yet is it possible to distinguish the one from the
other, else would not the word bid us to prove our own works, Gal. 6.4. 1 Cor.
11.28. Yea sundry Saints have found their hearts upright. David, Psalm 101.2. I
will behave myself in a perfect way, I will walk in mine house with a perfect
heart. Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. Paul and other believers, 2 Cor. 1.12. In
simplicity and Godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world.

8 We must not from any observation of hypocrisy in our hearts deny any true
work of grace in our selves, and so bear false witness against our selves, to
cause us to walk heavily. The beholding of any truth of heart in our selves
should make us go on with joyfulness, cheerfulness and thankfulness, being sure
God will perfect the good work he has begun, how small soever, Phil. 1.6.

Trials of an Hypocrite.
1 To look mostly at the eye of man in what he does. All his care is to have
men's observation of the good he does, Matthew. 6.2. If there be no observation of
man, his endeavors flag, so his care is to keep his naughtiness from man, but
makes little conscience of sinning in secret. Many will say, Have we not writ
many books? preached many sermons? built Hospitals? but the Lord will say, Thou
did so, but it was to thy praise and credit, not out of love to me, nor zeal
of my glory.

Contrary, sincere souls in what they do, desire to seek the glory of God, not
their own glory, John 7.18. 2 Cor. 4.5.

2 A going on in dead and liveless duties, and not feeling his deadness a
burden, he counts them a task, a penance, and were it not conscience would fly
in his face, he would leave them quite off: he counts Gods service a weariness,
and snuffs at it. Though Gods Saints too often perform dead and liveless duties
by fits, yet the deadness of hypocrites differs in two particulars;

1 The hypocrite has a voluntary careless admission of rovings in duty, Prove.
5.14. I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and Assemblies.
So Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel. 33.31. When they were at hearing their hearts ran
after their covetousness.

2 The hypocrite sees not the face of God in duty, Job. 13.16. He only is my
salvation, says Job: how proves he that? Why, because a hypocrite shall not
come before him. Job means into his special presence, for into his omnipresence
all creatures come, yea the devils: the dwelling in and enjoying of Gods
special presence is determined to the upright, Psalm 140.13. See also Psalm
11.7. His countenance does behold the upright, Psalm 97.11. Light is sown for
the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Possibly upright men may so
formalize and post over duty, that they may see no face of God therein, but
when they pray with life, and quickening, and strength of affection, then they
see the face of God.

3 Note, Though a hypocrite has many good things in him, yet the bent of his
heart is not for God, he does sundry good acts, but he has no good habit or
inclination. Hos. 7.16. They return, but not to the most high, they are like a
deceitful bow. q. d. as an archer when he shoots, though he aim never so well
at the white, yet the bow being deceitful he cannot come near it, so these
hypocrites who howl upon their beds, they pretend to return, but it is not in
the purpose of their hearts, it is not to the most High. Their prayers for corn
and wine are only as the cries of a hog when he is pinched, or the howling of
a wolf when he is hungry; yea even a hypocrite when he most forbears sin, the
bent of his heart is for it. See it in Balaam, when for fear he should be
destroyed, he durst not curse, yet how did he thirst after it? how did he love
the wages of unrighteousness? and see whether God that would not let him curse
Israel at one time, would let him curse them at another. Herod when he heard
John gladly, yet the bent of his heart was for Herodias. All the while Demas
was with Paul, yet the bent of his heart was for the world. As the bent of the
dogs appetite is after the porrige pot or dripping pan, though he stand quietly
by it, or the bent of the wolves appetite is after the sheep, though for fear
of the shepherds staff he dare not touch them, so the bent of a hypocrites
heart is to some sin which he will not leave, though by some respects he may be
restrained from it, so that habitually he does the evil which actually he
forbears. This is called an inclining to wickedness in the heart, Psalm 66.18.
A committing sin, 1 John 3.8. a working of iniquity, Matthew. 7.23. Contrarily
the upright have the habitual bent of their heart for God, Psalm. 119.6. also,
v. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. Their hearts stick to Gods
testimonies, v. 31. Refraining the feet from every evil way, v. 101. Upright
men are not so much descerned by their good actions, as by this bent of heart.
See 2 Chronicles. 19.3.30.18, 19. It Is called a not departing from Gods judgments,
v. 102. a keeping of Gods precepts, v. 106. an inclining of the heart to
perform Gods statutes unto the end, v. 112. Isai. 26.8. The desire of my soul
is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. That the bent of upright hearts
is for God, appears in their readiness, cheerfulness, and delight they have in
doing such things as God requires. So Paul, Lord what will thou have me to do?
As we see a ship that has wind and tide with it bends more and more to the
haven.

4 Censoriousness of other men's actions, when thy self lives in gross sins.
When a man can see motes in another, I mean sins of infirmities, to which the
holiest are liable, and cannot see beams in himself, strain at a gnat in
another, and swallow a Camel, Matthew. 23.24. So the Ruler of the Synagogue Luke
13.13, 14. (whom Christ therefore called hypocrite) censured Christ for healing
a daughter of Abraham on the Sabbath, when on that same day every one of them
would lead their Ass to watering. The way to make themselves even with the best
men, is either to grow higher, which their lusts will not suffer them, or to
pull others lower, hence they censure the best men, and even motes in such,
sins of ignorance and infirmity, yea many times that which is no sin, as the
Pharisees taxed Christ's Disciples for eating with unwashen hands, when mean
time their own hearts were unwasht, for plucking a few ears of corn, when their
own houses were full of rapine. Contrary, upright men are most censorious
against themselves, 2 Samuel 24.17. These sheep what have they done? let thy hand
be against me and against my fathers house. His subjects doubtless had much
provoked God, yet he had more to say against himself then against all his
subjects. So Nehemiah, c. 1.6, 7. Would we judge our selves we should have less
time, and more compassion to judge others.

5 Partiality in obedience. The hypocrite will only do some or many things,
not all, as Herod, Mark 6.20. Jehu, 2 Kings 10.28. If thou suffer thy self to
be drawn to some good things not all, and withdrawn from some evils not all,
and that for thy own credit, profit, or ease sake, and not Gods sake, only or
principally, thou art a plain hypocrite. Let there be one idol in our hearts of
which thy heart upon deliberation will, or must say, thou will rather leave the
Lord then it, thou art no better then an hypocrite. If we live but in one sin
(though every man that lives in one lives in more) we manifest a plain contempt
of God, yea we set up a god to our selves. When David pronounces a blessing to
an upright man, Psalm. 119.1. he tells us who is such, v. 2. They seek God with
the whole heart, and v. 3. They do no iniquity. So long as a man picks and
chooses Gods commands, and obeys them with such and such reservations, let such
a man know he is no better then an hypocrite. If there be any uprightness in
thee thou will be stirred up at thy own lie, as well as at an other man's oath.
Unsound men never close with all duties, nor part with all sins, but still
retain some darling sin, which tends to their profit, or credit, or pleasure,
yea the duties they do are caused by some outward principle. Even as heat that
is natural is durable, but adventitious heat is soon gone, as in water, meat
boiled or roasted. So outward principles setting hypocrites awork, as shame of
the world, fear of hell, etc. they do many things, but the cause being taken
away, the effect ceases.

6 A compliant turning of themselves according to times and places. So
Achitophel in David's Court would be very devout, but when there was a rebellion
he would be first in it. Psalm. 55.12, 13. Hypocrites when they are in good
company and good families can frame themselves thereto, and they can game, talk
wantonly, speak against goodness, when they are elsewhere.

A true Christian finds it harder to be good in some places and companies then
in others, and the devil when he has the opportunity of time, place and
company, will press more hard upon a child of God to do evil, also to put him
back from goodness, when time, place, and company stand cross to goodness; yea
sometimes temptations of fear or hope may shake a Christian in his obedience,
yet his desires so hang to the Lord, that he is not at rest till he have
returned to his first husband, and to his former obedience. Yea he has not a
complying principle of hypocrisy to suit his practice to times and places.
Joash was an unsound man, and, when he came in bad company, he came to be like
like them, 2 Chronicles. 24.17. but a sincere soul resolves to follow duty though
all the world should be against it. Upright men they apprehend the Lord every
where present, hence they labor to walk before him. When its a thing God would
have him do, he does not consult with flesh and blood, whether he had best to
do it, Gal. 1.15. but does it without consultment of flesh and blood. Still an
upright man is thinking, what will God have me do? If Gods word bid him do a
thing, he does it, though not without some hanging back of the flesh, but
unsound men still think, whether will this tend to their credit and profit?
with these two are their souls carried like a Coach with the horses, to comply
to all times, places and company.

7 When a soul has only some good fits and moods of goodness. Hos. 6.4. Thy
righteousness is like the morning dew, which has a fit of coming, and then
goes away. Balaam had such a fit, Numb. 23.10. Let me dye the death of the
righteous. So Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron in haste to pray for him. Exodus
10.16. So those hypocrites, Psalm. 78.34, 35. When he slew them then they sought
him, and enquired early after God, nevertheless they did but flatter with their
mouth. Such were Jonah's mariners, as some think, Jon. 1.5. and John's hearers,
who rejoiced in John's doctrine for a season. So Saul, in a fit he cries out,
Thou art more righteous then I, my son David. Some when the Lord afflicts them
with the death of relations and other crosses, have a fit of godly sorrow, as
that Scribe, Matthew. 8.20.

That this may not be mistaken take four cautions.

1 That a man may have intermissions, wherein his grace, zeal, and heavenly
mindedness may not appear in that measure that sometimes it has appeared, and
yet be sincere, as Asa, etc.

2 A soul may have declensions and decaies in grace, and yet not serve God by
fits, as in the Angel of Ephesus, and to keep the soul in that height of
consistence, whereto perhaps at present it is wrought, is not possible, because
the lifting up of the soul depends upon the spirits breathing, who is a free
agent.

3 A Saint may be more godly at some time then at another, and yet not serve
God by fits; as the Husbandman labors all the year, but specially in seed-time
and harvest. A believer may constantly follow the Lord, yet sometimes be more
in heaven, taken up with Moses into the Mount.

4 The deeplier a soul is in distress, the more earnestly should he seek God,
and yet this is no serving God by fits. So Jonah in the Whales belly, Jon. 2.7.
and those Isai. 26.17. and it is said of hypocrites, They cry not when God
binds them, Job 36.13.

But this I call a serving God by fits and moods, when all a man's religion is
only for a fit. So long as such a Magistrate favors it, and when he falls off
they fall off; as when Rehoboam forsook the Lord, all Israel forsook the Law of
the Lord with him, 2 Chronicles. 12.1. So to have a fit of reformation so long as
Gods hand is upon us, after, when his hand is taken away, to be as bad as we
were, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36.

As there is difference betwixt a well set color in a persons face, and a
color that arises from blushing, so there is difference betwixt fits and states
of godliness. Hypocrites have fits but not states. Sudden heats and sudden
colds argue an unhealthfull temperature in the body, so does it in the Spirit:
some are mightily lifted up at a Sermon, by and by, as presently cold. Jehu hot
against Baal, cold against the Calves. By the equality of pulse we judge of the
body, let us do so of the soul, not by what it is in a fit. A man may have a
fit of crying Hosanna, and next day cry, Crucify. Our obedience should be like
the fire of the Sanctuary that never went out.

8 When a man willingly winks against light, and will not see that which is
either contrary to his lusts, or may expose him to sufferings, loath to read
such Books, hear such Preachers, or meditate of such Scriptures, as may inform
him of such sins as he is loath to part with, or to do such duties as he is
unwilling to do. Romans 1.18. They withold the truth in unrighteousness. Joh.
3.21. These are said, not to come to the light, lest their deeds should be
discovered. Matthew. 13.15. They have closed up their eyes. 2 Pet. 3.5. They are
willingly ignorant. Isai. 30.10. They say to the seers, See not.

Contrarily sincere men have their hearts open to know the whole mind of God,
Acts 10.33. 1 Samuel 3.17, 18.

9 A care to reform the outward man with a neglect of the inward man.
Hypocrites are busiest in outward performances. For example, in matters of
religion, there is the outward part and the inward part, for the outward part,
as hearing, presenting himself at worship, Eccl. 8.10. He comes and goes to the
place of the holy, but for the inward part, to wit, the bleeding heart, the
melting affection, the rectified will, the inward washing of the heart, Jer.
4.14. these he is a stranger from. He is like a Bankrupt that makes show of all
and more then all the wares he has. Matthew. 15.7, 8, 9. Ye Hypocrites, well did
Isaiah say, this people draws nigh me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me.

Contrary the sincere Christian is like a rich Merchant that has much more
goods then is seen, in Warehouses and Cellars: if he cleanse himself he
labors not only to cleanse his hands, as Pilate did, but he cleanses his
heart. Jam. 4.8. If he gives thanks he does not only lift up his hand but his
heart to God in the heavens, Lam. 3.40. He cleanses himself not only from
filthiness of the flesh, but of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1. Jer. 4.14. If he give
alms he draws out his soul to the hungry, as well as his hand. Isai. 58.10. If
he obey God in any command it is from the heart, Romans 6.17. Col. 3.23. If he be
baptized, he cares not only to have his body washed with pure water, but to
have his heart sprinkled from an evil conscience. Heb. 10.22. He does not only
speak of good things with his tongue, but the Law of God is in his heart. Psalm.
37.31. Because the outward part is easy and glorious in the eyes of the world,
the hypocrite will do that, but the inward part being difficult and costly he
will not do that.

10 A following God in cheap and creditable duties, but not in costly and
dishonorable duties. So Saul, 1 Samuel 15.8, 9. Saul destroyed the worst of the
sheep and cattle, every thing that was vile and refuse they destroyed utterly,
but for Agag and the best of the sheep, and oxen, and fatlings, and all that
was good, they would not utterly destroy. So when a duty is creditable a
hypocrite will do it, as to profess Religion forwardly where it is in credit,
as many hypocrites did in Josiah's time, whose hypocrisy was seen when he was
dead.

Contrarily sincere persons follow God in costly duties: if duty cost them all
their preferment and wealth, they will part with it, Luke 14.33. Heb. 11.25.26.
They will not offer to God that which costs them nothing: so in duties wherein
there is no credit, as David when he danced before the ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.20.
though Michal scoft at him, yet would he do it.

11 Self justification and translation of the fault upon others. 1 Samuel 15.13.
I have performed the commandment of the Lord, but Samuel said, What means the
bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear? Saul answered,
v. 15. The people spared of the best of the sheep, and of the Oxen. He lays
the fault on the people, v. 20, 21.

Contrarily, sincere souls take the shame of their evils don to themselves, 2 Samuel 24.17. Luke 15.18. When this frame of self justification is usual, its a
bad temper. See it in the Pharisee, Luke 18.12, 13. Contrary the publican. But
this sign I apply to an act, rather then to a state of hypocrisy.

12 The living in sin, mean while pretending to be religious: see it in that
strumpet; Prove. 7.14. she seemed very devout, yet was an arrant strumpet, see
Eccles. 8.10. Jer. 7.10, 11. Herod, Mark 6.20. In the midst of all his devotion
he lived, in incest, by this was Jehu, Saul, etc. discovered, Deuteronomy. 26.13, 14.
One sin lived in proves a man an hypocrite, Hab. 2.4. John 5.44. Psalm 19.13.

Remedies against hypocrisy.
1 Beg a sound heart of God, that he would give thee a right Spirit, Psalm
51.10.143.10. Psalm 139.24. Try me, O Lord, search me, see if there be any way
of wickedness in me. Though Satan may tell thee God hears thee not, because
thou art an hypocrite, yet may thou answer him, He that confesses and
forsakes shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13.

2 Walk suitable to thy own principles: beware what principles thou receivest,
but having received them, and thy conscience having given judgment herein,
walk suitable to them. It Is greatly hypocritical to have our principles go one
way and our practice another; yet ought there to be a tender respect to the
principles of others, judging that with as good a conscience they refrain that
which you conscientiously seem to practice.

3 Search thy heart to find out thy hypocrisy, and bewail it. So Mr. Bradford
was wont to call himself a painted hypocrite. If we find sincerity wrought in
us, let us hold fast the comfort of it, Job. 27.5. But if on the other side we
find we prefer our credit and profit before the Lord, that we retain some
darling sin, and that we will not do some costly, painful, or shameful duty,
that we make clean the outside of the cup and platter, but the inside is full
of filth, that we usually do that in secret we would not for a world should
come abroad, see that thou bewail all these hypocrisies, thou being weary and
heavy laden with this sin as well as others, art bid to come to Christ, Matthew.
11.28.

Say not thou if thou have been an hypocrite all this while it will never be
better, if thou will not see the hypocrisy of thy heart, and confess and
bewail it before the Lord thou shall never be better, but if believingly thou
mourn under it, there is a fountain set open, to wash thee from this as well as
from other pollutions, Zac. 13.1. 1 John 1.7, 8. And for the relics of
hypocrisy by often searching and bewailing they are weeded out; every time a
garden is weeded the weeds are the fewer, and the herbs and flowers prosper
better.

4 Trace your hearts in your motives, actings and ends. Its hard for creatures
to get lurking holes when they are closely hunted; so hunt thy hypocrisy and
it will hardly get harbor, reflect upon thy self and consider the motives that
set thee on work to do such an action: was it the glory of God, or thy own
glory, when thou denies thy self in such an enjoyment? was it out of love to
God, or to get esteem? Hezekiah thus traced his heart, Esa. 38.3. and so did
David in the matter of Bathsheba, hence he so prays that God would renew a
right spirit in him. Probably Paul did the same, Acts 9.9. and Peter, Mark
14.72. when he thought thereon, he wept, the word is, (...) he casting up,
Peter cast up how deceitfully he had dealt with Christ in denying him at such a
time, and for swearing, and that three several times, and that in the presence
of his enemies, upon a poor simple maids question, at such a time, when if ever
he should have stood for Christ, he cast up all this, and traced his heart and
so wept. Trace thy heart in thy dealings of buying, selling, etc. with men, and
thou shall find much hypocrisy, in thy pretenses of love to thy friends, in
thy speaking of thine enemies. How often do thou in thy devotions seem, if
not what thou art, yet more then thou art? how often do thou among bad men seem
worse then thou art? and among good men seem better then thou art? If thou thus
tracest thy heart, hypocrisy will not have a quiet abode in thy heart.

5 Look upon Gods all-seeing eye, Heb. 4.13. Prove. 5.21. He ponders all our
goings, as well of the inward man, as outward man, he knows every one of them.
Ezekiel. 11.5. Yea every thought, Job. 42.2. If a man looked upon us we would not
dally with him, nor dissemble with him, why do thou deal hypocritically?
surely because thou more or less questions or forgets Gods omniscience. 2 Cor.
2.17. Psalm 44.17, 18, compared with v. 21.

6 Practice Godly jealousy from the known slipperiness of thy heart, to be
jealous over it in every company, in every acting, especially where there is
any credit or profit coming toward you, or on the other side any suffering is
to be endured. A man cannot think the number of the hypocrisies such
temptations draw out: above all be jealous of the itch of vain glory, the heart
is deceitful above all things, yea above the devil, Jer. 17.10. Thou have a
watchful eye upon thievish slippery servants, have the same of thy theevish
slippery heart. If we be not jealous of our hearts, hypocrisy will set up a
throne there before we are aware; no man so in danger of being overcome herein,
as he that is most confident.

Complain against thy hypocrisy before the Lord, when thy heart at any time
shall epsy it in thee and tell thee of it, do it with aggravations, and make
thy heart to ache therewith, Esa. 64.7, 8. Psalm 51.10.

8 Get faith, not only to receive the blood of Christ to wash thee from thy
hypocrisy. Heb. 10.22. but also to receive the spirit of Christ who leads
believers into all truth, John 14.17. Psalm 143.10.

9 Repent of every known sin: if there be one sin in thee unrepented of, thou
art an hypocrite. Romans 6.2. How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer
therein? q. d. How is it possible? Such were Ezekiels hearers, Ezekiel. 33.31. See
it in Jehu, 2 Kings 10.28.

10 Consider what dishonor will come to God, to thy brethren and to thy self,
in case thou should be an hypocrite. 1 to God, Ezekiel. 36.23. When a Saint
falls into a scandalous sin, and violates his uprightness but in one
particular, how do the enemies of God blaspheme? 2 Samuel 12.14. Much more if he
were unsound in the whole, and Gods people are much dishonored, for thy
hypocrisy will be imputed to them, Psalm 69.6. Such as is one such are they
all, will carnal men say, and for thy self, how will thou be ashamed should
thou be found an hypocrite? See Matthew. 24.51. Hence David prays, Psalm 119.80.
Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, Why? that I be not ashamed in the
presence of God, Angels, and men.

Shall in no wise lose his reward.]

Obs. There is a certain gracious reward which Christ has in store for his
people that truly serve him, Psalm 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the
righteous, Prove. 11.18. to him that sows righteousness there shall be a sure
reward.

Reas. 1 For the encouragement of Saints in their obedience, Psalm. 19.11. In
keeping of them there is great reward. Heb. 6.10, 11. 1 Cor. 15.58. Earthly
rewards do much draw endeavors, how much more should the reward of glory?

2 That Gods servants may see that God is a good Master, Col. 3.24.

Use 1 Reprehension of all merit, because the reward is free and gracious. When
we have done what we can, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. That a work
may be meritorious there must be a proportion betwixt the work and the wages,
but there can be no proportion betwixt our service here and the crown of glory,
because our work is finite, but the crown infinite.

2 Exhortation. 1 To believe there is such a reward, Heb. 11.6. He that comes
to God, next to the believing that God is, must believe that God is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him. Psalm. 58.11. If thou do believe this that
there is such a reward, then cast not away thy confidence which has great
recompense of reward, Heb. 10.35. Concerning which reward, consider,

1 What it is, 2 To whom it is given. 3 When. 4 What assurance of it.

1 What it is. A. God himself. God tells Abraham, that he was his exceeding
great reward, Genesis 15.1. Besides there is a reward of inheritance, Col. 1.24.
Knowing that from the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance, Luke
6.35. Great is your reward in heaven, 1 Cor. 2.9.

2 To whom it is given. A. 1 Negatively, not to lazy and slothful souls.
Matthew. 11.12. The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take
it by force. 2 Not to Merit-mongers, nor to those who trust to their own
righteousness. Romans 4.4. To him that works is the reward, not reckoned of
grace but of debt.

2 Affirmatively. It is, 1 To those who believe the promise, Heb. 10.36, 37,
38. 2 To those who patiently continue in well doing. Romans 2.7, 8. 3 To those
who love the appearing of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8.

3 Quest. When this reward shall be.

Answ. This is in part when we die, as to the Thief on the cross, the fullness
of it at Christ's coming, Matthew. 16.27. When the Son of man shall come in the
glory of his Father with the Angels, then he shall reward every man according
to his works. Rev. 22.12. Behold, I come quickly and my reward is with me, to
give every man according as his work shall be. 2 Timothy 4.8. There Is a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day,
yea to all that love his appearing. This recompense is at the resurrection of
the just. See Luke 14.13, 14. Rev. 11.18.

4 What assurance of this reward?

Answ. Great assurance. 1 From Gods promise. Prove. 11.18. To him that sows
righteousness shall be a sure reward. 1 Pet. 5.4.

2 The believers knowledge. 1 Cor. 15.58. Ye know your labor will not be in
vain. Col. 3.24. Knowing that from the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance.

2 Exhort. To look upon this reward. So did Moses, Heb. 11.26. He had respect
to the recompense of the reward. Though we must not do good only for reward
without conscience to duty, and love to God, for this were merely mercinary,
and to eschew evil merely for fear of vengeance were slavish, yet may we look
both to reward to excite us to good, and to the punishment to deter us from
evil. 2 Cor 5.10.11. Heb. 12.27, 28. as the promised reward draws our
regenerate part, so does the threatening awe our unregenerate part, and beat
down our flesh.

3 Exhort. Beware you be not beguiled of this reward. Col. 2.18. Men are by
Satan miserably cousen'd, he takes gold from them, in stead of which he gives
them counters, he casts dust of honor and riches in the eyes of most, and then
cousens them of the reward of heaven. How careful are we not to be cheated of
our estates on earth? much more take care thou be not cheated of the crown in
heaven.

4 Exhort. Be laborious in the work of God. 1 Cor. 15.58. Be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know
your labor will not be in vain in the Lord. Gal. 6.9. Yea to serve God
willingly, 1 Cor. 9.17. If I do this thing willingly I have a reward. Heb.
6.10, 11. Did persons believe there were such a reward, how would their
endeavors be stirred up? When David believed he should have Saul's daughter,
how was his valor stirred up to kill the Philistims, and to bring two hundred
of the Philistims fore-skins? Let men say what they will, where there are not
holy endeavors used, they do not believe this promised reward. Persuasion
still stirs up the soul to endeavors. Oh then, So run that ye may obtain. 1
Cor. 9.24.

5 Exhort. Be content to suffer all hardships in hope of this reward. So Moses,
Heb. 11.25, 26. Moses preferred the reproaches of Christ before the treasures
of Egypt in hope of this reward. Matthew. 5.11, 12. So those Saints, Heb. 10.34.
They suffered the spoiling of their goods in hope of this reward.

3 Use. Terror to wicked men; they have no reward. Prove. 24.20. No reward of
happiness, but the reward of iniquity. So Judas, Acts 1.18. They will one day
see they have rewarded evil to their own souls, Isa. 3.9. then shall wicked men
find the words of the Prophet to be true, Isa. 3.10, 11. Say to the righteous,
It shall be well with him, for he shall eat the fruit of his doings, woe to the
wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him. Gal. 6.8. 2 These. 1.6, 7. Heb. 10.30.

Lastly, in that the Disciples propound the scruples, and Christ answers them,
both in v. 34. and in these three last verses, observe:

Obs. The Saints of God should endeavor satisfaction in their scruples.

Two things. 1 What a scruple is, 2 Why Gods people should labor and endeavor
for satisfaction herein.

1 What a scruple is. The Latin word scrupulus is derived of scrupus, which
signifies a little sharp stone, which falling into a man's shoes troubles him in
travel, metaphorically it signifies a doubt or trouble which inwardly grates
upon the soul, putting it to pain for want of light until the conscience have
satisfaction therein, though therein the conscience incline to one side.

In which five things;

1 A scruple is a doubt or trouble wherein the soul is troubled as to the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of a thing, as to the practicing or forbearing of a
thing. When a man asks question for conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.27.

2 The seat of this scrupling or doubting, it is in the conscience. 1 Cor.
10.25. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles that eat, asking no question for
conscience sake: so that when a thing is to be done or forborne you ask a
question herein to satisfy conscience, which cannot witness with you
concerning the rectitude of such an action, but stands hesitating and doubting
herein.

3 This doubt or scruple inwardly grates upon the soul, and puts it to pain, so
that the soul is heavy and lumpish under it, and sometimes grieved, and
sometimes presses the soul down with the weight thereof, that the removing of
it is as if you should take off a talent of lead.

4 The cause of all scruples is want of light, because a soul cannot see his
way: hence some scrupulous souls, Romans 14.2. wanting light to see that they
might feed on all creatures lawfully, fed only upon herbs, for fear they
should eat some meat which God in Moses Law had forbidden.

5 There is an inclination to the lawfulness of one part above another, but yet
not without trouble because of some difficulties it knows not how to answer.
For example, when a Christian was invited to go to a feast that was at an
Idolaters house, but was no Idol feast, there could not but be some trouble in
the hearts of some, whether they should go, yet the conscience inclined to
dictate that they might go from that permission, 1 Cor. 10.27. When a false
Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. wrought a miracle that came to pass, and
solicited them to go after other gods, they could not but have some doubt in
their minds, whether they should go after strange gods, yet, conscience
inclining unto truth, they were to stand to that, and to abandon the scruple,
and to suppress and conclude against the reasons and arguments which caused
them to doubt: so that the difference betwixt a doubtful and a scrupulous
conscience is this, A doubtful conscience hangs in suspense with equality of
reasons, concerning the lawfulness and unlawfulness of something to be
practiced or believed, but a scrupulous conscience inclines to the lawfulness
of the thing to be done, but not without some doubts, because of the difficulty
of the arguments, which it well knows not how to answer. When we incline to
the lawfulness of a thing we should labor to suppress all difficulties, which
cause us to doubt, if that cannot be done, yet are we to go to that side
conscience most inclines to.

Obj. But do not all doubts in the conscience suspend a man's acting every way,
seeing the Apostle says, He that doubts is damned if he eat? Romans 14.23.
and, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and, Every man is to be fully persuaded
in his own mind, v. 5.

Answ. All doubts in the conscience do not suspend a man's acting in practice.
For example, a man doubts whether the first day of the week be a day appointed
by command from God for worship, his conscience perhaps doubts both ways, yet,
may he keep it, for where there is no harm in the practical part the doubt may
without harm be in the conscience, and yet he may act one way. But those doubts
seem to me to suspend practice where arguments are of equal force both ways, as
where there are two faces of authority in a nation, the conscience questions
which have right on their side, the subject so doubting must be neutral.

2 When conscience doubts on one part, and is resolved on the other, we must
refuse the doubting part, and take that wherein we are sure; as in Cards and
Dice, if we play not we are safe.

3 When conscience doubts on both sides, which is the sin and which not, then
ought a man to do that which is most void of offense.

4 We may have sundry doubts of other men's actings, and yet these not hinder
our own acting; nor do they come under Paul's kind of doubting, who speaks
only of a man's own actings; our conscience or persuasion has nothing to do to
judge an other man's liberty, 1 Cor. 10.29. For example, Augustus laid a tax
upon all the world, some Christians doubted that part of this tax would be
bestowed on Idols and their Priests, and therefore doubted whether they might
pay Augustus tribute: their doubts were not to be regarded, they might pay
tribute notwithstanding these doubts, for they had nothing to do to doubt or
judge what Augustus would do with it, being secret in his own breast. An
Officer doubts the Magistrate has given an unjust sentence, yet may he execute
it, because his own duty is clear to him, but the Magistrates injustice is not.
I am a Church member, I doubt my fellow member is an hypocrite, yet may I
communicate with him, because his hypocrisy does not appear, and the
manifestation of his evil and the censure of the Church thereupon, is the
ground for my not communicating, not my doubting of his unsoundness. A soldier
doubts his Captain sends him upon an unjust service, this soldier if he know
not the injustice may not refrain.

5 In your own proper actings do not that you doubt of. Romans 14.5, 23. As it is
against the Law of friendship willingly to do that which we doubt, whether it
will be acceptable to our friend, so is it against the Law of the love of God
to do such things as we doubt whether or no do please him.

Reas. 1 Because satisfaction in scruples tends much to the quieting of the
soul. The Jews doubted whether any of their members might eat with the
Gentiles, Acts 11.2. and some of them dealt with Peter herein. When Peter gave
them satisfaction concerning the lawfulness thereof, They were glad and
glorified God, v. 18. Then is it that a man can act comfortably and cheerfully.

2 Clearing up of scruples tends to make Church Communion comfortable. The Jews
did earnestly endeavor to keep the ceremonial commands of the Law, and to
impose them upon others, and would not have communion with the Gentile brethren
that would not keep them, Acts 15.1. On the other side the Gentile believers,
knowing their liberty by Christ, would exclude the Jews (living Jewishly) from
their communion, whereupon a Schism was like to arise; therefore Paul to heal
the scruples on all sides warns the Jewish believers so to follow their
opinion, that they did not condemn the Gentile believers of wickedness, and
warns the Gentile believers that they should not refrain the Communion of the
Jewish believers, because they lived Jewishly, nor despise them for it, but
that they should receive one another to Church Fellowship. Romans 14.1. Him that
is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations. The words
(...), signify the judging of thoughts, q.d. Do not you Gentile believers
judge whether they use these ceremonial commands as necessary, or as
profitable, or how they hold them in their conscience, what have you to do to
rifle there? what have you to do to judge their thoughts?

3 The great anguish that is in the soul for want of satisfaction herein Many
have scruples as to vows, oaths, restitution, assurance, obedience to men's
commands, etc. and go on in a pining condition for many years together, when
one word of a faithful Teacher, or Brother would quiet all. How much better
did those poor Jews who were pricked in their hearts for guilt? Who in their
anguish of conscience asked of Peter and the Apostles, Men and brethren what
shall we do? Peter with a few words speaking, heals all the scruple, Acts 2.37,
38, 39. saying, Repent and be baptized, but they had another scruple, that in
their violence against Christ, they had wished his blood be on their children,
this scruple Peter answers, The promise is to you and to your children when the
Lord shall call them. For to satisfy afflicted souls, the Lord has given the
tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to him that is weary. Isai.
50.4. How painful have the doubts and scruples about assurance been to sundry
of Gods children? Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Isai. 49.14, 15. Especially when an evil
day comes, as sickness, death, etc. How will these scruples afflict you? how
will they make you unwilling to dye? It Is like David had a scruple on his death
bed for not putting Joab to death who had killed two innocent men, hence he gives
Solomon order to put him to death; for we cannot think that now when he
expected mercy from God he did it out of revenge, 1 Kings 2.5, 6.

Use. Exhort to clear up all thy scruples; Now scruples are of two sorts;

1 Rational and material, so the woman of Samaria having a scruple where the
place of worship, and where the true Church was, whether in Mount Gerizim,
where was a Temple built by Manasses the High Priests son (as Josephus
mentions) or whether at Jerusalem was the place of worship? Christ answers her
scruple, 1 Condemns her worship and the worship of the Samaritans, because not
grounded upon knowledge, saying, Ye worship ye know not what, Joh. 4.22. 2
Commends the worship at Jerusalem by two reasons. v. 22. 1 Because grounded
upon knowledge, We know what we worship. 2 Because the Jews had the means of
salvation there, which the Samaritans had not, saying, Salvation is of the
Jews. Such was that of Joseph, Matthew. 1.19, 20. who was perplexed about the
putting away of Mary.

2 Irrational and circumstantial. Satan pussles many with these, as some
persons when they have paid money, because they could not remember the time or
place, have scrupled whether they have paid it, though their hearts tell them
they pay every man presently after it is due. Sometimes when a soul has
cleared up a scruple to full satisfaction, the devil comes a year or more after
and endeavors to trouble him again, to re-act a discussion of the same
question, in both which cases Satan endeavors to rob us of our time, carrying
us to impertinencies, and if possible to make us walk heavily. I much question
whether it were not a needless scruple in David, when his heart smote him for
cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, 2 Samuel 24.4, 5. seeing he did it not for
to affright him, nor to impoverish him, but to make his own innocence appear,
that he was not an enemy to him. Others scruple whether it be lawful to eat
flesh upon a Friday, whether they may teach their children a Catechism or
pattern of sound words, the slighting of these and such like is not a way to
weaken but to strengthen the conscience. All scruples that bring not a word are
frivolous and vain, and not to be discussed.

Means to be used in case of scruples.
1 Suffer not men to impose upon us and subject us to their ordinances, beyond
the bounds of the word. Col. 2.18, 20, 21. The false Teachers would have
imposed Angel-worship, and would (...) judged them to hell, and that they
should never have the crown of glory, if they did not observe them, but the
Apostle bids they should not regard their judgment.

2 Where we come where persons can resolve us, to propound our doubts, Mal.
2.7. As of old Priests lips did preserve knowledge, so should the lips of
Church Elders. Herein lay aside sinful bashfulness which makes many go sadly
for want of propounding the difficulties which afflict them: thus did the
Churches of Antioch, Acts 15.2. and Corinth, 1 Cor. 7.1. 1 Cor. 10.25, 27.

3 Urge the Lord with his promise to give you direction in your difficulties,
Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord? Him shall he direct in the way
that he shall choose. Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy steps. David was in a strait to know whether Saul would come against
Keilah, and whether the men of Keilah would deliver him up, and he enquires of
God herein, 1 Samuel 23.11, 12. and the Lord answered him, that the men of Keilah
would deliver him up, 2 Samuel 21.1. Jos. 7.6. to v. 20. Judge. 20.26, 27, 28.

4 Examine reasons on all sides, and then go that way which seems likeliest,
and has best reasons out of Gods word. David had a great scruple about Gods
providence as to wicked men, until he went into the Sanctuary of God, and
there in the Ministry of Gods word he found reasons to stablish him, to wit
concerning their end. 1 That though they were so happy at present, yet they
stood in slippery places. 2 That they were cast down into destruction and
desolation in a moment, Psalm. 73.16, 17, 18, 19.

But if reasons from Gods word are equal on both sides, choose that side that
has least fleshly respects in it, I mean as to thy self, as to self-credit,
profit or benefit, or makes most for Religion, Gods glory, and the credit of
the Gospel, according to those three rules, 1 Corinthians. 10.31, 32, 33.

5 Find out the cause of your scruple. If it be ignorance, strive for
information, and do not out of conceitedness of thy own opinion put it off.

If Satan's suggestion, compare the reasons with the Word. If melancholy be the
cause, as often it is, compare the soul when it is in a quiet frame, and the
melancholy fit over with those reasons that appeared in the time of melancholy,
thou shall see a great unlikeness betwixt them, as betwixt water when it is
puddled or jumbled together, and water when it is clear.

If thy scruple arise from scrupulous persons, consider the weight of their
reasons, remembering no man is to be heeded more then his reason weighs.

If it arise from fear of sinning against God and conscience of duty, then
remember its backed with a plain commandment.

6 Beware you do not strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel; to scruple about the
payment of the tithe of rue, mint, anise, and cummin, and neglect the weightier
matters of the Law, justice and the love of God: we may scruple justly to break
the least command, as Daniel was resolvedly set not to defile himself with the
portion of the Kings meat, Dan. 1.8. as also not to neglect a duty, Dan. 6.10.
yet be sure that you be as much or more scrupulous in the weightier matters of
the Law, Matthew. 23.23. by no means to have the least hand in the violation of
them.

7 Let not the mind run too much upon a scruple, for Satan is wont to stir up
a great fog and mist in the minds of some conscientious people, and so to
impress strange things on the imagination, by the minds still running
thereupon, though some are too far the other way that they will not so much as
reason whether things be right or wrong.

8 When we see scruples are needless and endless and cannot be taken away with
contrary reason, let them forcibly be laid aside at least till another time,
for sometimes Satan follows weak Christians so closely, that they can no other
way get out of them.

9 Where we see the questions we have in our minds are needless scruples,
wherein is no reason, we may act against them, and yet the conscience not be
weaker but stronger.

10 In case of scrupling let conscience speak out till it it have no more to
say, and beware you do not put a trick upon conscience by a cunning
distinction. If conscience put thee upon hard things yet be sure to follow it,
Acts 20.22, 23, 24. as it may be it puts thee upon duty whereby thou shall lose
some dear friend, and procure some heavy enemy.

11 Beware of pretending a scruple when there is no such thing. Matthew. 22.16,
17. The Herodians come to Christ and pretend a scruple, We know thou art true,
and teach the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man, for thou
regardest not the person of men, tell us, Is it lawful to give tribute to
Caesar, or not? In which question they only endeavored ensnarement, if Christ
said it was lawful, they would have rendered him a flattering timeserver,
because the Jews held generally that the Romans had violently subdued them; if
he had said it was not lawful, they would have accused him of treason against
Caesar. Thus to pretend a scruple is an act of gross hypocrisy, and those that
thus set up a stumbling block of iniquity, and come to a Prophet to enquire
concerning the Lord or his ways, the Lord will answer him accordingly, Ezekiel.
14.7. And I will set my face against that man. So those, Jerem. 42.5, 6.

12 Do not despise nor be eager against scrupulous persons, Scrupulosi non sunt
rigide tractandi, said Antoninus the Casuist, because this tenderness of
conscience when it is real is a precious principle, arising from a great
measure of Gods fear, and is a fruit of the spirit in whom it is, though
sometimes through ignorance and injudiciousness it scruples where it ought not.
Yet as in fields where there are many briars, thistles, and thorns, it argues
there is good ground if it were well husbanded, so a heart that conscientiously
scruples, though often the scruples are not good, yet they, arising from a true
fear of not sinning against God, they argue the heart is good. Yet an
enlightened. conscience, other things being like, is better then a scrupuling
conscience.

13 Sometimes a scruple may be determined by an use of lot, when a soul doubts
which way God would have him to go, yet he is so purged from self-endedness
that he desires God may determine the matter. Acts 1.24. Thou, Lord, which
know the hearts, show which of these two thou have chosen.

14 To scruple in small things and not in great matters is a note of a
hypocrite. Matthew. 23.23. Also the Jewish Priests scrupled the bringing the
thirty pieces into the treasury, being the price of blood, Matthew. 27.6. yet
they scrupled not to shed innocent blood. The Jews scrupled to give Paul one
stripe above the Law; the Law was, Deuteronomy. 25.3. that the Judge determine him
forty stripes but not exceed, now the Jews whipped Paul five times, and they
scrupled so to transgress the Law herein, that they gave him but thirty nine
stripes, but they scrupled not to whip an innocent person. Saul would not eat
with the blood, he scrupled it, yet would he not scruple to take away the lives
of fourscore of the Lords Priests at one time.

15 Still urge thy soul to give a reason of thy scruple. So David, Psalm. 43.5.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? If
the soul cannot render a reason of it, be sure it comes either from Satan or
melancholy, or some such cause, or its some injected temptation, such as the
devil cast into Christ's mind, to make him scruple whether God was his father.

16 Answer the scruples. When thou see them manifest fallacies in grace,
though true consequences in nature: for example, Satan says thou art a sinner,
God is just, therefore he hates thee, therefore inflicts punishment, therefore
he hears thee not, this consequence cannot be denied in nature. The consequence
of grace is, thou art a sinner therefore believe, and when Satan opposes thy
sins, say, What is that to thee Satan? I have not sinned against thee but
against my God, I am not thy sinner, what power have thou over me, Satan, if it
be truly a sin whereof thou accusest me? Satan sometimes terrifies the mind
also with those things which are not sins but he alleges them to be sins, as
Christ will not quench smoking flax, no more will I quench it in my self.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table of some of the Common places which are handled in these
first Ten Chapters of MATTHEW.
A. ADultery, Matthew. 5.27. Five disswasions from it. Ten remedies against it.
Alms. Grounds thereof. Properties therein. Helps thereto. Objections answered,
Matthew. 5.42. And the manner of doing it, Matthew. 6.1, 2. Anger, Matthew. 5.22.
Holy. Six properties. Fifteen remedies against sinful Anger. Apparel, Matthew.
6.26. Grounds of moderation herein. Astrology Judicial the vanity of it, in
Matthew. 2.2. Assurance. Eight reasons that it may be had; it breeds not
security, Matthew. 6.12.
B. THe point of Baptism handled, Matthew. 3.6. Eight Reasons why Christ was
Baptized, though he had no sin, Matthew. 3.13. What is meant by fulfilling all
righteousness in six particulars, Matthew. 3.15.
C. CArking Cares, Matthew. 6.25, 26. Thirty four helps against them. Cross to be
taken up. Seventeen grounds, Matthew. 10.38. Companying with wicked men, how far
lawful, how far unlawful. Eight helps how to carry our selves when cast among
them. Seven means to get rid of them. Eleven grounds thereto. Confession and
Denial of Christ, in Matthew. 10.32, 33. Contentions about Religion, Matthew.
10.34.
D. OF Demoniacks, Matthew. 8.16. Of Divorce, Matthew. 5.30. Of doing as we would
be don to, Matthew. 7.12. Of Dreams, Matthew. 1.20. Four sorts, uses to be made of
them.
E. ENemies to be loved. Five grounds of it. How the Prophets prayed against
Enemies. Six objections answered. Seven means to love them. Motives thereto.
Matthew. 5.44. F. FAith weak and strong. In what respects faith admits degrees in
six particulars. Six notes of a strong Faith, Mat. 6.26. Fasting, Matthew. 6.16.
Nine rules in Fasting. Seven rocks to be shunned. Fewness of saved ones. Seven
reasons of it, Matthew. 7.13. Fear of God, Matthew. 10.28. First, the causes. The
degrees. The necessity in six particulars. Eleven trials. Five means to it.
Five differences betwixt filial and slavish fear. Ten motives. Slavish Fear,
Matthew. 8.26. 1 Kinds. Seven grounds against it. Four motives to rid the heart
of it. Of Flight in persecution, Matthew. 10.23. Seven rules therein. Forgiveness
of sins as from God, Matthew. 6.12. Six comforts to drooping souls. Nine grounds
of begging pardon. 11 signs to know whether our sins be pardoned. Forgiveness
of sins to men, Matthew. 5.25. Where, 1 The manner of forgiveness. 2 The order of
forgiveness. 3 The Motives thereto. See chap. 6.14, 15. Following Christ,
Matthew. 10.38. Six grounds thereof. Four means. Seven hindrances. Five motives.
H. HUnger and thirst after righteousness. Five reasons. Eleven grounds. Four
motives, on Matthew. 5.6. Hearing and doing must go together, Matthew. 7.24. Eleven
grounds thereof. Who are right Hearers. Fifteen rules in right hearing, Matthew.
7.26. Twelve causes of unprofitable hearing, ibid. on Matthew. 7.26. Hell, the
punishment of the damned therein, Matthew. 8.12. There is material fire therein,
or that which is worse. Matthew. 10.28. Hypocrisy. First the kinds. 2 What it
is. Seven cautions before trial of our selves. Twelve marks of an Hypocrite.
Ten remedies against Hypocrisy, Matthew. 10.42.
I. INvocation of Saints. Seven grounds against it. Infirmities, Matthew. 8.17.
Four trials whether thy sins be Infirmities. Seven grounds to bear with others
Infirmities, Matthew. 8.17. Judgment, Rash. First what it is. Eleven grounds to
take us from it. Six sorts of rash judgment condemned, on Matthew. 7.1, 2.
K. OF the Kingdom of Christ. 1 Of Grace, which comes six ways. 2 Of Glory, in
which 3 things. 1 The beginning of it. 2 The end of it. 3 The gloriousness of
it. Set down, 1 By similitudes. 2 By plain Scriptures. 3 By the excellent
things therein, which are, 1 In general. 8 In particular. Seven evils Saints
shall be delivered from. Four goods they shall enjoy therein, Matthew. 6.12. L.
LAying on of hands after Baptism. Three kinds of Laying on of hands, Matthew.
10.18. depraved by three sorts of men. Seven Arguments to prove it an
Apostolical institution. Seven objections against it answered. Laborers in
Gods harvest, Matthew. 9.38. Their duty. The causes why so few. Of the Law and
fulfilling thereof by Christ, Matthew. 5.17. A large discourse of spiritual Life
and death, Matthew. 8.22. Seven trials of dead men. Seven trials of men alive.
Three means to life. Eleven motives to it. Love of the world. Six grounds of
conviction herein. Thirteen grounds of disswasion from it. Eleven remedies
against it. Four grounds of the reign of this sin. Six grounds it reigns not,
Matthew. 6.24. Lust of the heart, Matthew. 5.28. Six remedies against it.
M. MEekness. The grounds of it. Properties of it. Six Means to obtain it.
Mercifulness. Three reasons. Eight grounds. Nine rules therein, on Matthew. 5.7.
Murder and cruelty, Matthew. 5.21. The kinds of it. Five objections answered.
Lawful War no Murder. Mourning, spiritual. Six grounds of it. Nine trials.
Nine Means thereto, Matthew. 5.4.
O. OAths. Several cases about them, Matthew. 5.33. Outward things how promised
by God, Matthew. 6.33.
P. OF Peace and Peacemaking. Seven means to Peace. Three means to
Peacemaking. Eight motives, in the last whereof are seven benefits, Matthew.
5.9. Perfection in God, Matthew. 5.48. Six grounds of it. Seven Uses. Perfection
in Saints how it is taken. Four trials of it. Persecution for righteousness
sake. Nine grounds of suffering it. Twelve means thereto. Four consolations
under it. Poverty spiritual, Matthew. 5.2. What it is. Eight trials. Seven means
thereto. Power of God, Matthew. 6.14. Twofold. Eight grounds setting forth Gods
power. Prayer. Six questions handled, Matthew. 6.7. 1 About repetitions. 2 About
long Prayer. 3 Also v. 9. About meltings in Prayer, wherein twelve things
considerable. 4 About delaying Prayer. 5 About distractions in Prayer. 6 About
straitnings and enlargements in Prayer. Fourteen rules in Praying. 18 Motives
to stir us up to Prayer. Nine things concerning the object, the Trinity we eye
in Prayer, and of the manner herein. Prophets false, Mat. 7.15. Four grounds
why to be shunned. Their resemblance to Wolves in six particulars. Fourteen
signs of them, with a large answer to three Scriptures, abused by the deluders
of the times. Preachers maintenance the manner of it, the right they have to
it, wherein certain proposals, as to the Magistrates maintenance, are soberly
offered, not peremptorily determined, with many objections on both sides,
largely handled, on Mat. 10.9. Providence of God on Mat. 10.29, 30. Nine
grounds asserting it, four uses made of it. Powerless profession, on Mat. 7.21.
Five reasons of it, Five remedies against it, Six trials herein. Of Prophecy,
on Mat. 10.41. Two kinds of it, Nine helps thereto. Of the Pharisees and
Saduces what they were, Mat. 3.7. Of Purity of heart, Mat. 5.8. what it is, Six
means to it.
R REpentance, on Mat. 3.1. Replies in public Congregations lawful, but apt
to be abused, Eight benefits hereby, Nine rules to be observed herein, on Mat.
7.26. Revilings, on Mat. 5.12. Nine Consolations herein when they are for
Christ. Revenge private, on Mat. 5.38. Reproof, on Mat. 7.6. to whom to be
given. Eight rules in giving it. Righteousness of Christians two fold, where
many questions are handled about Gods righteousness and man's righteousness, on
Mat. 10.41. Reward of Saints, what it is, to whom given, and when, on Mat.
10.42.
S. SAvory life on Mat. 5.13. Eight resemblances of a Christians Life and Salt.
Seven disswasions from unsavoriness, six helps to a savory life. Sanctification
of Gods name, on Mat. 6.9. Six ways of Sanctifying it. Self-destruction, on
Mat. 4.6. Thirteen helps against it. Secret actions seen by God, Mat. 6.3.
Sight of God, on Mat. 5.8. the kinds of it, the happiness of a glorified sight,
in six particulars, with answer to some objections. Souls sleep not, nor are
annihilated till the day of the Resurrection. Sincerity, Mat. 10.42. Twelve
grounds to it, Six comforts in it, Twelve trials of it. Scruples, their kinds,
nature. Twelve rules about scruples, on Mat. 10.14.
T TEmptation of Christ, on Mat. 4.1. Temptations of Christians, Mat. 6.13.
where 1 the kinds of it. God has five ends therein. Nineteen remedies herein.
Thoughts, the causes of evil thoughts. Four ways they become evil: objections
answered, five trials of thy thoughts, seven remedies against bad thoughts,
seven motives to look to the thoughts, on Matthew. 9.4. Treasure, heavenly,
Eleven notes of it, Mat. 6.19. Teaching with authority seen in eight
particulars, Mat. 7.29.
V USury on Matthew. 5.42. what it is: Its usually falsely described.
Understanding enlightened, Matthew. 6.22, 23.
W OF the Will of God, Mat. 6.11.
There are diverse other common places, but these belonging to the practical and
savory part of Christianity, I have picked out for the benefit of some Readers,
who may be straightened in time to peruse the whole: I would have made a larger
Table, but being far from the Press, it could not so well be done by me.

FINIS.

