A more Exact RELATION OF THE GREAT DEFEAT GIVEN to Gorings Army in the West;
By the Victorious Sr. Thomas Fairfax.

Sent in a Letter from Captain Blackwell, to his father in London.

Published according to Order.

LONDN, Printed for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley, 1645.

A more exact relation of the great defeat given to Gorings Army in the West:
by the Victorious Sr. Thomas Fairfax,
Dear Father.
I sent you yesterday a note wherein I acquainted you in general that Sr.
Thomas Fairfax had newly routed the Kings Army, under the command of General
Goring. Having now another oppertunity of sending and more time for writing, I
shall give a more large, yet a brief relation too of the particulars.

On Monday last we marched from Crookhorne toward Ilchester, a garrison of the
Kings, standing upon the river, (on the other side of which Gorings Army was
drawn up) they having broken down all the Bridges upon the river from Evil
to Bridgewater, and made good the passes by parties of theirs: we faced
Ilchester with our Horse about noone, and sent a small party toward the Town
to beat in their horse-guard, whereby we might the better view their works,
for we thought to have forced over the pass, We beat their guards in, having
wounded some of them, and taken a Lieut. prisoner, but found it difficult to
pass that way: whereupon we marched with our foot to Evil, 3 miles thence
that night, and found that Bridge also broke up. But the next morning early
inteligence came the enemy was marched toward Glasseabury and Bristoll.
Whereupon we thought to have followed them, but our intelligence being not
certain of the way of their march, because a party of them had marched another
way, and finding their garrison. viz. Ilchester quitted and burnt (the
strongest part of it,) we marched thither and quartered there on Teusday night
till better intelligence.

The next morning we understood they were marched to Langport, (another
Garrison upon the river) from whence they sent a party of horse toward
Ilmester where Major General Massies forces were quartered but being beaten
back and pursued near Langport, Massy found 3 Regiments of the enemies horse
turned out to grtse, which they seized upon and kept: and in the pursuit took
diverse colors from the enemy, and endangered Gorings person very much,
whilst Sr. Tho. Fairfax with his Army was on the other side the river within 3
miles of Langport, at a place called Sutton viewing the pursuit, having
received intelligence that night of this defeat given to the enemy by Massy,
the next morning the enemy were all drawn out of Langport, on that side of the
river where Our quarters were, we marched forthwith toward them: with 7
Regiments of horse (which were all the horse on this side the river) and one
Company of Dragoons, and 8 Regiments of foot, And drew up against them in a
Campania within a mile of Langport upon one hill, they being upon another, and
there was betwixt us a small valley, and only a road way to pass through, the
sides of the valley being enclosed grounds by hedges and a small brook running
in the bottom between us. Here we had some skirmiging with our horse, till at
last the enemy finding it would be much to their dis-advantage to lose, or to
suffer us to march up that way, they endeavored to make it good by lining the
hedges with Musquettiers, but we resolved about 10. of tht clock in the
morning to force our way (although they had also placed a pieces of Ordinance
on the top of the hill in the road way) when they perceived what we intended
by our drawing toward them, they sent Dragoones to make good the pass, and as
we thought, intended to draw off their Musquettiers, but before they could draw
them off, we had engaged them by forlorn hopes of Musquettiers, drawn down to
the hedges, both on the right hand and left of that pass, which they with
stood a while stoutly; but having drawn up our great Guns, and given them
about 50. or 60. great shot, their horse began to retreat, and their foot
could not abide so much heat, as they found in our Musquettiers, of both
forlorn hopes; whereupon our horse began to advance up the way: then their
foot ran from the hedges. The Regiments late Lieut. Gener2l is own Regiment
(for it is now divided into two) being in the Van, advanced up the hill, and
Major Bethell of one of those Regiments gave the horse such a gallant charge up
the hill, that they after a long dispute with him quitted the ground, and gave
liberty for the rest of our Horse to come up; who found them not resolved for a
long dispute, and therefore charging them desparately the enemy all faced
about, and ran away both horse and foot most shamefully: The foot most of them
into Langport which was within half a mile of them, but for have threw down
all their arms by the way, and the Horse, all that were on this side the
River, toward Bridgewater, our Horse pursuing with the Lieutenant General
Cromwell, until they came within a mile of Bridgewater, killing many by the
way, and taking many prisoners, while they were pursuing the Lieut. General
gave order for a party of Horse to face Langport, their Garrison to secure the
rear, And after his return finding them marching out of Langport, on the
other side of the water, made ready a party of Horse and Dragoons, if it were
possible to come at them to pursue them also: when they were all marched out of
the Town, but some of their own that they killed, who would not march with
them: they set the farther end of the Town on fire in a narrow stree^e,
thinking thereby to have hindered us that we could not come after them: But
although the fire burnt very violently on both sides, so that many durst not
venture, the Lieut. General himself advanced in the head of 6. Troops of
Horse, with about 3. of Dragoons to pursue them, (two Regiments of Foot being
commanded to march as fast as they could after: he overtook them within 2. or
3. miles of the Town: And although their number was far greater, yet it
pleased the Lord to strike them with such a fear, that 15. Troops of Horse,
and about 2000. Foot, the greatest part of then ran away and hid themselves,
but we took hundreds of them prisoners, and marched through their own flame
with them back again into Langport, showing them their wickedness. Thus God
has blessed us exceedingly, we have taken many prisoners, I cannot at present
know what they are, but we have taken the Lieutenant General of their
Ordnance, and adjuvant General, 3. Colonels, with Lieutenant Colonels and
Majors, and many Captains and other Offices, about 30. Foot Colors, I have
not yet learnt how many Horse Colors, 2. pieces of Ordnance, the rest with
their Train being sent to Bridgewater, in the morning two wagons of
Ammunition, about a 1000. Muskets, I know not how many Horses, above a 1000.
prisoners of Foot. All their arms which we took not, they threw into the
River, and corn ficlds, killed about 60. or 80. of them, with the loss of
about 4. or 5. men at most: Many of the prisoners have taken up arms, the rest
are sent as I think for London, we are now upon our pursuit with the Army,
within 2. miles of Bridgewater, both Horse, Foot, and Train, intending to
fall to work there next, here are 3000. club-men declared for us, and keep
the passages with muskets between Bridgewater and Bristoll. Sir, we do, do
you also bless God, who has raised up a poor company of men to do him such
service, Men who were by some thought not firt to be tolerated in the
Kingdom, but faithful to God and those who have employed them, without any
other ends then Gods glory, and the public welfare of this poor Kingdom.
Sir, I have no more time, pray excuse my have, this is truth, and all the truth
I know at present: I desire all my friends may know what great things God has
done for us, and may bless his Name for it, with us:

Middlesey, July 11. Friday, 1645. Sir, Your most dutiful Son, John
Blackwell.

FINIS.

