Twelve ARGVMENTS Drawn out of the Scripture, Wherein the commonly received
Opinion touching the Deity of the Holy Spirit, is clearly and fully refuted.

To which is prefixed a Letter tending to the same purpose, written to a Member
of the Honorable House of Commons.

And to which is subjoyned an Exposition of five principal Passages of the
Scripture, alleged by the Adversaries to prove the Deity of the Holy Spirit;
together with an Answer to their grand Objection touching the supposed
Omnipresence of the Holy Spirit.

By JOHN BIDLE, Master of Arts.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.

Printed in the Year 1647.

To the impartial READER.
Reader,
WHen I consider with my self, how many Truths have (in their dawnings) gone
forth like the Morning, and are now risen unto a glorious day, unto the
amazement, and confounding of those, who were grand Opposers of them; (though I
know truth has, and still shall have many Adversaries; whilst the face of the
covering, and the veil spread over all Nations remains undestroyed; yet I know
too, that Truth's bare breasts are Armor of Prooff against all the daring
darts of Satan, and all the furious attempts and storms of the flesh) I cannot
but abundantly rejoice in the glory of its strength. How many things have in
several Ages (as well as in Ours) been cried up for truths? And how has God
blown upon them, that they have withered, and the whirlewind has taken them
away as stuble? Again, how many Truths have been cried down as Blasphemy and
Error, the beams of whose glory, are now ready to dazell and obscure all the
glory of the flesh? Sometimes taking in those (through the goings forth of God
in it,) who have bin the mightiest enemies, insomuch that (standing amazed
awhile) they have soon been swallowed up in the power of it: And oh that mine
eyes might behold more of that day of Gods power, and of the out-lettings of
the beauties of his holiness; that the tall Cedars of Lebanon might be bended,
and the Oaks of Bashan ashamed, that the creature and its glory might be
brought low, and men who are now like Bullocks unaccustomed unto the yoke,
might be made willing, and the Lord alone exalted in them, by them, and amongst
them.

Did we but seriously consider, how most men are adorned with living names, (
viz. of Believers, Christians, Protestants, etc.) whilst they are indeed dead,
(as will appear, seeing there are no symptoms of life in them) we could not but
startle at it: what is the profession, or Religion, of most part of men, but
formal and fleshly? Are they not like those barbarous Lettoes, who who were
always in the Fields and Woods, heard uttering these words, feru feru Masco
Lon: but being demanded the reason, they Replied, That they knew nothing, but
that they had bin so of long taught by their Ancestors: Men's mouths are now
filled with Forms, and they are daily crying out the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord; God, and Christ, and Spirit; when it is evident, they have no
more then what Education affords, nay less, because not moralized, wherein
Heathens outstrip them, they know not God, did they, they could not lightly
blaspheme him; they go Christlesse, and have not received the Spirit of
wisdom in the Revelation and knowledge of him; and this makes them to cry out,
that whatsoever is not according to their fleshly Forms, is Error, Heresy,
Blasphemy, because it will not hold according to carnal principals, unto
which they must needs reduce all things, who have no principal of life within
them; such are those who are called Christians, and yet reel too and fro
through wine and strong drink, and swell by reason of Oaths, living in
abominations; of which sort of men most of our Parish Churches are constituted:
such men have not discerning spirits, neither are they competent judges,
because enemies to Truth, as well as Error, wherefore the Author betakes
himself to the Christian Reader, i.e. one that is so indeed.

I know many men (as well as my self) will be ready to cry out Blasphemy,
Blasphemy at the first view of the Title Page, yet I could wish that they would
embrace the Apostles counsel, Prove all things, holding fast that which is
good: Call all things to a serious examine, and reject nothing hand over-head,
take nothing upon Trust, without a fore-examining of every circumstance, lest
in the one, they should reject Truth instead of Error; and in the other,
embrace Error instead of truth.

The Author has a long time waited upon learned men for a satisfactory Answer
to these Arguments, but has received none, his hopes are, that the publishing
of them will be a means to produce it, that he may receive satisfaction, and
others may be held no longer in suspense, who are in travel with an earnest
expectation of a speedy resolution, as well as he. I should desire those who
view it, but especially those who undertake to Answer it (for my hopes are,
that some one will) to consider; first, that to say, such an Argument is
invalid, and weak, and not worth the Answering, is no convincing way of
arguing, nor able to yield the least satisfaction to a doubting spirit.
Secondly, that invectives, railings or reproachful terms, are no convincing
Arguments (as all men of a sober judgment well know;) at these rates the
weakest man may subvert the strongest Controversy, yet these have been the
arguings of our times, both in Press and Pulpit. Thirdly, to prohibit the
progress of it, can no ways unscruple doubting spirits, amongst whom (for the
present) I number my self, expecting an Answer to these ensuing Arguments; and
that God will be with him that undertakes it, and give in a spirit of
Meekness, and of Wisdom, in the Revelation and Knowledge of Truth, shall be
the matter of his prayers, who desires Truth may be cleared up, and shine like
the noonday, and all Error confounded, and vanish before Truth, like a mist
before the Sun.

T. H.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I beseech thee, as thou tenderest thy salvation, that thou
would thoroughly examine the following Disputation, in the fear of God,
considering how much his glory is concerned therein, and at any hand forbear
to condemn my Opinion as Erroneous, till thou art able to bring pertinent and
solid Answers to all my Arguments; for thou must know, that though I have
contested with sundry Learned men, yet has none hitherto produced a
satisfactory Answer to so much as one Argument. Farewell.

I.B.

A LETTER written to a certain Knight, a Member of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
HAving now attended for the space of sixteen Months, partly in the Country,
and partly in Westminster, that I might come to my Answer before the
Parliament, and finding after all this tarriance, that I am still as far from
having my cause determined, as ever, I am even forced to make my address to
you, and to beseech you, if you have any bowels toward them that are in
misery, that you would either procure my discharge, or at least make report to
the House touching my denial of the supposed Deity of the Holy Spirit. For
that this only is the matter in contestation you very well know, having both
heard my confession before the Committee, and remembering how when I was urged
to declare my judgment concerning the Deity of Christ, I waved the question,
as neither being that I was accused of, nor which I had yet sufficiently
studied to engage my self publicly therein. As for my opinion touching the
Holy Spirit, it is thus; I believe the Holy Spirit to be the chief of all see
Heb. 1.13.14. whence these words are borrowed; and compare it with 1 Pet..1 12.
as also Heb. 1.7. compared with Acts 1.2, 3.4. and it will easily appear that
the Holy Spirit is a minister of God, as well as others.
Ministering Spirits, peculiarly sent out from Heaven to minister on their
behalf that shall inherit salvation; and I do place him both according to the
Scripture, and the Primitive Christians, and by name Justin Martyr in his
Apology, in the third rank after God and Christ, giving him a pre-eminence
above all the rest of the Heavenly Host; So that as there is one principal
Spirit amongst the evil Angels, known in the Scripture by the name of Satan or
the 1 Pet. 5.8.
Adversary, or the Zech. 13.2.
Unclean Spirit, or the 1 Samuel 16.15.16.
Evil Spirit of God, or ib. ver. the last.
the Spirit of God, or 1 Kings 12.21. according to the Original.
the Spirit by way of eminence: Even so is there one principal Spirit; (I
borrow this Appellation from the Septuagint, who render the latter clause of
the 12 verse of Psalm. 31. in this manner, (...), Spiritu principali fulci me,
stablish me with thy principal Spirit,) there is, I say, one principal Spirit
amongst the good Angels, called by the name of the John 16.7.
Advocate, or the Ephesians. 4.30.
Holy spirit, or Neh. 9.20.
the good spirit of God, or 1 Cot. 7.40.
the spirit of God, or Acts 10.19.
the spirit, by way of eminence. This opinion of mine is attested by the whole
tenor of the Scripture, which perpetually speaks of him as differing from
God, and inferior to him, but is irrefragably proved by these places of
Scripture, Neh. 9.6.20. Thou, even thou art Lord (or Jehovah) alone, thou have
made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their Host. Thou gave thy good
spirit to instruct them (the Children of Israel.)] John 16.7.8. etc.
Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away:
for if I go not away the So the word (...) in the Original perpetually
signifies amongst Greek Authors, and is so rendered by the Translatours
themselves. 1 John 2.1. and ought to have been so rendered here, especially
because he says in the following words, that the Holy Spirit shall convince
the world, for it is proper to an Advocate to convince.
Advocate will not come unto you, but if I depart I will send him unto you. And
when he is come, he will reprove (in the Original, Convince) the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. I have yet many things, to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the spirit of truth,
is come, he will guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself,
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he will show you
things to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and shall
show it unto you. All things that the Father has, are mine: therefore said I,
he shall take of mine, and show it unto you.] Romans 8.26, 27. Likewise the
spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for
as we ought: but the spirit himself makes intercession for us, with groans
that cannot be uttered. But he that searches the hearts, knows what is the
mind (or desire) of the spirit, for he makes intercession for the Saints
according to the will of God.] Acts 19.2. And (Paul) finding certain
Disciples, said unto them, have ye received the Holy Spirit, since ye
believed? And they said unto him, we have not so much as heard whether there be
any Holy spirit.] Ephesians. 4.4.5.6. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye
have been called in one hope of your calling. One Lord, one faith, one
Baptism. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all.] 1 Cor. 12.3.4. etc. Wherefore I give you to understand, that noman
speaking by the spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed, and that no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy spirit; But there are diversities of
gifts, yet the same spirit. And there are diversities of administrations, yet
the same Lord; And there are diversities of operations, yet it is the same God
that works all in all.] Luke 3.21, 22. It came to pass that Jesus also being
baptized, and praying, the Heaven was opened, and the Holy spirit descended in
a bodily shape like a dove upon him.] 1 Cor. 2.11.12.13. But God has revealed
them to us by his spirit, for the spirit searches all things, even the depths
of God. For what man knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man,
which is in him? even so the things of God knows none, but the spirit of God,
(he does not add, as before, which is in him.) Now we have received, not the
spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given us of God. Revel. 22.12.17. Behold I come quickly,
and my reward is with me, to give unto every man according as his work shall
be, and the Spirit and the Bride say, come.] Acts 5.32. And we are his
witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy Spirit, whom God has given
to them that obey him.] Gal. 3.5. He therefore that ministers (or gives) to
you the Spirit, and works miracles among you, does he it by the works of the
Law, or by the hearing (or rather preaching of Faith.] He that ministers or
gives the spirit to you, a strange kind of speech, if the Holy Spirit were
God. The Scripture is wont to speak more soberly of Almighty God, then to say
that he is given by another, much less by men, as it is here said of the Holy
Spirit, 1 Cor. 8.4.5.6. [ We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and
that there is no other God but one. For though there be that are called Gods,
whether in Heaven, or in Earth; as there be many Gods, and many Lords, yet unto
us there is but one God, ev^^ the Father, of whom are all things, and we unto
him; and one Lord, even Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.]
You see here that the Apostle being about to set down, who is the only God, and
only Lord of Christians, makes no mention of the Holy Spirit, which could not
have been done by so faithful an Apostle, had the Holy Spirit bin either God
or Lord. Of these places thus recited no man, though never so subtle, and
though he turn and wind his wit every way, shall ever be able to make sense,
unless he take the Holy Spirit to be what I say.

Behold now the cause for which I have lain under persecution, raised against
me by my adversaries, who being unable to justify by Argument their practice
of giving glory to the Holy Spirit, as God, in the end of their prayers, since
there is neither precept nor example for it in all the Scripture; and being
taxed by me for giving the glory of God to another, and worshipping what he
has not commanded, nor ever came into his heart, have in a cruel and
unchristian manner resorted to the arm of flesh, and instigated the Magistrate
against me, hoping by his sword, (not that of the Spirit) to uphold their
Will Worship; but in vain, since every Plant that the Heavenly Father has not
set, shall be rooted up; and that this practice of Worshipping the Holy Spirit
as God, is such a Plant as God never set in his word, would soon appear to
the Honorable House, could they be but so far prevailed with, as, laying
aside all prejudice, seriously to weigh the many and solid proofs that I
produce for my opinion out of the Scripture, together with the slight, or
rather no proofs of the adverse party for their opinion, which they themselves
know not what to make of, but that they endeavor to delude both themselves and
others with Personalities, Moods, Subsistences, and such like brainsick
Notions, that have neither sap nor sense in them, and were first hatched by the
subtilty of Satan in the heads of Platonists, to pervert the Worship of the
true God. Neither could this controversy be set on foot in a fitter juncture of
time then this, wherein the Parliament and Kingdom have solemnly engaged
themselves to resorme Religion both in Discipline and Doctrine. For amongst all
the corruptions in Doctrine, which certainly are many, there is none that more
deserves to be amended then this, that so palpably thwarteth the whole tenor
of the Scripture, and trencheth to the very object of our worship, and
therefore ought not to be lightly passed over by any man that professes
himself a Christian, much more a Reformer. God is jealous of his honor, and
will not give it to another, we therefore as beloved children should imitate
our heavenly Father herein, and not upon any pretense whatsoever depart from
his express command, and give the worship of the supreme Lord of Heaven and
Earth, to him whom the Scripture no where affirms to be God. For my own
particular, after a long and impartial enquiry of the truth, in this
controversy, and after much and earnest calling upon God to give unto me the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, I findemy self
obliged both by the principles of Scripture and of Reason to embrace the
opinion I now hold forth, and as much as in me lies, to endeavor that the
honor of Almighty God be not transferred to another, not only to the offense
of God himself, but also of his Holy Spirit, who cannot but be grieved to have
that ignorantly ascribed to himself, which is proper to God that sends him,
and which he no where challenges to himself in the Scripture: what shall
befall me in pursuance of this work, I refer to the disposal of the
all-wise God, whose glory is dearer to me, not only then my liberty, but then
my life. It will be your part, Honored Sir, into whose hands God has put such
an opportunity, to examine the business impartially, and to be an helper to
the truth, considering that this controversy is of the greatest importance in
the world, and that the divine truth suffers not her self to be despised
scot-free. Neither let the meanness of my outward presence deterr you from
stirring, since it is the part of a wise man, as in all things, so especially
in matters of Religion, not to regard so much who it is that speaks, as what
it is that is spoken, remembering how our Savior in the Gospel says that God
is wont to hide his secrets from the wise and prudent, and to reveal them unto
children. In which number I willingly reckon my self, being couscious of mine
own personal weakness, but well assured of the strength and evidence of the
Scripture to bear me out in this cause; and remain

April 1. 1647. Yours in the Lord, I. Bidle.

Twelve Arguments drawn out of the Scripture, wherein the commonly received
Opinion touching the Deity of the Holy Spirit, is clearly and fully refuted.
ARGUMENT 1.
HE that is distinguished from God, is not God; the holy Spirit is
distinguished from God. Ergo. The major is evident, for if he should both b^
God, and be distinguished from God, he would be distinguished from himself,
which implies a contradiction. The minor is confirmed by the whole current of
the Scripture, which calls him the Spirit of God, and says that he is sent
by God, and searches the depths of God etc. Neither let any man see think to
fly to that ignorant refuge of making a distinction between the Essence and
Person of God, saying that the Holy Spirit is distinguished from God, taken
personally not Essentially. For this wretched distinction (to omit the mention
of the Primitive Fathers) is not only unheard of in the Scripture, and so to be
rejected, it being presumption to affirm any thing of the unsearchable nature
of God, which he has not first affirmed of himself in the Scripture: but is
also disclaimed by Reason For first, it is impossible for any man, if he would
but endeavor to conceive the thing, and not delude both himself and others
with empty terms and words without understanding, to distinguish the person
from the Essence of God, and not to frame two beings or things in his mind,
and consequently two Gods. Secondly, If the person be distinct from the Essence
of God, then it is either something or nothing: if nothing, how can it be
distinguished, since nothing has no accidents? If something, then either some
finite or infinite thing; if finite, then there will be something finite in
God; and consequently since by the confession of the adversaryes themselves,
every thing in God is God himself, God will be finite, which the adversaryes
themselves will likewise confess to be absurd. If infinite, then there will be
two infinites in God, to wit the Person and Essence of God, and consequently
two Gods; which is more absurd then the former. Thirdly, to talk of God taken
only Essentially is ridiculous, not only because there is no example thereof in
Scripture, but because God is the name of a By person I understand, as
Philosophers do, suppositum intelligens, that is, an intellectual substance
complete and not a mood or subsistence, which are fantastical and senseless
terms, brought in to cousen the simple.
Person, and signifies him that rules over others; and when it is put for the
most high God, it denotes him who with sovereign and absolute authority rules
over all; but none but a person can rule over others, all actions being proper
to persons: wherefore to take God otherwise then personally, is to take him
otherwise then he is, and indeed to mistake him.

ARGUMENT 2.
If he that gave the Holy Spirit to the Israelites to instruct them, be Jehovah
alone, then the Holy Spirit is not Jehovah or God; But he that gave the Holy
Spirit to the Israelites to instruct them, is Jehovah alone; Ergo. The sequel
of the major is plain, for if he that gave the Holy Spirit be Jehovah alone,
and yet the Holy Spirit that was given be Jehovah too, the same will be Jehovah
alone, and not Jehovah alone, which implies a contradiction. The minor is
evidenced by Neh. 9.6.20.

ARGUMENT 3.
He that speaks not of himself, is not God. The Holy Spirit speaks not of
himself; Ergo. The minor is clear from Ioh 16.13. The major is proved thus:
God speaks of himself; therefore if there be any one that speaks not of
himself, he is not God. The antecedent is of it self apparent, for God is the
primary author of whatsoever he does, but should he not speak of himself,
he must speak from another, and so not be the primary, but secundary author
of his speech, which is absurd, if at least that may be called absurd, which is
impossible. The consequence is undeniable. For further confirmation of this
Argument, it is to be observed, that to speak or do any thing not of himself,
according to the ordinary phrase of Scripture, is to speak or do by the
showing, teaching, commanding, authorizing, or enabling of another, and
consequently incompatible with the supreme and selfe-sufficient Majesty of
God. Vid. John 5.19.20.30. 7.15.16.17.18.28. 8.28.42. 11.50. 51. 12.49.50.
14.10.24. 15.4. 18.34. Luke 12.56.57. 21.30. 2 Cor. 3.5.

ARGUMENT 4.
He that hears from another what he shall speak, is not God; The Holy spirit
does so; Ergo. The Minor is plain from the for^^ited place John 16.13. The
major is proved thus; he that is taught, is not God; he that hears from
another what he shall speak, is taught; Ergo. The major is clear by Esaias
40.13.14. compared with Romans 11.34. 1. Cor. 2.16. The Minor is evidenced by
John 8. where our Savior having said in the 26. verse, whatsoever I have heard
from him (the Father) these things I speak;] in the 28. verse he expresses
the same sense thus; According as the Father has taught me, these things I
speak. Neither let any man go about to elude so pregnant an Argument, by
saying that this is spoken of the Holy Spirit improperly; For let him turn
himself every way, and scrue the words as he please, yet shall he never be
able to make it out to a wise and considering man, how it can possibly be said
that any one hears from another what he will speak, who is the prime Author
of his speech, and into whom it is not at a certain time insinuated by
another. For this expression plainly intimates, that whatsoever the Holy
Spirit speaks to the Disciples, is first discovered and committed to him by
Christ, whose Ambassador he is, it being proper to an Ambassador to be the
Interpreter not of his own, but of another will. But it is contradictions to
imagine that the most high God can have any thing discovered and committed to
him by another.

ARGUMENT 5.
He that receives of another, is not God; The Holy Spirit does so; Ergo. The
Minor is witnessed by the aforesaid place John 16.14. The Major is proved thus;
God is he that gives all things to all; wherefore if there be any one that
receives of another, he cannot be God. The antecedent is plain by Acts
17.25. Romans 11.35.36. The consequence is undeniable, for if God should give all
things to all, and yet receive of another, he would both give all things, and
not give all things; which implies a contradiction. The Major of the
Prosyllogisme is otherwise urged thus, He that is dependent, is not God; he
that receiveih of another, is dependent; Ergo. The Major is unquestionable,
for to say that one is dependent, and yet God, is in effect to say he is God
and not God, which implies a contradiction. The Minor also is evident, for to
receive of another, is the very notion of dependency.

ARGUMENT 6.
He that is sent by another, is not God; the Holy Spirit is sent by another;
Ergo. The Minor is plain from the forequoted place John 16.7. The Major is
evinced thus; he that ministers is not God, he that is sent ministers; Ergo.
The Major is undubitable, it being dissonant to the supreme Majesty of God to
minister, and serve another, for that were to be God and not God; to exercise
sovereign dominion over all, and not to exercise it. The Minor is confirmed by
Heb. 1. ult. where the divine Author shows that the Angels are all Ministering
Spirits, in that they are sent forth; as he before intimated Christ to be Lord,
because he sits at the right hand of God. Thus David Psalm. 2. declares the
Sovereignty of God, in saying that he sits in Heaven. The Minor is further
proved thus; He that receives a command for the performance of something, does
Minister; He that is sent forth, receives a command for the performance of
something; Ergo. The Major is evident to common sense, since it suiteth with
none but ministers and inferiors to receive commands. The Minor is manifest by
John 12.49. The Father that has sent me, he gave me a Command what I shall
speak.] Neither let any man here reply that this very thing is spoken also of
Christ, unless, having first proved that Christ is supreme God, he will grant
that whatsoever is spoken of him, is spoken of him as God: or can make good
that to be sent at least may agree to him as God. The contrary whereof I
suppose I have clearly proved in this Argument, showing that it is unsuitable
to the divine Majesty.

ARGUMENT 7.
He that is the gist of God, is not God; The Holy Spirit is the gift of God;
Ergo. The minor is plain by Acts 11.17. For as much then as God gave them the
like gift (meaning the Spirit) as he did unto us, who have believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ, was I one that could withstand God? The Major though of it self
sufficiently clear, is yet further evidenced thus; he that is not the giver of
all things, is not God; he that is the gift of God, is not the giver of all
things; Ergo. the major is apparent from Acts 17.25. God gives to all, life,
breath, and all things. The Minor is proved thus; he that is himself given, is
not the giver of all things; he that is the gift of God, is himself given;
Ergo. The major is undeniable, for otherwise the same would be the giver of all
things, and yet not the giver of all things, inasmuch as he himself, a
principal thing, is giver, which implies a contradiction. The minor needs
no proof. Moreover, a gift is in the power, and at the disposal of the giver;
but it is gross and absurd to imagine that God can be in the power, or at the
disposal of another, Neither let any man here think to evade by saying, that
not the Holy Spirit himself, but only his gifts are imparted to men; Since
both the more learned adversaryes themselves confess, that the Person of of
the Holy Spirit is given together with his gifts, and the Scripture puts the
matter out of doubt if you consult Neh. 9.20. and Romans 5.5. In both which
places, the Holy Spirit is said to be given contradistinctly from his gifts and
operations; in the first, contradistinctly from the instruction flowing from
him; in the other, contradistinctly from the love of God diffused in our hearts
by him. Whence we may draw this Corollary, that if the Person of the Holy
Spirit be out of favor given to certain men, as the aforesaid places testify,
then he was not personally present with them before, and consequently by the
concession of the adversaries themselves, cannot be God, since they will not
deny that God is always personally present with all alike. But I forestall the
following Argument.

ARGUMENT 8.
He that changes place, is not God; The Holy Spirit changes place; Ergo. The
major is plain, for if God should change place, he would cease to be where he
was before, and begin to be where he was not before, which everteth his
Omnipresence, and consequently, by the confession of the adversaries
themselves, his Deity. The minor is ocularly apparent, if following the Abi,
Ariane, ad Iordanem, and Trinitatem videbis.
advise of the adversaries, you will but go to Jordan, for there you shall have
the Holy Spirit in a bodily shape descending from heaven, which is the terminus
a quo, alighting upon Christ, which is the terminus ad quem, Luke 3 21.22.
Neither let any man ^lledge, that as much is spoken of God. Exodus 3. and chap.
20. and Genesis 18. For if you compare Acts 7.30.35.38.53. Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2.3.
and chap. 13.2. with the foresaid places, you shall find, that it was not God
himself that came down, but only an Angel, sustaining the Person and Name of
God; which has no place in the history, touching the descent of the Holy Spirit

ARGUMENT 9.
He that prays unto Christ, to come to judgment, is not God; The Holy Spirit
does so; Ergo. The mayor is granted. The minor is evident from Rev. 22.17.
compared with 12. verse. Neither let any man think to elude this proof, by
saying, that the Spirit is here said to pray, only because he makes the Bride
to pray. For when the Scripture would signify the assistance of the Holy Spirit
in causing men to speak, it is wont to affirm, either that the Holy Spirit
speaks in them, as Matthew. 10.20. or that they speak by the Holy Spirit, as
Romans 8.15. We have received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry Abba
Father.] But here it is expressly said, that the Spirit and the Bride say,
come; not the Spirit in the Bride, not the Bride by the Spirit.

ARG. 10.
He in whom men have not believed, and yet have been Disciples and Believers,
is not God; Men have not believed in the Holy Spirit, and yet have been so;
Ergo: The major is plain, for how can any be Disciples and Believers, according
to the phrase of Scripture, and not believe in Him that is God? The minor is
proved thus, Men have not so much as heard whether there were an Holy Spirit,
and yet have been Disciples and Believers; Ergo: They have not believed in the
Holy Spirit, and yet have been Disciples and Believers. The Antecedent is
apparent from Acts 19.2. The consequence is grounded on that of the Apostle
Romans 10.14. [How shall they believe on Him, of whom they have not heard?] Now
if any man to decline the dint of this Argument, shall say, that by Holy Spirit
in these words [(...)] is meant not the Person, but the Gifts of the Holy
Spirit, He, besides that he perverteth the plain and genuine meaning of the
words, and speaks without example, does also evacuate the emphasis of the
Particles (...), which emply that these Disciple were so far from having
received the Gifts of the Holy Spirit, whereof we may grant that the question
made mention, that they had not so much as heard whether there were an Holy
Spirit or not. Again, that the Holy Spirit is not God, does further appear by
this very instance, since the Apostle, when there was so ample an occasion
offered to declare it, (if it had been so) does quite decline it: For it is
incredible that He, who was so intent and vigilant in propagating the Truth, as
that casually seeing an Altar at Athens inscribed to the unknown God, he
presently took a hint from thence to preach unto the Heathens the true God; yet
here being told by Disciples that they had not so much as heard whether there
were an Holy Spirit, or not, should not make use of the opportunity to discover
unto Them and in Them to Us, the (Deity of the Holy Spirit, but suffer them to
remain in ignorance touching a point of such consequence, that without the
knowledge thereof (if we believe many now now adays) men cannot be saved.
Certainly, the Apostle had a greater care both of the Truth of God, and the
salvation of men, then to do so.

ARG. 11.
He that has an understanding distinct from that of God, is not God; The Holy
Spirit has an understanding distinct from God; Ergo: The major is clear; for
he that has an understanding distinct from that of another, must needs
likewise have a distinct Essence, wherein that understanding may reside. The
minor is proved thus, He that hears from God, and that at the second hand,
what he shall speak, has an understanding distinct from that of God; The Holy
Spirit so hears from God; Ergo: the minor is evident from Joh. 16.13, 14, 15.
The major is confirmed thu^; He that is taught of God, has an understanding
distinct from that of God; He that hears from God, is taught of God; Ergo:
The minor is manifest from John 8. where our Savior Christ having said in the
Verse 26. w^a^soever I have heard from him (the Father) these things I speak:]
In Verse 28. he expresses the same sense thus, [ According as the Father has
taught me, these things I speak.] The major is of it self clear; for he that
is taught, has an unknowing understanding, since none can be taught what he
knows already; and he that teaches has a knowing understanding, otherwise
he could not teach another something; but it emplyeth a contradiction that the
same understanding should at the same time be both knowing and unknowing of the
same thing. Besides, that the Holy Spirit has an understanding distinct from
that of God, is easily deducible from the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.10.
where he affirms, that the Spirit searches the depths of God, (as Romans 8.27.
he intimates, that God searches the heart of the Spirit:) but to search the
depths of any one necessarily supposes one understanding in him that
searches, and another understanding in him whose depths are searched, as is
evident not only by collation of other places of the Scripture, as 1 Pet. 1.11.
Rev. 2.13. but even by common sense, dictating to every man so much, that none
can without absurdity be said to search the depths of his own understanding.
Whence the Apostle going about to illustrate what he had spoken of the Spirit
of God, by a similitude drawn from the spirit of a man, does not say, that the
spirit of a man does search, but know the things of a man, though his former
words did seem to lead him thereunto.

ARG. 12.
He that has a will distinct in number from that of God, is not God; The Holy
Spirit has a will distinct in number from that of God, Ergo. The major is
irrefragable: The minor is asserted thus; He that wills conformably to the
will of God, has a will distinct in number from that of God; The Holy Spirit
so w^lleth; Ergo: The major is plain, for conformity must be between two at
least, else it will not be conformity, but identity. The minor is confirmed by
Romans 8.26.27. [Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know
not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit himself makes intercession
for us with groans unutterable; But he that searches the heart, knows what
is the mind (or will) of the Spirit, for he makes intercession for the Saints
according to (or conformably to) the will of God.] Which words of the Apostle
afford us another impregnable Argument of the Holy Spirit's being inferior to
God, inasmuch as he is said to make intercession unto God (as we before urged
his praying to Christ, Arg. 9.) and that with groans unutterable; which is not
so to be understood as if the Holy Spirit were here said to help our
infirmities only by suggesting petitions and groans unto us, and making us to
pray, (as is commonly, but falsely affirmed,) for the very words of the context
sufficiently refute such a gloss, since they say that the Spirit himself, not
we by the Spirit, (as we have it in verse 15. of the same chap.) makes
intercession for us: but to help others infirmities by making intercession for
them, is not to instill petitions into them, but to pour out petitions apart in
their behalf, as is apparent both from the thing it self (since none can
intercede for himself, all intercession requiring the enterm se of a third
person:) and by the collation of verse 34. of the same chapter, and by the 30.
ver. of the 15. chap. and by 2 Cor. 1.11. Heb. 7.25. 1 Timothy 2.1. Col. 4.12.
Ephesians. 6.18. Neither let any man think to bafflle off this Argument, which is
written with a beam of the Sun, by saying that this is improperly spoken of
the Hol^ Spirit; for, besides that he has no other ground to say so, but his
own preconceived opinion touching the Diety of the of Holy Spirit, he ought to
know that the Scripture, though it speaks many things after the manner of
men, yet does it no where speak any thing that argues his inferiority to, and
dependence on another. But this passage of the Apostle plainly intimates the
Holy Spirit to be inferior to God, and dependent on him; otherwise what need
had he to intercede with God, and that with groans unutterable, on the behalf
of the Saints?

An Exposition of Matthew. 28.19.
[Goe ye therefore, and make Disciples (so it is in the Original) of all
Nations, baptising them into the name (so is it also in the Original) of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.]

In the name of the Holy Spirit] that is, into the Holy Spirit, by a
circumlocution usual in the Scripture, vid. Acts 19.5. compared with Romans 6.3.
And into the Holy Spirit, that is, into the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Thus
the Jews are said to have been all baptized into Moses, 1 Cor. 10.2. So that
our Savior's words amount to thus much; initiating them into the confession
and obedience of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus; Christ, the Son of the
Father, and of the Holy Spirit the Advocate and guide of all truth. Now the
Holy Spirit is mentioned together with God and Christ, because he is the chief
Instrument whereby they guide govern, sanctify and endow the Church; and to
intimate, that whereas men, before they gave their names to Christ, lived
according to the Prince of this world, the unclean Spirit, that works in the
children of disobedience, they ought henceforth, being sequestered from the
world, and admitted into the Church to resign up themselves to the guidance of
the Holy Spirit, whom God and Christ have appointed to order and direct the
Church. For that the Holy Spirit is not ranked with the Father and the Son as
being equal to them, is evident by other punctual places of the Scripture, as
1 Cor. 12.3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. where when the mention of him, is
joined with that of the Father and the Son, he is expressly and emphatically
excluded from being either God or Lord, by being contra-distinguished from
both. But if he be neither God nor Lord, as the Apostle not only in these
places, but elsewhere clearly testifies, vid. 1 Cor. 8.5.6. he cannot be equal
to the Father and the Son, but is only the chief Minister of Both, peculiarly
sent our to Minister on their behalf that shall inherit salvation.

An Exposition of 1 John 5.7.
[For there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Spirit, and these three are one.]

It would have been hard, if not impossible, (had not men bin precorrupted)
that it should ever come into any ones head to imagine, that this phrase are
one] did signify [have one Essence,] since such an Exposition is not only
contrary to common sense, but also to other places of the Scripture, wherein
this kind of speaking prepetually signifies an union in consent and agreement,
or the like, but never an union in Essence. To omit other Sacred Writers, this
very Apostle in his Gospel, chap. 17. ver. 11.21, 22, 23. uses the same
expression six times, intimating no other but an union of agreement; yea, in
verse. 8. of this very chapter in his Epistle, he uses it in the same sense.
For though the expression varieth somewhat in the ordinary Greek Testaments, in
that the preposition [(...)] is prefixed, (although the Complutensian Bible
reads it [(...)] in both verses:) yet is the sense the same; this latter
being spoken after the Hebrew idiome, the former according to the ordinary
phrase; for confirmation whereof see Matthew. 19. comparing verse 5. and 6.
together in the Original; wherefore this expression ought to be rendered alike
in both verses, as the former Interpreters did it, though the Latter
Interpreters, in verse. 8. have rendered it [ agree in one] putting the gloss
instead of the Translation. So that this place makes nothing for them that
hold the Holy Spirit to have one and the same Essence with the Father, unless
they can prove that those who are one in agreement must likewise necessarily be
one in Essence; or that two or three cannot be one, but it must presently be
in Essence. I omit for the present to speak of the suspectednesse of this
place, how it is not extant in the ancient Greek Coppies, nor in the Syriack
Translation, nor in most ancient Books of the Latin Edition, and rejected by
sundry Interpreters both Ancient and Mordern.

An Exposition of Acts 5.3.4.
[But Peter said, Ananias, Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to, (or
deceive) the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the price of the Land? while
it remained, was it not thine own? And after it was sold, was it not in thine
own power? Why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou have not
lied unto men, but unto God.]

In this passage the Holy Spirit is neither expressly, nor by good consequence
called God. For admit the ordinary Translation were true, (as it is not) yet
will it not presently follow, because Ananias by lying to men endued with the
Holy Spirit (for even Piscator in the words acknowledges, and the words
themselves, according to this Interpretation, emply a metonymie of the adjunct)
lied not to men, but to God, that therefore the Holy Spirit is God; for in
lying to them that are endued with the Spirit of God, one may lie to God, and
yet neither they, nor the Spirit in them be God, but only the Messengers of
God; for what is done to Messengers redounds to him that sends them. see 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. John 13.20. Luke 10.16. But if any man look more narrowly into the
words, he shall perceive that the verb [(...)] is construed in a different
manner, to wit, with an accusative in verse 3. and with a dative in verse 4.
Now [(...)] with an accusative in Greek Authors is the same with [(...)] that
is, to belly, or counterfeit; thus Lucan in Pseudom. (...), nomen quoddam
mentitus, counterfeiting a certain name. This being so, the words are to be
rendered thus, [Why has Satan filled thy heart to belly or counterfeit the Holy
Spirit? (that is, why have thou suffered the unclean spirit so far to prevail
with thee, as to lay down this money at his suggestion, as appears, in that
thou have proloyned part of the price of thy Possession, and not laid down all:
and yet to bear us in hand, that thou, as well as others, did it at the
motion of the Holy Spirit?) Thou have not lied to men, but to God: (that is,
assure thy self that this dessembling of thine is not so much to us, ^s to God
himself, whose servants we are.) This Exposition is not only agreeable to the
Greek context, and scope of the place, but is a also seconded by Erasmus,
Calvin, and Aretius.

An Exposition of 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
[What? know ye not, that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Spirit, that is
in you, whom you have of God, and that ye are not your own? For ye have been
bought with a price: wherefore glorify God both in your body, and in your
Spirit, which are God's.]

Whereas it is objected by some out of this passage, that the Holy Spirit is
God, in that our Body is said to be his Temple: I Answer, that it would follow,
could it be proved that our body is so the Temple of the Holy Spirit, as to be
his by interest, and dedicated to his honor, both which are in the following
words affirmed of God contra-distinctly from the Holy Spirit. But these things
are so far from being held forth in this place, that the contrary may thence
not obscurely be evinced. For the Apostle, after he had intimated in what
respect our body is the Temple of the Holy Spirit, to wit, by inhabitation,
(for so much is emplyed by the description, added to the Holy Spirit, since
descriptions in Sacred Writers are not idle and impertinent) he adds that we
have Him from God, thereby not only distinguishing Him from God, but intimating
also that He is desposed of by God, and bestowed on Us, and consequently that
He is ours by interest, and not we his, as the objection would infer.

An Exposition of Matthew. 12.31.
[All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the
blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven unto men.]

For the Objection drawn hence, that the sin against the Holy Spirit is
unpardonable: I Answer, that the sin against the Holy Spirit is not therefore
unpardonable, because he is God, (for this the Scripture nowhere acknowledges,
and besides, by the same reason every sin against God would be unpardonable:)
but because he that sins against the Holy Spirit, does in the same act sin
against God (for every sin is terminated in God) with an high hand, to wit,
either by slandering and opposing such works, whereof a man is convinced in
conscience that God has wrought them by his Holy Spirit, as the Pharisees did;
or by renouncing and opposing such Truths, whereof a man is convinced in
conscience that God has revealed them by his Holy Spirit, as the Renegadoes
did, that are mentioned by the Author to the Hebrews, cha. 10, 25, 26. etc.
Which things are the greatest affronts that can be offered to God, who uses
the Ministry of the Spirit in none but things of the greatest importance.

An Answer to the grand Objection of the Adversaries touching the supposed
Omnipresence of the Holy Spirit.
After I had thoroughly sifted this Controversy, I found that the Adversaries,
who so much cry down Reason, saying that we must renounce it when we speak of
Divine Mysteries, and simply rest in the words of the Scripture, do
notwithstanding in the upshot wave the Scripture, as giving a very uncertain
Testimony to their Doctrine in this point, and ground themselves on the mear
conjectures of their own Reason. For thus they argue, The Holy Spirit, if he
were not omnipresent, and consequently God, could not inspire and dwell in so
many men at one time. For Answer hereunto, I will only ask them one question,
which if they resolve, I will then tell them how the Holy Spirit though he be
not omni-present, may inspire all the faithful in the world at one time. Our
Savior in the fourth of Mark, explaining the Parable of the sower, says in
verse. 15. [And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown, but when
they have heard, Satan comes immediately and takes the Word that was sown in
their hearts.] Suppose now that the seed of the Word be sown in ten thousand
places at one time, as it happens on every Lords day, how can Satan whom the
Adversaries will deny to be omni-present, come and immediately snatch the Word
out of the hearts of the greatest part of the Hearers? The same resolution that
they shall give to this question, will I apply to their own objection. If this
be not sufficient, take yet more proofs, that may seem to evince the
omni-presence of the unclean spirit: Thus is he said to have been a lying
spirit in the mouth of four hundred false Prophets, 1 King. 22.22, 23. (and
there is the same reason between four hundred, and four Millions.) Thus is he
said to hold the impenitent (who make the greatest part of mankind) in hi^
snare, and to take them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. ult. To blind the minds
of them that believe not, 2 Cor. 4.4. To dwell in the ungodly, Revel. 2.13. To
show the wicked whatsoever they practice, Joh. 8.38. Yea, to deceive the whole
world, Rev. 12.9. and 20.2.3. If they dare not for all this to affirm the
unclean spirit to be omni-present, why do they on less ground conclude the
omni-presence of the Holy Spirit, especially when the Scripture so plainly
testifyeth that He changes place, as you may see in the eigth Argument above?

FINIS.

