Living Truths IN DYING TIMES: SOME MEDITATIONS (Upon Luke 21.30.) Occasioned
by the present Judgment of the PLAGUE. By THOMAS BLAKE.

Isa. 26.21. For behold the Lord comes out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, etc. Exodus 9.13. Let my people go,
that they may serve me. Isa. 27.7. Has he smitten him, as he smote those that
smote him? etc. London, Printed Anno Dom. 1665

To all that love our Lord Jesus in sincerity, peace be multiplied.
IT is a law of Customs making, to usher in, whatsoever is made public, by an
Epistle: That which invites me to this general Dedication, is that of the
Apostle in 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or
Cephas: The abilities of the Saints are intended for the benefit of the Saints,
and those of a lower as well as of a higher Orb; he that has but one Talent,
it is given him for the edification of the body, as well as he that has ten;
and therefore I am willing to cast my Mite into your Treasury. Such who are
taught of God, are also taught to bear with whatever weakness may discover it
self in the following Treatise. If you will be at the pains to look it over,
you will find (I hope) truth useful, though in a plain and homely dress; Milk,
rather then meat for strong men; and though but Milk, yet my hope is, It will
be (...), sincere Milk, as Peter's expression is, 1 Pet. 2.2. I have not at all
endeavored to make things acceptable by flourishes of Wit and Learning, being
persuaded, that that fire in which the Lords people have bin held, now some
years, has purged you from the dross of nice and curious appetites: My design
through the whole is, to help you a little through the distresses of the
present day, and after that to present you without blame in the day of Christ:
I think I may say before the searcher of hearts, my designs in this undertaking
have been upright, and as far as I am able to judge, I have been drawn to ^^is
Publication by the overruling hand of the Lord, in as much as such a thing was
never in my thoughts, until eight parts of ^en of this little Treatise were
finished. The day in which we live, is a scattering day; and as the sad
providence of the day drew me to consider the Text which I have enlarged upon,
so the scatterings of poor souls, and the remembrance of absent friends, whose
faces I have not long seen (into whose hands what I have written will I hope
fall) has much engaged me to send it abroad. Into what hand soever it shall
come, whether Saint or sinner, the Lord, who supplyeth seed to the Sower, and
Bread to the Eater, bless this seed, and make it useful to its intended ends,
as is the prayer of

Tho. Blake.

LIVING TRUTHS IN DYING TIMES. Some Meditations upon this Text,
Luke 21.36. Watch therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son
of man.


OUR Lord Jesus in this Chapter, is laying down some certain forerunners of
the destruction of Jerusalem, and of his own coming: He is answering that
question, which you will find the Disciples put to him, what the signs should
be, and what should be the forerunners of the destruction of Jerusalem; and
also what should precede his own appearance and coming; and he tells them that
there should be providence very amazing and dreadful, that should be the
Antecedents of both: So it is expressed in the 25, 26. verses, And there shall
be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth
distress, and distress not limited and consined to a little corner only, but
distress of Nations; and the distress of Nations should have this effect, Men's
hearts should fail them for fear, and for looking at the things that were
coming on.

Now considering those things that were to come to pass, our Lord subjoyns a
serious and weighty piece of counsel for the directing of his own poor
disciples, what they were to do, and how they were to carry it; that ye have in
the words I have read, Watch ye, etc. In which words you have these three
things observable, among others.

1. Dreadful things supposed, and that you have in that expression, These
things that shall come to pass; that is, these wonderful, amazing and
tremendous providence that I have hinted to you.

2. You have a double duty imposed and given in charge, to the poor Disciples
of Christ, and that is, Watchfulness and Prayer; well, says he, watch ye and
pray, I (says he) and pray always; not always in every time, that is not the
meaning; but pray always in every season (as the original word is properly to
be understood) pray in every season, be as much at it as you can; get to it in
every opportunity you can meet with, and follow the work closely.

And then 3. You have a double end proposed, to which these duties are a means;
and that is, first, The escaping the shock and weight of these dreadful
providence; And secondly, after that, the being enabled to stand before the
Son of man: For truly that is that we are to have a look unto, and not only
to fix the eye upon and be anxious about present Dispensations, and the
weathering through such a storm, but how to stand before the Son of man, which
will be more weighty, and a greater and other kind of thing, then any present
providence can be; it will have more of terror in it then any present
providence can possibly have. There are abundance of excellent truths would
flow from this Scripture; I shall content my self to collect four or five,
which I conceive to be the especial design of our Lord Jesus in these words,
and that (through Grace) may be especially useful to your souls.

1. Then from hence I would commend to you this truth, that there are certain
times and seasons, in which dreadful things, sad providence must inavoidably
break in upon the world: this I gather thus, All these things that shall come
to pass: as if he should have said, There are sad things, there are providence
very grievous, such as shall make the heart to ache, and trembling to possess
the spirits of most men upon the face of the earth: yet says he, they are such
as must come to pass, if all the Angels in heaven stood up to prevent the
breaking in of these providence; there is an unavoidable necessity of it, come
they must.

2. I would note, that in and under these dreadful providence, the God of
heaven is especially thoughtful for, and careful about his own people; when he
thrusts these providence into the world, I say the Lord is especially
thoughtful of and careful about his own people; this I suppose also to be
fairly gathered from this Scripture, Watch ye and pray (says he) that you may
escape these things: As if he should have said, My brethren, my poor disciples
with whom my heart is, and for whose weal and welfare, I am greatly engaged; it
is true, sad things must be in the world, but I would take a little care of
you, and stand by you, and be a help to you by what means I may, that you may
ride safe in and through that storm; and when the world shall be in a flame,
and every corner of it full of trouble, I would that things might then go well
with you, and your weal might go forward notwithstanding: that is the second.

3. But note this, that the escaping of common calamity, it is a great honor
and great mercy, and that that gracious hearts ought to put out earnestly for.
I gather this note thus, that it is a great honor, a great mercy, from that
expression, That ye may be accounted worthy to escape; I tell you souls, those
that God thus in a way of mercy shelters and preserves, and carries through
days of evil and times of common calamity, it is a mark of honor that God puts
on them; and it is a mercy also that gracious souls should make after, and put
themselves forward for the attaining of; that I gather thus, Watch ye and pray
always, make out after this mercy, put out earnestly for it: look not upon it
as an indifferent thing, whether you escape or not, but look upon it as a mercy
worth the seeking after; that is a third thing that lies plainly in the words.

Again 4. Note, that watchfulness and prayer are the necessary mediums, the
proper means, at least a part, and great part of the proper means, to which we
are directed for preservation in times of common calamity.

5. And then one thing more I would also recommend to you from these words, and
that is this, that it is not the escaping common calamities only, that we are
to be solicitous about, but also, and above all, and more especially, how we
may after all stand before the Son of man, etc. Alas my brethren, what if God
should satisfy and assure you or me, and tell you from heaven, you shall
survive, and outlive the distresses of your day; but yet when this is done,
and you are past this storm, you must stand before the judgment seat of
Christ, every soul must appear at that great Tribunal, from which there is no
exemption by any means whatever: and the presence and glory, the dread and
majesty of that day is more, and another kind of thing, then any dispensation
upon earth can be supposed to be; therefore how to hold up the head and stand
with comfort at such a time, is the great thing that we are especially to be
solicitous about, and that which our souls should be making out the hardest
after.

Now I confess the two latter of these notes will be most spi^itual, and that
that the soul and its concernments lie most in; and therefore I shall be much
the shorter in the three former, though it is requisite to spend sometime on
them, considering the dispensations of God at this day. I shall begin with with
the first, and shall be brief in the speaking unto it, viz. That some dreadful
providence mu^^ break in upon the world; there are times and seasons when
dreadful things must come upon the earth, such as shall sink the souls of many
of the inhabitants of the earth: and there is a threefold reason of it.

1. Because God has spoken it, and he must not be a liar; he is true,
therefore what he has said must come to pass. I tell you, though it were the
razing up the foundations of the earth, or the most dreadful evil that the
heart of man can imagine, if God have said it, his word must stand; that must
be effected, rather then any reflection should be upon the truth and
faithfulness of God; therefore says our Lord Jesus in Luke 21.33. Heaven and
earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away: God stands so much upon
his word, that he will not give any on earth occasion to reflect upon him as
unfaithful and wanting in his truth; not the least Iota or tittle of the Lords
word shall fail, but shall be fulfilled to every letter of it; and therefore
Mat. 25.18. it is thus written, I say to you, Until heaven and earth pass away,
one jot or title shall in no wise pass from the law, until all be fulfilled.
The Law is taken here in a comprehensive sense, for the whole book of
Scripture; and heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one title of the mind
and will of God that he has revealed, shall be made void, but shall stand and
be accomplished: and it is sufficiently bound and confirmed, in that the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it. You shall find in Scripture that God stands greatly
upon his word: what he speaks touching a particular people or person, he will
be sure to accomplish it, whether it be good or evil; and therefore in Genesis 18.
it is said of Abraham, that he will command his children to keep the way of the
Lord, etc. that he may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him in
verse 19. as if he should have said, God has spoken a great deal of good
concerning Abraham; now having spoken it, he must bring it to pass. Truly God
has been wont to do so, he is accustomed to it, he is used to confirm his word
unto his servants, and to do to them according to what word is gone out of his
mouth; and therefore when discreet Abigail comes to plead with David that he
should not take revenge upon Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.30. she tells him, that when the
Lord should have done according to all the good that he has spoken concerning
him, it should then be a grief to him that he had shed blood causelessly; she
concludes that God would do David good as he had spoken: And it is as if she
should have said, I know the word of God having gone forth, he will do good
unto David according as he has said: And therefore you shall find David does
wonderfully rejoice in a word from God; if God do but speak it, David is
comforted. Psalm. 60. David is in the beginning of the Psalm under some kind of
diffidence and distrust, and a little discouraged; but in verse. 6. God has
spoken (says he) in his holiness, and I will rejoice: Why, says he, it is
true, my condition is sad; it was a time when David was in distress and
trouble: but now God has spoken, and given me a word that it shall go well with
me; and in that I am satisfied, in that I can bear up my heart, I will rejoice.
I will divide Sechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth: Judah is mine, etc.
so when God has spoken a word to a people, he will make it good: hence is that
of Balaam, Numb. 23.19. You know he was sent to curse Israel, but instead
thereof he blesses them, and speaks good to them; and wherefore did he do
it? Why, says he, God has spoken good of Israel, and that he will do; so that
what God speaks, he stands upon his word to have it accomplished. Secondly,
when he speaks evil against a people, that must be accomplished: God has
spoken evil against Babylon, Jer. 51.62. verse to the end, And what, must it be
accomplished? Yea it must; and as a sign that what he had spoken should be
confirmed, It shall be, says the Lord there, that when thou have made an end
of reading this book, thou shall bind a stone to it, and cast it into the
midst of Euphrates; she shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon
her: I have not spoken evil only, but I will bring evil upon her; and as a
sign for confirmation of this, the book was to be cast into the River
Euphrates, and so should God cast her down, that she should never rise more. So
take for confirmation of this, Jer. 32. 24. God had threatened evil against
Jerusalem, that the Caldeans should come and fight against it, and take it; and
what then? behold the mounts, they are come unto the City to take it, and that
that God has spoken is come to pass, and thou see it, thy eyes behold; the
thing the Lord has spoken and threatened, it is come to pass: that is the first
reason what God has spoken must come to pass, and God has spoken dreadful
things, that sad judgments shall break in upon the world, the vials of the
wrath of God shall be poured forth, and in this Chapter he has said distress
of Nations shall be; and having determined it, it shall be accomplished.

2. It must be to stain the pride of all glory (and so I suppose where that
expression is, that I shall turn you to by and by, the Spirit of God intends)
the staining the pride of all glory is the letting us see the vanity and
emptyness of all the glory in the world, and whatever we are apt to be taken
with: now for the letting us see the emptiness of it, the Lord must introduce
sad providence upon the world, nothing else will do it: Alas, where the Gospel
of Christ is, God has been preaching it a great while; we have been told of
the excellency of God, and of Communion with him, and the excellency of
spiritual things; but who is sufficiently affected with their excellencies, and
the emptiness of the things of this world! and if this way will not do it, God
will go another way to work, and will cause judgment to break in, and that
will cause him that has honor to see how little that is worth, and they that
have the riches of this world, to see how little they are worth; the judgments
of God knock off our fingers from these things, they open our eyes and possess
us thoroughly with a sense of the vanity of all these things. That is a full
Scripture that you have to this purpose, Isa. 23.9. The Lord of hosts has
purposed it to stain the pride of all glory, etc. Now for opening this
Scripture, and letting you see how it is to my present purpose, give me leave
to take up a little time, and I desire you to consider two things in this Text,
that I may let you see how it is to my present purpose.

First, Consider who are the honorable that God will bring into contempt.

And secondly, By what means God will bring contempt upon them: and when I have
done this, you will find that the judgments of God are Gods great ways and
means to stain the pride of all glory.

1. Consider, who this was spoken unto, it was to the City Tire, the burden of
Tire; well, and what was the glory of this City? There are diverse things that
were its glory.

First of all, it was a City, that was part of its glory; and so it is called
once and again in this Chapter, as at verse. 7. Is this your joyous City?

Secondly, It was a City in an Island, therefore of more then ordinary
strength, and some peculiar excellency it had upon that account; and that it
was upon an Island, is plain from v. 2. Be still ye inhabitants of the Isles;
he speaks still to Tyrus: and so at verse. 6. Howl ye inhabitants of the Isle;
he speaks still to this City Tyrus.

Thirdly, It was an ancient City, so you see at verse. 7. Is this your joyous
City, whose antiquity is of ancient days? that was a part of its glory and
honor; the antiquity of it could plead its Charter for a long time.

Fou^thly, A great trading City, that you have at verse. 3. The harvest of the
River is her revenue, and she is a mart of Nations, with which the Nations of
the world come and trade, whither they come from all parts of the world: well,
that is a fourth part of her glory.

Fifthly, It was a very rich City, which is excellently expressed at verse. 8.
Who has taken this counsel against the crowning City; mark the expression by
which it is called, The crowning City; the meaning of the expression is this,
Tire it is such a City that it crowns her Merchants, makes them Princes, rich
and mighty ones in the world; her Merchants are Princes, and her traffickers
the honorable ones of the earth, as is after expressed; she fills them with
treasure, and makes them admired in the world: now this was the glory that the
Spirit of God here speaks that he would stain, to be a City, a City in an
Island, an ancient City, a great trading City, and a rich crowning City; this
was Tyres great glory, and yet this the Lord purposed to stain. But now 2. How
will God do it? You will find it must be by judgment, Howl ye ships of
Tarshish, for it is laid waste, verse. 1. That is the way to show men the
emptiness of the things of this world, and to bring them out of conceit with
them; and therefore in verse. 8. Who has taken this counsel against Tire, that
is, of laying it waste, who has such purpose? Oh, says he in verse. 9. The
Lord has purposed it: this little word It has a strong reference to the 8.
and 1. verse. Who has taken this counsel, etc. that is, the Lord has done it,
and who has laid it waste? it is the Lord has done it, he has purposed to
bring judgment, and to lay waste, and so to stain the pride of their glory.

Thus you see that this Text is full to my purpose, that the judgments of God
are needful in order to the staining the pride of the world. Thus also in the
case of Nebuchadnezzar in Dan. 4. What was it that humbled the heart of that
man? it was the judgments of God did it; he comes in a proud spirit, more like
a God then man, and in the pride of his heart he swells exceeding, Is not this
great Babylon that I have built? etc. verse. 30. Well, but what course does God
take to humble him? Why in verse. 31. while the word was in his mouth, he was
took from men, and turned to graze among the beasts; this was Gods way to stain
the pride of Nebuchadnezzar, to bring him down in a way of judgment, the like
we never read or heard of; and you find when his seven years were accomplished,
then he comes and adores God in a calm spirit, and gives glory to him; the man
was cooled and humbled, and it was this dreadful stroke upon him that did it.
Take one Scripture more, and that you have in Isa. 2. you may peruse the whole
Chapter, and you shall there see how the judgments of God are designed to
humble men, but particularly at verse. 17. And the loftiness of man shall be
bowed down, etc. Now how shall this be brought to pass? look back to verse. 12.
and there he tells you, The day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one
that is proud and lofty, etc. the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon him,
that is, the day of Gods indignation, of his judgments, the day of his
breaking forth in great displeasure, that shall bring them down: We poor
creatures, a little thing lifts us up, but it must be a great thing must
bring us down, it must be the day of the Lord of hosts; he that commands the
Armies of heaven and earth, he that commands the Armies of Angels, and sends
them out to do execution; he that commands judgments: they are his hosts, the
creatures are his hosts, and the Angels are his hosts; he sets the sword to
work, and the pestilence to work; and by fighting against them with these
hosts, he humbles them, and brings them down, and lays the heart of the
haughty and lofty low; and so in the 19, 20, 21. verses, They shall go into the
holes of the rocks, etc. What is it makes them do it? It is for fear of the
Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the
earth; then all men they throw away their Idols. Oh that we might all throw
away our idols! have we m^de the world, riches, honors, pleasures, our idols?
Oh it is time to throw them to the Owls and to the Bats; it is fit for them
only to live upon such things as these are: when God comes forth thus in
judgment, then they shall throw their idols to the Owls and to the Bats; and
why so? it is because they shall then be convinced of the vanity and emptiness
of these things. That is my second reason why such providence must be, it is
to stain the pride of all glory; God has reserved himself no other way to do
it for ought we know, and the heart of man will not be brought down at any
cheaper rate: Alas, the great men of the world they think they may do as they
please, but when God comes thundering with his judgments, he makes them to
tremble, and confess that they are but as other men.

But then one reason more why such such things must come to pass in their time
and season, why it must be.

3. To vindicate Gods holiness, that there may not be a reproach left upon the
God of heaven, as if he were pleased with the sin and wickedness of an evil
generation. With reverence be it spoken, the God of heaven has no other way to
vindicate his holiness, but by the execution of these judgments of his; I say
that is the Lords way: do but mark how the wicked of the world do sometimes
challenge God to show himself in his judgments, if he be a holy God; and
therefore God is constrained to do it. In Mal. 2.17. You have wearyed God with
your words, and wherein? even when you say every one that does evil is good in
the sight of the Lord, or where is the God of judgment? Wicked men they say
that God loves men that walk wickedly; and though we sin, he loves us never the
worse: why if he do not love the workers of iniquity, where is the God of
judgment? If our evil doings displease him, why does he not execute judgment?
why does be not let us see his displeasure? God may say in his word what he
will, wicked men will not understand that; They better understand the language
of his judgments, and therefore if he be not the God of evil, and do hate all
iniquity, why does he not show it by his judgments? Now I say God is put upon
this, he is constrained to vindicate his own holiness by his judgment: Because
sentence against an evil-work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of
the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil, Eccl. 8.11. The meaning of
the Text is plainly this, because wicked men are not punished in ways of sin,
say they, we may live as wickedly as we will, for ought we see, we shall fare
as well as those that are more precise: This is the desperate wickedness of the
heart, but God will make known himself by his judgments, and thereby he will
take off this reproach; and therefore that is a notable place Psalm. 9.16. I
think you have not this word Higgaion Selah above once more in the Scripture;
this Higgaion does import, Consider, Meditate upon this: why what is it we
should take such notice of? why it is this, The Lord is known by the judgments
that he executes, that is, God is known by his judgments, in his holiness, in
his purity, and it is that that sets him forth in the glory of his attributes;
when God brings judgment on the wicked, then they must confess that God is a
holy God: and therefore take that Scripture more, where you have this
confirmed, Psalm. 58.9, 10. Before your pots can feel the thorns; it is a
metaphorical expression, and I suppose the meaning is this, before the thorns
or any other combustible matter put under the pot can heat it, that is, in a
very little time, God shall take away the wicked: what shall be the effect of
this? The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, and a man shall
say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that
judges in the earth: See what effect Gods judgments have, that a mere man
that has not any thing of grace in his soul, shall be forced to say that there
is a reward for the righteous. They that say, Where is the God of judgment?
when God comes forth in ways of judgment, he will make them change their note,
and say, There is a God that does righteously. Now here you have my reasons why
God will bring great judgments upon the world, having spoken it, as also to
stain the pride of all flesh, and lastly to vindicate his own holiness.

Now we will try a little how this may be improved, what use we may make of it:
truly I think it may inform us of some such things as these.

1. If it be thus that dismal providence must come into the world, that God
has spoken of it, and given warning of it, then what a stupid sottish thing is
a carnal heart, that will not believe it until he feels it! I say, such is the
stupidity of a carnal heart, that it will not believe it until he feels it;
this we find often in Scripture, Psalm. 50. 21. These things thou have done
(speaking about a great many miscarriages of wicked men) and I kept silence,
says God; and what then? thou thoughtest that I liked all thy wickedness very
well; but says God, I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee; I,
and consider it you that forget God! You do not think what I am, until I come
to tear you in pieces: consider it you that forget God; consider h s holiness,
his purity, his truth, his faithfulness in his threatening, for says God, I am
coming to tear you in pieces, I am coming with providence that will awaken
you: So 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. This is the hardness, the sottishness of wicked men,
they are saying, Where is the promise of his coming? and who is the God of
judgment? they would believe that all things continue as they were; they will
not consider it until the judgment of God breaks forth among them. That is the
first inference, what a stupid sottish thing is a carnal heart.

Again 2. It may inform us farther of the desperate estate of sinners that are
not awakened with the judgments of God that are begun; such there are in the
world, that though God be come forth in a way of judgment, and have begun to
do what he has spoken, yet they do little consider it. Indeed many sinners
before judgments are begun, do hope they will never begin, and they feed
themselves much with such fancies: much such a people you read of in Ezekiel.
11.2. It is not near, let us build houses, etc. there were a people there, that
the Prophet had threatened grievous things against. Well, what say they? why if
these things shall come, they are a great way off; and though they come, it is
not like that it will be in our days; and so hardened themselves against the
judgments; of the Lord that were to come upon them: So that Amos. 6.3. Ye put
far away the evil day, and persuade your selves that things are like to go well
enough, and that judgments were a great way off, if they should ever come; and
therefore the Lord directs the P^ophet in his message, Ezekiel. 12.22. Son of man,
what is that proverb? etc. Usually God did in Scripture give some time between
threatening and execution, and what effect had this? Why the days are prolonged,
say they, and every vision fails: Judgments did not come presently,
therefore they minded them not; and therefore says God, I will cause this
proverb to cease; the days are at hand, and the effect of every vision;
judgment shall come: and yet such is the security of men's hearts, they would
first secure themselves that judgments should not begin; and when they are
begun, they are not much minded: doubtless this is great carnal security,
therefore Amos 3.8. The lion has roared, who would not fear? I will at least
allude to it; when the Lion does roar, when God is come out in the way of his
judgments, who would not fear? it is a great evil to be of a stupid spirit
under the judgments of God. I shall here a little, before I leave this head,
show first when souls are not affected with the judgments of God: And
secondly, whence it is that they are not affected.

1. When souls are not affected with the judgments of God, it is when they do
not hear and consider what providence they lie under, Isa. 26.11. When thy
hand is lifted up they will not see; they go on in their own course, and do not
so much as consider that there is a fire kindled, and a fire that may burn very
far, and do dreadful things.

2. Again secondly, The heart is not affected, when it does not inquire into
the ground of the controversy: we are not only to speak of the judgment it
self, but we are to inquire into the ground of the controversy: when Israel
fled before the men of Ai, Joshua he fell on his face to inquire what the
matter was, what the ground of this controversy was. How many are there in
this great City that do not say, What have I done? wherefore does God do this!

3. When men do not endeavor to set things right; when they do not labor to
find out what is the controversy, and having found it out, compose the breach
that is between the Lord and his people, Jer. 8.6. I hearkened and heard, but
they spoke not aright: no man repented of his evil way, saying, What have I
done? they spoke not aright; why pray when do a people speak aright in time of
judgment? says he, No man repented of his wickedness, etc. observe it: What
is a right spirit in a day of judgment? It is to be saying, What have I done?
to say, What has the Nation done, is a duty, and What have others done, but
especially to say, What have I done? and wherein have I contributed to the evil
of the day? Nay and this inquiring spirit is not all, but there must be a
reforming spirit; he must turn from his course, and leave the trade of sin that
he was wont to drive; thus is it when we are not affected with the judgments
of God. And whence is it? it is from ten causes.

1. From secret hope it may go well with them: and I tell you, for the most
part, wicked men are apt to think themselves most secure: Amos 9.10. You read
there of a strange spirit; they were sinners, a wicked people, and yet says
he, They say the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us: but says God, The
sinners of my people shall dye by the sword, I shall meet with them; that is
the purpose and determination of God.

2. They do not consider the dread that there is in the judgment of God: I
found a poor soul speaking of this judgment lately, saying, What should we
fear? we must all dye, and of what should we be afraid? but I fear such souls
that can look upon things of such moment so slightly, hardly know what dying
means, Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son, left he be angry, and ye perish from the way*
when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him; a little of the wrath of God is dreadful: God is very terrible in
his judgments, though wicked men do not mind it, Psalm. 66.3. Say unto the
Lord, How terrible art thou in all thy works? In thy works of judgment how
terrible art thou? the judgments of God would make men bow, but they do not
consider the dread of them, until they are under them; the servants of God
they do melt under them, and have a sense of them, not a dread and fear that
discomposeth the soul, and puts it by its duty, but such as is an awful sense,
Psalm. 52.5, 6. Observe what a mixture there is in the spirit of a Saint under
Gods judgments: Gods judgments as they are revelations of his righteousness,
making good his threatenings, working out his glory; so the righteous laughs,
but yet he fears too: There is a holy dread and awe upon his soul when he sees
how much of majesty shines forth in them: Yea hypocrites are brought to fear
because of Gods judgments sometimes; but now they that do not see what dread
there is in them, they are not affected. Isa. 26. When the judgments of God
are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants thereof shall learn righteousness,
that is, the good inhabitants of the earth shall do so: mercy does not any good
to the wicked, nor will judgment, because they mind not the majesty of the
Lord, therefore they are not affected: that is a second inference.

3. If it be thus that sad judgments must break in upon the world, then how
miserable will the wicked of the world be? Truly they fall under a double
misery; miserable first, in that they shall have the greatest part of present
judgment. Secondly, In that they shall have an eternity of misery hereafter.
Miserable in that they shall have the greater part of present judgment: Mind
that Isa. 33.13, 14. Hear ye that are afar off what I have done, and you that
are near acknowledge my might: The sinners in Sion are afraid, etc. mark, as if
he should say, Men at length begin to consider: Oh present judgments are sad,
You that are near acknowledge my might: you see much of terror is in present
judgments; but if such be terrible, what will an after-judgement be? what will
devouring fire be? therefore take heed where your lot is cast, and among what
sort of men you are.

4. What should sinners do? will such judgments break in upon the world? what
should sinners do? they should come and submit to Christ. Be any of you
sinners? I tell you dreadful things will be upon the world; whether they be now
begun or no, I cannot tell you; but such there shall be; and what will you do?
your work is to come and close with Christ; the second Psalm is worth your
reading an hundred times over, he tells you what he will do with the wicked, he
will break them in pieces, he will scatter them; Well, what then? Oh, Kiss the
Son, lest he be angry, come bow before him (for that kiss is a kiss of
subjection) it is a dreadful thing to meet with an angry Christ: He is a Lamb,
and he is a Lion; he is a Lamb slain, and come but and kiss him, and he will be
a Lamb slain to you; if not, he will be the Lion of the tribe of Judah, to tear
you in pieces. Now knowing, says the Apostle, the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men; we persuade them, to what? why we beseech you to come and submit
to Jesus Christ, that is that that we pray of you, and that we are earnest with
you for: and one text more I would give you to this purpose, Isa. 28.14, 15,
16. Take the sense of this text, and you shall see it much to my purpose: God
was coming forth in dreadful judgments, but the wicked of the world they think
to secure themselves: How? When the overflowing scourge shall pass over, it
shall not come nigh to us: Why not? why, We have compounded with death, and
with hell are we at agreement. I but says the Spirit of God, take a little of
my advice; do not give trust and confidence to your own ways, But, says he, I
have laid in Sion a chief cornerstone, and trust to that: this is the meaning
of it; do not talk of your agreeing with Death, and compounding with hell, but
to go to Christ, to the foundation that I have set and laid for you to build
upon for your safety and security. Will you ask your heart how it is with you?
Have you built on this foundation-stone? if you have, that is the way not to be
ashamed; be that believes shall not be confounded.

5. Must such judgments break in upon the worl^? it should teach us and direct
us in praying with respect to present judgments, and that thus: we cannot
absolutely or peremptorily beg that present judgments might be stayed, but
with this reserve, that p^ovided it be not the time, when God is coming forth
with his great work in the world; if it be not that time, that God would stay
his hand; and also if God do purpose to do dreadful things in the land, that he
would make them serve the designs of his glory, and for the furtherance of
those things which he has to do in the world: but I say absolutely we may not
(I think) beg of God that he would remove such a judgment; beg that he would
preserve his people, and do them good by it, and if it be not the beginning of
what he has said himself shall come to pass, then that he would divert it and
stay his hand.

6. If God be coming forth in judgments, and such terrible ones too, how good
is it to be a Saint, and to be found in a right spirit in the day when God
contends and comes out with his indignation against the world? I tell thee, if
thou art a Saint, and that in a right spirit, it will be well with thee in the
day that God contends. And thus I have dispatched the first Doctrine, namely,
that dreadful providence must come upon the world: and having done with this,
I pass on to the second note from the words,

2. Namely, that when God does come forth with these dreadful dispensations, he
is especially thoughtful for and careful about the weal and welfare of his own
people. He does not hurl his judgments into the world at all adventures,
carelessly and inconsiderately, not caring where they light; but his eye is much
upon, and his care much after his own people: He has a great respect to them
in all that he does in the world.

1. In prosecution of this truth, I shall first confirm it to you, that in
public calamities, God is very mindful of his people, and his heart is much to
them.

And 2. Give you the Reasons of it, and then make a little Application.

But first of all, for confirmation of the truth, it is evident from two or
three things, that the Lord does take a special care of his people in days and
times of common calamity: It is evident from what he has done in such seasons
in times past; you shall scarce find a common calamity recorded in the book of
God, but you shall find some care taken of his people: therefore though there
is a true sense in that word, that all things come alike to all, I say a sense
that has a truth in it, yet this is also true, that God has a care of his
people in all the common calamities that ever come upon the world: Thus it it
was when God came to sweep away a whole world, was there none to be thought of?
no body to be remembered? yes, there was a Noah that God could not forget, Genesis
6.13, 14. Noah might say, What, the end of all flesh? what shall become of me
then? what shall I do when all flesh is destroyed? Why, says God, Noah, make
thee an A^k, ver. 14. I will not so destroy all flesh, but I will remember thee
Noah, and therefore make thee an Ark; and says God to him in verse. 18. With
thee I will establish my covenant, and thou shall come into the ark, thou and
thy sons, and thy sons wives with thee. Thus it was in the destruction of
Sodom, God came with resolution to destroy that place, Genesis 19.12, 13. Great
provocations call for great desolation; dreadful judgments are the necessary
consequents of great preceding iniquities: but Lot he must be taken care of,
and a shelter and refuge must be provided for him. Thus in the land of Egypt,
when the Lord sent his Plagues amongst them, ye this very judgment of the
Plague I believe that was the judgment, and I will give you a Scripture to
prove it; the threatening was, he would destroy all the firstborn of Pharaoh,
Exodus 11.5, 6, 7. Now the question is what judgment it was that he did destroy
the firstborn of Egypt by; I think it was the Plague, and that that confirms
me in my thoughts of it, is that Amos 4.10. where he says, I have sent among
you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt: Now I do not know any time when
God did send the Pestilence into Egypt, unless when he destroyed the
firstborn; and yet at that time when he did destroy the firstborn of all the
house of Egypt, the Lord took care of his people, Israel must be preserved, not
a dog must move the tongue against any of them. Genesis 42. when there was a
famine in Canaan, yea a famine in all lands, and a great scarcity grew over the
face of the Land of Egypt; yet Jacob and his children must be provided for, and
God must look after them, and he bids them go down to Egypt; and you find how
they were there fed; God had by a signal providence sent Joseph before hand, as
he says himself, to save Jacob and his family alive. Jeremiah in the time of
captivity, and great destruction, what must become of him? must he perish with
the rest? No, says God, I will deliver thee in that day, Jer. 39.17, 18.

Now this is my first argument to confirm this general truth, that in times of
common calamity, God takes an especial care of his people, as is evident from
what he has done.

2. From the promise of what he will do; he makes special promises to his
people of what he will do in such season^, Psalm. 91.9, 10. Because thou have
made the most High thy refuge, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall
any Plague come nigh thy dwelling: Souls that are Saints, and Saints in a right
spirit, here is a promise, a singular special promise made to them; and so you
have it in Isa. 3.8. Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, because their
tongue and their doings are against the Lord: By the way observe, God takes
notice what we say, as well as what we do: well, what now? is ^erusalem fallen,
and Judah ruined? what shall become of the Saints then? why says God, Say unto
the righteous, It shall be well with them, verse. 10.11. Jerusalem it is true is
ruined, but why? why, say to the wicked it shall be ill with them, but unto the
righteous it shall be well with them, Isa. 26.21. Behold, the Lord comes out of
his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: Does he
so? what then? what will he do unto his people? why if you look verse. 20. Come,
says he, my people, enter into your chambers, and shut the doors about you,
hide your self for a little moment, until mine indignation be over-past. I am
coming to punish the world for their iniquity; but my people I have a word for
your comfort, I will find retiring Chambers for you; Hide your self, says he,
for a little moment, until mine indignation be over-passed: So Joel. 3.16. He
shall roar out of Sion, etc. the Lord will work for his people, and do his
people good; he will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the
children of Israel: Therefore this is my second argument, God makes special
promises to his people, therefore, he will take special care of them.

3. He gives special counsel and direction to them what to do in order to their
preservation in times of common calamity.

There are three parts of counsel that the Lord gives to his people in such
seasons, and he directs them sometimes to one of these things, and sometimes to
another, according as he thinks good in himself; sometimes he calls his people
out of the places that shall be the seats of his judgments: he did so in the
case of Sodom: and it is worth your considering that you have Luke 21.20, 21.
When you shall see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, know the desolation thereof
is nigh; that shall be a sign to you, that I am coming against it with a
desolating judgment: Well, what then must be done? Let them that are in Judah
fly to the mountain, and let them that are in the City depart out, and let not
them that are in the Countries enter thereinto. This was his counsel at that
time; and thus God does sometimes: he calls some out of the places by the
method of his providence, he tells them his will, and brings them out of the
seat of his judgments.

2. He calls all in all times in, order to preservation, from closing with and
cleaving to the sins of the places which are to be judged, and for which he
judges and condemns; that one known Text may serve in stead of many, Rev.
18.4. Come out of her my peole (that is, out of Babylon) and be ye separate,
partake not of her sins, lest ye also partake of her plagues; sin as sinners
do, and you must expect to suffer as they do.

3. He does direct his people to some special duties that have an especial
tendency to preservation, sometimes to faith, to trust in, and dependence upon
the Lord; and sometimes to prayer and watchfulness, as here in my Text: to some
such special duties, that have an especial use in order to the preservation of
a people from destroying and ruining calamities. Thus, I say, put these things
together, what God has done, what he has promised to do, what counsel he
gives unto his people, in respect to common calamities, they are evident tokens
of love to his people in times of distress: But now what is the reason?
wherefore is it that God should especially be careful of his people in days of
great distress and trouble? I answer, he does it for two or three reasons.

1. For the love he bears them, and the interest that he has in them; he has
an interest in his people, they are near unto him in a near relation, and he
has great love to them; therefore it is he especially bears an eye to his
people, and looks after them, that things may go well with them in the days of
evil; some Scriptures you have to this purpose: That Jer. 30.10, 11. Fear not,
O my servant Jacob, etc. though, says God, I make a full end of other Nations
and people, I will save thee. Truly one might have replied to the Lord as
Judas did (not Iscariot) And why us Lord, and why not the world? Because thou
art Jacob my servant, thou art Israel a people that I have interest in,
therefore I will look after thee, and show kindness unto thee; I will do it for
that reason: and add to this, that Jer. 43.4. Observe here, I will give men for
thee, and people for thy life. What is the meaning of that? I will let my wrath
and rage vent it self upon the world, but I will spare my people: Why so? I
have loved them, therefore I will give men for them; hundreds of men God will
give for his people, they are near the heart of God, therefore he is pleased to
exercise this peculiar kindness to them.

2. He does it because of the preciousness and worth that is in them; not that
a Saint by nature is better then others, but through grace he is become a
choice and precious one; and because of the worth, choiceness, and excellency
of a gracious soul, God loves him: The Saint is an excellent piece; The
righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: It may be the righteous man is
in a poor low condition in the world, and his neighbor a great rich man,
abounding in the things of this world, and yet for all that the righteous is
more excellent then his neighbor. God has a great care of his people, and that
because they are precious, Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight,
thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee; therefore others shall dye,
and thou shall be saved: Why? namely, because thou art precious in my sight, I
see a worth in thee, and an excellency in thee, and therefore others shall go
for thee; they shall perish, but thou shall be preserved. In Psalm. 116.15.
David has an expression to this purpose, Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the Death of his Saints; and the Psalmist gives this as a reason why the Lord
did preserve him when time was, says he, Precious in the sight of the Lord is
the death of his Saints. Psalm. 72.14. You have a Scripture something of like
nature, Precious shall their blood be in his sight.

3. But one reason more, Why the Lord in common calamities is especially
careful of his people, it is because they trust God with themselves, they
charge God with them, and God will be faithful to his charge; he will not
betray his trust, he is the hope of his people. So Jer. 14.8. Oh thou the hope
of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble: So Jer. 17.16, 17. As
for me, I have not hastened from being a Pastor to follow thee, nor have I
desired the woeful day; be not a terror unto me, Thou art my hope in the day of
evil: Oh says the Lord, think upon me, I desire to be faithful unto thee, to
mind thee in thy work, and follow thee in thy way; and I have not desired the
evil day, thou know, that that came out of my lips was right before thee,
and thou are my hope: Mind it, this was the reason why God did give Jeremiah a
special preservation; it was because he made the Lord his trust, Jer. 39.18.
For I will surely deliver thee, etc. thou have committed the keeping thy self
unto me, therefore I will be good to thee, and I will preserve thee. It is
worth the thinking of, that the Lord does it because his people t^ust in him.
Thus much for confirmation of the point, and the Reasons of it.

Object. But you will say, If this be a truth, this may be objected, If the
Lord choose to have a particular respect unto his people in times of common
calamity, how comes it to pass that any of his people should fall in such a
dispensation, as we sometimes see they do?

To that I answer, There are these reasons why, notwithstanding Gods special
care of his people in common calamities, some of them do fall therein: it is
for one or more of these reasons usually.

1. It is sometimes through unbelief; God keeps them while they trust him, but
when their trust fails, then the promise fails, and God is not a security to
them: it is sometimes through unbelief; so we find it in the case of Isreal's
going to Canaan; there were abundance fell in the wilderness, and truly among
those that fell we may think there were some upright ones that had grace in
their hearts, but yet they distrusted God, they thought the journey was long
and tedious, and the way was difficult, therefore they fell in the wilderness,
it was because of their unbelief: By whom was he grieved forty years in the
wilderness? Was it not by them whose carcases fell in the wilderness? To whom
he swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest, Heb. 3.17, 18,
19. And why entered they not? because of unbelief: So it is in this case, God
makes special promises of preservation; but when the faith of his people
fails, sometimes God suffers them to lose the fruit of the promise.

2. When his people sin as the world does, then he causes them to taste of
judgment with the world; when they keep not clear from the sin for which God
contends, he suffers them to fall in and by the judgments wherewith he
contends: So in that of the Revelations, Partake not of her sins, lest you
partake of her plagues: in which words you have a promise and a threatening;
promise, if you do not partake of her sin, then you shall not suffer with her;
but if you do, you may expect to share with her in judgment: and therefore you
find Moses a choice servant, and he suffered in the wilderness as well as the
rest; and it was because he sinned as they did that dyed in the wilderness,
Numb. 27.12. Why might he not go into Canaan? Why, says he, For ye rebelled
against my commandment in the desert of Zin, etc. You rebelled when the
Congregation rebelled, and therefore for that reason, although it was the one
time that Moses did miscarry in his way toward Canaan, and yet for joining
with the people in that one sin of murmuring, he was cut short of Canaan: and
so it is in cases of common calamity, if we sin with the world, we may be led
to suffer with the world. Therefore by the way, make this your care, Touch not
with the abominations of the Day in which you live, for which you may conclude
God contends; rather suffer any thing in the world, then put your self under
the stroke of God, by doing any thing against him; and say not it is a little
sin, because Moses sinning but once with the people, he fell with them in the
wilderness.

3. It is sometimes for want of making use of the means that the Lord has
appointed for preservation. It is not good to sin against the use of means: God
does great things, but he does use to tie us to the use of means: Naaman he
came to the Prophet, and the Prophet bids him go to Jordan, and wash seven
times, and he should be whole. Now he was vexed at this, and why would not
other waters do as well? but his servants encouraged him to use the means the
Prophet had prescribed; and if he had not, he might have gone a Le^par to his
grave. So Christ he takes clay and spittle, and annoints the eyes of the blind
man therewith, and bids him go wash in the waters of Siloam, and he should
receive his sight: Now the neglect of the means the Lord is pleased to provide
for us, is enough to make us fall by the public and common stroke. The
children of Israel, as you read, Acts 7.25. When Moses was full forty years
old, he supposed that they would have understood he was to have been their
Savior, and that they would have taken hold of him for their deliverance at
that time; but they did not see the means proposed, and did not make use of it,
and what followed? you shall find it was forty years after before he returned
unto them again, as you may see at verse. 30. This is plain, that Moses did
offer himself to them at that time, as a deliverer appointed by God, but they
not see it, and make use of it, and therefore they continued in their bondage
forty years more. I quote this, to tell you that you ought to look up unto the
Lord for what means he does allow, for the communication of that mercy that we
wait for, and by his providence he seems to point out to us: That the neglect
hereof may be the occasion of our falling.

4. God does sometimes suffer Saints to fall by common strokes, to prevent some
greater evils, as you have it Isa. 57. The righteous perishes and no man
lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering that they
are taken away from the evil to come. Truly God sometimes takes away his
people in the beginning of a calamity, and that because there are more dreadful
things behind; and that because he would preserve them from that evil, he is
pleased to suffer them to fall.

And these may serve as an account why notwithstanding Gods peculiar and
singular care of his people, he suffers sometimes some of them to fall in and
by public calamities.

And thus I have dispatched the Doctrinal part of this truth, and I shall
conclude what I have more to say to it in a little Application.

Is this true, that God does in a peculiar way in times of public calamity
look after his people?

1. Surely then it should stir up all that have any mercy of this kind, to give
the Lord the glory of his goodness, and speak good of his name, that he is
pleased thus to bear a hand upon his own people.

2. The Lord taking this care for his people, you ought to serve him in the
making use of any thing that he prescribes you in order to self-preservation,
to wait upon the Lord in watchfulness and prayer, and whatever means he does
direct you unto, in order to preservation: As the life of a Saint is precious
in his eyes, so should it be in yours, and whatever God looks upon as a mercy
worth the bestowing, you should look upon as worth the receiving: Ah souls! let
me tell you, the judgments of God they are no slight things, but things that
carry a great deal of dread along with them, and it is eminent kindness (as I
hope to show you hereafter) to be safe guarded at such times and under such
providence.

3. If it be thus, that God in calamity takes a singular care of his people,
you also should take singular care to glorify God, and answer his providence
and design in and under common calamities: Ever mark this, in whatever thing
God shows kindness unto his people, they also stand much engaged to show
kindness unto God, as I may with reverence phrase it, that is, that they be
careful to honor him. But you will say, How are we to carry it in such a day?

Why for answer, First of all study the judgment well; when the hand of God is
abroad, do not slight it, do not make light of it, but see that it is Gods
hand, and his hand in a more then ordinary way; labor to see and be affected
with that majesty that shines forth in it: David says, My flesh trembles for
fear of thee, and I am afraid of all thy judgments, Psalm. 119.120. He did not
look upon the judgments of God with a slight spirit, but did see much of the
glory of God shining therein.

2. You are much to study your own hearts; such dealings of God without you, do
call upon you to be looking within you, to be considering the frame of your
souls; it calls upon you loudly to be finding out the plague of your own heart,
1 King. 8.38. Every man is to study his own heart, to labor to know that, and
see the sinfulness, vileness, and wretchedness of that. I tell you souls, the
judgments of God that are abroad are not things of an empty sound, but they do
speak powerfully and plainly, and are loud calls of God unto you, that you
should make it your business and the design of your souls to be more acquainted
with your selves then ever.

3. He calls to you to mourn over your own and others abominations, Ezekiel. 9.4.
The spirit of God speaks of them that mourn, sigh and weep, for the
abominations of the wicked; that is it that the God of heaven calls for at your
hands.

And then lastly, if this be a truth, that the Lord bears a special eye of
favor to his people in the day of their calamity, then let every soul of you
pass into the number of Saints.

There are three sorts of persons in the world, and but one of the three that
can promise themselves safety in a day of evil. 1. Openly profane. 2. Secret
hypocrites; And 3. real Saints: and of the three, it is but the latter sort
that can promise themselves any security.

1. Of the openly profane, what shall come of them? Isa. 3.11. Woe to the
wicked, it shall go ill with them, for the reward of their hands shall be given
them.

2. As for the secret hypocrites, what shall become of them? things shall go
ill enough with them also, as you have it in the prophecy of Isaiah, The
sinners in Sion are afraid, and fear has surprised the hypocrite, and who can
dwell in everlasting burnings?

But 3. The Saints they are the people that shall have the especial kindness of
God over them; they are the people that God will look after; and therefore I
recommend this to you, to make it your business to see that there be something
of God in you in truth, and that you may be found in a spirit suiting the
providence of this day, and then the Lord may make you partakers of this
special mercy of being preserved in the time of common calamity.

Which leads me to the third Doctrine, namely, That it is a great honor and an
especial mercy, and that that Saints should put out earnestly for, to be
preserved and kept in times of common calamity.

In treating of which, I shall endeavor distinctly to confirm these three
things. 1. That it is a great honor. 2. A great mercy. 3. That the Saints
should put out hard for preservation in a time of common calamity.

For the first therefore, that it is a great honor to be preserved, when God
comes forth with desolating judgment: Methinks that Scripture carries much
of weight in it, that you have Genesis 6.8. But Noah found grace in the eyes of
the Lord: What is that? Noah found favor in the eyes of God; that is, he was a
man that became a favorite of God; he was one honored in the Court of heaven.
It is the known signification of the term in our common language, such a one
finds grace in the sight of his Prince, that is, he is his favorite, and he is
honored by him: So Noah he was one that God put an honor upon; and what was the
honor? it was to make him a preserved one in the time of that common calamity.
It may appear if we consider three things, that it is a great honor to be
preserved in a desolating calamity.

1. If you consider this, That usually such as the Lord preserves, they are
such upon whom there are some marks of honor found, or (mind what I add more)
if any other be preserved, it is for the sake of them upon whom something is
found very honorable and worthy. I shall clear up this from many instances,
that there is some excellent thing found in and upon those whom the Lord
usually preserves in a desolating judgment; and my first instance is that of
Noah, and you shall find something in him very honorable and commendable: Noah
found favor with God, and what was the reason that he should be marked by God
for this special favor? If you look Genesis 5.9. you shall find that Noah was a
just man and perfect in his generation, and he walked with God: You must bear
with me if I take up a little time in insisting upon this, that I may show you
the design I have herein.

There were three excellent things found upon Noah, upon which account God
marked him out for the man that should be preserved from this deluge.

1. He was a just man, an upright, sincere, single-hearted man; he was a man
that did in the truth of his soul follow God, which is an admirable thing:
Hypocrisy and guile is one of the most dishonorable things under heaven; I
tell you souls, a hypocritical professor is worse then a downright sinner, and
so the Lord himself accounts him, Psalm. 51.6. Thou desire truth in the inward
part, and in the hidden part thou shall make me to u^derstand wisdom; thou art,
says David, for simplicity, for sincerity and integrity; that is a thing that
takes much with the heart of God. Hypocrisy is one of the worst things, and
has one of the saddest issues and consequences in the world, and therefore
hypocrites they are said to heap up wrath, in Job 36.13. Hypocrites in heart
they heap up wrath: This juggling and false-heartedness is a most displeasing
thing to God, and is of most wretched consequence, for they shall not only
fall under wrath, but under heaps of wrath, that are found in this frame; they
shall have the indignation of God heaped upon them: now I conclude on the other
hand, sincerity is a thing of great worth, and this was found upon Noah.

2. He was a perfect man in his generation; that is thus, he was perfect in the
sight of men among whom he lived and conversed; he was such, and so walked,
that none about him could tell how to accuse him; he was a man that gave them
no just offense, nor laid a stone of stumbling before those that lived about
him: the world (as wicked as it was) could not say that he gave them any ill
example, but he was upright in that wicked world; now this is a very honorable
thing: I tell you many professors do profession more hurt then good, and it
were well they were out of it, for they carry it so wickedly and basely, that
they harden the hearts of sinners, and make them think ill of the ways of God:
but it is an excellent thing so to carry it, that they may be good examples: is
not this Christ's command? Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine, as that others
seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven: carry it
so in the world, as that you may encourage all, and discourage none, that is
the meaning of it, that you may not be a hinderance unto any in their closing
with and giving up themselves unto God. Paul that servant of the Lord enjoined
the same thing, 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none offense neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor
to the Church of God; carry it so, that you may not justly cast a stone of
stumbling in their way; this was found in Noah, and was a thing very honorable
in him, and it is commended in others in that Luke 1. and the beginning: it was
the commendation of Zachary and Elizabeth, that they walked in all the
commandments of the Lord blameless, as you have it in ver. 6. Observe what is
commended in these two persons, what marks of honor were upon them, they were
righteous before God; a righteousness they had, that was so in Gods account;
and in their walking before men they were blameless, as to commandments and
ordinances. Mark this text, there is a great fault in many in the world; two
sorts of people especially are to blame by virtue of this Text: some walk in
commandments, but are not for ordinances; and some in ordinances, and not in
commandments: whereas it is the glory of a people to walk both in commandments
and in ordinances: my meaning is, the carrying of it so in the worship of God,
and in your conversations also among men, that they may not have just occasion
of offense. Now this was found upon Noah, he was just in his generation.

And the other thing is this, And Noah walked with God, that is the third
honorable character upon Noah, He walked with God: What is that? truly I think
walking with God is the having friendship and acquaintance with God: Can two
walk together unless they be agreed? says Amos, 3.3. Noah he had friendship
and acquaintance with God, and therefore he could walk with him, he could keep
company with him: in walking together we have the company of one another; this
had Noah, he was in Gods way, he kept in his way. Also the having and
maintaining peace and communion with God, is intended in this walking with God.
We are apt to account it a great happiness to have friendship with great men;
surely it is much more and a great deal better to have communion with the God
of heaven; to have it and keep it, is the great glory of a Christian. This Noah
had, and it was greatly his honor: Says 1 John 1.3. Our fellowship is with the
Father and with his Son Jesus Christ; as if he should have said, Brethren, we
are a people interested in choice and excellent mercies, and we would invite
you to a part in them; but pray what is this choice mercy? Why it is this, We
have fellowship with the Father through his Son Jesus Christ: A great honor to
the souls that have it; and these were the honorable marks upon this Noah. Now
he was the man that God picked out to deliver and keep in this common calamity
when all the world was drowned, he and those that went upon his score (for his
family was taken in upon this account) they must be preserved: and that is my
first instance.

My second is the instance of Lot, a man preserved in a common calamity, and a
few others for his sake: Well, was there any honorable Character found upon
him? Yes, there was, look 2 Pet. 2.6* 7. He delivered just Lot vexed with the
filthy conversation of the wicked. Here is the honorable Character found upon
Lot: He was just Lot, and just Lot vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked: I shall only a little insist upon that clause, Vexed with the filthy
conversation of the wicked.

The sin of the world was a burden to his soul, and that that he could hardly
bear up under: You shall find that is an excellent frame, and that that God is
pleased much to honor: says David, Psalm. 139.21. Do I not hate them that hate
thee? and am I not grieved with them that rise up against thee? Oh, says he,
Lord, thou know my heart, and thou know that there is something in me
that thou prizest, that is his meaning; now what is it? Why, says he, they
that grieve God, they grieve me too; they that carry it so as that they are a
burden to the Spirit of Grace, they are also a burden to my spirit, I cannot
bear it: And hence he cries out in Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me that I so journ in
Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar; that is, that I dwell among a
wicked ungodly people, a people whereby God is greatly dishonored; woe is me
that my lot is cast among such a people: This was the honorable character found
upon Lot, he was grieved with the filthy conversation of the wicked, therefore
God marks him out, and would not suffer him to fall by that judgment.

My next instance is, that of Caleb and Joshua, upon them were also some marks
of honor, upon Caleb especially, Numb. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, because he
had another spirit, and has followed me fully, etc. Here was Calebs mercy, his
going into Canaan, and the honor put upon him, was his not falling in the
wilderness among the many thousands that fell, but he must go into the good
land.

His honorable characters were these two. First, he was a man of another
spirit. Secondly, He had followed God fully.

1. He was a man of another spirit, of a more excellent spirit then the rest of
Israel: I, let me tell you, a man of a more excellent spirit then some of the
worthies of Israel: To have some excellency of spirit, is one of the most
excellent things in the world; a man is truly excellent according to the
excellence of his spirit, and that was found upon Caleb. Moses was a man of a
very good spirit, yet (it seems) Caleb was of a more excellent spirit then he.
I say, Moses was a man of a very good spirit, Number. 12.3. Now the man Moses was
very meek above all the men on the face of the earth; he had great meekness of
spirit, which is one of the most excellent spirits in the world: See what
testimony God gives of such in that 1 Pet. 3.4. The ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. Now, I say, Moses he
had ^his excellence of a meek spirit, and yet it seems Caleb had some greater
excellency of spirit then he; for Moses dies in the wilderness and Caleb is
carried unto Canaan: that was one of the marks upon him, he was a man of a more
excellent spirit: And the other was, he followed God fully. What is the meaning
of that? It is this, he he was for all sorts of work, easy and hard, and all
together, never made a difficulty where God made none; whatever God called him
to, that he was for. You shall find wherein he did discover his following of
God fully, Number. 13.31. When the bad spies came and brought an ill report on the
good land, and cried there are great difficulties, we shall never be able to
encounter with them: Now Caleb he discovers his excellency, and shows that he
was a man of another spirit; says he in Numb. 14.6, 7. It is an excellent good
land; and in Chap. 13.30. says he, We are well able to overcome it: in this he
followed God fully, resolving according to the call of God, though the
difficulty were ever so great: a heart to follow God, and following of him
through all difficulties, was the excellency of this Caleb. Here is a man that
followed God to purpose, this excellence was upon him, and he is the man must
go to Canaan to possess the good land, though Moses and Aaron must dye by the
way. In Ezekiel. 9.14. you have there an Angel commissioned to go forth and set a
mark upon the foreheads of those that sigh and cry for the abominations that
were committed in that day: Here are some men must be spared; Who are they,
pray? They are a people sighing for the abominations of their day; such a
spirit as Lot had, vexed for the abominations of their time, therefore these
must be preserved: and this is what I shall say to the first head, that it is
an honor to be preserved; it is so from this consideration, that usually God
preserves none in such a season, but those upon whom there is something of
excellence to be found; or if others, it is for the sake of those upon whom
those honorable Characters are found.

2. It is a great honor to be preserved from common calamity, if you consider,
that those that he does preserve are usually such as he does mean to honor with
himself for ever; or if he do honor others with this mercy, it is for the sake
of those that he intends to honor with himself for ever: There was a kind of
typ^fying ^ut of this, in the slaying the firstborn of Egypt: At that time,
who must be preserved? Why Israel: Now all Israel were Types of Gods own
people, and in that God did Typically foretell what he would do in aftertime,
especially in the latter times, that his saved ones should be his true Israel.
There is a Scripture I will recommend to you, make what use of it the Lord
shall help you, Isa. 4.3. And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in
Zion, and he that remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, even every one
that is written among the living in Jerusalem: Now what time does this relate
unto? It was a time of great destruction, as you have it Chap. 3.26. Her gates
shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground; and
in verse. 25. Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty men in war: Now in
this desolation some shall escape, and who shall they be? What sort of men
shall they be? Mark what he says, and make of it as much as the Lord shall help
you; they that escape of Israel, they that are left in Sion, and they that
remain in Jerusalem shall be called holy; that is, shall be holy, for God calls
things as they are, or he will make them to be what he calls them: And is that
all? No, such as are written among the living, or (as the word may be rendered)
such as are written to life in Jerusalem: written to life, is the same with
being written in the Lambs book of life; such as he will make holy, they shall
be the escaped, they shall be preserved. I will give you another text, Mat.
24.22. It speaks of the tribulations of the latter times, most dreadful things;
And what then? Except these days be shortened, no flesh shall be saved: They
should be such as should cut off every soul from the earth: but God has an
elect upon whom his heart is set, and for their sakes it shall be shortened. The
meaning of the text, I take to be this, there shall be dreadful tribulations in
the latter days, such as if they were let run on their course, would cut off
every soul; but they shall be so cut short, that a people written unto life
shall outlive them. And if this be so, surely it is a great honor to outlive
common calamities, especially in the latter days, into which we are come, or
unto which we are drawing nigh apace.

But one thing more, a third argument is this, it is an honorable thing to have
preservation in times of common calamity, if you consider, That such who are so
preserved, are preserved to very honorable ends; God does not preserve them
for nothing, but to very honorable ends; the Prophet Isa. 66. tells us of
dreadful providence, verse. 15, 16. For behold, the Lord will come with fire,
etc. Well, shall any escape at that day? Yes, there shall, if you look to verse.
14. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, etc. The hand of the Lord
that shall be known to his friends for their preservation, to his enemies for
their destruction; but to what end will he reserve them that he does preserve?
That you have in verse. 19. I will set a sign among them, and I will send those
that escape of them to the nations; the escaped people, what shall they be for?
They shall be to make known, set up, and advance the glory of God, and to tell
of his wondrous workings. I confess, that I conceive this text does relate to
the Jewish Nation; but there shall be a remnant preserved, and the reserved are
reserved to honorable ends, to make known much of God, to reveal and speak of
his glory: To which add that Jer. 50. 28. you read of some that escaped the^e
in that day of distress; and what do they escape for? It is to declare in Zion
the vengeance of the Lord; they are a remnant reserved to speak the praise of
God, to magnify and admire him in the dispensations of his providence; and
therefore being reserved to honorable ends, it is an honorable preservation:
That is the first thing in the Doctrine.

2. As it is an honor, so it is an especial mercy, to be preserved in times of
public judgments; it is not like the honor of this world, which is but an
empty blast of breath, but such as is a mercy as well as an honor: and, Oh how
great is the mercy of surviving, and out-living common calamities! I shall
briefly show you it is great mercy, and it will be evidenced in the
consideration of six or seven particulars.

1. It appears to be so, from the thankfulness of those that have been
preserved: You shall find some souls have been much taken with the goodness of
God, and have admired his kindness in the delivering a people from common
calamity. David in his time under a common distress, how does he admire the
grace of God, that shined forth in his preservation? What, says David, they
cut off, and I alive! What have I done? these sheep what have they done? Ezra
9.7, 8. here was a reserved people, a people b^ought back from Captivity, and
what does Ezra say? Oh, says he, it is great grace, there is abundance of
mercy in it, that we should be preserved, that the Lord should keep us alive,
and has not suffered us to fall in our bondage, but has given us a nail in
his house. Now the thankfulness of a people delivered from such calami^y, is a
great ground to think it a great mercy, Jer. 20.13. Sing unto the Lord, praise
ye the Lord, for he has delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evil
doers. Now that I say that the people of God are so thankful for, and do praise
God for, certainly it is a great mercy.

2. It is a great mercy to be preserved in common calamities, if you consider
this well, that though God may find some hono^able things upon his people, that
he is pleased to honor with preservation, yet (if he would look thoroughly) he
might find something in them that might provoke him to let them fall with
others: It is true, God when he does preserve, does find something honorable
upon those that he does preserve, it is so for the most part; as he found faith
in Jeremiah, a relying and recumbency upon him, and therefore honored him with
preservation. In Psalm. 91. the Lord found three things honorable upon a people,
to which he annexeth a promise of preservation; one you have verse. 9, 10. He
finds faith there, and that he honors with a promise of preservation; and in
the 11, 12. He shall give his angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy
ways: Here he finds a people walking wi^h him, and therefore he promises them
preservation. Now if God do find any thing of excellence upon a people, yet how
often is it cold and dead, and at a very low ebb? if he finds faith, How much
of unbelief is there in the soul? Also if he finds him walking with God, how
much turning aside? And is it not great mercy that God is yet pleased to crown
them with preservation, because he finds but some small matter of excellency
upon them? You shall see how David speaks, Psalm. 130.3. If thou should mark
iniquities, Oh Lord, who shall stand? That is, if thou come to search us
thoroughly, and resolvest to do according to all that thou see in us, who then
shall stand? But it is the kindness of God, that he does not mark all iniquity,
and does not look upon every miscarriage of his poor people, he covers many of
them; therefore in Lam. 3. how much are they there taken with Gods mercy? It is
of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail
not, verse. 22.

3. It is a great mercy, if you consider Gods preservations are special
kindnesses, a great deal of love goes therewith: Hezakiah when he was sick of
the Plague, God carries him through it, he did not let him fall by it; and
what says he? Isa. 38.17. Thou have not let me fall, but have kept me, and
thou have done it in love to my soul: And to this add that 2 King. 19.30, 31.
Mark it, the Assyrian (I think it was) that did hardly bestead poor Israel, who
were greatly distressed by them; well, but says God, Out of Sion shall go a
remnant, and some shall escape; but how? Why, the zeal of the Lord of hosts
shall perform it. That is, his love and care shall be engaged for a remnant; so
that it is great mercy to be preserved, and that because God does preserve in
great kindness.

4. It is a great mercy, if you consider that God often shows a great deal of
mercy to the souls of them that do escape: in Isa. 4. you see what a mercy the
Lord shows, and what good he does upon the souls of those that should remain in
Sion: in verse. 4. The escaped remnant shall not carry their dross along with
them, but God will take away their dross, and do away their filth: this shall
be the mercy of this escaping remnant: and so Mal. 3.2, 3. Who may abide the
day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? Why, what is it makes
that day so terrible? Oh this is it, He shall sit as a refiners fire, and as
Fullers soap: In verse. 6. Oh, says he, when I come in my dreadful calamities
and judgments, Jacob shall not be consumned; Why not? what shall then be done
upon him? He will take away their dross, and their Tynn, and purify them as
Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness; and truly this is more then to escape: to escape is not so
much, as to escape it and your corruption too; to be out of trouble, and freed
from sin too, this is a mercy of mercies.

5. Great mercy to preserved in and through a common calamity, in as much as it
gives farther opportunity to get the soul into a better order, to mourn over
past miscarriages: for the soul of the best, and the frame of the best had need
be better; and he that out-lives a calamity, lives to a farther opportunity of
getting his heart better prepared; says David, Oh spare me a little, that I
may recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen. Length of time
is an advantage to getting more of strength, and they that are wise whom God
has delivered, they should improve it, Ezekiel. 6.8, 9. Yet will I leave a
remnant, etc. This improvement shall the escaping remnant make of their
escaping, they shall mourn over their hearts and ways at a greater rate then
ever: So Ezekiel. 7.16. But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on
the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every one for his
iniquity. The best of Saints, I am persuaded, that God carries through common
calamity, they do there and thence take opportunity of looking into their
hearts more thoroughly, and bemoaning them in the presence of God, They shall
mourn every one for his iniquity: and is not this a mercy, to have a reserve of
time to mourn over their ways in the presence of God?

6. It is a mercy, if you consider the reserved people are a reconciled people;
usu^lly God is well pleased with them, and pacified toward them, as Hezekiah
said in the text I quoted to you just now, Isa. 38.17. Behold, for peace I had
great bitterness, but thou have in love to my soul, delivered it from the pit
of corruption, for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. This is usually
Gods method; a people that he reserves through calamity, to them he pardons all
iniquity, with them he is at peace, and unto them he is pleased graciously to
be reconciled. So Jer. 50.20. I will pardon them whom I reserve; I will not
only reserve them, but I will pardon them: that is a mercy, and double mercy
to be a reserved and a pardoned people.

7. It is a great mercy to be preserved through public calamities, if you
consider God often makes the issue of it the inabling the soul to be more for
God, and to walk more with him than ever at former times, Isa. 37.31. And the
remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah, shall again take root downwards,
and bear fruit upward: It has a spiritual as well as a litteral sense, no
doubt, They shall be a rooted people, and also a fruitful people: it is a mercy
when God makes the issue of these Dispensations, the purging of us, to make us
bring forth more fruit; the fire of affliction, a means for their purging, and
consequently of their bearing more fruit to the praise of God: So Isa. 10.20,
21. And it shall come to pass in that day, the remnant shall return, even the
remnant of Jacob to the mighty God. We are apt to be running from God, but
there shall be an escaping remnant, and what shall the issue of it be? They
that return unto the Lord, God shall have more of their hearts then ever he had
before. This is a great mercy, and doubtless the soul should admire it, and
seek it; which leads me to the third thing in the Doctrine, namely, that it is
that that gracious souls should put out hard after, to be delivered and
preserved in the times of public calamities.

You shall find sometimes the people of Go^ have been very earnest for the dive
^^ng a judgment, for the taking of it off if it might be; that was the case of
Abraham, Oh how he pleads for poor Sodom! And in times when that cannot be
prevailed for, how do the people of God sue for particular preservation! That
they may be the spared people; the Prophet Jeremiah begs this mercy from God,
Jer. 17.16, 17. As for me, I have not hastened, etc. Oh, says he, I have not
done any thing toward the pulling down of these troubles: I have not
endeavored to hasten them; Lord let not me feel the dread and terror of them:
here I say the good man is begging for an immunity and freedom, for a
particular preservation in times and days of evil: So David, Psalm. 71.2. He is
also lodging some requests in the bosom of the Lord, Deliver me in thy
righteousness, cause me to escape; let me be of the escaping side, and in the
number of those whom thou will preserve: and so also in the prophecy of Joel,
such kind of counsel is given, in Joel 2. There was a day of great distress and
trouble in verse. 1. Blow ye the trumpet in Sion, etc. Well, but what mus^ we do
at such a time? why in verse. 17. Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord
stand between the Temple and the Altar, and cry, Lord spare thy people, etc.
Whatever thou do, and whatever sad providence be abroad, Oh, says he,
Spare thy people: That was the thing they should seek and beg at the hands of
God; and truly could we pray more, and seek more, who knows what might be
done? In Isa. 37. you find there King Hezekiah sends to the Prophet, and bids
him lift up a prayer for the remaining remnant, at verse. 4. It may be the Lord
thy God will hear, etc. Wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is
left: Here are some escaped out of the hand of the King of Assyria, Oh, says
he, Pray unto the Lord, and beg hard, that this escaping remnant may be
delivered from the rage of the King of Assyria, and may not fall by the stroke
of his hand: Thus we should beg for preservation in times of common calamity:
how and in what manner, and at what rate this prayer is to be managed, will be
showed in the next Doctrine. And if you would know the reason why we should beg
this mercy, much might be said, but only this shall suffice.

1. Because it is a mercy of great worth, and therefore should be greatly
sought; and also I might say, it is the p^oper means to fetch down this and
every other mercy; and therefore if we would have it, we must set to the
seeking of it.

But here an Objection may be made against what I have said, If we should beg
preservation in times of common calamity, what shall we say of David? 2 Samuel
24.17. And David spoke unto the Lord, etc. I have been showing you that Saints
should beg preservation in common calamities, and David here he begs
destruction, And did he do well in it? I say, he begs he may be destroyed, or
at least it seems as if he did; he does not say, Lord preserve me and my
fathers house, but, Let thine hand be against me, I pray thee, and against my
fathers house; and therefore now shall we reconcile these, and bring them
together?

I answer therefore in two or three things plainly thus.

1. David he speaks this, because he supposed that a strictness of ju^tice
required it should be so; he it was th t was the only offending person, it was
the numbering the people that caused God to send this judgment, and that David
did, and no body else, therefore he could not but confess that in strictness of
justice he should have dyed, and the people have lived, and therefore he could
not but say, Lord let thy hand be upon me, but as for these sheep what have
they done?

2. This is to be considered, that it is a p^rticular case, we have not the
like of it that I know; it was the punishment of a pa^ticular sin, and David
had chosen the punishment, he had submitted himself to it, and beforehand given
himself up to the stroke of God; for the Prophet comes unto him, and tells him,
he had sinned, and now he must fall under one of the three judgments, sword,
famine, or pestilence; and therefore, says he, Let us have the Pestilence; it
was his own sin, and he chose the judgment, and therefore he supposed it was
his due to suffer because he had sinned.

And 3. It argues his great love to the people, he would willingly have dyed if
their lives might have been saved; and I know not but another might say in such
a case, Lord, if the hand of God being upon me, might save many others, let it
be so: Not that he did simply desire to fall under the stroke, but
conditionally, if his life might save the lives of others: But this was a
particular case. Now the judgment of God as it comes among us, we know not who
it is particularly pointed at; it is our duty in the mean time to seek unto God
that we may be his hidden ones in the day of his anger.

Thus I have dispatched the doctrinal part, the Application now remains.

Is it true that it is a great honor, and a mercy much to be sought for, to
outlive a distre^s and common calamity? Then what shall we say to the
desperate wickedness of those that run themselves upon the judgments of God? I
mean, that do the things, and go on desperately in the sins that seldom find an
escape under such judgments? Ah, my friends, we are a people wi^h whom God is
contending, his hand is lifted up, Oh that the^e were none found among us
pertinaciously going on in those desperate ways of sin and ^ebellion, that are
usually attended with destruction and desolation. My friends, let me tell you,
the men that adhere to, and are found readily going on in the ways of sin, that
provoke to desolation, their case is very desperate: Oh that we could all with
brokenness of heart, mourn over such a generation! That we could lay their case
to heart! It is a dreadful thing to stand before the stroke of Divine
indignation, a dreadful thing to dare the God of heaven to his face, to bid
defiance to him, as if he ware not a God of power, as if there were no dread in
his judgments, as if standing before his rebuke were an easy matter. But you
will say, Are there any so desp^rate in common calamities to dare God to his
face? I wish there were none. But I shall tell you of six or seven things that
God has resolved those that be found under such sins, they shall not be of the
escaping remnant.

1. Such as grievously corrupt the worship of God, when he comes forth in ways
of judgment he sometimes determines against them that they shall not escape,
Ezekiel. 5.10, 11. Wherefore as I live says the Lord God, because thou have
defiled my Sanctuary with thy detestable things, mine eyes shall not spare,
etc. Oh miserable! how sad is the case of such a people? I will follow thee
without mercy, thou shall have no mercy in such a day: here is the sin,
grievous corrupting the worship of God, and Gods determination concerning such,
he will destroy them utterly: Oh stand at a distance from such a people, it
will be sad to have any thing to do with them in such a day, Isa. 13.19. And
Babylon the glory of Kingdoms, etc. And at verse. 15. Every one that is found
shall be thrust through, and every one that is joined to her shall be thrust
through, etc.

2. Corruption in worship, which God has witnessed against: when God comes to
judge for such things, there is seldom any escaping, ser. 11.10, 11, 12. They
are turned back to the iniquity of their forefathers etc. Mark, says God, they
live in the sins of their forefathers, sins that I misliked, reproved, and
punished in them; and Therefore thus says the Lord, I will bring evil upon
them that they shall not escape; nay, though they cry to me, I will not hear
them: though they would then come to me, and f^wn upon me, and be glad of
protection and preservation, I will not hear them; and woe to them upon whom
this lot lights. I may allude to that that you have in Ezra 9.14 Should we
again break thy commandments, and join our selves in affinity with the people
in these abominations? etc. Mark, we were a vile people, and lived in a great
many sins, what then should we return unto them again? if we should do so, the
vengeance of God would rest upon us, so that we should be sure there should
scarce be any escaping for us.

3. Sinning under Gods warnings, (...) duly minding of them, whether in his
wo^d, or by his works; such a people shall escape very ha^dly, if at all, Jer.
13.10 This ev^l people which refuse to hear my words, etc. An in v r 13, 14.
Then shall thou say unto them I will d^sh them one against another, etc. It is
a dreadful thing to sin against fair warning, I will ruin them u^terly: Yea if
the warning be by the works of God; What then? Why if there be not warning
taken, what will come of it? Isa 5.11.12. Woe to them that rise up early, and^.
But re^ard not the works of the Lord nor consider the operation of his hands. I
beseech you mind it; by the works of God, I understand his works of p ovidence,
by which he speaks ter^i le t^ings: Well, what ^o they do in such a d^y? Why
they drown all these voices in their cups: Now what shall come of these? that
you have in ver. 13.14. Therefore my people are gone into captivity, etc. It is
a full text to my purpose; a people that God warns by his word and by his
works, and yet would not take warning: Hell has opened her mouth, etc. they
shall go by thousands to hell and to the grave, for the original word
signifies both.

4. Covenant Breaking is a sin, that where-eve^ God finds it, in the day of his
judgments, they upon whose skirts thi^ sin is found, do hardly escape. In Jer.
34 8. If you read on several verses, you shall find that Zedekiah made a
co^enant, and he after breaks the Covenant; and see what comes of breach of
covenant, in verse. 17, 18. Therefore thus says the Lord, etc. This shall be
your judgment, says he, the judgment of the God of heaven shall be sure to
light upon you that have broken the Covenant: look Ezekiel. 17.15, 16 But he
rebelled against him, etc. Shall he break the covenant and be delivered? surely
no such matter

5. Hard dealings with the people of God, which is such a sin that when God
comes to deal for it, those that are found in that sin hardly escape. There is
much in the Scripture to this purpose; you have one p^ssage very suitable in
^er. 25.12, 13, 14. And it shall come to pass when seventy years are
accomplished, etc. It is a strange Scripture, if you consider it well: The
people of Israel by Gods ordination were to be seventy years captive in
Babylon, and yet, says he, when this captivity shall have an end, I will be
sure to punish them, that is Babylon, they shall be su^e not to escape the sad
p ovidences that God will bring them under. Now though persecutors in
persecution do nothing bu^ by Gods permission, yet he will ^unish them for it;
and the reason is in Ezekiel. 25.15 I will destroy them utterly, I will cut off
the remnant, etc. Why so? Because thoug^ I put my people into their hands, they
did not deal with you, because I put them upon it, but they acted from a
principle of rage and malice. And truly, souls, whoever are found under any
such sins as these, the Lord give them repentance, or it is like to go very ill
with them: that is the first thing in the Use, how desperate is the folly of
such who contend with God, wi^h whom there is no conten^ing, and do daringly
venture upon those sins that God will be sure to punish.

2. Is escaping such a mercy? well then souls, let us look homeward; what
honorable marks have we upon us, that may give us ground to hope we shall
escape? My friends, I must deal faithfully with you, and let us consider if we
should be weighed in the balance, what little reason may most of us have to
hold up our heads on high, and to be found with confidence of an escape in such
a day as this is! Dare we say we have some of these honorable marks upon us,
which God has been pleased to honor with preservation in times past? It is not
good to build a confidence too hastily, but it is good to see upon what good
ground we do conclude our preservation.

Let me speak a little home to your consciences, and ask your souls these
questions.

1. What sense have you upon your souls of the sins of the generation among
whom you live? It was an honorable character found upon Lot, that he was
grieved with the filthy conversation of the wicked; and upon them in Ezekiel,
That they did sigh and mourn for the abominations and the evil of that day: Now
is this mark upon you, that the great burden of your souls is the sin and
wickedness of the days in which your lot is cast? It is worth the considering
and inquiring into your hearts about it? But if you should ask me how should I
know whether my heart be affected wi^h the abominations of the day in which you
live?

1. Do you mourn in secret because of those abominations? says the Prophet
Jerem^ah in Chap. 13.17. If you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret,
etc. Can you say when you come into the presence of God in secret, not only
your own, but others sins aff^ct your heart? You know God is as eminently
dishonored in this Nation, as he has been in most Nations of the world; as
noto^ious desper^te sinning against light, and against the goodness of God, as
almost any people have been guilty of; greater breach of Covenant, sinning
against light, despite done to the Spirit of Grace, slighting of and
neglecting of the Go^pel of Christ, has scarce been found among a people for
many years: and by all this, how i^ God dishonored? to have his Gospel
slighted, and turned out of doors, and men's posts set up by Gods posts; for him
that departs from evil, thereby to make himself a prey; Can you say for these
things as the Prophet, My eyes run down with tears, and for these things you^
soul mourns in secret? I would only put it to your conscience, and ask your
souls the question; you would (I believe) be glad to get on the other side of
this storm that is now ^egun, and have some assurance that you should outlive
the present providence; why if you would, then labor to get some of the marks
that are to be found upon those that God does use to deliver from such
calamities.

2. What love have you for God? Beca^se he has set his love upon me, says
God, therefore will I deliver him. Put the question home to your own souls, and
see what answer will be made; Can you say you have set your love upon God and
Christ? I believe we may say most of us, We see him lovely, we have raised
affections and desires after him; but can we say we have set our love upon him,
that he is the center upon which our souls have fixed; that we see no
excellence in any thing that can satisfy our souls, save only in him? Can you
say you have lived up to that direction of the Apostle, Set your affections on
things above and not on things on the earth? Faith and Love are the two great
things that distinguish a Saint and an empty professor. Now what say you? Do
you love him? If your heart be not only running out after him, but set upon
him, then he is yours, and then you may expect he will look after your
preservation: only this I would say, so^e souls there are that dare not say
they love God, they have a great many doubts and fea^s, whether they do truly
love God or no; and therefore if you should ask me, But how shall I know where
my he^^t is, and whether I have thi^ l^ve or no, I would only say for present,
What desires are the^e in thee after acqu^intance with God? And what desires
have you to be found doing the will of God? If thou can say, Above all
things, oh I would know him, and enjoy him above all things in the world, I am
jealous lest I should dishonor him, then I would say to thee that thou have
ground to hope the Lord has circumcised thy heart in truth to love him.

But 3. How do you walk with God? You must be in Gods way, if you will have his
preservation, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all
thy ways, that is, in all his ways, for we should have no way, but Gods ways,
all our ways should be his ways.

There are some things inconsistent with the walking with God, and it will be
well if none of those things be to be found upon our souls.

1. The harbo^ing of bosom-sins, if thou harbourest and allowest thy self in
any secret sin, thou art not one that walk with God.

2. If thou art not one pursuing the death of all sin; if thou do not l^bor
to mortify the deeds of the body, I dare pronounce thee one that art walking
after the flesh.

3. This I add, that if thou art not one that stand upon thy w^tch, thou art
none of those that walk with God: a careless professor, that minds not what he
is, nor what he does, will hardly ever be found in Gods way; the path is too
narrow for a soul to keep in, without much diligence. Ask your souls, and
examine what you have within you, to witness to you that you are a people
walking with God.

4. Would you be of the escaping number, pray what Faith have you? how stands
you^ Faith? examine that a little; some there are that say, I bless God I can
trust him without any hesitation, without any stumbling: but I beseech you bear
with me a little if I try your faith, and help you so to do.

There be three things that expose men to the stroke of the judgment of God,
and cut them short of mercy many times, viz. Unbelief, Presumption, and
Secu^ity; and any one of them does it as well as the other.

1. Unbelief, I say that cuts short of a great deal of mercy, particularly in
such a day as this: if you will be carried through the wilderness, watch
against unbelief.

2. Security: a people not being affected with the judgments of God, it lays
them as much open to the weight of the judgment, as any thing else, Isa. 5.11.
And the harp, and the viol, etc. a regardless, sottish, stupid people, that are
not affected with the judgments of God, shall fall by them.

3. Presumption also, which they call Faith, and that does as certainly lay
open the soul to misery, as any other thing that has been hinted.

Now consider a little how it is with you; is your Faith true Faith, or is it
not Security? Is it not Presumption? Are you sure it is Faith? if not, it will
do you no service. You may think it is Faith, when it may prove somewhat else,
it may prove security: you think you have faith, because you have not fear: I
tell you souls, there may and should be an aw of God, and yet be faith, as I
will tell you by and by. You may think it faith, because you are secure, and
not much affected; but take heed lest it should disappoint thee: if it be not
faith, it may lay you open to the judgment of God, and cut you short of being
one of the escaping remnant, as well as any thing else whatever.

If you have true Faith, you will know it by one or two things.

1. You will be sensible of your great unworthiness to receive any thing at the
hand of God, or to be preserved by him; that is the property of faith, it is an
humbling Grace, a self-abasing Grace, Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercy we
are not consumed: Here was faith at work, and what effect had it upon their
souls? Oh it made them very sensible of their unworthiness, to receive any
mercy at the Lords hand, It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed.
Call thy confidence what thou will, if it have not some effect upon thee of
this kind, it is not true faith.

2 If thou have faith, it has an allay and mixrure of a holy aw of the
judgments of God; faith is not a thing that makes a man stupid, but sensible
and tender; faith as it looks to the promise for preservation, so it seet^ God
in the judgments, and it is aff^cted with that Glory and Majesty of God, that
shines forth in such a judgment: it sees it is the hand of the great,
glorious, mighty, ter^ible God, and therefore the soul that knows who he is,
and what he is, cannot but have an awe of his judgment resting upon him. David
was no Infidel, yet a man of fear, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear
of thee, and I am afraid of all thy judgments. David had this, and it was no
unbecoming fear; he had a holy awe of God: a dread of the judgments of God
upon the soul, is so far from being inconsistent with faith, that it is a
necessary concomitant of it.

Again 3. Faith cuts not the throat of the use of means, but whilst thou
believe for preservation, thou art waiting on God in the use of that means
that he directs thee to; faith it puts upon the use of means, but does not call
off from it: You believe God for salvation, What then? you wait upon God in the
use of Ordinances: Now by these things ask your hearts whether you have faith
or no. Two or three things more, and I have done. Is preservation such a mercy?
I would first say to you, Labor then to be Saints in earnest, for if you should
be preserved and not be Saints, you loose the mercy of your preservation, Isa.
15.4. His life shall be grievous unto him, etc. The case of evil men is such
sometimes, that the very living is a burden to them: and such may be the case
of a sinner, though he may not be cut off, their life may be worse to them then
cutting off, Jer. 8.3. And death shall be chosen rather then life, etc. the
life of a sinner is not worth the living.

2. Above all things, have as little to do with sin as you can, that is one of
the best preservatives, Job 11.14. If iniquity be in thy tabernacle, put it far
away from thee.

3. And lastly, while you are in the world, and distress is in the world,
especially remember and be sollicitous for the Sion of God. Oh stand up and
plead for the poor people of Sion, Jer. 51.50. Let Jerusalem come into your
minds. Oh my friends, while the distresses of this day lasts, Let Jerusalem
come into your mind! If God preserve you, I say, while he p^eserves you, think
of Jerusalem, plead with God for his poor people, that that intere^t may be
secured, that the Lord would be to his people the shadow of a great rock in a
weary land.

And thus I have dispatched the third Doctrine, namely, that it is a great
honor, and an especial mercy, and that that Saints should put out hard for, to
be delivered in times of common calamity.

I shall now go on with the fourth Observation from the words, That
watchfulness and prayer are rare preservatives, and excellent means for safety
in the time of common calamities. I dare not say they are never-failing means,
but they are the best means, and that as seldom fail as any; they are the best
preservatives you can have, and will do you most service of any thing; if there
be any safety to be had, it is in the use of these means. That is the note I
would spend a little time upon; the God of all our mercies knows how to make it
of use to us.

I would treat a little distinctly on each of them, and show how far each of
them serve to this design; what part prayer has in it, and what part
watchfulness: I shall begin with the first, viz. Prayer; and in what I have to
say to that, I shall propound three things to be treated on.

1. Consider a little what prayer is, because if we mistake the thing it self,
we are out in the whole, as if a skilful Physician prescribe one potion, and it
be mistaken, and another taken for it, instead of doing good it may do much
harm; therefore it is good to know what prayer is.

2. Consider, what prayer is wont to do: When Physicians prescribe a remedy,
they will tell you what great cures such medicines have effected; and therefore
I shall show you what prayer has done, and then how it comes to be
particularly useful in this case of a common calamity.

For the first then, what is Prayer: we often speak of going to prayer, but what
is praying? Why prayer it may be thus described: It is the breathing of a
gracious soul, in the help of the Spirit of Grace, whereby it is enabled to go
to God in a promise, in the Name of Christ, to beg suitable mercy as the case
may require. I will take this description in parts, and confirm each part unto
you, that you may see it is a description consonant and agreeable unto the word
of truth.

First of all, I say, prayer is the breathing of the soul; heartless prayer is
no prayer, it is the work of the soul, the work of the heart; and that in which
the heart is not, is not prayer at all: hence you have that expression in Jam.
5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of the righteous avails much; it may be
better rendered, The Inwrought prayer of the righteous; prayer it is an
Inwrought thing, it is first wrought in the heart, before it is brought forth
into petitions; and if it be not first wrought in the heart before it is
brought forth into desires and petitions, it is not prayer. The heart must go
whatsoever is w^nting; whether you pray with the voice or not, you must pray
with the heart; such a thing you read of in the known case of Hannah, 1 Samuel
1.13. Hannah she speaks in her heart only, her lips moved, her voice was not
heard, she spoke in her heart, her heart was in the prayer, and it was a sign
it was, by the good issue it had. David Psalm. 119. 145. has an expression that
looks that way, I cried with my whole heart, Oh Lord I will keep thy statutes:
If you cry, it must be with the heart, that must not be wanting; for if that be
wanting, truly the best ingredient of prayer is wanting; hence you have that
expression in Psalm. 25.1. I lift up my soul unto thee: the meaning is, I pray
unto thee, I call unto thee; but he does express it by lifting up the soul,
because the soul was engaged in the work, I lift up my soul unto thee; the like
expression you have Psalm. 86.4.

Now that is the first thing in the description, it is the breathing of the
soul.

2. It is the breathing of a gracious soul: it is not every heart, but a
gracious heart that knows how to pray, the breathings of a gracious soul, and
therefore whatever name the desires of a wicked man may have, yet alas it does
not amount to prayer, Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked it is an
abomination unto the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight: A
wicked man may bring his sacrifice, may think to put up his petition, but what
is it? It is an abomination unto the Lord, but the prayer of the upright that
is his delight. When God comes to speak of the prayer of the wicked, see h^w he
is pleased to phrase it, Hos. 7.14. Says he, They have not cried unto me with
their hearts, when they have houled upon their beds: The prayer they put up is
no better then the howling of a dog; if it be not the voice of a gracious
heart, it is but the voice of a dog, and you know it is so called in the
Scripture; and hence in Zach. 12.10. it is said, he will pour out upon the
house of David the Spirit of Grace and of supplication; first the Spirit of
Grace, and then the Spirit of Supplication; if there be not first a spirit of
grace, truly there can be no spirit of supplication: and it was hence that
Saul when he was effectually wrought upon and the work of grace was begun in
his heart, the spirit of God takes notice of it, Behold he prays: doubtless
he had made many a long prayer, and done something that he called prayer before
that time, being a Pharisee, and one of the strictest Sect, but yet he never
prayed until now; now there is grace in his heart, and he prays to purpose:
that is the second thing, it is the breathing of a gracious soul.

3. It is done in the help of the Spirit of Grace: for if a gracious soul come
and speak his own words, that is not praying, it must be speaking the words of
the Spirit of God, the breathing out the petitions that are put into the heart
by the Spirit of God. Zach. 12.10. a place I quoted even now, you read that it
is a Spirit of Supplication; Gods good Spirit it helps and furthers, and
forwards the soul in this great work, Romans 8.26. We know not what to pray for
as we ought, but the Spirit it self helps our infirmities; and truly souls,
this is very considerable, when praying is as it should be, it is done in the
help of the Spirit of grace.

4. In prayer the soul goes to God, as the Father and fountain of mercy; he
goes to him, directs a prayer unto him, therefore David says in Psalm. 25.1. To
thee, O Lord, I lift up my soul; and we are taught when Christ teaches us how
to pray in Mat. 6.9. to go unto God, Say, says Christ, Our Father; we are bid
to go to him, and to go to him as to a Father.

And further, 5. Prayer is going to God, and a going to him in a promise; you
must have a promise to encourage you to pray: mark this as a certain rule, you
have no warrant to ask that of God of which you have not a promise, or
something that is in the nature of a promise: and if you ask me what I mean by
something in the nature of a promise, why it is the experience of the Saints of
God, what he has done for them, and wrought for them; this is in the nature of
a promise, and you may plead it with God, that what he has wrought his
servants of old, that he would do again: now by promise I mean the Word of God,
to plead for something that God has given h^s word to give: Jacob in Genesis 32.
11. he was in a straight, and he goes to God, and what has he to plead with
God? Why he had a promise, And thou said, I will surely do thee good, etc.
verse. 12. He urges God with his promise, Lord thou have said thou will do me
good, and make my seed as the sand of the Sea; If Esau come and kill my
children, How shall this promise be fulfilled? Therefore deliver me, I pray
thee, etc. And in Rev 22.20. He which testifies these things, says, Surely I
come quickly: Even so, come Lord Jesus. Mark, here is the promise, and the
pleading of it also, both in this verse; the promise, Christ says, Surely I
come; the pleading of the promise, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus: so if we come
to God in prayer, we must plead a promise, or something in the nature of a
promise, or else it is not praying.

6. We must go to God in the name of Christ: now that is not (you will easily
grant) the bare saying we ask this in the name of Christ, and beg it for
Christ's sake; but the putting forth an act of f^i^h upon Christ, as he to whom
all promises are made, and who has pu^chased for us an interest in the
promises; that is what I mean when I say we are to come in the name of Christ's,
Joh. 16.23. Whatever you shall ask the Father in my name, that you shall have;
come to God, and tell him, Lord thou have made a great many promises to poor
souls through Christ Jesus; Christ has purchased these promises at thy hand,
therefore we come to beseech thee, for the merit and righteousness of Jesus
Christ, that thou would make good those promises that thou have made, 2 Cor.
1.20. In him are all the promises Yea and Amen; in him, that is, in Christ; and
in him they are Yea and Amen, that is, they are made good to the soul through
Christ; first the soul believes in Christ, and has interest in him, and then
has interest in the promises.

7. They go for suitable mercy, according as their needs and necessities are:
The necessities of the Saints are not always the same, sometimes they are of
one kind and sometimes of another, and the spirit of grace helps the soul to
beg mercies suitable to its wants; sometimes not to be led into temptation, as
Christ teaches us to pray, and sometimes to be delivered from trouble, as
David Psalm. 59.1. Deliver me from mine enemies, O God, defend me from those
that rise up against me.

And thus I have given you an account what prayer is, and showed you that it is
the breathing of a gracious soul in the help of the spirit of grace, whereby it
is enabled to go to God in a promise, in the name of Christ, to ask suitable
mercy as the case requires. That is the first thing propounded, what p^ayer is.

But 2. What can prayer do, what has it done? To that I answer, Very great
things.

1. Prayer has prevailed to pull down very dreadful judgments upon a people:
Thus they that mocked the Prophet and scoft at him, a little prayer of the
Prophet brought very dreadful things upon those people, 2 King. 2. And he went
up from thence, etc. at verse. 23. it is spoken concerning Elisha, and it is
said, that He turned back and cursed them in the name of the Lord, that is, he
prayed that God would meet with them for this; and wh^t came of it? you read,
There came two she-bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of
them, that mocked the Prophet. David with a very short prayer, he b^i^gs down
judgment and evil upon Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15. it was a very short prayer he
puts up at verse. 31. O Lord I pray thee turn thee counsel of Achitophel into
foolishness. It was, you see, a very short prayer, and yet if you look to Chap.
17.23. you shall find how it was succeeded; He went home and hanged himself,
because his counsel was not followed: And thus you find in other cases, prayer
has brought down judgment upon a people: the single prayer of the Prophet
Elijah brought down judgment upon all Israel, 1 King. 17.1. As the Lord God of
Israel lives, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these
years, but according to my words, that is, according to my prayer; and Elias
you read in Jam. 5.17. he prayed down a judgment for three years and s^x
months, He prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not for the
space of three years and six months: And let me tell you, all the dreadful
judgments that come upon the world, they come down as an answer to the prayer
of the people of God: Look Psalm. 65.5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us, etc. I quote this for this purpose, to tell you that the
terrible judgments that fall upon the world, they do come in answer to the
prayer of the Saints: yea let me tell you, this very judgment on foot at this
day, at which our hearts do tremble, it comes in answer to the prayer of the
people of God; I mean thus, the people of God have prayed that God would
promote his interest, that he would advance the scepter of his Son, that he
would pull down his enemies; and they leave him to do it which way he pleases:
Now this is Gods way to advance his interest, and you will find it so; and I
say moreover, the dreadful things that shall be in the world, and shall come
upon the heads of the ungodly of the world, they come all in answer to the
prayer of the Saints. The ninth Psalm is a Psalm concerning Antichrist the
great destroye^: Well, what says it of him? in verse. 11, 12. Sing praises to
the Lord which dwells in Sion: when he makes inquisition for blood, he
remembers them, he forgets not the cry of the humble: There is a time,
says David, when he will make inquisition for blood, that is, when he will
contend with Antichrist, the great destroye^, for all the slaughter that has
been made upon his people; he will come and recompense them for this blood; and
which way shall it come to pass? He forgets not the cry of the humble; he
hears them, and that stirs him up to make inquisition for blood; so that I
say many great judgments that have been in the world, they have many times
come in answer to the prayer of the Saints.

Again 2. Prayer it sometimes prevents the evil we fear. Jacob in the instance
given but now, had a great deal of fear upon him, Genesis 32.6, 7, 11, 12. he was
greatly distressed, and then he goes to prayer, and what comes of it? in
Chap. 33.4. Esau ran to meet him, and falls on his neck and kisses him; here
was the worst of their meeting: he thought verily Esau would have come to kill
him, and therefore set himself to seek the Lord, and ^hen God prevented his
fear, for Esau fell on his ^eck and kissed him. Thus God sometimes prevents the
thing that we fear; and so in 2 Chronicles. 20. in the case of Jehosaphat, when many
Nations combine to fight against him, verse. 3. Jehosaphat feared, and what
then? He set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast through out all
Judah: And what came of it? truly God delivered him very wonderfully: in verse.
17. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle, etc. And God makes those men
that came against him to destroy one another, at verse. 12. I quote all this, to
this end only, to tell you what great work and mighty service sometimes prayer
does, it helps to keep off the things that we fear.

3. It helps to remove the evils we feel, as well as prevents what we fear: you
know when Israel was in bondage, what was a means to help them out, Exodus 2.23.
They cried, and their cry came up; they cried, and it was not in vain, for God
heard them, their praying and seeking his face it did not prove fruitless: in
Judges 5. you have a notable expression of Deborah, O my soul, thou have trodden
down strength: the people of Israel were greatly oppressed and dealt hardly
with, and there were some stirred up to go out and oppose; but what got the
victory? Oh, says she, My soul, thou have trodden down strength! It was her
souls going to God in prayer, it was that did the work, and it was instrumental
for the removing that great oppression that was upon them; and therefore the
Prophet in Isa. 10. When he foretells their deliverance from the yoke of the
Assyrian bondage, says he, the yoke shall be destroyed because of the
anointing, verse. 27. that evil shall be removed, How! by the anointing, one
part of the sense whereof is, that a part of the spirit of grace and
supplication should be powered forth on the people, they should plead with God,
and because of that anointing, they should be delivered, Psalm. 40.1, 2. I
waited patiently for the Lord and cried unto him, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry: he prayed and God heard him, and this was the issue, He brought
me up also, etc. verse. 2, 3. that is a third thing, it delivers from many evils
felt as well as feared.

4. It prevails for strength to stand up under, and grapple with great
difficulty: when God thinks not fit to remove difficulty, then the soul prays
for strength to stand up under those difficulties, Isa. 40.31. They that wait
on the Lord, shall ^enew their strength, etc. they may have difficulty, but if
they wait on the Lord, they shall have strength as well as difficulty, Psalm.
138.3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me, and strengthnedst me with
strength in my soul. David was under many difficulties and streights, but yet
in calling upon the Lord, the Lord gave him strength: to which add that, Heb.
11.34. That some out of weakness were made strong; that is the fourth thing
that Prayer does.

5. It prevails also for preservation in common calamities; that mercy Jeremiah
had in a way of Prayer, Chap. 17. he does address himself unto God by prayer,
in verse. 17. Be not a terror unto me, thou art my hope in the day of evil: And
God gave him a promise of preservation, and was with him according to his
promise. Thus you see what great things prayer does.

1. It has pulled down dreadful judgments.

2. Prevented evils feared.

3. Removed evils f^lt.

4. Prevailed for strength to bear up under difficulties.

And 5. Prevailed also for preservation in times of great distress.

To the third thing. Then how comes prayer to b^^seful for our preservation in
common calamity? It comes to be useful in that, as in all other cases, these
four or five ways:

1. From a great deal of efficacy that is in it; it is a thing that has a
great deal of efficacy and power going along with it, Mat. 7.7. Mat. 21.22.
Jam. 5.16.

But, 2. It comes to be effectual, in that it sues out and pleads the Promise:
the prayer of Faith it challenges God with his word, it pleads out the Promise
in the presence of God; it goes to that, and takes hold of it; and many
p^omises I have heretofore quoted you, that God has given for preservation in
common calamity. Now it is the work of the people of God, to go to God and sue
them out, to remember him of his promise, 2 Chronicles. 20. Jehosaphat, when he is
at prayer there, he remembers God of his promise, verse. 8, 9, 10. he goes to
prayer, and there he pleads the promise; Lord, says he, at the dedication of
this Temple, did thou not engage, that if we stood by this house, called by
thy Name, in a time of calamity, did thou not promise that thou would be
with us? This is that that he remembers God of; and the people of God they are
called Gods remembrancers, in the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chap. 62. v. 6. You that
make mention of the Lord; it is in the margent, You that are the Lords
remembrancers: Prove. 18.10. it is said, The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower,
the righteous run thither and are saved: this running is a running in prayer,
in a prayer of faith, when the soul in prayer does put the Lord in mind, that
he has said, he is a strong Tower, and will be a Refuge, and therefore beg of
him to be according to his word; that is a second thing, it prevails for
preservation, in that it pleads the promise.

3. It prevails, in that it is Gods own Ordinance and appointment, the means
that he has given us to prevail in any case; and he is pleased to put that
honor upon the head of prayer, that it shall be a door to let in mercy to us.
When he had promised to do a great deal for Israel, yet, says he, for all this
I will be sought of them; it is prayer fetches in the mercy, Job 11.13. If
thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hand toward him, etc. And in
verse. 15. Thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear. Mark, particular
preservation is promised to ^e given forth in a way of prayer.

4. As it is useful to remove that that may pull on a calamity, and may make
the Lord strike us with such a stroke: you know sin is that that brings all
judgment; now the prayer of Faith is very instrumental and serviceable in order
to the taking away of guilt, and removing of sin; and by faith in prayer we go
to Christ, and take hold of him, and leave our guilt upon him, leave him to
grapple with the Fathers displeasure: This we do by Prayer. David you know,
when he would be preserved himself from the Plague, he goes and offers a
Sacrifice; I think I have hinted to you what that was

5. Thus it comes to do us service: if it be right, and as it should be, we put
up no petition but what God first puts into our hearts. Now, if prayer be
right, it is God's work, and he is obliged to stand to his own act; if God put
me upon pleading for preservation, it is a tie upon God to answer it, for it is
his own work, and therefore he must not disown his own work. Upon this account
it is that prayer comes to be useful to our preservation; I shall now proceed to
show you a little the great use of watchfulnes, in order to preservation. 1. In
that it helps to prayer; prayer is a great means to our preservation, and
watchfulness is a handmaid to prayer; there is no praying well without it: It
is a furtherance and help to us, 1. In that it finds out the most apt and fit
season for pray^r: there are certainly fit, and apt, and proper seasons in
which the soul may do much more in prayer then it can do at other times; and it
is the part of watchfulness to spy and find out those opportunities; and
therefore you have a notable expression in 1 Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is
at hand, be ye sober therefore, and watch unto prayer; that is, let your watch
serve you to find out the best, fittest and aptest seasons, and the greatest
advantages to further you in prayer: doubtless there are seasons in which the
heart is best framed for the duty* and seasons in which God seems to give some
secret inclinations to the soul* that he will please to be besought* Now when
the soul has any great suit to go forward with, and any great request to
present at the Throne of grace, the soul then watches to find out such a
season; and this does further the duty of prayer exceedingly.

2. It furthers prayer, in that it keeps up the heart when it is engaged in
that work; and therefore you find them coupled together, in Mat. 26.41. Watch
and pray, says he. Souls, let me tell you, if you pray, and do not watch, you
will hardly get the heart to pray; but if you do get the heart there, you will
hardly keep it there, unless you stand upon your watch. It is a truth much
experienced, that a soul is no longer kept to duty, then a watchful eye is born
over it: consider it, it may help you many times, if it be remembered, that
watchfulness considers how the heart is, how the Tempter deals with the soul,
what pains he takes to distract, and get the soul out of a duty in which it is
engaged; sometimes you are dead, it is watchfulness finds it out; and
therefore David being upon his watch, as well as in the way of his duty, he
prays often in Psalm. 119. Quicken thou me; sometimes the heart is distracted,
wandering and getting aside from the work that is before it, it is watchfulness
that makes this discovery; it observes how Satan moves, and how the soul moves
in a duty, whether to God or no; I may allude to that you have, Genesis 15.9. when
God comes to confirm the Covenant unto Abraham, and bid him sacrifice and
divide the H^ifer, and the Turtle-doves, and young Pigeons, in verse. 11. When
the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abraham drove them away. I may allude to
it thus: When you come to sacrifice, fowls come down upon the sacrifice,
oft-times temptations, divisions, distractions, attend you; they are fowls upon
the sacrifice that do spoil it, and it is watchfulness that must help you to
keep off the fowls from the sacrifice, and it is that that must observe how the
case stands with you. Now this is that which watchfulness does in prayer; it
keeps the heart unto God.

3. It helps to take in, and improve answers of prayer; the soul when it has
prayed, has not done all its work, but it is to look after answers of prayers,
and that is the part of watchfulness; watchfulness looks after the petitions
put up, and observes how they speed, and what comes of them: says Habakkuk, I
will stand upon my watchtower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me:
you must watch unto prayer, watch in prayer, and watch when you have prayed*
watch to see what comes of the petitions you have put up, and what answer you
have received, and how God comes into your souls in a way of return to the
requests you have lodged with him, Mich. 7.7. Therefore I will look, etc. I
will look unto God by Faith and Prayer; and when I have done, I will watch to
see what the God of my salvation says to me. Psalm. 40.1. I waited patiently
for the Lord, and he heard me. I cried, and when I had done, I waited to see
what would come of it, Psalm. 5.3. I will direct my prayer unto thee, and I will
look after it; I will see how it will succeed. Well, you will say, what if
watchfulness do help to look after answers of prayer, how does this farther
preservation? Why, these two ways it is helping you to see what answer God
makes to prayer, furthers your preservation two ways.

1. If you have no answer, it puts you upon praying again, until God does give
you a word to hope in for you^ safety in days of evil.

Or secondly, If when you have prayed, and are upon your watch, so that you
have found an answer, it helps you to improve it for your preservation; it
helps you to plead the answer that God has given you: if you find he h^th
answered you in the desire of your hearts, it helps you to hang upon God, and
plead it with God as did David, Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy word unto thy
serva^t upon which thou have caused him to hope: God may gi^e answer; and if
thou art not upon thy watch, thou may not see it.

3. It is serviceable to preservation as it helps to keep you from the sin and
provocations, that might, if lived in, provoke God to cut you off among the
number that fall. I tell you souls, there are many provocations; when a soul is
found under them, they do wonderfully stir up the Spirit of God against him,
and provoke God to cut them off in the time of his anger; and it is the part of
watchfulness to keep you from them, Rev. 16. Blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments; you cannot keep your garments if you do not watch; such
are the corruptions of your hearts, and the subtilty of the tempter, that he
will quickly make you defile your garments, 1 These. 5.6. Let not us sleep as do
others, but let us watch and be sober. All kind of sin it is an intemperance,
if you are not upon your watch you will be wanting in your sob^iety, you will
quickly run into ways of sin, if you are not found upon the duty of
Watchfulness. Watchfulness does especi^lly keep you from the sins, which if you
are not kept from, will lay you open to the judgments of God; consider Luke
21.34, 35. compared with my text, Mark: Christ my brethren, a day of d^eadful
judgments is coming, it will come upon the world, when they little think of
it, when they are not well aware of it; and there are many sins that provoke
God to pull down these judgments on you, surfeting and drunkenness, and the
cares of this life; but, say they, how may we be preserved? Oh, says he,
watch, that will keep you from the sin, from surfeiting and from drunkenness,
and whatever other sins may be a provocation to the Divine Majesty.

There are four or five sins that it is very bad to be found under, against all
which watchfulness is an excellent preservative.

1. The sins of the times, the very sins for which God does primarily contend,
and at which he directs his judgments; Come out of her my people, and be not
partakers of her sins, lest you partake of her plagues: It will be bad being
found in Babylons sins, they do provoke God mightily, Therefore partake not of
her sins: Murmuring was the sin of Israel of old, a special sin that God
contends for; you find that Moses stepped but once into that sin in Numb. 27. and
for it he must dye in the wilderness, in verse. 14. Whatsoever sin it is that
God especially contends for in any day of common calamity, Oh souls as you love
tender and regard your own preservation, come not nigh it: But of this before.

2. Leaning unto your own wisdom, that is a very bad thing; we are to trust the
wisdom of God, and lean upon him for all our preservation. The people of
Israel, some of them when there was a great part carried captive by the King of
Babylon in Jer. 42.15, 16. Hear the word of the Lord, ye remnant of Judah, etc.
I quote it to this purpose, to show you that when a man sets up his wisdom in
direct opposition to Gods wisdom, he thereby forfeits his preservation; but
when a soul comes and says, Lord I will be what thou would have me, and do
what thou requirest of me; this is a good frame: but I say to lean unto our own
understanding, and not to ask counsel of God, not to walk as he directs, it is
the direct way to forfeit our preservation.

3. Not considering the judgments of God, is another sin that watchfulness
will keep the heart from; you know how ill God takes it at the hand of a people
to be insensible under his judgments, Isa. 5.11, 12. Woe unto them, etc. they
are a sottish people, a people that are not affected with Gods judgments, and
therefore what then? at verse. 14. The Lord will destroy them, Therefore, says
he, hell has enlarged her borders, etc. Now I tell you souls, a watchful
spirit will not easily run into this evil; no, no, it looks out, it spies the
hand of God; watchfulness keeps the eye of faith open, it keeps the soul from
sl^mbering and keeping, and inables the soul to see that mercy that shines
forth in the dispensations of God.

4. Unthankfulness for daily preservation, this is a great evil, and that that
watchfulness will excellently preserve you from; God usually walks by this
rule, he that prizeth and improveth a little, to him he gives more; so he that
prizes and improves, and thankfully owns, the daily preservation and protection
of God, such a one is in the way to receive more at the hand of God; but when
the daily goodness of God is slighted and past over, without consideration, and
being carefully heeded and regarded by any soul; such a soul is like to be left
to fall under the stroke of Gods indignation; it was the care of the Church in
the Lamentations to give God his glory, Chap. 3.22, 23. It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, etc. his mercy every morning should be prized
and improved by us.

And lastly, A proud unhumbled frame of soul, is that that watchfulness will
help us against: souls, wherever that is found, it is a grievous provocation;
God he delights to do good unto his poor broken humble souls, He resists the
proud, but he gives grace unto the humble; and therefore watchf^lness being an
excellent means to keep us from these and other such like sins, which lay a
people exceedingly open to the stroke of Gods indignation; it so becomes very
useful and serviceable to our preservation.

And thus I have dispatched the doctrinal part. Give me leave to conclude this
Doctrine in a little Application, and to enforce these duties of watchfulness
and prayer. Let me hence, first, take up a few things for information.

And if so be that watchfulness and prayer are means that have so great a
tendency to preservation, it may inform us of two things.

1. How ill it is like to fare with poor sinners, that can neither watch nor
pray: if the infinite overflowing goodness of God prevent not, they must
perish, they cannot make use of the means of preservation: What can we expect
but that they should perish? Oh that we could put on bowels of pity for such
souls! the sacrifice of the wicked, what is it, but an abomination unto the
Lord: sinners in the day of their prosperity they will not look after God, nor
his counsel, neither will they mind his dealings; if they do come in a day of
distress, and cry and howl, and make much ado, they may do so, but yet God has
told them it shall be little to their comfort, for Prove. 1.26. he has told
them, that he w^^l laugh at their calamities, and mock ^hen their fear comes.

2. We may infer also that here is room for the fall of Saints: whatever
promise of preservation is made, upright souls may fall; and why so? Why we may
neglect the being found in our duty; we may not watch, and pray, as we should
and ought; we may pray, but it may be coldly, and without any fervor of
spirit; we may not follow closely our duty with God; and therefore missing in
the means, we may miss in the end also: and that is my first Use, a Use of
Inference.

2. It should stir us up to commune with our hearts a little: what do we? do we
watch and pray? are we in the Use of the Means? whatever other means we use, we
should not let this be neglected; it is not preservatives and removing from
place to place, that can do you that service, that watchfulness and prayer can.
You will say, you do pray; let me ask you again, do you watch unto prayer? I
hope you can say you do.

And if you should ask me how you may know watchful prayer, I shall give you a
few Characters of it.

1. If it be watchful prayer, there is an exciting, stirring and calling up the
heart unto the Duty, Judges 5.12. Awake Deborah awake; she calls up her self,
and stirs up her self to this Duty, as you find the Servants of God have done,
they stirred up all the faculties of their souls, Psalm. 57.8. Awake up my
glory, says David; It is the Soul he calls his glory: And Daniel in the ninth
chapter, he says, I set my face to the Lord God, at the third verse; the
setting a man's self, is the provoking and calling a man's self unto the Duty.
Now do you stir up and call up your hearts to the work of God? If you be in a
watchful frame you will do so.

Again, if it be watchful prayer, it is accompanied with much fervency; if you
watch at prayer, it is not a cold lifeless Duty; it is a Duty has heat, and
vigor, and life in it, if you watch unto it: the Rule is, Not slothful in
business: but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, as it is in the Romans 12.11.
And if there be a watchfulness in the Duty, there will be fervency going along
with it. It is said of Elias, James 5.17. that He prayed earnestly; you read
also of an effectual prayer, and if it be watchful, it must be a fervent prayer.

3. If it be a watchful prayer, it is attended with much importunity, you press
God and wrestle with him: Jacob watched all night at it, and it was an
importunate prayer; I will not let thee go unless thou bless me: The poor woman
of Canaan, hers was an importunate prayer, she followed and pursued her request
although she had some repulses, Mat. 15.22, 23, 26, 27.

Now consider how it is with you, for hereupon much of your safety may depend
for ought I know; If you would be preserved in this day of calamity, as you
pray for it, so you must watch in prayer, and see that there be that watchful
frame of soul that is suitable unto this Rule and Counsel of Jesus: that is the
second Use.

Thirdly and lastly, should we watch and pray always in every season?

I would then first say, Make seasons for prayer; spare them out of some other
things, rather then want them.

2. I would say, Take seasons for prayer when you may best attend the Work, and
hope most to prevail with God. If you ask me what are the seasons? a word or
two of that, and I shall come to the fifth Proposition from the words.

1. I say your leisure-seasons, when you are not engaged in business.

2. The seasons when your spirits are most serious, and least distracted; it is
not good to set to duty in a crowd, if you can help it.

3. When the Spirit of God provokes you to come into the presence of God; you
that are experienced Christians, can say, that you have found sometimes your
souls longing to be in his Presence; You have hungered after Communion with God
in Duty; Oh, take that time! that is a fit season.

4. When God has warmed and refreshed thy heart in a Duty, under any Ordinance
with any tokens of love, it is I say a fit season for thee to improve with the
Lord: God does sometimes give the soul a look of love to encourage it to wait
upon him; Now take that season: it is a great part of Wisdom to know a season;
and if you shall find a season offering it self to you apt, and fit, and
proper for your going to God, take it and bless God for it, and improve it with
all your soul and might; it is much Mercy, and a great deal of goodness may
come in to you at that door.

And thus now I have dispatced the fourth Observation, namely, that
watchfulness and prayer are the best means and have the greatest tendency to
preservation in times of common calamity.

I come now to the fifth and last Note from the words, namely this, That the
escaping common calamities, is not the only thing, nor the chief thing that we
are to be careful about, but especially, and above other things, how we shall
stand before the Son of man.

Alas! to stand in a day of calamity is one thing, ^ut to stand before the Son
of man is another, and a far more weighty thing, as I purpose to show anon.

This is that the Lord says in this Scripture, Do what you may, watch and
pray, and use the best means you can, to escape in a day of calamity; but
remember, when that is done, all is not done, nor is the great thing done;
remember after all, whether you stand or fall in a calamity, you must stand
before the Son of man: If you fall in a calamity, that will not end all. It is
appointed to all men once to dye, and after that the judgment: if you do
escape a calamity, there will be a time when you must stand before the Son of
man; so that whether you stand or fall, that is not the main thing, nor
especially considerable business, but the great and main thing about which you
are to be especially careful, is how you may do to look Christ in the face at
last, how you may do to hold up your head before the Son of man. Standing
before the Son of man is taken three ways in Scripture.

1. Merely for appearing before him, for appearing at his Tribunal; so it is
taken sometimes in the Scriptures, for instance, that in the Romans 14.10. We
shall all appear before his ^udgement-seat. So, 2 Corinthians. 5.10. For we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, etc. Revel. 20.12. verse. And I
saw the dead, both small and great, stand before God, etc. That is the first
sense it is taken in in Scripture, merely for appearing before the Son of man.

2. To stand before him, it is taken for an estate of honor and promotion, as
to stand before a Prince, we reckon such a person is preferred and highly
honored, as it was said of Solomon's servants, Happy are thy servants, which
stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom, as you have it, 2 Chronicles.
9.7.

And thirdly, it is taken for standing with joy, and comfort, and boldness; and
it is upon that account, that you have that expression, Psalm. 1.5. The ungodly
shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the
Righteous; They shall stand in one sense, though not in another; they shall all
stand in it, so as to come to it; but they shall not stand with comfort, so as
to hold up their heads: standing here is opposed to adjection of spirit, of
falling before the dreadful Majesty of God, and our Savior: They shall not
stand; that is, such dread shall seize upon their souls, that they shall not be
able to lift up their heads, they shall be so filled with confusion and shame,
that they shall not be able to hold up their heads in that day. So standing
before the Son of man is taken in this sense in my Text, especially; that you
may be able to stand before the Son of man, is, that you may be able to stand
before him with comfort, that you may lift up your head with joy, when the Lord
Jesus Christ shall appear.

In the prosecution of this great truth, I shall propound the consideration of
several things to you; and I would do it so, as I may best keep to the design
of the text, as the Lord shall enable me.

1. I would endeavor to show you that the standing before Christ is a much more
serious and weighty thing, then any calamity in this world can be; whatever
dread there is upon the heart at the thoughts of a calamity, we may have much
more fear, and many more thoughts of heart upon the account of standing before
the Son of man at his appearance and Kingdom.

2. I shall endeavor to show you that they that will not tremble at a
judgment, that they that are like to laugh a calamity in the face, will yet
tremble when the Son of man shall appear, that will put such out of countenance
as are not abashed by any calamity they meet with in the world.

3. I shall show you who they are that shall never be able to stand before the
S n of man.

4. Who they are, and what they must be that shall stand before him.

And fifthly, What is the best frame a soul can be in, in o^der to a meeting
with Christ, with the greatest confidence and boldness.

And sixthly and lastly, conclude all in a little Application.

But first of the first, namely to show you that the standing before Christ is
a much more serious and weighty thing, and ought to be more seriously thought
of, and more solemnly provided for, then any common calamity whatsoever: Many
gracious hearts do tremble at the thoughts of a common calamity; and truly
there is reason why they should do so; David himself did thus, Psalm. 119.120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments: but you
shall find that sometimes sinners themselves do tremble more, and are much more
affected with the thoughts of enduring the presence of Christ, then the bearing
up under any common calamity that can befall them, Isa. 33.13. says the Spirit
of God there, Hear ye that are afar off what I have done, and ye that are near
acknowledge my might, that is in my judgments which I execute; says he,
consider them, see what weight and force there is in them: But mark, how is it
with sinners? in verse. 14. The sinners in Sion are afraid. Afraid of what?
Fearfulness has surprised the hypocrite, What is he afraid of? Who shall stand
before the devouring fire? who shall dwell with everlasting burnings? as if
they should have said, There is a might, and there is a power and majesty of
God appearing, and shining forth in all his judgments; but if you would have
us speak our hearts, and tell what we dread most, it is standing before him in
that great day, when he shall appear as a devouring fire; it is the being able
to hold up the head at that season, that does distress us most, and fill us
with dread and fear: I say, the standing in the day of Christ is a much more
difficult thing, then the standing in a common calamity; and I shall show you
in several particulars how that day will outdo every thing that can be in a
common calamity: I shall show it you in eleven or twelve particulars.

1. The day of Christ is more dreadful then a calamity in this respect, that
every calamity in this world is a call to repentance, but the day of Christ's
appearance is only a call unto judgment: I say calamities in this world, they
are calls to repentance, to a sinful people to return; the voice of the word is
the first call, and sinners are deaf and will not hear that call, and therefore
God sounds an alarm by his judgments, and by them he calls unto poor sinners
to repent and turn unto him; but now I say in the day of Christ there is no
call unto repentance, nor place for repent^nce, he only then calls to
judgment: you shall find calamities are calls to repentance, and that is the
fruit that God expects from them, that they should work upon a rebellious
people, and turn them to himself: look Amos 4. in diverse verses of that
Chap^er, you have God setting down the calamities he exercised the people with,
and what he expected from them, Amos 4.6. Here was a famine, a dreadful
calamity that is, upon whomsoeve^ it lights; what does he expect from thence?
Yet have you not returned unto me; as if he should have said, this calamity I
have exercised you with, but it has not brought forth its desired fruit, it
has not answered my design upon you; I expected you should have been a broken
people, but yet have you not turned unto me: he goes on in verse. 7, 8. Also I
have withholden rain, etc. yet have you not returned unto me; and still God
intends the same thing, to call in, and bring over a rebellious people unto
himself: In verse. 9. I have smitten you with blasting, etc. Here was another
judgment, God smites them in the fruits of the earth, and ^ook ^way the
creatures of the earth from them, and what was Gods exp^ct^tion from them? yet
have you not returned unto me: In verse. 10. I have sent among you the
pestilence, and what does the expect that should do? your young men have I
slain with the sword; and what work did this do? yet have ye not returned unto
me. I gather from all this, that the design of God in public calamities, is to
make a rebellious people turn unto him; calamities are loud calls to
repentance, 2 Joel 11.12, 13. It was a day of calamity, a day of outward
distress, that is here spoken of, and a dreadful day, therefore says the Lord
in verse. 12. Turn you unto me with all your hearts, etc. You see here there was
a dreadful judgment of God upon the backs of this people, and Gods call was,
return unto me: Gods expectation from this people encompassed about with these
judgments, was that they should be a repenting, relenting, returning,
brokenhearted people, that they should come in unto God, and that their
uncircumcised hearts might be turned. Rev. 9. dreadful Plagues the Lord sent
forth, and for ought we know, we may be at this season, in this time (and many
holy men are of that persuasion) God was sending forth rattling judgments under
the second woe: there are many things in the Revelations, that point out the
periods of time, the knowing of which tells us what times we are in, and what
God is doing: now this text relates to the second woe, which the judicious do
suppose relates to those that we are under; and now what it is God expects, you
may judge by the complaint is made, They repented not of the works of their
hands, verse. 20, 21. God expects that his people should be a repenting,
relenting people: to which add that Rev. 19.9, 10, 11. Men were scorched with
great heat, etc. in the pouring out of the vials, that are the last judgments
that God will execute; they are the gteatest: and mark now, even from the
greatest and last calamities that shall come upon the world, what is it God
expects? it is a relenting, repenting, reforming, he still calls to it; the
greatest calamities that he brings upon the world, that is the effect that he
looks they should have. But the coming of Christ will be another thing, when he
comes it will not be a call to repentance, but a call to judgment; not a call
to reform what thou have done amiss, but to receive a doom for thy miss-doing.
Therefore when mention is made of appearing before the Son of m^n, it is called
appearing before his judgment seat; not to get thee an interest in Christ, but
to be judged by Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the
judgment seat, etc. That is the first thing, the day of Christ will be a much
more serious thing then any judgment in the world, because judgments are
calls unto repentance, but when we come to stand before Christ, it is a call
unto judgment.

2. Standing before Christ is a thing of much more seriousness and weight, then
the standing under a common calamity, upon a second account.

In outward calamities we deal with God remotely, and at a distance; but in the
day of Christ, we must deal with Christ immediately. Oh that we could consider
this thing seriously! it is a weighty thing indeed to have to do with God
immediately.

Beloved, let me tell you, you would not be able to bear the presence of
Christ, if he should but speak to you immediately, you would not be able to
bear his presence; it would be so full of Glory and Majesty, that you would not
possibly stand up under it; much less shall we be able to bear the immediate
presence of Christ, when he comes to judgment. You cannot, I say, bear the
immediate presence of Christ, if he were only to spe^k to you Exodus 20.19.
Speak thou unto us, and we will hear: but let not God speak to us, lest we dye:
Mark the request they make; Let not God speak to us, they were not able ^o hear
a word immediately from God, Speak thou to us, but let not God speak to us,
lest we dye. And therefore it is that God ha^h graciously so ordered it, that
we should have the Gospel delivered to us by Creatures like our selves, because
we are not able to bear the immediate presence of God: And therefore says the
Apostle, We have this treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Corinthians. 4.7. We are not
able to bear the communication of it otherwise, but only by poor Creatures
like our selves; you are not able to bear the immediate presence of Angels, who
are infinitely less in glory then the God of Glory, and his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Chronicles. 21.20. And Ornan turned back and saw the Angel, and his four sons that
were with him hid themselves; they were not able to endure the presence of the
Angel, they run away from him, as a sight too glorious for them to bear.

But my Brethren, in the day of Christ you must have to do immediately with
Christ himself; you must have to do with him immdiately, nothing standing
between Christ and you. Alas! in a common calamity it is not so; God deals with
you remotely, and at a distance: you do not see him in his Glory and Majesty;
but in that day you must have to do with him immediately: and therefore it is
said, We must stand before His Judgment Seat. God executes his judgments now
in secret and hidden ways, but then he will himself execute it immediately.

3. The day of Christ will be much more dreadful then any calamity, upon this
account, because in any calamity the Majesty of God is veiled and hid; but in
the day of Christ, God and Christ will appear in all their Majesty, Beauty and
Glory, in all their Excellence: I say, in a day of calamity the Majesty and
Glory of Christ is veiled and hid; it cannot be seen, they that see most of it,
see but little: but in the day of Christ he will appear in all his Royalty and
Glory. Wicked men will not see what of the Glory and Majesty of God may be seen
in a judgment, Isai. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not
see; that is, in a judgment, they will not see: Why, what will they not see?
they will not behold the Majesty of the Lord, as it is in the 10. verse. What of
God may be seen, and what of his Majesty does shine forth in a day of common
calamity, they will not see, that they will not consider: and Saints see but
very little of God in a judg^ment neither, Micah 6.9. The Lords voice cries to
the City, the man of wisdom shall see thy Name. A Saint does see something of
the Name and Glory, something of the greatness and Majesty of God that does
shine forth in a calamity: but of that that they do see, as was spoken in
another Case, Job 4.12. Now a thing was secretly brought unto me, and mine ear
received a little thereof. So must I say, as to the Majesty of God in a
judgment, we Receive a little thereof: it is a small part of the Majesty of
God, that we are able to conceive of, and to take in, as it is said in Job 26.
speaking about the Works of God, Lo, these are parts of his ways; but how
little a portion is heard of him? In the last verse. So I may say of the
judgments of God, Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is
seen of him? When we consider Gods creating Works, his work of Providence, an^
his works of Judgment; How little a Portion can we take in of God? but Christ
when we shall come to stand before the Judgment Seat, he will then appear in
all his Royalty and Glory, his Majesty and Beauty shall then discover it self
eminently: Therefore in Revelations 20.12. it is said, I saw the dead both
small and great standing before God: Christ shall then appear in his Royalty,
as he is God, and equal with the Father; he shall appear not only cl^d with
his humanity, but with his Godhead in that day. It is true, we are said to
appear before the Son of man; He shall sit as the Son of man, but yet he shall
also sit as God; which how shall it startle every Christless soul, that shall
stand before the glory of that day! Matt. 25.31, 32. When the Son of man shall
come ^n his Glory, etc. Jesus Christ he is King in the world, and he governs
the Providence in the world, and sends about the judgments that are abroad:
but who sees the Majesty and Glory of Christ, that is now hid? but in the day
of Christ that shall appear; then his Glory shall shine forth eminently, Matt.
24.30. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man, etc. They shall see the
Son of man coming in Power and great Glory. Now that is another difference: in
a calamity, the Majesty of Christ is veiled; but in the day of Christ, Christ
will then appear in his Glory.

4. In the forest calamity that ever was, or shall be in the world, the Lord
does not deal in strictness of justice, not does he come forth with all his
wrath; but in the day of Christ he will then sit upon the Throne, judgeing with
exactness of Justice, and rendering to every one according to the utmost extent
of all that they have done: There is much of the wrath of God is kept in, in
the most wrathful providenc^ that comes upon the world: wha^ Ezra speaks in
the 9th. chap. and 13. v. thou Have punished us less then our iniquities
deserved, etc. So it may be said with respect unto any judgment that ever was,
is, or may be upon earth, the Lord punishes less then iniquity dedeserves; the
most dreadful calamity has not that terror in it, that inquity calls for, and
deserves at the hand of God: And therefore the people of God in the Lament.
3.22. do acknowledge, It is the Lords mercies they are not consumed. Any thing
on this side being consumed, and cut off from the presence of God, is Mercy.

Ah my Friends! however severe the Lord may seem in any of his providence, he
is not so severe as he might be, if he did stir up all his wrath, and deal in
strictness and exactness of severity; but when Christ comes to judgment, every
man shall have according to his work: Poor sinners shall then receive the
utmost penny, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
what he has done, whether good or bad. Upon earth men do not receive according
to what is done, according to the sinfulness of sin, but God in wrath remembers
mercy; but at that day all men shall receive according to what they have done;
there shall be a retribution according to the strictness of Justice, Romans 2.5,
6. But after thy hardness, treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath, etc.
and so, Matt. 16.27. For the Son of man shall come in the Glory of his Father
with his Angels: and then he shall reward every man according to his works:
That is another thing in which the greatest day of common calamity, and the day
of Christ differ exceedingly.

5. There is this Difference: Calamities in this world they mainly light upon
the outward man; but when Jesus Christ shall sit in judgment, he will judge
both inward and outward man together; he will reach the soul as well as the
body, and have to do with that. Present calamity lights upon the outward man,
it is the body at the utmost, is the seat of that. There be many sore
calamities that do not reach the body, as the first distresses that fell on
Job, which were sore distresses, yet at first they did not so much as reach his
body, Job 1.14, 16. There came a messenger that told him his Cattle were taken,
etc. these were sore distresses, sharp calamities; but yet all this while the
body of Job was not so much as touched. And also sometimes calamities do reach
the body; the hand of God was upon Job himself in the conclusion: and sometimes
it reaches the life; the poor carcass is carried to earth. Thus it was with the
firstborn of Egypt; in the days of David, when many souls fell by that
judgment, by the Plague; and if it do so, yet the dread of this is not like
that that shall attend the coming of Christ: He shall sit in judgment upon
inward and outward man at once: He shall reach the body as well as the soul at
once. And therefore is that prayer of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. And I pray God
sanctify you wholly, and the Lord keep you in soul, body and spirit, etc. as
if he would have said, The Lord look after the inward and outward man, and keep
them to the day of Christ, for Christ in his day will have to do with both: It
will not be as it is in outward calamity, in which the body falls only, but
Christ will sit in judgment upon the inward man also: And therefore it is said
in Mat. 23. Fear not him that can kill the body only, but him that can cast
both body and soul into hell: Christ is able to reach souls as well as ^odies,
and he will make it known that he is able to do it in the day of Christ.

6. Common calamity and the day of Christ differ upon this account: if in
outward calamities upon the body, any sin be brought to remembrance, it is not
such a bringing sin to remembrance as shall be in the day of Christ; I confess
in days of outward calamity, there is a bringing of sin to remembrance, but not
such as shall be in the day of Christ: God did bring sin to Jobs remembrance in
the time of his calamity, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and
make me to possess the iniquities of my youth: This was the case of poor Job,
he was under outward afflictions, and God also did set home some sin upon his
soul, and brought that to remembrance. And this was also the case of David,
Look upon my pain, says he, and forgive me my sin; and therefore he prays in
another verse, Forgive me the sins of my youth: In his affliction God made him
remember the sins of his youth: but in the day of Christ there will be another
kind of bringing sin to our remembrance, then there is in any calamity
whatsoever: All the sinners sins shall then be presented to him at once, with
all their aggravations, with every circumstance attending it; and what dread,
what confusion will it bring upon the heart, when it shall be at this pass?
Psalm. 50.21. These things thou have done, and I kept silence, and thou
thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will set them in
order before thee. Now the great day of setting them in order, it will be the
day of Christ, that will be the special season when the Lord will set them in
order before the soul.

7. Farther, there is this difference: In outward calamities, God deals
secretly with men, but in the day of Christ he will deal with them in the sight
of the whole world: In a calamity God deals secretly, and cuts off a sinner now
and then, and there is no great noise about it; but in the day of Christ he
will deal with them in the sight of all: now the publikeness or solemnity of an
action makes it the more eminent and terrible: It puts a great deal more of
dread and terror into the malefactor, to be tried and executed in the face of
the Country; the solemnity increases the terror. Oh my friends, when you come
to stand before the Son of man, you shall stand also before men and Angels; the
work of that day shall not be done in a corner, but whole heaven and earth
shall be spectators, and witnesses of what is done, and what passes in that
day; and therefore it is said in that forementioned place, Rev. 20.12. I saw
the dead both small and great standing before the Lord; they were all standing
before God, Mat. 25.31, 32. The Son of man shall come in his glory, and all his
holy Angels with him: the whole host of Angels shall be present: And what more?
And before him shall be gathered all nations: This shall be a great appearance,
and in the sight of God, Angels and men, all shall be done at that day: and in
that respect there is a great deal of difference.

8 There is a great deal of difference upon this account; as for common
calamities it is possible they may be escaped, you may live in the midst of
Gods judgments and yet be preserved; yea possibly a sinner for the sake of
some that fear the Lord, may be preserved in a common calamity, as was Noah's
case, he and his wife, and his sons and their wives, all escaped the flood; but
it was Noah was the righteous person, the rest were given in for his sake: it
may be a righteous soul beggs preservation for some poor sinners or other, and
for their sakes God gives them a preservation; but none can be indulged in the
day of Christ, every one must then fall under the sentence that shall be
pronounced by Christ, whatever it be: There is no way to prevail for indulgence
for thy absence at that day, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all men once to
dye, and after that the judgment; good and bad, all must pass through the gate
of death, and must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ: and as the
wise man speaks of death, so may I speak of succeeding judgment, Eccl. 8.8. No
man has power in the day of death, and there is no discharge in that war; so
may I say, No man has power in the day of Christ, and there is no discharge
from that war: Thou must ride out that storm, and see and bear the worst of it,
for thou must appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

9. There is yet this difference: some that fall under a common calamity,
suppose this of the Plague, God takes away their reason, so that they do not
feel the dread of it; it is no more to them, nor are they sensible of any more
pain then those that are in health and strength; but in the day of Christ we
shall all stand before him in our senses, we shall then know, and understand
and feel, what the weight, and dread, and majesty of Christ is in that day, and
at that time, Rev. 1.5. He comes in the clouds, and every eye shall see him,
and they also that pierced him; they that would be most willing not to see and
behold Christ, they must see, their senses shall all be set at work, to
understand what the dread, glory, and majesty of that day is.

10. There is this difference also: in a common calamity, it may be if it
lights upon thee, some friend, some indulgent relation will stand by thee, to
help, support thee, and bear thee up; but in the day of Christ thou must stand
single. My friends, though these be plain things, they may do our souls a great
deal of good, if God will bless them; it is a great relief in a calamity, when
the hand of God is upon you, when you are sick, and weak, and full of pain, if
some friend will stand by to help thee, to bear thee up, and endeavor to
relieve the outward man; but in the day of Christ all will stand at a distance,
the knots of all relations (except those only that are spiritual) must be at
an end when life ends; and when thou come to stand before Christ, thou must
stand singly, nakedly, and alone, none to stand by thee, thou will have none to
befriend thee at that hour, unless Christ be thy friend; it is well for them
that have a Christ to befriend them at that day.

I shall only make a little allusion to that Text that you have, Matt. 22.30.
When the question was put to Christ concerning the woman that had seven
Husbands, in the Resurrection, whose wife should she be? Answer is made, In the
Resurrection they neither marry, nor give in marriage; all Relation then
cease: the friend that was unto thee as thy own soul, and thou as dear unto
him, in the day of Christ, (unless there be any spiritual tie, unless you and
he have union with God in Christ) he will have no pity, no tenderness for you,
but you must stand alone to receive a sentence from the Lord.

11. There is this farther difference: any outward calamity, though never so
sharp, may be of short continuance; the hand of God may light upon thee in such
a dispensation as is now abroad, and in a few days it may send thee to another
world, or the extremity of it may be passed over in a little time: but when
thou come to stand before the judgment seat of Christ, the issue of that d^y
will last to all eternity, Mat. 25.32. Before him shall be gathered all
Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd divides
the sheep from the goats: and what shall the issue of this separation be? In
verse. 46. These shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous
into life eternal: eternity will be the result and product of thy standing
before the judgment seat of Christ: calamity, outward distress, may soon come
to a period, but standing before Christ will reach thy everlasting condition.

And 12. This difference there is also between common calamity, and standing
before Christ; in that the utmost dread and worst part of outward calamity is
this, that it lets thee in unto the dreadful tribunal of Christ; wherefore do
you fear, or any that are in fear of a judgment, but only because possibly
you consider that that may let the soul in to the judgment seat of Christ? but
now the dread of the judgment seat of Christ, is this, in that it determines
thy estate for ever: I say, the dread of any calamity lies in this, that
possibly it may bring thee to death, and so let thee in to judgment; but this
is the dread of standing before the judgment seat of Christ, it lets thee into
an everlasting state, to the passing of a sentence not to be revoked for ever:
God many times threatens in outward calamities, and afterward repeals it, Hos.
11.8. How shall I give thee up, Oh Ephraim, etc. God was determining to make
Ephraim as Admah, and to set him as Zeboim, that is, to cut him off in a
judgment, and by destruction; But how shall I do it, says God? His bowels
were turned in him, he repented him of the evil, and he was troubled for what
he had done: so in Jonah 9. the people repented, and the Lord repented of the
evil, and was pleased to revoke the sentence he had passed upon that City of
Niniveh: So in Amos 4. you have mention made of the Lords repenting, that is,
some judgment or other he was thinking to send upon a people, and yet he
revokes the sentence, and resolves it should not come upon them: but when you
come to stand before the judgment seat of Christ, you shall receive a sentence
there that shall stand for ever, it shall stand without any recalling.

And thus I have briefly dispatched the first thing propounded, to show you,
that to stand before the Son of Man, is a much more weighty and serious thing,
then standing under any temporal calamity. I do not speak thus to make you
slight any temporal or common stroke, but only to raise up your hearts to a
much more serious thoughtfulness about the standing before the Son of man, and
to show you that that is a thing much more weighty; which leads me to the
second thing propounded for the prosecution of this Point; namely, that secure
sinners that are so confident that they can laugh the most dreadful calamity in
the face, they shall be made serious, and brought to tremble in the day of
Christ: They shall find it to be no laughing matter. Indeed the Servants of
God sometimes are said to laugh at calamity, but it is in a good sense, Job
5.20, 21, 22. In famine he shall redeem thee, etc. At destruction and famine
thou shall laugh: but you must know, the sense of that expression here is this,
they shall not make light of a calamity, they shall consider the dread and
Majesty of God that shines forth in it; but when they consider their security,
through the goodness of God, they shall look upon calamity as that that is not
able to touch them: Such may be the safety and security of the Saints and
Servants of God, through his kindness, that they may laugh at a calamity, as a
thing that shall not be able to come nigh them. Such is the wretchedness and
the hardness of the hearts of sinners, that the most startling judgments do
not awaken them; let God threaten, they are not moved: And therefore you shall
find what the Lord by the Prophet complains of as a great evil; Woe unto them
that draw iniquity with the cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a
cart-rope, Isaiah 5.19, 20. Mark what it is, They say, Let him make speed and
hasten his work, that we may see it: It was a taunting and deriding speech,
wherewith this people mocked the Prophet: he tells them that judgment would
come; Come, say they, let us see what he will do; It was a daring and insulting
speech. And by the way, let me tell you what the reason is of the desperate
sinfulness of sinners, in time of Gods judgment; They draw, says he, iniquity
with the cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope; that is, they
sin as fast as they can, they do not mind the judgments of God, if they did,
they would put a check upon them; they fear not, come what will, they think it
will be well enough with them. That this is the guise of sinners, you shall
see, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. But they mocked the Messengers of God, etc. Let the Lord
threaten what he will, they for their parts were not concerned with it; they
mocked the Messengers, despised the Prophets, and all the judgments of God
were light in their accounts. And it is no wonder that sinners fear not
judgment, for they fear not sin, which is a thing that is much more dreadful
then judgment, if rightly considered, Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock at sin:
And the very appearance of Christ himself, (the most dreadful of all
dispensations) before it comes, sinners will but mock and scoff at it, as you
have it, 2 Pet. 3. says he, They will scoff at the coming of Christ, at the
great Day of the Lord; they will but make a mock of it, and say, Where is the
Christ you talk of? we see no preparation to it: For since the fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were: When Christ comes in earnest, he will
make them fear in earnest; and then the most daring and confident of sinners
shall tremble: it is evident from five or six things I would go over very
briefly.

1. From hence, in the day of Christ, the conscience of every sinner shall be
effectually awakened: There shall be no secure conscience in the day of Chris^s
appearing. Now, though a sinner with a sleepy conscience may not consider, may
not be affected with and moved by the present judgments of God; yet when
Christ shall apear, and conscience shall be awakened with it, it will set him
into a fit of trembling: For present, under word and works, it is possible
hardness of heart may remain upon sinners. Scripture makes mention of a very
desperate hardness of heart upon some: it was said of some, they were past
feeling, conscience was so stupefied, that they had no kind of sense, no kind
of tenderness at all, 1 Timothy 4.2. Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
consciences seared as with a hot Iron: You know, that that which is seared with
a hot Iron, if it be the flesh, it becomes senseless, and be nummed; so it is
with the conscience, there are consciences seared as with hot Irons; the sense,
and vigor, and activity of it is taken away: but in the day of Christ this
sl^epy dead conscience shall be quickened: that Scripture in the 9th. chap. of
Mark, is usually applied to this purpose, v. 44, 45. You read of a Worm that
never dies, which is granted on all hands to be the conscience; and this
receives a quickening when it comes to stand before the Seat of Christ, and
shall remain so for ever, with a quickened conscience shall they be cast into
Hell: So the Acts 3.20. The time of Christ's coming, is called, The time of the
restitution of all things; There shall be a restitution of all things, with
respect to the comfort of the S^ints; Therefore it is called, A time of
refreshing to them, 19. verse. When Christ shall come, there will be a
restitution of all things, to the refreshing of the Saints: but mark, It will
tend to the misery of sinners; and among other things, upon this account,
because then the conscience of sinners shall be returned unto them. Man at
first Creation had a lively active conscience, that could quickly feel the
least stirring from God; but that man by sin has lost in a great measure: and
at that day I am speaking of, conscience shall be restored to its activity,
life and strength: and what a dread will an awakened guilty conscience put the
sinner into? A wakened guilty conscience, of all things, dreads the presence of
God most; it cannot away with that, above any thing. Methinks that expression
should help a little this way, that you have concerning Cain, Genesis 4.16. And
Cain went out from the presence of God: He was full of guilt, the blood of Abel
was upon him; he had guilt upon him, and he gat him out of the presence of God:
and so Adam before him, and his Wife; what did they? Genesis 3.10. I heard thy
voice in the gard^n, and I was afraid: He had a guilty awakened conscience, and
therefore he could not bear the presence of the Lord. A poor sinner! What will
he do in the day of Christ, when his conscience shall be awakened, and it shall
be guilty enough, and yet he must endure the presence of Christ; there shall be
no refuge for him to run to, nor place where he shall be able to hide himself.
Now upon this account that sinners will be awakened, they will be filled with
trembling.

2. When Christ shall come, all the Atheism in their hearts will be
effectually confuted: You cannot conceive what a deal of Atheism there is in
the heart of man by Nature, unless you have observed it in your own hearts, and
that will tell you there is this Atheism in the heart of man by Nature, they
think there is no God, or at least, wish there were none; and they are ready to
say, All this preaching is but to keep us in awe, and to hinder us from living
merrily; and with such kind of Atheism as this is, the heart of man is fraught
by nature, Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God: and
Psalm. 10.4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after
God: God is not in all his thoughts; or as it may be rendered, All his thoughts
are, There is no God: it may be he will not say so openly, but he does it in
his heart, and he thinks so: Few will speak it openly, though they have secret
thoughts that there is no God, nor Christ, nor judgment to come. But now, how
will they tremble when they shall come to see all their Atheism confuted, when
they shall see Christ in his Glory, and sitting upon his Throne, and there
sitting to execute judgment according to a Scripture-Rule, according to what
they have often heard? Oh, what a plunge will they be in at such a season? what
a damp will this strike upon their spirits, when all their Atheism shall be
confuted? 2 These. 1.7. it is said, Christ shall be revealed from Heaven in
flaming fire. Revealed from Heaven! Wh^ is he not reve^led in the Scripture? Do
we not know there is a God, and Christ, and judgment, by the Scripture? Yes,
but that will not convince some stupid sinners: There be many will not believe
there is a God, a Christ, and a Judgment, for all this; but he must be
Revealed from Heaven, before the s^nners Atheism will be wholly confuted.
Christ in the Gospel is Revealed from Heaven: this word it is not of men's
making, it is of Divine Authority; but yet this will not dispel the Ath^ism, he
must Be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, ^efo^e this work will ^e done.
That is the second thing, to show that some will tremble at Christ's judgment,
that would not tremble at any previous judgment.

3. They will then be filled with trembling, because they will then be
convinced of the sinfulness of sin: There is not a sinner upon the face of the
earth, that does see sin to be as sinful as it is; Why, what do they think of
sin? Fools they make a mock of sin; or as the Wise man says, It is a sport to
a wicked man to do mischief; that is, to commit sin: this is but to the sinner
a pretty kind of diversion, that helps him to pass away his time m^rrily. Some
sinners the^e are that have renderness enough to tremble at the thoughts of
judgment, thoug^ not to tremble ^t sin, Job 36.21. Take heed, regard not
iniquity: for this have thou chosen rather then affl ction. This is the sinne^s
choice, they do see a dread in judgment, but none in sin; therefore they
^ather choose to sin then suffer, or fall under outward tro^bles. Sinners have
mighty slight thoughs of sin, as appears by that, Malach. 2.17. Why, say they,
what great matter have we done to weary God? Why, says God, you have sinned,
and thereby you have wearied me; and yet ye cry, Wherein have we wearied thee?
we can tell no great hurt we have done thee: This is the guise of sinners; but
the time will come when Christ shall appear, and then sinners shall be
convinced of sins, in the 15 verse. of Jude, To execute judgment, etc. What
will Christ do, when he comes? he will come to convince them of their sins, of
all their ungodly deeds, and to show them what sinfulness there is in their
sin. And now, I say, when sinners shall see and be convinced of the sinfulness
of sin, that will make them tremble, that will awaken them, and that will be
done when Christ comes.

4. Because then they shall have all their misconceivings and false
apprehensions of God removed. It is true, it may be sinners think there is a
God, but yet such a God as an Idol would make; they have such misconceptions of
him, which will then be effectually removed: if they think that he is a God,
yet a God that does not see and observe all that they do. Psalm. 94.6, 7. They
slay, etc. Yet they say, He shall not see: he is a God, but such an one as an
Idol might make; a God, but a God at a distance, that does not trouble himself
with our concernment: So Psalm. 10.10, 11. He croucheth and humbles himself,
that the poor may fall by his strong ones: This is that that sinners say,
Suppose we grant he be God, and does see what we do, yet he will not trouble
himself to call us to an account for every thing that we do: so you have it in
the 13. verse. He has said in his heart, Thou will not require it: These are
the misconceptions that sinners have of God, either he will not see, or if he
do, he will not regard, he will not call to account: but now how will sinners
be startled when they shall fi^^^ there is a God, and all their
misapprehensions of him are confuted? Revel. 6. the later end, They shall call
unt^ ^h^ Rocks to fall on them, and to the Mountai^^ (...) cover them from the
presence of the L^m^ ^^^o shall appear as a Lion, and (...) that sits upon the
Throne; and Psalm. 58. last verse. So that a man shall say, Verily th^^e is a
reward for the righ^eous* verily (...) is a God that judges in the earth: Once
it may be they said, There is ^o God; or if there be a God, he sees not, and
will not judge: but now they shall say, Verily there is a God that judges in
the earth. This is that that will make them tremble exceedingly.

5. This shall fill them with trembling, that they shall find they are not able
to bear up against the glory and majesty of that day: so Rev. 6. latter end,
Hide us from the wrath of the Lamb, and him that sits upon the throne; they
shall see that infinite dread in the wrath of the Lamb, that they shall not be
able to stand up under: so Isa. 3.14. Who shall stand before a devouring fire?
who shall dwell with everlasting burning?

6. And sixt^ly and lastly, Sinners that did not dread judgment, shall dread
the appearance and coming of Christ, for then they will be overcome and
stricken down with desperate despairing thoughts, they will find their
condition then incurable for ever; they make light of their estate for present,
but they will then find it past remedy for ever: now I would say this, If there
be any sinners so stupid that present judgments do not affect them, I would
say, let them alone until Christ comes.

The third thing propounded, to show who they are that shall never be able to
stand before the Son of man.

Doubtless my friends it is a very great honor to be accounted worthy to stand
before Jesus Christ: If the Queen of Sheba could say, and that upon some
ground, to Solomon, Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants which
stand continually before thee to hear thy wisdom: How much more may we say,
Happy are thy men, and happy are thy servants, O Lord Jesus, who shall stand
before thee to hear thy wisdom, to sh^re with thee in thy glory, and to behold
thy face to all eternity! surely that is a far greater honor: therefore in
Psalm. 15.1. David puts the question, Who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who
shall dwell in thy holy hill? the tabe^nacle of God, and the holy hill of God,
is both the place where his worship was of old, and it is also put for heaven
sometimes in Scripture; and in both there is the presence of God and of his
Christ, he is met withal in his worship, and most of all and most eminently in
glory; but now, says the Psalmist, Who shall stand in thy holy place? who shall
stand in thy presence? Where shall ^h^^e be any found that shall be dignified
with this honor? What so^t of people must they be that thou will thus promote?
Doubtless there are very many that shall never be able to stand before Christ,
Luke 13.23. the question was put, Are there few that shall be saved? Christ
answers, Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many I say unto you shall
seek and shall not be able to enter: and hence it is that it is said, Mat.
7.22, 23. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, etc.

Now in treating on the fourth, who they are that shall not stand, I shall show
you that there are ten sorts of persons that will never be able to stand before
the Son of man: The Lord grant we may not be of that number.

1. Ungodly sinners, openly profane, who spend their days without any awe of
God upon them, they are persons never like to be honored by Christ in his day,
and at his appearance and coming, Psalm. 1.5. The ungodly shall not stand not
stand in the judgment, etc. the ungodly, such as live in a neg^ect of Duty;
the sinners, such as live ^n the acting of all impiety, says he, these shall
not stand in the judgment, 1 Pet. 4.18. If the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the sinner and ungodly appear? If they find some difficulty in
ascending the mount of glory, what then shall sinners do? doubtless they will
never be able to stand in the presence of Christ.

2. Such as promote and encourage sin in others, they are not like to be owned,
and honored, and promoted by Christ in his day: some there are that are such
and so good factors for the Devil, that they wonderfully promote his trade in
the world, and as a recompense of all their trouble they shall receive the
salary of eternal misery; whatever souls they are that are so in love with sin,
and the ways and works thereof, that they help it on, and further it by what
means they can, must never expect to be owned and honored by Christ when they
shall stand before him at his judgment seat: there are such in the world as
the Prophet complains of, Ezekiel. 13.22. Who strengthen the hands of the wicked;
many ways there are to do it, but it is miserable work, whoever is found in it:
we promote and encourage sin, either when we provoke and entice unto it, as
Solomon warns his son, Prove. 1.10. When sinners entice thee, consent not to
them; there are such sinners that in^ice unto sin, as the whorish woman, Prove.
7.21. With many fair speeches she caused him to yield, that is a promoting of
sin; and much more do they promote it, that by what means they can do constrain
others to it.

Thus do the wicked great men of the earth, that compel others unto their
idolatry, and to share in their abominations, as Jeroboam did in 2 King. 17.21,
etc. They also promote sin ^n others, who do labor to extenuate and lessen
sin, and make people believe it is not what it is, to the end they may less
fear and dread it, and go on in it with the more confidence; such a kind of
people as the Lord by the Prophet meets with in Mal. 2.17. Ye have wearied me,
etc. when you tell people sin is not such a thing as some would have you
believe, and he will love you for all that, this is an enticing unto evil: I
but what will become of them? that will you see in Romans 1.32. Who knowing the
judgment, etc, in which words you have both the sin and punisment that shall
follow upon the sinner: the sin is expressed, that they sin, and love to have
others do so; the punishment is employed, they that so sin are worthy of death,
and that they shall have, they shall have their demerit, not life from Christ,
nor shall they live with Christ, but everlasting death is their demerit, and
that they shall have, that shall be their portion; and so that Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall break any of these little commandments, and teach men so to do,
etc. whoever shall sin, and encourage others in it, what shall become of him?
he shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven: the words are a figurative speech,
where less is spoken then intended: least, that is, he shall be so little, that
he shall not be at all in the Kingdom of heaven: That is the second sort that
shall not stand before the Son of man. Only I would put in a caution, That it
is possible good souls, even the Lords own people, may sometimes prove a means
of encouraging sin in others, and that either by some ill example, as such a
case is intimated, 1 Cor. 8.10. If any man, etc. The example of a stronger
Christian may encourage a weak one to do things against his conscience, things
he is not satisfied in, and so it may be a sin unto that weak one, he may sin
being led to it by the example of another; or we may further sin in others,
when we do not restrain it according as we may and ought: Thus did Eli, who was
a very good man, but yet he did further the sin of his sons, in that he did not
restrain them, he did only give them a gentle and mild reproof, when he should
have put a restraint upon them, as you may read, 1 Samuel 2.22. and forward, Now
Eli was very old, etc. in a mild way he reproves them, when as he was a
Magistrate he should have put a restraint upon them: and see how God punishes
this upon him in Chap. 3.13. It is not enough to reprove a sin, but where we
can we ought to restrain it, as Masters, Parents, Magistrates, and the like,
that is their duty, and they that are not faithful in the discharge of it, may
be thereby an incourager of sin in others: only this note, that though sinners
may encourage sin, and Saints may encourage sin too, yet it is greatly
different; Saints may encourage sin eventually and accidentally, but not
inten^ionally; it is not their design: sinners do it designedly, and Saints
accidentally, and that is a wide difference.

To proceed, thirdly, They may not expect to stand in the day of Christ, that
rush on upon ways of sin, contrary to light and convictions received, Romans
1.21. Because that when they knew God, etc. in a due proportion to the light we
have received, such should our walkings and acting be, and he that sins against
his light, sins greatly: Many make dreadful havoc of their light, and great
inrodes upon their conscience: You read in Prove. 20.27. The spirit of a man is
the candle of the Lord; the conscience of a man it is the candle of the Lord,
and we often sin against it, until we sin it out, although this cannot be done
at a cheap rate, and yet how often do we do it! Psalm. 125.5. As for such as
turn aside, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity; in
which is employed, not only that God will leave them to sin as the wicked do,
but to the same punishment that does attend and betide the workers of iniquity;
and also to this purpose take that text again, Romans 1.32. Who knowing the just
judgments of God; there is a great emphasis, in that they that know that he
that sins so and so what he does deserve, they are like to fall under his
just judgment, Luke 12.47. The servant that knows his Lords will, etc. What,
shall he be rewarded? No, But he shall be beaten with many stripes.

A fourth sort of persons that shall never stand before Christ, are they that
turn the grace of God and Christ into wantonness; they that from the kindness
of God in the Gospel, take occasion to strengthen their hands in ways of
rebellion against God and Christ: I tell you such souls will have a sad account
to make in the day of Christ, and will stand with much paleness of face, and
dejection of spirit; in verse. 4. of Judes Epistle, we are pointed to such a
people, who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness; that is, Make use of
the grace of God in the Gospel, as an occasion to lasciviousness: Oh it is sad
indeed to make the greatest mercy a prop and fartherer of the greatest
iniquity! Paul tells us in Romans 7.11. That sin took occasion by the
Commandment; that is, there is such an enmity and contrariety in the heart of
man naturally against God, and the mind of God, that the very command to
holiness is a spur and furtherance unto wickedness; such is the enmity that is
in the heart unto God. Now it is a very great sin, that the Law that is
intended to keep from sin, should be an occasion of sin; it is a great
aggravation: but it is much more a great sin, when the Mercy and Grace of God
that should be the greatest hindrance, and let, in the way of sin, if that
should become an occasion of sin, and a means to further it: The Rule is, 1
John 2.1. My little Children, these things I write, that you sin not. And if
any man sin, we have an Advocate, etc. We have an Advocate; we have a Christ,
to the end that it should keep us in from sin, and not that it should be an
occasion to sin; and in Romans 6.1. says Paul, What shall we say then? shall we
sin that grace may abound? God forbid, God forbid that the kindness of God in
the Gospel should be a means to further us in any provocation, that were a
dreadful evil. And yet this is the guise of some poor Creatures; because God
has found out a way for Pardon and Reconciliation, therefore some poor souls
venture upon sin the more boldly: And what will be the issue of this? Oh such
shall smart and suffer dearly for it: they shall be punished after the Example
of Sodom, in the seventh verse of Judes Epistle.

5. Such as neglect and slight the Gospel of Christ, and the Grace of Christ in
the Gospel: They do not much mind it, God he offers us fairly, he offers us a
great deal of kindness and mercy in the Gospel; but we do not mind it, and
what will the result of it be? Romans 2.4, 5. Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness? etc. It has been the Lot of the Gospel to meet with very course and
rough usage, Mat. 22.4, 5. And Again, he sent forth other servants, etc. They
slighted the offer as a thing not worth the considering, not worth the giving
heed to; let thy preparation and dinner go as it will, they made light of it:
But what will the issue of this be? what will this come to? This is not the way
to stand before Christ; look to the Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?

6. Secret Hypocrites and Apostates will never be able to stand in the day of
Christ. Secret Hypocrites that profess to be for Christ, but are inwardly
against him, their hearts are not with him; such souls will come off with shame
in the day of Christ: Therefore you find what is said, Job 36.13. The
hypocrite in heart heaps up wrath, etc. and Mat. 24.51. intimates to us that
the portion of hypocrites shall be of all the most sad and dismal portion. And
also for Apostates that have begun in the spirit, but do end in the flesh; that
have professed a love to Christ, but really have their hearts at a distance
from Christ; such as Paul wishes the Galathians might never prove, Gal. 3.3.
Are ye so foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the
flesh? Such souls as shall do thus, they will find their case sad at last;
such as Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy 1.19. that make Shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience: That have professed the Faith, and have had some light and
tenderness of Conscience, but have thrown off all: how will it be with such?
Heb. 10.23. Hold fast the profession of your Faith without wavering, etc. and
25. verse. Forsake not the assembling your selves together, as the manner of
some is: For if you sin after the receiving the knowledge of the Truth, it will
be sad: For, says he, it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.

7. Carnal and Formal professors that set out and keep up in a Profession, but
are without spirit and life, that have nothing but a form and outside of
godliness, without the power: Such souls there are in the world: But alas, such
souls will sit down short of a comfortable enjoyment of Christ. How many are
there in days in which profession is crowned, that attend diligently upon
opportunity? But how little is that considered, in John 1.24. God is a Spirit,
and will be worshipped in spirit and in truth? How many poor creatures are
there that only mind a little lifeless, heartless worshpiping of God? Though
the number of the Children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a Remnant shall
be saved. Though Professors be as the sand of the Sea, a great many; yet but a
remnant shall be saved: And why but a remnant? it is because though they were
Israel, yet they were but formal, they are spiritually Sapless professors: And
therefore because they are but so, but a remnant shall escape.

8. I might also add those moral men, that carry things right between man and
man; yet that is not enough to bear up the soul in the presence of Christ.

9. Faint seekers, that have some faint desires, and a h^lf-broken kind of
willingness: what will that come to? Luke 13.24. Strive to enter, etc. He
intimates that there should be some should put forth some few cold desires and
endeavors, but should not set to the work in earnest; they should seek to
enter, but the Issue of such a seeking should be this; They should not be able:
So, Mat. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, etc. The preaching of
John had put another spirit into the people, that they were even pressing into
the Kingdom of Heaven; The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence: Many were
pressing into the Kingdom of God, and the violent they would take no denial;
they would take the Kingdom of Heaven by force. These hot-metled souls, they
were hot upon the Kingdom of Heaven, and there was no satisfying them without
it: but the Faint seekers will be denied.

10. It may be they that have some raised confidence, though upon bad grounds,
and think to challenge Heaven with as much boldness as any, among them there
may be such that shall fall short, Mat. 7.22, 23. They shall come unto him, and
say, Lord, Lord, etc. They shall come and challenge an entrance, with a great
deal of boldness and confidence, as if they doubted not of their reception and
entertainment; but yet he shall say unto them, Verily I know you not, Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity, Job 8.13.14. The hypocrites hope shall perish:
And thus, I say, these several sorts of persons are like to fall short of
standing before the Son of man with comfort. But then if these shall not stand,
who are they, and what must they be, that shall stand before him with joy? That
is the fourth thing.

There are souls that shall stand. Christ has not dyed in vain, he shall s^e
of the travel of his soul; there are them that shall lift up their heads when
the Son of man shall appear; and that shall be the time of their redemption,
the time of their refreshing: and who are they? I shall give you this
description of him that shall stand before the Son of man: He is such a one,
who having denied and renounced his own righteousness, has put on Christ's
Righteousness; is renewed in the Inner man, and bound in spirit for God;
desirous to be found in the whole Will of God, both in doing and in suffering:
Of such an one I shall say, as the Psalmist speaks, in the Psalm. 24.5. He shall
receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his
salvation. I shall take this description in parts, and clear up every part of
it, and shall beg of you to put the question unto your own hearts, How far you
can experience such a Work of God upon your own spirits?

1. He that shall be accounted worthy to stand before the Son of man, is one
that has denied and renounced his own righteousness; he is one that is brought
to see he has no righteousness of his own; and therefore desires to give up
all the thoughs of hanging upon any righteousness of his own whatever: He is
one, I say, that sees he has no righteousness of his own; and that sight
arises from the sight of his Original pollution, and of his actual departure
from the Lord: he sees his Original pollution, and that makes him cry out as
Job, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one: It makes
him cry out as David, Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me. And the soul also sees its own actual departure
from the Lord, and that makes it cry out as they in Isai. 64.6. We are all as
an unclean thing, and also all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. This you
shall find is the spirit that the people of God have been found in; they have
put off their own righteousness, turned their backs upon it. Paul once thought
he had as much as others, and as we use to say, Thought his penny was as good
silver as another: He thought he was in as good a condition as the best; but
you have him crying out in Phil. 3.7. What things I counted gain, those I count
l^ss for Christ. Outward privileges, gifts, d^ties, whatever he thought would
stand him in stead in times past, he lays it down, and calls it but dung and
dross. And souls, this frame we must be in, or we are not like else to stand
before Christ with comfort. If any man will come after me, he must deny
himself: That is it that Christ calls for, that is Christ's Rule, He must deny
himself, Mat. 16.24. If any man will come after Christ, and end where he did,
that, is in Glory,

The first thing is, He must deny himself; and nothing can be more properly
called our selves, then our own righteousness; and this you must abjure, this
you most resolve not to own: And that Text is commonly quoted to this purpose,
Mat. 25.22. etc.

Now my Friends, consider what have been the dealings of God with your spirits,
what have you experienced of such workings upon your soul? Have you been
brought to see your own natural pollution, the defilement of your souls with
guilt and filth by nature? and have you been brought to see your turnings from
God in your whole course? and has it wrought this upon you, to see that you
have nothing of your own to commend you to God? that all in you, and all
without you, is but what may be a provocation to the Divine Majesty, and that
you do renounce it all as dung and dross?

2. You must put on Christ's R^ghteousness, for the putting off your own will
not do it; you must have a righteousness, the putting off your own must be
followed with the putting on of Christ's; and with that you may be able to stand
before the Lord in the great day: This you find is our Duty, and that to which
we are called, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me: Coming unto Christ, it is believing,
taking hold of his Righteousness: It is not enough that you know there is a
Righteousness held forth, a Righteousness offered; but it must be taken, you
must put on Christ, as the phrase of Scripture is: Paul you find did thus, in
that Phil. 3.7. I count all dung for Christ; and in the 8. verse. Yea doubtless
I count all loss, etc. All loss for Christ! and in the 9. verse. you have the
reason, that I may be found in him, not having my own righteousness, etc. Mark,
he made it his business not only to put off his own, but to put on Christ's
Righteousness; that was his care, And this, I say, will do the work: the soul
standing clad with the Robes of Christ's Righteousness, will stand with comfort
in the day of Christ. I will recommend to your consideration, that Revel. 7 9.
you read of A great multitude, which no man could number, that stood before the
Throne, and stood before the Lamb, clothed with white, and palms in their
hands. And who are they that are thus before the Throne? In the 13, 14. verses,
he tells you, They were they that had washed their Robes, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb; and in the next verse. he adds, Therefore are they
before the Throne; they had washed their Robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb: That is, they had the Robes of Righteousness, that were
purchased by the Blood of Christ; and the Righteousness of Christ was found
upon them, and upon this account they stood before the Lamb: and hence in Mat.
22.11, 12. When the feast was made, and the King comes to view his guests, he
says unto one of them, How come thou in hither, not having on a
Wedding Garment? He wanted the Righteousness of Christ, that was the
Wedding Garment; that not being found upon him, he must be cast out to be a
companion of them that knew not God. Now this is the question; Have you put off
your own Righteousness, and put on Christ's, without which there is no standing,
with which you may and will stand before the Son of man? What is the answer of
your hearts in this case? You will say, It is a hard matter to determine
whether I have put on Christ's Righteousness or no. I answer, Whether it be hard
or easy to determine whether you have done it or no, yet this is concluded on
that it must be done, if we would stand before Christ: but a little to help
you, before I leave it, consider these two things.

1. Consider that the putting on the Righteousness of Christ, it is but one
act. The soul sees a Beauty and Excellency in Christ, and likes him.

2. It is a consenting act, a Marriage-act: when the soul as it likes Christ,
so is willing to receive him according to the terms of the Gospel, at that time
it does put on Christ, and his Righteousness. Now this is the question you are
to ask your selves; Have you found such a consenting unto Christ, such a giving
up your selves unto Christ, upon the terms of the Gospel? You like him, and
approve him, and liking of him, you willingly take him upon the terms he has
offered himself unto you: If you can say, You have found such an act pass
between Christ and your souls; it is well, and it may assure you, that you will
stand among them that shall stand before Christ.

But then thirdly, in the Description I told you the soul is renewed: Old
things must pass away, Christ must be sanctification, as well as Righteousness,
John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
There must be a new Birth, a new work of God must pass upon the soul; that
renewing work it is in all the powers and faculties of the soul: The old Nature
it is in some measure weakened in all the faculties of the soul, though not
wholly driven out of any of them: There is something of God spread over the
whole soul; but yet not so, but that there is room for the soul, to complain as
Paul did, Romans 7.3. Who shall deliver me from this body of death? The soul it
is brought to thoughts of God that once it had not, and thoughts of sin that
once it had not; it is a real, though but an imperfect work; it is a work
really begun upon the soul, really wrought upon the heart, though not presently
perfected: It is an earnest and pledge of that that shall be wrought out and
completed in the season thereof. Now here is the question you are to put to
your hearts: What beginnings of this Work have you upon your souls? H^ve you
thoughts of God you had not, and thoughts of sin you had not, and thoughts of
holiness that you were once utter strangers unto?

4. This is in the description, the soul is made to be for Christ, Titus 2.13,
14. Who gave himself for us, that he might purify to himself a peculiar
people, etc. Christ did purchase a people to himself: Time was thou were all
for sin, and Satan, but now thou art for Christ; thy Vote is on his side,
though sometimes sin and Satan may carry it against thee.

5. The bent of the heart is for God the ship that is bound for the Indies (a
long voyage) it meets with many cross winds, and is often driven back; but yet
being bound for the same place, it still sets out with the first fair wind, and
makes forward as much as it can: It is thus with the soul that shall stand with
Christ, it is bound for God, for heaven; it meets with many cross winds; the
winds makes the waves of the sea boisterous, and the soul is brought back again
to as bad, or it may be, to its own apprehension, a worse condition then at
first, when it set out for God, yet bound for God it is, and therefore it
improves all its opportunities for God; that is the bent and frame of such a
soul, Isa. 26.8. The desires of our soul are toward thee, etc.

6. It is desirous to be found in the whole will of God; not that it is always
found in the will of God, but yet the desires are after it, that is the
inclination of the heart, and to be found in the whole will of God, in one part
as well as another: Caleb was a type of them that shall stand before Christ,
Number. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit, and had
followed the Lord fully, etc. He was to go to Canaan, and he was a type of all
that shall inhabit the heavenly Canaan, that shall sit down in the land of
rest; they are persons of such spirits, that they are willing to follow the
Lord fully, to be found in the whole will of God, in the duties of the first
Table, in the worship of God with his people in their family, Psalm. 4.3.
Therefore called the godly man: They are for the second Table-duties, to do the
duty of their places and relations toward God and all men, therefore Tit.
2.11. The grace of God teaches to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc.
Now see, how is it with thee? thou have corruptions remaining, sin dwelling in
thee, and thou art found but little in the way and work of God; but which way
is the bent of thy heart? which way do the strongest desires of thy heart run?

7. It is willing not only to do but to suffer for God, to be true to his
name, his honor and glory, whatever it may cost him; to submit his life,
liberty, estate, honor, or whatever he has, to the will of Christ: if the Lord
wills me to suffer, I will undergo it, if I may but any way further and promote
his glory; that is the requirement of Christ in Mark. 8.38. Whoever shall be
ashamed of me, etc. he that will not own Christ, and his way and work in the
face of the utmost hazard that he can run, he shall not be owned of Christ when
he shall come: so Rev. 2. Fear none of those things, be faithful to death, etc.
So consider and commune with your spirits in this matter; are you willing to do
his will, and suffer his will? is it the design of your spirits, to stand
perfect in the whole will of God? It is good if so, and such as I have here
described shall be sure to stand before Christ, whoever be rejected in that day.

And this brings me to the fifth thing, to show you what is the best frame that
the soul should be most ambitious of, and that will best fit it to stand before
the Son of m^n: What is the best frame ^o stand before Christ in the day of
Christ? There are these five things necessary, if you would be able to meet
Christ without any consternation of spirit, if you would be able to meet him
with settled confidence and boldness, besides what I have already laid down.

Five things are needful, 1. To have the love of God in Christ witnessed and
sealed up to the soul: It is a great mercy to have an interest in Christ, to
have taken hold on his righteousness; but it is a further and greater mercy, to
have the love of God in Christ witnessed, and manifested, and sealed up to the
soul by the Spirit of Christ; souls, this is that mercy which the Saints have
been breathing after, Psalm. 4.6. Lift up the light of thy countenance upon us;
this is that mercy which the Saints have prized above the dearest and best of
all the mercies of this life, Psalm. 163.3. Because thy loving kindness is
better then life, etc. life is better then any other thing in this world, but
the love of God manifested to the soul that is better then life; this is that
that the Saints of God have traveled for, and for which they are traveling,
for which they are waiting upon the Lord from time to time, and from duty to
duty; this is that that their souls are set upon, Psalm. 77.4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house
of the Lord to behold his face, etc. Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early
will I seek thee, etc. This is that the soul of the Psalmist was seeking after;
this is that that carries the soul courageously and comfortably through the
most rugged and unpleasing paths and passages it meets with in this world, Romans
5.3. We glory in tribulations; and what is it that makes the soul glory in
tribulation? says he, Because the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the Spirit of God, that is the instrument to do that work upon the soul, that
is it that makes the soul rejoice in, and go cheerfully through, whatever
irksome providence it may possibly meet with in the world: it has the light of
Gods countenance, a sense of his love and favor; it has the good will of God
sealed up to it by the Spirit of Christ, and this is that that will give the
soul the greatest boldness in the day of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. Give all
diligence that you may be found of him in peace, etc. by this means you shall
be carried with the greatest cheerfulness and comfort unto the day and coming
of our Lord Jesus.

2. This is needful, that the soul be weaned from this world, and dis-ingaged
to all the intanglements and encumbrances of it; that it sit loose from the
cares and comforts of this world; this is requisite to be the frame of those
that would meet with Christ with comfort and boldness: You shall find the
things of this world are of a very hurtful tendency to the souls of ^he Saints,
they do a wonderful deal of harm; they are often a means to carry off the heart
from God, if it be not exceedingly careful: therefore Christ gives this
counsel, Mat. 6.25. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life,
etc. be not much taken up with the things and concernments of this life: Why
what is the hazard? why, says he, in verse. 4. No man can serve two masters,
etc. Let not the heart run out too much after the world, for fear the world
take the heart away from God; a man cannot have his heart too much let out to
this world, but it will draw the soul too much from Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. Thou
therefore endure hardness: No man that warreth entangleth himself with the
affairs of this life: If you are for Christ, and ever mean to do Christ any
service, make this your care, that the heart be not taken up with the concerns
of this life: if you let it out to things below, Christ will have little of
your love, and little of your service by this means; so that I say is an
excellent frame in order to the meeting with Christ with the greatest comfort
and boldness, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any time, etc. take
heed your hearts are not swallowed up with things below, and so that day come
upon you unawares: whosoever has his heart too much engaged in the things of
this life, the day of Christ will take him at a disadvantage, he will not be
able to meet Christ with so much boldness as otherwise he might: Christ in Luke
12. gives his disciples this counsel, verse. 35. Let your loins be girded about,
etc. What must we be if we would be found in the greatest posture of fitness
for the Lord? Why, let your loins be girded about: The loins here, is that that
is called elsewhere the loins of the mind, 1 Pet. 1.13. Now these are the
affections and workings of the heart, which must be girt up, and not suffered
to hang loose to the things of this world, not suffered to wander after the
concernments of this world, that will not do well; but you mu t have them
settled upon and kept close to due and proper objects: Affections set on things
above, is a spirit fit to mee^ with Christ in.

3. Thi^ i^ needful, that grace be in its act and exercise. I tell you the soul
may have grace in the heart, but yet if you would meet with Christ with that
boldness and comfort that it is fit we should aim at, it is necessary moreover
that the habit be drawn forth into exercise. Grace in the heart of a Saint, it
is not there to be useless, but it is there seated, that it may from thence
shine forth, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, etc. The exercise
of Grace is a very grateful and pleasing thing to our Lord Jesus: he takes very
much delight in it, Cant. 2.14. Come, says he, let me see thy countenance,
etc. The exercise of Grace, in a Saint, is pleasing and delightful to our Lord
Jesus Christ; and then is it that Grace is in its excellency, then the
sweetness of it is manifested, when it is exercised, Cant. 1.12. says the
Spouse, When the King sits at his table, my spicknard sends forth the smell
thereof: That Spicknard and other precious Ointments, represent the Graces of
the Spirit of God in the heart of a Saint: and when she did attend upon God in
ways of Duty, says she, My Grace is at work, and then it sends forth its
smells. The sweetness of Grace is not found but in its exercise; and it is then
when Grace is in exercise, that a soul is fit to meet Christ. It was not the
commendation, nor the mercy of the wise Virgins, that They slumbred and slept,
Mat. 25.5. And they knew it was not: therefore it is said, they arose, and
trimmed their Lamps, they ro^zed up themselves, and stirred up the Grace of God
that was in them: This is that that Christ calls for, Luke 12.35. Let your
loins be girt about, and your Lamps burning: The burning of the Lamps, is the
exercise of Grace: it may be thou have thy Lamp; but Oh! labor that it may be
a bu^ning and shining Lamp, to have thy Grace acting and displaying it self,
th^^ is your Duty, and you will meet with Christ with much the more comf^rt. If
Go^ should come, how little of this would he find in us! our pride is working,
our covetousness, our (...) and animosity, and such like? But who of us can say
that Grace is in exercise? Well, that is the third thing requisite in order to
the meet^ng Christ with comfort and boldness.

4. Communion with God, and a holy conversation maintained and kept up, is very
necessary, if we would meet with Christ with comfort and boldness. Communion
with God, which are those sweet interchanges of love between God and the soul,
the preserving and maintaining as well as getting whereof, is much the duty,
and much the excellency and glory of a Christian, to carry it so, that you may
not give Christ occasion to stand as a stranger unto the soul; to preserve the
Unity and Amity between Christ and the soul, is much the Duty of a poor
Creature: it was the misery and unhappiness of the Spouse, that she was wanting
in that work, Cant. 5.2. When Christ invites her unto opportunities of
Communion with himself, she says, I have put off my coat, etc. She trifles
away that opportunity, and out of a slothful spirit neglects it; and this
occasioned a strangeness between him and her for some time after: The avoiding
of this is much our wisdom, and will much advantage in the day of Christ; the
preserving also a very holy conversation, Phil. 3.20. says the Apostle, Our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a Savior: And if thou art
looking for a Savior in earnest, keep thy conversation in heaven: Now our
conversations being in heaven, it implies both the maintaining communion, and
friendship, and concord between God and us; and also a holy and upright
conversation: He that lives in heaven, keeps his peace with God; and he that
lives in heaven, walks closely with God: such a frame as that, becomes one that
looks for Christ, and waits for his appearance, that is most certain, Titus
2.14. The Apostle there is telling what is the Expectation of the Saints, 13.
verse. Looking for, says he, that blessed hope, etc. How did they carry it in
this time of their hope and expectation? Why? they were taught to Deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts; and in such a posture they did Look for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God. 1 Pet. 13.14. Gird
up the loins of your minds, be sober and hope unto the end, etc. He wishes
them to look for the appearance and coming of Christ; but what posture must
they be in while they are thus looking? Why, as obedient Children, etc.

5. And longing of soul for his appearance and coming is also necessary; that
is it, that is in Scripture called, A waiting for; it is a waiting with desire
and longing: last of Canticles and the last verse. Make have, my Beloved, and be
as a Roe or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices. The soul thinks the
coming of Christ long, Revel. 22.21. He that says these things testifies,
Behold, I come quickly: even so, come Lord Jesus. That is the frame the soul
should be in, to be still crying, Come Lord Jesus.

And thus I have given you what I intended in answer to the fifth thing: What
is the best frame the soul can be in, in order to its meeting with Christ, with
the greatest comfort and boldness?

As first^ to have the love of Christ witnessed and sealed up unto the soul, by
the Spirit of God.

2. To be disingaged from this world and all the intanglements and encumbrances
thereof.

3. To have Grace in its exercise.

4. Communion with God, and a holy conversation maintained and kept up.

5. Raised desires, and longing of soul for his appearance.

The Application of the Point only remains: And I shall be brief in what I add
more.

1. If it be a truth, as I have endeavored to make it good, that standing
before Christ is so serious and weighty a thing: The Use of the Point will be
in three or four things, some of which will concern us all.

The first Use would be, to put us a little upon inquiry; Where are you? what
posture are you in? what preparation have we made for that solemn day? what
have we done that may fit us to stand before the Son of man? It will be a day
of great solemn^ty; great will be the Majesty of that Day; and how fares it
with us? Can we say that Christ is become our Friend, that we have made peace
with God through him, that all controversies between God and our souls are
taken up and ^ompounded? The counsel that is gi^en, Mat. 25.25. Agree with thy
adversary quickly, while he is in the way ^ith him, is very good. There is
enmi^y between God and man by nature: ^he counsel given, is to compound and
^ake up the breach; and that is to be ^one while we are in the way with him: ^f
we let it alone until the coming of Christ, we shall be delivered unto the
Officer, and by him be hurried to prison, from whence we shall not be delivered
for ever: And therefore it is a very serious question which you had all need to
put to your souls, whether you have ^eceived Christ and made sure of him, that
so all differences between God and you be compounded and made up, that you may
be able to hold up your ^eads in the great and notable day of the Lord; for
such it will be, and so it is called in the Word of Truth.

I have already showed you what kind of persons they must be that shall stand
before Christ, that it must be one that has renounced his own righteousness,
and put on Christ's Righteousness, and is renewed in the inner man, and bound in
spirit for God, desirous to be found in his Will both by doing and suffering:
you may reflect upon what has been said, and consult your spirits thereby. But
here you will say, Whether have I received Christ or no, that is that that
sticks with me, and I cannot answer that to my own satisfaction. Why? consider,
Oh soul, thou may know it, by the precious thoughts, and high esteem thou
have of Christ! 1 Pet. 2.7. To you therefore which believe he is precious: and
you may turn it thus; You to whom Christ is precious, you believe in him: You
say, He is precious and worth a world, but whether he be yours, that is the
question. Why souls, I tell you, if your hearts be in love with him, it is
because he first loved you; and thou can not have a true love unto Christ
without the work of his Spirit.

2. You may know it by those holy breathings you have after more o^ likeness
and conformity to him; this is certain, the soul of this Saint is no^ what it
should be, but is longing to be what it is not; pressing after more of Christ,
and the Image of God. There was a time when Paul thought that he had enough,
and was in an excellent ^ood cond^^^^^^ but Go^ ^^ught him to ^e it wa^ (...)
^uch matter, R^m. 7.9. I ^as (^^ie^ P^^^) ^^ve once without the law, but ^^e^
the commandment came, and^. (...) the Law ^^me in its understan^^^g, and in
(...) Applic^^ion; when he wa^ able to under^^^nd ^he Law in its exte^^ and
spiri^^^lity, and apply it to himself; then ^e found he had a great deal of
sin, and little of God in him: then he come^ to ^ee his wretchedness, to gro^n
under his burden: and this cannot be but where the soul has received life
from Christ. How is it with thee? do thou see thy filthiness, and groan under
thy burden? It is a great sign, ^f so, and a token for good, that there is a
principle of new Life, of new and spiritual life communicated to thee, and that
thou have received life from Christ, who is the Fountain of Life, and of it
thou may assure thy self.

3. From that holy awe and dread tha^ is upon thy heart, lest thou should b^
left to sin against and dishonor Go^ Where there is a closing with Christ i^
earnest, there is an awe of God arisin^ from a sense of duty, and from a sense
(...) goodness, Hosea 3.5. where it is spoken concerning the Jewish people, a^
the time of their Conversion, the they Shall fear the Lord and his goodness in
the latter day. When the^ shall in the latter days be brought ne^ unto God,
there shall be a holy aw^ of God upon their hearts, that she keep them and
preserve them, and l^ a restraint upon them, that they she not be left ^o do
the things that a^ grievou^ in his sight. Now it is go^ to inquire whether you
find such (...) awe upon your s^^ls, that you c^ look upon what ^e has done,
a^ thereby find a k^nd of restra^^t l^id upon you, to keep close to ^im to
a^^e^ his work, and ^^it^^^ ^he things the are ple^sing in his si^^^.

A ^econd (...) is thi^: Is s^andi^ before Christ su^^ a serious thing? may
help a little for the support them that tremble at the thoughts of ^tanding
before him. There are some ^ouls that do conclude, or at least are very apt to
conclude, they shall never stand before Christ with comfort, that they shall
never be able to bear his presence; that that day will be a day of such dread
and terror to them, that they shall fall before his great and glorious
Majesty. I would say, Is there any that have such workings of heart? Why, what
is the ground of it? what is it that fills you with this fear? Why, says the
soul, I am full of fear, that his appearance and coming will have so much dread
in it, that I shall not be able to bear it. Unto such I would say, It is true,
the appearance of Christ will be dreadful; but unto whom? 2 These. 2.8. It is
the wicked that the Lord will consume with the brightness of his coming. The
dread of the day will not light upon his people, but his enemies; it will be
upon them that know not God: And therefore soul, thou need not tremble;
though it will be dreadful unto them that are his enemies, thou may
notwithstanding hold up thy head. I but, says the soul, this is my case, I
have a rebellious heart, a hard heart, that will not stoop and subject it self
to Christ; and therefore his coming will be terribl^ unto me. To th^^ I answer,
Pa^^ ^^^er he was converted ^^d ^ebe^^^^ in his ^ea^t, lusts in hi^ he^^t,
ri^^^g u^ ^gain^t God, as well as thou ha^^, Romans 7.19. I find a law in my
members war^^ng against the law of my mind. Christ's coming into the soul, does
not dispossess sin all at once; it does begin the work, but it does not turn
sin wholly out of doors, no, that it does not; but it does give an earnest of
what shall be done, that he will at length subdue thy corruptions thoroughly:
But consider this, though thou have a rebellious heart, is it not that that
thou mournest over? is it not that that is thy burden, that that is grievous
unto thy soul? if it be, fear not, Christ will come and refine thee, not
destroy thee; he will take away thy dross, he will destroy thy corruption, but
not thee, Malach. 3.2, 3. But who may abide the day of his coming? He will sit
as a Refiner of silver, etc. So I may say unto such a soul as I am now speaking
to; he will sit as a refiners fire, he will purify, but he will not destroy;
he will take away thy dross, he will conquer thy corruption, but thee he will
save. I but, says the soul, I dread the thoughts of his coming; and therefore
sure it will not be to be born by me. To that I answer, Thy present
apprehension is no ground from whence thou may make a certain conclusion; for
wicked men (observe it) they do not dread the coming of Christ, they make a
light matter of it, and yet it shall be dreadful unto them: So thou do dread
his coming, and the thoughts of it are irksome to thee, but it may be, it may
not be dreadful when it does come: we have other thoughts of God then we should
have, many times; and therefore the Prophet in Jer. 17.17. he prays, Be not
thou a terror unto me: He did mistake God; God he intended to deliver him, and
not to be a terror to him: and so we are apt to think that Christ will be a
terror unto us, when it is no such matter, when he comes only to take us unto
himself, to set us with himself in glory. And that is the second.

3. Will the day of Christ's appearing be so dreadful? How should it quicken and
stir up our hearts then, to get into some readiness for that day? Motives I
might give you many; but let this suffice, the coming of the Lord draws nigh;
not according to that expression, A thousand years is as one day, and so God
may say it i^ nigh; but really, and in truth, the Judge stands at the door; and
surely there is but a little time between us, and that notable day of the Lord.
Oh the signs that we have of the Son of man! Immediately before the tribulation
of that day, The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light,
etc. Luke 21.25. Truly, this has been abundantly of late, in a more then
ordinary manner.

2. Distress of Nations, which is added: God seems to sound an Alarm to the
world, by that distress that he brings upon Nations: And (if the report at
least be true) a spirit stirring among the Ancient Jewish people, is as eminent
a sign of Christ's coming, as any that w^ have met with before. This I am
satisfied about, that things do look as if the day of the Son of man did hasten
gre^tly, as if it we^e even at the door; and I am sure it does call loudly unto
us to p^ck up for Eternity, and make ready for that solemn day: There are
preparations in heaven toward it; all things are setting in order against that
great Assize, and let not us be behind-hand. Oh, says the soul, what shall I
do! I a rebel against Christ, is there any hope for me, that I may yet make
peace? my heart is full of fear, what I shall do when Christ shall sit upon the
Throne. I will give thee answer, soul, in allusion to that case between
Adonijah and Solomon: Adonijah rises up in rebellion, scrambles for the Crown,
but Solomon was crowned before him, and in the 1 King. 1.15, 52. It was told
Solomon, saying, Adonijah says, Let King Solomon swear I shall not dye, etc. I
allude to it, and I think it does point to what I am speaking of. Thou have
been a rebel against Christ; thou hear the Father will set the Crown upon
his head, that he shall be inthroned: And now thy heart trembles, and ^hou
cryest, Oh that King Solomon would swear unto me, that I shall not dye: Oh that
Christ would assure me that I should find Grace and Favor with him. It may
be, that is thy language: take the answer of Christ the true Solomon, If thou
show thy self a worthy man, there shall not a hair of thine head fall to the
earth; that is, if thou will lay down thy arms, and come and submit unto Christ
heartily, and sincerely; if thou will come and bow before him, and acknowledge
him for thine Head, Lord and Lawgiver, the Lord Jesus gives his royal Word,
Not a hair of thy head shall fall to the ground: But if thou will continue in
thy rebellion, and iniquity be found in you, you shall dye. Now soul, what is
the answer of thy heart? art thou purposed in the strength of the Lord, to come
and submit to Jesus? If so, thou show thy self a worthy man, and things
shall then go well with thee, and thou may meet him with comfort, and stand
before ^im with joy.

And one Use more: If standing before Christ will be so serious a work, then to
you that are able to say, Through Grace, things are at that pass, that you have
ground ^o think you can and ^^all stand before him with comfort; What
thankfulness does this call you up unto? What a day will that be to you? a
wonderful day, a day filled with Wonder; a day rich and glorious in a way of
mercy to you; the wonders of that day unto you will be many: These two or three
among others.

1. A wonderful freedom from all your burdens, both of sin and suffering.

2. Wonderful meeting with all your friends; the Saints of all ages shall be
gathered together before the throne: if the sight of one friend be so
refreshing, what will it be when all the Saints of all ages shall meet together?

3. A wonderful enjoyment of Christ and God, and this to all eternity: never
more complaining of ^bsence, and distance, of hiding and withdrawing; but you
shall be caught up to the Lord, to be for ever with ^im: therefore do as is the
exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Comfort one another with these
words: you may have your burdens of sin and outward trouble for a while, there
may be breakings and scatterings of Saints from one another for a time, and
some hidings of Gods face; but in the end these things will end, and God and
you, and the Saints and you, shall sit down together to rejoice in one another
to all eternity.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

