A bloody Fight at Sea, BETWEEN The Parliament of England's Fleet, commanded by
General Blague, and Prince Ruperts Navy, near Carthaginia Road, upon the Coast
of Spain: With a most true and infallible Narrative of the manner of the Fight,
continuing for the space of 7 hours; the number of ships sunk, burnt, and
taken, with 500 Pieces of Ordnance; the number of men killed, sunk, and taken,
and Colonel Welsh, the Rear-Admiral drowned, with 700 Officers and Seamen: the
total routing and dispersing of the whole Navy; the manner of Prince Ruperts
getting off and flying away with the Swallow; the retaking of the
London-Marigold, and the rest of the Malligo Fleet; and a List of the names of
both Navies. The D^claration of the King of Spain, concerning Prince Rupert,
and the Parliament, and his setting forth 40 Sail of Ships and Galleys. With
the Desires of King John of Portingal, touching the States of England.

Certified by several Letters from Madridin Spain, to Merchants at the Royal
Exchange in London on Saturday last; and printed, to be published in all
Cities, and Market-Townes, throughout England, Scotland, Ir^land, and Wales.

FOR THE PRINCE. -- FOR THE PARLIAMENT.

depiction of sea battle

LONDON, printed for G. W, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in Co^^^il*
165^

A great Fight at Sea, between Prince Ruperts Fleet, and the Parliament of
ENGLAND.
BY Letters from Madrid in Spain, we have received a true and infallible
Narrative of the great and bloody fight, between Prince Rupert and Gen: Blaque,
Admiral for the Parliament of England* the manner thus. Genesis Blaque having
received intelligence of Prince Ruperts sailing toward the Coast of Spain,
with a Resolution to surprise the Malligo Fleet, bound for England, left no
means unattempted, for the preventing his design; but it so fell out, that
before he could come up to secure them, they were all surprised by the Enemy;
insomuch, that Prince Ruperts pride was so exceedingly heightened, that he swore
God dam him, Blaque should never return to England alive, but that he would
have him, within a days time, either alive or dead, and was now resolved to
fight him; in order whereunto, gave out, that each Ship should prepare for
battery, for that he had received information, that the English Fleet were
within six Leagues of them; which indeed; he soon found to be truth, for within
two hours time, they discovered several Sail of Ships making toward them, and
with a Prospective-Glasse discovered the English Colors, which did not a
little dant the courage of this vanting Prince: insomuch, that he seemed to
decline Engagement, and with a half Gale, endeavored to make from them;
whereupon, Genesis Blaque with all haste made after to them, and divine providence
so decreed his expedition, that by a fair Gale of wind, he soon came within
Cannon shot of them, their Rear-Admiral the Convertine, and with the English
Vice Admiral, gave them a broad side, Prince Rupert answered with another
Volley, and seconded the first with two broad sides from the Swallow; after
which, the rest of the Fleets came near each other; insomuch, that diverse times
they were upon the motion of grapling and boarding, the Dispute being very
hot, and with great gallantry performed on both sides.

Then came up General Blaque with the Bonadventure, and Constant-Warwick,
presenting three broad sides, giving a Volley from threescore piece of
Ordnance; which was well taken, and again answered; till at the last, the
Elizabeth Frigate, carrying forty piece of Canon, came in by the leeward, and
having resolutely discharged all her Guns against one of Prince Ruperts ships,
called the Lewis of France, immediately fell to grappling and boarding; but
finding the work somewhat difficult, presently betook themselves to their
fireworks, casting hundreds of Granado's aboard the French, and within a
quarter of an hour, fired her tacklings, burnt all her sayls, which fire; with
great vehemence, soon descended down, both to de^k and keel, the fierceness
whereof, could not possibly be allayed or quenched; so that she presently sunk,
with 44 pieces of Ordnance, and about one hundred men there perished in the sea.

No sooner was this achievement accomplished, but another Trophy attended the
English, for by the dexterity and courage of the rest of our Mariners, they
fired two more of the Princes ships, took five, dispersed the rest; some
running themselves aground, to the end, the men might get ashore, and Prince
Rupert narrowly escaped with the Swallow and another ship, both exceedingly
rent and torn. This fight continued for the space of seven hours, victory
seeming very dubious a long time, till at the last, it pleased Divine
Providence, to crown his saints and servants, with triumphant success and
mercies, in not only giving a dreadful blow to the adversary, but also by
retaking the London Marigold, and the rest of the Malligo Fleet, which are of
great value and estimation. For the further particulars hereof, I shall refer
thee to the ensuing Letter.

Another Letter in confirmation of the aforesaid Fight.
SIR,
IT has pleased God to appear wonderfully for the ParliamentsNavy at Sea, as
well as to their Army at Land, having given them a great Victory over their
most insolentest Enemy, as appears by this ensuing Narrative, viz About the 4.
of this instant December. Genesis Blake with about 13 Sail* a List whereof I have
here enclosed. met with P. Rupertnear Carthaginia, upon the Coast of Spain,
consisting of 27 Sail* or thereabouts; and after a bloody Fight, fired some of
them, sunk others, dispersed the rest, the Prince getting off only with two
Ships; all which was performed with little loss on the Parliamentsside, having
about 30 slain, and 60 wounded: Ou^ intelligence from Carthaginia says, that
P. Maurice perished in the Sea, being in one of the Ships that were sunk, that
Col. Welsh the Rear-Admiral is also drowned, and about 40 other Commanders of
note, 700 Seamen, with at least 500 piece of Cannon* In this fight diverse
Portingals perished, being very resolute and stout Mariners. We hear that King
John of Portugal desires a peace with the Parl, of England. His Maj. of Spain
has likewise declared to be assistant to the Parl. of England; General Blaque
is at present upon the Coast of Spain, some of his Fleet are gone into the
Downs,

Carthaginia 12 December, 1650,

A List of the two Fleets, and the number of ships, Men, and Ordnance, sunk and
taken.
Genesis Blague's Fleet.
Guns Leopard 50 Bonadventure 42 Happy Entrance 42 Eliz. Frigate 42 Warwick. 32
Expedition 30 John 30 Phoenix 20 And about five more.

Ships gone to General Blague.
Guns. Centurion 42 Swiftsure 38 Foresight 38 Pelican 38 Ginny Frigate 20

Prince Rupert's Fleet.
Guns Swallow 44 Convertine 40 Lewis of France 40 Royal Dolphin 40 Royal John
of Portingal. 40 And about 22 other Ships and Frigates.

Sunk 5 Burnt 3 Routed the whole Navy. Killed about 700 Sunk and taken five
hundred piece of Ordnance.

Prince Rupert narrowly escaped with the Swallow, and one more.

Published according to Order.
FINIS.

