XVI PROPOSITIONS

CONCERNING The Reign and Government of a KING. Propounded, by The Right
Honorable, Sir FRANCIS BACON, late Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND, Wherein is
showed,

1. The Power which God has given to Kings. 2. How a King ought to wear His
Crown. 3. To make Religion the Rule of Government 4. The danger in alteration
of Government. 5. The love which a King owes to His Subjects.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

London, Printed for R. Wood. 1647.

XVI. P.ROPOSITIONS Concerning THE REIGN AND GOVERNMENT OF A KING
1.

A KING is a Mortal God on Earth, unto whom the living God ha^h lent his own
Name as a great honor; but withal told him he should die like a Man, lest he
should be proud and flatter himself? That God has with his Name, imparted unto
him his Nature also.

2. Of all kind of Men, God is least beholding unto them, for He does most for
Them, and they do ordinarily least for Him.

3. A King that would not feel his Crown too heavy for him, must wear it every
day; but if he think it to light, he knows not of what metal it is made of.

4. He must make Religion the Rule of Government, and not the Balance the
Scale; for he that casts in Religion only to make the Scales even, his own
weight is contained in these Characters, Tekel uphrasin, he is found too light,
his Kingdom shall be taken from him.

5. And that King that holds not Religion the best reason of State, is void of
all Piety and Justice, the Supporters of a King.

6. He must be able to give Council himself, but not to rely thereupon; for
though happy Events justify their Councels, yet it is better, that the evil
event of good advice be rather imputed to a Subject, then a Sovereign.

7. He is the Fountain of Honor, which should not run with a wast Pipe,
least the Courtiers sell the Waters, and then (as Papists say of their Holy
Wels) to lose the virtue.

8. He is the life of the Law; not only as He is lex loquens himself, but
because he animateth the dead letter, making it active toward all his
Subjects, premio and poena.

9. A wise King must do less in altering his Laws, then he may, for new
Government is ever dangerous, it being true in the Body Politic, as in the
Corporal, that omnis subditi imitatio est periculosa; and though it be for the
better, yet it is not without a fearful apprehension; for he that changes
the Fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, thinks that there is no good Title to a
Crown, but by Conquest.

10. A King that sets to sale Seats of Justice, oppresses the People, for
he teaches his Judge to sell Justice, and precis parata precia vincitur
justitia.

11. Bounty and magnificence are virtues very regal, but a prodigal King is
nearer a Tyrant, then a Parcimonious; for store at home draws his
Contemplations abroad, but want supplyeth it felf of what is next, and many
times the next way; and herein He must be wise, and know what He may justly do.

12. That King which is not seared, is not loved, and he that is well seen in
his Craft, must as well study to be feared, as loved; yet, not loved for fear,
but feared for love.

13. Therefore, as He must always resemble Him, whose great Name He bears,
and that in manifesting the sweet influence of his mercy, over the severest
stroke of his just^ce sometimes, so in this, not to suffer a man of death to
live; for besides, that the land does mourn the restraint of justice toward
sin, does more retard the affection of love, then the extent of mercy does
inflame it, and sure where love is bestowed, fear is quite lost.

14 His greatest enemies are his flatterers, for though they ever speak on his
side, yet their words still make against him.

The love which a King owes to the weal public, should not be restrained to
any one particular, yet that his more special favor do reflect upon some
worthy ones, is somewhat necessary, because there are so few of that capacity.

16 He must have a special care of five things, if he would not have his crown
to be put upon him, Infelix felicitatis.

I. First, that simulata sanctittas be not in the Church, for that is, duplex
iniquitas. II. That inutil is equitas sit not in the Chancery, for that is,
inepta misericordia. III. That utilis iniquitas keep not the Exchequer, for
that is crudele latrocinium. IV. That fidelis timeritas be not his General,
for that will bring but seram penitentiam. V. That infidelis prudentia be not
his Secretary, for that he is anguis sub viridi herba. VI. To conclude, as he
is of the greatest Power, so He is subject to the greatest Cares, and made the
servant of His People, or else, he were without a Calling at all.

He then that honors him not [being endued with these gifts] is next an
Atheist, wanting the fear of God in His heart.


Certain remarkable Passages, touching the Power and Prerogative of a KING.
I.
THE absolute Prerogative which is in Kings, according to their private wills
and judgment, cannot be executed by any Subject; neither is it possible to give
such power by Commission, or fit to subject the people to the same, for the
King, in that he is the Substitute of God, immediately the Father of his People,
and Head of the Commonwealth, has by participation with God, and with his
Subjects, a discretion, judgment, and feeling love toward those over whom He
reigns, only proper to Himself, or to His Places and Person; who seeing he
cannot in any others infuse his wisdom, power or gifts, which God in respect of
his place and charge has enabled him withal, can neither subordinate any
other Judge to govern by that knowledge; which the King can no otherwise, then
by his known will participate unto him.

And if any such subordinate Judge shall obtain Commission, according to the
discretion of such a Judge to govern the People, that Judge is bound to think
that to be his sound discretion, which the law, in which the Kings known will
shows unto him to be that justice which he ought to administer; otherwise, he
might seem to esteem himself above the Kings Law, who will not govern by him,
or to have a power derived from other then from the King, which in the Kingdom
will administer justice contrary unto the Justice of the Land; neither can such
a Judge or Commissioner, under the Name of his Authority, shroud his own high
affection, seeing the Conscience and discretion of every man is particular and
private to himself, as the discretion of the Judge cannot be properly or
possible the discretion of the Conscience of the King, and if not his
discretion, neither the judgment that is ruled by another man's only.

Therefore, it may seem they rather desire to be Kings; then to rule the People
under the King, which will not administer Justice by Law, but by their own will.

II.
This administration in a Subject, is derogation to the Kings Prerogative, for
he administreth justice out of a private direction, being not capable of a
general direction how to use the Kings Children in pleasure, in cases of
particular respect, etc.

And to conclude, 1. Custom cannot confirm that which is any ways
unreasonable of it self.

2. Wisdom will not allow that which is many ways dangerous, and no ways
profitable.

3. Justice will not approve that Government, where it cannot be, but wrong
must be committed.

4. Neither can there be any rule by which to try it, nor means of reformation
of it.

Therefore, whosoever desires Government, must seek such a Government as he
is capable of; not such as seems to himself most easy to execute: For it is
apparent, that it is easy to him that knows not Law nor Justice, to rule as
he lists his will never wanting a power to it self; but it is safe and
blameless, both for the Judge and People, and honor to the King, that Judges
be appointed who know the Law, and that they be limited to govern according to
the Law.

Imprimatur,

J. Cranford.

FINIS.

