SPECULUM CULMERIANUM, WHERE^N All persecuting, and malicious PRIESTS May
behold the blindness of their Zeal, the shame of their Hypocricy, and the
just reward of their unsatisfied malice.

BEING An Answer to a scandalous book, called a Parish Looking-glass for
persecutors of Ministers, pretended to be writ by Richard Culmer the younger,
in defense of his father Richard Culmer, Minister of Minster in the County of
Kent, in the Isle of ^hanet, near Canterbury.

By Stephen Blaxland.

Isa. 57. v. 21. The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire, and dirt.

Isa. 10 12.13. Wherefore thus says the Lord the holy one of Israel, because
ye despise this word, and trust in oppression, and perverseness and stay
thereon.

Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling
out of a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in an instant.

Anno 1657.

To all the well affected Gentlemen in KENT.
Gentlemen,
HAving been instigated, and indeed importuned by Mr. Culmers unsufferable
abuses, and most scandalous falseties, I have undertaken this short answer,
which I hope will not be found larded with untruths, but to relish of aproved
verity. I protest I write no thing out of malice, but shall refer my self unto
your candid judgments, and rest

A servant to you all, and a lover of my Country. Stephen Blaxlan^

To the Reader.
READER,
BEfore I make any progress into my intended discourse I will declare unto the
world the reason of my undertakings, which in short, is as follows.

First in respect of the wrong, and unsufferable injury done to my deceased
father by the false and approbrious aspertions of Mr. Richard Culmer the elder,
Minister of Minster in the Isle of Thanet, the known Author of that impertinent
and shameful book, entitled, A Parish Looking glass, pretended to be writ by
his son, in defense of his (as he pretends) persecuted Father, but time shall
show Mr. Culmers falsity to the world, whilst truth (the virginity of the soul)
shall in despite of malice, like the rod of Moses, devour the rods of the
Egyptians.

Secondly, In respect of my own reputation, which Mr. Culmer has most
injuriously endeavored to demolish by several untruthes, which I shall declare
to the world without the least prejudice to truth, and I question not, but to
shake off his serpentine invectives, as St. Paul did his viper, without the
least detriment to my own conscience.

And now I shall desire the ingenious Reader, after he has seriously perpended
and weighed each particular in the balance of reason to be an equal judge, for
I must confess I have undertaken to encounter a Goliath, a man armed with
litterature (or at least ought to be) whose proud insults, can neither
terrify, nor conquer a true Israelite; The sling of Justice is better than the
sword of envy.

Thus armed with resolution, I will enter the lists, notwithstanding I
sufficiently know, that to strive with my superior, is furious, with my equal,
doubtful, with my inferior, sordid and base, with any, full of unquietness;
for indeed, as one very well says, It is a shame to resist, where it is no
honor to overcome: It was the saying of a wise man, that a man knows himself
best by his enemies, which I have found to be an approved truth, for I have
benefitted more by the serious consideration of Mr. Culmers malice, than ever I
did by his doctrine; I will only say of him, as it was said of Nero Caesar, he
was Maximus tyrannorum but minimus Doctorum, and invert that which was said of
Julius Caesar, he believed as a Pagan, but workt as a Christian, so Mr. Culmer
may be said to believe as a Christian, but to act as a Pagan, I am sorry that
his own merits enforce me to these expressions.

It was a custom amongst the Heathens, to choose their priests out of their
Philosophers, and their Kings out of their Priests; had Master Culmer lived in
those days, he must have approved himself a better proficient in learning,
than he did in making those verses of Queen Anne, which he so much boasts of in
his Book of nicknames, where he makes an E^dipthong short, Culmeriana
authoritate, and not poetica licentia: neither would I have my Reader mistake
me, and think that I am an enemy to Ministry, for I protest, I honor them
with as much fidelity, as the Israelites did Aaron the first of Priests, and
love them with as much integrity as Jonathan did David the best of Kings,
Prophets, and Priests; but when a priest shall degenerate into a Rabshecai, a
scoffer, a railer, and instead of pitying those that he pretends to be
criminalls, nick name, and revile them, then we may, like Lot, turn our backs
upon Sodom; I never read that St. Paul, St. Peter, or the rest of the Apostles
ever did so, but constantly exhorted one another, to meekness, patience, and
charity; which three virtues cover the heart of man (as Solomon did the Temple)
with gold: but when these three graces are deficient, it is an undoubted truth
that the Divine cannot be Orthodoxal; Moreover, all things in a Divine ought to
preach; his habit, his diet, nay, his whole life; he must not, like Ishmael,
have his hands against every man, and every man's hands against him, but like
Joseph forgive his brethren, and instead of punishing them for their cruelty
toward him, send them home to their father laden with provision for their
necessities; again, a Divines words ought to be Maxims, and his actions
examples, and his examples rules, and his perfections ought to consist in the
acknowledging his imperfections; for wisdom lives at the sign of humility: but
as for Mr. Culmer, he may truly say to all these forementioned virtues, as S.
Peter said when he denied our Savior; I know not the man, neither understand I
what thou say: notwithstanding, I do really believe Mr. Culmer is no enemy
to learning, neither do I believe that learning is much a friend to him, but it
may be replied, what then, the Apostles were ilitterate, 'T is truth, but
during the time of their ignorance they converted none, but when they had the
gift of tongues, and were acquainted with learning, they converted thousands;
It is said by a good Author that Josias was but eight years old when he walked
religiously before God, therefore Religion consists not in learning, but in
grace, is it not possible for him to whom nothing is impossible to make Josia's
a Scholar at eight years old: moreover it is said that the learned always put
the cause before the effect, knowledge was the cause of Josia's his Religion,
and his Religion was the effect of that cause, for he could not be zealous for
God without being taught to know there was a God, for zeal (as one says)
without learning is stark blind, and learning without discretion is pur-blind,
like Sampson without his eyes; apt to do little good, but able to do a great
deal of mischief: but I stay too long in the Porch, I will therefore conclude
with the Poet, -- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.


SPECULUM CULMERIANUM
Qui male fecit, semper aliquid praetendit. FIrst I must begin with your large
commendations; for in your Epistle Dedicatory to the Right honorable, (and I
may truly say) most worthy Colonel Gibbon, Governor of the Isle of Ierfy,
you begin very pathetically thus:

Right Honorable

Culmer. YOur Native Country (the County of Kent) has many obligations of
much due respects unto you for your valiant actions formerly, and at present
for the welfare, and safety thereof, etc.

Answer.
This is an undeniable truth, and I must confess, a person of his Honor
deserves (I speak it without a hyperboly to his worth) a larger and better
encomium than I am able to express, yet I am sorry that this Lamb should live
so near a Lion, this truth border upon an untruth, being not many lines
asunder; which is,

Culmer. And your undeserved favor, etc. has encouraged, etc. to crave your
patronage of this Apology, which the Law of filial love and duty has compelled
me to write in defense of my aged Father, whose Ministerial employment will not
give him leave to do it with his own Pen, I do unfeignedly profess it is
rather a grief then any delight to me that (upon this occasion) I am
necessetated to publish that any such Savages as are here discribed, should be
found in Kent, etc.

Answer.
Here we may find a strange Metamorphosis, the Father transformed into the
Son, and the Son into the Father, the Son must further the Fathers works, and
the Father must cherrish the Son in owning an untruth, and the more to excuse
the business, and to be thought studious you say that your Ministerial
employments will not give you leave to do it with your own Pen, when I am very
confident that you take not so much pains in your Ministerial employment, but
that you may take time enough to write a great deal more, to as little purpose,
as you have done this, which neither savours of learning, conscience, nor
modesty as shall hereafter be expressed: Suppose it be your Sons (as it is well
known it is not) he has used you, as you do your Text, for at first he calls
you Father, and afterward never mentions you, but by the name of Mr. Culmer.

As for your book, I look upon it as a very rediculous thing, wherein you seek
more your own private interest by calumniaing of others, than the discharging
of a good conscience by gently admonishing them; I will pass over the first
and second pages, and only look upon them as a preludium to your own praises,
and vain ostentations.

Culmer, page 3ly. 12ly. But I shall only instance in the persecutors of
Master Rich. Culmer, (heretofore of Magdalen College in Cambridge Master of
Arts) now Minister of Minster, in the Isle of Thanet in the County of Kent,
whose persecutors are now very few living in that Parish, but mighty, and
numerous elsewhere, especially those of the Popish, prelatical, and Cavalier
party that never saw him, because of his activenesse against their cause.

Answer.
First, for your Persecutors, I know, none of them, neither can I
experimentally say that ever I knew you persecuted, but I believe when you name
persecutors, you mean prosecutors, for indeed I know some that prosecuted you
for your unjust actions, but I know none that persecute you (as you pretend)
for your activenesse in the service of the State, or that you were ever
indemnefied more then what the State has doubly; nay, trebly requited,
therefore this, your persecuting expressions, are only to bring your former
actions into remembrance, and advance your own merits by a popular applause:
St. Paul was persecuted for the truth, but you are only prosecuted for the
contrary, he fought with beasts at Ephesus, but you make your Parish Ephesus,
and your Parishioners beasts: You likewise say that you have very few
persecutors now living in the Parish of Minster, truly, I am of your opinion,
and yet I believe you have as many there now as ever, because in your book of
Nicknames, you use so many inveterate and violent expressions against them; so
that how can you expect a Parochial affection, when you come so much short of
your Ministerial profession; can the sheep feed, when they are frightened by the
shepherd.

As for your being of Magdelin College in Cambridge, I cannot deny it, but as
for your being Mr. of Arts, I must be silent, I confess, I never heard, nor
saw your Latin Sermon, which you preached at St. Mary's, which I wonder you had
not boasted of (if there were any such thing) as well as of a few Schoolboyes
verses, page the 7 h. at the latter end; And at the latter end of the 6th. page
you say, they published Libells that you were famous in the Universitie for
football playing, but never thought to be cut out for a Mercury; Indeed that
is an undeniable truth, for ex omni ligno non fit Mercurius.

But in the latter end of the same page, you say, you gave a specimen to the
contrary in many public Arts, naming only that in Print, in the book called
[Lachrymae Canterbrigiencis,] which litter of verses are as follows: Upon
Queen Ann.
Cynthia lucifluo conjungitur aurea Phaebo.
Phoebaeo in terris conjux fuit Anna Jacobo:
Ecclepsin patitnr Phaebe: sic deficit Anna:
Phoebus in orb micat: sic splendit in urbe Jacobus
Luna praeest undis, lachrymas tulit Anna Brittannis;
Sol radiis undas siccat: splendore Jacobus.
Rich. Culmer Col. Mag.

Now let the Reader judge wherein consists the excellency of those verses,
except it be in, luna praeest undis, wherein an ae. is made short Culmeriana
authoritate; If this be all the learning you can boast of, then every Schoolboy
may pretend to be a Divine, but it may be you did it purposely to be known to
be a poor Scholar.

Now we come to your testimonials, page the 8th. where being afraid you should
want matter for your vain-glorie you request a Certificate from the Major,
Alder-men, and the inhabitants of Canterbury, which may be seen in the two last
lines of the 7th. page.

Civit. Cant. ff.

We the Major, Alder-men, and other inhabitants thereof, at the request of
Rich. Culmer, Clark, do testify that he is a man of an exemplarie life, etc.
and an able Teacher of Gods word, etc. August the 10th. Ann. Dom. 1642.

This Certificate is signed by above threescore persons, but what is this
material to your present affairs, it being above 12. years since you begged
it, since which time we have had those happy revolutions, that have quite
altered the face of things, from what they were then, neither do I believe that
you are now of the same opinion you were of then, yet these present
testimonials must be produced, more out of vain-glorie to show what you have
been, then out of policy to show what you are, as if it were impossible for you
to change your principles, when you know, Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in
illis, and this you do because the ill-affected should not point at you, but
many of those that were worst affected in those times, are best affected in
these, therefore those testimonials are not materia for your purpose.

As for the 10th. 11, 12, 13, 14. and 15. pages, they are indeed either very
scurrulous, or large encomiums of your own worth, therefore I will pass them
by, and come to the sixteenth page, where we may find in the two and twentieth
of that page, that you give a Nickname to one, and call him the five hundred
pound-man.

The party so Nicknamed was my Father, therefore I must crave leave a little
to enlarge my self.

It was very well known to all in that Island, that my Father was a man of a
quiet and peaceable spirit, one, that would not (like you, our Minister) act
the part of Tom a Bedlam, as shall be sufficiently proved, and if the Parish
since that time has been distempered, it was by example of the Priest,
therefore the less to be condemned by you; Neither was my Father ever thought
to have a spurious offspring, insomuch that he was enforced to exhaust his
livelihood from the Tap, I need not further explain my self, for I know you
very well understand me.

It is an ancient addage, de mortuis nil nisi lonum, and ignobilia sunt odia
quae ultra mortem procedunt, which saying it may well be perceived, you observe
not, for indeed you endeavor (which is a thing very unsuitable to your
profession) to scratch the dead out of their Graves, with the sharp Nails of
malice.

As for my Father, (I will speak it in defiance of your envy) he was well known
to live quietly and lovingly amongst his Neighbors, which is more than you can
boast of. And he was likewise careful in the education of his Children, not
permitting them to royot, as you do your Children, for it is very well known
that your eldest Son being drunk at Sandwich, opposed the Mayor, for which he
was sent to prison, and has bragged of his beastly behavior toward women:
And as for your youngest Son, it was very well known how often he has
attempted the abuse of several women.

By these things we may observe the good instructions, and careful education
you have given to your Children; but it may be, you suppose, that they may take
the liberty by the Laws of Nature Patrizare: Thus you that pronounce the just
judgments of God upon others that suffer by any mischance, or come to any
untimely end, will not look at home and there behold his judgments
sufficiently exemplified upon your self, in your Children.

Again, in the first line of the seventeenth page, you say that I. W. For
crying all, all, was within a short time after crushed to death with a Wagon.

Answer.
I will not deny but that it may be truth, and that Gods judgments are just,
and that he is known by them, but so known by them, that he would not have us
Triumph over other men's misfortunes; but rather when we see, or hear of them,
be truly thankful to him that the like judgments have not fallen upon us,
who have equally deserved the like, though it be his goodness to retard them.

In the fifth following line of the same page, you say, That notwithstandanding
the forementioned judgments of God, that some continued to revile you.

Answer.
If you admire at this, what reason had Moses to admire at Pharaoh, that
notwithstanding all the continuation, and experience of so many plagues did
persist in his obstinacy against the Children of Israel; God permits no
punishment to be inflicted without just desert, but I perceive that (in such
matters as these) you see but with one eye, for you only look upon the
pretended malice of the Agent, and not upon the just deserts of the patient,
St. Paul, as he was the greatest of sufferers, so he was by his own confession
the greatest of sinners, he made it no wonder that men should revile him,
because he was conscious to himself of his own sins; but you, without the least
reflection upon your self, wonder that people should revile you, remember our
blessed Savior, remember David in all his troubles, remember Job upon the
dunghill, and then you will find that these things are the Ornaments of a
Christian; but you, instead of acknowledging your own infirmities, procure
others to flatter you with the vain, and untrue praises of your own abilities;
Now let the Reader judge whether, or no your actions be any thing consonant to
the Acts of the Apostles.

Culmer. Page the eighteenth line, the twelfth: But this is an ordinary
persecution of Ministers, as now, when lately in that Isle a Drunken,
scandalous, railing Priest was ejected, there scarce came one in ten, to hear
the Godly Minister.

Answer.
Here I find that quite contrary to the rules of Divinity, you absolutely
justify one party, and condemn the other, but you know the heart of man is
deceitful above measure, who can know it? All that I can say is this, it is
pity he was so; however, his Doctrine may be good, though his life be bad,
where we cannot live by example, we must be content to live by praecept, for a
good disposition, makes a good exposition; And if God speaks to us as he did to
Balaam, by the mouth of an Ass, we must hear him, and if he will have us saved
by one that shall be damned, we must hear what he says, not look what he does.

In the twentieth page, about the four and thirtieth line, we may judge your
resolutions by your Heathenish expressions, which are Flectere si nequeo
superos, Acharonta movebo.

With that it may be the better understood by all, I will render the effect of
it in English. But if the Gods deny to please me well
In my designs, I Will work my ends by Hell.


Now Reader judge, if this expression be any way fit to be used by a Divine,
and whether, or no his Parishioners ought to credit, or follow his Doctrine
that is so Diabolical in his resolutions.

Culmer, page 33. l. 38. And to oppress Mr. Culmer, the more they minded not
the bounds of the Parish.

Answer.
Here you endeavor to tax the Parish with injustice, when you your self know
the bounds of the Parish as well as any, for the bounds are so well known, that
it is altogether needless to put the Parish to unnecessary charges, neither is
it a thing usual there abouts; but this truth is very much like the rest.

Culmer, page 24. l. 1. And besides all these apprehensions, one thing more in
point of livelihood, I thought fit to mention. That Mr. Culmer having laid out
about five pounds in demolishing the Monuments of Idolatry at Minster by
special order, according to the Act of Parliament, for their demolishing,
cannot get his money so laid out: At his first coming he often desired the
Churchwardens to do that work according to the Act, but the five hundred
pound-man being Churchwarden refused to Act.

Answer.
All this that you have declared is an absolute untruth, for my Father, whom
you (not like a Divine) wisely Nickname the five hundred pound-man, did go with
you, and the rest of the chiefest of the Parish did go upon a May day in the
morning, and took down that, which you, in your grave wisdom, thought any way
Superstitious, or Idolatrous; Insomuch that you, your self at the same instant
gave the glory to God in bringing to pass so great a Reformation, in a day,
which was set apart for a deformation: But after all this you being moved in
spirit, got the Key of the Church, and locked your self in (because none should
participate in so glorious a work) and took an occasion to quarrel with the
Kings of Israel, which were painted in the Chancel windows, which, (when the
Chief of the Parish were with you in the Church) you thought were not
Superstitious, (as indeed they were not) but it was you, that were envious,
because you very well knew that my Father (the five hundred pound-man, as your
gravity is pleased to call him) was to maintain the Chapel, now pray tell me
where was the glory to God? I am sure he cannot be glorified with envy, hatred,
and malice, for it may easily be discerned, that envy was your zeal, and that
you minded more the completion of your own wicked resolutions, than the glory
of God.

Culmer, page the 25. l. 5. And the next Sabbath day Mr. Culmer got into the
Church at the broken windows, which were left unrepaired by the five hundred
pound-man above half a year, in hope that Master Culmer should pay for all the
ruins, which came through the wilful neglect of the five hundred pounds-man
speedy reparations those windows, which belonged to him to repair as Parson,
according to the said Act of Parliament; there was not at first above ten foot
broken there.

Answer.
What reason was there that my Father should repair those demolishments which
you made contrary to Act of Parliament, when as you your self did not think
them Superstitious, therefore reason and equity will Demonstrate that what you
ruin without order, you ought to repair at at your own proper cost and
charges.

Culmer, page 25. l. 25. Yet I heard him say that he could have easily killed
them every one with his Steeletto, but he often said, he blessed God, who kept
his hands from shedding their blood, and that he admired at the goodness of
God to him, that gave him such a spirit of meekness upon such an occasion,
contrary to his natural and usual disposition in his own defense.

Answer.
I do much wonder that a man of your Coat should offer so much to disguise the
truth with the imaculations of falsehood; for it can be proved as it is Articled
against you, that you have said, That you would stand up to your own knees in
blood, and up to your Horses knees in blood, but you would have your Tithes,
and up to the ears in blood, when you have been persuaded to be reasonable.
And that it was the greatest sin that you had to answer for that you had not
sued more for your Tithes: And that you were sorry that you had not persecuted
those that pulled you out of your Pulpit, even to their very Estates; and
thought it was justifiable if you had murdered them all in the place, and said
that you had that about you that would easily have done it, meaning a Dagger,
and other things.

Here you show your zeal, your humility, your meekness, your love, and your
charity: God bless every flock from such a shepherd.

Culmer page 27. l. 29. Afterward two Justices did sit upon the Riot, and the
Riotors were bound over to the Sessions, and there indicted and found guilty,
and fined each of them forty shillings, which they received again from their
good Masters and Dames.

Answer.
That the Rioters were indicted and found guilty, and fined forty shillings a
man, is truth: but that (as you most falsely suggest) they received their moneys
again from their good Masters and Dames, as you call them, is altogether false:
but Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem: Testadiu:

What Is bred in the bone will never off of the flesh.

Culmer, page 29. l. 4. And especially, two Justices of Peace, and Deputy
Lieutenants came with their Families constantly about two years to hear Mr.
Culmer Preach.

Answer.
Here you may take notice of your own vainglory, thinking to advance your
abillities in preaching, by divulging, what Eminent men came to hear you, when
as, all, was but two. (Mr. Paromour, and Mr. Foach. (Though you seem to divide
them into many: Remember, who says, I will scatter the proud in the
imagination of his heart: As for those beastly lines which follow in the same
page I will omit, being fitting to be expressed only by such a mouth as your own.

Culmer, page 29. l. 12. And this wife of the five hundred pound-man, told her
husband that she edified most by Master Culmers Ministry, and desired him to
carry her about to no other Parishes, etc.

Answer.
I do much wonder to what intent you should speak this, except it be (as indeed
it is your constant practice) to prove your self vainglorious; but they that
build their designs (as you do) upon the Maxims of falsehood must expect, as
you may, the just rewards, of their merits, for as for my Mothers expressions
to my Father, which you say, were, as is bf ore mentioned, I am confident and
very certain is altogether untrue.

Culmer, page the 33. l. 29. And Master Culmer indicted the Scout for barring a
common sheep-way, and had a verdict against him, etc.

Answer.
It Is truth you did (to your credit be it spoken) indict the Gentleman, which
you out of a wonderful deal of discretion) Nickname the Scout, and had a
verdict (such an one as it was) against him, but notwithstanding, your gravity,
dare not ride that way without his permission, except it be on a Sunday morning
early, and when you came home from London from prosecuting your Neighbors. As
for procuring five men to be his assistants in the Exchequer, as you allege
in the same page, is altogether false, for he neither persuaded, nor procured
them: As for the Articles you there speak of, there was none exhibited against
you, but what may be sufficiently proved.

Culmer, page 34. l. 15. This man was lately brought in to be Clark of the
Parish, for his good service done against Master Culmer many ways, etc.

Answer.
It is false that this man (who you are wisely pleased to Nickname the
Trumpetter) was put in by the faction; But in this you discover your exquisite
malice, in endeavoring to make all the Parish assistants and maintainers of
this man's actions, which your own conscience if you dare examine it,) informs
you to be untrue; For it is very well known that the Parish abounds with many
inhabitants now (the more their misery in respect of so troublesome a Minister)
that were not then, nor had any cognizance of the difference between you and
your Parishioners; For my own part, I was no inhabitant at the same time when
you, and the Ryotors fell out, but the greatest cause that the Parishioners had
to put him in Clark, was, charity, (which is, indeed a stranger to you) in
respect he was aged, and lame, and not in a capacity of relieving himself, and
not be a charge, and trouble to the Parish.

Culmer, page 34. l. 40. Who is a profane scoffer at the Communicants, calling
them Master Culmers Disciples.

Answer.
In respect that I know you mean me, I shall in short answer for my self, and
let the World know what an undeserving scandal you have cast upon me; I thank
God I have been, and am (though not by you) better principled in my Religion
thn to be a Profane so offer, as you term me, at holy Ordinances, neither did
I, as you falsely suggest in dirision, call them your Disciples, for indeed I
rather will pity, than laugh at them knowing what a bad, and Hypocritical
Master they have; As for the Chancel windows you make mention of, I confess,
I did not repair them till I was absolutely informed whether I had right to a
Pew, which I built in the Chancel; which your Son (learning humility of his
Father) broke down, saying, that he was placed there by order, but when I knew
that the right lay in me, you very well know I mended them according to the
time limited by the Justice.

Culmer, page 35. l. 21. But they need not seek revenge further than their own
avenging themselves by their calumnies and false accusations and railings
against Mr. Culmer.

Answer.
I never knew any that sought revenge against you, except you account it
revenge, for people to seek for right in their own cause; neither did any
calumniate you, except you look upon truth, as a calumny, because your civil,
or (to speak truth) your uncivil deportments and misdemeanors deserved to be
taken notice of: and whereas you declare that we combine to put you to charges
in the Law, you are very much mistaken, for you know that your Tithes were
never denied you, for you sued me, and the rest before we denied payment, and
have put us to unjust charges, as the success of your suit will manifest.

Culmer, page the 35. l. 25. But it seems nothing will satisfy their malice
and rage, but his purses bleeding to death by taking away his means of
livelihood and subsistence by his ejection, or removeal from his place and
station.

Answer.
If we endeavor your removeal, it is because you endeavor our disquiet, and
instead of making peace amongst us, you endeavor to bring us into confusion;
Neither is your Ministerial employment all your livelihood, for we very well
know that you have (except you have spent it in Law) 120 pounds per annum,
besides your Land in Ireland, but because you will make your condition to be
the more commiserated, you beggar it by an untruth, and say, we go about to
take away your livelihood and subsistence, but I will not trouble my self with
any more of your impertinences, only give a glance upon the 37th. page.

Culmer, page 37. l. 2. It is a sure sign commonly, that a Minister is good
when all the Parish is against him; and commonly when a whole Parish loves a
Minister, and speaks well of him, he is stark naught.

Answer.
This indeed is a prime sentence, and very worth the taking notice of, for here
you say that you must upon necessity be very good, because your Parishioners
hate you, (as indeed the most part do: (And other Reverend Divines (not far
from you) because they are generally beloved of their Parishioners, are stark
naught: I hope some of them will give you no thanks for this expression, but
indeed this is something like your Flectere si nequeo superos, acharonta movebo.

Moreover, by this you condemn all the Apostles, who found love and respect
from Christians wheresoever they came; but you, no where; Then again, you
condemn the Fathers, for I never read but that Augustine was very well beloved,
and his death very much lamented by his Parishioners at Hipo, where he was
Minister; And Chrisistome at Constantinople, and Barnard, Jerome, and the rest
at their respective Parishes, how happy are you, (nay, and are like to continue
so) that all your Parish hate you? neither dare we believe that you will give
us cause to do otherwise; for if we should, we should make our selves guilty of
your being stark naught, so that now we may say (and you may be proud of it if
you please) Good Master Culmer.

Thus having answered to all, or most part of your most material vilifications,
give me leave to desire you to look upon a place of Scripture, which I believe
you either never saw, or very little minded; It is the third of Timothy,
beginning at the second verse, where we shall be informed what a true Minister
ought to be, and if you can approve your self to be so, then let me, and others
be condemned for our disrespects.

Verse the second, a Bishop, or Minister must be blameless, the Husband of one
Wife: vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to Hospitality; apt to Teach.

Verse the third, not given to Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre,
but patient, not a brawser not coveteous; One that rules well his own house,
having his Children in subjection with all gravity.

Verse the sixth, not a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into
the condemnation of the Devil.

Verse the seventh, moreover, he must have a good report of them that are
without, least he fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil.

Verse eight, he must be grave, not double tongued.

Now Master Culmer, if you can prove your self to be any of all these, except
it be the Husband of one Wife, then go on, and hold the mystery of faith in a
pure conscience, and follow the prescriptions of your Lord and Master, who
says, Learn of me, for I am meek, and endeavor to keep the Unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace, remember what he said to St. Peter, Peter, Peter, love
thou me, feed my Sheep, remember the charge that he gave to his Disciples,
Preach to all Nations, unity, peace and concord, do you the same to your
Parishioners, and if it be your Parishioners weakness to offend, let it be
your goodness to forgive, so shall you be sure to purchase a good report here,
and a happy enjoyment hereafter.

But before I conclude, let me entreat you not to misconstrue what I have writ,
but prove (when you have read) a Dove, without gall, and as I hope you will
read without prejudice, so I protest, I have not writ one Syllable out of
malice, or envy, but with a serene and calm spirit, and I hope what I have writ
will not procure me the name of a busie-bodie, in respect I have not meddled
with any man's business but my own, for indeed it is a very great argument,
that he which shuffles himself into other men's business, has little to do of
his own. Moreover, as one very well says, a busie-bodie talks without credit,
lives without love, dies without tears, or pity, only some may say 'twas
pity he died no sooner.

And as I have writ nothing to boast of, so I hope I have writ nothing to blush
at, except it be the reiteration of your Invectives, which indeed will prove
foul spots in your reputation, except you wipe them off by a discreet
acknowledgement, for a crime timely acknowledged is half expiated, and I hope
you will not so much abuse your discretion as to justify that, which the World
condemns; give me leave to furnish you with that advice, which I never had
from you, which is, speak evil of no man; do good to all: let not the Serpent
of your envy, devour the innocent Dove of your charity, let your life teach us
to die, and if the World revile you without a cause, remember our Savior; or
if you have denied our Savior, either by the omission of those things, which
are necessary for salvation, or by the Commission of those things that are
inducements to destruction, do as Peter did, go out and weep bitterly, so
shall your bitter tears be sweetened with a plentiful remission, and our
Savior (as Noah did his Dove) will take you into the Arc of his mercy.

Sir, Let me entreat you not to do to me as the Jews did to our Savior,
laugh me to scorn for what I have spoken, say not, nay think not, that I have
writ any thing out of vain glory, or to argue my self discreet above my
Neighbors, but rather believe that I have told you these things out of the
humilli^ie of my spirit, desiring you to observe what I have writ, or to write
me better things for my observation.

It is reported that the Lion (the King of beasts) is directed to his Prey by a
Jacka, which is a very small beast, yet so great for the Lions benefit, that
his livelihood depends upon him; Sir, I speak this, because (knowing my self
inferior to you.) I have presumed to hunt out these observations, and lay them
before you, for though the Lion has the better judgment to choose his Prey, and
the better stomach to digest it, yet the Jacka has the better sent.

Neither despise me because I am many degrees lower in my judgment then your
self; but know, that though you are like Saul, higher by the head and shoulders
then the rest, yet I will endeavor (like short legged Zacheus) to get up into
a Tree but I will see my Savior.

Luther says, that a man lives forty years before he knows himself to be a
Fool, and by that time he sees his folly he dies: I am of Luthers opinion,
and shall only add this, that though we do know our selves to be fools at
forty years old, yet we are ashamed (or at least unwilling) to confess it at
threescore.

To conclude all, I shall desire Mr. Culmer, seriously to consider ^^d ruminate
upon What I have express in my preceding answer, and if he conceives I have
injured him by my objections, let him justify himself by his answer, or prove
himself guilty by his silence.

FINIS.

