BLOODY NEVVES FROM Bedford-Shire: Concerning the late Fights on Sunday and
Monday last, between the Forces under the Command of the Duke of Buckingham,
and the Forces commanded by Sir Michael Lievesey, and Col. Skroop.

LIKEWISE The number that were slain, wounded, and taken prisoners, and the
full particulars of each days action. With the Declaration of the Counties of
Buckingham, Bedford, and Hartford-shire, concerning the Duke of Buckinghams
taking up of Arms for the KING, and his further proceedings concerning his
Majesty.

Together with bloody News from Penbrook and Colchester, communicating the
proceedings of Col. John Poyer, Col. Horton, the Lord General Fairfax, and Sir
Charles Lucas.

Printed at London, to prevent misinformation, 1648.

THE DECLARATION OF The Counties of Hartford, Buckingham, and Bedfordshire,
concerning the Duke of Buckingham his raising of new Forces.
Honored Sir,
Upon the Duke of Buckinghams raising of new forces about Kingston, Iver,
Uxbridge and other places, the well-affected in those parts and other Towns
adjacent, had several meetings, and after some debate and consultation
thereupon they unanimously declared 'and jointly resolved, That they would
enter into an Engagement, to raise new forces, for the defense, safety, and
preservation of those counties of Hartford, Bedford, and Buckingham, and to
oppse all forces whatsoever, that should endeavor the obstructing the peace
thereof; and thereupon resolved to make Proclamation at several Market-townes
within the said Counties, to stir up the hearts of the People to join with them
in this their Engagement, for the defense of King, Parliament, and Kingdom,
against the forces now raised under the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of
Holland, whose pretense and designs tends only to the involving of this
Kingdom in a more bloody and desparate War.

Yesterday we received intelligence of the enemies being about St. Albanes,
their number consisting of about six hundred Horse and Foot; from thence we
received information that about one of the clock they marched toward Lewton in
Bedford-shire, and from thence they took their circumference toward Bedford
town, not daring to stay long in a place, by reason of the close pursuit of the
Parliaments Forces, for they were no sooner marched out of Newton, but certain
Scouts belonging to Sir Michael Lievesey entered the town, took six troopers who
were drinking at the sign of the Princes Arms, and upon their entering into the
Cham^er where these Troopers were, found them very merry and drinking of
Healths, with their swords drawn, and stuck into the Sealing of the Chamber,
their Pistols lying by them, and their Hats upon the Table; but by reason of
their sudden surprizall, they soon left their quaffing and drinking, and were
forced to cry out (in the chief of their jollity) for mercy, and so yielded
themselves prisoners.

Upon their advance toward Bedford, Sir Michael Lievesey's Forlorn of Horse
fell upon the Dukes Rearguard within two miles of Newton Towns-end, and after
the exchange of several Pistols, and a very hot dispute, the Enemy were forced
to retreat with the loss of fifteen men, six slain, and nine wounded, who were
taken prisoners: All this were performed with the loss of five men.

The Parliaments Forces are now in pursuit of them toward Bedford, and Col-
Skroop with his Regiment of Horse are now joined with Sir Michael Lieveseyes
Forces, which makes a very considerable party, and able to subdue a far greater
power then before spoken of.

This day a party of Major Gibbons Troop, who were in close pursuit of the
Enemy, fell upon some scattering Forces of the Lord Dukes in the town of
Marston, a Village some fourteen miles distant from Newton, in the Road toward
Cambridg, and after a sharp conflict took 8 or 9 prisoners, and killed three of
them, the rest made good their retreat toward Bedford. The well-affected of
this County who assembled themselves together in a posture of War, have secured
Hatfield house belonging to the Earl of Salisbury, to prevent the Designs of
the Enemy, and have placed a guard of Musketeers therein.

We expect a sudden Engagement in these parts, between the Cavaliers and the
Parliamentiers, but this County, and others adjacent, have declared, That they
will hazard their lives and fortunes for the defense of King, Parliament, and
Kingdom, against all opposition whatsiever.

From Pembroke we have received intelligence of the proceedings of Lieu. Genesis
Cromwell; the particulars whereof I shall refer you to the enclosed paper.

Worthy Sir, We have made several attempts against the town, and stormed the
walls in two or three places, fought with the enemy in the town, worsted them,
and beat them up to the Castle Walls, doing great execution throughout the town,
and killing near upon one hundred of the enemy in the pursuit. But a Major of
Lieutenant General Cromwels not following with the Reserve of Pikes and
Musketeers, according to order, Major General Laughorn came in the Rear of
them with a party of Horse, and forced them to quit the town, out of which they
were driven, and about 30 of our men killed, some few wounded, the rest made
good their retreat.

Of the enemies side it is supposed their loss were as many more, as appears
by the confession of diverse who have since disserted that service, and come in
to the Lieut. General.

In this conflict Col. Horton behaved himself with much gallantry, and Col.
Okeyes Dragoones did exceeding good service, who pursued the enemy almost to
the very walls, and made good their retreat with very little loss.

Our Batteries are now finished, and our Ordnance planted against the Town and
Castle, and have made several Breaches, and the Council of War have resolved
to storm it again.

The reason why the siege continues so long is the want of some great Guns and
Mortar-Pieces, which came not until within these few days down Severne, the
wind having been long opposite to them.

Capt. Flower of Col. Deanes Regiment was lately wounded upon a storm, and
Major Grigs Lieutenant and Ensign slain, Captain Burges is wounded and very
sick.

All the insurrections about you (I believe will not make us yield any other
conditions then mercy to those within, and in case before we have done, they
chance to get never so great and impregnable an Army, they will give us leave to
have one bout with them before we be disbanded, we that are here do not intend
to give all lost.

The Lieutenant General is alive and in health, and willing to fight for the
liberties of England, as ever he did formerly.

Tuesday last we gave the Town another strong allarum, 120. of Poyers men laid
down their Arms, vowing never to take them up again, but by the importunity of
Poyer and Laughorn, telling them, if relief came not within four days, they
would yield, and they should hang them, by which means they engaged again. We
are informed, that they have not provisions for fourteen days: we expect
every day that most of them come to us through want: they only have a little
rain water and Biscuit left: But its still feared, that Poyer and Laughorn, when
they can hold out the Town no longer will betake themselves to the Castle, and
leave the rest to mercy: if we get the Town, we doubt not to carry the Castle
suddenly.

Our Morter-pieces have played hard against the town and done great execution,
and has batterd down many houses, and killed at the least 30. of the Enemy, as
appears by the confession of two of Poyers men who came over the walls to us.

From the Leaguer before Penbroke, July 6. 1648.
Postscript.
SIR,
Upon the close of these papers, we received an Express from Colchester, which
intimates, That upon Friday last the Forces in the town displaid their great
Ordnance, which did something annoy the Generals men at the works, whereupon
the great Ordnance played against the town, and fetched down the Battlements of
several steeples, doing great execution. The Enemy made a salley out, but were
forced to retreat with great loss. Sir, by the next, I doubt not but to give
you a speedy account of the chief Occurrences in these parts, and remain

Your devoted Servant, J. Villers.
Hartford 10. July, 1648.
FINIS.

