The Storming of ANTICHRIST, In his two last and strongest GARRISONS; Of
Compulsion of CONSCIENCE, and Infants BAPTISM.

Wherein is set down a way and manner for Church constitution; together with
marks to know right constituted Churches, from all other societies in the
world. Also the cruelty inequality and injustice of compulsion for conscience,
by 29. Arguments is opened; with an answer to 26. Objections brought for the
same. Also 12. Arguments against the baptizing of infants; with an answer to
26. Objections brought for the same. Wherein is displayed to the view of all,
from the testimonies of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels; the mischiefs,
uncertainties, novelties, and absudities that do attend the same. Wherein is
answered the most valid arguments brought by St. Martial, in his Sermon
preached in the Abbey Church at Westminster, for the defense hereof. With an
answer to Mr. Blake his Arguments, in his Book called Birth-priviledge; and to
the arguments of diverse others. As also a Catechism, wherein is clearly
opened the doctrine of Baptism, together with a resolution of diverse questions
and cases of conscience, about Baptism.

Written by Chapter Blackwood, out of his earnest desire he has to a through
Reformation, having formerly seen the mischiefs of half Reformations.

Matthew. 13.30. Let both grow together until the Harvest.

Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.

Quod si quando obstructi sint veritatis canales vel turbidi fluant, hoc est
Episcopi and Pastores corrupt doceant, recurrendum tunc sit ad primam originem
and traditionem Apostolicam in sacris Scripturis traditam ut inde surgat actus
nostri ratio. Cypr. Epist ad Pomp. cont. Epist. Steph. Episc. Romani.

Printed Anno 1644. Being one of those years, wherein ANTICHRIST threatened the
storming of the CHVRCHES.

Faults escaped.
REader, I shall desire thee to correct these faults which hinder the sense,
and so often as the sense is interrupted, to have recourse hereto; the Author
being for the most part absent, could not oversee the Press, so that many
faults have escaped, full sore against the Authors mind.

In the I. Part.

FOr officers and read offerers and, page 5. successive for succession, page 6.
terminis convertabiles for termini convertibiles, page 8. fitter read sifted,
p. 12. exceeding r. proceeding, p. 17. excommunication r. excommunicatum, ibid,
can approve r. cannot approve, p. 19. for do it r. do it, but quaere hereof p.
23. gilded r. guided, p. 24. just solemn r. most solemn, p. 25. worshipping r.
worship, p, 27. almost r. utmost, ibid. worship a glorious, r. promote a
glorious, p. 33. most whereof r. some whereof, ibid.

In the II. Part.

ARe gathered read being gathered, page 4. thirdly to belong to Christ etc. it
was a Marginall note, and should have come in the answer next thereto in the
third place, p. 5. from Judaea r. for, p. 6. preach r. reach, p. 6. the Greek
word only signifies read, r. so the Greek word, etc. for Christ r. Cyrus, p. 8.
for imitation r. initiation, p. 9. that in a state r. that were in a state, p.
12. verbo ecclesiae baptismo r. vero ecclesiae baptismo in the margent, p. 13.
for they are r. for there are, p. 14. others in infants r. others in future, p.
16. baptize destroys r. baptism destroys, p, 17. imitation r. initiation, p,
18. and sealed r. or sealed, p. 19. 5. in the course r. 4. in the course, p.
21. (...) r. (...) p. 24. Cothians, r. Corinthians, p. 26. the Canons r. these
Canons, p. 27. (...) r. (...) page 28. married r. unmaried, p. 29. Collegio r.
Collegae, p. 30. were the r. were then, p. 36. suchnesse r. suchnesse of
condition, p. 38. (...) for (...) p. 39 mark seal r. mark set, p. 41. blood of
marriage, r. bond of marriage, p. 44. Esa. 16.17. r. Esa. 60, 17. p. 45. blot out
the 2 answer to object. the 15. p. 47. which was a mistake through have. Our
pertakers r. once pertakers, p. 52. over commanded, r. once commanded, ibid.
for allege r. some allege, p. 53. express receiving r. express reviving, p.
54. the promises r. the premises, p. 56. I know most that, r. I know many that,
p. 57. line 26. circumcision of circumcision r. covenant of circumcision, p.
61. such a worship r. Mass, p. 62. With some mis-spellings and misaccenting
here and there, which I desire the favorable Reader to correct.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
LE^st that proverb should be turned upon me, Prove. 26.17. He that medleth
with strife belonging not to him, is like one that takes a Dog by the ear:
The Reader may understand, that I entered not upon this controversy without a
sufficient call, the which was this: There being a Sermon preached at
Cranbrooke in Kent, by Mr. Francis Cornewell, against Paedobaptisme, therein
was by him asserted, that it was an Antichristian Innovation, a humane
Tradition, and that it had neither precept, nor example, nor yet true deduction
from the Word; or words to the like effect. Diverse of the Ministers
thereabouts; (Some whereof were present, and heard him) being much offended
hereat (my self mean time being silent on both sides) agreed together, that
we should in our private studies examine the question, and at our next meeting,
which was within a fortnight, bring our collections according as we found it;
according to which agreement, I studying the question at large, found that it
was a humane Tradition, and that it contained more evil in it then ever I
could have imagined; according to our agreement, I brought in my arguments
against infants baptism, nothing being brought in the defense thereof; the
Ministers being hindered through forgetfulness, and interruption of business
as they said. The Collections being then and there read, a Reverend brother
stood up in the name of the rest, who spoke to this Effect. That they sought
for truth rather then for victory; and therefore he desired that the arguments
might be left with one of them, that so they might be examined; whereunto all
the rest of the Ministres, then and there present, did accord; the arguments
having lain five weeks, and seeing no answer of any kind given to them, I sent
for them home, and with some additions transcribed them for the Press.

I am conscious of mine own inability herein, especially in this learned age,
but partly knowing that it is the Lords manner of working, to choose the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty, and things that are not, to bring to naught
things that are, that all the glory may be his, 1 Cor. 27, 28. and partly being
convinced of the uprightness of the cause I maintain, being thereunto led by a
clear light, though not favored by times, nor accompanied with any temporal
ends that I know of: I have adventured for the satisfaction of doubting
consciences, to publish these my thoughts; what I have cited out of Antiquity,
I have done it in sincerity as in the sight of my conscience. If in any thing
else there be a mistake, let the reader consider in what untrodden paths our
way lies.

I was not so incogitant as not to forethink, that the Cross of Christ was
like to attend the confession of this tenent, for I well foresaw it, but the
evidence of truth shining clear unto me, the Lord taught me not to consult with
flesh and blood: I know it will be no little guilt at the day of Christ for the
gaining earthly goods, and escaping temporal hazards, to wincke at light for
fear of convincement, nor will then a Scholasticke frivolous distinction, nor
a Logical fallacye, stop the mouth of that Conscience from barking, which now
thereby is layen to sleep.

There are diverse things alleged against this tenent, or tenants;

1 Antiquity; To which I answer, infants baptism is ancient, but nothing near
so ancient as the world is borne in hand, the name of it is not in the world in
the Apostles time nor many years after.

Was not Episcopacie, giving the Lords supper to infants, ancient; putting away
wives was ancient, but from the beginning it was not so, those things which
have not been in force from the beginning, cannot be in force by succession of
time.

2 The fewness of those that defend this: I answer, its true: But,

1 Truth has often been locked up in the breast of few, who in competition of
voices could not make their party good. In the first Nicene Counsel,
Athanasius almost alone did oppose the Arguments of the Arrians, Mort. de
council. author lib. 4. cap. 8. page 361. Constantine the Arrian the son of
Constantine, did upbraid the orthodox, that Athanasius with four or five more
troubled the peace of all the world, to whom Liberius Bishop of Rome, said; The
word of faith is not diminished by my alonenesse: Theodoret lib. 2. hist.
Eccle. cap. 16. whereby we may see the uncertainty of stablishing Religion by
plurality of votes.

2. T^ere are but few that will examine things, when times and preferment stand
thwart; few there were that stood against Nebuchadnezzars Decree: Where losses
are on the one hand, and sufferings on the other few will examine in such
cases, not one of many will reason the matter with his own conscience, and of
those that do reason, not one of many will suffer conscience to speak out, and
of those that do suffer conscience to speak what it can, not one of many, but
he stifles conscience with a distinction.

The testimony of a few that are not blinded with temporal ends, but swim
painfully against the stream, is not to be slighted.

3 Might not the same things seven years ago have been alleged against the
Prelacie, Common prayer Book, few opposed these; Its an hard thing to get an
open heart to receive truths, when Magistrates are opposite, and the receiving
hereof, shall expose our selves and families to want and misery.

3 The universality of those that defend infant baptism, both churches and
learned men; Though many of them have defended it, as Luther, Calvin, etc. Yet
there have been many that have opposed it, who have not wanted learning to
defend their cause. For churches I shall hereafter show how they have erred. I
will now give one instance, viz: Their mistake in the matter of the church, for
so many hundred years, taking mixed multitudes for the matter thereof, when the
Scripture makes Saints in profession the matter thereof. Baptism being
appointed of Christ, for differencing the matter of the church from all other
societies, surely a right baptism failing, in respect of the subject, a right
matter must needs fail; these two errors like Hypocrates Twins, were borne at
the same time, and will dye together.

Now that the Saints are the matter of the church, peruse these places: 1 Cor.
1.2. To the church which is at Corinthus, Sanctified in Christ Jesus and called
to be Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. God is not the God of confusion but of order, as in
all the churches of the Saints. We see, All the churches consisted of Saints,
Gal. 1.22. I was unknown to the churches of Judea, which were in Christ, 1
These. 2.14. You became followers of the churches of God, which in Judea are in
Christ Jesus, 1 These. 1.1. Paul and Silvanus, unto the church of the
Tessalonians, which is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ. We see
what persons were churches, even such as were deemed to be in Christ and in
God. 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many are one bread, and one body; Now how can
carnal and civil men make one bread and one body with the Saints.

Apoc. 1.20, 12. The Seven churches of Asia are called seven golden
candlesticks, which shows what kind of matter the churches ought to consist
of.

In a word to this objction of Churches, I will only oppose the calve worship
in Israel, that continued 200. years backed with authority, and the many
idolatries and corruptions, that were universally upon every v^sible church in
Antichrists Apostasy. And for learned men, I oppose the learned Fathers for the
first 300. years, or near upon, not regarding the ^^thority of following times
herein.

The fourth thing objected, is that there are so many godly men among ^s, that
have suffered so much in the days of the Prelacy, for standing out against
them; and these are contrary minded, both those in the Synod, and others out of
it.

Ans. 1. The examples of the holiest men, are not rules for worship or
conscience, further then they follow the Scriptures; Chrysostom says, there
is more heed to be given to the Scriptures, then to the voice of Angels.

2 Godly men through slavish fears of poverty, disgrace, etc. may be slow in
receiving convinceable truths.

3 One thing that may hinder godly men from receiving truths, may be the
diminution of their own repute, when they have formerly taught many glorious
truths, and now they must come to be ashamed of their setting their posts
against Gods posts. Pezelius in his book of the Sacrament (if my memory fail me
not, I having not the book by) says; That when none from Franckford Mart,
brought Calvin's Institutions to Luther, and after asked him what he thought of
it? He answered, Profecto non inepte hic Author dixit. Yet would he not recant
what he had said, lest the truth of all his doctrine should be called in
question; but secretly as I have heard, communicated his mistakes to Melancton.

4 Many godly men (especially those of the Synod) have had little time to study
this controversy, being overburthened in their daily conferences, and weekly
preachings, and the controversy was but newly begun to be inquired into, in
the beginning of their sitting.

5 These godly men, nor any other godly men in the world, that I ever heard of,
suffered any thing for the defense of this point. But many have suffered for
protesting against it, and those of Gods dear children. And this I am
persuaded, were times now, or should they be hereafter, against Infants
baptism, there is hardly that person to be found, that would lose a Living,
much less his life, for the defense hereof. And yet I doubt not, but many
persons who hold the same, in defense of a plain and clear truth, would not
spare to sacrifice livings, credit, life, and all for Jesus Christ. For when a
person is put upon losing some dear enjoyment, and suffering some great
hardship, a man will not go a jot further then he has clear light, nay in
point of danger the flesh seeks to wind out it self all that it can; So that
if there be not a plain command from God, a man will not suffer.

5 Its objected we know not what we would have, neither do the Reformers know
what we desire?

Answ. The desires of all I know not, but my own desires, and the desires of
diverse of Gods Saints, I shall propose, in all humility to be considered of;
which may be considered under these par^iculars.

1 We desire pure worship; that we may have wherewith to answer the conscience,
when it questions who has required these things a^ your hands? Esa. 1. We know
how hot the jealousy of God is in case of strange fire, as we see in the case
of Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10.1.

2 We desire that it may be enquired into, whether the division of Assemblies,
which was in use in the time of the first Nicene Council (and how long before
I cannot tell, probably thought to have continued from the Apostles time)
wherein congregations were divided into three sorts. 1. (...) Hearers, 2. (...)
persons catechized, or fitted for membership. 3. (...) Officers and
Communicants; be not suitable to the Scriptures, and a practice seriously to be
thought of in these times of Reformation,

That this was the manner of dividing Congregations, we see, council. Nicen.
can. 14. de catechumenis la^sis. council. Ancyran. canon 6. de his qui timore
ritus Gentilium peregeruat. See the same more fully, canon 4 de his qui
Gentilitatis ritus aliquid peregerunt. In which Canons, Assemblies were divided
into Hearers, Catechumeni, and Communicants.

1 Hearers; and the necessity of the times (did it not agree with the Word and
the ancient Council, as it does clearly) require one rank of persons to be only
hearers, what are the whole rabble of ignorants, drunkards, swarers, worldlings,
fit to be, save hearers? and these are far the greater number; nor will a
little stupifactive divinity, in taking them and theirs to baptism, and keeping
them off from the supper, promote them to a higher rank.

2 Catechumeni; These were persons of whom there was some good hope that they
would embrace Christianity in the truth and power, who thereupon were
instructed in the principles of christian Religion, before they were baptized.
Cypr. l. de bapt. haeret. says, If any of the catech^meni shall be slain for
the conf^ssion of the name of Christ, before he be baptized; it hurts him not
that he was not dipped in water, because such an one is baptized with the most
glorious and principal baptism of blood, of which Christ said, I have another
baptism. Hence there was an Officer in the ancient church, who was called a
Catechist, whose Office was to prepare persons for the receiving of baptism
and the supper, and for other duties. Such an one was Origin at Alexandria,
Eus. l. 6. c. 12. who seeing the burden to be too great for himself alone,
took in one Heraclus to be a fellow helper with him, and this Office was
according to Gal. 6.6. (...), etc. Let him that is cat^chised, make him that
catechiseth partake in all his goods.

3 Offerers or Communicants, who being once taken in by baptism, remained in
full communion, till they were cut off by death or censures.

The third thing we desire, is purity in constitution of Religion.

1 We desire not a reformation of the old, which seems to be false for these
two reasons.

1 Because of the universal defection of Antichrist, whereby all Ordinances,
Officers, and Constitutions of Jesus Christ were put out of place, and new ones
come in their stead: In stead of Pastors, Elders, Teachers, Deacons, etc. there
has come in Diocesan Bishops, Priests, Archdeacons, Deans, Prebends,
Churchwardens, Sidemen: Instead of preaching and prayer; Mattens and Even-song
and Lyturgies, of I know not how many sorts.

2 Because the matter of the Church has been so erroneous, that suppose the
power of all Ordinances and Keys in a time ot universal defection, should
resolve it self radically into the Church? Yet there being not any Church
right for matter, which is part of the Essence; this power could not resolve it
self radically into a Church: And therefore if it be any where on earth (as
doubtless it is) t must needs be in believers, who joining themselves together
in Assemblies, may stir up and take again that power which was committed to
the Churches, and after cheated away by Antichrist.

If Idolatry, will worship, false matter, can un-church Churches, then
doubtless all the Churches so overshadowed by an Antichristian veil, have
ceased to be Churches, and if neither Idolaters, will worship, nor false
matter, singularly, nor collectively, do unchurch Churches; then the Churches
under the Papacy, may perhaps be found to continue true Churches to this day,
who have had a successive, though not of preached doctrines, yet of persons,
such as they were; which succession has been like a ship which the longer it
went to Sea, the fuller it was of leakes. Yet if any please they may querie
further of the two last branches.

2 We desire a setting up of constitutions according to the Scripture; or in
plain terms, to have a Church described by such notes that cannot be applied
to any other society in the world, the taking away of one of which, destroys
the essence of the Church. That so Gods people may know how to recollect
themselves by these signs, as Captains in war use by military signs; to
recollect their routed and scattered forces. Only we must consider by way of
premise, that which Zwinglius long ago observed, that there are but two sorts
of Churches mentioned in Scrip ure.

1 Catholic, comprehending all the elect or body of Christ, borne or unborne,
which were purchased with Christ's blood; Ephesians. 5.25. Many men dream of a
Catholic visible Church: Jews and Gentiles are taken into one body, Ephesians.
2.14. But not in respect of ministerial dispensation, but of mystical union.
The Fathers were wont to call the Church Catholic, in opposition to Heretics;
and in opposition to the Churches formerly closed up in Judaea, but not
dreaming of any such united visible body here upon earth, also in respect that
all believers had one and the same faith. If all the Churches in a Nation make
one body National, and all bodies National make one body Catholic, then must
there be a suitable soul to animate this body; but this cannot be Christ nor his
spirit, therefore must it be Antichrist; who has overshadowed the whole world,
under the cloud of a visible catholic Church.

2 Particular church or churches; which is no other then a company of Saints in
profession, explicitly or implicitly consenting together, to worship God in
the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, and all other duties of Religion.

Now whereas there is mention made of churches in some particular men's houses,
as in the houses of Philemon, Aquila, and others; I suppose the churches in
those houses were no distinct kind of churches, from those that were named in
Towns and Cities; but they were so called, because the brethren did meet to
worship God in these principal men's houses, and because its like there were
diverse believers in those houses. When the Apostles came to this or that City,
we must not think that multitudes were converted at once, but now one and then
one; so that often the constituted churches were so small, that they could well
meet together in one place, in one private house.

Now whereas some others have labored to find a Presbyteriall church, in no
place in all the New Testament, are the Elders or Presbytery clearly so called;
though many have labored with all their power, herein to find it.

Much less is there any shadow of a parochial church, but it has been
brought in by Antichrist of late days: Instead of a Parhagiall church
consisting of Saints, Antichrist has brought in a Parochial church,
consisting of a multitude, meaning the cohabiting multitude.

These things being thus premised, we will set down these signs of a Church,
as they do in order of nature present themselves; These are six, the three
former necessary to the being; the three latter, to the well-being of a church.

The first is a right matter, viz. visible Saints, as was proved before; 1 Cor.
14 33. Matter toward the production of being, is in order, though not in time
before form; therefore it is essentially requisitie to a well constituted
church, that there be a right matter: We will not here dispute, whether
churches failing in the matter, cease to be churches? But this is enough, that
we know God requires such a matter; henceforth such matter must the churches
have to be right, as the Apostolical churches had; but they had Saints for the
matter of their churches, therefore so must we have. Believe it, we are
beholding for the recovery of this truth, to our brethren (nicknamed
Independants;) which is as precious a truth about church order, as ever was
recovered from the spoils of Antichrist; for if the matter of churches be
wrong, let the wisest and holiest do what they can, they shall never bring
things into a comfortable order.

2 The second Essential requisite to a consti uted church is agreement,
consent, or covenant, call it what you please, the foundations of all societies
are and have been established herein, nor can this nor any other society be
accidentally shuffled together as Cards in a pack, or Lo^s in a Lot box,
therefore sanctified reason requires, that a particular or visible church (for
these are terminis convertabiles) be established by some kind of covenant or
agreement, which to me seems sufficient, if it came under no other precept
but the precept of order, yet have we examples, both of the 3000. added to the
Church at Jerusalem, Acts 2.41, 47. and the Apostle Acts 9 6. Paul assaying to
join to the church; who could not be admitted, till Barnabas gave testimony
of him, for those places which some allege for this covenant, from Deuteronomy.
26.17, 18. and 29.10, 11, 12. Ier. 50.4. etc. They were peculiar to the church
of the Jews, and were used in point of Reformation, not of Constitution, and
belongd only to the church of the Jews, which did, tota specie, differ from
Evangelicall churches, as having both Ordinances and Officers different, they
having Priests, we Ministers, They bodily Sacrifices of beasts, We spiritual,
They having the presence of God confined to one place especially, We having it
where two or three are gathered in Christ's Name; Their service for the most
part ceremonial, till time of Reformation, Ours Morrall and perpetual; Their
passover eaten by all the family, confined to a certain day, with many other
differences.

Yet when I speak thus of this covenant, its far from me to think that it
does give being to the Church: Its one thing to give being to a thing, per se,
or by it self, and its another thing to concur to the being of a thing;
meat and drink does not give being to the life of man, though without it he
could not live, for if he had not rest, and Physic and air, and Stomach, and
digestive power, he could not live, though he had never so good meat and
drink: So this covenant, or agreement, does not give being to the church, for
a company of Arrians, Socinians, Papists, etc. may have a visible Sanctity,
and enter thus into covenant, yet will not we call them a church, but a
Synagoue of Satan, because they want a right dispensation of doctrine, and
Sacraments. This is such a necessary sign, that one Church cannot be severed
from another without it; son why are you of this Church rather then of that?
Because there was such an agreement betwixt the Elders and members of this
Church, which was not betwixt the Elders and members of another.

The third sign is, a right dispensation of the word and Sacraments. That
whereby the Apostolical Churches were known from other societies, is a sign
of a true Church of Christ; but they were known by this,

See this note, first in constitution of Churches, Acts 2.42. they continue^ in
the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and in prayers,
Matthew. 28.19. Christ sending forth the Apostles to convert and constitute
Churches, bids them only teach and baptize them; as if he should say, word and
Sacraments are essential to his Church.

2 In reformation, when Josiah would reform the Church of the jews, he declares
the doctrine of the law unto them, 2 Kings 23.1, 2, 3.2 Chron. 34.30, 31. when
Ezra was to restore the Church after the captivity, he lays this foundation
for restoring of it; he expounds the law to the people, a practice well to be
thought of in these times, fit for many congregations in this Kingdom, who are
not fit to partake of any thing else save the word: shortly after Ezra restored
the worship of the Passover according to the prescript of Moses, Ezra 6.19.

Apoc. 11.1. There was in the reformation of the Churches, a reed to m^asure
the Temilo and the worshippers therein, this was no other but the word of God;
and Paul 1 Cor. 11. reforming the Church of Corinth, teaches them the doctrine
of the Sacrament of the Supper, as he had received it from Christ. verse 23.

There are besides these three essential signs, three others; which though
not essential primarily, yet so necessary that I cannot see how a Church can
subsist without them.

1 Profession, when any man would join to a Church, let him show his right to
the holy things of God by profession; So the Eunuch Acts 8.38. 1 Pet. 3.17. be
ready to give an answer to every one that asks you a reason of the hope in
you, if to ev^ry one, then much more to those persons with whom you desire to
remain in Church Communion, Romans 10.10. with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the tongue confession is made to salvation. John looked
for this confession or profession before he would baptize them, Mat. 3.6. they
were baptized of John in Jordan confessing their sins, the Ephesians Acts
19.19. many that believed came and confess^d, and showed their deeds. As faith
makes us members of the Catholic, so the profession hereof concur^es to make
us members of the visible Church, now whether this prof^ssion be before the
Elders, for the Eunuch only professed before Philip; so the Elders may relate
what professions have been made, which I think expedient in respect of women's
bashfulnesse, and the weakness of expressions in some, though otherwise godly;
or whether it be done before the whole Church is not much material, christians
must not only look to lawfulness, but to expedien^ie in respect of the times
and places where we live, 1 Cor. 6.12. and for christi^ns let them not be
ashamed to prof^sse their faith, and confess their sins in this way, seeing
Christ calls himself the High Priest of their profession, or (...), ^onfession,
Heb. 3.1. also cap 4.14. Seeing we have a great High Priest that is entered unto
the heavens, Jesus the Son of God; let us hold fast our prof^ssi n or
confession: what profession? truly that which we have ever held from the hour
of our baptism.

2 Ministry; the church of Colosse had Epaphras, and some think besides
Ar^hi^^as; the chu c^ of Philippi Epaphroditus; all the seven churches had
their several Angels, the Holy Ghost makes them overseers over the flock, Acts
20 28. (For the calling of the Ministry, see Acts 6 2 4. Heb. 13.7) Paul calls
it a di^tinct Office, 1 Timothy 3.1. If a man desire the Office of an overseer or
Bishop (for they are both one in the Greek) he desires a good work. Also,
verse. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. he sets down sundry qualifications of an overseer; So does
he, Titus 1.6, 7, 8. I will not derogate from Prophecy, but that some wise and
sober minded men may now and then prophecy, tha^ in case of need the churches
may have continual supply; but let men elevate prophecy as high as they
please, and degrade ministry as low as they please, yet I fear me I shall
prophecy too truly, in saying, the downfall of ministry will be a speedy
presage of the ruin of the churches.

Object. But if the Ministry be a note of the church, then when the ministry
dies, the c urch should die.

Answ. We must distinguish betwixt a Minister and the ministry, the Ministers
may dye hundreds one after another, and yet the ministry remain by the supply
of others. Its good to walk in a mean, betwixt Presbiteriall and popular
ingrossement, and I hope upon trial, it will be found to accord with the word.

Nor is that lightly to be past over, that sending of Ministers is the highest
foregoing requisites of faith and prayer; the inseparable adjuncts of all true
members of churches, so far as man can judge. Romans 10.14.15. How shall they
hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach, except they be sent? A^ it
is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of
Peace? No sending of Preachers, no preaching; no preaching, no hearing; no
hearing, no believing; no believing, no prayer; no prayer, no salvation. By
which gradation it appears, it is exceeding necessary to salvation to have a
sent Ministry; and in vain is reformation, where not only matter, but also
persons for ministry, is wanting.

Q^^st, What is requisite to right sending?

Answ. 1. Something from God. As first, gifts of learning, memory, knowledge of
the Scriptures, ability to divide the word, and to preach seasonable truths.
Christ ascending to receive and to give gifts to, and for the Ministry, Psalm.
68.28. compared with Ephesians. 4.8. We cannot think him a Minister that wants
these, this is absolutely necessary. 2 If it may be, also let him be a man of a
gracious spirit; for though it were granted that a wicked man might convert and
build up, yet can there not be like blessing expected from those who preach out
of other men's ^ee^lings, as from those who preach out of their own experience.

2 Something from men.

As first, Election of the people, Acts 14.23. And when they had ordaine^ them
Elders, (...), which does not signify every church as it is translated but
according to the church; which is an ordinary Graecisme and Latinisme. The
Orator says, Faciam secundum te, I will do it according to thy mind, so they
ordained them elders according to the Church, that is, according to the mind
and will of the Church; the force of church Election lies not in the word (...)
which in Grammatical construction, can agree with no other then Paul an^
Barnabas, verse. 22. and was only their act but in the word (...).

2 Ordination, that the Elders of the churches do examine him, to know hi^
parts and fitness, and finding him fit, do allow and ordain him, Acts 14.23 If
they know his fitness without examination, then may examining be omitted
Timothy being ordained, 2 Timothy 1.6. was warned not to partake in ordaining a
unworthy man, 1 Timoth. 5.22. Lay hands suddenly no man, neither be partaker^
of other men's sins.

The third sign is discipline or government. If the commonwealth, nay if
family, cannot subsist without government, how then can the church of God
subsist without it? Godly men have many unmortified relics in them, which
mus^ be curbed.

The fourth thing we desire, is Liberty of conscience; That we behaving ou^
selves peaceably in the commonwealth, and yielding due obedience to the Civil
Magistrate (To whom we acknowledg^ our selves subject in our good and bodies,
not only for fear of their wrath, but for conscience toward God Romans 13.5 1
Pet. 2.13.14.) may have liberty to worship the Lord according to that light
revealed unto us, against which we cannot go, without manifest ruin^ of our own
souls, and with which we cannot practice, without the apparent hazard of our
persons and families, unless protected, permitted, or connived at b^ the
Magistrate. Herein we shall desire all christian spirits, who have any credi^
with the State, and have themselves felt the weight of an oppressed conscience
to mediate for us; (as we are men, as we are Christians, as we have been
fellow sufferers, and fellow-helpers, to break off the common yoke) tha^ we
may enjoy Liberty to worship our GOD according to our light, which if not
granted, the blood of us and ours, must needs cry aloud in the ear of God; But
if granted, we shall have cause daily to bless out GOD for such a mercy, in
inclining the hearts of our Rulers to break off former yokes and our common
affections shall be more indeered toward them, to assist them to the utmost of
our estates and lives, if need shall require, with our daily prayers powered up
to heaven for them.

6 We desire that neither the headin^sse and tumultuousnesse of some men's
car^iages, nor the exasperating speeches of some printed pamphlets, whom Satan
^oubtl^sse has stird up thereto, may be charged upon peaceable and sober
minded men who do no less mourn for those passionate disputes and distempers,
then the men that seem to be blemished by them.

6 The sixth and last thing objected is, these things be truth concerning
infants ^aptisme, etc. How falls it out that these things were no sooner
discovered?

Ans. People through ignorance may live long in error, Neh. 8 11. God
commanded by M^s^s, the children of Israel to dwell in boothes, in the feast of
the 7th. month, yet had the people lived in the omission of this duty, from the
days of Io^hua, to the days of Nehemia, verse. 17. which was about 7. or 8^0.
years. 2 It ^s Gods privilege to open mysteries, when and to whom he pleases,
Mat. 13.11. Whether in opening mysteries of godliness, or in discovering the
mystery of ini^uity. 3 The same things might have been objected in the days of
Luther and Calvi, and may now be objected against the Hierarchy ceremonies,
etc. 4 The tumultuous carriage of the Anabaptists in Germany (as Sleydan and
other contrary minded Historians write, if it be lawful to believe a History
from the mouth and ^en of an enemy) might keep many good men from searching
into these things. ^ The great hazard and apparent ruin which those preachers
and professors who first protested against infants baptism must incur,
doubtless has caused that men ^ave no sooner fitted this question, the fear
and foresight hereof, made my spirit to stand nor a little averse, till God
overpowred my heart by his spirit, and by a clear light, as I suppose. 6 The
stream of learned men in these latter times. ^he far greater part defending
it, though the learned men extant for the first 300 ^eares, or very near upon,
were for the Generality otherwise minded, so far as I can see, upon a strict
search of antiquity herein.

Reader, I fear I have been tedious in this long Preface, wherein I have
enlarged my self far beyond my expectation, the Porch being something too big
for a House so little, but the scope of my study being edification, not the
pleasing of fancy, I hope thou will ^eare with me; construe these notions in
good part which conscience principally moved we to make public. The Lord in
mercy dispell those mists of darkness that are upon our minds, and fill our
hearts with such sincere intentions, that we may desire always to ^ook at his
eye in the things which we do. Where the bent of my reasons are against the
arguments of Mr. M. I shall desire thee to compare them together, retaining
still a reverend esteem of the person against whose argum^nts I write, whose
gifts and grace in ^ther things, I desire to reverence and acknowledge, and I
hope thou will do the same. Lord in mercy lead us into all truth, and bring us
into his everlasting Kingdom, where all difference of judgment shall be taken
away. mean time I rest.

Thine in all Christian duty, C. B.

The storming of ANTICHRIST In his two last and strongest GARRISONS, of
Compulsion of CONSCIENCE, And Infants BABPTISME. The First Part.
Question.

WHether it be lawful for any person whatsoever to compel the conscience?

Answer. It is not.

1 Because the Apostle himself though he had many revelations from God,
acknowledge^h he had no dominion over the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.24. ^f such an
Apostle disclaim it, upon what pretense can any Magistrate, or Presbiter in
the world require it? now is it not a dominion, when in case of scruple of
compliance with public practice, or practizing according to the light the Lord
gives us, we shall be forced from the one to the other, 1 Pe^. 5. not as Lords
over Gods heritage. Now he lords it, that imposes laws upon the conscience.

2 Persecution for conscience is unlawful, because of the near relation Gods
people are to God They are Gods anointed, Psalm. 105.15. Touch not mine
anointed; much less, fine, bannish, imprison. And when Paul would have
brought the brethren bound to Jerusalem, for professing the says of Christ,
and renouncing Judaisme, its called no less then persecution, Acts 9.2, 3, 4.
Matthew. 18.6. whosoever shall offend one of these little ones which believe in
me, it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea: what guilt then lies on the
souls of those that offend many such, and that for small matters, as
difference of judgment?

3 Because there may be difference of belief in smaller matters, and yet both
do it unto God, Romans 14.2. One believes that he may eat all things; another
who is weak eats herbs, that is, he believed it was not lawful for him to
eat something, and yet he that did eat, did eat to the Lord, and he that did
not eat to the Lord, he did not eat, both did it cons^ienciously to God, now
it is so far from deserving persecution to do things to God, that it deserves
praise.

4 It is a note of the false church to persecute, and of the true Church to be
persecuted. Mat. 10.16 A sheep will be a sheep, though you handle it never so
roughly, but Wolves will persecute, and persons are more or less wolvish, as
they more or less persecute, Gal. 4.29. As he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted him that is borne after the Spirit; So it is now, 2 Timothy 3 12.
Whosoever will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution.

5 Because it is not in the power of a man, to believe what he would; A man
trying all thigns according to 1 These. 5. cannot believe what he would, but
according as the strength of Arguments present themselves to his understanding,
therefore it is not just that he should be punish^d, for believing what he
cannot see grouds to believe, there being no volun^arinesse therein. It is not
just he should be punished, as in some cases its plain when a man forgoes some
enjoyments, and exposes himself to sufferings. When a man sees crosses on the
one hand, and temporal ends on the other, doubtless he would believe, so
that he might enjoy the one, and escape the other, could he have light so to
do; Especially, when the persecutor says, believe this or you shall dye,
Burn.

6 Christ forbids pulling up Tares, lest they pull up good Wheat: But they
must both grow together in the world, Mat. 13.30. which cannot be meant of
Hypocrites, unless the field were the church, but the field, is the world as
Christ expounds it, verse 38. where he also expounds what he means, both by
Tares and Wheat, the Tares are the children of the wicked one, and these must
grow in the field of the world, till the harvest; That is, till the end of the
World, as Christ expounds it, God intended many of these should be brought home
in future time, therefore they should not be banished from their seats and
dwellings, but let alone, if God at any time would give them repen^ance. By
Tares are meant persons, not doctrines, as verse 38. and for persons Christ
uses a general word, (...) signifying all those weeds that spring up with the
corn, to show that all prsons opposite to true worshipers ought to be permited
in the field of the World: But for as much as God has appointed the civil
sword to take away wicked men; as thieves, murderers, etc. And that the
children of the Kingdom are the visible Church of Christ, Mat. 8.12, 21.43
erefore the Tares are Idolaters, Will-worshippers which are to remain in the
field of the world.

7 Persecu^ion for religion makes us uncapeable of amending what is amiss, or
seeing our own errors, yea by this ground the R^formers themselves tha^ sit
about Refo mation would be made uncap^ble of reforming any thing amiss in the
churches, were there such m^gistrates as formerly, ^o put the laws yet
standing in execution, yet do the bent see but in part, and many glorious
truths have been lately revealed, and more may we expect, if the compulsions of
conscience, which is in most places of the Christian world, hinder not.

8 It is against all equity for it is unequal, for to bid me to see with other
men's eyes, they have read other books, heard other conferences and reasons then
I have, yet I must see with their eyes.

9 Because there is a possibility of error in those that think they s^e most,
yea, even Paul said of himself, and his collegus; We know only in part, and
prophecy in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.12. How often have the most glorious Fathers of
the church erred, not one of them that ever I heard of, but have erred, the
fure General Councels, though many good things concluded, yet I suppose in
many things, have erred; Have not Parliaments sometimes erred doing and
undoing, did not those godly Martyrs, who laid down their lives for some
truths, remain in other things erroneous, and left the ceremonies the stumbling
block of the godly, for so many years. Now there being a possibility of error,
how know you, but you in p^rsecuting and compelling may persecute and compel a
man who retains the trurh, your self mean time retaining the error.

10 Because the Scriptures of the New Testament (for what can be alleged from
the old testament, we shall hereafter answer God willing) never mention any
compulsion, but the embracement of Christian religion, is required form persons
willingly; When Christ sent out the 70. Luke 10.6, 10.11. They were to wish
peace if they were received well, if not, they were only to shake off the dust
off their feet, and not to go to any violence So Mark ^6.15.16. preach the
Gospel to every creature, whosoever believes and is baptized, shall be saved,
they were to do no more but only propound truths, and so perswde, Act. 2.41.
They that gladly received the word were baptized, here was nothing but
willinesse. The Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8 5. gave their owo s^lues to the Lord, and
to us by the will of God, there was no compulsion. And so Mat. 11.12. From the
days of ^ohn the Baptist, until now, the Kingdom ^f Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force, there was no violence offered to
persons to embrace it, for persons did willingly embrace it of themselves, 1
Cor. 14.25. The unbeleever that comes into the Churches assembly having the
secrets of his heart discovered he fa^ls down to worship that God, that they
preached; and report when he was gone, that God was in them of a truth. And
therefore to force Papists and profane multitudes, whether they will or no, to
join in one worship, one word, Baptism, Supper, and Identity of communion, is
not according to the word; but though it carry the specious show of a glorious
uniformity, yet does it b^get nothing but a politic hypocritical faith, which
changes according to the vicissitude of Armies in time of war, and the
multitude of Princes, States, and humane Laws, in times of Peace.

11 Compulsion is unlawful, because it produces many mischiefs; As first, it
exposes Protestan^s to compulsion, in Popish countries. I have heard ^t
related, that when sundry Protestants in France complained against persecution,
the Pap^sts made this answer; that we do no otherwise then your own Doctor
Calvin allows.

2 It is a great mischief to your posterity, yea to the posterity of the whole
Kingdom; for though your self were so full resolved, that you should never
stand need nor see more light, yet how know you but your son, or daughter or
father or mother, may see more light then your self do, and would you willingly
loose the society of so many friends by banishm^nt, imprisonment, d^a^h? when
it may be you have none of your kindred so conscientious as they; for indeed
conscientious persons only, or mostly suffer in point of compulsion, other men
by Scholastick-distinctions, and fleshly devices, being able to turn themselves
any way.

3 It hardens Papists in their inquisitory practices, for they reason thus; the
Protestants as well as we do all agree in this point, as well as in the
doctrine of the Trinity, Resurrection, etc. therefore that wherein all agree,
is undoubted. And so long as t ey go in these inquisitory ways, there is
little likelihood that the Gospel should once take footing in Spain, or
Italy, etc.

S^^ M. S. Ans. to A. S p. 24. Bloody Tenent of pers^. for cons. p 6
4 It causes many hypocrites, and time-s^rvers, or else cause
State-insurrections, as in Holland, Scotland.

5 It takes away possibility from coming to the light of any new truth.

12 Compulsion is unlawful in Religion, from universal practice, both of
Nations and Churches, till the t me of Antichrist; the Sichemites suffer^p
Jacob and his sons to dwell among them, though of a different Religion, Genesis
4.7. When the Israelites were in captivity, yet did they enjoy their
consciences. The Romans bore with the Jews in their Religion, t^ough a
tributary Na^ion; yea among the Jews there were diverse Sects, as Pharis^es,
Saduc^s, Herodians. There were diverse errors in the Churches of Corinth,
Galatia, seven Churches of Asia, yet are none blamed for not forcing, but for
not Excommunicating the Heretical; for the first 300. years after Christ,
though we find the sword of Excommunication drawn out too rashly, yet did we
never hear that they compelled one another consciences, and as the prevailing
party of Presbyters invested Emperors with this power, we find the Apostacy
to have come in. How often by these means have the most glorious lights of the
church been exiled from public preaching, as Athanasius, Chrysostom and
others. Purchase speaks of the Mahomitans in Cayro, and Egypt, that there are
four several religions, different from each others in Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, and concerning also civil and cannon Law, all
founded on the Mahomitan scripture, by four learned men, diversely construing
the general rules, to such particulars, as seemed to them fitter for their
followers, who disagreeing in opinion, agree in affection, and converse
together without hatred, or upbraiding each other, Purch. Pilg. part 1. lib. 3.
p. 275. Let Christans learn from these. Many flourishing states at this day
permit it, as Poland, the Sates of Holland, etc. With no small benefit to the
public peace.

13 Compulsion is unlawful, because in case of Heresy, Apostacy, or
corruption in manners, we find in Scriptures of the New Testament, no further
punishment then exceeding to rejection or excommunication, Tit. 3.10. A man
that is an Heretic after the first or second admonition, reject. When
Hymeneus and Alexander made Shipwreck of their faith, Paul deliverd them to
Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20. There was no Compulsion by any civil Magistrate. So the
incestuous person, there was no further proceeding against him, then the
delivering of him to Satan. 1 Cor. 5. Mat. 18. If he will not hear the church,
Let him be an Heathen or a Publicane; There was no writ granted of
Excommunication, capiendi, to carry him to prison without Bail or Mainprize,
that he should have no power to make a will, or to deprive him of such
burial, as other men had.

14 Compulsion in religion does enforce persons, not only to do things with a
doubting conscience, and so is sinful, Romans 14.23. but makes men sin against
their consciences, which is abominable; or else to suffer a ruin of their
states and persons, which is uncharitable. In compelling persons against
conscience, you compel them against that which they deem to be the eternal
truth of God.

If you say the magistrate has no intent to compel me to sin, nor to extort a
confession contrary to my conscience; I answer, But he has this end, that if I
profess not, what he thinks truth, or laws enacted require, he intends to
punish me with imprisonment, banishment, etc. which is uncharitable in him: And
what if for fear of the Magistrates force, rather then the fear of hell, I
profess a false principle, though I shall be duly punished for denying Christ,
yet shall not he be free who compelled me thereto.

15 It brings no small hazard and trouble to the civil Magistrate; hazard in
exposing him to persecute the truths of God, a burden that has lain heavy upon
the consciences of Magistrates for many years past, that when some few in a
Convocation have concluded some points Supersticious, or Erroneous, the
Magistrates, Judges, Justices have been the -- to put these cruelties in
execution, and they with trembling consciences have helped forward the
exilement and misery of many a Saint of God. The Scripture requiring weak
brethren so be so far borne with, as we see, Romans 14 3.4, 5. That if their
outward deportment be fair, honest, and humble, it would trouble the acutest
Magistrate, to prove them obstinate; must it not be very hazardous for the
magistrate to meddle with such godly persons though in an error?

And for the trouble it will be endless, there being such strong arguments
against any uniforme practice whatsoever, and the persons not members in a way
commanded by the State, will the Magistrate be ever free from trouble with such
persons? Besides it will be a great trouble to him, to study in such intricate
cases, when it is fit for him to employ his coercive or constraining power, and
when it is not fit: and if the same point which he now persecutes, shall after
appear to him to be truth, what a sting will this be to his conscience, when as
all this trouble and hazard shall be taken away, if persons may be left to
worship God together, according to the light they have, they behaving
themselves soberly, and peaceably in the Commonwealth.

16 If that religion may be forced upon the consciences of others, by the Major
part of a Synod or Convocation Vote, we may be liable to change our religion
often in our lives time; as four times in a matter of 20. years in H. 8. Ed. 6.
Q. M. Q. E. and so in Q. E. K. I. K. C. and the present Synod; which if we do,
then we wound our consciences, and declare plainly that we have no true fear
of God in us, in that his fear is taught by the commandments of men, Esaias;
29.13. and if we do not, we are every time liable to persecution, to the
enforcement of selling lands, leaving Offices, kindred, and callings, and
betaking our selves to wild woods, strange countries, and this may be the
condition of sundry persons, who think themselves straightened in their
Government, unless they may rule in other men's consciences, so various and
unstable are all things under the sun.

17 None are like to suffer by compulsion of conscience, but conscientious men,
see a sad instance, Dan. 3. as soon as the act of Compulsion was proclaimed by
the Herald, v. 4. 5. to you it is cammanded, O people Nations and languages,
that as soon as you hear the sound of the Cornet, Flute, Sackbut, etc, ye fall
down and worship the golden image, and whosoever falls not down shall the same
hour be cast into a burning fiery furnace. Verse. 7. Therefore all that time,
when all the people heard the sound of the Cornet, Flute Harp, all the people,
Nations, and languages, fell down and worshipped the golden image, that
Nebuchadnezzar had set up; now Shadrach, Mesh^ch, and Abednego, being
conscientious men, they were only caught in this decree. So will it be in
these days, whatsoever be established by those that conquer in these wars,
there is not one of many will resist it, whether it be Episcopacie, Presbitery,
etc. Only conscientious men will stagger in it, and suffer for what conscience
can approve; who suffered in Q Mary's time, against the Mass stablished by
law, but good men? So when the ceremonies, Episcopal Courts, were in force,
the godly were ensnared by them.

18 Compu^sion of conscience, overthrows Christian liberty; contrary to Gal.
5.1. stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free: yea it
overthrowes it in the greatest measure, in that our faith cannot fix freely
upon the object, and a su^able confession from our mouths, but we must suffer
pi^lories, loss of liberty etc. We tax this as a brand of Rome, that they
take away all Christian liberty, whiles they force us believe as the Church
believe, let us not be guilty herein; To have our states inslaved is hard, and
that which ingenuous spirits cannot well bear, yet had I rather my person and
estate were enslaved, then my conscience.

19. Compulsion of conscience was never at^ributed to the Civil Magistrate, M
S. p. 6
but only by those that were assured they should have the civil Magistrare on
their side. In some places they magnify the Magistrates power herein, as in
England they were wont to do; but the French Churches go a contrary strain.
Jesuits do the same, cry up regal power when it is for them, when it is
against them, exempt them there from.

20 There is a natural freedom in us in civil things, to believe what we
think to be truth, and to believe nothing else; yea, and in divine things, no
man can hinder me from believing what I think to be truth: And therefore it is
absurd to compel us to believe otherwise in a visible profession; and in
effect, it is to compel us to believe a ly^: what in civil things would be
monstrous, shall it go for current in divine things?

Object. But no man can be compelled to faith, yet may he be compelled to
outward means; according to that saying, Cogi nemo potest ad fidem, cogi tamen
potest ad media.

Answ. This is in effect, to compel a man to be present at a worship which he
loathes. The Papist hereby would compel you to the Mass, as a means of
faith; the Lutheran to consubstantation, and if you refused, they might torture
you with the most exquisite tortures; But you will limit the axiom ad vera
media, to true means: they will say their means of faith are true, and they
have as good an opinion of them, as you can have of yours.

21 This compulsion of conscience, will be a special bar to hinder the Jews
conversion, for whenever they are converted to the faith of Christ, its
likely they must be brought home thereto voluntarily, out of the strength they
see in the truth, not by compulsion of fines, banishment, imprisonment, etc.

22 It will much harden Heathens and Mahometans, not to permit christians among
them, or at least not to have any great freedom in their countries, because
where christians get the upper hand, they compel all persons to embrace their
religion; yea this very principle doubtless scares the Papists from letting
the Protestants have such freedom in their countries, because if they should
prove the stronger party, they would compel them to a religion they so much
abhor. Hence in sundry popish countries, they tolerate all or most religions,
save Protestanisme,

23 If persons in Place shall violently force the consciences of their
brethren, who knows (the issue of war being so uncertain) whether God in
judgment may give them up into the hands of Enemies, (which God forbid) who
may with like unmercifulness force their consciences. Jam. 2.13. He shall have
judgment without mercy, who has showed no mercy.

24 Great is the tenderness of conscience in good men, Scrupulosi non sunt
rigide tractandi, said Antoninus the Casmist. Those that have the power of
compulsion now can tell this experimentally, and it is but newly the yoke is
off from themselves; well were it if they could remember the violent
compulsions of H. Commission, Episcopal courts. Learn of Christ, who Heb. 2.18
in that he himself has suffered being tempted, is able to succor them that
are tempted. Remember Q. Didoes speech; Non ignara mali miseris succurrere
disco. It is with a tender conscience, as with the eye; a small matter will
offend it.

25 Christ says Matthew. 7.12. what you would that men should do to you, do you
so to them. Now I appeal to any man's conscience, who has power of compulsion
in his hands, whether if a different judgment had the upper hand, he would not
desire to worship God according to his light, and whether he would not think it
injustice to be compeld to worship God contrary to his light? Or in case,
because his conscience could not close with so gross a practice; himself and
his posterity to be ruined, merely because he makes conscience; which
doubtless is a work of the spirit, in whomsoever it is. As it is unequal for
me to compel you to be of my religion, so is it unequal for you to compel me
to be of your Religion, and as unequal for a whole Council to compel either
of us to be of their religion: And all Protestants condemn the proceedings of
the Council of Constance herein, against John Hus, who caused him to be burned
for dissenting from them.

26 Freedom of conscience would join the affections of all sorts of subjects
to the Magistrate, because each of them shared in the benefit: So that any
thing that should be done against the Magistrate, each man would take it as
done against himself; An example of which we see in Holland, wherein men of
diverse religions, conjoyn against the common enemy, yea more unanimously then
the forced uniformists of our Country.

27 The Scripture no where makes the Magistrate judge of our faith, therefore
he has no power to compel our conscience: Whiles we tax the Romish French
Churches (if I may so call them) for making General Councels the judge of the
faith; and the Spanish and Italian Romish Churches for making the Pope judge of
the faith: Take we heed we dash not upon as great a rock, in making the
Magistrate judge thereof: Who hereby will have ground either to make all men's
principles submit to his, whether they be true or false; or else to expose the
refusers to what penalty and hardship as he shall think meet. And so there will
be a continual uncertainty in the enjoyment of any comfort any man has, for
as soon as the Magistrate changes his principles we must change, or else live
in continual hazard of persecution. The conscience of man next under God and
his word, is to judge what faith is true and what false. Romans 14.5.22, 23:

28 In compulsion of conscience not only persons guilty, but guiltless
suffer without any fault committed by them, when an husband is heretical (or
at least so deemed) if he do not comply against his conscience which is
abominable, then not only himself suffers from the Magistrate, but his wife
who perhaps is of the Magistrates Religion, yea, his little ones, some whereof
perhaps suck the breasts.

29 This is against Christian Liberty, whereby all things may be proved; all
things are to be proved, and out of them all that which the prover deems good
to be held, 1 These 5.21. But this cannot be where the conscience is compeld. By
this compulsion, a person is kept proving things, or exposed to ruin if the
conscience shall find any thing to be good, and be willing to hold it.

29 Compulsion of conscience makes differences to rise to a great height, which
if men were left to their own light, what is not of God would far more easily
fall: But when Churches and states shall fall to determine these, and to impose
them upon others when there is light for neither, this does not abate out
increase the flame.

Obj^ctions ag inst compulsion of Conscience answered.

1. Object. The Kings of Judah compeld persons to such a worship; also they
took away idolatries, superstitions, and why should not Kings and States have
the some power in these days, and in case they cannot be otherwise removed,
why should not the persons peccant be punished with banishment, imprisonment,
death, according as the Civil Magistrate sees fit.

Answ. 1. This compulsion, was only for those that lived under the Jewish
worship, or born of Jewish Parents, it was not for strangers, they were not
compeld thereto.

2 That which we find them compeld so principally, was to obey in entering in a
national Covenant to worship the Lord God of Israel, which all the Jews
acknowledged it to be their duty to do, and this was done as well by the vulgus
the body of the nation, as by the civil Magistrate, 2 Chronicles 16.12, 13, 14, 15.

3 Suppose the Kings of Judah alone had done this, yet were not their actions
moral to oblige other Kings to do so, no more then the office of Kings was
moral, but we see that office was not moral, for all the time before the
Greeks and Romans seized the Jews Country. They were only a free State, when
Zerubbabol, Neheviah, and diverse others were Governors, which they would not
have been, had the Office of Kings been moral. And if the office and power of
the Kings of Judah be moral, why do we not allow the same power to other
Kings? No more are many of their actions moral to oblige other nations.

See th^s Q fully discust by M. S. against A. S. p 52, 53, 5^, 55.
4 The Kings of Judah never imprisoned nor used any violence against any
Schismatics, nor did the State after them when it was governed by a State,
though Pharisees, Herodians, etc. and many other Sects, lived among them. Why
may not the Prelates as well allege the order of the Priesthood, for their
Metropolicall Episcopacy?

6 Either this power was conferd on the Kings of Judah as a Law moral, or
politic; If moral, where is that command set down, that Magistrates
indefinitely shall compel the consciences of others within their territories,
to the practice of one worship, and that to be the Magistrates own worship of
which himself is of? For to be sure he will not compel to any other. 2 Where
can the Magistrate be assured of the morality of such compulsions, wanting
extraordinary Prophets which the Kings of Judah had? For without plain and
undoubted grounds, the Magistrate cannot proceed to go in such ways, which
tends to the ruin of many a dear child of God, and their posterity. Or else
its a politic and judicial law, which no more obliges Kings of other
nations, then that law mentioned Deuteronomy. 23 ^^ to verse. 18, which injoyneth the
slaying the inhabitants of an indolatrous City, and burning the spoil, and the
city also without rebuilding.

6 Imagine all Magistrates had such power now as the kings of Judah had (which
I suppose will never be granted, their Governments being absolute, and in their
original determined by a message of God, as we see in Samuels anointing Saul,
and after wards David; whereas the Governments of other Nations are
Coordinate, and determined by men) yet had not the Kings of Judah power to
compel any ones conscience in point of belief, or religion, or to punish them
in case they dissented in belief, therefore no magistrates have power herein;
the Magistrates of Judah had power to punish ennormious vices, as Blasphemy,
De. 24.13, 14. But Moses had a direct Commission from God, before he would put
the blasphemer to death. So Idolatry, Sabath breaking, Nehem. 13 and also to
punish all sins contrary to the public peace, but not to commpell belief.

Object. 2. Magistrates are to be a terror to evil workers, Romans 13. But
heresy is an evil work.

Answ. Evil works are of three sorts.

1 Those that are committed against the light of nature and reason, as the
setting up of Mahomet, or any other God besides him that is the creator of
heaven and earth; Atheism, when any man shall boldly affirm there is no God,
Polutheisme, when men affirm many gods, Blasphemy, Murder, Adultery, False
witness, Perjury, Theft, Disobedience to parents, Sedition, Sodomy, Buggery,
Drunkenesse, tumults against the public peace, etc. These and such like, the
Magistrate, whether heathen or christian, is to be a terror unto.

2 Against the light of Nations; there is no nation in the world, but in it the
magistrate will punish those that speak against the God they profess, and
against that which they think his Scripture; So if any one rail against
Christ, or deny the Scriptures to be his Word, or affirm the Epistles to be
only Letters written to particular churches, and no rule for us, and so
unsettle our faith; This I take may be punished by the Magistrate, because all
or most Nations in the world do it.

3. A third sort of evil works, are those that are committed against the
light of faith, as denial of Christ, walking contrary to a man's own
principles, presenting our selves at false worship, pride, covetousness,
unbeleefe, impenitencie, rotten communication, heresy, schism; these I
suppose, and many such, which are no less evil works, then the other, the
Magistrate cannot be a terror unto, but they must be left to the respective
Churches, of which the persons offending are members. The Apostle calls the
Magistrate a terror to evil works, but not to all evil works, and if he be
a terror to all evil works d^ne against light of faith, what need we contend
for any government by Ecclesiastical discipline, being the Magistrate has
power in his own hand to punish, therefore evil workers against the light of
faith, may be permitted in the world, though not in the Churches.

Object. 3. If men be permitted to preach, and disperse erroneous doctrines,
the number of heritikes may be so increased, that they may in time extirpate
the truth.

Answ. What is alleged herein, but the Romanist may make the same use for
extirpating the Protestant Religion, yea any persons Heretical that have the
Magistrate on their side, may allege the same.

2 Though such Doctrines are erroneous in your conscience, yet are you not sure
that such are erroneous in themselves, because you are not sure your dictates
are infallible.

3 If you were infallibly sure you had the truth, and the doctrines you
suppose, erroneous, yet all errors being not of the same size, such persons
may be borne withal, whose errors trench not upon the foundation.

4 Either Heretics are in the church, or in the world, if they be in the
church, the church has power to censure them before they be too rank, Tit.
3.10. if in the world, what have churchcs or Elders to do with them? 1 Cor.
5.12. what have I do to judge them that are without? and for the civil
Magistrate, first how can he be gilded with a spirit of infallibility, that
such a thing is an heresy, and much more that he has infallible grounds for
the violence or compulsion he exercises toward such persons that he may do it
in faith; 2 the civil Magistrate is absolutely forbid all such violence and
rooting up, Mat. 13.30. Let both grow together, until the harvest; but in what
field is it? verse. 38. Truly in the field of the World, and that by this
Command, of let both grow together, is meant. Heretics, Schismatikes;
appears because, if the Magistrate be busy about plucking up these, he will
be in danger of plucking up the good wheat, that is, many a child of God, who
is thus stigmatized, and who thinks in conscience he is bound to do that which
he does.

5 If Heresy and Truth may have a like permission, Truth will get the victory
in the understandings of many, yea most.

Object. But we see the contrary in popish countries.

Ans. But the cause is not because truth and error are left to fight in men's
understanding, but because men by inquisitions suppress the truth from
passage, in some places, where truth and error have been alike permitted;
truth has eaten out error, witness Amsterdam, not long since most Papists,
now almost all Protestants.

Object. But would you have all sorts of Sects, and Scismes tolerated in
Christian churches, as Jews, Papists, or all sorts of Protestants differing in
Judgment as Lutherans, Arminians, etc. This would tend to confusion both in
Church and state.

Answ. For the Jews they are tolerable, for else how should they ever be taken
into us Gentil^s; it is not prisons and fines will bring them in, but a victory
of Evangelicall truths in their understanding; for all sorts of protestants
they may be ^olerated, because no side dare affirm, that there adversaries
tenants are destructive unto their souls that hold them.

And for Papists, though they are least to be borne of all others, because of
the uncertainty of their keeping faith with heretics, as they call us, and
because they may be absolved of securements, that can arise from the just
solemn oaths, and because of their cruelty against the Protestants in diverse
countries where they get the upper hand, and because they are professed
Idolaters, yet may they be borne with (as I suppose, with submission to better
judgments) in Protestant governments in point of religion.

1 Because we have no command to root out any for conscience, and less then a
command will not serve, nor have we any example in the New testament for the
same.

2 Violent compulsions of them, will rather exasperate them against the
Protestant religion, then win them to a liking thereof.

3 In the violent compulsion of Papists, nothing but mischief arises either to
the party compelled, who against his conscience complies to the protestant
religion, for the saving his estate, and so it is made twofold more the child
of hell; or else if he do not complie, but suffers, his innocent children are
punished herein.

4 It would be a good pattern to Papists in popish countries, to bear with
protestants, and to remove inquisitions.

But yet with these two cautions may they be borne.

1 If the number be so many that they are like to overtop the Protestants, or
to come near them in number, then the Magistrare giving them leave to sell
their estates, may command some of them out of the Kingdom, because the safety
of the people, is the highest law, and this is according to that principle;
Every being preserves it self.

2 For the remaining party, to take such securement of them in point of Arms,
that they may be sure never to make any head.

In all this I meddle not with delinquent Papists, who answering respectively,
for their acts of hostility against the state, the number of Papists will be
much fewer, and may the more easily be borne if the state see fit.

5 Object. Why may we not cut off Heretics by death, or Punish them by
banishment, imprisont, being they go about to destroy other men's souls.

Answer.

1 Because you have no command for it, nor no example, and less then a plain
command will not serve herein; Why do you not cut off persons infected with the
Pox, Leprosy, Pestilence, being they hazard other men's lives? And why do
Princes let them live in their commonweal, being they are so destructive to
mankind; the reason is at hand, because they have no command to do it, and the
persons may recover in time to come; so it is here, the Magistrate has no
command to cut off the Heretic, and also he may recover in time to come.

Object. But the similitude holds not, because there is no voluntarinesse in
him that is infected with a bodily disease.

Answ. No more is there any voluntarinesse in the Heretics in the seducing of
others, for he thinks that to be truth whereto he persuades the other.

2 Its nor possible for the Elect to be seduced so far as to be taken off from
their foundation, Christ; Mat. 24. But its possible for Heretics to to come
off from the foundation of their Heresy, therefore they are to be let alone.

3 Few, of the controversies among us, if any will, amount to heresy, if we
count heresy to be election of a faith by our selves, they can at most be
called schism; and therefore the persons that hold the tenants, cannot come
under the forsaid penallties of Banishment, impisonment, etc.

4 It much concurs to murder, that there be a murtherous intention, but
Heretics have no murtherous but a saving intention in drawing others to their
way. He that should go about to destroy other men's souls, with an intention
to destroy them, might be cut off as a murderer. But he that does it
accidentally against his will is to have a city of refuge from temporal death,
as he under the Law had, that slew a man against his will, which Law was no
other then the Law of Nations.

Objection. 6.

But if there should be any such toleration, we should have a wonderful
confusion; parents would go one way, children another; husbands one way, wives
another; master one way, servant another; which would be great confusion in
Church and State.

Answer.

1 The confusion will not be such as is imagined; when every man and woman have
joined themselves, with such as are of their own judgment.

2 I answer with the saying of one, viz. Whether is it not a greater confusion
both before God and men, for a hundred men and women of ten several religions
or opinions, to assemble together every Sunday in a Parish, for fear of
imprisonment or fines, or else that the same hundred being permitted freely to
meet in a peaceable manner at ten several places, according to their different
opinions, worshipping God according to their light.

3 This is no other confusion then is in an Army, wherein many that were
together in a tumultuous manner, repair to their several Companies and
Colors; or City societies, See Mr. Goodwins Sermon on Acts 5.38 39.
wherein sundry persons in one and the same House, belong to several
Companies, one to the Drapers, another to the Mercers.

4 Whether is worse? A glorious seeming uniformity in a state of
self-condemnation? or a seeming confusion with a conscientious satisfaction?

Objection.

But these persons were good Protestants, before this licentiousness of
conscience was granted.

Answer.

1 Had they been so before, they would have been so still, and are so still.
2 If they embraced the truth before, it was by accident; as a rustie hand of a
clock, may by accident tell what a clock it is, though it stand still and move
not. 3 It appears by their change that many of those things they had, they had
them only by an implicit faith, not from an examination of the ground.

2 If they were good before, when in an ungrounded uniformity, they complied to
the common practice without principles, or upon unsatisfying principles; they
are sure better Protestants now when they dare not do things without grounds.

Objection.

But should the Magistrate permit this liberty of conscience, he should partake
with other men in their sins; as the Papists, Arminians, Brownists, etc,

Answer.

1 No man pertakes, in not restraining any sin when it it is beyond the
compass of his calling; now the punishing for heresy, is beyond the compass
of a Magistrates calling. Tit. 2.10. 1 Timothy 1 21, we find a Heretic after the
first or second admonition rejected, or almost excommunicated, as Hymeneus and
Alexander were.

2 Whether is not the Magistrate more in danger of pertaking in sin, by
compelling persons to do things with doubting consciences, yea against their
consciences? And if they do not, to be ruined they and their guiltless
children in their estates. Rom 14.^.22.
Or to partake in sin, by leaving men to walk according to that which they
think to be the truth; Let every man judg^?

Objection.

But if such men be suffered to preach such doctrines, the number of Heretics
will be so great, that they will endanger the Orthodoxe; as weeds choke the
corn.

Answer.

1 There will be no such danger, if there be no persecution for conscience; and
a Law made for repealing the laws already made for compulsion.

2 Such freedom being granted, its likelier that truth will get ground of
error, then error get ground of truth.

3 It is a thing to be questioned, whether those that are still in credit with
the Magistrate be the Orthodoxe, and those that are in discredit be the
Heretics? We must imagine that those that make this objection, are those that
are still in credit with the Magistrate.

Objection.

We would willingly suffer the truth to be preached, but those that we prosecute
they teach erron^ous doctrines, which hazard the souls of men.

Answer.

1 The guilt hereof lies upon the conscience of the Teachers, and not upon the
Magistrate, Matt. 5.19. Whosoever shall teach men so, he shall be least in the
Kingdom of heaven. Heb. 13 7

2 Those that so teach, think they teach truth, and do but discharge their
consciences in so teaching, for should they teach otherwise then what they
believe, they should sin.

3 Though the truth be but one, yet whether is the truth so in the breast of
him that has the power of prosecution, that he can infallibly say his tenants
are absolute truths; and what are different herefrom are erroneous doctrines,
hazarding the souls of men. We see the contrary, Acts 4.19. Joh. 16.2.
Whosoever kills you, will think he does good service.

4 By this pretense, many men serviceable to the Church of God, are and have
been cut off: See J^r. 29.26. Hereby Jeroboam, 2 Reg. 17.21. ^ ave Isra^l from
following the Lord.

5 This is the plea tha^ all manner of persons in any place or state use, for
the suppressing of any persons contrary minded; as Lutherans, Papists, etc.
Therefore it cannot be an infallible rule, which is so frequently false, and
which has occasioned so much blood of many Saints.

6 We must make distinction betwixt erroneous doctrines; some teach upon the
foundation, and are more dangerous; as some poin^s of Popery, Socinianisme,
etc. Some only are varieties of judgment about smaller matters, as the
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, whose difference is principally about
order, holding Christ for a foundation; Against these, doubtless there can be
no exception why they may not be permitted.

Objection.

For tender consciences that are truly godly, we would willingly suffer them,
but these men differ from the practice established by Law, out of pride and
stubbornness.

Answer.

1 Because God is the searcher of hearts; we ought to think the difference of
such men's judgments, is out of conscience, not out of stubbornness, till the
contrary do evidently appear.

2 For the offenses of visible pride and stubbornness, when they shall grow to
that height that they trouble the public peace, the Magistrate may doubtless
punish such, in what sect soever.

Objection.

But we would willingly permit you your own conscience, but we are loath to
permit you, first to worship God in assemblies; secondly, to communicate what
you believe, unto others: For the Apostle says, have thou faith? Have it to
thy self before God, Romans 14.

Answer.

To the former; first, did not God require assembly-worship, and that the
Saints should join themselves in bodies, we could be content to enjoy our own
consciences; but God requires the same, 1 Cor. 14, 33.

Objection.

But hereby you get away our good hearers, which diverse of our Ministers have
been the means of conversion.

Answer.

1 First for the crown of your Ministers it shall not be the less, in that
they have converted them. 2 For your selves, you may have the benefit of their
prayers, and ex^mples, as formerly. 3 Whether had you rather have them pure in
conscience in departing from you according to their principles, or to abide
with you with wounded consciences?

To the second branch I answer, of communicating what we believe unto others,
though in point of meats and days, we may have faith to our selves, Romans
14.22. To believe in our hearts what is lawful to eat, and observe what not,
yet does not this hinder, but we must communicate to others what we think to be
truth.

1 Because Christ has so commanded, Matthew. 10.27. What I tell you in
darkness, that speak you in light; and what ye hear in the ear, that preach
you upon the house top.

Obj. But if I do so they will kill me, to which Christ says, fear not them
that kill the body, etc.

2. Because the Apostles so practiced when a whole Council had silenced them,
Acts 4, 17.20. We cannot but speak the things we have seen and heard. 1 John
1.2. Its related of Socrates, that he would not forbear the declaring of one
God, though he were sure to die for it. How much more should Christians declare
the truths of God?

3 The persons that do declare those tenants they think to be truths, they are
either Ministers or people; if Ministers, then there is a woe unto them if they do
not declare what they think truth. 1 Cor 9 ^6, Woe unto me if I preach not the
Gospel. Acts 5 20, Go into the Temple and speak all the words of this life.
Else may there be guilt of the blood of souls, Acts 20 26, 27. If people, they
are bound to strengthen others, themselves being converted. Luke 22 32. So did
the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.29. come see a man that told me all that ever I
did, is not this the Christ? Though the Samaritans generally were of another
belief before, as appears v. 39.41

Objection.

But is it not lawful to reduce seduced persons to the truth?

Answer.

Yes, but not by carnal weapons of clubs, fines, banishment, 2 Cor. 10.4. the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the casting
down of strong holds and imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God; among which is Heresy for one, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2 Violence never made any
man cordially to close with any Religion, though it has forced the outward man.

Obj^ction.

Though men be forced to embrace a religion against their wills, yet after they
come to approve it, and will not come to another.

Answer.

The accidental good that fell out, cannot make lawful the evil upon which
they ventured. 2 Such men as do thus comply against conscience, they are
usually made twofold more the children of hell then formerly, though there may
be a different issue in some.

Objection.

Many ignorant souls hereby will be in danger of being seduced by Popish
Priests, and other Sectary Teachers.

Ans. 1. Better sometimes a mischief, then always an inconvenience.

2 These ignorant persons thus wrought on by tampering, would in such variety
of judgments, try all sides, especially when there were freedom herein to
reason and debate.

3 Hereby many weak ones among the Papists were in likelihood to be gained from
them; yea far more then the Protestants would in likelihood lose.

4 Gods ways are always the safest, and that which most concerns his own
glory.

Objection.

Esaias 49.23. Kings shall be thy thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing
Mothers, therefore Kings and Princes may employ their compulsory power, for the
nourishing of the church.

Answer.

We deny the consequence;

For 1. The scope of the place is; that Gods people being in Captivity, thought
God had forgotten and forsaken them, Verse. 14 God tells them, he had not, nor
could not, verse. 15. He had graven them upon the palms of his hands, and their
walls were always before him, verse. 16. and told them that their builders make
haste, and their destroyers should depart far from them, verse. 17. and though
verse. 19. their desolations were great, and their land desert yet shortly the
inhabitants should be so many, The Lord tells them of the two causes hereof. ^
efficient verse 22.
that the land should be too strait for them, verse. 20. hence the people of
Israel fall to wonder, that their number should so multiply, verse. 21.
enquires how it should be; to which the Lord answers, verse. 22. I will lift up
my hand to the Nations: q: d: it shall be my work, there shall sundry of the
Gentiles shall come into them as proselites, and not only themselves, but they
shall also bring their children in their arms, and upon their shoulders with
them.

2 The second or inferior means of this enlargement shall be this, 2
Isntrumental v 2^.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers, verse 23.
as Cyrus, Darius, Queen Hester, Artaxerxes, etc. for that he speaks of
deliverance out of Babylon, appears in the two next verses, shall the prey be
taken from the strong, or the lawful captive delivered, etc.

2 Suppose it were a prophecy of Kings and Queens under the Gospel, yet may
Kings and Queens be nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers, by countenancing and
contributing toward religion, and the maintenance and professors thereof, by
improving all their credit and state toward the good of Gods people, and so
the prophecy is fulfilled in what it holds forth without Princes using any
coercive power in the behalf thereof.

3 The very similitude of a nursing Father, and nursing mother, holds not forth
to us violence or compulsion, but kindness and love, such as the loving nurse
uses toward the tender babes; little did the holy ghost using such a
similitude of love and kindness, think that men would pervert it to violence
and constraint.

4 Compulsorie power of princes and states, is so far from nourishing of the
churches, that it has destroyed many, both in body and soul; in body, whiles
much Christian blood ^ath been shed, whiles each man has with his blood
defended his own tenants; and in soul, whiles many have complied for fear of
the Magistrate to do things, not only with doubting consciences which is
damnable, Rom 14.23. He that doubts is damned if he eat; but even against
conscience, which is much more damnable. This compulsorie power may worship a
glorious uniformitie, and make pompous and Populous assemblies, but all this
while many a one goes on with a griping unsatisfied conscience, whose light is
one ways, and their practice forced to be another; or else they must ruin
themselves wives and children. Princes by this compulsion, may be nursing
Fathers, to the Parochial ministers, by increasing of their maintenance, but
whether they Will be stepfathers hereby, to tender consciences, I leave it to
inquiry.

Objection.

Let every soul be subj ct to the Highest powers, Romans 13.1.

Answer.

The apostle means in civil things, not spiritual.

For 1. Had the Apostle meant spiritual things, or matters of conscience, then
Nero, and the Magistrates that then lived, might have compelled the Christians
to have worshipped the Sun, and in case of refusal might have punished them.

2 Then had the Apostles sinned in refusing to be subject to the Magistrate
herein. When they said, we ought to obey God rather then men.

Frivoulous is that distinction, which is made betwixt Magistrate, Christian,
and not Christian.

For 1. What power any Magistrate receives from God, as a Magistrate, every
Magistrate receives the same.

2 The Scripture does not make one rule for the Magistrates that lived in Paul's
time, who were Heathens, and another rule for the Magistrates that lived in
Constantines time, most whereof were Christians, but one and the same rule is
set down toward all Magistrates, qua tales; and this distinction has been
made politickly, by Divines, at first; who had the same Magistrates on their
side, and seconded by others, who either had the same codition, or through a
passive understanding did embrace former tenent without Examination.

Objection.

Apoc. 17.16 Its said the ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these
shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire; and these ten Horns are ten King^. Therefore
Kings have power to compel in Religion.

Answer.

1 From allegorical places there can no firm argument be deduced.

2 By Kings here is meant not the persons of Kings, but the power of Kings, for
Chap. 18 9. the Kings of the earth who have committed fornication with this
whose bewail her, and lament her, when they see the smoke of her burning,
Saying, verse 10. Alas, alas; That great city Babylon, that mighty city, now
they would not have bewailed her, had they themselves burnt her flesh with fire.

3 Suppose it were granted that the Kings and States of the earth had power to
punish Idolatry, which is properly a worshipping of Similitudes of (...),
therefore they have power to compel the consciences of persons to an
Uniformity, to do things with doubting consciences, yea against their
consciences, how does this follow.

4 The adequate object of the power of the ten Horns, whether Kings or States,
is only the whore of Babylon, whom they burn with fire, not extending it self
further then to her, how then can it reach al Idolaters, much less, persons
that are not Idolaters, who at most are deemed only Schismatic to differ
from their brethren?

5 There are many crimes committed by this Whore of Babylon, against the civil
laws of these ten Kings or States, for which the temporal sword of these
Kings, or states, might justly punish her; as her persecution and murder of the
Martyrs of Jesus, and being drunken with her blood, Apoc. 17.6. cap. 18.24. In
her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain
upon the earth: Therefore Kings and States migh justly punish her, for breaking
their civil laws, yet does it not follow, that those that have not broken
such civil laws, should be her Example.

6 There is no demonstration can be made that this compulsion of the whore, by
eating her flesh, and burning her with fire was done by penal Laws, but only
by force of arms, as apeares probably, Chap. 18.6, 7, 8. The people of God in
Rome, verse. 4 6. conjoyning with the Protestant army without, therefore no
inference of compulsion for conscience by penal laws can be drawn from hence.

Objection.

Freedom of conscience is contrary to Uniformity.

Answer.

We see the mischief of a forced uniformitie in the Episcopal case, when it
was endeavored to bring three Kingdoms to an uniforme practice.

2 God prefers the peace of his servants consciences before the specious show
of a glorious uniformity.

Objection.

But the things we impose upon you, and compel you to, are not things
unlawful but indifferent.

Answer.

1 That which is indifferent in your conscience, is unlawful in mine, and
therefore you cannot impose it.

2 If it be an indifferent thing, you take away my Christian liberty, in making
it necessary; against which your invasion, the Apostle calls me to stand fast
in my liberty, Gal. 5.1.

3 It is my own, not another man's conscience must be judge, what is indifferent
to me.

From what has been laid down, it^ very considerable, to inquire whether it
be not lawful for the Magistrates to grant liberty of conscience to all men
And without all con^roversie, Christian brethen, who differ in judgment in
smaller matters, as the Presbyterian, Independent, and Annabaptist (though
falsely so called) may each of them in point of conscience enjoy his own way,
to worship God under one and the same State, in one and the same Kingdom,
according that which each of them thinks to be the truth.

Objection.

Ezra. 7.26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the law of the King,
Let judgment be executed speedily upon him; whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment: therefore its
lawful for the civil Magistrate, by all these ways to compel men in
Religion.

Answer.

1 This was an edict of an heathen Emperor made out of fear of wrath verse 23.
not by command from God.

2 He gives Ezra power to set Magistrates to compel them to do the Law of God,
but he gives him not power to punish, in case of misbeleef, of which the
question in hand is.

3 I do the Law of God in walking according to my light, and therefore cannot
come under any of these penalties; either my conscience must be the judge, that
I do the Law of God, or the civil Magistrate, if my conscience must be the
judge, that tells me that I do it: If the civil Magistrate must be judge, then
does this lay a snare for all protestants in popish countries; those
Magistrates hereby will have power to destroy all Protestants dissenting from
them, with death, banishment, imprisonment, confisca^ion.

4 There is no such power affixt upon Magistrates in the New Testament.

5 There is no ground to prove that Artaxerxes was infallibly inspired from God
to give this strict Decree to Ezra, neither did Ezra nor any judge deputed by
him, put the same in execu ion, and no less then a grounded inspiration from
God, will prove that it was obligatorie, at any time, in foro conscientia, much
less to us.

6 Compulsion of persons different in judgment to any uniforme practice is not
the law of God, for the contrary appears, Romans 14.3, 4, 5.6 13. 1 Cor. 8.11,
12. Therefore no man for want of this uniforme practice can be punished by
banishment, death, etc.

7 This Decree of A^^axerx^s was not morral^, but only Judicial, respecting
that former opposition which was made against the Jews, by Tatna^, Shether,
Bosnai, and their companions, Chap. 5.6. and least any others should attempt
the like accusations, its likely the king gave this severe decree.

8 If we might reason from this king, that all other princes, or states, might
stablish the like, it would invest them with the most absolute tyranny that
ever was in the Christian world, not over our estates only, but which is
worse, over our consciences.

Objection.

Luke 14.23. Its said go out into the high ways, and hedges, and compel them
to come in, that my house may be filled; therefore its lawful to compel
persons in religion.

Answer.

1 This parable is the same with Mat. 22.1. Where the King of heaven inviting
the Jews to a Marriage with his son, and they refusing, the King sends his
servants to necessitate the Gentiles to come in; the word is. (...) which
signifies, to necessitate, which was not any violent compulsion, but only to
show them the need and necessity there was of the Gentiles, parts to come in
being they were blind and lame, that is, void of true knowledge of God, and
not able to move toward grace or heaven, which was manifested, and declared,
Acts 13.46, 47, 48.

Reasons why the Magistrates necessitating or Compulsion, cannot here be meant.
1 BEcause the servants that were sent forth the invite to Jews to the
Marriage Supper, or the precious benefit in Christ, were not Magistrates, but
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, who had not any power of Compulsion in their
hand.

2 Because had these servants had any power of compoulsion in their hands, they
would not have taken a repulse of the jews, but have forced them whether they
would or not, to have come in.

3 There is a two fold compulsion;

1 Violent by force of arms and civil sword.

2 Voluntary, as when the reason of man is forced to side, where he sees
strength of argument; It was this latter compulsion or necessitation, that
these servants had and not the former, in their ministerial dispensations,
they were to show them what a great necessity lay on them, to come to Christ
and his benefits. But what is this to the Magistrates compulsion.

Objection.

Dan. 6.26. Darius makes a decree that in every dominion of his kingdom, men
fear and tremble before the God of Daniel, therefore compulsion in religion is
lawful.

Answer.

This Decree only reaches to the acknowledgement of the true God, which only
cuts off those that deny him, as Mahumitanes, Idolaters, etc.

2 He did (pro imperio) as an absolute price command this, not that he had any
command from God for the doing of it.

3 The hinderance why conscientious persons cannot comply to the laws
established, by the Magistrate, or State, is the fear of offending God, if they
should so do, and therefore they need not be compelled to that which thy have
already.

4 Either my conscience, or the Magistrate must be judge what is the true fear
God; if my conscience, it will witness, that I fear him, because, neither for
the gaining temporal goods, nor escaping temporll hazards dare I sin against
him; but if the Magistrate must be judge, then in other Kingdoms and States
the Magistrate must be judge also, and so the French King may compel to
worship of Images of Christ; the Spanish King may compel to Mass; as well as
other States may compel to be present at infants baptism, or Common
Prayer Book, when persons are contrary minded.

Means to liberty of Conscience; which are of two sorts.
1 ON the Magistrates part, who has power to grant it.

2 On the peoples part, who do desire it.

Means on the Magistrates part, are these.
1 That he listen not to those, who out of particular interests may render us
odious, comparing many tender consciences, who cannot comply with public
practices with the Anabaptists of Germany; as if we maintained free will,
falling from grace, denied original sin; nor to those who shall insinuate,
that the Magistrate cannot without guilt and breach of covenant, bear with such
men, when there will an undoubted guilt come upon him, by punishing so many of
the Saints of God, merely for doing things conscientiously to God. Also that he
listen not to them when the shall impute the evil success in the Kingdom,
and retarding of business unto these men's divisions in opinion: no guilt comes
upon a man for not reforming things which are out of the reach of his power.
Let the Magistrate judge, whether the doing things out of conscience, or the
compelling men to do things with a doubting conscience, or against conscience,
or in case of refusal, to fine, banishment, etc. be the more likely cause to
procure these prolongings of our miseries.

2 That he permit free congregations of visible Saints; but if instead hereof
such shall be persecuted and driven away, as in the days of the Bishops;
surely it must be bitterness in the end, when God shall make inquisition for
their blood. Luther said well, Heretics are to be burnt with the fire of
Charttie.

3 That the Magistrate look upon this sort of men, stigmatized by the names of
Independents, Anabaptists, as confiding persons, and as irreconcilable enemies
to Popery, Prelacy, tyranny, as any others. Its observed that the French Kings
are wont to place more confidence in the Protestants in France, then in the
Papists there, as being further removed from the Spanish faction; And why may
not Magistrates do as much here to these men, who are as far, if not farther
removed from Popery, Prelacy, as any persons whatsoever?

4 That the Magistrate look on these men, as those that have lent their hand,
their purse, yea many of them their lives, to break off the common yoke.

Means to Liberty of Conscience on the peoples part, who do desire it.
1 THat you come with humble petitions as Queen Hester, Hest. 7.3, 4. Le^ our
estates, lib^rties, and Country be continued to us, seeing many of our Enemies
tell us of nothing but ruin and violence, which we can hardly b^leeve can
proceed from such men we have to deal w^ hall.

2 Beware in Pamp^lets and o^therwise, of giving hard speeches either to your
wor^hy (...) noble S^^t^^men, whose indefatigable pains will be famous to all
post^^i^^e. 2 P^t. 2.10 Its said of some wicked hypocrites, they were not
afraid to sp^^k ev ll of dignities, nor to the Assembly. A^ong whom we mu^^
^eeds, upon knowledge affirm, there are diverse learned and godly men:
Provoking words raise up the spirits even of good men, and it is not so easy
to lay them again.

3 Show your selves further helpful in the cause, though your selves should
never have any benefit, reserving only so much as in a moderate way may fit
you for banishment, which if the Magistrate never consider, God will. Remember
that however things go, yet will there be in the prevailing of this party, a
great step to reformation; and God will have far more glory then in the
prevailing of the Popish and Prelaticall party. Let it be the joy of our hearts
that God may have glory, though we have confusion.

4 Beware of headiness^ and unadvised opinions, flowing from many out of
wantonness and curiosity, rather then a desire of edifying; which carriage has
but too much alienated the Magistrates, from those that are truly tender and
innocent herein, by preaching and printing irrational and undigested
principles.

5 Be much in prayer and fasting, that God would turn the Magistrates hearts
to you; as when Haman had got a decree, the Jews lay in s^ckcloth, and there
was great weeping and wailing. Hest. 4.2, 3. So let the rumor of Ordinances
and Decrees (whether true or false I know not) coming out against us, cause us
by mourning, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing, to give the Lord no rest,
till he look down from heaven upon us, and turn our condition by the means of
some faithful Mordecai, speaking good for us, or otherwise, as he in his
wisdom and providence sees fit.

6 For those that are in favor with the Magistrate, whether Ministers or
others, to interpose themselves for their brethren; as Queen Hester and
Nehemiah did, not contenting themselves with their own liberty, if they were
sure to have it; for who knows whether God have raised them up to such a time,
who if they do not bestir themselves, deliverance may come from another place,
and they and their houses be destroyed.

REader, I shall desire thee seriously to ponder what has been laid down; it
makes my heart to bleed to see all Christendom the Cockpit of the world, to
the great scandal of Christ and Christianity among Mahumitans and Infidels: It
is a matter (if possible) to be bewailed with tears of blood, that no Nation
or people in the world, so persecute one another, as these that are called
Christians do: What rule they have from Christ herein is to me unknown; sure
his gentle and sweet carriage ^aught us or otherwise* who when the Disciples
would have called for fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans, he reproved
them for their headiness, Luke 9 54 The root of all these fiery distempers in
Chr^ste^dome (as I conjecture) is no other then the doctrine of compulsion of
conscience, which ha^h been gr^undlesly affixt upon the Magistrate by those
that were su^e they should ^ave the Magistrate on their side. And thoug^
persons dec^^ed more Heterodoxe then either the Independent, or
^at^paedobap^st, or the nicknamed Anabaptist, may challenge the liberty of
their consciences by divine right; yet may these in a special manner challenge
it, as d ff^ring from the Presbyteriall judgment in smaller matters; as the
st^ong and the weak did in point of days and meats, Rom 14. Many of all the
three sorts being dear servants of God, whose spirits a^^ ^o^ to be grieve^ by
uncharitable walking, see Romans 14.15, 10. 1 Cor. 8.12, 13. much less the
spirit of God in them.

FINIS.
The Storming of ANTICHRIST In his two last and strongest GARRISONS, of
Compulsion of CONSCIENCE, And Infants BAPTISM. The Second Part.
Question.

WHether it be lawful to Baptize infants?

Answer.

Its unlawful for these arguments.

The Baptism of Christ is dipping.

The Baptism of infants is not dipping, therefore the Baptism of infants is
not the Baptism of Christ.

I prove the proposition that the Baptism of Christ is dipping, three ways;

1. From the Greek Lexicon, the Author hereof could not be suspected, Scap. in
Verbo. (...)
as being an utter enemy to the Tenent; as calling the Anabaptists a
diabolical Sect, and himself a Calvinist, as appears By his Dedication of
his Book to the Magistrates of Berne. He gives the prime signification to be to
Drowned, Dip, or Plunge, and Sometimes to Wash, as he cites Mark. 7. Luke 11.
which are all the authorities he brings; for the word to signify to wash, he
brings no authority out of any Greek Author, for to prove it to signify so
much as to wash: But he never gives it the least title of signification, as if
in any Auther Sacred or Profane, it did signify to Sprinkle.

(...) Though in one Heathen Au^hors (...) is used for ad, yet in Scripture it
is used for into, Mat 28.19. 1. Cor. 8.13. Specially after the Word Baptize, 1
Cor. 1.13. Mar. 1 (...)
2. From the difference twixt Baptizing and Sprinkling, in Scripture. We see
what Sprinkling is, Heb. 9.13, 19. The ashes of an Heyfer sprinkling the
unclean, So verse 19 he took the blood of Goats, and Hysope and sprinkled both
the Book and all the people, The Greek word is, (...).

Now Baptizing in Scripture is Dipping, Luke 16 24 (a) Send Lazarus (...) that
he may not Sprinkle, but dip the tip of his finger in water; John 3.23. John
was Baptizing in Aenon near to Salem, because there were many waters, or much
water ther^; which would have been needless, had Sprinkling been the manner of
Baptizing, Math. 3.6. They were Baptized of John in Jordan: Mar. 1.8. I Baptize
you with water, So it is in the Greek, which he could not have said had he not
applied the subject to the water. But especially, Mark 1.9. They were Baptized
of John into Jordan, which signifies the word to mean to Dip, not to Sprinkle,
and it shows there was an application of the person to the water, not of the
water to the person; as it is in Sprinkling. So verse. 10. Straitway coming out
of the water. Acts. 8.38.39. Philip and the Eunuch (b) they went both of them
into the water, and he Baptized him. So much appears in the phrase, buried
with him by Baptism, Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. For it shows there must be a
dipping in it, or else there can be no burial.

(...) The preposition (...) signifies not to but into as apeares by these
words (...) and (...) ascenderunt and discenderunt, and these words (...) not
from but out of the water, ^^ct. 8.^8, ^i.
3. That Baptism signifies no other thing then Dipping, appears from the
proportion and lively resemblance twixt dipping into the water and rising up
again; Dipping signifies death, and Burial with Christ, and rising up above
the water, Resurrection with Christ, Romans 6.3.4. Know ye not that so many of us
as were Baptized into Jesus Christ, were Baptized into his Death, therefore we
are buried with him by Baptism unto death, that like as Christ was raised from
the dead, so we also should walk in newness of life, Col. 2.12. Buried with
him in Baptism, wherein you are also risen with him. So Pareus on the sixth
verse of the six of the Romans, says the ancient right in the Apostolical
Church was this, the persons baptized were dipped all over in a River, with
some tarriance under the water, then they rose up again; dipping showed
Crucifying and Death, because it was not without terror; Tarrying under the
waters burial, and coming up out of the water resurrection with Christ.

Object. Mar. 7.8. The pharisees held the Baptism of pots and cups; here
Baptism signifies washing.

Answer. 1. It signifies such a washing as is by dipping, for usually when we
wash pots and cups we do not sprinkle them but dip them.

2. In washing pots and cups we wash them all over, which is not only dipping
but total dipping.

3. Whereas verse 4. the word beds is used, they held the washing of brazen
vessels, and beds for the word (...) only signifies a bed, and never a table,
I suppose they wash them by dipping them some way or other in water, but sure
they never sprinkled them, they dipped them because they were legally polluted.

Object. The word Baptize signifies to sprinkle, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were
Baptized unto Moses in the cloud and Sea, and yet there was no water, for they
went through the sea, on dry land: Therefore, that Baptism, was the sprinkling
of rain from From heaven as appears, by comparing Psalm. 76.17.18. The clouds
powered out water, the voice of thy Thunder was in the Heaven, the lightnings
lightened the World, etc. With Exodus 14.21, 22.

Answ. 1. Then the Holy Ghost would not have used the word, (...) which is
never used in Scripture for the sprinkling, but the word, (...) which is
always used in Scripture for sprinkling. So the Apostle would have said, you
were Rantized, or sprinkled to Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and not
said, Baptized to Moses.

2. At that time when the Israelies were Baptized to Moses in the cloud and
s^a, Exodus 14.2^.22. There were none of those things mentioned, Psalm. 77.17.
Neither the clouds pouring forth water, nor the voice of Thunder and Lightning,
but Exodus 9.17.18. compared with verse. 23.24. There is mention made of all
these, where there was a very grievous rain, together with such Thunder and
lightning, that the fire ran along upon the ground. Therefore that place of
Psalm. 77.17. must have respect to this seventh Plague of Egypt, and not to the
story of Exodus 14. When they went through the sea, therefore Paul's words
(Baptize to Moses) cannot signify to sprinkle, but must needs signify a
Metaphorical Baptism.

3. There Is mention of the clouds going before them, and standing behind them,
but never of the going of it over their heads, much less of the raining of the
cloud, upon them, there is not one word of Rain or Thunder in all that chapter.

The Second Arguments against Baptising Infants.
1. Ministers who are Christ's commissioners, ought to cleave close to their
commission.

But to make Disciples before Baptising, is the Ministers Commission.

Therefore Ministers who are Christ's commissioners ought to cleave close hereto.

The major is undoubted, all persons and States confine their commissioners to
their commisson.

The minor (viz.) that first to make Disciples, and after to Baptize is their
commission appears, Mat. 28.

There are sundry exceptions from this place.

As first, the order of the words is not moral, but that, though make
disciples be here put before baptising, yet Mar. 1.4. baptising is put before
preaching; JOHN did baptize in the wilderness^, and preach the baptism of
repentance unto remission of sins.

Answ. Preaching verse 3. is put before baptising, the voice of one crying in
the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord. 2. This place is rather to be
referred to Christ's commission, then Christ's commission to this, and the Geneva
notes on the place do so refer this verse.

Now that the order of the words is moral appears;

1. Because it reaches to all nations, and to the end of the world.

2. Because the same order is observed, Mark. 16.16.

3. It is Christ's last commission; now in commissions there is a punctual
command not only what shall be done, but also the manner of doing.

4. Its absurd to think a man can be baptized before he be preached unto, for
so he shall be baptized into he knows not what

2. Exception. John Baptist did baptize before this commission was given, John
1.26. and so did Christ's discipl^s; John 4.2. therefore this was not the
commission, but an enlargement thereof.

Ans. We only find the practice before we find not any commission for the
practice, We are not to take notice of what unvv^itten word. Christ spoke,
which we know not of, but of what he has left us in ^^citing.
and in that practice we find only believers and repentants baptized, not
infants. 2. Its like Christ gave them a commission by word of mouth for what
they did, but this is the churches commission by writing, to the end of the
world.

3. If this were the enlargement of their commission, show us where the
commission it self is, the Word is silent concerning any such thing: Either
this is our commission from Christ, or else we have nothing but bare example;
yea we know nothing about the form of baptism, to baptize in the name of the
Father, Son, and Ho^y Ghost, but from this place.

3. Exception. There is difference betwixt a church gathering and a church
gathered, though Faith was to go before Baptism then in the gathering of
churches, people coming then out of Heathenisme; yet is not so required now
churches are gathered.

Answ. Then there must be either an exception from the commission, or a
limitation of it; that this my commission shall last till churches be gathered,
and no longer. 3. Or a dispensation with it, as if Christ should say, I gave
you a commission to make Disciples, and Baptize, but now I dispense with it.
Or, 4. an institution besides it, as if Christ would say, I gave you such a
commission formerly, but now here is a new institution; the churches being
gathered, the old is out of date. But Christ says no such thing.

2. Christ intends no difference twixt churches gathering and gathered, for the
commission reaches to the worlds end, lo I am present with you to the end of
the world.

3. The Apostle cuts off all such difFerence, Gal. 3.27. As many as were
baptized into CHRIST, that is into the name, doctrine, and profession of
Christ, had put on CHRIST, which both excludes infants, and shows there was no
difference twixt churches gathering and gathered.

4. Give an example of any one baptized in a gathered church without faith? The
Scripture is silent herein.

5. Our Savior names faith as an univers^ll preceding, requisite for all that
are baptized. Mark. 16.16. Preach the Gospel to every creature whosoever
believes, etc. cutting of all distinctions of churches gathering and gathered.

6. When Christ was 40. days on earth after his resurrection, and spoke of
things concerning Gods Kingdom, Acts. 1.3. strange he should not speah one
tittle hereof; strange Christ should set down such a general rule, and speak
of no exception, and yet mean one.

4. Exception. The commission is, make disciples all nations, baptising them;
but infants are capable of being made disciples: Mr. M. pa 4. 39. But infa^ts
belong to Christ, therefore they may be disciples.
For first to belong to Christ and to be a disciple of Christ is all one: Mat.
10.42 compared with Mar. 9.41. Secondly, Acts 15 10. All they upon whose necks
the false teachers would have put the yoke of circumcision, are called
disciples, but they would have put this yoke upon infants as well as others,
therefore infants are disciples. Thirdly, to belong to Christ, and to be a
disc^ple are not all one, for the ore may be in present the other in
possibility. Its true in grown and converted disciples, not in infants.

Answ. To the former, infants belong to Christ not in respect of visible
constitution but in respect of mystical union; and not all, but only elect
infants, 2. Christ speaks not of infants, but of discipl^s grown up: Mat.
10.42. Mar. 9.41. and these he makes all one with belonging to Christ, though
he call them little ones; its because they are little in their own apprehension.

For that Acts 15.10. the false teachers did not go about to put a yoke upon
the neck of infants, but only on the brethren; as appears verse. 1. Certain mean
came down from Judea, taught the Brethren, and said, except Ye (not infants)
be circumcised after the manner of Moses, you cannot be saved. 2. Though
infants might be sensible of pain yet could they not be sensible of a yoke,
only the disciples were sensible of this; and therefore they only are meant.

Now that infants are not disciples, first because a disciple in English is a
scholar, now what can infants learn?

(...). 57 ^^ar^ an^ ^.
Austin says, Infants to know divine things that have not yet known humane
things, if in words we would show, I fear we may seem to offer injury to our
senses, when by speaking we persuade it.

Those that go about to make infants scholars or disciples, they do not only
lose their pains, but expose themselves to laughter.

2. The very commission shows what kind of disciples Christ meant in these
words; teaching them ((...) not (...) which must agree with (...) not (...)) to
observe all things that I have commanded them, but this cannot infants do;
therefore infants must needs be excluded from being any of the disciples here
meant.

5. Exception, Christ says, baptize all nations; but children are part of the
nation, therefore they may be baptized.

Answ. In the proposition there is a fallacy of division whereby one conjoined
proposition is divided into two pieces. As a certain Atheist that would prove
out of Scripture there was no God, for which he alleged the 14. Psalm. verse. 1.
where it is said, there is no God: but he left out the foregoing words, the
fool has said in his heart. So here Christ says, baptize all nations; but he
conjoynes with it, make disciples all nations: Mr M. page 14.
which the objector here left out.

6. Exception. Is, this of Mat. 28.9. is only an enlargement of their
commission; that whereas before they were to go to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, now they were to go into all the world. Mat. 10.1.

Answ. This going to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel, was only to
preach, and to confirm their doctrine with miracles; as healing the sick,
cleansing Lepers, raising the dead, etc. there was not a tittle about
baptising; as appears Mat. 10.1. to 16. Mar. 3.15, 16, 7. Luke 9.1 2, 3, 4. and
the 70. had, the same commission, Luke 10.1, 2, 3. besides Christ gives a
commission here that has not miracles annexed as that had; but is to remain to
the end of the world.

2. These commissions differ in respect of persons and place, that commission
was only from Judea, this was for all nations; that was to preach to Judea,
this to preach to all nations, and to baptize those that should believe the
things spoken to be true.

3. If this were an enlargement of Christ's former commission in that (make
disciples all nations baptising them) is put in, yet are Ministers and
christians tied to observe the enlargement of the commission, in the very
manner and form, as well as any former commission; because Christ says,
Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded them.

4. Here is a full commission with all its causes; As first efficient, All
power is given me, etc. Secondly the form and immediate call; Go ye therefore.
Thirdly the matter, teaching the nations and baptising the disciples. Fourthly,
the end expressed by the effect, that they may keep all things commanded. 5. The
effect, and behold I am with you to the worlds end; and upon no other condition.

3. The Bap^isme of Christ is the Baptism of actual repentance.

The Baptism of Infants is not the Baptism of actual repentance.

Therefore the Baptism of infants is not the Baptism of Christ.

The proposition appears, that the Baptism of Chirist is the Baptism of
actual repentance, Acts 2.38. Repent and be Baptized every one of you, as if
he should say, first repent, then be baptized, Matthew 3.6. John was Baptising in
Jordan those that confessed their sins, but when he saw the Pharisees and
Saduces come to his Baptism, he said, O generation of vipers, who has
forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come, and would not Baptize them, as
appears, Luke 7.30. Now for the assumption, the Baptism of infants is not
Baptism of actual repentance. There is no shame, sorrow, hatred of sin in
them. Besides, these that baptize Infants for repentance in time to come, they
make two Baptismes, one of the repentance of Infants for time to come, and the
other of the repentance of grown persons, contrary to the Scriptures that
says, there is one Baptism, Ephesians. 4 5.

4. The Baptism of Christ requires faith as an inseparable condition or
qualification to the right receiving of it, without which it ought not to be
administered.

But the Baptism of infants does not require faith as an inseparable condition
or qualification.

Therefore the Baptism of Infants is not the Baptism of Christ.

The proposition appears, 1. From Scripture, which tells us that Christ's
Baptsme requires faith as an inseparable condition, Mar. 16.16. Go preach the
Gospel to every creature, whosoever believes and is Baptized shall be saved;
as if he should say, among creatures where the Gospel is preached none are to
be Baptized but he that believes, for where believers are commanded to be
Baptized, unbeleevers are forbid, under an Affirmative command, the negative is
included, Acts 8.37. Here is water what does hinder me from being Baptized.
Philip answers if thou beleevest it is lawful, for the Greek word only
signifies, as if he should say, (...) Nor thee to be Baptized.
if thou ^ost not believe, it is not lawful neither for thee nor me, for me to
Baptize thee, Acts. 8.12. When the Samaritanes believed Philip, preaching the
things of God, and the name of Jesus Christ they were Baptized both men and
women. When were they baptized, when they believed, not till then.

Object. But its said Simon was Baptized, and yet he was an unbeleever.

Answ. It is said expressly that Simon believed also, with whose profession
Philip was satisfied, for neither Officers nor church can look into men's
hearts, whether they prof^sse in truth; but charity teaches us to judge, they
speak in truth, especially if the profession of life condemns not the profesion
of word, could we look into the heart none were to have this Seal or Sign
save justified persons.

The assumption is, the Baptism of infants does not require faith as an
inseparable condition appears, in that it is maintained by some, that the
faith of the Godfathers, by others the faith of the whole church, others the
parents faith, others the faith of Abraham will serve the turn, though they
have no faith of their own; yea most maintain that they may be Baptized though
they have no faith.

Object. But Infants have faith, for Jeremy was Sanctified from the womb, Ier.
1.5.

Answ. 1. The Hebrew word signifies to separate as well as to Sanctify, so its
the same with Gal. 1.15. Paul says, God that separated me from my mothers
womb, so Esaias 13.3. Christ and his Soldiers are called Gods Sanctified ones.

Object But it is said of John Baptist, Luke 1.15. He shall be filled with the
holy Ghost, from his mothers womb.

Answ. I answer with Augustine, neither do I countenance that which is done in
John; nor thence do I fasten a rule what should be thought of infants:
Mirabili^^.
yea I do wonderfully or miraculously publish that in him, because I find it
not in others, Aug. Epist. 57.

2. Had we any extraordinary testimony by an Angel, that this or that infant
were filled with the holy Ghost from the womb; then should we incline the more
to baptize them.

Thirdly, all that can be deduced hence is, that there is power in God to give
the holy Ghost to an infant in a miraculous way: yet does it not appear that
John was filled with the holy Ghost by believing. That he was filled with the
holy Ghost from the womb is certain, because the word sets it down; but for the
manner how this was done is uncertain, because the word sets it not down. We
may as well reason, that because Enoch and Eliah were translated into heaven,
other men are so to.

3. Object. We cannot except any from having faith, therefore we baptize all.

Answ. First, we except against all from having faith in their infancy, because
they have not so much as understanding; now faith is as well an act of the
understanding as of the will.

2. In dispensation of this ordinance, we must have ground of accepting persons
as fit subjects, before we can dispense it, Acts 8.38. which cannot in an
ordinary way be affirmed of infants.

3. It appears that all infants wants faith; For the proof whereof, Downs on
Iust^f^cation.
I will give sundry reasons published long ago, by a Divine not interested in
this cause, who ex professo took upon him to handle this question.

1 They have no knowledge of good nor evil, Deuteronomy. 1.39. Cannot discern betw^xt
the right hand and left, Jon. 4.11. How then can they understand those things
that are above the pitch of nature?

2 The dislike that infants have at baptism, testified by their crying and
other motion of body; had they actual faith, they would endure all with much
patience: but if in doing so they go against their knowledge, the Sacrament is
so far from benefitting of them, that by their reluctation they contract a
further guilt.

3 If they have faith, why are they not after the imitation by baptism,
forthwith ad^itted to the Lords Supper? As they were from Augustines time, to
the times of L^dovious Pitts and Lotharius, a matter of 600 years, nay why are
they not rather admitted then those of riper years? for infants ^ave not so
much as evil thoughts in them.

4 Because not so much as any one of them among so many millions as have been
in the world, when he comes to riper years, gives any testimony of his faith
till he be further taught and instructed: If a child born of christian
parents, and entered into a visible Church by baptism, shall yet while he is
in his tender years fall into the hands of Turks, as many thousand have done;
the whole band of Janissaries (as some say) consists of no other: does he not
readily receive that religion which is first instild into him without dreaming
of the Cristian faith? Which yet how it should be, having from his first
infancy been seasoned and sanctified in the Christian faith, cannot easily be
conceived or imagined.

5 Do all that have received faith in infancy, lose it again when they come to
be of more years? It seems so, if they received it; for otherwise, why are
they put to their catechism and taught the Elements of faith again? But this
were a strange course. For how should they lose it, unless perhaps God
secretly steal that from them, which in time past he gave them; which to say,
is very derogatory to the bounty of God; who never withdrawes favor once
given, until man by abusing of it have deserved to lose it. Not losing it
therefore, and yet learning it when they come to years of capacity; it is a
plain argument they never received it in their infancy.

6 All habits, whether acquired by custom or infused from above, make a man
more apt and prone unto their proper actions. For example, whosoever is
possessed of the virtues of Justice, Temperance, Liberality, Fortitude, will
readily do justly, temperately, liberally, valiantly; it being the nature of
habits to make easy their actions: Are now the children of Christians when
they come first to be instructed, are more capable of Christian Relgion, or
more inclineable to holy actions, then the children of Infidels? experience
tells they are not, but are as wax indifferently flexible any way, Its absurd
therefore and void of reason to place in infants the habit of faith, which yet
inclines them no more to the acts of faith, then those that are without it.

^om. 10.^.
7. Faith comes by hearing, but infants hear not, neither by the ear nor by any
other way proportionable thereto, or if they do, they understand not what they
hear, for did they understand, I pr^sume they would hearken more attentively
unto what is said, then we see they do.

Wherefore not hearing neither do they believe. If you say they believe by an
inward hearing, then is that faith wrought either by ordinary or extraordinary
means, not by extraordinary means, for it is done every day and hour; by
ordinary therefore. If so, then have we a double manner of working faith and
both of them ordinary, the one by inward hearing in infants only, the other by
inward and outward also in those that are adult, which is a mere noveltie in
the church of God, haec ille.

To conclude the point, August. contra Donatisas l 4. c. 24. says, Baptized
infants cannot as yet believe with the heart unto righteousness, and confess
with the mouth unto Salvation.

Also Chemnic. Deer. Conc. Trid. pars, 2. exam. Can. 13. p. 89. says, I truly
that love simplicity, do not understad, nor can unfold after what manner that
infants that are baptized do believe.

Object. But though infants have not actual faith yet they have Seminall faith.

Answ. This is a vain distinction, For 1. There is but one faith, Epes. 4.
consisting in taking and relying on Christ if we understand justifying faith,
and one profession of faith, which metonimically is called faith, and goes
current for says in all Ecclesiastical Dispensations, when the profession of
life condemns not the profession of words.

1 Pet. 23. Borne again of immortal seed.
2. There can be no such thing as Seminall faith in infants, because the first
feed of faith is illumination, of which infants are not capable, because void
of understanding.

This word (Seminall) does merely delude men by the Metaphorical acception, to
make men think there is a phisickall grouth of faith, as in seeds of vegitive
bodies when they are sown, when the growth is Metaphisicall, and only in
reasonable souls who are fit subjects thereof.

Obj^ct. But if infants have not faith how can they please God and how are they
saved. Heb. 11 6. Without Faith its impossible to please God John 3.17. He that
believes not is condemned already.

Answ. First, the Scripture has not revealed unto us any thing clearly,
concerning the salvation or damnation of infants. 2 Forasmuch, as there is no
name under heaven whereby persons can be saved but by Christ; Acts 4.12, And
forasmuch as infants are guilty of original sin, Romans 5.14. Death reigned from
Adam to Moses, and consequently sin over them that had not sinned, after the
similitude of Adams transgression; that is to say by actual sin. It is then
most likely, that infants as well as others, are saved by the presentment of
the satisfaction of Christ to Gods justice for original sin: Romans 5.18. By the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all, etc. This satisfaction its
true is but one, but there is a twofold way of applying it; first, through
believing, in those that are capable of believing, and so the objected
Scrip^ures and others of the like kind mean it; and its most absurd to refer
the preaching of the Gospel to infants, and to think them capable of
believing, that are not capable of k^owledge.

3 Without believing, is this satisfaction applied for dying infants (by virtue
of Election and the free grace of God) to the justice of God. Romans 11.7.
Elcteion has obtained it, that is the free grace of God, verse. 5. Romans 5.18 If
we ask how baptized infants dying after baptism are saved, you must needs have
recourse to this way; especially it being concluded on both sides, that
baptism does neither confer grace, nor wash away original sin.

Arg. 5. The children of wrath are not to be sealed with the seal of grace;
Baptism is a seal of grace;

Therefore infants are not to be sealed with the seal of grace.

The proposition is undoubted; because every man as he comes into the world, is
by nature the child of wrath: As every nature pertaketh of the nature of which
it is begot, so does man; Ephesians 2.3 Were by nature the children of wrath, even
as others: Psalm. 51 5.

Obj. But if infants as well as others, be children of wrath by nature, then
they dying in their infancy must needs be damned.

Answ. No; natural defilement with original sin does not simply damn, it
shows there is something in us that deserves damnation, but it does not appear
from Scripture grounds, that any person was damned for it alone. David's infant,
though it died the seventh day (a day before circumcision) is probably thought
by divines to have gone to heaven; 2 Samuel 12.13. I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me: And if men may judge (though secret things belong to
God) why may not we think infants in general so dying, their innocence being
the same in respect of actual sin, to be saved through the presentment of the
satisfaction of Christ's death to Gods justice, as was said before.

2 As men have a charitable opinion concerning those infants that died
uncircumcised in the Wilderness for 40. years space, and of those infants that
died before the institution of Circumcision, and of the children of Christians
in the Primitive Church that dyed before their parent, or parents, were
christianized: So must we have the same charitable opinion concerning other
infants: yea those that hold Baptism of infants, hold their infants dying
after Baptism to be saved, and yet they confess Baptism does not take away
original sin.

Object. 2. Among the infants that are children of wrath, there are many
thousand are Elect, therefore they may be Babtized.

Answ. 1. The church cannot judge of secret things, nor knows nothing of their
Election. 2. The Scripture revealing every man to be a a child of wrath by
nature, looks upon them under that notion till there be some profession or
appearance of the contrary, reserving still a charitable judgment for those
that dye in their infancy, and the rather because Christ says of such is the
kingdom of heaven.

Object. 3. Whereres its objected of the Jews infants, they they were children
of wrath by nature, and yet they were sealed with circumcision a seal of
grace, and therefore the infants of Christians may be so Sealed.

Answ. Circumcision was no seal of grace to the nation of the jews, for
persons that in a state of rejection, as Ishmael and Esau had it, yea all that
were bought with a jews money, what it was to Abraham alone, we shall dispute
of it further hereafter. Circumcision was an obligation to keep Moses Law, see,
Romans 2.24. Gal. 5.3, 6, 13. Act. 15.5. And it was to be given to the whole
body of the Jewish nation, whether they had grace or not, it was not
material, this was enough to inright infants to circumcision, that they were
descended of Jewish Parents.

Argument. 6. Acts 8.10.12. There is mention made of a whole Cities baptising,
or at least of a great part of it, who after they believed Philip, preaching
the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus, Christ, were
baptized both men, and women: There is no mention made of believers, and their
seed, but only of men and women; Surely, among so many believers there were
many children, which had they been baptized the Scriptures would not have been
more silent of their Baptism then of their parents, especially seeing children
are named with their Parents when there is occasion, Acts 21. vcas. 5. They all
brought us on our way with wives and children till we were out of the City.
Should an Heathen (in time when Jewish worship was required) have came to a
Priest, and told him that he believed in the God of Israel, and desired to be
joined to the Jewish church, the Priest would tell him if you join to us you
must have the foreskin of your flesh cut off, and the foreskin of all your
Males, this Proselite might reply, this circumcision is painful, where do you
find it written, the Priest would instantly turn to the 17. of Genesis, and
show him where it is written: In like manner, So among those 30 ^. souls there
is not so much as (...) in infant spoken o^ but only sa^h as gladly rece^ved
the Wo^d, Act 2.41
An Heathen comes to a Minister and tells him that he believes in Jesus Christ,
and desires to join to a Christian church, the Minister tells him if you join
to us you must be baptized, you and your children, now should the Heathen
reply, where do you find it written, do not you think the Minister would be
greatly pusled to prove it, and would he not be ashamed to fetch his Covenant
from Moses, and his sign or seal from Jesus Christ.

So that I conclude, if the Samaritans men and women, had children or infants
why had they not brought them.

Argument 7. Acts 19.2, 3, 4, 5. Baptism of persons that want faith in one of
the persons of the Trinity is insufficient.

Infants at baptism wants faith, not only in one, but in every person of the
Trinity, therefore there baptism is insufficient.

For the assumption, we have proved before that infants want faith at their
baptism.

For the propositon it appears, Acts 19.2, 3, 4 When certain that were not
well instucted in christianity had Baptized some Disciples, but had not
baptized them into the name of the holy Ghost, and its probable by Paul's
speech, verse 4. that they were not baptized, so much as into the Name of Jesus
Christ, but only into the name of one God, hence their baptism being
defective in believing in some of the persons of the Trinity, they counted
their baptism not to be sufficient and so had a right baptism, in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, neither was this a needless scruple of Conscience in them, for
Paul did approve it, verse 6. By laying his hands on them; How much more then is
baptism of infants insufficient, that do not believe in any person of the
Trinity. Neither let any man say this was a relation of Paul, concerning John's
hearers in the time of John's ministry, so that this word (They) must have
reference unto those hearers, and not a relation of Paul concerning an act done
by John, it plainly appears, because the Apostle goes on in a continued
History, concerning the Twelve, to verse 8. for they that Paul laid his hands
on and received the holy Ghost, and spoke with tongues, verse 6. must needs be
meant, verse 4.5.

And whereas those that maintain that Paul verse. 4.5.6. relates concerning John
and his hearers. Contend that imposition of hands, and believing in Christ are
all one, the contrary appears, Act. 16.17, 10, 47.

Argument 8. The same condition and qualifications are required in persons
baptiseable in our days, as were required in times of the Apostles.

But to have put on Christ to be baptized into Christ's death, to have the heart
sprinkled from an evil conscience, to be buried and risen again with Christ,
to have the answer of a good conscience, were the conditions then required.

Therefore such conditions and qualifications are required in our days.

The proposition appears, because the essentials of the church of Christ are
the same in all ages; and its no where said, these conditions shall be
essential requisites to the planting of churches, but after churches be
planted; members shall come in, in the faith of their master or parent.

For the Assumption it appears, Romans 6.3, 4. Know you not that so many of us as
were baptized into Jesus Christ (that is the name, doctrine, and prof^ssion of
Christ, the badge of Christianity, Christian worship, Christian religion) were
baptized into his death. The Apostle speaks of their being dead and buried with
Christ, as of a thing that was in being at their baptism, when they were
baptized into the name and doctrine of Christ.

Obj. But this was meant only of those that were brought out of a state of
Gentilisme, but this does not hinder but the infants of such were baptized,
though they were not deemed to have grace.

Answ. The Apostle cuts of all such allegations by these words; Know ye not
that so many of you as were baptized into Jesus Christ (that is the name and
profession of Christ) were baptized into his death, and buried with him by
baptism.

So Gal. 3.26, 27. The Apostle had said verse. 26. The Galatians were all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: he proves it from their baptism,
verse. 27. For as many as were baptized into Jesus Christ, that is his name and
doctrine, have put on Christ. That is, all those that were baptized in Galatia,
into the name, doctrine and profession of Christ; had put on Christ before
baptism, so far as man could judge; else any man might have excepted against
the Apostles reason, and said this proves not the point: for they are others,
that is to say infants, that are baptized into Christ, and have not put on
Christ.

So Coloss. 2.11, 12. The Colossians were not baptized to believe in time to
come, but because it was supposed, They had the circumcision made without
hands, by the spirit Christ: verse. 11. death burial and resurrection with
Christ: verse. 12. Also faith of the operation of God. Now how could this be
said of infants? So Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure water. Divines interpret this washing of our bodies,
of the washing in baptism. And Estius upon the place, says its the common
exposition as well of the Greeks as of the Latins, to understand it of the
Sacrament of Baptism, which must needs be meant, because he names the body; for
if he would not have named something that he had not named before, he would not
have called it body but soul, and have said, having your soul washed with pure
water; but he had spoke before of the soul in these words, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience; therefore he must needs speak of such a
washing as respects the body as it is a body, which can be no other then the
water of baptism. Which things being so, we see what kind of persons are
baptized; Those that had their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
had faith to draw nearer in assurance to God. So 1 Pet 2 21. The like figure
whereunto Baptism does now save us, not the putting away of the filth o^ the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God. (...)
In the Greek the interrogation of a good conscience, when the conscience is so
purged that God has nothing against it to condemn it, it can interrogate God
what he has against it? Which shows in Peter's time who were the subjects of
baptism; Even such as were deemed to have purged conscienc^s. Hence Tertullian
in his book of repentance faith, that washing of baptism is the seal of faith,
which faith is begun and c^mmended from the faith repentance; for we are not
therefore washed that we may cease to sin, but because we have ceased, because
we are now washed in heart. So that we see what qualifications were in the
Apostles time, and afterward to a right receiving of baptism; and are to
continue as a rule for all churches.

Argum. 9. That tenent which brings mischiefs to the churches, and the contrary
practice, benefits; the practicing of the one is unlawful, and the contrary
practice required.

But the baptism of infants brings mischiefs to the churches, and the delaying
baptism till persons believe brings benefit.

Therefore the practicing of infants baptism is unlawful, and the contrary
practice required.

The proposition is undoubted, the assumption has two branches; 1 That infants
baptism brings mischiefs. 2 That the delaying baptism til persons believe
brings benefits.


I will show the mischiefs which infants baptism brings,

1 It fills the Church with rotten members; Such persons in following times
growing up prove often wicked, and many of them only civil men, we know not
how to get them out of Communion; and so the matter of the churches come to be
so corrupted, that they are made incapable of reformation; for when the matter
of Churches is rotten, what hope is there that the churches will come into a
pure state? Better did the Nicene Council, that divided their Congregations
into Hearers, Catechumeni or persons catechized, and Communicant. The mixed
multitude were hearers hopeful persons that had good desires were
Chatechumini, and those that were deemed believers, were Communicants; a
practice much to be thought of in these times of reformation.

2 It confounds the world and the church together, which Christ has severed,
Joh. 15.19 Joh. 17.9.14.15. Infants b^ptisme especially serving to christianize
the profane world, who if men enlightened would speak what they think, they
must needs say they are not Christians, no not one tenth part in too too many
Congregations.

3 It causes reproach to christianity, when many persons that have been
christianized only by their infants baptism, prove so unholy, which Heathens
look on as part of you; yea though they be kept off from communion with you in
the Lords Supper, yet will it be hard to keep off such from the Supper: their
ignorance must be very gross, and their scandals very soul that keeps them
off, but more hard to keep them off if they lead civil lives and be rich,
especially if they understand some Catechisticall points, though any christian
man may see they are strangers from any life of grace.

4 Wicked persons rest in the baptism they had in their infancy without
seeking after knowledge or grace; whereas were they held a while upon hope of
acceptance into communion of churches, they might be furthered to seek
knowledge, and restrain from gross enormities; whereas now supposing
themselves Christians by their baptism they received in infancy, they care not
to do either.

5 Its a Nest-egge and ground work for traditions; if we fall upon traditionary
teachers, Bell ^^. d ve^b ^ d^^ 5. Mort A^ol part 2. l 1. c 39. Obj-Ame^ Ant
Synod ^e ^^ ^ver. (...) apo p 2^2
presently they hit us in the teeth with infants baptism. B^llarmine says,
the Lutherans cannot prove the baptism of infants against the Anabaptists by
the Scripture, the Catholics are not wont. So the Remonstrants in their
Assemblies as a very ancient rite, which can scarcely be left off without great
scandal and offense.

6. It fills the conscience with scruples, some question whether they were ever
baptized, some question how could I make a covenant by my self, much less by
others, being an infant. Some think there is no word at all for what is herein
done, but its only a laudable Apostolical tradition, some think it a Sign
of faith in present, others in infants. But that which causes most scruple is,
about the formalis ratio, the formal cause that inrights a man to this infant
Baptism. Some think the faith of the parents, or of those that offer them,
does inright them hereto; Others think that the faith of their Grandfather,
great-grandfather to many generations, if none be nearer, that were godly of
the race, the faith of Noah shall serve; Aug. Ser. 1 ^. de ver. apostol.
Others think the faith of the whole Church. Others think that childrens
Seminall faith makes them capable hereof, the nature whereof who can
understand, seeing all faith requires an act of the understanding which infants
have not; Some think Abraham's faith does it; Some think there is an inward
covenant which was made to Abraham, whereby whatsoever God is to a godly man,
he is the same to all the seed. Nay say others; seeing many of the godlies seed
are wicked, this is impossible but th^re is a certain outward Covenant,
formerly in circumcision, now in bap^isme whereby infants do partake, talk
with ten men, and you shall see them divided into five parts about the formal
cause that en^itles an infant to baptism. Its a speech of Erasmus, things are
bad where there is need of so many remedies.

Infants Baptize destroys two of the principal marks of a particular church,
whereby the members of it are known from all other societies i^ the world, so
that hereby they are made no marks at all, as 1. Prof^ssion. 2. Baptism.

1. Profession, That which makes us members of the Catholic, I mean Christ's
body, (for the catholic visible church I explod as a monster, that has
neither Ordinances nor officers, unless w^e take catholic into opposition to
the church closed up in Judea) I say that which makes us members of the
catholic, the profession hereof makes us members of a particular Church, faith
does the one, the profession of faith does the other, Acts 8.37, 38. Acts
19.18. and this profession is required in New England before any person is
admitted as a member. Now infants baptism utterly destroys this note, being
they are members already

2. Infants baptism destroys baptism from being a mark of a Church. He that
would truly define, and describe it by such properties as are so essential to
the thing, as that being there, they make it to be that it is, and being
absent, it cease to be any more the same. And further, that it be common to
no more but that thing; Now infants baptism is no distinguishable sign or
mark of a member of a church, because it is common to more persons then such as
by Church right are members of Churches, even to many, that as soon as they grow
up become persecutors of believing members of the same church of which the
persecutors themseves are reputed members. Most Divines make Baptism a sign
of a church, but how it can be so in such a subject I see not.

8. It makes the Preachers assertions of Baptism and the peoples practicalls
to jar one with another.

Melancton says dipping signifies the old man with sin to be appointed to
death; and coming up out of the water, Loc. com de bap.
signifies that we being now washed do expect a new and eternal life.

Zanchy. They that are dipped, Zanch in Ephesians. loc. de ba^
are received into the faith and flock of Christ, and Order of them that are to
be renewed by the spirit, forgiveness of all sins being given unto them.

^n Roma^^s, c 6.5.
Martyr says, Baptism is a sign of regeneration into Christ, into his death
and resurrection, which succeeded circumcision; consisting of the washing of
water in the word, whereby in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
remission of sins and pouring out of the Spirit is offered, and by a Sacrament
we are planted in Christ and his visible Church, and right to the Kingdom of
heaven is sealed unto us, and we likewise profess that we will hereafter die
^o sin, and live to Christ.

(...) l. cap. ^5.
Polanus says, Baptism is a Sacrament in which they to whom the Cov^nant of
grace belongs, according to the command of Christ, are washed with water in the
name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, that is, that it may be signified and
sealed unto them that are baptized, that they are taken into the communion of
the covenant of grace, planted in Christ and his mystical body, justified of
God for the blood of Christ powered out for us, and ^ generated by the spirit of
Christ; and likewise, we are bound to worship him in faith and a good
conscience, and to call upon this God the Father, Son, etc.

^oc. 47. ^g 6^7.
Bucan says, Baptism is a seal of the righteousness of says, that is, of
our incorporation with Christ, of remission of sins, of giving the Holy Ghost
and regeneration, whereby we are sealed unto Christ, incorporated and buried
with Christ, and die unto sin by the power of the death of Christ, and rise to
newness of life: Or it is a mutual obligation of God, testifying that he
receives the person baptized into favor: and of the person baptized, giving
his faith to God that he will worship him rightly.

^g. 612. ^p. 81 of ^aptisme.
Greenham says, Baptism is a pledge of our washing in Christ's blood, Acts
2.39. of our justification, Gal. 27. of our ingrafting into Christ's body,
Ephesians. 4.16. of our dying to sin, Romans 6.3. of our resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.29.
of our unity of spirit with our brethren.

^ontr. 12. ^est. 1.
Willet Synepsis says, we define Baptism a sign or s^al of regeneration,
whereby we are assured, that as verily by says in the blood of Christ, we are
cleansed from sins, as our bodies are washed with water in the name of the
Father: And a little after he says; It is the proper act of faith to
regenerate us, not of Baptism; the use and end whereof is to strengthen and
increase our faith.

^oc. com. ^g. 614.
Mu^culus says, Baptism is a Sacrament of regeneration, purgation, or if you
will of washing imitation, sanctification, and incorporation, whereby we
repenting and professing faith and Christ's religion, that being washed from our
sins, we may walk in newness of life; are incorporated and sealed to Christ
and his church.

^. 2.
Trelcatius says, the primary end of Baptism, is to signify seal and show
Sacramentally the forgiveness of sins, benefit of regeneration, and union with
Christ.

I might heap up many assertions of Divines like these alleged, but these are
enough to show how the practicals jar with these assertions laid down, and how
unsound diverse of them are, if affirmed of infants.

9 Infants Baptism produces many absurdities;

1 It puts an infant in a state of grace and remission of sins, M.F.C. i^ his
Book of K Jesus p. 5, 6, 7, 8
before calling.

2 It makes them visible members of Christ's church before calling, contrary to
1 Cor. 1.2.

3 It upholds a national church as Circumcision did, the national church is
but one candlestick, the particular churches are seven candlesticks, Apoc. 1.
20,

4 It intayles grace to generation, not to regeneration; contrary to Joh. 3.5,
6.

5 It goes quite contrary to Christ's order, who first bids make disciples, and
then baptize after, haec ille.

6 Hereby the carnal seed is taken, and acknowledged to be the spiritual seed
of Abram.

7 Whereas the Scripture requires only persons to be baptized who gladly
receive the word, Acts 2.41. and desire baptism, Acts 8.36. by this infant
baptism all are compelled, they and their children to be made Christians
whether they will or no.

8 Christ did never ordain the Sacrament of Baptism any way to concur
toward grace, but as it works in, by and upon the understanding (for if we go
any other way, we must say the Sacrament of Baptism confers faith) then is it
an absurdity to dispense it where there is no understanding to conceive the
history or mystery thereof.

10 Infants Baptism is a foundation for the Arminians to maintain, Ane Sy^alia
de pe^^ever. ^anctor. cap. 11.
falling from grace; If infants be baptized because they are in covenant with
God, then it seems they after proving wicked are fallen away: This Argument was
urged by the Remonstrants, which Doctor Ames was forced to slight, because he
could not answer.

11 Many by infants Baptism are received into communion of Baptism, who are
excluded from the communion in the Lords Supper, whereas the communion in both
is one and the same; which I prove by four reasons.

1 One and the same thing is signified and sealed both in Baptism and the
Supper; that is to say, our partaking in the death and resurrection of Christ,
therefore the communion is the same.

2 The same preparations that are required for a right receiving the Lords
Supper, are required for a right receiving of Baptism; and the qualifications
which does exclude from the one, does also exclude from the other. For example,
faith and repentance qualifies for the Supper, so for Baptism; nay there are
plainer places to prove the necessity of these requisites in Baptism, then in
the supper: Ex Gr.

For repentance a preparation to Baptism, we see Acts 2.37.38.41. Repent and
be baptized, and they that gladly received the Word were baptized, Math. 3 6.
They were baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their sins; hence B^ptisme is
called the baptism of Repentance, Luke 3.3. Because it was administered only
to penitent persons. See Mark. 4. Acts 13.24, Luk 3.3. How John preached the
baptism of repentance, so faith is another prec^ding requisite to baptism, we
see Mark. 16.16. Whosoever beleev^th and is baptized. Acts 8.12. When the
Samaritans believed Philip, they were baptized. Acts 8.37. If thou beleevest it
is lawful. Acts 10.47. Can any one forbid water that these should not be
baptized that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we.

Now for preceding requisites to the Supper, we see 1 Cor, 11.27.29. He that
eats and drinks unworthily, etc. This word worthily shows there are certain
preceding requisites without which God will not think us worthy receivers;
these are 1. repentance, for which we can hardly bring a plain place the most
is, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself.

So for faith we have it to be a preparation only by deduction, Matthew. 26.28.
The cup is said to be the Blood of the new Testament shed for the rem ssion of
sins: but this being apprehended no otherwise then by faith, faith must be a
precedent requisite to right receiving: This is the sum of the four
Evangelists concerning this matter; saving that Luke adds these words, Luke
22.19. This is my body which is given for you: which requires faith to believe
this promise. For the sixth of John, the best Divines upon undoubted grounds
confess Christ speaks not a word of the Supper. Another deduction I only
remember is from 1 Cor. 10.16. Where bread and wine or rather the Cup of
blessing, are called the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, that is, by
faith coming betwixt; for by faith only, we have union and communion with
Christ.

To conclude, seeing the Scripture does require the same requisites to precede
Baptism that it does to precedr the Supper, as plainly yea far more plainly;
requisites for Baptism being set forth by plain commands, practices and
examples, and requisites for the Supper, drawn only by plain and clear
deduction; I conclude, that without the foregoing requisites of faith and
r^pentance, so far as the Church or Elders are able to judge, no man ought to
be received into communion in Baptism, no more then he ought to be received
into communion in the Supper; for want of the said requisites of faith and
repentance.

3 There is but one excommunication, therefore there is but one communion, as
we see Math: 18. If he h^ar not the Church, let him be as a Heathen and a
Publican, and consequently he is cast out of communion in baptism, as well as
in the Supper for a person cast out is to be as an Heathen or publican, neither
of which were baptized: And so was the incestuous person cast out, for that
which is called a less excommunication, con^uting in an abstention of vicious
men from the Supper, and yet holding them in commnunion in other privileges,
has so far as I see, little ground in Scripiure. That place 2 These. 3.14.
commonly alleged for it proves nothing. If any man obey not our w^rd by this
Epistle, note that man and have no company with him that he may be ashamed, yet
count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. The word in Greek for
note is (...), which signifies to mark or sign with a mark notorious, which
was no other but that excommunication practiced on the incestuous person, as
appears by these reasons.

1 Because there is the same beginning of excommunication here, that is set
down 1 Cor. 5.4. as appears in the 6. verse of this chapter, which must be
conjoined with this 14. verse, We command you brethren in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
disorderly.

2. By the signification of the word (...) which signifies to set a brand upon
a Subject.

3. By his bidding them withdraw their company from such, for fear of
infection, not only verse. 6. but also verse 14.

4. There is the end of excommunication set down, that is, That he may be
ashamed, both of his wickedness and come to repentance, and of that public
brand wherewith he is stigmatized.

Now whereas verse. 15. its said count him not as an Enemy, that is, after the
censure is thus past upon the sinner, count him not as an enemy that is as a
persecutor, or one that is an adversary of the faith, but admonish him as a
brother, that is, Though he cease to be a brother, being cut off, yet do not
you lay aside your brotherly affection toward him, but still admonish him as
if he were a brother in communion with you, for admonition is a duty we owe to
excommunicate persons, and yet we may withdraw familiar society from them, as
we do from Heathens and Publicanes.

5. In the course of Scripture, those that pertooke of Baptism did also
partake of the supper, 1 Cor. 12.13. the Apostle speaks of all believers, that
by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one spirit; where
we see three things. 1. That only those, that in the judgment of charity have
the Spirit, are and ought to be baptized, 2. All such that were so judged of
were Baptized. 3. The same all pertook of the Lords Supper, being all made to
drink into one Spirit, which divines expound to be no other then drinking in
the Lords Supper, which by a Synecdoche is put for whole communicating.

I will now prove the second branch of the assumption, that is this, the
delaying baptism till persons believe, brings benefits, As;

1. Hereby the matters of the Churches will be right, whiles none but Saints in
profession shall be admitted members, and without a right matter there will
never be comfortable Reformation.

2. Persons being delayed will be careful to get knowledge, that so they may
partake of Church Privileges, and without which they cannot partake of them,
and also to address their lives according to the Rule of Christianity, seeing
a want of either would keep them off from being church Members, but now most
persons being, once baptized in their infancy, are careless to get either
knowledge or Holiness, but rest in their baptism.

Object. But what if a person should die in the time when he is delayed?

Answ. When he has a will to receive the Odinance of Baptism, but cannot,
being kept off by the Church or Elders, his faith will save him in this case,
when there is neither carelesenesse nor contempt on his part.

Ambrose doubts not of the salvation of the Emperor Valentiniar, though he
were not baptized.

3. Ministers and Christians would have a more perfect understanding of the
Doctrine of Baptism, which being administered to infants seems to be under a
cloud.

What Baptism is.
For Example, Baptism is a sign or seal of our Death, Burial, and
Resurrection with Christ, Romans 6.3, 4. And that we are planted into the
likeness of his Death, and Resurrection, having sin dead in us respect of the
reign and dying in respect of the relics verse. 5. and we rising again to
newn^sse of life. Also its a sign of our faith. Mar. 16. of our fellowship
with Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. of the holy Ghost, Acts 10.47. Of our putting on of
Christ, Gal. 3.27. of a heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10.22.
Of the answer of a good conscience, 1. Pet. 3.21. When we read these things in
the Scriptures, we must needs question, how can these things be in the baptism
of infants, many of which prove very wicked, and some will be ready to think
they once had this grace in baptism, but are now fallen from it, but if these
things be affirmed of grown persons who understand what they do, and profess
what they understand, there will be no difficulty in conceiving what the
Scripture means seeing every church of Christ, or the Elders of it, judges
such persons to profess in sincerity.

4. Deferring of baptism would come nearer the purity of ancient times, as
appears not only in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 8.37, 10, 47.16.35. and
there is never an instance of c^ilden, so the 3000. and Lidia.

So the counsel of Laodicea, it behooves them that come to baptism, (...).
Conc La^^ cor 46 (...). Council. Constant. Can 7.
learn the faith, and to give account of it to the Bishop or Elders, the which
very cannon its like, upon some abuse, or neglect, r^established in the
counsel of Trullo word word for word, cann^on. 78.

So in the counsel of Constantinople which was called in the reign of
Theodosiu^, canon the 7. the words are, So we Catechize them and make them for
to come for a certain time into the Church, and to hear the Scriptures, and
then we baptize them.

5. Deferring Baptism would take off scruples from godly Ministers, who
scruple the giving the Lords Supper to ungodly civil persons, and not without
cause, being; 1. They bear false witness to them, asserting the body of
Chirist to be given for them; 2. Give them a knif wherewith they know they will
cut their own throats, now if these should profess the faith in words and not
deny it in deeds before they were baptized, by virtue of the same profession,
they might be admitted to the supper, without any more ado, and continue
therein, till they either dyed or were cut of by censure, without which, what
soever the Discipline be its more then probable their consciences will still
scruple, whiles under the mask of infants baptism all sorts of civil and
wicked men creep in, to partake of the Supper in sundry congregations, where
are thousands of communicants, the Minister or elders cannot with comfort admit
one quarter to the supper

Argument 10. That tenent which was first taken up in the Churches, upon
unfound and erroneous principles is unlawful.

But so was infants baptism, therefore its unlawful; I prove the assumption,
in that it was brought in upon these grounds or such like.

1. That baptism did wash away original sin, so Orig. in c. 6. ad Roma. says
the church received a tradition from the Apostles, to give baptism to infants,
for they to whom the secrets of Divine mysteries were committed, knew that they
were in all the natural filth of sin, which ought to be abolished by water,
and the spirit.

Hence the counsel of Carthage. Can. 111. Ordained children to be baptized,
for the washing away of original sin, (...) etc.
that that infants contracted by the old generation, may be purged by
regeneration, by which the counsel means baptism.

(...) Bellar. l 2 c^p 1. ^e sacr^m nt
So the Counsel of Trullo, that was called together under the Emperor
Justinian, which Counsel ordained, though they could not fit sureties for
infants be found, and though in regard of age they could not answer for
themselves, yet ought they to be baptized, without any offense, lest this kind
of doubting should deprive them of the Sanctification of so great a
Purification.

2. That Baptism did confer grace, hence every man was afraid his child
should die without baptism, least it should die without grace, hence the
Papists teach, that the Sacraments, as Physical causes effectually, a lively
and immediately produce and make the grace of Justification, in the heart of
man. For this end the Priest accordinig to the prescript of the Reformed
Mass^-booke is bound to pray, tha^ the nature of water may receive the power of
Sanctification, that God would make the water fruitful by the secret mixture
of his Godhead, that Sanctification being conceived, a certain new creatur may
arise out of the unspotted womb of that Divine fountain, that it may be the
water of life, that it may remain eff^ctuall to purge our minds.

That the holy Ghost would descend into the fullness of that fountain, that he
would make all the substance of the waters fruitful, to make Regeneration, so
in the Sc^tch Service Book, which in the beginning of these stirs was thrust
upon them, there are these words, in the administration of Baptism, commanded
by the Presbiter, to be used as often as the water was emptied out of the Font,
and new water put in, the Presbiter was to use this Petition, Sanctify this
fountain of Baptism, Oh thou which art the the Sanctifi^r of all things.
Which in effect was, that the Presbiter should pray for some material
creature. And this is according to the Popish axiom that the Sacraments
confer grace, without the faith of the receiver; Nor was our Common prayer
book much removed from this Tenet, as apeares in the Catechism. Who gave you
that name?

Answer. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a
member of Christ the child of God, and an inheritour of Heaven; And in the
Rubricke before the Catechism. Children being baptized have all things
necessary for their Salvation, (...).
and be undoubtedly saved, which could not upon any ground be said, if the
Authors did not imagine that Baptism did confer grace; and it further
appears, in the Thanksgiving after public baptism, when the Minister says,
We yield thee hearty thanks that it has pleased thee to regenerate this
infant with thy holy Spirit.

3. The third was the absolute necessity of baptism to Salvation, so the
counsel of Carthage Cannon. 111. when the Lord says, unless a man be
Regenerate of Water and of the Spirit, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of
God. What Catholic doubts, that he partakes of the Devil that is not coheire
of Christ, where we see the Counsel judge infants dying without baptism to be
damned, and that they gave it infants upon a supposed absolute necessity to
Salvation.

So the Counsel of Laodicea Canon 48, it behooves them that are Baptized after
Baptism to receive the heavenly oil, and to partakers of the Kigdome of
Christ, so the Minister in the Rubricke before private Baptism, is enjoined to
baptize the infant using the form of words if he have not time to pray with
it; yea, if have not so much time as to s^y the Lords Prayer. From which
appares infants Baptism did arise from an op^nion of the absolute necessity of
Baptism to salvation, and danger of damnation if the Infant wanted the same.

4. For the increasement of christendom, Some christians out of wordly wisdom
and a weariness to suffer, I doubt not about the times of Austin or a little
before brought it into the Church, but only as a tradition.

Argument, 12. From the universal practice, not only in the times of the
Apostles but in following times, wherein we find persons only Baptized after
they believed.

For the Apostles times we see, Acts. 2.38. Repent and be Baptized, Matthew.
28.19. Make disciples all Nations Baptizing them, Mat. 16.16. Whosoever
believes and is Baptized shall be saved, John 3.5. Except a man be borne
again of water and of the Spirit, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God,
Acts. 18.12. When the Samaritanes believed Philip they were Baptized, Acts 8
37. If thou beleevest its lawful, Acts 10.47. Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be Baptized, that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we;
Lydia, Act. 16. The Jaylour v. 34. The Cothians, Act. 18.8. Act. 19.5. Romans 6,
3, 4, 5. Gal 3.37. Col. 2.12. Heb. 10.22. 1 Pet. 3.21. This book of the Acts of
the Apostles sets down the History and practice of the churches in the best
and purest times.

Object. But we cannot tell out of Antiquity when infants baptism came in,
therefore it was Apostolical.

Answ. We can prove out of Antiquity, when it was not in the church, even in
Justin Martyrs days, who is the ancientest father Extant, that I know of, who
was not Spurious. Yet is it never mentioned, in his genuine works, though he
often speak of Baptism indeed in the suppositious book which is called,
Quaestions and Responsiones ad Orthadoxos, it is once mentioned in these words.
If infants dying, have neither praise nor blame by their works, what
difference in the Resurrection betwixt them that have been Baptiz^d of some,
and have done nothing, and those that are not Baptized, and lik^wise have done
nothing, to which the answer given is, The Baptized obtain^ the go d things
that come by Baptism, the others not, moreover, they are worthy of the good
things that come by Baptism, by their faith that offers them to baptism.

(...)
For answer, the whole book, though it go under Ju^tins name, is forg^d as
ap^ares by the 16. and 17. questions, also 139.14^. Where he has th^^e words,
subsistences, Persons, Trinity Unity, which S^ulptotus in Ana^^ Iustini, cap.
11. Says, he was ignorant of, in his former writings, and the Church of God
was necessitated long after to use these words, moreover Sculptetus adds these
words. I think no man will doubt that this treatise has crept i^to the number
of Justins writings, for qu^st. 112. The angel that spoke to Jacob and Moses,
is said to be a created angel, but in the disputation with Tripho the Jew,
which is confessed to be his own, that angel is said to be the Son of God,
again in the 82. and 86. questions, Origin is cited for the exposition of
certain Hebrew names, when he lived a matter of 80. years after Justine. So
question 127. the Manichees are cited, who sprung not up till 130. years after
Justine, so quest. 75. that the souls are kept in places worthy of them, till
the day of the resurrection how does it argee with those things which the true
Justine written, in his Oration to the Greeks, viz. The soul being fred from
evils goes to him that made it: there are other reasons to be seen in
Sculpt^tus against this book.

2. In this p^int of infants baptism this place of Iustine is contrary to that
which the true Istine writes, in his Second apology for the christans, (...),
etc.
to the Emeperour Antoninus; where he says, whosoever are persuaded and
believe those things to be true which are delivered and spoken of us, and
receive that they can so live, -- they are brought of us where there is water
-- and are washed in the Name of the Father, and Lord of all things, and our
Savior Jesus christ, and the Holy Spirit. page 73. Editio Commelini; This book
by all men's conf^ssion was his own, for which he suff^red death, also page 76.
He says moreover, We after this w^shing do bring the believer now joined to us
to the brethren, as they are called, where they are gathered together to Common
Prayers, and supplications both for themselves, and the party Baptized, or
enlightened, and for all others, and mark it in this Apology, he sets down
the practice of the Church, both for word prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, and that ex Professo. This is all that I can find upon a diligent
search for Baptising infants in Iustine Man. so tha^ it was not in the world in
his time, and but once named in one book, which most falf^ly is attributed to
him, and the contrary practice we see in the true writings of Iustin^, and this
that I have spoken, I challenge any man to gainsaiy if he can.

And therefore, I wonder how Mr. M. can use such a confident assertion as he
does, when he says, this privilege of baptizing of such infants, Mr. M. page
3.
the christian church has been in possession of for the space of 1500. years
and upwards, and for the confirmation hereof, he brings a quota^^ out of this
spurious Book falsely attributed to Iustine Martyr, quest. 56. the vanity of
which Book I have sufficiently proved. We shall desire him or any other to
prove if he can, that in any place of Iustine Martyrs genuine Works, there is
so much as the name of Infants Baptism, much less the thing. I suppose he may
as soon find a Dolphin in the woods, as find any such thing. Yea, we shall
desire him or any other if they can, to prove insu^ts baptism out of Iustone
Martyr, Ireniaeus, Origin, Clemens Alexandrirus, or Tertullian, which are the
fathers next to the Apostles. (For the following Fathers, we do not regard
their authority in this point, as being far off from the Apostles times.) I
suppose it will trouble any man to find so much as the name, much less the
thing Save that Origin calls it a tradition, in Romans 6. his words are. The
church received a tradition from the Apostles, to give baptism to infants, for
they to whom the secrets of divine mysteries were committed, knew that there
were in all the natural filth of sin, which ought to be abolished by water and
the spirit, whether this tradition of infants baptism washing away the
natural filth of sin, be to be conjoined in equality of power with those
traditions the Apostle mentions, 2 These. 2.13. I appeal to Mr. M. Mr M page 4
his own conscience. Besides, why the word (...), which is translated,
Ordinances; 1 Cor. 11.2. should be here translated, Traditions, I see not; the
word being in every tittle the same, it ought to have been translated
Ordinances here, as well as there: Such ordinances of the Word, as the Apostle
in his preaching as well as his writing had set them in, of these he says,
(...), hold these ordinances with all your power, these kind of reasonings do
not edify, but make way for the Popish delusions of written and unwritten
word. And whereas M. M. adds, page 4. that Origin calls it a tradition
received from the Apostles; I answer, many things are falsely attributed to the
Apostles; as the Apostles Creed, and that Book called Canones Apostolorum,
neither of which Luke mentions in the Acts of the Apostles, no more then he
does this tradition of baptising infants. ^sidore as Gratian cites him Did.
16. says, the canons were made by heretics, and put out under the Apostles
name. And indeed there are many things in them quite contrary to the Apostle
doctrine. O sia^d^r says l. 3. c. 3. Its certain these canons were not
composed by Christ's Apostles. Therefore we must not lay any great weight upon
Origens calling infants baptism a tradition received from the Apostles.

So CLEMENS ALEXANDRINVS, We being dipped are enlightened, we being enlightened are
adopted for sons, (...), ^c. Peda^o^ l^b 1. ^ap. (...), etc.
we being adopted are made perfect, being perfect we are made immortal. And
then he adds, this work (meaning Baptism) is called diversty; viz. 1. a
washing whereby we wipe away our sins; 2. Grace whereby the punishments due to
our sins are forgiven. 3. Inlightning, whereby we behold that holy and
wholesome light.

Further, ibid. page 95. Moreover these bonds (speaking of ignorance and sin)
are most spec^tily forgiven by man's faith, but by Gods grace, that is to say,
when sins are forgiven by one Paeomian medicine, that is to say, the baptism
of the word, therefore we wash away all our sins, and forthwith we are no m^re
wicked, for this is one grace of illumination ^r Baptism, that there are not
the same manners that were before we were washed.

Also page 96. ibid. he says, We repenting of our sins, and renouncing their
diminutions, being purged from our dregs by baptism also, have recourse to
that eternal light, as children to their father: By which it appears in
Clemens his time, repentance went before baptism.

So Basil. cont. Eunomin. lib. 3. Qui enim gratia divinus efficitur, etc. For
he that is made godly by grace, is changeable by nature, sometimes by
negligence falling from goodness; but that does plainly resist the tradition
of wholesome baptism, for baptism is the seal of faith, but faith is the
confession of the Dietie; for first he ought to believe, and after to be sealed
with baptism. Page 24. Also Fol. 107 Baptism therefore is the forgiveness of
the debt of prisoners, the death of sin, the regeneration of the soul. How can
this be affirmed of infants? And speaking of persons of wicked men, he says
Page 15. I will roll in mire after the manner of hogs, I will walk
deceitfully, swear, lie, and then when I am full with evils, I will cease and
receive baptism: Which shows at what time persons were wont to be baptized,
not in their infancy, but when they were men.

For Mr. M. ^. M. ^^g. 44.
his place out of Irenaeus adversus haereses, lib. 2. there is not in that
place the least tittle concerning any kind of Baptism, neither of infants or
any other, as I can declare upon a diligent search, the place makes more
against him then for him.

Tertull. de Baptismo adversus Quintill, Editio de la Cerda, vol. 2. p. 153.
There is nothing so hardens the minds of men, as the simplicity of Gods
works; that a man without pomp and cost let down in the water, and betwixt a
few words dipped, rises again etc. Observe he speaks of a man, not of an
infant. La Cerda on these words (in aqua demissus) observes, that in time past
baptism was celebrated by dipping, though he after adds, baptism was conferd
on sick persons by sprinkling.

Ibid. cap. 13. Lex tingnendi (to use his own word) the Law of dipping is
imposed, and the form prescribed, go ye teach all nations dipping them in the
Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; to this law is that definition
compared, unless a man be born again of the water and of the spirit, he shall
not enter into the Kingdom of heaven, he has bound faith to the necessity of
baptism, therefore all believers from thence were baptized, and then Paul when
he believed was baptized. Where observe, first dipping was set down by a Law. 2
He binds faith to the necessity of baptism. 3 He says, therefore all
believers from thence were baptized, mentioning none else.

But most fully he says, cap. 18. For every persons condition, disposition,
and age, the delay of baptism is more profitable, especially about little
ones, for what need is there that Sureties should be hazarded, who by their
mortality may fail of their promises, and be deceived with the going forward of
an evil towardliness -- Let them come whiles they are young, whiles wherein
they come they are taught, let them become christians when they know Christ.
Also, a little after he says, shall it be done more warily in secular things,
that to whom earthly substance is not committed divine should be committed;
they shall know to beg salvation, that thou may seem to give it to him that
asks it. In the same chapter he says further, For no less cause unmarried
persons are to be delayed, in whom the tentation is prepared, etc. If any one
understand the right baptism, he will rather fear the obtaining then the
delaying.

1 Where observe he says, for every persons condition disposition and age, the
delay of baptism is more profitable, much more for infants.

2 He says, let them become christians when they know Christ, this cannot
infants do.

3 He says we will not commit earthly substance to little ones, and shall we
commit divine?

4 It must be given to them that ask it, therefore not infants.

5 He would have married folks delayed, because of the strength of tentation
in them.

6 He says if any one understand the weight of baptism, he will rather fear
the obtaining then delaying, therefore little did he think it lawful to
baptize infants.

Also in the 20. chapter of the same Book he says, it behooves them that are
about to enter into baptism, to pray with frequent prayers, fastings,
kneelings and watchings, and with the confession of all their sins past; this
cannot infants do.

Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. tom. 1. hom. 21. page 267. Edif. purif. (...)
Wherefore I have spoken before, and now speak, and will not cease to speak, if
any one have not corrected the transgresions of his manners and has not mad^
ver^ue easy ^o himself let him not Baptized.

For CYPRIANS authority whereas Epist. 59. a certain Bishop named Fidus,
maintained that infants were not to be baptized till the eighth day, there was
a Counsel of 66. Bishops that met together condemning Fidus his opinion, yet
^pproving infants Baptism, but two things are to be considered. 1. The
weakness of the grounds; 2. The errors that came along with it that no man
has cause to triumph in their authority.

The grounds of Cyprian and his 66. Bishops were;

1. The son of man came not to destroy souls but to save, therefore so far as
lies in us no soul is to be destroyed,

2. God shows himself a like father to all, to the obtaining of the heave^ly
grace.

3. If forgiveness of sins be given to greatest sinners (that most sin
against God) when they believe, and none of them are hindered from Baptism and
grace, much less ought infants to be hindered, that being newly borne have
sinned only by Original sin, and so much the more because not his own but
other men's sins are forgiven to him. T^ese were the counsels Reasons:
Cyprianus, and Collegio, 66. Fido fratri de B^ptiz^ndis infantibus, Epist. 59.

Now for the Errors about Baptism they were many: As,

1. That the Holy Ghost was received by baptism, expounding Joh. 4 He that
drinks of the water that I shall give him, of the water of Baptism: Epistola
Caecilio De Sacramento dominus calicis, page 147. The signing with the sign of
the Cross. lib. 4 ^p^st. 56. ad Thibarianos, So they thought that he who
baptized could give the holy Ghost, and if the Priest o^ Presbiter could not
give the Holy Ghost, then he could not baptize, Epist. 70. ad I^nuarium and
Episcopos Nilmidas de Baptizandis haereticis. Yea then they joined Unction with
Baptism, that he that was anointed therewith might become one of Gods
Anointed. Ibid. And for the Sign of the Cross, several times, more
especially in this Epistle, de lapsis, he says, The forehead pure with the
sign of God could not bear the sign of the Devil. It would be too long to
tell of other gross errors, as that only baptized persons escape eternal
punishents. That Original sin is done away by it, and that actual sins
sprouting up, Original sin is not after to be imputed, etc. By all which, we
may see what heed we may give to Cyprians time when they were such gross
errors about Baptism. And yet but in one Epistle do I find mention to be made
of infants baptism, which the forementioned Epistle to Fidus, which may not
without some grounds be suspected to be suppositions.

1. JAMES PAMELIUS that wrote the Annotations upon this Epistle cannot find of
what place Fidus was bishop.

2 The weakness of the forementioned arguments, not likely to come from a
Council of 66. Bishops.

3 There is no mention at what place this Synod of 66. Bishops sh u^d mee^. But
suppose this Epistle were not feigned, among all other corruptious, Infants in
CYPRIANS time pertook of the Lords Supper; yet will not any allow this. CYPRIAN
in his Epistle de lapsis, speaking of the wickedness of those that sacrificed
at the heat^e^ Altars, that they sacrificed their faith their hope in those
deadly fires, aggravates their sin that their infants they carried in their
arms or led in their hands, lost that which they had gotten in the beginning
of their birth: when the day of judgment comes they will say, we have done
nothing, neither did we leaving the Meat and Cup of the Lo^d, hasten willingly
to profane defilements; others treachery has destroyed us, we perceive our
parents were our murderers.

4 It appears it was feigned, because it was so contrary to the doctrine laid
down in Tertullian, whom Cyprian as I suppose the learned know, did in his
works very much imitate, that he called him his Master; Da mihi Magistrum, was
Cyprians speech of Tertu^lian.

5 It appears from Baronius testimony, that Cyprian was against it. Baron.
Annal. Eccles. tom. prim. A. 53. page 398. who s^ith. If Cypri^n had been sure
that that had been an Apostolical tradition (speaking of infants baptism) and
not contrary to holy Scriptures is by sound and sincere opinion, without doubt
he had rested.

Bernard. sermon. 65. super cant. page 144 Speaking of some Christians that
opposed the popish stream, he faith; They laugh at us be because we baptize
infants, because we pray for the dead, because we require the prayers of
S^ints. This I add for illustration, not regarding any authority after the
first 300. years.

Answer to the objections brought for infants Baptism.

Obj. 1. As the infants of Jews were circumcised, so the infants of Christians
are to be baptized.

Answ. We deny the consequence;

1 Because there are two Covenants essentially differing, Jer. 5.1 32.33. I
will make a new Covenant, not according to the covenant I made with them when I
brought them up out of the Land of Egypt, therefore their s^a^^s ought to be
essentially diver. The first Covenant was carnal typi^all, as appears Jer.
11.7.8. verse. 6. God bids them hear the words of ^is Covenant and do them. And
verse. 7. I earnestly protested unto your Fathers, in the day that I brought
them out of the Land of Egypt even unto this day rising early, and protesting
saying, obey my voice, yet they ob^yed not nor inclined their ear, therefore I
will bring upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to
do, but they did them not.

2 Then the Lords Supper should be given to infants, because they all pertook
of Manna and the Paschall Lamb. If it be said they are kept off from the Supper
because they cannot examine themselves, so are they to be kept off from
baptism, because they have not faith, repentance, nor the covenanting of a
good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21.

3 Circumcision was commanded as well to reprobates as to the elect, Genesis
17.10. Every man child among you shall be circumcised; among which were many
reprobates. Esau after God had said, The elder shall serve the younger, Genesis
25.23, which the Apostle applies to reprobation, Romans 9.12. was circumcised. So
Ishmael, after God had rejected him in respect of spiritual blessings, Genesis
17.20. yet verse. 23. he Was circumcised, and so were all that were born in his
house, or bought with money. So that circumcision was to be administered to
reprobates as well as godly, but baptism is to be administered only to those
that repent and believe.

4 Baptism and circumcision do much differ. First, as circumcision was to be
done the 8. day, Baptism any day. 2 Circumcision was only on the males, this
on males and females. Circumcision done by the parents to the children; by the
father as Abram, by the mother as Zipporah. Circumcision belonged only to the
nation of the Jews, baptism to the believers in all nations. So in
signification, circumcision signed a right to Canaan, baptism signs a right
to the death and satisfaction of Christ. So in duration, the one was to endure
to the end of the Jewish nation, the other to the end of the world. And though
circumcision be called an everlasting covenant, yet the Schools distinction is
known, aeternum suis and aeternum dei, Exodus 21.6. His master shall bore his
ear, and he shall serve him for ever. Exodus 28. 43, It was a statute for ever,
that Aron should have his linen breeches on, when they came to minister in the
holy place. See Exodus 30.21. Levit. 6.18.22.7.34.36 10.15. Number. 18.11. Exodus
40.15. Their anointing shall be for an everlasting Priesthood. So that ever and
everlasting in the Old Testament are taken for length of time, or the
continuation of a thing.

5 Circumcision was a profession of the observation of the Law. Romans 2.25.
Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the Law, but if thou be a breaker of
the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. q. d. They being not able to
keep the Law, they were no less miserable then the Gentiles. For the Apostles
scope is to humble the Jews, who doted upon outward privileges. Gal. 5.3.
Every man that is circumcised is a debtor to do the whole Law. Now to be a bond
to keep the whole Law and to be a seal of grace and remission of sins, are two
contrary things. Gal. 6.13. Neither they themselves who are circumcised keep
the Law. q. d. The use of circumcision in the Jewish Church, to bind the
keeping of Moses Law, Acts 15.5. The Jewish brethren commanded to circumcise
them, and to keep the Law of Moses. So verse. 24, There were some that troubled
you, saying that you ought to be circumcised and keep the Law: so that keeping
the Law is still joined to circumcision. So that if you ask what circumcision
was, it was the profession of the observation of the Law; but baptism
signifies forgiveness of sins, death, burial, and resurrection with CHRIST,
which is a thing of another kind.

6 Circumcision differs from baptism, 1 in the matter, cutting in the flesh
being the matter hereof, which left a sensible sign in the flesh, which the
infant when he was grown up could behold all the days of his life. But dipping
in the water is the matter of baptism, which leaves no sensible sign in
infants; and therefore in respect of them cannot be a Sacrament.

2 In respect of form of words, because in circumcision there are no words
recited as in baptism, the Minister says, I baptize thee; therefore persons
baptized ought to be capable of reason, that they may understand those words,
and form their thoughts unto the death and resurrection of Christ.

7 It follows not because of the difference in respect of the visible church
in the time of the Law, and the vsible churches under the times of the Gospel,
which differ.

1 In matter, the matter of the visible church of the Jews, was the whole
nation of the Jews good and bad; the matter of the Christian church, are those
that profess faith and repentance.

2 In the form of inrightment, Circumcision in the flesh gave a person
inrightment to the visible church of the Jews, but now circumcision of the
heart (at least in profession) is required, to make a man a member of the
visible church.

3 In kind of worship, the Jewish worship and Priesthood, and day of worship,
and maintenance of Officers, that is tithes are put to an end, therefore there
is an end of the visible Church then, and instead thereof in the visible
churches now there are Ministers to preach and baptize, there is also a new
worship, and a new day of worship, and a new way of maintenance of Officers.
Now there being a change of the Ordinances and government of the visible
church, it is a folly to argue from circumcision to baptism.

8 The Sacraments of the new Testament cannot be proved, but by the Scripture
of the new Testament; therefore that consequence which is drawn from the old
Testament, is absurd.

Obj. 2. They that are in covenant, they must be sealed with the seal thereof:
but infants of believers are in covenant.

Answ. We deny the proposition, for the covenant in times past belonged to the
females of the Jews, yet were they not to be sealed with the seal of the
covenant for want of a command, to say they were circumcised in the males is a
mistake; for

1 In nothing save marriage two shall be one flesh, but this was a state of
infancy not of marriage. 2 whereas some allege the Jews were called the
Circumcision, it is only as other denominations are from the better or greater
part as Exodus 9.6. all the cattle of Egypt dyed, yet verse. 25. there were
cattle left.

2 I answer to the assumtion viz. infants of godly parents are in Covenant
therefore to be baptized: Then this Covenant is either the Covenant of grace
made with the Elect, or some outward Covenant, it is not the Covenant of grace
made with the Elect; for

1 Those that are in the Covenant of grace God made with the Elect cannot fall
away from that Covenant, but those that are children of godly men do often fall
out of this Covenant, and prone to be wicked: therefore the Covenant of grace
God makes with the Elect cannaot be meant.

2. The Covenant of grace with the Elect has sundry branches not competible
unto all the seed of godly men, nor none but the Elect among the which the
Church cannot tell who they be, as that their iniquities shall be forgiven then
Jer. 31.33.34. Esa. 59.21. that they shall be all taught of God, etc. Therefore
it cannot be affirmed that infants of godly parent or parents much less of the
infants of a whole Nation that they are in any such Covenant.

Or else this Covenant is outward, and so the bond on Abram and his seeds
part, is circumcision, Genesis 17.10. This is my Covenant which you shall keep
betwixt me and you, and thy seed after thee, every man child shall be
circumcised so, Acts 7.8. and he gave him the Covenant of Circumcision, and so
Abraham begat Isaac.

Answ. 1. If circumcision be the covenant it self, and so the Covenant be
outward, then is the land of Canaan only the counterpart of this covenant, as
appears Acts 7. first 8. verses.

2 Those that allege this, must disclaim circumcision from being the seal of
the righteousness by faith, as they allege; for the righteousness by faith
is the covenant with the Elect. Also they must cease to fly betwixt two
lurking holes, sometimes to say circumcision is a seal of the covenant made
with the Elect which is the same in all ages, and when they dispute in another
place, they only make it an outward covenant.

3 Baptism is no outward covenant, and therefore cannot succeed circumcision
in any such Identity, but is a sign or seal of an inward covenant, viz. death,
burial, and resurrection with Christ. Paul for all he was borne in the jewish
covenant, and circumcised the eighth day, yet did not Ananias nor himself
think this enough, but he was baptized, Acts 22.16.

4. There is but one Covenant under the new testament, the laws whereof are
writ in the hearts of believers. Heb. 8.6. Its called a better covenant, and
verse. 8. a New covenant, in the singular number, not covenants, and those that
are in it have their sins forgiven.

Those that urge circumcision to be a seal of the Covenant of grace, and
sometimes urge it to be the covenant it self, they run upon this absurdity,
that they make the covenant and the seal to be one and the same thing in
number, which is impossible.

Object. But its said, Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.
If there were any distinct covenant made with Abraham, it is only the same in
respect of spiritual reference which was made with Noah, Genesis 6.18. Chap.
9.10.11, 12.

Answ. There the new Covenant is promised but not covenanted, which promise
before was made to Adam, Noah, Abraham, Genesis 12.3. Ier. 31.31. I will make a
new covenant with the house of Israel, not according to the covenant I made
with their fathers, and verse. 33. This shall be the covenant, I will put my
law in their inward parts; He says not, I have made a covenant, but I will
make a new Covenant which was made good at the death of Christ, as the Apostle
makes it appear. Heb. 8.9.10 repeating this place of Jeremy, so verse. 11.12,
13. 2. Abraham had but three seeds, viz. 1. Christ, Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham
and his seed were the promises made, he says not, and to seeds, as of many,
but as one, and to thy seeds which is Christ.

2. The carnal Jew, so we Gentile cannot be the seed.

3. Believer of Jew and Gentile we Gentiles come to be the seed only this way
Gal. 3.29. If ye be Christ's then (and not till then) are ye Abraham's seed and
heirs according to the promise, Gal. 4.28. Now we brethren as Isaac was, are
the children of promise; Which was only by Isaacks faith looking on the
promised Messiah, and so we;

Now many mistake, besides these three seeds (which are all the seeds the
Scripture names) a fourth seed, that is, the seed of believers, unto which they
think God will be a God because they are such, which cannot be because many of
them prove wicked, and none of them for the present appear to be Godly.

Object. 4. Baptism succeeded Circumcision, as an initiating sign, Col. 2.12.
For the Collossians objected this, if Circumcision be abolished then we
Christians have no outward sign at all to confirm unto us Christ's
satisfaction, where by the minds of believers may be confirmed and parswaded
that they are partakers of the Spiritual benefits in Christ: Now if baptism
succeed circumcision as an initiating sign, then as infants were the
circumcised, so infants should be now baptized.

Answ. 1. We deny the consequence, for those in Colosse that were baptized were
not infants but grown persons that were circcumcised with the circumcision wade
without hands, and had faith tbrough the operation of God.

2. We deny there was any such scruple in the Colossians, 1. Because had there
been any such scruple, the apostle would have given some intimation thereof, or
preparation thereto in words preceding, but he speaks not one word tending to
any such thing; 2. because he was not come to a period in answer to the
circumcision teachers, and did not come to a period, till the end of this 12.
verse, therefore could not be upon any other subject in this verse then he was
in the former, and so much the word Also proves, and the apposition of buried,
circumcised, and risen again, proves it.

3. Because the Collosians had baptism already being buried and risen again
with Christ therein, therefore they could not reasonably object that the
circumcision teachers would abolish baptism, nor could they say what shall we
do for an initiating sign to confirm our faith, for they had baptism already.

3. But suppose it were granted that baptism did succed circumcision as an
initiating sign, yet where is there any such thing in the text as this, viz.
As Baptism shall succeed in the same latitude of infancy, of so much as
Males, much less of Females, which is the supposition endeavored to be proved
from the text, nay the contrary appears, that there were none but grown persons
because, they are said to have faith and burial and Resurrection with Christ,
which could not in an ordinary way be affimed of infants.

Suppose all the objectors premises were true yet all that can properly be
deduced from it, is this, viz. That circumcision was an initiating sign to the
Jewish church, and Baptism is an initiating sign to the Christian church, and
hereof there would be no great contention.

4. The true connection of the words with the foregoing, is this; Paul having
answered Philosophy teachers verse 9.10. The word, Also, shows he comes to
answer teachers who would have brought in circumcision, to whom he answers
adversitively, whereas you would bring in circumcision which is made with
hands, we have a better Circumcision made without hands, which consists not of
cutting off the bodily skin of the flesh, but in putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision of the Spirit of Christ, and having laid
downo the benefit or privilege, verse. 11. He comes further to confirm them in
it, by the seal or isntrumental sign thereof, which these Collossians had
already received, that is to say, by the seal or sign of baptism buried with
him in baptism, wherein ye are also risen again, etc.

Object. 5. If infants may not now be baptized, then are they deprived of some
grace Circumcision did confer.

Answ. No, For 1. Circumcision did not bring any grace to the Jews, but was
rather a yoke of a curse, Acts 15.10, 11. Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon
the neck of the Disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear.
He speaks of Circumcision not as the false teachers would then have brought it
in, but as it was considered simply in it self, in that he calls it a yoke,
upon their fathers not able to be borne, who lived before those false teachers
were. What this yoke was, we see, Gal 5.3. to be debttors to keep the whole
Law, and for failing in one point to be under the curse Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
and the Apostle verse. 11. opposes the grace of the Lord Jesus to this yoke.

2. It is not a benefit but a misery for children to be baptized, for hereby
they are apt to think themselves Christians when they are strangers from
Christ.

Object, 6. Unless infants be baptized they are excluded from the new Covenant
but they are not excluded, Mat. 19 14. Of such is the kingdom of God.

Answ. 1. We deny the consequence, for 1. The females of the Jews were saved
without Circumcision, So Job, Lot, So the Cananitish woman without baptism
were in Covenant with Christ; 2. You think your infants not baptized are
saved. 3. The Scripture no where sets down baptism as a gate to let in, or a
condition without which we cannot partake of Gods covenant.

2. For the Assumption it follows not, because Christ bad suffer those little
children, therefore that he would permit all from a particular to an
viniversall, these is no consequence, because it once rained Manna, and once
water came out of the Rock, therefore it shall be so always.

2. From a negative there cannot be drawn an affirmative conclusion, Christ
did not baptize any, John 4.2. therefore we ought to baptize infants.

2 Its probable the kingdom of glory does in a great part consist of such
infants, so dying in infancy through the free grace of God, and presentment of
the Satisfaction of Christ's death to the justice of God, for Original sin, yet
does it not follow, they must be baptized: neither do we know which will dye
in infancy, free from actual sin, or which will live and grow up, and prove
wicked therefore we cannot baptize any.

If it should be concluded Christ laid his hands upon them, and blessed them,
therefore we ought so to do the conclusion were probable.

4. Christ being God, and knowing all things, his divine nature might
communicate to the Humanity, that to those infants that were then brought and
such like as they were, the kingdom of God did belong, as knowing all things,
he knew them to be elect, yet it follows not to other infants that the kindome
of God should belong, the greater part whereof grew up and proved wicked.

5. Of such is the kingdom of God; there is a two fold suchnesse, 1. Of
person; 2. Of condition, no man can say, Christ speaks of suchnesse of person
because they are little ones, For the Indians and Mahamitans might come in so:
but he speaks of a suchnesse; 1. Because the word is a word of similitude, he
says not (...) of these but (...) of of such like is the Kingdom of God, that
is of such as are like in humility, etc. 2. Because Christ, Mat. 18.4. draws
us to humility from the example of little children, 1 Cor. 14.20. In malice be
ye children.

6. Had Christ used to baptize little children, the disciples would not have
rebuked them for bringing their children as we see they do, Mat. 19.13.

Obj. 7. Little children receive the Kingdom of God, Mark 10.15. and Luke
calls those little children, infants: Luke 18.15. and both Mark and Luke have
this saying, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little
child, shall no enter into it, Christ saying, of little child, or children,
indefinitely, it may be understood of all children, and so all children may be
Baptized.

Answr. Three things are to be opened.

1. What Christ means by the Kingdom of God, I take it, Christ means the
Kingdom of glory, though we will not much contend whether both Kingdoms be
meant by the Kingdom of grace, and the Kingdom of glory, or whether the
Kingdom of glory only, yet I rather think the kingdme of glory is here
meant, for these reasons.

1 Because infants are not capable to understand the Laws of Christ, which God
declares in the Kingdom of grace, neither are they able to to yield obedience
hereto, but they are capable enough to receive the gift of heavenly glory.

2 Because this Kingdom is a local Kingdom, because here is mention made of
coming into it; the Greek word is (...), which signifies a going into a place;
but the Kingdom of grace is not a local place.

2 What is meant by receiving, whosoever shall not receive, etc. The Greek word
is (...), which signifies to receive that which another gives, its derived a
(...) to give, and (...) to take, which is as much as to take that which
another gives. So that whosoever shall not receive, means whosoever shall not
take from gift the Kingdom of God.

3 What is meant by little child or children (for child is put in the
singular number, Mar. 10.15. and in the plural number verse. 16.)

Answ. Little children or infants are to be considered two ways;

1 Collectively and that two ways.

1 In an universal collection, for all infants that shall be born, whether
they live or die; of these we cannot affirm Christ's words to be truth, that
these receive the Kingdom of God, unless we maintain falling from grace that
they once had received it, but were after fallen from it, much less can we
affirm baptizing of them.

2 In partial or divisine collection, and that in a twofold respect.

1 For the kind of infants or little children living so, our Saviors words
would not be true. For many of them (yea even the infants of godly parents)
grow up and prove wicked, and do not receive the kingdom of God, therefore it
cannot be so taken, and we cannot know which will prove good or bad, that we
may baptize or not baptize them.

2 In a partial collection for all infants so dying; in this sense Christ's
words would import, that all such go to heaven, and so it would not follow that
they should be baptized, because we know not certainly which will dye or
live, and therefore though the dying infant go to heaven, yet can no Minister
baptize it, because he cannot know infallibly that it will dye till it be dead:
nor has the Minister any such command so to do.

2 Singularly, Little children or infants are to be taken singularly, or
individually, for some infant or infants which were then brought to Christ,
whom Christ as God, knew to be elect; and of these our Savior speaks, and not
indefinitely of all infants, when he says; whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God a little child, shall not enter into it. And that Christ so
means, his speech appears, by Mark. 10.14. Luke 18.16. where the words are,
(...), horum, hujusmodi, of these, such like, is the Kingdom of God, Christ
pointing at them in respect of their humility and election to grace and glory,
Reader, there being a mista^e in the foregoing instead of infants, re^de,
humility.
not of their infancy, for many infants never receive heaven, and except we
receive the Kingdom of glory as that little child or children, we shall never
enter into it.

Yet does it not follow, that because Christ revealed his fathers eternal love
and good will to some infants that were brought unto him, and that heaven
belonged to them, that therefore it should belong to all infants in general,
or to all infants of godly parents, many whereof grow up and prove wicked. But
all that probably follows is, that as those infants that were brought to
Christ, received heaven of free gift, as the word (...) to receive signifies
(as was shown before) so all that come to heav^n, must receive heaven in the
like manner of free gift, if ever they mean to come hither.

Mr. M. page 15.
Obj. 8. Acts 2.38.39. when Peter exhorted his hearers to repent and be
baptized, he uses an argument from the benefit that should come to their
posterity; For the promise is to you and your children. Or as others frame the
argument; As it is to a godly man, so is it to his children, but the promise
belongs to a godly man, therefore it belongs also to his children.

Answ. 1. The word children does signify in Scripture men, Mark. 10.44. the
disciples are called children, (...), Children, how hard is it for them that
have ri^hes to enter into Gods Kingdom, Joh. 8.39. If ye were Abrams children,
you would do the works of Abram. Yea, the diminitive (...), is attributed to
men, Gal. 4.19. My little children of whom I travel in birth till Christ be
formed in you.

2 This place is not a promise, but a proffer of a promise, to persons not
actually converted, but in a way of conversion, verse. 37. they cry out what
shall we do to be saved? Hence Peter tells them, verse. 38.39. what they should
do, and after he had this and testified with many other words, verse. 40. they
believed. verse. 41. Hence we cannot allege, as it is to a godly man so is it
to his children, because these men were not yet converted persons.

3 If there were any promise then, it must be either remission of sins, or the
gift of the Holy Ghost, which must be made to godly men and their children.
Had it been any other promise save remission of sins, it had not been a salve
for the sore of a guilty conscience. verse. 38. But this cannot be, because many
children of godly persons prove wicked, which if they do, having formerly had a
promise of remission of sins, and of the holy Ghost, then, 1. either God falls
from his promise, which is blasphemy to say, or 2. the child is fallen from
grace, having formerly had the Holy Ghost, but is now wicked.

4 This promise was no more to these that were pricked at their heart, then it
was, to them that were far off, verse. 39. The promise is to you, and to your
children, and to all that were a far off, whether a far ^ff from you as the
G^ntiles, or a far off, from the promise, as men in the natural state, to
them that are afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall call.

The Apostle does n t as the obje^tor supposes, use an argument to his hearers
to repent and be bap^ized, from the benefit tha^ should come to their
posterity, but answers a question which troubled consciences pricked for their
^illing the Lord of life, made, viz. What shall we do to be saved? to whom
Peter said, repent, and be baptized in the name of Christ, so re^ission^
sins, they farther scrupled, what ground have you for this? to whom Peter
propounds the universallity of the promise viz.

It is ^o you, to your children to all that are a far off, even as many as
God shall please in time ffectually to call.

They further scrupled we have contracted guilt on our children, by wishing
Christ's blood to be on them as well as our selves; to this Peter says the
promise is to you and your children.

6. There was none in that place was baptized, but they that gladly received
the word; as appears, verse. 41. It is not said they and their infants, or
children, but only they that gladly received the word.

Object. 9. The parents faith is sufficient to receive baptism.

Answ 1. The just must live by his own faith, Hab. 2.4. The righteousn^sse of
the righteous shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18.11.

2. What did Isaacs faith profit Esau, or Iehosophats faith Iehoram?

Object. 10. Baptism and circumcision are essentially the seals of faith,
Romans 4 11. Therefore baptism succeeding in the room of circumcision, ought
not to be denied to infants, although it be the baptism of faith, and
rep^ntance.

Answer.

1. We deny that Circumcision was an universal seal of faith, but was only
an individual seal, of the individual faith of Abraham, as appears out of
the text.

2. (...) The word translated seal, signifies a sign in the first place; ^t
also signifies a mark seal upon any thing, to know it is as well as a seal,
and so the meaning may be, God would have Abraham circumcised as a note of his
faith, and a memorial and eternal monument of his fame, that he was the first
circumcised person of that nation, yet does it not hence follow that it was the
seal of the righteousness of faith, either to Abraham, or his seed.

3. Suppose Circumcision were the seal of faith absolutely, and were
administered to the Jewish infants, yet was it so done, because it was so
commanded of God; in like manner, the baptism of faith and repentance were to
be administered to infants, if it were so commanded in the Gospel, but there is
no such thing commanded.

4 Abram received not the seal of the Covenanant before he first believed, now
we are the spiritual sons of Abram as believers, not as carnal discending
from his loins; therefore we ought first to believe before we receive the seal
of the new Covenant.

5 Should we grant the argument, yet hence none should be baptized but those
that were grown persons, and had the righteousness of faith as Abram had at
this time when he was circumcised, neither of which are compatible to infants
of days: Its absurd to think that baptism should succeed circumcision in
respect of infancy, which is not here mentioned in the text, nor now was not
the age of Abraham; and yet that it should not succeed it in what is mentioned
in the text, that is, in being a seal to the righteousness of faith or grace
received in an adult person.

6 The scope of the place is this, viz. As the Apostle had given a comfort to
the beleiving uncircumcised Gentiles, that by the example of the same
righteousness of faith, which was reckoned to Abram in uncircumcision,
righteousness should be reckoned to them, verse. 9, 10. So he gives a
consolation not the barely circumcised, But to the believing Jews who walk in
the steps of Abrams faith, verse. 11.12. That in like manner righteousness
should be imputed unto them. But what does this conduce to the baptising of
infants?

1 Cor. 7.18.
Obj. 11. Holy persons are to be baptized, but infants are holy, ergo.

Answ. 1. To the proposition I answer;

1 Holy persons endued with a holiness known to the Church, ought to be
baptized, but the Apostle here speaks of an outward holiness, common to the
Reprobate as well as the Elect; for such a holiness we see Heb. 9.13. The
blood of Bulls sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh.

2 To the assumption I answer;

1 Children in this Text are not holy with an holiness distinct from
Idolaters, as appears in the repetition of the word sanctified.

2 Though they were holy persons, yet are they not to be baptized;

1 Because there is no command for baptising of them.

2 Because this holiness must be either inward and inherent, which is unknown
to the Church, and so the Church has nothing to dispense baptism; or else it
is outward, and so the Church cannot dispense baptism, because baptism is not
a sign of outward holiness, but of the fellowship which the Church judges
the baptized person to have in the death, burial, and resurection of the Lord
Jesus; Here is a full answer to the argument, and I need not meddle with what
holiness is here meant. Yet will I speak a little of it, supposing that my
answer given already is sufficient, should I say no more.

To open which, consider these things;

1 The occasion of these words. Some Corinthian Believers scrupled, whether
they might live with their unbelieving yoke-fellowes? verse. 1. compared with
verse. 12. To this the Apostle says, Let not the Believer put away the
unbeliever.

2 Of what holiness does the Apostle speak of?

Answ. I will show;

1 Negatively, of what holiness the Apostle did not speak of.

2 Positively, of what he does speak of.

1 Negatively, he speaks not of any covenant holiness which we partake from
Abram.

1 Because it does not agree with the context; for the question was not, after
what way man woman or child become holy? But whether a Believer or an
unbeliever might live one with another in marriage? To which the Apostle
answers affirmatively, they might live together; and gives a reason verse. 14.
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife. This word For, tells us
it is a reason.

2 If the child be holy with a covenant holiness, then is the wife holy with
covenant sanctification; so the wife though a Heathen, belongs to the Covenant
of grace.

3 If there should be any covenant holiness conveyed to Gentiles, it must be
by our being Abrams seed; but this is only by faith, Gal 3.29. If ye be
Christ's, then are you Abrams seed.

2 Positively: What holiness is here meant.

Answ. A civil holiness:

1 Of matrimonial institution, wherein God appointed man and wife to live
together, which is called, a Holy State; in opposition to fornicators, 1 These.
4.4, 5. Possess his vessel in sanctification, not in the lust of
concupiscence.

And also, because of the holy person who instituted it, and the holy end
whereto it was instituted.

Reasons why this holiness is here meant;

1 It agrees with the context, he bid them dwell together, verse. 12. Now what
more favorable reason can there be to the binding of a Believers conscience,
then Gods institution.

2 Because such an holiness must be meant, as could befall an unbeliever, for
the unbelieving man or woman is sanctified with his holiness, and yet remains
a privative unbeliever, that had not acknowledged the faith in an hi^toricall
a^sen^, now a covenant holiness could not befall such a person, being every
way a stranger from the covenants of promise, but a holiness of matrimonial
institution, may well befit such.

3 Because this holiness has a proper influence upon the children, to make
them in some sense holy, Mal. 2.15. The children of one man and one woman, are
called a godly seed; So the Apostle here argues from contraries If your
marriage were not holy by Gods institution, then your children born in the
blood of marriage were unholy; but you have no thought of putting them away or
leaving them, therefore must you think your own marriage lawful, which make^
your children so to be. For the rise of this Corinthian scruple no man can tell
the ground of it, therefore in vain do they carry it to the time of Ezra; The
Text is silent of the rise of it.

4 Whereas some Corinthians scrupled living with an Heathen yoke fellow, the
Apostle shows that they might live lawfully together now, which they could not
do under the Law, Deuteronomy. 7.4. If ^he Jews had taken wives among the Heathen,
they were to put them away. Ezra 10.3. But now under the Gospel it is
otherwise, Acts 10.15. A Heathen was now clean to a Christian.

2 Holiness that may be meant is a holiness of education; when the believer
and u^believer lives together, the children are in a way of being brought up
godlily, whereas if they part one from another, the unbeliever will be apt to
get some of the children, and then they will not be brought up holily. And so
Estius and Gorranus (otherwise) that is to say, if you depart one from another
(your children) now born (should be unclean) that is remain in unbelief,
following the greater part; which then were unbelievers: (but now) if you
remain together (they are holy) that is, they are in a way to become Christians.

(Again we deny the consequence, for those 1 Cor 7.14. were not holier then
those infants brought to Christ, Math. 19.14. yet would not Christ baptize
them, for Christ baptized not: Joh. 4.2. and if those that had right to the
Kingdom by Christ's own confession were not baptized, much less others.)

Obj 12. The holiness of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, redounded to their
posterity, Romans 11.6. If the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy.
Therefore Christians being taken into the same body, the same holiness will
befall all their posteri^ie.

Answ. 1. If it were granted that there were such an holiness^ in Chr^stianity,
yet should not their infants be baptized, because the females of the Jews were
partakers of the same holiness, yet were not circumcised; for want of a
command.

2 It should thence follow, that there should be a Catholic visible Church,
into which the Gentiles should be planted.

3 The Gentiles are not planted into the root but only by faith; therefore not
the unbelieving Gentiles, but believers among the Gentiles, are planted into
Abraham.

4 The Apostle therefore speaks only of the Jewish offspring, and not of the
Gentiles: And although the Jews are brought into one body, and the mi^dle wall
of partition is broken down, Ephesians. 2.14. It is to be understood of believing
Jews and Gentiles, united in Christ by mystical union, not by visible
Ecclesiastical dispensation.

5 The root there meant is Christ, and the lump are the multitude of Jews to
be called into the faith of Christ in the last times, which multitude shall be
all holy, because Romans 11.26 27. All Israel shall be saved, and the deliverer
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, Esa. 16.17. I will make thy Officers
peace, and thine exact^rs righteousness, and verse. 21. Thy people also shall
be all righteous.

Quest. Whether by first fruit and root, are meant Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and by the lump and branches their posterity? Or whether by first fruit and
root are meant Jesus Christ, and by the lump and branches the Jews in elect to
salvation to be called home.

Answ. By first fruits are meant Christ, etc.

1 Because Abram, Isaac and Jacob, are never in Scrip ure called by these names
of first fruits and root, and their posterity by the name of lump, and seldom
by the name of branches: But Christ and his body the Elect, are called by this
name, 1 Cor. 15.20. He is b^come the f^^st fruits of them that slept. So Christ
is called a roo^, Esa. 53 2. Apo^. 5.5^ 22.16. and the Elect are called
branches, Ioh. 15.5. who are said to be rooted in Christ, Colos. 2.7.

2 The root and branches, the first fruit and lump, must be of the same kind,
but Abram and his posterity are not of the same kind; his posteri^y being
many of them wicked: But Christ and his body mystical are of the same kind,
having the graces of Christ communicated to them.

3 The lump and branches meant here, are such as are holy persons; but what
holiness can there be in the fleshly seed of Abram, being now in a state of
rejection, that they can truly and properly be so called?

So ORIGIN; As well the first fruit as root is no other but CHRIST: Because
every man that is saved, is planted into this root.

Object. 13. 1 Cor. 10.1 They were all baptized unto MOSES, in the cloud and in
the Sea. Now their baptism was a Type of our baptism.

1 The scope is, that the Corinthians should not rest in outward privileges,
seeing diverse of the Jews had outward privileges, and yet God was to well
pleased with them.

2 To understand the place, look Exodus 14 We shall see this baptism was
Metophoricall because it was without water, verse. 21. The Lord caused the sea
to go back all that night, and made the sea dry land, and verse. 22. The
children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon dry ground: so that the
Israelites were Baptized spiritually in the cloud and sea, because for the
miracles which they saw in the cloud and sea, they believed, we see there
unbeleefe verse. 11.12. Because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken
us to die in the wilderness? and verse. 19. We see the pillar of the cloud
stand behind them, and verse. 20. It was a cloud and darkness to them, but
gave light to those, and verse. 21.22. Moses stretched out his hand over the
sea, and the Lord caused the sea to go back all that night and made the sea
dry land, and the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea and the
same sea swallowed up the Egyptians, verse. 23.24.25.26.27.28. When they saw the
cloud, thus over them, and the sea giving them passage, its said, verse. 31. The
people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord and his servant Moses, So that
their being b^ptized is Metophoricall, as Mat. 20. Can ye be baptized with the
baptism I am baptized with. They were baptized, that is seeing the cloud over
them a sign of Gods presence, and the sea thus divided they were Baptized,
that is cleansed from their ignorance security impenitency and unbeleefe.

2 If baptizing unto Moses were a type of our Baptism, and that as all were
baptized then, so all should be Baptized now, then Manna the spiritual food
they eat, and water out of the rock the spiritual drink they drank, should
be types of the Lords Supper, and in the same latitude, and so all persons must
be admitted to the Lords Supper, as all Israel were to the eating of Manna, and
drinking water, but our godly brethren among the Paedobaptists do generally
explode this, therefore the other, the thing typified by the Manna and rock,
was not the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but Christ, they drank of that
spiritual rock ( Sacramento tenus as Austin speaks) which followed them, and
that rock was Christ; it has been an error as I suppose to make one type to
typifie another.

3 Whereas some bring this place to prove thousands of infants were Baptized in
the sea; I ask whether the Baptism of Christ, and the Apostles were
instituted under the old Testament? If not then in vain is this allege.

Object. 14. Lydia, and all her family was Baptized, but it is not said her
family believe, therefore its lawful for persons to be baptized, although they
do not believe.

Answ. 1. Lydia, and her family were baptized as Christ commanded, else Paul
had contemned an ordinance of God.

2 Its absurd to Baptize any one in the faith of their master or mistress: I
ask those that hold infants baptism, whether they would baptize all the
servants of a Turk if he should believe, though the servants did not believe.

3 Hard Scriptures are to be expounded by easy, Nehe. 8.8. But in the same
chapter, the Jailour and all his house believed, and then were baptized, Acts
16 32.34.^8.8.

Object. 15. There are but two kingdoms, families, cities, households, Mr. M.
page. 9.14.
verse 2. Gods and the devils, if infants be not of Gods family, Kingdom
household, then are they of the devils, which is uncharitable to think.

Answ. 1. Its true in respect of election, and reprobation, there are but two
Kingdoms families, and to one of these all infants do belong, but election
and reprobation being secret things there, no Church can tell whom elect or
reprobate, that they may receive one infant and refuse another, and without
grounds of receiving they are not to dispense this ordinance, Acts 8.37.10.47.

2. The objection places all infants in one state, that they are all either of
Gods kingdom or Satan's kingdom, whereas the Scripture places them of two
several kingdoms, as we see in Jacob and Esau, Rom, 9. and the greater number
grow up and go the broad way.

3 But if by kingdom, city, family, household, they mean the visible Church,
and then if because infants are not of this, then are they of the devils
kingdom; we deny the consequence, for first many are of this kingdom who are
notwithstanding of the devils kingdom, as Ishmael, Magus, 2. Many are not of
this kingdom, who yet notwithstanding are of Gods kingdom as Job, and Jacob,
before he was borne, and had done either good or evil, before he was
circumcised, nay borne, it was said Jacob have I loved, and so he belonged to
Gods Kingdom of glory, yet was he not of any visible Church, as being
uncircumcised.

Object. 16. As the child is borne free by the fathers freedom, Mr. M. page
15. and others.
so if God take the father into Covenant, he takes the children in with him,
and if he reject the parents the children are cast out with them. As the son of
a Priest, or Levite, the son of a state officer, by birth has right to his
fathers office, so in this case God takes the father and children into the same
Covenant.

Answ. 1. There can no argument be drawn from symbolicall divinity.

2. No child of a believer is borne in the same privilege of adoption wherein
his father is invested as he is a child to such a father, for them all the
children, would be so borne, if by covenant, we mean the covenant of grace, no
believer is borne in this, being we all are by nature the children of wrath,
much less can the children be borne in any such cov nant.

But if the objector mean it of some ou^ward covenant, that is in^ig^tment to
Church privilege, that by the fathers inrightment hereto, the child should be
inrighted, I answer first they must show some copy that by the fathers
inrightment in Church privileges, all his children ar^ inrighted, for that
Acts 3.38. and Genesis 17.7. we have answereed before; believers under the gospel
are Abraham's seed, Romans 9. Gal. 7, 29. Not children of believers of whose being
Abraham's seed, the scripture speaks not a word.

2. If by this outward Covenant, the children by Gods taking the the father
into covenant, be inrighted into the church privilege of baptism, then are
they in righted into the Church privilege of the Supper being there is, one
communion in both, and so by consequent are inrighted, to that which brings
judgment to many of them which are wicked.

3. Baptism is not a sign of any such inrightment but of our fellowship with
Christ, in his death burial resurrection.

4 For these three instances of a child being free by his fathers freedom,
and the son of a Levite, to be a Levite, and the son of a state officer to
succeed in his fathers office; they had patents for these, either in divine
writ or human ordinances: now let these objectors produce if they can, that
there is any patent in scripture, that the children of those believers, whose
parents partake in ordinances, shall also partake therein, that the children of
him that is baptized shall also be baptized.

Object. But the children of all them that were circumcised, were also
circumcised.

Answ. 1. All the children were not, only the males; see, Answer. 1. and 2.
objection.

2. That the children of circumcised jews, were circumcised; it was because it
was commanded of God, Genesis 7. let us see the same command under the gospel,
that the children of all them that are baptized shall be baptized, and we will
obey it. We see contrary, Acts 2.41. Acts 8.12.

Object. But Baptism succeeded circumcision, Col. 2.12.

Answ. We have answered to this before, that it succeeds nor in respect either
of subject, or signification: See the full answer to the fourth objection.

5. It infers an absurdity, verse. 2. that a christan should beget a christian,
or else a person inrighted to the seal of christianity; which is in effect the
same, whereas he begets him as a man, not as a Christian; and the scripture
speaks of all, that they are by nature the children of wrath: Ephesians. 2.3. Many
have defended the traduction of the soul, but no age before this, defended the
traduction of christianity.

Ob. 17. Luke 19 9. As soon as Zach. professed the faith of Christ, the Covenant
of salvation comes to his house, forasmuch as he is a son of Abraham.

Answ. All that can be gathered from that text is, that salvatian, or Christ
who is called salvation, Luke 2.30. comes to Zacheus or any one that is a son
of Abraham: but we Gentiles (Its probable Zacheus was one as being a Publican)
are Abraham's sons, not by discending from his loins, but by walking in the
steps of his faith, Romans 4.13.

2 Christ speaks not of an outward covenant holiness, that comes to the house
by Zacheus his being a son of Abraham, but of salvatior; which came not to
every person in the house, but only to the house; which it did as soon as
^acheus entertained Christ joyfully, though never an one else in the family
should receive him.

Object. 18. Romans 11.28. The Jews are beloved for the fathers sake; therefore
we may far better in outward privileges, for our godly forefathers sake.

Answ. The Apostle speaks only of the Jews to be called home into state of
grace in the last time what is that to us Gentiles?

2 Suppose there were any such promise made to us Gentiles as may be alleged
from Gods showing mercy to thousands we may for our forefathers sake partake in
other privileges; as the fatness of the earth, and yet have nothing to do
with ordinances: If spiritual mercies be meant to a 1000. generations, its
only on this condition; if we love him and keep his commandments, not because
we are descended lineally of such as did love him and keep his commandments.

Object. 19. We read of whole households baptized, as Lydia, the jaylour
Stephanas, its probable there were some infants. Mr. M. page 40.


Answ. 1. For Lydia, there is no mention made of her being married much less
of her having children; but rather we may gather the contrary: first, because
she was so importunate with the Apostles, persons so generally hated, to come
into her house, Acts 16.15. If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord,
come into my house; and she constrained us: had she had an husband she durst
not have brought them in, the magistrates being so incensed at them, that they
rent off their clothes, verse 22.

2 Those that were in Lydias house were capable of consolation, verse. 40. and
they went out of the prison and entered into the house of Lydia, and when they
had seen the brethren they comforted them, and so departed.

2 For the Iaylours family its said expressly; That he and all his house
believed in God, Acts 16.34. therefore there were no infants.

3 For Stephanas who was a Corinthian, he was baptized and all his household, 1.
Cor. 1.16. But it plainly appears th^re were no infants in his house. 1 Cor.
16.15. I beseech you brethren, you know the house of Stephanas that it is the
first fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry
of the Saints. The house did give themselves to serve the Saints, therefore
there were no infants there.

2 It is not like they had two several kinds of baptism in Corinth; Now for
the manner of baptizing the Corinthians, it is set down, Acts 13.8. Many
Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. First heard, then believed,
then were baptized.

3 The Scripture still speaks of children, when there is occasion; As Exodus 12,
37. The chilren of Israel journeyed about 600000. men, besides children. Deuteronomy.
1.39. Your little ones which you said should be a prey, and your children that
had not done good or evil. So Ion. 4.11. Mat. 14.21. They that had eaten were
about 5000. besides women and children. Strange then that the Holy Ghost should
never once mention children, at the baptizing of men and women.

Mr. M. ^bid.
For other Baptized households there are none in Scripture; Cornelius his house
feared God, but he was not yet instructed in the Messiah as already come, Acts
10.4. much less was he baptized in the name of Christ. (...).
So whereas some allege Narcissus household, 1 Cor. 16.11. There Is no mention of
household in Greek, but it may be friends or kindred; and so for Aristobulus
household, 1 Cor. 16.10. there is no mention of household in Greek, but the
words are the same with that of Narcissus word for word.

Object. 20. Baptism of infants is not forbid in Scripture, therefore its
lawful.

Answ. 1. That worship is forbid, which is not commanded: And condemned Col.
2.23. Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Y^ shall not add thereto, nor take
therefrom. 1 Reg. 12.23. Jeroboam is condemned for devising the time and place
of worship other then God required. So Esa. 29.13. Ier. 7.31. Hos. 13.2.

2 As in the time of circumcision, they that were not expressed in the command or
circumcision were excluded, because they were not expressed; as the children of
the Heathen, and the females of the Jews: Though it were no where said thou
shall not circumcise a Heathen, or one of thy own females. So infants are
excluded, because they are not in Christ's commission Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.16.
Though it be no where said, thou shall not baptize infants.

3 The Scripture in so many words does not condemn prayers for the dead, the
baptismes of Bells and Ships, the ceremonies of the Church of England, but where
it condemns Will Worship, it condemns these.

4 They cannot have faith in the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ,
therefore they are excluded, Romans 6.3.

Obj. 21. But here is no alteration of the worship, Virtus at integ^a causa,
vitium ex qu^libet defectu.
but only of the subject; for the manner of baptising is the same.

Answ. The change of the subject makes it Will Worship; because herein we go
from the will of that one Lawgiver, who wills that only believers (whose sins
in the judgment of charity are forgiven) should be baptized. Acts 22.16. And
now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling
on the name of the Lord.

2 Those that defend infants baptism, would think it Will Worship if any
Minister should go and baptize the children of Turks or Indians when their
parents were not Christians, and that upon this ground, because they are not
fit subjects? The like conclude we from the baptising of infants, as being not
fit subjects, as not having faith, not so much as in profession.

3 Its an essential point in worship, that the subject be right. Pro. 15.8.
The prayers of a wicked man for the matter, may be better then the prayers of a
child of God. But for want of a right subject, they are abomination.

Object. 22. To whom the inward grace of Baptism does belong, Mr. M. page 41.
to them belongs the outward sign. But infants of believers are made pertakers
of the inward grace of baptism, of the heavenly and spiritual part, as well
as grown men; Ergo, they may and ought to receive the outward sign of baptism.

Sol. 1. We deny the proposition, for inward grace belonged to the godly Jewish
women, yet were they not sealed for want of a command.

2 The inward grace of baptism is remission of sins; which all the Elect only
partake of: But no church can tell who are elect, therefore the outward sign
does not belong to them, because many of the Elect cannot make it appear in a
visible way, that they have right.

3 Persons may have an invisible right to ordinances, that have not a visible
right; as an Elect person (as the incestuous man was) may be justly
excommunicate. The Proposition may be granted to be true in foro coeli, but not
in foro Ecclesiae; in the court of heaven, not in the court of Churches; in
respect of invisible right, yet not in respect of visible; and yet it will not
be true so: For Churches are to dispense Ordinances according to visible right
only; and this is but as in courts of men, if any one lay claim to estates or
lands, they must first show their right to them by their evidence, before they
can have any seal in that Court to authorize them thereto. So is it in this
case, Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized
which have received the holy Ghost, q. d. Baptism must be administered upon
some visible right.

2 To the Assumption, viz. That infants are partakers of the inward grace of
Baptism, of the heavenly and spiritual part, as well as grown men: I Answer,

1 If we understand it of all infants that live in Protestant Churches; its
manifestly false, for abundance of them prove wicked.

2 If we limit it to all infants of believers, it is as false; for if all such
be partakers of the inward grace of Baptism, and of the heavenly and
spiritual part, then many of them after proving wicked, must needs fall from
the inward grace of Baptism, which is putting on of Christ; Gal. 3.27. And the
fellowship with Christ in his death and burial, Romans 6.3, 4. or else, God must
fall from his promise, in making them our partakers of the heavenly and
spiritual part, and now taking it from them.

3 If we limit it to some infants of beleivers, that they are partakers of the
inward grace of Baptism, of the heavenly and spiritual part, and therefore
may and ought to receive the outward sign of Baptism; I answer, no Church is
able to put a difference betwixt those some that are partakers of the inward
grace, and those that are not; if any man could tell us who they were it were,
something, but this is impossible: the right of these persons being invisible,
it is absurd to put a visible sign thereto.

4 These some that are partakers of the inward grace of Baptism, they are only
partakers of it in respect of election, but not in respect of actual
conversion; according to which, or the profession thereof, the Churches are to
dispense Ordinances.

Mr. M. p. 6.
Obj. 23. There are three great mischiefs go along with denying infants
Baptism; as First, they reject the observation of the Lords day.

Answ. We deny it, and the generality of those that are against infants
Baptism, receive it, observe it with as due observation, as those that accuse
them indeed; for the Jewish Sabbath over-commanded by God, it is put to an end,
Colos. 2.16. else it stands in force yet; and that being put to an end, we
observe the Lords day from the Apostles example, and the mortality of the
fourth Commandment, which requires one day in seven.

2 It is objected, the teachers of this opinion, wherever they prevail, take
their Proselytes wholly off from the Ministry of the word.

Answ. I know the contrary, among many persons that are in Churchway.

2 It is not these teachers that take off others, so much as the Preachers of
infants Baptism; for these by praying and preaching against things which these
you call Anabaptists practice, they cause them to withdraw themselves, unless
you would have them to be present at such worship, as they neither love nor can
say Amen unto.

3 If you would in your several Presbyteries, consent to forbear these
doubtful disputations, both in your Sermons and prayers, the persons you so
accuse would not only be willing to hear you, but account it a mercy to
partake of your gifts; which we desire to acknowledge and reverence.

3 Object. This opinion puts all infants of believers into the same condition
wi^h Turks and Indians. Answ. As the infants of Turks and Christians, dying
infants are all alike, free from actual sin, being only guilty of original,
why may they not partake of the same benefit of free grace? why may we not have
charitable thoughts concerning the salvation of Turkish infants? seeing we know
nothing of their damnation: and we read not of any one in Scripture damned
merely for original sin, the innocence of all infants so dying, is the same in
respect of actual sin.

But for the consequences drawn upon us from hence, we deny: As First, all of
them are damned who dye in their infancy, being without the Covenant of grace,
having no part in Christ; or all of them are saved having no original sin: Mr
M. Ib^
For their damnation we know nothing of it, for their salvation we charitably
hope it, though they come into the world guilty of original sin: for what
hinders, but they may be saved through the presentment of the satisfaction of
Christ to the justice of God for original guilt, or some other way unknown to
us; and whereas for allege against this, M M(...)
that hereby we carry salvation by Christ out of the Church. Answ. Where is
there any limitation, that the free grace of God shall go no further then
visible Churches?

Obj. 24. There is no express command, Mr. M. p. 34. 35.
no example in the New Testament of women's receiving the Lords Supper, no
express command for the celebration of a weekly Sabbath.

Answ. First, that women received the Lords Supper appears,

1. From example, Act. 1.14. where the Virgin Mary and other women were
gathered together, and these women, together with the rest of the disciples,
were altogether in one place, and so Peter preaches, cap. 2. 1. and v. 42.
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking
of bread, and in prayers, and v. 44. Its expressly said, that all that
believed were together. 2. It appears from command, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat; the Greek word signifies a man and a
woman, the word is (...), a word of the commune ^ender; as appears, 1 Timothy
2.4.5. there is one Mediator betwixt God and man, and woman, there is the same
word used, Gal, 4.28. there is neither male nor female, but ye are all one in
Christ.

3 It appears from reason, there is one and the same communion in baptism and
in the Supper, now women were baptized, Acts. 8 12. They were baptized both men
and women, therefore they also recived the Lords Supper.

Mr. M. Ib d.
2. There is no express command, for the celebration of a weekly Sabbath.

Answ. 1. If their be no command, there is no observation due, Mat. 28.20.
Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you; if there be no
command, there is no observation due.

2. But the Sabbath is commanded indeterminately in the fourth commandment,
which commands us to observe the day of Gods rest. Now, being the first day of
the week, is the day of Gods rest, we observe it, though not in such a way as
the Jews were wont to observe their sabbath, because no command can be brought
to affix the rest of the Jewish sabbath on the Christian Lords day, yet in such
a way we from the command observe it, that in it we may have communion with God
in prayer, and hearing and receiving the Supper, meditation, works of charity,
etc.

We should desire in the bowels of Christ and bond of love, passing by what
hard speeches we find in your writings, not to render us odious to our godly
and wise Senators, and other friends, by calumneyes and false reports; which we
hope are no ways of your inventing, but yet through too much credulity of your
receiving, in as much as we find the same in sundry of your printed books.

Mr. M. ^b. d.
For those other exceptions; as first, that there is no express receiving of
the Laws concerning the forbidding degrees of marriage.

Answ. Yes, there is not only a prohibition of having ones fathers wife, 1
Cor. 5.1. But also of having one brothers wife, Mark 6.18. John told Herod, it
was not lawful to have his brother Philips wife, Mat. 14.3. Now these
incestuous relations, having no other prohibition then those other mentioned,
Levit. 18. The same commandment that forbids the one, does also forbid the
other.

Mr. M. ^b d.
So when its alleged, there is no express command against, Poligamy, in the
new Testament the contrary appears, Mat. 29.5. They twain shall be one flesh,
1 Cor. 7.39. If her husband be dead, she is at liberty to marry to whom she
will, only in the Lord she is free to marry to another, but not till her
husband be dead, Romans 7.3.4. If while her husband lives, she be married to
another man, she shall be called an adultresse, 1 Timothy 3.12. The deacon must be
the husband of one wife, by which is condemned the taking of more wives at
once, not second marriages.

Mr. M. Ib.
So its alleged, that there is no command, nor example, that the children of
those that are believers should be baptized when they are grown men.

Answ. Its true, if they be only grown men there is no command nor nor
example to baptize them, but if they believe, there is; Mark 16.16. Whosoever
believes and is baptized, etc. also Mat. 28.19. all are to be baptized that
are made disciples, if the children of unbeleevers are to be baptized when they
are grown up, and are believers, then surely the believing children of
believers cannot be excluded.

Object. 23. The denying infants baptism, is contrary to the practice of all
the Churches, and casts an aspertion upon them.

Answ. 1 I have heard otherwise, that there are Churches in Transylvania, and
Holland, that so practice.

2 We find the History of the Acts of the Apostles, and the first 300. years,
well nigh if not altogether clear for us; as has been showed before.

3 All the Churches erred for many 100. years, since the times of the
Antichristian apostacy, not only in smaller matters, as about Church orderer,
but in point of the mass, justification by works, transubstantiation, judge of
the faith, etc. In receiving infants to the Lords Supper, for 600. years
together, as was showen before, Apoc. 13.3. and all the world wondered after the
beast.

4 They have I supposed erred (I mean the Protestant, consisting of Lutheran
and Calvinian Churches) in the particulars since the reformation, which I
should be loath to risse but that only the matter comes in competition with
Gods glory.

1 In retaining the baptism which they had from the hands of Popish priests,
in the time of the deep abomination, which they could never retain without
acknowledging the Romish Church, to be a true Church, and their priesthood to
be true, and their ministers to be the ministers of Jesus Christ.

2 They erred, in that the elders of the Churches received all sorts of persons
to baptism, upon a supposed covenant holiness, derived from the parents,
which were Idolaters in the grossest Idolatry, for many a hundred years.

3. In that elders, members, and the whole Church (as they are called) did
agree that the Church should be divided by parishes, making cohabitation or
dwelling together in such a parish, a sufficient inrightment to Church
privileges; till the other day almost the independent Churches (though)
improperly so called began to epsy out this abomination.

4 They have all erred in a wrong matter, in that they have taken the whole
profane world, that lies in wickedness into them, and made wicked men that are
strangers from God, hereby to dream of a communion with him and them; till the
other day this abomination began to be discovered.

5 They have erred in the continuation of Episcopacy, for so many 100 years,
though in some places, the name is now changed into Superintendency.

6 I will speak little of the mutual invectives of the Lutherans against the
Calvinists, and of these against the Lutherans, even in the public assemblies;
yet could I never read of any of the ministers censured for this great
violation of charity, nor of the power of compulsion, which has been given to
the civil magistrate over consciences, whereby the weaker party have been
compelled to see, with the stronger parties eyes, and to subscribe to their
conclusions, the promises whereof they never heard; or else if they refused,
then banishment and imprisonment followed, or some such punishment; witness
the banishment of Molerus, from Wittemburge, and Zanch^, from Strasburge, and
many others.

5 There is no promise that all the Protestant churches, shall be kept from
error, from the time of Luther or Calvin, or that they shall come into a state
of perfection all at once, either in point of doctrine or discipline: we tax it
as a brand of Room to hold the church cannot err, and we by the same position
shall cast our selves upon a desperate rock, of never amending what is amiss.

Object. 26. There are many mischiefs go along with it, and therefore we
ought to abandon this Doctrine of not baptizing infants.

1 There will be a wide door set open to heathenisme, for a great part of the
world, will in time become heathens, seeing many that go for Christians
partake of nothing in christianity, but their baptism.

Answ. 1. This will be no damage, but benefit to christianity, in that many
that live the lives of heathens under the name of Christians, will be
discovered and seem as they are, so the name of God will be kept from
blaspheming by these, whose infant baptism says they are Christians, when
they are only artificial christians.

2 This will overthrow parishes, or Parochial churches.

Answ. True, and I think it comes nearer the Apostolical institutions,
wherein calling out of the world by believing and repenting, did make a person
capable of baptism, Tho^ndi^e. of the primit^v gov^^nment of c^u^c^es. page
16. 17
and so to become a member of a church; not only the Apostles, but after them
Apost^licall men went to chief cities and preached there, and those in the
city, and in the adjoining parts that came to hear, having their hearts opened
became a church; Its plain (says one) the Apostles, could not bestow their
pains on all places: hence, reason required they should labor most to plant
the faith in the most populous places, and common sense and the least knowledge
of times, will serve to show that from thence it was propagated through the
countries that lay to those cities; half the city of Rome were not christians
in Cyprians time, which was long after the Apostles.

For the division of parishes, it is but of late standing, in the depth of
Antichrists mists, in which blind times its very improbable that the multitude
of men, and women, were fit matter for a Church; I fear me this parochial
constitution, and the large tithes that do accompany it, are one of the
greatest objectons, that hinder the passage of this truth.

3 Though this were truth, yet its now unseasonable, when there are so many
divisions.

Answ. It is most seasonable now, had it come at any other time, an Episcopal
or presbiteriall power might have crushed it, there were never more times of
likelihood, then when men are upon such a general enquiry for truth, and each
man gives his reasons for his dissent from others practice; truth is never
unseasonable: I will conclude this with a saying of A ^brose ad Theodosium
Augustum, lib. 5. epist. 29. tom. 3. page 109 nihil in sacerdote, etc. There is
nothing in a priest or presbiter so dangerous with God, so filthy with men,
then not freely to speak what he thinks, seeing that it is written, I spoke of
thy testimonies before Kings, and was not confounded,

4 That such persons as hold this, are going into deeper errors, and that this
is but the entrance, and that God gives up such persons, every where to
dangerous opinions.

Answ. This is but one of Satan's old juglings; no disparagement to our
accusers, I know most that I have been acquainted with, are as sound in the
faith as our accusers; free from Socinianisme, familisme, Popery, Arminianisme,
or any other doctrine, which is unsound, as our accusers that do accuse us; and
shall be ready to give a confession of our faith, if we shall be duly called
thereunto, wherein we shall confess what we hold in opposition to the fore
named errors.

5 It is against charity, in making schism in the Church.

Answ. How is it possible ever to recover the souls of men out of this will
worship, but by dividing from the common practice. 2. Christ and his disciples
were not schismatics in keeping his passover two days different from the
received practice of the Jewish Church. God commanded, Number. 9.3. That it should
be kept in the 14. day of the first month, in the appointed season, and the
Jewish teachers and people, put it off to the 16. day, as appears, because the
day Christ was crucified on, was the day after his passover, Mat. 20.19.20
compared with John 18.28. But the day he was crucified on, was the day before
the passover, as appears, John 18.28.19, 14. No more are we Schismatikes
keeping to the rule though the generality of men practice otherwise.

3. With Luther I say, potius quam aliquid discedat gloriae dei, oceidat non
solemn pax, sed etiam Coelum and terra, rather then any thing depart from the
glory of God, let not only peace, but heaven and earth fall.

A brief CATECHISM Concerning BAPTJSME: Drawn from the preceding Disputation.
Question.

WHat is the English word of Baptism?

Answer. Dipping or Washing; by dipping never does it signify Sprinkling.

Quest. What is this Sacrament of Baptism or dipping, a sign or seal of?

Answ. It is a sign of my death and burying, and resurrection with Christ,
Romans 6.3, 4. of my putting on of Christ, Gal. 3.27. and that as by water, I put
away the filth of my flesh, So have I the answer of a good conscience, by the
death and resurrection of Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Quest. Whether is Baptism a sign of grace to be wrought in future, or of
grace already wrought?

Answ. Or both.

1. Of grace already wrought, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near in full assurance,
having our heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water, Col. 2.12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein you have risen
again.

2. Of grace to be further wrought, Romans 6.4. That Christ will give us strength
to walk in newness of life.

Quest. Who are fit subjects for Baptism?

Answ. Only such as believe, Acts 8.12, 37, 16, 34, 18, 8. Mat. 28.19. and
such as repent, Acts 2.38. Mat. 3.6.

Quest. Why are not infants fit subjects of Baptism?

Answ. Because they do not believe; nor can give any church any true grounds
upon which the Minister can administer the Ordinance, neither are they in
Christ's Commission and therefore are excluded.

Quest. Whether do you think it would be better for persons to have Baptism
deferred till they be able to make profession of their faith?

Answ. Yes, it would be far better, for hereby the churches would have a right
matter, that is, Saints in profession; and persons would be careful to get
knowledge and holiness, whereas now they are careless of of both.

Quest. What mischief and hurt comes by infants Baptism?

Answ. It brings many mischiefs, besides that it fills the Churches with rotten
Members, and confounds the world, and the Church together, it is a groundworke
for more traditions, and does so darken the doctrine of Baptism, that we
cannot know the true meaning of it, when we read of Baptism in the Scriptures;
yea hereby many are taken into communion in baptism, who are excluded from
communion in the supper, whereas the communion in both is one and the same.

Quest. How do you prove that there is but one Communion in baptism, and in
the Supper?

Answ. Because there is the same thing signified in baptism that there is in
the supper, that is to say, our fellowship with Christ in his death and
resurrection. So that all that are baptized into one body are all made to
drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. and the same preparations of faith and
repentance that are required for the one, are also required for the other, and
he that is cast out of the one is cast out of the other, seeing that by
excommunication he becomes like an Heathen or a Publicane.

Quest. But what if an infant or any other in their childehood should die
unbaptized, are they not damned?

Answ. We know nothing out of the Scriptures of their salvation or damnation,
and therefore we must not be too inquisitive, yet may such infants so dying be
saved, through the presentment of the satisfaction of Christ, Romans 5.18
to the justice of God for original sin, which satisfaction, though it be
applied through believing, in those that can believe, yet may it be applied
without in those that cannot believe; for else how could any infants be saved?

Quest. Do you think infants have no faith?

Answ. Yes, they have not faith, for they have not reason to discern betwixt
good and evil, Deuteronomy. 1.39. If they had faith, they were presently to be
admitted to the supper; Faith is an act of understanding, which comme^h by
hearing, as well as an act of the will.

Quest. What grounds have you against infants baptism?

Answ. Many, but chiefly Christ's commission, Mat. 28.19. Where the subjects of
baptism, are those that are made Disciples, and this commission is to last to
the worlds end, verse. 20. and reaches to every creature that is to partake of
baptism, Mark 16.15, 16.

Quest. Is it not lawful to baptize persons without they believe?

Answ. No, Acts 8.37. If thou beleevest it is lawful, Acts 10.47. and 16.34.
and 8.12. and 18.8.

Quest. But may we not be baptized if we be ABRAMS seed?

Answ. Yes, but we gentiles are only Abrams seed by believing, Gal. 3.7. Know
ye therefore that they which are of the faith, are the children of Abraham, so
Romans 4.16. Gal. 3.29.

Quest. But what think you of them that would make the children of believers to
be the seed of Abraham?

Answ. They are mistaken, for the scripture speaks only of three seeds of
Abraham; that is Christ, Gal. 3.16. He says not to seeds as of many, but as of
one, and to thy seed, which is Christ. and 2. the carnal Jew. 3. the bel^ever
of Jew and Gentile, Gal. 3.28. and they add a fourth seed of Abraham, viz. The
seed or children of believers among the Gentiles, about which the scripture is
silent.

Quest. But are not the children of Godly persons visibly in the covenant of
grace?

Answ. No, the covenant of grace is an invisible thing, and we cannot know who
are in it, nor have we grounds to judge persons are in it, till we see some
profession of holy life, and profession of faith and repentance, which infants
cannot make.

Quest. What is circumcision?

Answ. It was an obligation to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. Romans 2.24. and
showed unto them that it was their duties to circumcise their hearts, Ier. 4.4.

Quest. Whether was it not also a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans
4.11?

Answ. Yes, to Abraham only, and if Abraham's believing children among the
Gentiles should be baptized as he was circumcised, then must it not be till
they have the righteosnesse of faith as Abraham here had, at least they must
have it in profession.

Quest. Whether does Baptism succeed Circumcision in the same Office?

Answ. No, Circumcision was to every Male though reprobate; but baptism only
to the believer, Mat. 28.19. There being a change of the visible Church and of
the Ordinances, this cannot succeed in room thereof, nor has any dependence
thereon.

Quest. Whether may not infants of believers be baptized by virtue of a
covenant holiness?

Answ. No, for baptism is not a sign or seal of any such outward holiness
which may befall reprobates as well as Elect, but it is a sign of death,
Burial, and Resurrection, which the believer has with Christ. 2. There is no
command for baptizing such, if the Gentiles were so holy, which yet is not
proved.

Quest. Whether is infants baptism forbid in Scripture?

Answ. Yes, where will worship is forbid, Levit. 10.1. As they that were not in
the Circumcision of Circumcision were excluded, because they were not expressed
as the males, and females of Heathen; So is it in Christ's Commission about
Baptism, they that are not expressed in it, are excluded from it.

But now to answer to questions or cases of conscience about this point.

Quest. WHether is it lawful for a person that is convicted of the
unlawfulness of Infants baptism, or doubts thereof, to be present at it?

Answ. No, in no wise, for these reasons.

1 Because the inward man and outward man must not be divided in worship, 1
Cor. 6.20. Glorify God both with body and spirit, which are his. Its gross
hypocrisy, when the outward man is at a worship which the heart does not love.

2 Because by our presence at such a worship, we strengthen and embolden others
at a false worship, wiles they look on us, as those that worship the same kind
of worship, 1 Cor. 8.10. If any man see thee which have knowledge, fit at meat
in the Idols temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be
imbouldened to eat those things which are offered to Idols?

3 Because the person that is present at such a worship, is not able to make
any apology to God, why he or she is present at such a worship in bodily
presence, though he or she reserve their hearts to God: As a man's wife that is
taken in an adulterous bed with another man, can give no excuse for her
presenting her body there, though she say she keep her heart and affection to
her husband.

4 Because in false worship we are not so much as to touch the unclean thing: 2
Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and touch not the unclean thing. Now this
being an unclean thing in my conscience, I cannot nor must not touch it any
way, neither with my affection nor with my bodily presence; but that as soon at
any preacher begins to pray for any such thing, I must instantly depart, though
it be in his prayer after his Sermon.

5 Because the Martyrs would not give their bodily presence at any such worship
as they disallowed; they might have put an end to their sufferings would they
have done so, but they durst not: But one of them being at such a worship,
cried out; If there be any of the servants of God here, bear me witness at the
day of judgment, that I do not worship at this idolatrous service. Or words to
this effect.

6 Its unlawful for any Christian, either to allow himself in that which he
condemns, or to condemn himself in that which he allows: Romans 14 2. Happy is
he that condemns not himself in that things which he allows. But by my
presence at such a worship, I condemn my self in that which I allow; my bodily
presence allows that which my conscience condemns, and my conscience
condemns that which my bodily presence allows.

7 The end and scope of Christian actions, should be spiritual edification,
and not the destruction of any; but herein I do not edify, but cast a
stumbling block and an occasion of falling, in my brothers way; condemned Romans
14.13.

8 The actions of Christians ought to be done in faith, that what they do, they
may have good grounds that it is pleasing unto God; but to be present at such
worship, cannot be done in faith, but with a doubting conscience; contrary to
Romans 14.23. Nay which is worse, with a condemning conscience, therefore its
unlawful.

9 In all worship, we must be able to answer that question, Esa. 1. Who has
required these things at your hands? But in this worship we must acknowledge
that Antichrist or humane traditions, not any precept nor example of Gods word,
has required this: Therefore its unlawful for us to be present at it.

Quest. Who has the power of baptising?

Answ. I will not determine this question now, as requiring a tractate by it
self; which I purpose to handle at large in time to come; If God permit.

Only for present, the persons that lay claim to baptize, they are e^^her
ordinary Believers, or Ministers of the Churches.

For Believers, I will no speak any thing now, only I will cite a saying of
T^r^ull. cap. 17. de Baptismo, ad Quintil. edit. la Cerda.

It remainss to conclude the matter, also to warn concerning the giving and
receiving baptism; the Bishop has power of giving it, then again the
Presbyters and Deacons, but not without the authority o^ the Bish^p, for the
honor of the Churcb; which being safe, the peace is safe, otherwise the right
were in the people. For that which is equally received, may be equally given --
Therefore also baptism being equally Gods tribut^, may be ex^rcised of all;
But how much more does the discipline of shamefastness and modesty lie on the
people, that they do not take the Bishops Office. -- All things are lawful,
but all things are not expedient. Its sufficient that thou use it in
nec^ssities of time, place, person, because he shall be guilty of the man that
is lost, if he shall forbear to perform what freely he might. This was
delivered by him above 1300. years ago.

Or else the persons that baptize are Ministers; and these are of two sorts.

First, those that were chosen by the Churches, and were never Ministers
before; Of these I will not say any thing.

Secondly, they are such as are Ministers now, and were so before; Of these
men's power I thus reason; Either the power Ministerial that was in the former
Church state, is true or false; If true then are we Ministers, and have the
same power to administer all Ordinances, as being ordained by a Bishop as well
as others; if that power were false, then the subject that must receive this
power, must be either wicked men or believers, or else Christ has no subject
on earth to receive it; but Christ has a subject, and these are not wicked men
but believers, and these joining together, have power to choose a Pastor to
administer ordinances; if a new ordination for such can be had, it is
expedient; but if it cannot be had, then election in the beginning of the
recovery out of the Apostasy is sufficient, provided that the person chosen be
guifted, and blameless: My reason is, because all Ordinances and Offices, do
resolve themselves radically into Believers, in time of a general Apostacy.

Quest. Whether do you think Baptism administered in infancy, to be a lawful
Baptism and sufficient?

Answ. To me it is not; For I think it to be a profanation of an Ordinance,
for these reasons:

1 Because it is taught by the precepts of men, Esa. 29.13. not by God, Jer.
7.39.

2 Because it was done in a wrong manner, by sprinkling in stead of dipping.

3 Because it is done by an Officer, where there was;

1 A questionable power; the ministers being ordained by Bishops, deemed
Antichristian.

2 A wrong matter, to which it is a question whether Christ have committed any
Ordinances, Mat. 18. and therefore cannot be an infallible power in the
dispenser.

4 Because it is done upon a wrong subject, who is not in Christ's Commission,
Mat. 28.19. Nor Mar. 16.16. Believers and repentants being the subjects therein.

5 Because all the certainty I can have of such a baptism, is only
conjecturall, not infallible, whereas the outward sign of Sacrament must be
visible and infallible, as the thing signified is; this infant baptism, I take
only in trust from others.

Quest. Whether is it not lawful to baptize in one water as well as another?

Answ. It appears by the Eunuchs speech, that its alike lawful to baptize in
one water as well as another. See, here is water, what does hinder me? howbeit
we find it in Scripture, administered commonly in rivers, or where there were
many waters. Tertul, cap. 4 de Bap. Says, It is all one whether one be washed
in a Pond or in the Sea, in a River or in a Fontaine, in a Lake, or in a
Channel; Neither is there any difference betwixt those whom John Dipped in
Jordan, and those whom Peter Dipped in Tyber; which shows the Ancients accounted
all waters alike fit for Baptism.

FJNJS.
An answer to Mr. BLAKE his Arguments.
Objection.

Believing Gentiles succeed the Jews in the Covenant, the Jews being broken
off, the Gentiles are grafted in; by virtue of this insition we are branches of
the root Abraham.

Sol. The objector is overtaken in a gross absurditi^, to think there is some
universal visible Church begun in Abraham, into which upon the rejection of
the Jews, the believers among the Gentiles and their seed are to be received,
for besides the invisible Church the body of Christ's mystical, there are only
particular Churches under the Gospel, and much more does he err to think all
the members of the Gentile Churches to be taken into the Jewish, and Jews cast
out.

2. He erres in thinking there is some Covenant, into which the Gentiles are
grafted in upon the Jews rejection of it, which should belong to the Gentiles
and their seed, for there is no other Covenant, with the Gentiles now, but that
which was Covenanted before the world was, and agreed betwixt the trinity,
Titus 1.2. that eternal life should be by believing in Christ, and this
Covenant never belonged to the body of the Jewish nation, but to a remnant
therein, see, Romans 9.6.7.8. so verse. 27.

3 This insition in the root Abraham in the Jews stead, by a visible
constitution is merely imaginary, for Abraham stands as a root two ways;
first visibly to the Jews that descended of him, secondly invisibly to the
believers among Jews, and Gentiles, see, Romans 4.11.17. Its by virtue of this
latter insition, that not the Gentiles, but the believers among the Gentiles
are grafted in.

2. Object. The grand birth privilege of the Jews, was to be an holy nation,
but this honor to be an holy nation is given to believing Christians, 1. Pet
2.9. therefore Christians in this birth privilege are equal to the nation of
the Jews.

Resp. The very answer, Mr. Blake goes about to refute, but cannot is enough,
verse. 2. Peter means it of the invisible Church the body of Christ, who are
all holy by an imputative holiness of justification and an inherent holiness
of sanctification, so that there is not any equalizing of justified persons
with the body of the nation of the Jews.

2. This privilege (verse. 2. to be an holy nation) which belongs to the
mystical body of Christ, he would draw it, to all Gentile nations, which
profess Christ, among which there are thousands are visible unbeleevers,
because it was a birth privilege of the Jews to be an holy nation, which is a
mere Paralogisme, indeed believers, or justified persons, whet^er Jews, or
Gentiles, are all one in Christ, Ephesians. 2.14. but it follows not, they are all
one in any visible constitution, unless we hold some universal visible
Church on earth, of which the Scripture is silent.

Object. 3. The seed of believers must either be looked upon as foederally holy
Jews by nature were, or else as sinners of the Gentiles: A third sort cannot
be assigned. If under the first, we have that we contend for: If under the
second, then the heavy doom of sinners, Gentiles, aliens, is their condition,
they are then without Christ, without hope, etc.

Sol. We look upon them as sinners of the Gentiles, tainted with original sin;
and either these persons live and grow up to years, and are capable of
believing and so salvable; or else they dye in infancy, and are salvable
through the presentment of the satisfaction of Christ, to Gods justice for
original sin; and therefore not without hope, nor without Christ. And I would
fain know what way infants dying after baptism, are more salvable then these
dying before? Or whether in any other way they are salvable, but by Gods free
Election, and Christ's satisfaction to Gods justice, unless we held (which no
Protestants that I know of do) that baptism takes away original sin.
Therefore the hope about infants dying unbaptised, is full as much as the hope
about infants dying baptized.

Object. 4. Those that have the substance and thing signified, they must not be
denied the sign: But infants have the thing signified, viz. Christ, Ergo, they
must not be denied the sign.

Resp. We deny the minor, that all infants (nay the greater part) have not the
thing signified, but grow up and prove wicked; and for those that have the
thing signified, let them make it appear to any Church of Christ, and they
cannot deny them baptism. Mean time, because the greater part go the broad
way, and the Church is to judge only of visible things, give us leave to
forbear till we see how those that have right can make it appear.

This is the sum of Mr. Blake his Arguments; only he breaks out with many
aspersions to render us odious, p. 17. as that the Anabaptists of this present
age (for so he is pleased to call us that do desire to offer up to God pure
worship, and do abominate all such points) sail between two rocks, either to
affirm that infants dye in their pollution, and perish in their birth-sin, or
else to deny this original pollution, or any birth-sin at all: The latter of
the two they therefore generally choose, judging it more fair to deny infants
sin, then to affirm their condemnation. So choosing to join hands with Pelagians
to deny original sin, they strait fall upon universal grace, freedom of will
in things spiritual, the free Election of God they overthrow, leaving it in
our power to make choice of Christ, and not Christ to make choice of us.

These things its like were written to render us odious, though not without
some evasion. p. 18. But to forbid rendering evil for evil, but after the
example of our Lord, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he was
persecuted, he threatened not, but committed his cause to him that judges
righteously. 1 Pet. 2.23. We answer to these aspersions, that we sail not
betwixt two rocks, either to deny original sin, or to affirm that infants
dying therein perish. For we confess every man by nature to be defiled by
original sin, yet do they not die or perish in it, because from the grace of
Gods Election, and the presentment of the satisfaction of Christ to the justice
of God, they are saved from it, which though it be apprehended by faith in
those that are capable of believing, yet in those that are not capable of
believing as infants are not, it may through Gods free grace be presented to
Gods justice. If we enquire how your infants dying after baptism are saved?
You must have recourse to this way of salvation, no other being assigneable.

As false are the deductions that Mr. B. affirms p. 17. that denying original
sin, we strait fall upon universal grace, freedom of will in things
spiritual, overthrowing of Gods election, for we have constantly maintained
the contrary to that we are charged with; only in point of Paedobaptisme: We
desire not for fear of persecution, to wink against the light the Lord has let
us see. Let him remember what he says, page 30. If a Turk fall upon a Popish
State under the notion of Christian, he is a persecutor: If a Popish State fall
upon a Reformed nation, he is much more guilty. A foul sin for a people of God
in name and title, to persecute his people in truth. To which i will add, its
more horrid for those that are Gods people in truth (as I hope Mr. Blake is
one, though I never saw him) to persecute others who are no less Gods people
then himself is, and that for difference of judgment. For one godly man may
persecute another, as Asa who imprisoned Hanani.

Arg. 5. A believer can in the behalf of his infant, make good such a title to
the inward Covenant, that none can say thou have no part nor portion in this
things, and because it cannot be denied, it is to be presumed. Page 29.

Resp. The proof lies on the believers part, that his infant has right to the
thing signified in baptism, and so to the sign, before any Church can
administer Baptism, the sign or seal thereof; because the Church judge not of
secret things, it lies upon their part to prove that they have part or portion,
not upon the Churches part to prove they have no part or portion, It did not
lie upon the Apostles to prove that Magnus had no faith, but upon him to prove
that he had, so the Eunuch. Acts 8.37. Acts 10.49.

These are all the Arguments that are worth examining, which Mr. B. has, save
those common objections I have elsewhere answered. Only some equivocate
speeches, that delude the Reader; as p. 28. In nature, children are their
parents; in Covenant Gods: Every Christian parent has a child of God
committed to his tuition and care, which is by the Book, unless he mean a
child of Gods creating, or maintain falling from grace.

Obj. 6. Genesis 17. I will be the God of thee and of thy seed, therefore all
believers are in Covenant with God, and so they are to be sealed.

Answ. To all former Answers, see Object. 2. and 3. I Will only add, that it
this Covenant with Abram was the Covenant of grace, yet was it made with the
children of promise only, which are believers of Jew and Gentile, and not
their seed; many whereof are wicked, and preffered only to the carnal seed
that were circumcised, and not made nor covenanted with them.

FINIS.

