A Little STREAM OF DIVINE Sweetness, FROM The Living Fountain for the
Paradise of God.

LONDON, Printed by G.D. sold by Tho: Brewster and Greg: Moule, at the three
Bibles in Paul's Churchyard, near the West end. 1650.

THE subject and occasion of this little Treatise: fainting in the wilderness
of affliction, I went to these Scriptures for recovery, and on them spent some
few meditations, which I recommend unto the dead and livings view, as useful
unto both;

Rev. 3.21. To him that over comes will I give to sit with me in my Throns,
even as I overcame, and am set with my Father in his Throne.

Rev. 21.2. And I John saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, come down from God out
of Heaven, prepared as a bride, trimmed for her husband.

Rev. 3.2. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and
open, I will come in and sup with him.

Rev. 22.1. And he showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as
Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God and the Lamb.

Rev. 22.4. And they shall see my face, and his name shall be on their
foreheads.

Do not look, but read, and for what you profit, let God have all the glory,
for to your sinful friend there is none at all due.

To the right honorable, his Excellency, THO. Lord FAIRFAX, Captain general
of all the forces in England and Wales, etc.
NOble captain General, will your Excellency once give leave to, I dare scarce
say what; yet, I beg as on my bended knee, for the Spirits sake, leave to
shelter these few lines under your greatness, hoping you will peruse them in a
leisure hour, not but that your breast has sweeter things in it, in which ye
delight your self more, then in all your victories, pomps, glory, greatness,
which you are crowned with, and admired for by all men, good and bad: but the
reason why I take this boldness, is, to present my thankfulness for your
unwearied marches round about this kingdom, in all hours and seasons; I say,
for this and your many brave, bold, gallant charges, where Cannons played, like
thunder; and bullets flew like Haile-stones driven by the wind, such was that
at Maid-stone, and diverse more besides; but in these Christ did ever keep you
with his lifeguard of Angels, and now has brought you home from the fields of
deadly slaughter to refresh your greatness; now good men will bring presents,
or at least, their thankfulness, as well as bad men, court you for their own
advantage: both the former I would do as well as I can, will your Excellency
so take it, my thankfulness it is, and a present too, like a glass of Nectar
from the Spirits breathings, drink it up my Lord, for sure it will refresh
you; I know you may refuse it, expecting the sons of Levi should all bring in
their flagons full of rich and choycer liquor; but they are many of them angry,
I cannot tell the reason, why good men should be so, unless they are weak and
froward, and know not what they would have; but yet I think you value not the
ingratitude of men, knowing your reward is with your Lord and Master Christ,
the King of kings, who will one day set you in his throne and glory, for you
have overcome; you, my Lord Tho. Fairfax have foyld, and spoyld all; yea, all
the mighty ones that have risen against us, yea, you, I say, with your gallant
Champions, have bravely done the thing once over, and once again to that, and
with such expedition, that the world round does wonder, for which we hope,
though many stars or commets like to stars be fallen, yet your honor, glory
shall endure like to the sun and moon for ever, and your merits with your
Champions be remembered whilst one good man breaths in the nation; And now, we
who are private christians add this short title to your Excellency, the Saints
Captain General, next under Christ, and when, my Lord, you need us, we are
all in readiness, to pray, to fight, to live and die at your command, for Christ
and this nation, which now sits at rest: but for taxes, some poor, and widows
wants, who are all in hopes, you will speak a word in their behalf to those,
who soon can help them, and surely will ere long, though murmuring men say no.
Well, my Lord, I say no more, but the great Jehovah, God Almighty bless you,
make his face to shine in, and from you, and al those who have followd you,
high and low, in faithfulness and unweariednes: doing Christ's, and the nations
work; this is my wish to you, and those who are sent over to the other nation,
by yours and others commands, to do Christ's work, and make him room for his
Gospel; and to this I wish O all ye Saints, that love Christ your king, his
cause, or these nations, say, Amen, Amen, as with one voice.

Your Lordships servant in Christ. WILL. BLAKE.

To the Christian Reader.
TO the strong and to the weak, to the merry, and melancholy Christian, I
recommend these following lines, which was pend in a wilderness of affliction,
by the Spirits strength and power, which has emboldned me, to present them to
thy view, and the worlds; and that on serious consideration, and some able
Christians importunity.

But first, I will tell thee what I was, and now am, that thou may see Gods
goodness, calling poor creatures out of darkness to himself; I was brought
up by my parents in my youth, to learn, hall mary, Pater noster, the Belief,
and learn to read, and where I served my apprenticeship little more was to be
found; but in that time, I speak, without any boasting, to the praise of Gods
grace, he shind in some measure into me, minding me of eternity, and my souls
condition, which I saw, and I still do, to be very sinful. Well, I fell to
reading the Practice of Piety, Mr. Perkins, and by these, or rather the Spirit,
I got a little persuading of Gods love to my soul. Well, my time being out, I
set up for my self; and seeking out for a wife, which with long waiting and
difficulty, much expense and charge, at last I got; Four children, God gave me
by her, but he has taken them and her all again too; who was a woman of a
thousand for good nature. In six weeks time, which must needs go near. My
eldest Son and daughter in a fortnight, and my Wife a month after. Well,
thought I, if comfort be any where, it is in God; and so fell to meditating of
these Scriptures; but no more of this, nor another tedious line; only mark
Gods dealing with his people in afflictions, which is most seen in that
furnesse; instance Peter, Paul, Daniel, and the three Children. Well friends,
what ever your afflictions, or conditions be, I know not; but in these
following lines, lies much comfort, which I found in penning, and I hope you
will in reading; for the glory all is yours, and the sweetness too, what is
yours you may rejoice in, by an eye of faith, foreseeing it a forehand: God
gives a promise, after that the thing; so he dealt with us by his Son; first,
sent him in a promise, after that in substance, to be our life, light, and
glory, rest, peace, comfort, and salvation, in all wants, and from all wants,
of all kinds and nature. Well, this Christ, and God that sent him, and the
Spirit too, is the Stream of sweetness, where all your comfort lies, unless
it be in the creature, which withers, like the grass when it is cut and grows
no more; if creature comforts be cut off, or withering, one of these they are,
or else they are not momentany, but enduring, which I am sure they are not,
from my own experience, no more then a dream, which is but a fancy: when the
man awakes, may fancies, riches, honors, pleasures, profits, in the dreaming
hour; thou may do the like, and not enjoy at all what thou labourst for,
whilst thou seek it in the creature; run thou may, and win not, seek
thou may, and find not, try thou may, and taste not, the sweetness thou
expectest; true some lies in every flower, but the Be that skips from one to
another, all the Summer long can scarce fill her Hive; but grant that she do,
how quickly is she rebl'd and strangled too at last, O thou (...) Christian,
after pleasures, profits, riches, lands, and livings, death will one day
strangle thee, and r^b th^e to, of all those sweet comforts thou ever g^therste
here the Manna would not keep but in the pot of gold, no more will the
creature, but in God and Christ, and therefore what thou have, lay it up (...)
Christ, and lay it out for Christ, and the thou shall be sure to find it, like
bread upon the waters, after many days; but thou that seek none, and have
none, but God, Christ, and the Spirit; thou have all already, yea, more then
all the world, ten thousand times, can give thee, for thou have all. All they
seek and crave, thou have found in God, Christ, and the Spirit; and hence it is
that a poor Christian, who has Gods love, Christ's pardon, and the Spirits
seal, can bear up his head, and smile in his heart, though purseless, and
penyless, houseless, and homelesse, ragged, poor and hungry, in a cheerful
way, when many rich and great men complain of a thousand wants; whilst the
true Christian, in the sense of Gods love, wants nothing: but if some poor
Christian (...), as many there are, wailing and weeping, like to Hagar, for
want of this or that comfort, a Wife, a Child, estate, pardon; this or that
comfort, light, or knowledge: lo, this seeming want is in thee, only thou do
not see it, for where Christ is, all is; and therefore look about thee, yea
look, and if Christ be in thee, I dare say, thou shall find more sweetness,
and drink too, more delight (out of this little Book) then in all the creature
comforts thou ever yet enjoyest, and therefore when the world is still, and thy
Spirit quiet, in a leisure hour, taste, try, read, and if ye be deceived
pardon me, for I am a weak, froward, doubting Christian, and yet I hope a
growing, though it be but slowly: let us pray for one another, for I will for
you, and the Israel of God, while my name is William Blake.

A Word, and but a Word, to many of my fellow Christians, who think they have
no ability to raise, write, or speak to a portion of Scripture, in a linct and
profitable way, for want of learning. I dare say to thee, whoever thou art, if
the Spirit of God be in thee, lend him thy sleep, or meditation, when thy
business of the world is ever, and thy Spirit quiet, he will feed thy thoughts
beyond thy expectation; I dare pawn my life for it, these few lines was brought
to my hand in this way: and therefore try and see, if William Blakes words be
not true.

A STREAM OF SWEETNESS from the Spirits breathing.
Revelat. chap. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I give to sit with me in my
throne, as I have overcome, and am set with my Father in his throne.
THis is the revelation of God by Jesus Christ unto John, and therefore it is
said: blessed is he that reads, and he that hears: What, this mystery, or
prophecy? I, blessed is that soul for ever, as in the first chap. and the
third verse: In the seventh verse Christ says he comes; Amen, says the Bride,
come Lord Jesus quickly; In the last of the Revelation and in the second
chapter, and the seventh verse. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
Tree of Life.

This tree is Christ, and his leaves are for the healing of the Nations, Rev.
the 22. and the 2. v. And in the last of the 10 v. A Crown of life. And in the
latter end of the 11. v. A promise of no hurt, by the second death. In the 17.
v. A promise to eat of the Manna that is hid.

This Manna was the sweet food that the children of Israel fed on in the
Wilderness; Christ is this Manna, but his sweetness is a hidden thing to the
carnal world; and in the 25. A promise to rule over Nations, and further, I
will give him the morning Star: this Star is Christ, as Peter tells us, saying,
Wait until the day dawn, and the Star arise in your hearts. In the 15. ver.
of the 3. chap. Christ tells his Church, That he that overcomes shall be clothed
in white array. I, then shall he stand with boldness before Christ, when Kings
and Princes shall cry to the hills and mountains to fall and cover them, Revel.
the 16. And further, I will not put out his name out of the book of life. and
in the 12. ver. I will make him a standing Pillar in the house of my God, and I
will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, and
my name: The name of my God, that is, he shall be so filled with his divine
nature, that it shall be as visible as a name in his forehead.

And now in the 21. ver. which I first mentioned, a further promise is laid
down, as if Christ had not enough yet spoken, to engage his Church against
hers and his enemies, namely, the world, flesh, and devil.

Well, according to my light, I shall hint at the meaning of Christ in these
words: and first,

Observe. The universallity of the promise, it is a promise to him, any him;
high, low, rich, poor, young old, bond, or free, man or master, maid, or
mistress: O but the world does not always so; one gains the victory, and
another gets the honor, or reward many times.

But secondly, What is meant by overcomming, surely to get the masterdome, or
upper hand with those we encounter with: this masterdome is got two ways, by a
Captain, or a soldier, by a Captain, or a Champion; so David. engaged with
Goliath, and his slaying him was Isreal's victory, and he in this was a type of
our David, our Christ, who has slain and triumphed openly over our enemies upon
the cross.

And therefore says Christ to his Disciples, be of good cheer, I have
overcome, as in John the 16, the last. Secondly, We do overcome likewise, when
we do by the strength of Christ oppose and overcome the pollutions of the
world. In this sense says John, Greater is he that is in you, then he that is
in this world: and yet not, but that a poor soul may be foyld, and seemingly
wholly overcome, as David, but yet David, by renewing grace he gets up and
fights, and like David in conclusion, wholly overcomes Saul and his house.

Again, he may be said to overcome two ways. First, Comparing himself with
himself, I was such a sinner, and such a sinner, but now I thank God I am no
more the same man. Secondly, He may be said to overcome, comparing himself
with the world, who lies, lives and wallows in all kind of polutions and
defilements; Revel. 16. there is a blessing promised to such a one; Behold
says Christ I come as a Thief in the night: blessed is he that keeps his
garments undefiled,

Thirdly, What is meant by Christ's Throne, and by the Fathers Throne, surely
here is meant both one thing, namely, the Glory of God, I say, the Glory of God
is the thing meant, the eteruall Glory of God is the Throne on which Christ
sits on, and in which you must fit also.

Does Christ sit in this glory of God, Christ your Husband, Christ your Head,
Christ your Vine? then must you O Christians too, for ye are inseparable.

Where should the Bride sit but by the Bridegroom? Where should the Members be
but with the Head? Where should the Branches be but with the Vine?

O poor gentile sinner, what glory is designed for thee?

But fourthly, What is meant by sitting down in Christ's Throne, or Gods Glory.

First, It denotes a cessation, or rest, so you know Christ is said to enter
into his rest, as he is set down with his Father in glory. And Paul says,
there remains a rest for the people of God, aluding to that, so that to sit
down with Christ in his Throne is to sit with Christ in the Glory of God; Moses
was but a while in the Mount with God, and yet his face shined, so that Israel
could not behold him. O how will thy face shine, when thou shall sit down with
Christ in the true glory of God; Moses saw him in fire, smoke, and thunder:
but thou shall see him in Christ, a loving, kind and tender father, a father
rejoicing over thee, even as a bridegroom rejoicing over his bride, to do them
good, says the Lord, in Isai. O how well pleased was Jacob when he had his
Joseph? O friends, God will sweetly please himself, as I may so say; when
Christ shall say, he are am I and all the Children thou have given me, make
them welcome Father, they are my sons and daughters whom I dearly loved, and
dearly bought: O seeing now I have them, I am at rest, while they were in the
world, tossed with afflictions, and troubled with temptations, my heart was not
at rest, but seeing now I have them, and from those things have freed them, I
will set them in my Glory, where they shall sweetly sing: thus,

Farewell all sin and sorrow, which now shall be no more, my work and labor is
over, and nothing now remains but rest, and joy, and glory: O this is a sweet
sitting down indeed for a soul tossed and tumbled with sin and sorrow, to be
brought from all, to rest for ever.

Secondly, This setting in Christ's Throne, or Gods glory denotes a welcome unto
Christ; we bid them sit down that are welcome unto us, take them by the hand
and set them down by us: O friends, Christ will one day take you by the hand,
lead you to the Father, present you as his Spouse, the Father will take both
Christ and ye, and set you both down in his own Glory: and in that day says
Christ, Ye shall know the Father is in me, and I in you; then shall ye know
the Fathers love too, as Christ speaks, John 17. last v. O Christians ye will
never know this love, nor your union, the strength, glory, sweetness of it,
till that day comes, but in that day ye shall know the relation your souls
stand in to God, to Christ. You will know him then to be a Father indeed, and
not in name only, you will find so much fatherly love and tenderness toward
you, that your souls shall lie steeping in it like Sugar in wine.

If a little taste of Gods love now be so sweet, O what will it be when you
shall lie night and day soaking in it, and wholly melted by it into holy
praises.

Here a gracious heart mourns for want of love to God, to Christ, but this want
shall be supplied, when the Father and you personally meet, which day is a
coming, and I tell you this, till this day comes, ye will never know what
the love of God and Christ is.

Now a drop is sweet, but how sweet will it be when it shall be like a flowing
Fountain in you. O friends, in that day ye shall be like as a Vessel that's
set under a Fountain Cock, always full and always running over: Now says
David, thy loving kindness is better then life. O but then he will say nothing
but stand; stand, pore, and admire; I admire to al eternity: when great and
undeserved love is shown unto us by some one unexpected, how do we admire, and
as it were study and wonder why such kindness should be shown unto us.

O precious christian, thou will one day admire indeed to think, that such love
should be shown to such a dead dog; as that good man said before the King, so
will thou say, O my God and King, what am I, that thou should love a poor
Gentile sinner, to keep me in thy presence, to have me in thine eye, to set me
in thy throne, that thou may talk with me, and tell me there thy thoughts of
old. O great and glorious God, why art thou so kind to worm, Jacob.

Thirdly, by sitting down in the throne of Christ or Gods glory, it denotes
respect and estimation: we usually bid them sit down, whom we best respect and
esteem.

O happy christian, how art thou esteemed of the Son and Father, that thou
should sit down with them: the world hates thee, so far as Christ appears
in thee: yea, it cannot but hate thee so far, I say it hates thee, though it
love thee other ways as a friend, and kinsman, or harmless man: but I say, so
far as thou refusest to comply with their ways, and wink at their faults, to
speak of their folly, to sigh at their joy, and mourn at their laughter, so
far, I say, they cannot but hate thee: but so far as thou workest by their
example, and walk by their rule, and speak them fair, thou please them
well to smooth them thus up, by laughing, and saying, and doing as they; I say,
thus far happily the world may not slight thee, but esteem thee, though Christ
be grieved by thee: but still I say, so far as you make Christ your rule, his
word your law, his work your pleasure, and service your delight, not at all
caring who be pleased or displeased, so Christ be honored and obeyed: this, I
say, will make the world hate you, and so it did Christ.

Well, the world slights thee, and shufes thee; so far as they see Christ
appearing in thee: do not thou be troubled, Christ will one day take thee, and
embrace thee as a man does his lover.

O thou shall sit and sup with Christ. Rev. 3.20. thou shall sit at his table,
and stand by his side, yea cut on his trencher, and feed on his dainties, which
is the feast of fat things God speaks of in Esaiah. Behold I will make in this
mount a feast of fat things: of marrow, and of wines, well refined Isa. 25. v.
6. O this mount is Christ, and the feast, Gods discovery to a Saint in Christ:
this feast is sweet, yea sweeter then honey, or the honey-combe, though it
comes far short of that which God shall make for the Lamb, and the Lambs wife.
Rev. 19.9. Which is called the Lambs supper, of which it is said, blessed are
all they that are called to it; yea, blessed indeed that ever they were borne
to come to this Supper.

O this God and Christ, familiar presence with you will be a feast and supper
to you: here is Christ the tree of life, and God the river of life, eat and
drink abundantly, yea, I mean now, O precious christian, by believing what is a
coming.

O, I would a poor Saint should feast his soul with expectation of what Christ
has promised, and will then make good in that day, when they shall sit in his
throne, and feed at his table, and drink of his wine, at this feast of Gods own
making for his sons and daughters now married to Christ, and brought to his
presence, to live in his sight, and feast at his table.

It is said, when the King sits at his table his Spiknard sends forth a
fragrant smell, as in Solomon's songs: This is spoken of Christ sitting in a
Saints heart.

O but what a smell shall there be then, when a Saint shall sit (as I may so
say) in God and Christ's heart at supper in their loves, by feeding on divine
delights.

O friends this is the sweet Manna that Christ promised to feed his Saints
with. Rev. 2.17. Christ tells his disciples, he will drink no more of the fruit
of the vine: till he drink it new in his fathers kingdom with them: the Vine
was a tipe of Christ's blood, and Christ's blood a type of Christ's love, and
Christ's love a merit and manifestation of the Fathers love, when ye come to sit
down in the glory of God and Christ: full cups of this shall go round from
Saint to Saint.

Fourthly, this sitting down in Christ's kingdom or throne, and Gods glory it
denotes familiarity, we usually bid friends sit down to enterchange discourse
with them.

O friends in that day, God will tell thee over and over again his
transactions in respect of decree and purpose: O when God shall tell thee, how
he rould thee in his thoughts, and carried thee in his purpose, and had thee in
his eye, intending thee for glory: it is sweet to think how Gods delight was
with the sons of men before the foundation of the world, as himself speaks
Pro. 8. and then in that day shall Christ tell thee over his travels, troubles,
and pains too, for thee his Spouse.

It is said in a fablish story, that Dido the queen wept when Aeneas, prince of
Troy, cold her of his ten years wars. I will not say thou shall weep when thy
dear Savior shall tell thee these true things: but I dare say, thy soul
shall even melt, (as it were) to think what pains and labor, what care and
cost, what grief and sorrow, thy soul did cost thy dear Savior: besides the
slights, and scorns, and jeares which the vilest of men did cast upon him,
which he contentedly did bear for thee from day to day his whole life long.

And then at last, still for thy sake, his back, his belly, his hands, his
feet, his head, his side, his heart; his heart blood too, and all for thee,
that thou might know how much he loved thee.

O friends, I am persuaded that Christ will in that day tell you over and over
such true stories, that it shall even melt you hearts and souls to think how
much he loved you, how dear he bought you: but then Christ shall ask his
Saints what they suffered for him, to which they will answer, O sweet Jesus,
why do thou ask us this question, seeing thou know all our sufferings were
but fleabites to thine, thine, O dear Savior: the most we suffered was but
jears, and scorns, and such slight things; nay, my children, ye were whipped,
and stripped, and killed too for me, my sake; O Christ do not speak of that,
were it to do again, ten thousand lives should not be dear for thee, thy sake
O dearest Christ, to whom our souls are so engaged.

O Christ, we now Wish we had done when time was, and sufferd ten thousand
times more then we did: O Christ, it even now grieves us to think we never did,
nor suffered any thing for thy sake to any purpose. O Christ, that we had now
an opportunity to show our love as once we had, for squibs and scorns, for
stripes and prisons we would not stand, nor yet our lives, nay, souls and all
to honor thee. O sweet, O dear, O precious Christ: and then Christ being taken
as it were with these expressions of his Spouse shall stroke her, saying, O my
love, my dove, my dear, thou sufferedst enough to testify thy love to me.

But now, my love, my dove, the winter is over, all storms past, singing,
rejoicing is now at hand, come along, come along my love, from Lebon, come let
us to my fathers wine-seller: who shall then say, bring them in, and set them
down in my throne and glory, they are my sons and daughters.

Friends, what a privilidge will this be to sit by God and Christ in glory,
like children round about a fathers table.

Mary once sat at Christ's feet pondering Christ's sayings, and it was a great
privilidge for a sinner to sit so near a Savior: but thy privilidge is far
greater, who shall sit by God and this Savior, who is, far ascended above all
principalities and power, and is set down in glory on the right hand of God, as
the Apostle speaks.

This is a greater privilidge then Marys, bearing Christ, (barely considered;)
the disciples had a great privilege to wait on Christ: a greater to sup, and
dine with Christ: but what are all to the sitting down with Christ, in the
throne of Christ.

It is said, John leaned on the bosom of Christ, O loving John! O loving
Christ! to give such privilege to a bold, but loving, sweet, and humble
sinner: John, John, how could thou be so bold with Christ thy Lord and
Master? John, it was love within that bosom that drawed thee there to rest, and
loll as in a lap, it was love that drawed thee, it was love that laid thee in
that same bosom: but yet I say, thy privilege far excels in sitting down with
Christ in the throne of Christ, Christ was in the form of a servant, now Lord
of all things: Christ was then, I say, on earth with a mean outside round
about him, but now surrounded with Angels with his title on his thigh, King of
kings, Lord of lords.

Christ was then in rags but now clothed with suns and stars, Christ was then
God-man, unglorified, but now glorified of God with that eternal glory of God
which Christ had before the world was, as Christ speaks, John. 17.

O friends, this glory like glistering diamonds, sparkles round the heavens,
dazeling Saints and Angels. Well friend, is not thy privilidge far above
John's, to sit down with this Christ in his throne and glory, side by side, as I
may so say.

Fifthly, this sitting down in the throne of Christ, and the glory of God,
denotes honor; what an honor is it for a beggar to sit at a Kings table, you
will say, that is a great honor indeed: but what is that to thine, O gentle
sinner? to sit with God and Christ in glory.

Seems it a small thing, says David, to be a Kings son in law? O but ye are
the King of kings sons and daughters, ye are the Bride, the Lambs wife. Rev. 21
9. Come says the Angel, I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife, nothing
draws the eyes of the people to gaze more, then the sight of the Bride and the
Bridegroom. Was the queen of Sheba so taken with Solomon's glory, that she cried
out, O happy are these that tend thee, O Solomon: Angels and Archangels will be
taken with thy glory, when this marriage shall be solemnized before the Father.

It was a question once. What shall be done to the man whom the King will
honor, and delight in: But I ask, what shall be done to the man whom the King
of kings delights to honor; first, he shall be arrayed in pure white linen,
which is the rigteousnesse of the Saints, as in Revel. He shall be clothed
with the Sun, and trample the Moon under his feet.

I know, the Saints shining forth in Christ are able in some measure to trample
these changeable things, by living far above them, in an unchangeable God, by
the Spirit of Christ living in them: but so far as they are flesh, they are apt
to mix themselves with these things below: not knowing their majesty, nor
glory, forgetting their descent, but time is a coming that they shall know
God: know as they are known, they shall know God with all his attributes and
glory: yea, they shall know themselves with the glory designed for them.

Christ says, John 17. The glory thou have given me, I have given them, that
we may be one, O Father. One part of Christ's glory is this, that the Father
has appointed the Son to judge the world, and in this respect Christ will
honor his Saints; know ye not, says Paul, that the saints shall judge Angels
and men: here they look like poor shrimps, as they are clothed with rags and
flesh: but when Christ shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory, as
the Apostle John speaks.

O this appearance shall confound the world, as soon as Christ has confounded
the world, with his own, and his Saints glorious appearing to the world; then
shall he sit down in glory, to rest himself as it were satisfied in the
finishments of all his works, and the Saints shall sit down by Christ, as well
pleased with Christ and all his works, what an honor is this? Well, this
honor all his Saints shall have, Thy name O Lord it above the heavens, says
David; and as his name, so his Saints too, in seating them above Angels, as
taken into union with Christ, and set down in the Throne of Christ: What joy,
feasting, music, is there at your Princes marriage days when solemnized? O
but when the Bridegroom, and his Spouse the Bride, and the Lambs Wife shall
sit down to solemnize that eternal match, made up in the everlasting purpose
and counsel of God the Father, long before all worlds, or the Foundations of
them: O what songs then? what joy? what praises shall Angels sing with
lightsome hearts? Yea, I say Angels, and this too shall they count their heaven
and happiness: O thou melancholy Saint, tossed with afflictions, what think
thou of this day? tell me, tell me true; sure thou do not mind this, if thou
did, thou could never complain of wants and losses; if thou did mind this
day indeed, this endless day, when heaven shall ring with shouts and praises
unto the Lord, and unto the Lamb, by Saints and Angels as with one voice.

Does a little Instrument sweetly touchd, take and charm the ear, and
Siren-like, kill all other delights, at least, for present? O how shall thy
soul be taken? yea, taken and charmed to hear the Songs of praises unto the
Lord, unto the Lamb, in that same day unto the Lord; O that must needs have a
sweet melody in it, which must touch and take that ear, which made that ear
by which weheare.

If all the skilfullest Musitions in the world should meet, with every one the
sweetest Instruments that could be thought on, with all Solomon's Singers, yea,
and ten thousand more to them; I say, if all these should meet to try their
skill, and strain their voices, yet would the Songs, the Praises of one bare
Saint, or Angel, as far excel them all for sweetness, as they excel the
Asses braying; and if so, what sweetness will there be when ten thousand times
ten chousands of Saints, with as many Angels, shall all join as with one
voice, to sing their praises unto the Lamb; O Christ, how blessed is that soul
whom thou will to sit in thy Throne to hear these Songs, to hear these praises.

Sixthly, This sitting down in the Throne of Christ, and the Glory of God,
denotes joy and triumph: It is said, at Christ's birth, Angels and innumerable
company of Angels was heard to sing and rejoice, Luke 2.13. Glory to God on
high, peace and good will to men on Earth.

Shall not this Song be sung again at that day, when Christ's marriage shall be
solemnized, a match of the Fathers own making? Surely yea, and the twenty four
Elders shall sing, worship God for ever, Revel. 18.20. O Heavens do ye
rejoice, and all ye holy Apostles and Prophets too.

At Isreal's victory its said, Deborah, and Barak sung praises: but for Christ's
victory, and his Saints, over Worlds, Men, Sin, Death, and Devils; let all
now rejoice; now let the Song of Moses be sung again, Revel. 15.3. Great and
merveilous are thy work, Lord God almighty, just, and true are thy ways, O
thou King of Saints; Who shall not fear thee, give glory to thee, and glorify
thy name, for thou only art holy, and all Nations shall come and worship thee,
for thy judgments are manifest. How glad was Israel when David had slain and
spoiled Goliath?

O friend, this David was a tipe of our David, our Christ, who has foyld and
slain all for his Israel; Let her therefore be glad and rejoice in God her
Savior, yea, let her rejoice now with Timbrell and Harp, let the high praises
be had in their mouths, and let them sing aloud his praises, who has now
redeemed them from off the earth, out of every kindred, tongues, and nations, a
people for his praises.

O Israel, created for his praises, praise thou the Lord; O Jacob, formed of
God, praise thou the Lord: O all ye Saints of his, praise him day and night; O
all ye Angels, Archangels, Cherubims, and Seraphims praise ye the Lord, for he
has magnified you.

Seventhly, this sitting down in the throne of Christ, or Gods glory, denotes
abiding; we bid friends sit down when we would have them abide With us: so by
this sitting in the throne of Christ, it denotes, that Christ is willing thou
should abide, and sit with him for ever. I remember Peter, having but a
glimps of Moses and Elias glory in the mount, says thus to Christ: O Master,
let us build here Tabernacles: mark Peter's desire was sure to live and die
here.

O precious Christian, thou shall live and never die in this mount Sion, where
thou shall see Moses and Elias again; yea ten thousand times ten thousand
glorious Saints, as well as with as many Angels, and God, and Christ, excelling
all ten thousand times over and over again: now Peter, how much better will
this be then thy wish, to sit down in the glory of this God, and throne of
Christ. One thing, says David, I have desired of the Lord, That I might dwell
all the days of my life in thy house, to behold the beauty of thy temple: this
is the wish of every gracious heart as well as David's: but here is more
promised, far more then this wish: namely, an abiding, not only in the house
of God, but a sitting in the glory of God, with Christ, where thou shall sit
time, time out of mind. Christ will never bid that soul sit up, whom he once
sets down in his throne.

Christ tells his Disciples, because I live, ye shall live also. John. 17. As if
Christ should have said, I cannot live without you: and whilst I have a throne,
I must have your company.

O christian, were thou to be in heaven a few moments, it would be a reward
sufficient for all thou did, or ever sufferedst for Christ. O happy
christian, thou shall sit, not only moments, but days, months, nay years,
nay ages, yea more then ages, as much longer then ages: as all ages are longer
then one moment, one bare moment, time shall be no more, nor sin be no more,
nor sorrow shall be no more but thou shall remain, and be for ever with Christ
in the throne of Christ.

O says Daniel, his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom: so may I say, his
throne is an everlasting throne, David says, Though the heavens be changed,
and rouled up like a scrowle, yet thou remainest the same: so may I say of this
throne: O happy christian, Princes would think themselves happy, might they
but sit but a few days more then ordinary in their thrones to reign in glory.

O friends, Christ says, He that overcommeth shall sit with me in my throne,
as I have overcome, and am set with my Father in his throne; so that thou shall
sit with Christ, and reign, as it were, within the eternity of Christ. O
eternity, O eternity, when I think on thee, how is times and worlds swallowed
up, and lost like little rivers in the ocean? how are joys, griefs, and
sorrows swallowed up by thee, O Eternity, like little fishes by the whales?
here one age passes, and another comes, all mouldering into eternity, like
flesh to dust, here, says Paul, we have noe abiding city: but we have one to
come, aluding to what Christ has promised. O that can never be shaken: all
things here, are, and must be shaken, yea, the earth, and heavens, as Paul
speaks, We see it, we see it, how are all earthly Monarchs shaken now in our
days. O me thinks Christ is now a shaking all powers in the world, do not you
see it, nay, do not you see them fall like our ripe fruit; truly, me thinks I
see Christ hewing down Kings and Princes with a voice as loud as thunder,
crying, room, room, for my self, and my Gospel: O how have these kingdoms
been shaking, and the mighty men overturned: overturned by the voice which is
still abroad thundering, that the world round about may hear and make room for
Christ, and his Gospel, and all that will embrace it: but the heavens must be
shaken, the heavens that cover this earth, and the heavens that covers Gods
glory, the glory of his free grace in Jesus Christ: I mean, man's
righteousness, that is now a shaking by the Spirit of the Lord, by proclaiming
Christ, and his righteousuesse to the worst of sinners.

Men have thought, by way of works, to find life and salvation, neglecting
Christ, at least in part, by resting, as it were, on two propes, Christ, and
their own works: but know this, Christ is all, and now will be all or nothing
at all; your former Popish ignorance he winked at, but now he wills that all
men repent of this sin, selfconceitednesse. O! Christ must be all in all, but
I shall step a little aside; the thing I aim at, is to tell you, what that is
that remains, and cannot, nor shall ever be shaken by men, or devils; well
heaven and earth must be, but these two things cannot be.

First, The righteousness of Christ in which he clothes sinners, yea, the
worst of sinners that comes to him, and makes them Saints. O sinner, sinner,
come to Christ, honor him by coming, and he will honor thee, by giving his
righteousness unto thee; O this righteousness is the long white Robe in which
all the Saints are clothed, Revelations. Sinner, come and take this Robe, come,
ye may have it, come, it is free, ye may have it, come, it is free to all,
yea, free to all that will accept it: O come then, come sinners, all sorts of
sinners, high, low, rich, poor, young, old, bound, free; but if ye do not
come, then remember this, I say, remember this, ye shall cry one day to the
rocks and mountains to fall on you, and run to the dens and caves to hide
your naked souls, naked for want of Christ's righteousness which ye once
refused.

Secondly, As the righteousness of Christ cannot be shaken, so the throne of
Christ cannot be shaken: Daniel says, His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
and his Throne is an everlasting Throne, and is established for ever, says
David. Well, he that overcomes by Christ, shall sit by Christ in this Throne.
How we overcome I told you at first, namely, by Christ the Captain of our
salvation, an easy way for thee: well, O sinner, resolve, resolve thy self
what thou will do. For surely there are two eternities that all must pass
into; one with Christ in the Throne of Christ; and of this eternity and glory,
all this that has been spoken, is but as one Grape of that Bunch which the
Spies brought from Canaan for Israel to taste in her journey; you, who are
traveling with your faces Zion ward, taste if there be not a sweetness in this
one Grape, this one Promise of Christ, in sitting down with Christ in the
Throne and Glory of Christ: but as for thy resolution I know it, I know it very
well; thou art resolved to live more and more to Christ, and the honor of
Christ, who will thus honor thee, by seating thee on his own Throne: but for
thy resolution, I feign would have. yea, thine O careless sinner, and if it be
not for Christ, and the honor of Christ, mark me well what I say; thy eternity
shall not be with Christ, no, nor the Saints of Christ, but quite contrary with
Devils, Zim, and Ohim, and damned spirits in dreadful flames and utter
darkness: but I hope thou will be wise, and change thy resolution, or else, O
all that love thee, mourn, mourn, mourn for thee.

Revel. 21. v. 1. And I John, saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, come down
from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband,
MAny glorious things did this young bosom beloved disciple see, in the chap.
20. v. 11. He saw Christ sitting on his throne in Judicature, and in v. 12. The
dead both small and great standing before him, and the books opened: which I
conceive to be the consciences of men, by which he judges all according to
their works, and in the 13. v. it is said, The Sea, Death, and Hell give up
their dead, and in conclusion, all was cast into the lake, that was not found
in the book of life: which book of life, I conceive to be Christ, or the
foreknowledge, or purpose of God in Christ.

And now in the 1. verse of this chap. he saw a new representation of all
things, as a new Heaven, and a new earth, and of this Isaiah speaks chap. 66.
v. 22. and chap. 65. v. 17. and here again. Rev. 21. I saw a new heaven, and a
new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth was passed away, and there
was no more sea, which denotes trouble. O christian, the time is coming, when
sea and trouble, sin and sorrow shall be no more for ever, and now in the 2. v.
he tells us of the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from
God, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband. I John saw, etc.

From whence observe briefly, that God makes his divine, and glorious
discoveries to some singular men, to Abraham, to Moses, to Jacob, to Daniel, to
a Paul, to a John, as in these words.

Secondly, I John saw the holy city too, he saw many glorious things, and this
city amongst the rest.

From whence observe, where God makes one divine discovery, he will go on to
make more and more still, till at last he shows them his own face, and glory,
and they shall see my face, says God, Revel. 22. verse 4.

Thirdly, I John saw, how did thou see? by a divine discovery of Christ, O
all discoveries of this nature, are from Christ and the Spirit: but when was
this discovery to him? on the Lords day, as chap. 1. v. 10. on the Lords day,
that is, on that day, when the Lord Christ took John up in a trance, to show
him all those glorious things, which he says, Blessed are they that read, or
hear these things. I, blessed are they indeed, that ever they were born, whose
eyes and ears Christ has so opened, as to see, and understand the mystery
herein, which the blind bats, and carnal world, neither do, nor can see, till
God enlighten them by his Spirit.

Fourthly, I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, the Prophet Isaiah speaks
chap. 64.16: of a holy city, which lay wast. v. 26. of a city which had
salvation for walls and bulwarks. But briefly, the holy city John speaks of
here, is that new Jerusalem, of which old Jerusalem was but a type, and yet
that Jerusalem, which was but a type of this city, was the glory of the whole
world, the only city in the world, yea called the city of the great King.

For first, it was the figure of the everlasting city of God, and therefore
called Salem, a place of peace, wherein the Priests of God reigned; it was
settled on four mountains, mount Sion, mount Moriah, the two chief: on mount
Sion, David's house stood, and it was called mount Sion, because it was a type
of the highest heaven, or habitation of Almighty God, from which throne, or
habitation, he descended in Christ to this lower Jerusalem, and became our
Redeemer, to bring us into the highest Mount, his eternal glory in mount Sion
the highest heavens.

And now for mount Moriah, it is as much to say, the Lords mirrhe, as ministers
do interpret, which signifies our Lord Christ, which is the true mirrhe, and a
sweet smelling sacrifice unto God, yea a steadfast rock, and unmovable
foundation, whereon Gods Church, and Christ's members are all built, as on a
sure foundation, as Isaiah 28. and Matthew. 16. On this rock I will build my
Church, says Christ, meaning himself, and therefore the gates of hell shall
never prevail against it.

Besides, this city had many mountains round about it, mount Olivet was one,
to which Christ went many times to pray and meditate, David says, in one of
his Psalms; as the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round
about his people, and in Jerusalem was David's house, which stood on mount Sion,
as I said before, mount Sion was a great mount in Jerusalem, on which David
built, typing out the Saints safety, who are built on Christ.

Thirdly, in Jerusalem was Solomon's temple, which the Jews told Christ was
forty years a building, and this temple was indeed the glorious piece in the
whole world, for workmanship, and riches, and in this temple was all the holy
things, the Ark and the Covenant, the Mercyseat, and the Manna, the Ark of God
was made of Shittim-wood, which like the Olivet, and the Cipresse, are not
subject to worms, and putrefaction, which did typefie the humane nature of
Christ, which David says. Psalm. 16. Thou will not suffer to see corruption.
And in this Ark of Shittim was kept, or laid up by Gods appointment, the golden
pot of Manna, Aarons rod, and the two tables of commandments, as Exodus 25. and
Hebr. 9. And for the golden pot of Manna, it was a clear type of Christ, who is
the true Manna, and the bread that came down from heaven, to give life to the
world, as himself speaks. John 6. I am the bread of life, says Christ to
the Jews.

And for Aarons Rod that lay in this Arc of Shittim wood, its blosomes did
signify, the sweetness of the Gospel, and the Glory of Christ, and the
fruitfulness of his Members, who bud and blosome continually by his renewing
grace.

Fourthly, To this City the Tribes and all the People of God, resorted at set
times to worship, and all the world to trade and trafique; it had twelve Gates,
which were not to be shut day nor night; which John alludes to in the 12. verse
of this chapter, Glorious things are spoken of this City; on the walls of this
City, says God, have I set watchmen, which shall never keep silence, till
Jerusalem be made the praise of the whole earth; this is the city which David
says, If I forget thee, then let my right hand for get its cunning; which was
his musical skill, by which he charmed the Devil in Saul many a time.

And this was that city too, which melted the heart of Christ to think of its
ruin, saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, with rouling bowels, ^ights, and tears,
O that thou had known in this thy day, the things that make for thy peace,
which now are hid from thine eyes. For this Cities sake, says Isaiah, will I
not hold my tongue, till Sion and Jerusalem be made the glory and praise of the
whole Earth. I shall speak no more of old Jerusalem the Type, but of this new
Jerusalem which is the Church and People of God.

But why is the Church of God called by the name of a City.

For three, or four reasons, which I will briefly hint at. 1. It is compared to
a city for numeration, and the variety of this numeration. 2. The Church of God
is called a city, for her visibility, for she is not like a candle under a
bushel, but like a beakon on a hill. 3. The Church of God may be called a
city, for her treasure and riches. 4. It may be called a city, for her peculiar
privileges, which the Church of God has from all the world; like a city from
your country towns and villages. 5. In respect of her rivers, your cities are
fed and refreshed by some great river; There is a river that the streams
thereof shall refresh the City of God, Psalm. 46. verse. 5.

And first, Whereas it is compared to a city, it denotes, the Church of God are
a great and numberless people, as you cannot number the Inhabitants of a city,
no more, nor less; indeed, can ye number the Church of God: O says God to
Abraham, In blessing, I will bless thee, and multiply thee as the Stars in
Heaven, or the sands on the Sea shore, so that if thou can number them, then
shall thy seed be numbered. Many shall come, says Christ, from the East, and
from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, I sack and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God. Here is the variety of the Church, some coming in, from the
East, and some from the West, which is the most remote place that can be, and
implies them to be the greatest sinners for Idolatry and Heathenisme; yet
says Christ, many of these shall come from both places, which denotes variety.
O the long ways, out ways, by ways, and many ways, that Christ brings
sinners to this City, or Fould; which Christ speaks of to the Jews, saying, I
have other Sheep, which I must bring into my Fould, when they shall he are my
voice, or whistle, by my Spirit in their souls, and so there shall be one
sheep, and one fould, Christ commands, and commissionates his disciples, to go
and preach the Gospel to every nation, tongue, and people; and therefore says
Paul, Jew and Gentile, bond, or free, Scithian or Barbarian, Christ is all, and
in all, he has all in his fould, and so he is all to them.

And as he has great number of these varieties, so his church may well be
called a numberless people, and therefore says John, I saw with the Lamb
standing, an hundred forty and four thousand, besides a great number, which no
tongue could tell.

Well, let us, who were remote sinners, not only in respect of nature and
gentilisme: but in respect of parentage, and families brought into the church
of Christ; one from popery, and popish ignorance, another from a cursed,
drunken, and hellish family, where God, it may be, never shined into one soul,
before he did into thine; which mercy calls for as much thankfulness at your
hands, as ever Noah's, Abraham's, Lots, Daniels. O, for God to appear to Abraham,
and enter into a covenant of life and peace, and to single out Noah from the
whole world, and lead out Lot, yea catch, and carry out the lingering man to a
Zoar, and leave the rest for fire and brimstone, did argue abundantly free
grace.

Well friend, do not thou neglect to bless God, whilst thou have any being,
for doing the like to thy soul, by choosing and pulling thee out of sin,
nature, death, and hell. O says Paul, I have obtained mercy.

Secondly, she may be compared to a city, because of her visibility, she is not
like a candle under a bushel, but as a fire, a beacon on a hill, your cities
are spacious to the eye, and so is the Church, and shall be more and more: for
Christ now by his providence seems to say, arise, and shine, and shake thy
self from the dust, O captive daughter of Sion, show thy self, and let the
nations know thy strength, power, glory, and greatness, that they may be in
love with thee, and come in, fall down, and bow their necks to thy sweet yoaks
of obedience to Christ.

Thirdly, the church of God is compared to a city for her treasure, you know
all the treasures of God are laid up in Christ, as a store house to this city,
and every citizen has, as I may so say, is the key of this storehouse, by
which he goes and fetches out what treasure he will, I mean the Spirit, by
which they may fetch out pardon, peace, righteousness, yea, any thing they
need: but still by the Spirit, which is the key of David, that shuts and no man
opens, that opens and no man shuts, this Spirit says Christ to his disciples,
shall take of mine, and show it unto you, as John 10.

And this he does to the whole church of God, and truly, you that know the
Spirit, knows, he brings rich and costly things to your souls many times;
sometime pardon for sin, and them freely too, which could not be bought out
by tears and sorrows before he comes.

O says the Spirit, I have brought thee that, for which thou weepest, and
mournest, namely, a pardon sealed in Christ's blood, and a crown to purchased by
Christ's merits. O sinner, what think thou of this pardon, is it not sweet,
yes says the sinner, sweeter then the honey, or the hony-combe.

O says a poor soul, I bless God more for this, then if he had made me the
greatest prince in the world.

Fourthly, it is called a city, for her privilidges; no city, but has its
charter, and privilidges, at least some distinct from towns and villages.

O Jerusalem, city of our God, thy privilidges excel all the worlds, who may
be compared to thee for privilidges, yea, peculiar privilidges; which no
nation, but thee, can lay hold on, nor people in the world neither; all the
people in the world are Gods by creation, but Jerusalem by purchase; all the
world he feeds and clothes.

O Israel, who is a people like unto thee, shielded by the great God, fed by
the Manna, and watered by the rocks, and sheltred by a cloud by day, and a
pillar of sire by night.

God in a way of providence, keeps all creatures, but man especially: but
Israel and Jerusalem above all, who are his choice pieces of silver, yea, his
treasure and jewels; now treasure, you know, men will keep choicer then that
which is but ordinary, parents will let farthings and counters lie about for
their children to play with: but who will leave jewels carelessly, here and
there, in common places: no, men are wise, and will lay up their precious
stones in choice cabbenets: and so does God, he lays his up in his cabbenet of
providence, and charges his Angels with these jewels, or sons of Sion, more
precious then jewels, or choice silver either; and in this particular, he is
said to keep them, as a man keeps the apple of his eye, and is as tender over
them, as a father; so says David as a father pittieth his children, so
pittieth the Lord them that fear him.

O happy, and blessed people, pitied, saved, and kept by God; I will keep thee
every moment, yea, every moment in the den, yea, every moment in the furnace,
and every moment in all hours and seasons, night and day, death, and
judgment, in times of troubles, wars, and judgment, yea, closset them; in
raines I house them, like Noah in the Arc, and in famine feed them, like
Elisha by the raven; yea, what shall I say, I will be a pillar of fire by
night, and a cloud by day, yea, a sun and shield, as David speaks, and sure
defense too.

And now, who art thou that forgettest the Lord thy maker, and fear the man,
or the son of man, who is as the grass of the field, and shall die.

But in the fifth, and last place, the Church is compared to a city; because
the Spirit is as a river feeding of it, O says David, He feeds me in green
pastures, and leads me by the still waters, this he speaks of concerning the
Spirit; if the foundation be removed, what can the righteous do, There is a
river, the streams thereof shall make glad the city of God. Psalm. 46.4. O
this Spirit streaming in, and by thee, presents Christ over and over to thy
soul in all his loveliness, and this must needs make glad the city, a people
of God.

Nothing is the Spirit oftener compared to, then the waters, when the poor and
needy seeks waters, I the Lord will hear, and open rivers in the tops of the
mountains, this is a prophecy of the Spirits pouring out to poor, and
thirsty, who do apprehend themselves far from the water of consolation, I
will power out my Spirit says God, by the prophet Joel, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy, that is, they shall be enabled to open the
Scriptures mysteries.

But now, why is it called a holy city.

The Scripture speaks of a two fold holiness.

First a holiness of things.

Secondly a holiness of persons.

First, a holiness of things in four or five respects.

First, things are said to be holy, by way of dedication, or consecration, so
the bowls of the temple are said to be holy, and all the vessels of the temple
too.

Secondly, things are said to holy by way of simulation, or figure, so was the
Arc, the brazen serpent, Aarous rod, and the Manna, which did figure and
similie out Christ.

Thirdly, things may be said to be holy, by way of calling, so was the Priests
office, it was a holy calling: be holy, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.

Fourthly, things may be said to be holy, by way of rule, or precept, so the
word of God, the law of God is holy, as Paul says, though I be sinful, yet
the law is holy, and just, and good, though I be carnal.

Fifthly, things may be said to be holy, by way of comparation, so Jerusalem is
called, the holy city, because the holy God was worshipped in it, though it
were in it self a sinful city.

But secondly, persons may be said to be holy likewise.

And first, by way of creation, so the fallen Angels were made holy, and Adam
too in his first creation, God created man upright: but he found out many
inventions.

Secondly, persons may be said to be holy, by way of calling, so the Priests,
Prophets, Apostles, and Patriarchs, O says Paul, the holy men of God spoke as
they were inspired by the holy Ghost in them.

Thirdly, men may be said to be holy, by the inherent holiness of God in them,
having the holy Spirit of God in them, purifying of them, and now they may be
well said to be holy, in these respects, first comparing themselves with
themselves, formerly they walked in darkness, and lived in sin, and nature:
but now in light by the Spirit, who tells them they are none of their own: but
redeemed of Christ, to whom they live, as Paul says, if I live, I live to
Christ, and if I die, I die to Christ, O happy change from sin and Satan, to
God and Christ.

Secondly, men may be said to be holy, comparing themselves with others, whose
lives lies and wallows in all pollution, Paul speaks of some, who were
drunkards, covetous, filthy, unclean, sinners, and such were some of you, but
now you are washed, and cleansed.

Lastly, and chiefly, men may be said to be holy, by way of imputation, having
the holiness, or righteousness of God imputed to them, he was made sin for us who
knew no sin, that we might be the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.21.
And in this sense, the whole church of God is holy, having the holiness, or
righteousness of Christ imputed to her; and in this sense, she is said to be
holy, even as Christ is holy.

But thirdly, why is this Jerusalem called new Jerusalem, for three or four
reasons.

First, in respect of creation.

Secondly, in respect of declaration.

Thirdly, in respect of reparation.

First, in respect of creation, so you call a thing new, that is newly made;
what is so a building is called new, because it is newly set up: in this
respect Jerusalem is called new Jerusalem, because God has set it up for a
building for himself, or habitation for his own glory, where he will dwell
for ever, as David speaks in another case.

Secondly, a thing may be said to be new, in respect of reparation.

God dwells with his people. O when God shall new pollish his temple, and
repair all the wants of his people, may he not then be said, to new make his
temple: yea, his presence with them, is the glory of them.

Thirdly, Jerusalem may be said, to be new, comparatively, comparing it with
old Jerusalem that was defiled; this washed, that decayed and withered, this
fresh and lovely, even as Bride.

Fourthly, Jerusalem may be said, to be new, in respect of the manifestation
God gave to John, he never saw this new Jerusalem till now, old Jerusalem he
had seen again, and again, but this new and lovely City he never saw before,
and therefore it was new to him, for he had never till now the full discovery
of it; I shall wind up these former lines by a word, or two, to what I
apprehend, and have said of this City, this holy City, new Jerusalem, which
John saw coming down from God.

But some may say, your lines would have been more advantages to the Saints and
Servants of God, if they had been on some practical point.

O christian, precious Christian, let me tell thee, nothing in the world does
more divinely fire the spirits of holy Souls, then a spiritual discourse of
the holy God, and the holy City; O did the Earthly christian but mind this
heavenly Jerusalem, how would his low and base affections loosen from the
creatures pleasures and profits hear below; or did the ignorant christian but
know this holy City, new Ierasalem, how sweetly would this knowledge feed his
soul, if he did indeed, divinely know this Jerusalem, his soul would feed on
this knowledge, yea, it would feed his soul as with marrow and fatness.

And if the fainting christian did but mind this holy City, and his eternal
rest in it, how would he pluck up his spirits; this would be like the honey
that Jonathan licked on, which did so much revive his spirits.

O the knowledge of this holy City new Jerusalem, it would make the blind
christian see, yea, see and say, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the holy City, the
City of the great King, who may be compared with thee, for the glory of the
Lord is in thee, the glory of the Lord is on thee, thy Sun shall never set, thy
day shall never end, thy sorrows shall be no more, thy joy shall be for ever.

And now come ye lame christian and leap for joy, for the Tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself will be their God, and dwell with them, and by dwelling with them,
wipe away all tears from their eyes, so as they shall never sorrow more, and
death shall be no more, for the fountain of life shall live with them; nay,
with them, do I say, it shall live in them, and they shall live in it, and by
it, and to it for ever and ever, wherefore leap and dance, O thou lame soul.

Truly friends, I know no portion in Gods Word like this and that which
follows, which I shall point at by Gods assistance, to raise and cheer
christians, all sorts of christians, blind christians, deaf and dumb
christians.

O but how do you call christians, deaf, blind, and dumb? how? well enough, if
they do not hear with joy these things, I think they are deaf; and if they
do not see with an eye of pleasure, with an eye of joy these things, are they
not blind? I am sure they are little better; and if they do not sing for joy,
are they not dumb? O christian, I say, thou art dumb, if thou do not come away
and sing: O but what shall I sing, and how shall I sing? O Jerusalem;
Jerusalem, thy warfare is accomplished, thy sorrows are over, thy enemies
dead, thy God, and thy Father, thy Husband, thy Christ is alive, and he lives
for ever, for ever for thee, for ever with thee, for ever to thee; let this be
thy Song and the burden of it, free grace, free grace, be sure of that: but now
not knowing but some unclean wretch may read these sweet lines, who lives,
loves, and wallowes in his sins; I shall not speak many words, but one word
I would speak to such a one; O poor soul, go and weep, weep, weep seas, if
it be possible, that thou should be still in thy filth, thy blood, and thy
sins.

O poor and unhappy man, as sure as the Lord lives, if thou be not washed by
Christ's blood, faith and repentance, thou will be shut out of this city,
amongst Dogs, Sorserers, and Whoremongers, and Liars, which thou may think
me harsh for telling of thee, but read I pray, and consider, Revel. 22.15. and
there it is written with a Pen of Iron what I say, which thou will one day
find the truth of it; and then, what will thou then do? but mourn, mourn
bitterly, mourn because thou did not when time was, mourn for thy sins,
but please thy self with a bare name of a christian, when indeed thou were in
thy heart an enemy to Christ and his people.

But fifthly, It is called new Jerusalem, because it so far transcends old
Jerusalem: I shall hint something briefly. 1. In respect of her Foundation. 2
In respect of her Builders. 3. Her Materials. 4. In respect of her Walls and
Gates. 5. In respect of her Watchmen. 6. Her Glory. 7. Her Light. 8. Her
Safety. 9. Her Inhabitants.

But first, For her Foundation, which was but a common Foundation; but thine O
new Jerusalem, is a choice and precious Foundation; Christ in thee is the
Fonndation of thee.

Secondly, Old Ierusalems Foundation was a decaying, mouldering Foundation; but
thy Foundation, O new Jerusalem, is the Foundation indeed, the sure Foundation,
the lasting Foundation, yea, the outlasting Foundation, out lasting time and
ages, therefore he is called the rock of ages, the rock out lasting ages, all
ages and generations past and to come.

Thirdly, Ierusalems foundation was but a single foundation; but thine, O new
Jerusalem, is the foundation of all foundations; twelve foundations are laid
upon thee, on which twelve thousand souls have built, yea, twelve thousand
times twelve thousand, which if they had not, they had been ruind, yea, soul
and body for ever. O ye unbelieving and fearful Saints, did you know your
rock and safety, if you did, though the winds blow, and storms beat, yet you
will not fear.

Fourthly, Thy foundation, O Jerusalem, was but of yesterday, and to day it is
raised, but the ancient of days is thy foundation, O new Jerusalem, so that
thy foundation was for time, before all time past, and is, and shall be to all
time to come, yea, and longer too; the Angel swore time should be no more; God
has sworn by himself, that thou should be for ever, the foundation of
Jerusalem above, the mother of us all: and what shall I say of it? O
foundation, foundation, of Gods own laying, choice and precious, strong and
stable foundation, time and age out lasting foundation, heaven, earth, Saints,
and Angels foundation.

Secondly, It might be very well called new Jerusalem, if you consider her
builders: old Jerusalem was built by Bricklayers, Carpenters, and such like
crafts-men, the choysest of them; but thou, O new Jerusalem, by God, Christ and
the Spirit; therefore art thou said by Paul, to be made without hands; we
look for a City whose builder and maker is God; thy Husband is thy maker, the
God of the whole earth shall he be called, thy God and he only: none laid one
stone in thee, but he, none found a stone but he, no, nor stick, nor straw, as
I may so say, for he found all in his own eternal purpose: O, says God, this,
and this shall be a stone to make me a Jerusalem, where I will dwell for
evermore, but these I will not use, throwing millions by, which was as likely
as any if he had pleased to use them, to set his glory of.

But as God found all, so Christ bears all; We on him are built, says Paul,
as a spiritual house unto the Lord, built by the Spirit; for as God finds
all, and Christ bears all, so the Spirit builds all, by his Word and Prophets.

Fourthly, Jerusalem was built for the honor of the Jewish nation, but thee, O
new Jerusalem, for the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who will show
his glory in thee, because his love is set upon thee, yea, thy very gates more
then all the dwellings of Jacob.

Fifthly, Old Ierusalems walls and gates was but common stone, but thine, O new
Jerusalem, are built of all manner of precious stones, yea, thy very gates are
pearl, O glorious city, thy walls, thy gates are precious living stones, thy
pavements are pure Gold, Revel. 21.18.

O King Solomon, where is thy glory? all thy glory was but a dark shadow of
this glory, O Jerusalem, city of the great King, which he has built for his
Jewels, and by his Jewels, and the Sons of Sion more precious then choice
Silver, to dwell with him, Christ and Angels, for ever and ever.

Sixthly, It is called new Jerusalem, in respect of her watchmen and keepers; O
Jerusalem, God did once set watchmen on thy walls, but did they keep thee? nay,
they could not keep thee, they could not save thee, for thou wast raced even to
the ground. But thou, O new Jerusalem, has God and Christ within thee, Angels
round about thee, well may thy gates be open day and night, Revelations the 21.
all safety is in thee, all protection round about thee, who was wont to be
frighted from fears within, and dangers round about.

Seventhly, in respect of her light, thy light O Jerusalem, was not to be
compared to thine, O new Jerusalem, thy light was but sun, moon, and creatures
light: but thy light, O new Ierulem, is this sun, Suns and glory, Angels are
the sun of thy Sun, and God is the Sun of Angels, and glory too.

O new Jerusalem, the glory of this God in thee, is the light of thee, the
increated glory, the uncreated glory O Jerusalem, that is thy light: therefore
is thy light, the light of lights, and the light of life too, the glory of the
Lord, and of the Lamb in thee, are the light of thee, O Jerusalem; therefore
is thy light, the light of lights, and the light of life too.

Now thou shall need light of sun and moon no more, no more for ever; thou moon
give place unto the sun, thou sun give place unto the Lamb, and unto the Lord;
for they must shine, and ye must out for ever: and let them shine thy day
throughout, thy long and endless day, thy nightlesse day, thy time and age,
out-lasting day. It is said, Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day, O ye seed of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, rejoice in this your day, for it will make amends
for all your nights, your nights of sorrow, fear, and trouble, your longest
nights, your darksome, could, and stormy ones, yea, David tells you so, saying,
though sorrow endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning. I, this
morning has a noon of joy in it, this mornings dawning has: and when ye by
its dawning see, O then what joy, what peace, what hope, what rest! thou can
not tell, but do enjoy thy wish, thy would; thy only wish, thy only would,
which when thou have, thou ever cravest; just as the child which suckes, and
cries, and craves, but has.

Eighthly, it is called new Jerusalem, in respect of her glory, thy glory was
gates, walls, temple, towers, riches, strength, and numeration of people.

But for thy glory, O new Jerusalem, it does more excel all this, then ever
Solomon's did the poorest Pesant: for this read the 60 of Isa. Arise, and shine,
for the glory of the Lord is risen on thee, the full glory, the true glory,
which Moses could not behold and live, no man can see my glory, and live, says
God to Moses, but to thee, O new Jerusalem, when darkness shall cover the earth,
with all the dwellers therein, then shall the Lord arise upon thee, and his
glory shall be set, and seen on thee, yea, such a glory, which shall confound
the world, yea, confute the world of madness, and folly, the world has never
seen thy glory, O new Jerusalem, but when it does, shame shall cover her face,
and for shame shall kings and princes call to the hills, and mountains to fall
upon them. O Jerusalem, the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, then shall thou
see, and shine, and be astonished at thy own glory, the seas shall convert her
treasure, and the Gentiles their riches to Midian; Ephah and Sheba, shall bring
their gold and incense unto thee, for I will says God, beautify the house of
my glory. verse 7. The yles shall weight upon thee, the ships of Tharshish
shall bring their sons, their gold, and freely offer to thee, because of the
name of the Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel has glorified thee, Kings
shall minister unto thee: therefore thy gates shall be continually open, they
shall not be shut day nor night, verse 12. and those kings and nations that
will not serve thee shall be utterly destroyed. O, when will kings and nations
mind this prophecy, till then they will never submit, their proud hearts
cannot submit to lick the dust of thee, O Jerusalem, as David speaks Psalm.
But they shall submit, like Joseph's brethren, yea, they that did afflict thee,
shall fall down at the soles of thy feet, and call thee Sion, the holy One of
Israel.

And; whereas thou have been despised, so that men went by thee, I will make
thee an eternal glory, and a joy from generation to generation, and thou shall
suck the milk of Gentiles, and the breasts of kings, yea, the breast of Christ,
as I may so say, the King of kings, in whose breast lies a sea of sweetness,
where you may suck and smack, smack and suck, I, and so ye shall time out of
mind, suck for thirst, and thirst by sucking, because of sweetness, divine
time and age, outlasting sweetness.

Tenthly, it may be called new Jerusalem, in respect of her safety, thy safety,
O Jerusalem, was but men and walls, and creatures strength, but thine, O new
Jerusalem, is God in thee, and his salvation round about thee, is the safety of
thee, Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. Isaiah. 46.5. In the
midst of her the Lord does dwell, she shall no whit be moved. Psalm. 48.8. As we
have heard, so have we seen, in the city of our God, our God will establish it
for ever and ever. Isaiah 65, 21. They shall build houses and inhabit them,
plant vineyards and eat the fruit of them.

Paul speaks of a city, sure and stable, which cannot be shaken or moved: but
for old Jerusalem, it was shaken, and ransact too, and so shall all the cities
in the world, first, or last, but thou, O new Jerusalem, city of safety, city
of rest, blessed city, everlasting joy, and safety is in thee.

Again, in respect of her inhabitants in thee, O Jerusalem, was clean and
unclean, circumcised and uncircumcised, many were called Jews which were not
Jews, but were the very Synagogue of Satan. Revel. 3.9.

But for thee, O new Jerusalem, no unclean thing shall come into thee, God, and
Christ will keep out of thee every uncircumcised sinner, I say, Christ will
see, who comes into thee, O new Jerusalem.

Friend, where is thy wedding garment, bind him hand and foot, cast him out, I
will not have any unclean thing here, says Christ, in any wise, Revel. 21.27.
He is unclean, that was never washed in the fountain of Judah, and Jerusalem,
which stands open for sinners, therefore says Isaiah, henceforth shall come no
more into thee the uncircumcised and unclean.

Again, in respect of her temple in thee, O Jerusalem, was Solomon's temple: but
it was but a typical temple; but in thee, O new Jerusalem, is the true temple
indeed. Rev. 21.2. I saw no temple there, says John, for the Lord God, and the
Lamb was the temple of it. Ah! blessed temple, God and Christ, who would not
worship here. One thing, says David, have I desired of the Lord, that I might
dwell in his house all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord.
O David, here is thy wish, and more; for thou shall not only dwell in his
house, but dwell in himsef: for God will now dwell with his Jerusalem, and be
her temple, O thou need no other temple now to offer thy sacrifices, for
here shall all thy sacrifices of thanksgiving be continually offered unto the
Lord, and unto the Lamb: for he is thy temple now, where thou, and all thy
fellow Saints must offer their sacrifices, and sing their thankfulness for
evermore.

But I shall now hint at the last of these words, I saw her coming down from
God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband.

First, I conceive, she may be said to come from God, as being borne of God;
Christ speaks of some in the first of John, which were not borne of man, nor
the will of man, but of God; a thing is said, to be borne of that, of which it
had its first being: O Jerusalem, in this sense thou may be said truly, to be
borne of God, and to come down from God, for where had thou thy first being?
surely in God, yea, there thou had a being long before all beings; there wast
thou begotten indeed, begotten in his purpose, and in his love, yea, borne from
everlasting, and therefore art thou Melchisedek-like, without Father, or
Mother, and had thy being only in the purpose of God.

O how admirable it is, to think how long, as I may so say, God did travail
with his Jerusalem; a woman travailing but a few months, is in pain and longs
for deliverance: But O God, thou did with thy Jerusalem, not for a few
months, or years, but a time longer, yea, far more longer then a thousand
years, to a single moment, from everlasting was thy travail.

But, O God, was there not a longing in thee, or was it else a pleasure to
thee, it was both, it was both, O my dear Jerusalem.

For first, It was a pleasure to me, in all the time I bare thee, my pleasure
was, I had thee, my pleasure was, I bare thee; yea, a satisfying pleasure, or
if thou will delight, for I took solace in compassing the earth, and my
delight was in the sons of men; O God, seeing thou hadest many Angels, why
could thou not be satisfied? I wanted sons and daughters that they might be
my heirs; we are now the sons of God, and if sons, then heirs; yea, joint
heirs, as the Apostle speaks.

But, ah Lord, thou hadest a son and heir before, but I had not sons and
daughters to make me a Jerusalem, where I might show my glory. O Lord, had
thou not ten thousand times ten thousand Angels, Cherubims, and Seraphims? Yea,
but all they were not half enough for me, to show my glory too, therefore I
appointed as many more, Ephesians. the 1.14. That they should be to the praise and
glory of my grace; And so likewise in the 5. verse. He has predestined us,
says Paul, through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will,
that we might be to the praise and glory of his grace, as well as Angels. But
were not all man kind appointed to set forth his glory? Yea, they were so; But
shall they see his glory? No, no; But why not? Because God will have mercy on
whom he will, Romans the 8. But do not question no further about this, but
return back to the question; which was, Whether there was not a longing in
him, to see his sons and daughters, with whom he travailed, though that too,
were a pleasure?

Alas, he could not but long to see them, whom he had so long borne in his
purpose; and nature it self will answer this; Does not the Mother long to see
the Child she bare? Surely yes, the Parent longs to see his Child, so does
God his People too. Yea, how can he but long to see them, seeing they are his
own from everlasting, begotten in his purpose, and brought forth by his
providence into this world, where he a while nurseth them amongst the vulgar
people of this world, though they be Princes in respect of his eternal
thoughts toward them? yet I say, they are nursed as it were, and hardly kept
for a few years til he send for them home, by death and angels, who indeed did
always tend those Princes from the womb, for they have a charge with his
sons and daughters, to keep them in all their ways whilst they live, tend
their souls whilst they die; and surely no Ladies are readier to receive a
Princess into this world, to present it to the King its Father, then Angels
are the souls of his Children when they dye; the Angels mind the very bodies
of these Children turned to dust, and must give account of this dust to Christ,
for he shall one day send them to all the winds to pick it up, as himself
speaks.

Secondly, I John, saw the holy City, new Jerusalem, descending down from God,
prepared as a Bride; She descended, or came down from God.

Observe. Nothing comes up to God, but that descends from God; Flesh and blood,
says Christ, cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; no, it is a corrupt thing,
but corruption shall put on incorruption, and mortality put on immortality, but
this incorruption and immortality too, descends from above, and therefore, I
saw her descending down from God; the spirit and power of the mighty God, may
be the thing for which the Evangelist says, I saw new Jerusalem coming down
from God, out of Heaven.

But in the third place, I saw new Jerusalem coming down, prepared, or trimmed
like a Bride, a Bride is trimmed or adorned with new or beautiful garments,
old spotred garments are ill beseeming the Bride, and therefore she never does
array her self, but in lovely ones. Well then, here is according to my light,
the meaning of these words, and I think the very natural sense of the
spiritual, as I may so say, or the spiritual meaning of the Spirit of God in
these words. I John, saw the boly city, the new Iernsalem coming down,
prepared as a Bride, the righteousness of Christ Jesus, God, man, imputed,
reckoned and given to man by God, and put on by the mighty Spirit, is the
newness of it, and the adornment of her, and this righteousness of God. 2. Cor.
5. and the last. yea it is the righteousness of God, For he was made sin for
us, who knew no sin, that we might be the righteousness of God in him.

Well, by this mighty Spirit of God, is Jerusalem arrayed in this
righteousness, wrought out by Christ for her, and so given by God for that
same purpose, namely, Ierusalems adornment, and now, he beholding her in this,
he must needs say: I saw her descending down from God out of heaven trimmed as
a Bride.

When she is trimmed and arrayed by God, Christ, and the Spirit, yea, and she
must needs be now lovely and Bride-like beautiful; does the spotted moon, and
twinkling stars adorn the cloudy element, and make it so lovely, that a David
cries out, O Lord how wonderful are thy works. Psalm. 8. v. 3. then must
needs Christ the Sun of suns, and angels too, to make his Jerusalem beautiful,
when he shall cloth her with his own righteousness, as with a garment, down
to the ground.

Ofriends, this righteousness of Christ is the wedding garment of new
Jerusalem, and in this garment, says John, I saw her coming as a Bride
trimmed for her husband. Christ the King of kings, Saints, and Angels, surely
the kings daughter is all glorious without as well as within, for her clothing
is all embroidered gold, wrought out by Christ, and put on by the Spirit. O
when the Saints shall wait on Christ up and down the heavens in this garment,
or righteousness of his, how princelike will his attendance be, when ten
thousands of these shall stand before his throne, yea, ten thousandmillions of
these, with as many Angels to them, shall all as one join to sing his
victories over sin, death, hell, men, and devils, in this garment of love, and
livery of his favor, what sparkling beams will pass from one to the other,
like suns reflecting on each others glory, yet all from Christ, like Moon and
stars in their horizon.

And now, O thou poor, and prodigal sinner, what think thou of that day,
when it shall be said, bring hither the best robe, and the gold ring, for this
my once lost, but now found son.

O what a change will here be, when the rags in which thou tendedst hogs shall
be taken off, and thou clothed with thy eldest brothers garment brought thee,
will not thy change be like Ioshuahs, in putting off his filthy garment; yea,
truly will it: if dust were turned to gold, and common stones to jewels,
nights to days, and falling Commets to fixed stars, and then again to beaming
suns, yet all was nothing, I say, all these changes were nothing to that change
that Christ makes with sinners, when he takes off their sins, rags and
righteousness, and puts on his own righteousness on them, and therefore well
might John say, I saw her trimmed as a Bride, when he had trimmed her with his
own righteousness; thou art comely, in my comelines, says Christ to the spouse.

Well reader, I hope in this interpretation, that thou and I am one, and do
agree, that this is the beauty of the new Jerusalem, that the Spirit means by
wedding garment, and beautiful adornment.

And mark, because it is this she is trimmed with, therefore is she said to be
seen coming down from heaven, as having none of this bravery, but from God,
Christ, and the Spirit.

Secondly, I saw new Jerusalem coming down in an uniform manner, she came not
tumbling nor dropping, now and then a piece, as I may so say, nor in a
scattering manner, but I saw new Jerusalem, the whole Church, as one single
person coming down from God; the whole church is but one Bride, as I may so
say, for Christ the Bridegroom, neither does he look on her any other ways,
nor should we: but we are like the silly country people, who sometimes take
the Courtier for the Prince, and the lachey servant for the master: so we many
times, take the son for the Bridegroom, and the lasie professor, who makes a
fait show, when as indeed, he is but a beggarly time server, and has no true
grace nor virtue, for the noble and royal Christian, though there be not such
an outward show in respect of talk and perfection, which I speak not against in
a sincere heart, but as I said before, Christ counts his church but one, and so
the Angel invites, saying, behold ye the Bride, the Lambs wife, and so says
himself, my love, my dove, she is but one, the only one of her mother. And
this may justly reprove many in our days, who will distinguish the Church of
Christ into as many parcels, as are forms, or judgments, and congregations,
every one thinking themselves to be the true Church, when as, at the best, they
are but a piece of his Jerusalem, as I apprehend, and that for these reasons.

First, Jerusalem, or the Church of God, though she consist of many Jews and
Gentiles, called and uncalled; yet in truth, she is but one church or body, of
which Christ is the head.

Secondly, every particular person of the whole Church of Christ, being arrayed
and trimmed by God and Christ, may be called by the name of one single person,
and so counted the Spouse of Christ.

Again, I saw new Jerusalem coming down as a Bride, here he makes no
distinction of bond or free, high or low, Independent, Anabaptist,
Presbyterian, this, or that form of fellowship: but he saw all these as in one
coming down as a Bride, and now what shall I say of this Jerusalem coming
down in her bravery.

First, she is richly clothed, for it is in the righteousness of God, which
is sometimes called a decking, or trimming, with earrings, or jewels; Isaac
trimmed Rebecka so, and how lovely was she then in his eyes, surely very lovely.

O when Christ shall look on his Rebecka, trimmed with his righteousness, as
with earrings and jewels, how lovely will she then be? will he not then say,
Thou art all fair, my love, thou have ravished my heart with one of thine
eyes, as Solomon's songs. 4.9. Yea, she will ravish, as I may so say, the very
heart of God to behold her in his Sons righteousness, or bravery, in the day
of her espousals to him, when she is thus clothed as a Bride for Christ the
King of kings. O now who can behold any deformity in her, she is invisibly,
clothed and covered with his righteousness, from head to foot, as I may so say.

FINIS.
Revel. chap. 3.20. Behold, I standat the door and knock, and if any man hear
my voice, etc.
I Shall very briefly hint at these words, without any preface at all; Behold,
that is a word seriously to consider. 2. The Person, I, what I is it? I the
Lord of life, light and glory. 3. His Posture, Behold I stand, I the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; O high and low, great and humble Christ. 4. the
Place, Where is that? At the door, Behold I stand at the door. 5. Behold I
stand at the door, not gazing up and down, but I stand knocking; for this end,
to see if any man will hear and open, and then I will come in, and sup with
him, or refresh him with my presence.

But first, Behold, this is a word never used in Scripture, but upon some very
serious, great and weighty matter; this word, Behold, in Scripture, is like a
fiery Beakon on a mighty Hill, which is to give warning to all Inhabitants
round about; or like the silver Trumpet in the Law, which was blown to call
the People of God together, to the worship and service of God; or like a Larum
in the night to the Soldier, which cries, arm, arm, arm all; or like an
Ensign, or Banner, which being displaid, gathers all to hear and see.

For these reasons the Spirit uses it in Scripture; Bhold, a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and his name shall be called Jesus. Behold the
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. Behold I
come quickly, Revel. 3. And so in the last of the Revelations, to which the
Spouse says, Amen, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Secondly, Take notice of his patience, Behold, I stand, I, the Lord of life
and glory, I, the Savior of the world, I, the Son of God, the Lamb of God,
that was dead, but am alive, and live for evermore; I, that have this title on
my thigh, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, with the keys of death, hell,
in my hand, binding, loosing, and remitting whom I please.

Thirdly, His Posture, he stands, he sits not, Behold I stand and knock; What
is that? wait for admittance, which does denote his humility and patience; O
humble Christ, Lord of life, light and glory, King of Nations, Saints and
Angels, how do thou abase thy self to wait the sinners leisure? If a great
man should wait at a beggars door, how would men wonder? Lo, Christ waits at
thy door, O beggerlesse sinner, here is humility indeed, Christ the King of
Kings who has ten thousand times ten thousand Angels at his heels, waits at
thy door, O gentle sinner, did you ever see a Prince with his Nobles waiting
at a beggars door? no, I dare say, no; but hear is Christ the Prince of
Princes, waiting at the sinners door, whilst Angels and Archangels waits for
a beck, with all readiness to do his will; and this they count their heaven
too: Princes uses to send their pardons to malefactors, but Christ brings them,
and waits the sinners leisure too.

Christ, seeing thou have abased thy self, God shall highly exalt thee, above
all the Princes of the Earth, and Angels too in Heaven; for to which of them
has he said, Sit thee on my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy
footstool? O all must submit to Christ, and therefore it is said, At his name
shall every kneee bow, both in heaven, earth, and under the earth, that is to
say, Angels, men and Devils must submit, or be disposed by his appointment, to
light, life and glory, or wrath, hell, or darkness, even which he please: but
it denotes his patience too, as well as humility, if men be not ready to
receive courtesy, we usally withhold them: But Christ waits with patience the
sinners leisure, who is ever busy when Christ comes to him, in his house, or
calling, the pleasures, profits of the world, buying, selling, eating,
drinking, marrying, like the old world, who could not all hear Noah's
preaching, no more then they at Christ's knocks: O Christ, Why should thou
wait, seeing the sinner is so careless, to neglect his own welfare? Because I
am God, and not man, and my patience must be like my self, far above yours,
as the Heavens are above the earth, so is my patience above all Men and Angels,
and if it were not so, I should have no admittance no where; for I come to no
sinners door, but they make me stand and wait: sometimes they do not know me,
and sometimes they will not know me, and seldom it is too, they mind me,
unless it be in some great trouble, sickness, death, or danger, and then they
cry, help, help, with their bitter tears; help, O Christ, help, which many
times I do; and after comes and sees them, Doctor like, when they are well,
and free; but then they think I am paid by their old prayers, and so will
scarce admit me, or desire me to sit down, my company now is burdensome,
though once they thought it otherwise in their distress and misery. But O
Christ, thou art the desire of all Nations; who would not desire and mind
thee? for thou give Jewels, Crowns and Kingdoms, yea, Life, Light and
Pardons, to all that do admit thee; but even the sinner minds not, nor knows
not thy gifts nor the richness of it, or at least way see no want of pardon,
light, or knowledge; no, if he did, he would not stay so long waiting at his
door; how long O Christ? ten years at some, and twenty years at others, yea,
forty years have I waited, till I was greived with them, and swore they should
never enter in unto my rest.

Well sinner, happy is it, Christ has so much patience to weight thy leisure,
do not abuse this patience, lest he leave thee, and forsake thee, and swear
against thee by damning of thee, for neglecting and abusing his goodness; many
poor souls are in hell now for this very sin, neglecting Christ's patience,
standing at their hearts knocking for admittance, and yet, I dare say, there
are some sinners at whose door Christ has knocked twenty years by preachings,
teachings, afflicting, and admonishing by his word, and his Spirit, and by
example too.

But what do I speak of twenty years, are there not some gray headed
sinners, at whose door Christ has often knocked heretofore, but now they are
deaf, and cannot hear, and the things belonging to their peace are hid from
their eyes, as once from Ierusalems, for whose misery Christ wept, and so will
ye over your own souls one day in flames of hell.

O me thinks, I see poor souls sit looking on one another; weeping bitterly for
their folly, in not minding Christ's knocks when time was.

O says the aprentise wringing of his hands, with heart breaking sighs, I was
seven years in a godly family, where my master prayed, read, and expounded
every day: by which Christ often knocked at my heart, and made me to resolve for
to let him in; but I was young, and thought it was too soon to hear him yet, but
I made account to do it, when my time was out, but Christ then did not knock,
or at least, I minded him not: for the world, wife, and children came upon me,
that I did not once mind him.

And so another Bible-carrier does much the like. O says he, in these flames
weeping, I went twice every Sunday in the year to the Church with my wife and
family, heard-prayers, took my book, turned to text and proofs, and had Christ
knocking at my heart too, but I know not how, still I forgot all, and Christ
knocks too, who at last left to knock at all; but I went still to Church with
my neighbors according to the custom, with old father worldling, who would
always talk of business, going home and coming, putting all good things
quite out of my mind, for which, cursed be the time that ever I did see him;
for it may beels, I might have minded something, what I heard of there, as well
as many others, whom we counted puritanes, because they would still be talking
what good matter they had heard, and how sweet it was, talking of the uses: but
as we followed after, we laughing for to hear them go conning over the
sermon, one to another all the way home, not at all minding what he said to us,
but how he met with such a one, and such a one, and never minded once at all
our selves, like unhappy souls, for which we must lie in the flames for ever,
to repent our folly, and houle for our misery, in not harkening unto Christ,
when the time was, which never shall be more.

O says, wrinkled faced hypocrite in the flames at the bottom, I deceived my
self, and many an honest Christian too, like a cursed wretch, for I was a great
professor seven years together, in which time, Christ gave me many a hard rap
at the door of conscience, for my hollow-heart, sometimes telling me, I was a
masked sinner, and had a rotten heart, aiming at the world, name, fame, credit,
all the while profession was in request, going up and down with many honest
Christians, and would be talking with them in matters of religion for many by
ends, little minding Christ's thundering knocks against such as I: crying, woe,
woe, woe to the hypocrites, Scribes, and the Pharisees, one that did love much
to have preheminency, though a great professor, bearing sway, and rule, just
like a Bishop over the Church of Christ, lord and master-like, saying, he was
chief, and must be believed, and obeyed in his form, minding this, his own
self and interest, more then the honor of his master, or the good of poor
Christians, whom he seldom went to visit without his doctors fee, or the hope
of a sermon, if in case he died, worth him five pound; Woe, woe to those that
so neglect the Church of Christ, and the poor Saints, who sometimes lies in
cottages, and sellers, where their worships will not come, it is to mean a
thing, because they are masters, and called, Rabbi, Rabbi, which, the true
Disciple never aimed at.

But stay, I had like to forget one sinner more, where Christ has long stood,
and usually does, yea, longer then at any door besides, I mean the simple
Christian, or the ignorant Christian, who knows not right or left hand in
religion, more then his grandmother taught him bringing of him up, according to
the custom which their parents left them, building their religion on the old
race, yet must still be called Christian, for his baptism sake: which I speak
not against, but the man's ignorance, which the Lord knows, I pity; for truly
at these poor souls door, does Christ knock many times: but the soul is so
simple, it does not know Christ when he knocks, but gapes, and stares on the
Parson in the pulpit, when it is Christ that knocks at the heart, with life,
light, and knowledge, which is more worth then jewels, crowns, and kingdoms;
yea, the gold of Ophir, and the rich ships of Tharshish: but poor simple,
sotted, and deluded soul, thou know not the want of this knowledge, Christ,
and thy souls misery for want of knowledge.

And here, mistake me not, for I do not mean unlearned men, more then learned
men; for truly, many of them, which are great Grecians know not the A.B.C. in
the new creature, but by hear say poor simple souls, how many such be there
in the world, do you not know thousands, that are cried up for wise, able men,
though not such great Scholars, yet cried up for able men, fit for Jewry,
Judge, or Justiceship, which I do not speak against, but honor; yet I say, I
will take a young stripling in the school of Christ, without an hair on his
face, shall wind him like a child in the work of conviction for sin, Christ
knocking at thy heart, and the Spirits working in the new man; and old, and
sound experienced things.

I say, in these things, he will wind your old sollid blades and many
Churchwardens, who should be knowing men, as well as Furre-gowned, where Christ
has often knocked, before ever that came on him, but now he thinks it is enough
to sit by his white rod in a majestic way, with a black soul, by cheating of
the poor, to feast his own ungodly gut, with capon, sack, and claret, till his
belly be so swelld, that Christ cannot come at his heart, or seldom does
hereafter; for, for the most, they turn drunkards, not that I mean right
blading, cursed, or down right drunkards: but I mean, in a dry way without any
roaring, by clubbing pot after pot, and then an half pint, and another to that,
with a point at the last to set the reckoning right, and a gell of strong water
to close up their stomach, I am sure I know some, that will sit with a
coughing, and spauling discourse, from four to six, from six to eleven, with
aserious discourse in a cavilere way, of a turn that shall be, but I do not
know when: and so they drink healths, saying, you know who I mean, in a
mystical way, from one to another, till all be half drunk, and then they
depart with an equal proportion toward the shot; but I will bid these good
night, and come closse to the matter in a spiritual way, for I think it as
vain to speak to them now, as it is to expect a swallow in winter.

Well, the next thing is, the place where Christ knocks, which is the door, O
that is without you know, who is without, why, who is within, that the King of
glory is without, why, who is within, that Christ stands without? sin, Satan,
the world pleasure, profits, and they always keep Christ without, till he
breaks in, and whips these buyers and sellers out of his Temple, which Christ
sometimes does, as well as once those out of Solomon's Temple; but for present,
Christ is without, Christ the Lord of life and glory, who stands with pardons,
peace and mercy for their souls, if he might once be admitted; but what if he
be not? then they are undone, for they must die without them, and be damned
too, for the abuse of his patience; therefore mind it careless sinner, before
Christ goes and takes his leave for knocking any more, which Christ will one
day do, when he cannot have admittance for the worlds pleasures, profits.

But sure it is impossible Christ should be without, whilst they are within;
nay, it is true enough, do you not hear him knock? I hear some body, but I
do not think it is Christ, you do not think it is Christ; sometimes you do
not hear at all for business; and sometimes you do not hear for
carelessness; when shall Christ have admittance? (when) when I am for my self,
says the servant, and can tend to open; and when I have this, or that estate,
says the worldling, and for every child a portion; so says the vain
christian, or much to this purpose, when I have my swing of pleasure, I will
tend Christ, and till then he must wait; and thus the servant puts off Christ,
for freedom, and the worldling, for estate, and the luxurious, for his
pleasure, all abusing Christ, and his patience too.

But if these delays Christ should take, for full and flat denyals, what will
then become of their immortal souls, worth more then crowns and kingdoms, or
ten thousand worlds, because they are immortal and breathed once from God? But
now must die in their sins, as Christ told the Jews, and perish too for him;
and now they had been happy, if they had never heard of him, nor his knocks
neither; which seeing they have slighted, shall damn them with a vengeance.
(But how do you know it is Christ that knocks?) Poor simple soul, do you
not know it, that seems thou art not much acquainted with Christ, nor his
knocks, when thou do not know that; when the Servant knows his Master, and
the Child his Parent, every thing knows more then thee, the Sheep the
Shepherds whistle, the Be his own Hive, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but my
People knows not me, says the Lord, by his Prophet Isaiah.

But I will help thee, what I can to learn Christ's knocks, expecting thou will open, when he comes again? it is Christ knocks (mark me.)

First, I know it is Christ that knocks, he knocks thunderingly, or loudly. 2.
I know it is Christ that knocks, by his still and soft knocks. 3. I know it is
Christ, by his slow and leisurely knocks. 4. I know it is Christ, by his sweet
and pleasant knocks. 5. I know it is Christ, by the place, he knocks at the
door, where he usally comes in, and not at a window, or a by way.

But why does Christ knock so loud and thunderingly? He thinks you are
asleep, or dead sure, as every man and woman too, is by nature; and therefore
says Christ, The dead shall he are my voice and live, as in John 5.25.

This Christ does not mean of the day of Judgment, though that be true, that
by Christ's voice and power, the dead shall one day hear, and every man be
started from his grave; some for glory, most for wrath and vengeance, or
execution; like malefactors, with chains of guilt about their necks and
consciences, binding up their fears about them, which heavier lays then
milstones.

O how dreadful will this resurrection be, when millions of ungodly souls
shall come to join with cursed bodies. It is said, Iephthah wept and tore his
hair, when he saw his daughter, and the Virgins of Israel come to meet him;
but surely this meeting of damned souls and cursed bodies, will be much more
bitter to thy body, who laid in dust silent, free from pain; happy were it for
thy body, if it might still live with worms, and mouldring rottenness, and
silent darkness; but it cannot be, Christ must have thee out, and judge thee
too, for thy ungodly deeds and acts, as well as reward his Saints for all their
works wrought by his Spirit in their souls.

But I shall forget my self. The thing was, that I was speaking too, Sure
Christ knew the sinner was asleep, or dead, that he did not open; and truly a
sinner may be well said to be dead, till Christ comes to live in him, because
Christ is the Fountain of life; and therefore if Christ be not in the soul,
it must needs then be dead, at least in a spiritual sense, for want of Christ;
for as the soul is the life of the body, so Christ is the life of the soul,
and therefore when thou keepst Christ out, thou keepst thy soul from thy
soul; O death and sleepy sinner.

But why does he knock so softly? because he would not fright you, Christ would
come in a mild and gentle way, and not in a furions way, which he often does
to many souls, who has long kept him out by delays and sins, but Chrisst
does not always do so.

You know he discoursed and reasoned himself at the Well of Jacob unto the
Woman of Samaria, and invited himself to Zacheus house, bringing salvation
with him, and so did not at all fright the little man, though a great sinner;
the Ethiopian found Christ in his chariot, by reading of Isaiah, and many a
soul does the like by a good book, reading in a private way, where Christ
comes, breathing life and peace to their souls, as once to the Disciples when
the doors was all shut, and they met in a room, where Christ comes, and
breathes the holy Ghost on them.

But Thirdly, Why does Christ knock so slowly? that you might consider, who it
is that knocks, and opens to him; the Turtle has a sweet and penetrating
voice, but the most slow of any creature; you seldom hear her often at one
time, but she calls her mate once, and then is silent for a while, and then she
sweetly calls again, in a mournful way, even to the peircing of a man's heart,
as it were, with her sweet and serious, yet dolourous call, but with a pretty
distance of time, between every call.

Well, so does Christ by the soul, Christ comes by a Sermon, jogs and calls
sweetly to thy heart; sometimes by death in a dolourous way, percing thy heart,
for a wife, a child, a husband; sometimes at night, in a silent way by thy bed
side, saying, sinner, sinner, art thou awaked? it is time to rise, what do
thou mean? arise, arise, look about thee, get thy clothes, prepare for death,
by minding it, heaven, hell, and eternity, and thy souls condition, and its
eternity, which if it should miscarry thou art undone; it is time, high time,
and yet not to late, if thou will resolve thy self in earnest, to mind me,
and thy souls welfare, which is the only thing necessary; and therefore know,
thy souls life and pardon is the maine thing, when will that be minded? if
thou should delay this time, now away, time may be no more, no more for ever;
and then thou will weep like Esau, yea, bitterly weep, crying, have thou not
one blessing more, when Jacob has the maine, and thou can not have it, for
he has gotten it already. Christ tells the Jews, Many shall come from the East
and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but they
shall be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. And so says Christ softly to thy soul, this, or that sinner may be
saved, and thou damned, and how will thou weep, when thy neighbors child,
wife, parent, be received, and thou cast off, yea, into hell, for neglecting,
slighting me, my slow, and mournful knocks, minding thee of the grave, death,
and eternity, which will straight be here, what do thou mean to build castles
in the air, do thou know how long thou shall live.

Death has been at thy neighbouts, and fetched away his children, yea, in thine
own house, for a friend, a wife, a child, a servant, and he will come again to
morrow, or ere it be long, did thou not meet with a coffin, nor hear a
passing bell: hark, it is going now, whilst the death watch clickers, set thy
house in order, quickly, quickly, it is very dangerous, all delays breed
danger; but this, O sinner, simple sinner, more then any, yea, any in the
world; thou talkest of wife and children, and providing for them, I pray thee,
sinner, mind thy soul, let that be served first, it is time enough for them,
what is wife and children to thy soul, thy dear and precious, everliving
soul, if that be lost, all is lost for ever, then what good will their
welfare do thee, O sinner, this will no more advantage thee, then a little
thetch when the house and substance is all burnd. Osinner, it is thy soul that
is the substance, and the treasure too: for thy souls sake, have a care, it is
immortal, everliving, and shall never die, why should thou be cruel to
thine own soul, or unkind, and careless of its welfare, have thou any more
souls? if thou lose one soul, do thou not lose all, all thou have, and all
thou can? other losses may be gaind; name may be gaind, and friends may be
gaind, and estate too, before that thou die: but if it be not, thou may be
happy; yea, as an Angel of God.

But can thy soul be gained, being once lost, No, no, it cannot be once lost,
and lost for ever; yea, unrecoverable, O when men lose their friends, wife,
children, husbands, lands, living, it cuts deep: O but this soul of thine will
cut ten thousand times deeper, that is very near, but this ten thousand times
nearer; one creature may make up another in respect of loss, but who can make
up thy soul, if it be once lost; sorrow cannot do it, sighs cannot do it,
tears cannot do it, though they like brine, be steeped with sense of misery.
O sinner thy loss is irrecoverable, men cannot help thee, Angels cannot help
thee, God cannot help thee; nay, Christ himself cannot do thee any good: what
will thou now do? weep thou may in vain, cry thou may in vain, howl
thou may in vain, none now will pity thee, though thou weep seas, and seas
again to Christ; it will be all in vain: for bowels are all shut up, all that
are in men, all that are in Angels, all that are in God, all that are in
Christ, men would once pity thee, for a wife, a child, a friend; Angels would
once shelter thee from dangers, and mischiefs, Christ would once weep for
thee, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Christ would once fast for thee, Christ would
once bleed for thee, Christ would once live for thee, Christ would once die for
thee, and go into the grave, that thou might go to heaven: but all bowels
now are quite shut up, all in God, all in Christ, all in Angels, all in men,
all in friends, for they are buying, selling, and never mind thy howling; nay,
thy wife, and children do not think upon thee, though thou did them once,
more then thy soul, laboring still for riches for to leave behind thee, and
never thought on Christ to take along with thee, in thy long journey, between
the mighty seas of time and eternity, which is the dying minute, where devils
lies like robbers, catching every poor soul that has not Christ to guide
them, and so will he do thine; the first step thou settst in it, hurling thee a
long in a furious way of darkness, fear, and horror, trembling like the
partridge in the Falkons talent, and Satan swiftlier carrying thy soul a long
to hell, then lightning flies in air, or thunder bolts falls downward, where
Dives minds his brethren, but seldom they do him, thou may do the like by
thy wife and children, but they will not think on thee; for thou art quite
forgotten, for no remembrance is in grave, or at least of thy soul, and its
sad condition, men will laugh and talk, whilst thou weepst, and howlst,
friends will do the like while thou shreekst and christ, Saints are singing,
holy, holy, whilst thou art wailing, weeping, and wringing of thy hands, with
bitter tears, and soul-full sighs: while Angels sing with lightsome hearts,
like to the Saints, thou lie a cursing, just like the devils, sometime God
that made thee, and sometimes she that bare thee, as well as thy father;
sometimes the days, sometimes the nights, in which thou riotedst heretofore,
sometimes thy self, thy soul, thy body, sometimes thy friends, and old
companions of thy sins, whom once thou lovedst, and preferredst more then
many good Christian, who then told thee of this day, which thou then always
thoughtest was but untrue, or else a great way off, but now thou art a cursing
every one that comes within thy heavy, sad and doleful thoughts; sometimes
thy nurse, sometimes thy midwife, because she did not strangle thee, sometimes
the minister for no oftener feeding thee, when thou wast squay and squemish,
and would not digest any thing from him, something was too hard, and
something was too plain, something was too high, and something was too low,
something was too soon, and something never should be, though he preached it
never so often, and pressed it on thee too, with arguments from heaven, and
arguments from hell, with all likewise under the sun: which thou refusedst and
mindedst it not, but frownd, and quarreld, and raild, and jeard, with wicked
men, and said, thou would never hear him more; but such a one should be
thy Pastor, he smoothd thee up, and pleased thee well, but now thou see what
is come on it.

But I fear, I shall offend in running wide from the words, though it be in a
way of profit, and therefore come to another question.

Fourthly, why does Christ knock so sweetly, to tempt and allure you, to open
to him for his many sweet knocks; and many a soul Christ winnes by this kind
of knocking, which opens, as it were, all the veins and powers in the soul
wide unto Christ, and as freely entertain him, as ever did Zacheus.

Fifthly, why does Christ knock at the door, because he will come in there, or
no where, deceivers climbs the walls, but Christ will at the door, or no
where, if he comes, he can come in if he please any where, at the window, or
top of the house: but you know Christ loves to come in at the door of consent,
which is the common way of Christ's coming to every soul.

But the door, what is that, the heart, the heart of man, what would it be,
but why do ye call that a door: first, because it is the inlet to the house.
Secondly, it is the outlet to the house, so is the heart to the soul: as
Christ comes in at the heart, so the world, sin, and Satan goes out at the
heart, Solomon says, my son give me thy heart, well knowing, if he has this
door, he may lay what he will with in.

But you said, I may know it was Christ by his thundering knocks, but what do
you call Christ's thundering knocks, I mean his thundering judgments to the
world, the nations, and kingdoms of the world round about, in all which Christ
is now a thundering, rouzing them from their dens of pomp, glory, and
greatness, to exalt himself, and Saints, in the room of sinners, which must
be done in every kingdom, before that all be hushed, and Christ all in all, and
the kingdoms his according to Gods promise, I will give thee the uttermost
part of the earth for thy possession, says God by his prophet David. Turk,
Pope, and Antichristian Princes, have kept the nations of the world, and made
poor Saints squelke, and hide themselves in new plantations, to keep their
consciences free from their idolatrous worship.

But Christ is now a measuring out lands and livings for them, yea, cities,
towns, and kingdoms, by his prospering armies, which measure, by cutting every
one some: which makes the mighty grumble, as if they were losing all, and so
they are in danger too: if Christ be justled by them in his way of providence
by his thundering knocks.

Secondly, I mean by Christ's thundering knocks, those righteous judgments,
which thou see befall private wicked men, Christ brains on by his thunder
bolts, that twenty more might fear, sometimes strikes the drunkard with a
deadly surfeit, and sometimes the worldling with a deadly heat and cold, and
here and there a sinner, that thousands more might be warned.

Thirdly, I mean by Christ's thundering knocks, when Christ knocks like a
Bell-man, at midnight, in thy dead sleep, crying, fire, fire, fire, and is not
this a thundering knock: I truly, it would make a man start out of his bed
naked, to save his house, to save his goods, truly, thus Christ knocks at a
sinners heart, or door.

First, by judgments to the world, as I said before.

Secondly, by judgments on ungodly men, whom, first or last, Christ will meet
withal, when they have filled their measure, which thousands do apace, some by
ungodly deeds, some by ungodly speeches, which Christ will reckon with them
for, as it is said in Jude.

Thirdly, by Christ crying out at midnight, fire, fire, which frights a poor
man, that his sin, sin, death, hell, hell, and how does this, like a fire at
midnight, fright a man out of his sleep. And truly, many sinners does Christ
awake at midnight, that is an unexpected time.

Secondly, at midnight, in his deep sleep of drunkenness, uncleanness, or
such like sins: so you see what I mean by Christ's thundering knocks. I says
one, I have experience of this, he awaked me from my Dalilah, the sin
wherein I lay: I too, says another, that walked in his sins for twenty
years together: Christ falls upon a sinner by this kind of knocking, like
three or four enraged enemies upon a man, crying, down with him, down with
him, and so beats him down, leaving him even dead, and so goes away: but the
Spirit comes, and visites him, and raises him up again, by telling him, his
sins are not past, the cure of faith and repentance, which Christ both gives
to the man whom he wounds thus, with the sense of his sins.

Secondly, what do you mean by Christ's soft knocks, by Christ's soft knocks, I
mean his mild, and gentle way of coming to a sinner, craving of his due from
him, and not like that cruel servant, who finding out his debtor, caught him
by the throat presently, saying, pay me straight, and would have no compassion
on him.

But Christ, by his soft knocks, comes to a poor indebted sinner, and says
unto him, Friend, friend, do thou remember what thou owe me? yes, yes,
says the sinner, little minding how much it is, and so is straight a going:
nay, but stay, stay friend, says Christ, let me reckon with thee before thou
go: which the sinner less loves, then the broken Bankerout to look into, or
cast up his books, and therefore prays Christ to come to morrow, he is now
busy, buying of a Farm, or setting up his shop. O but Christ tells him, he will
neither stay, nor come again; but arrest him straight by death, which startles
so the sinner, that he now says, I will stay, and hear all I owe thee, and
then Christ tells him.

Sinner, first, thou owe me thy soul, I bought it.

Secondly, thy body, I redeemed it by my blood.

Thirdly, thy estate and gifts, I gave it thee.

O Christ, thou demands all: why, do not I deserve all? and thou owe me all?
yea, O Christ, but I would fain keep my estate to serve my wife and children,
and my gifts and parts; because they are of great esteem with men now a days:
Friend, do not talk of wife and children, I must have thy estate, thy gifts,
and parts too, let men esteem them how they will, I must have them all.

O Christ, this is hard pay, but I will pay thee some and some, as I am able:
do not tell me of that, I must have them all now, and it is not so hard as due,
or as thou think for, either: for I learn this lesson to all my poor indebted
scholars, yea, every one, and I tell thee man for thy comfort, when I have
learnd them this lesson, I do give them back their estates again, with interest
twenty in the hundred, and so I do their parts with the same advantage: but, O
Christ, will thou do so by me? if I give thee my whole estate, gifts, and
parts.

Friend, I always do so, trust me, try me, prove me. O Christ, I will, I
will: well friend, let me tell thee, as I am Christ, thou shall never lose by
it: but shall have the light of life, and glory to the bargain.

O, but what do ye mean by Christ's slow knocks: I mean, all the good purposes
he puts in your souls: as to read a chapter, go to prayers in the sense of his
goodness, to hear a sermon, to lead a new life, to serve God better; and
therefore friends, as you vallue Christ's company, or your own souls, look to
these knocks of good purposes, by Christ's knocking in your hearts.

Many souls are damnd in the year for neglecting these purposes, O says one,
I was going for to open, but I think, I was bewitched by my old companions, and
I too, says another, but there came some to buy commodities, and kept me in
my shop; and I too says another: but my friends began to jear, and said, I
would not now turn fool, would I, to open unto Christ, all the world would but
laugh at me, to mind him so soon before the worlds profits, pleasures, which
every one almost feekes first of all: and then Christ, when they die; which was
one Mr. Carefulls speech to his son Worldling many year ago: which I think
all his sons did very much mind, and ever since have practiced: but Zacheus a
convert by Christ's knocking at his heart, and inviting of himself to dinner.

But thirdly, what do you mean by Christ's slow knocks, evening meditations
telling thee of death, and eternity, the vanity of the world, the emptiness of
the creature, the necessity of himself.

O says Christ, the world is vain by knocking at the soul, Solomon has found
it so, and all the sons of wisdom too. One said it would not satisfy the
soul of any man, no more then mitigate the pains of the body: another said,
it was changeable like the Moon, and weather: sometimes in Eclins, sometimes
clear again, not a month constant all the year about: but altering men's
conditions, who live below the Sun: sometimes into sear, sometimes into care,
seldom out of trouble all the year about, which are so strong in many, that
they can scarcely sleep either day or night, and still after the world, which
changes like the Moon,

O happy were it for these souls, if Christ would knock, or tell them, they
are dead and buried in cares of the world, and so raise them up to live in
himself, and mind the other death and eternity beyond.

O death and eternity, who minds ye, and yet thou kilst and hourds up all yea
all, high, low, rich, poor, young, and old, in thy two garners of hell and
heaven, but the Saints only there, which Christ fetches in by his serious
knocks.

Fourthly, I mean by Christ's slow knocks his night knocks of affliction, such
as straits, wants, sickness, reproach, and disgrace; O friends, Christ knocks
at the door of your hearts by all these; blessed, and for ever blessed is such
a soul, that hears Christ by these kind of knocks.

But what do you mean by Christ's sweet knocks? I mean by Christ's sweet
knocks, his telling thee of thy Fathers love, the strength and length of this
love, with thy interest in it; O says Christ, my Father so loves thee, that he
thinks nothing too dear for thee; God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son; yea, and more he could not give, for in him he gives
himself, and all we have, and all we need; and therefore says the Apostle,
Seeing he has given us his Son, how shall be not with him give us all
things, life, pardon, heaven, happiness, and salvation; and therefore Christ
is called, The Gift of God, John 7. Had thou known the Gift of God, says
Christ to the woman of Samaria; and indeed to this Gift all is nothing; If a
Prince should give his favor, what was that to Christ? If he should give thee
houses, mannours, lordships, what was that to Christ? If he should give thee
crowns and kingdoms, what was that to Christ? honors, mannours, lordships,
crowns, and kingdoms, are but nothing unto Christ, the Gift of God to a poor
sinner: well might Paul say, O the height, depth, and breadth of this love,
which he acquaints the soul with, by his sweet knocks, and of his interest in
it too.

O says Christ to the sinner, It is firmly set upon thee, and cannot be
removed, mountains may be moved, but my Fathers love cannot; though the
mountains should be removed, yet my loving kindness will I not remove. Men
cannot, Devils cannot move it, sin cannot move it; If my Children forsake my
Law, yet my loving kindness will I not take away, says God by David, Mark, my
loving kindness will I not take away; I will only visit them with a rod: O
says Christ, once beloved and ever; men may love and hate, but God cannot, he
is unchangeable, Mal. 3. and so is his love too; his love is grounded in his
Son, and spread in all relations to show the greatness of it; the Friend loves
as a friend, the Bridegroom as the Husband, the Father as the Parent, but Gods
love is all at once; yea all, and more then all, ten thousand times over, and
over again to that. And therefore says the Apostle, Behold what manner of
love is this, how great? how sweet? how dear? how near is this Father,
Friend, and Husbands love? As a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so will I
rejoice over my People to do them good, says the Lord, by his Prophet Isaiah

Well Friend, Christ acquaints the soul of this love by his sweet knocks, which
even melts it, like the Suggar in the Wine.

But secondly, I mean by Christ's sweet knocks, his acquainting thee of the
Fathers glory, thy interest in this glory; Gods glory make the heavens heaven,
and fills the heavens too, and makes them heavens indeed to Saints and Angels,
and all that do dwell there.

Paul had once a glimps of this glory, and it was unutterable; Moses with the
very conceit of it, forsook Pharohs court, and chose rather to be afflicted
with the People of God, then to live in his court, and glory, and be the Son
in law to that great King of Egypt. Paul having once a glimple of it, desires
to dye, and be dissolved, that he might enjoy it: David cries out, saying, It
is wonderful, yea, it fills Heaven and Earth, says he, in his Psalms. And so
it shall thy soul too, says Christ, by his sweet knocks at the heart; O says
Christ, I will fill thee with this glory, and wrap thee in this glory, and
cloth thee head and foot, and thou shall be like Solomon, yea, like Angels,
clothed with splendour from the God of glory. And now, what think thou of it
sinner, if thou should see a lovely Princes arrayed and clothed in golden
Tissue, laced and trimmed with Jewels, it were a gallant sight; but O alas,
ten thousand of these were all but nothing to set off thy glory, O arrayed
Saint, by God and Christ in righteousness. But when shall I have this glory?
says the sinner, quickly, quickly: Behold I come quickly, Rev. 22.20. and will
then give it thee, and all that long for my appearance, as Paul says of his
Crown, which he tells you, is laid up for him, and all that loves Christ's
appearance.

But thirdly, I mean by Christ's sweet knocks, Christ telling thee of his
Fathers counsel and purpose, and of thy being wrapped up in this counsel and
purpose of God, like time between eternities; O friend, says Christ, my Father
loved thee from all eternity, and chose thee to him, from all eternity, a
vessel for his own Glory, Name, and Fame, that thou mights show in ages to
come, the exceeding riches of his grace, Ephesians. 4.5.6.

O this must needs be sweet indeed, for Christ to tell thee of a love before
time, and a love out lasting time; yea, all time and ages.

O when a sinner fits poring of this love, in respect of person, God the lover,
in respect of time, before all worlds; then says he, O Lord God, what is man
that thou art so mindful of him? and what am I, but less then the least of
all thy mercies, as Jacob once said, which was of old toward me? And why me, O
Lord God, a poor gentile sinner, a runnagado sinner, who had neither house,
nor home, nor grace, nor virtue, but hell, and sin, and cursed nature, and
yet thou love me more then all, and chose me out of all my neighbors,
kindred, house, and family, wherein were many sweet, and many courteous, many
wise, and many knowing, but none but I chosen, the youngest of them all, the
poorest of them all, the sinfullest of them all, yet I obtained mercy for his
purpose sake.

O says the sinner, me thinks I even see how God rould me in his thoughts, and
all the sons of men too; saying, this shall be a vessel, and this shall be a
vessel, and this shall be another, but these I will not use, throwing millions
by, which were as like as any, if he had pleased to use them to set his mercy
off; but he refused both mighty ones, and many, and chose a little remnant, of
which my soul was one, to set his love upon, which has no height, nor depth,
but over-spreadeth all, and leaves no room, to think the ground, or reasons of
it, but only free grace, which makes the soul still wonder, and leaves him at
a lost, why he should be the man to be exalted so, above his fellow creatures,
which are alike unto himself, but for free graces sake, which only looked on
him, and made him what he is, which makes him stud and still to say, it is God
alone does all, according to his purpose.

But secondly, I mean by Christ's sweet knocks, his acquainting thee with
himself.

First, In respect of his love, which thou art by nature more ignorant of, then
ever Joseph's Brethren were of him, who eat and drunk with him, but knew him
not to be their Brother, till tears and bowels said, it was he whom they
unkindly sold.

The sinner does the like, full many a time by Christ, when he comes to the
heart, and tells them of his dreams, as Joseph did his Brethren, how they must
bow to him, and eke submit their souls unto his yoaks of love, his sweet and
just commands; which thing they cannot away with, but huncht him for his news,
by greiving of his Spirit, but Christ now makes a famine by wants, and
straights, and knocks, and brings them down by need, to save their hungry
souls, which now do see the need of Christ, his love and righteousness,
which he cannot hide from them; but by his sweet knocks, acquaints them with
his love himself, like Joseph with his bowels.

And in respect of his love, which was and is, beyond all loves; Greater love,
says Christ to the sinner, has no man then this, to lay down his life for
his friend, but mine is greater. O unkind sinner, an enemy to me, who loved
thee in thy blood, and loved thee in thy sin, and hid thee from displeasure,
which thou once laidst liable too, till I in love did free thee; but this thou
little mindest, nor all my loves for many years together, in hunger, cold, and
wants, in life, in death, still for thy sake.

And thus Christ acquaints the soul with his love, by his sweet knocks, and
wider opens the sinners bowels, then ever Joseph did his Brethren.

But secondly, I mean by Christ's sweet knocks, his acquainting the soul with
his loveliness, as well as of his love, which washed us from our sins in his
blood, Revel. 1. v. 5.

O says Christ, sweetly knocking at the sinners door, in a woing way, Sinner,
sinner, behold me, behold me, my locks are wet with the dew of the night, Cant.
5.1, How long shall I knock and stand? for pity let me in, I am the rose of
Sharon, the sweetest of ten thousand, the Lilly of the valleys, the fairest of
ten thousand; How can thou chose but love me, sinner? Behold me, behold me,
with the Crown that my Father crowned me, Proverbs.

And now for my own sake sinner, with my crown and glory let me in; I am the
fairest, I am the sweetest that ever will come woing to thee; how can thou
thus deny me, O thou hard hearted sinner, that ever I met with, to stand me out
so long, who am the rose, the lilly, and star of heaven too, which twinkles
day and night, and darkens Sun and Moon, which cannot come near unto me, I am
so far, excelling for beauty, light and luster, and yet still undervalued by
thee, O proud and scorning sinner; But yet behold me once again, and if thou
can deny me, I will never try thee more, nor shall my spirits strive with
thee, when as it is in vain; and thus Christ acquaints the sinner of his
lovelines, by his sweet knocks.

But thirdly, Christ acquaintes the sinner with his union, O says Christ, I am
Adam too, yea flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone, thy brother, sister,
husband, friend, and father. Matthew. 12.48, 49. Will thou deny all these
relations, and fall below nature, then farewell sinner, but I am still the
same, and cannot yet deny my self in no respect to thee: O strange, unkind, and
forgetful sinner, of me thy husband, head, and vine in whom thou live, as in
thy root, when once thou know these sweet relations, which are more strong
then death, and sweeter too then sugared wines, the honey, or the honeycomb,
yea, and the rose of Sharon, the sweetest in the world.

But what my union is for sweetness, it is for time and length, and this I
would acquaint thee, O foolish, simple sinner.

And if thou did but mind me in this, how I am one with thee in all
conditions, and so will be to all eternity, thy head, and husband, vine and
glory.

But fourthly, I mean by Christ's sweet knocks, his acquainting thee of thy
union with him, as well as his with thee, by which Christ says to the sinner,
thou art righteous in my righteousness, and comely in my comeliness, and so
far, fair, yea, altogether lovely, there is no spot, nor wrinkle in thee
now, none that I can see, or my father either. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of thee my love, my dove, my undefiled one: it is God that justifies.
Romans 8.33.5. and I that died, who dares to question thee, my sister, my Spouse,
my love, my dove, my undefiled one. Cant. 1.2, 3. If men do it, it is no
matter: if sin do it, it is no matter: if Angels do it, it is no matter: what
if sin, Satan, men, and devils, Saints, and Angels, all accuse thee, and thy
self too, seeing I am he that justifies, all can do thee no hurt, and
therefore be not thou abasht, for I will bear thee out against all. Sin, death,
men, and devils, if thou will stick to me, by believing in me: but if thou do
not, tossed thou will be, and tumbled, foyld thou will be, and spoild of all
thy hopes, and comforts, joy, rest, and peace, which lies in my union with
thee, and thine with me.

And therefore now stick to me, for I will unto thee, lets see, who dares
condemn, for I am he that justifies, in spite of men, and devils, all that
comes to me, and believes in me, and will do so still, while my name is Christ.

Fifthly, I know it is Christ, by the place, he knocks at the door, which is
the heart of the sinner. Well, what of that, first it is the most secret and
retired part of man: a place indeed which none can speak to, but Christ, I have
had ere now many speak to my ear, but never any but Christ could speak to my
heart: many would speak to my ear, but that I little regarded; now Christ
speaks to my heart, and this I cannot but weigh.

Light things were spoken to my ear. O but Christ speaks serious things to my
heart, things concerning Gods glory, things concerning my soul; yea, the
everlasting welfare of it. O this hearts speaking must be weighed, O this
hearts speaking must be considered: it is as much as my life is worth; yea, it
is as much as my soul is worth.

I have heretofore heard talk of Christ, I have heretofore read of Christ, I
have heretofore disputed of Christ; O but I never till now, knew what it was
indeed to hear Christ, or speak with Christ, or converse with Christ either,
nor thousands in the world as well as I, that would be thought good christians,
and do pass for good christians by many.

O but now, to my comfort, I taste him, now I see him, now I feel him, now I
enjoy him, and from this tasting, seeing, feeling, and enjoying, my soul is
ravished, my heart is warmed, I am now filled with marrow and fatness. Psalm.

Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love is better then
wine. Cant. 11. v. 1. Yea, then life it self, so says David. I will now sing
of my beloved, he is the lilly among the valleys. Cant. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. He is
the rose of Sharon, he is white and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousand. Cant.
5.10. The chiefest of ten thousand, the sweetnest of ten thousand; for beauty,
love, and sweetness, there is none that can come near him.

They are mad that mind him not, they are mad that know him not, they are mad
that seek him not; did men know as I do, did men see as I do, and enjoy as I
do; they would say as I say, they would sing as I sing.

Thou, O Christ, art beautiful, thou, O Christ, art sweet, thou, O Christ, art
lovely; yea, altogether lovely; thou, O Christ, art all, yea, still I say, thou
art all: all for beauty, all for pleasure, all for profit, all for sweetness,
pure divine sweetness, yea, they would cry out, thou art all, thou art all,
thou art all, O Christ.

At all times, in all places, and conditions, all in wants, all in straights,
all in peace and plenty, all in bondage, all in fredome, all in health, all in
sickness, making health by thy presence.

O Christ, I say no more, but thou art all in life, and he that has thee shall
never die. John 4.10. and John 11.26.27. but shall live for ever with thee, and
therefore thou art all, O Christ, all in life, all in death, and eternity too.
3. Col. v. 11.

Revelat. chap. 22.1. And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and the Lamb.
THIS Revelation was shown to John, the bosom Disciple of Christ. Whence
observe, that divine, glorious, and spiritual revelations are to singular men;
to an Abraham will God discourse, even as a friend, God must acquaint Abraham
with his intention, concerning Sodom and Gomorrah, before he can do any thing;
How shall I do this thing, or hide it from Abraham? says God; O the secrets
of the Lord are revealed to them that fear him; often did God appear to
Moses, and once he caused his glory to pass before him, and proclaimed his
name unto him, I am the Lord, the Lord gracious and merciful, pardoning
iniquities, transgressions and sins, Exodus 33.18.19.20. Jacob wrestels with
God, and sees Christ in both his natures, in a dream of a lader reaching from
earth to heaven. The Angel Gabriel was sent to Daniel, to comfort him and
strengthen him; and at another time he appeared, saying, Daniel, singularly
Beloved, I am come to comfort thee, to strengthen thee, peace be to thee, be
strong, be strong, and I will show thee that, that is revealed in the Scripture
of truth; Christ's Kingdom the glory and dominion of it, Antichrists kingdom
with the (...) of it, and all the Monarchies besides, small and great, standing
before Christ, giving an account to Christ. Christ was so revealed to Isaiah
that foretold all, almost he die, or suffered; his riding to Jerusalem, and the
manner of it; Mary Magdalen shall conceive of Christ, by the power of the most
high, over shadowing her, and in her arms shall carry him that made the world,
her God and Savior, from place to place. Paul was struck to the ground by
Christ, after taken up into the heavens, with seeing such things that was
unutterable: So John sees here the Throne of God, the Glory of God, the River
of Life, the Tree of Life.

Secondly, All glorious discoveries are of Christ, and the Spirit; He showed me
the River of life; yea, all my revelations: as chap. 1. v. 1. and therefore it
is called, The revelations which God gave by Jesus Christ, to show unto his
Servants; of which it is said, Blessed is he that reads, and he that hears.

But I come to the words, and will open them, or at least will hint something
from them, according to my weak, and glimmering light.

And first, We have the rise of this River, and that is the Throne of God and
of the Lamb, which I conceive to be his own everlasting glory, in which he
dwells and lives; or otherwise, the glorious union of the divine nature, which
sets up one another, as a Throne, a Prince; the Father sets up the Son, the
Son reveals the Father, the Spirit sets up, and is sent forth by both, which
is the River.

Secondly, For the nature of this River, It is pure, He showed me a pure river
of water: so says David, With thee is the well of life so pure; this River is
pure, pure indeed.

First, In its nature and rise, it proceeded from the pure fountain of Gods
Glory, or the Throne of God and the Lamb; and so it is pure for nature.

Secondly, It is pure for operation, it purifieth where it runs, and so it
is like the refiners fire, and fullers soap, purifying the sons of Levi,
which is by washing them in the blood of Christ, and leading them in, and by
the commands of Christ.

Thirdly, It is clear, yea, so clear, as it cannot be compared to any thing
but the Crystal: O the Crystal stone, it is the clearest of all stones,
Diamonds are dark and cloudy many, but the Crystal stone, it is the clearest
of all; you may see through, and through it; so clear is this River, you may
see through and through all eternities by it; from eternity to eternity, and
mystery to mystery; Christ in earth, Christ in glory, Christ in flesh, Christ
in spirit, and all clear; We with open face, behold the glory of God, as in a
glass, and are changed from glory to glory, but by the spirit of the Lord, the
River from the Throne.

Fourthly, He showed me a pure river of life; I, that is the well of life,
says David, 36.8 Here is the excellency of this river, it is a living river,
and a life-giving river: so says Christ, He that shall drink of this water
that I shall give him, meaning this river, shall never thirst again, but shall
have a living satisfaction in it, and out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water. O the worth of this living river, this life-giving river,
endless life and glory; Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God; so
may I say of thee, O River of God, whose streams refresh the City of God,
Psalm. 46.4. Well, I know ye perceive by this, what this river, this living
river, so pure and clear as Crystal, flowing from the Throne of God, and the
Lamb, as proceeding from both, sent forth by both, to water the Paradise of
God, yea, every plant and tree, especially those that want most.

Well, are you satisfied what this river means, that John tells you is so pure,
so clear; I believe you are: but take this Scripture too however, John 7. v.
37. in the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood up, saying, if any
man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink, and out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water, and this spoke he of the Spirit which they should
receive, believing in him. Hearken O heavens, hear O earth, give ear O ye
inhabitants of the world.

O what a proclamation is here for you, from a sweet and bountiful Christ, to
a poor and thirsty sinner, what the river of life to any one, high, low, rich,
poor, young, old, bond, free; yea, any one that will come by believing. O free,
O bountiful Christ, inviting sinners to a river, yea, a living river to drink
their fills; and yet a drop is more worth then ten thousand rivers of oil; yea,
the oil of spices, yea, the sweetest spices. O christian friend, here is the
well of life indeed, here is the fountain of life indeed, here is the river of
pleasure, I, and the sweetest pleasure too lies in this stream: for it is the
river of life endless, endless life, and glory.

And hear now, O ye sons of men, how loudly Christ calls poor sinners to come
to this Crystal river; in the Scriptures before, John says, Christ stood up
in the midst of the feast upon the great day, where multitudes were gathered,
and cried out with a loud voice, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto
me; and drink. O sweet Savior of sinners, how do thou scatter life and
pardon to all? by standing up, and proclaiming loudly, a river of life to all:
thoughts of graces, and bounty are free, so says David's Psalm, Free indeed,
when unto all; and see the like proclamation Revel. 22. v. 17. the (...) of
God, and Christ, the heavenly Jerusalem, the misery of souls being spoken of
by John, that are shut out of this glory.

A proclamation is again made, supposing upon the former considerations,
careless sinners will mind their eternal happiness, being concerned (...).

Well, the Spirit, and the Bride says, come, and let him (...) bears say,
come, and whosoever is a thirst, let him come, and take the water of life
freely, freely. O friends, me thinks, this proclamation cries room, room,
expecting (as it were) the whole world would now follow Christ for this water
of life, the river of life, and yet where is the man that stirs: if a Prince
should ride a circuit with an Herald, and make a proclamation of lands, and
livings, to all that would accept them: How, O how then would all men run and
tumble.

O friends, Christ proclaims both lands and livings, jewels, crowns, and
kingdoms; nay, more, ten thousand times more: a river of life, and glory, and
men will scarcely stir: arise, arise sots, and hear, if you be not deaf, and
cannot. O the Spirit invites, and bids you come too, the eternal Spirit of
God, one with God, the third person in the Trinity of God; shall this eternal
Spirit of God, one with God, coming down from God, inviting you in the name of
God, and for your own souls sake, to accept of this river of God, sent forth
by God, for the glory of God, shall this invitation he slighted.

O, must not this be a high contempt of God, and a great afront to the Spirit
of God, sent to thee by God, so to be slighted? O thou slighting, careless,
foolish sinner.

Sinner, this contempt of the Spirits invitation, may cost thee thy soul: thy
soul, I say, thy everliving soul, if thou do not quickly mind it.

Secondly, the Bride bids you come, the Lambs wife, the Spouse of Christ,
united to Christ, being married with Christ, by the Spirit of Christ, in faith,
divine love, and sweet obedience to Christ. O she has drunk of this river,
well may she say, come all that will come, come, she knows by experience, this
to be the river of life and pleasure, and therefore she says come away, come
away, or else you die, you die; and now, O every one that will come, come;
Christ loudly calls you, and the Spirit still invites you, and the Bride would
feign persuade you, from her own experience that she has of this river, why
will you not then come away, and take the water of life, you may have it if you
will, now take it freely: so says, the Bride and the Spirit.

And now friends, ye see what this river is, how freely you may have it: yea,
you, I mean, the worst of sinners: come away then, come away, and drink
abundantly; come, I say, for the name of God, come and drink.

For the name of God, what is that?

His goodness, and his kindness, his unchangeable goodness, his transcendent
goodness, his infinite goodness, O for this his goodness sake come and
drink; for the name of Christ, come and drink.

For the name of Christ, what is that?

His love, his love, his bleeding love, his dying love, his living love, his
eternal love. O for Christ, and his loves sake, sinners, come away, for the
name, and sake of the Spirit, come and drink.

The name of the Spirit, what is that?

His freeing name, his sealing name, his comforting, and sweet name, his
leading name, his pleading name sake, come away, O sinner, in the name of God,
and for the sake of God, Christ, and the Spirit, come and drink. O sinner, I
should invite thee too for thine own souls sake: but what is that to God,
Christ, and the Spirits sake: but stay, me thinks I hear one say, what is it
to drink of this river of life. First, it is to delight your selves in it;
yea, drink for delight as well as for thirst.

O then, ye sons of men, why will ye not come hither, that your souls might
be delighted with draughts of living water.

Secondly, yea, drink to quench your thirst, O come, and quench your thirst in
this pleasant river; yea, quench all kinds of thirst in your souls: your
thirsts for profits, pleasures, and contents, come quench them here, for here
you may, and no where else: men who have run to creatures to quench their
thirsty souls, have found them all a lie, and so will you too, who run, and
call for creature waters, to quench their feverish souls.

Thirdly, ye drink to cool your selves, come hither, drink, drink, and then
ye shall lay all your heates, your worldly heates, your lustful heates, your
sinful heats.

O thou laborious Worldling, thy bottle will be empty, what shall thy soul then
do, when death, like night comes on thee, I say, what will you do. O me
thinks, I hear thee even crying out, drink, drink, or else I die, I die.

Why do you not give me drink, but let me thus lie burning, and dying too, for
thirst of that which once was freely offered to me, but now cannot be bought
with prayers, tears, nor cries, nor all my worldly riches, which I once
overvalued, and thirsted after, more then God, Christ, or heaven; have you
never heard dying worldlings thus complain? surely you have: why do you not
that are alive, and living come then unto this river, and drink of this same
water; and thee I would too, who art heated with lust, with burning lust of
uncleanness, pride, passion, and such like fiery distempers burning in thy
soul as if hell fire was already kindled in thee.

O friends, those lusts which lie so secret smothering in thy soul, will one
day break forth into dreadful flames, burning round about thee. Have you
never seen a dying sinner dispairing of mercy, lie in the midst of these flames
burning, and dispairing, and no friend able to bring him any comfort, no not in
the least.

Again, ye drink for comfort, to comfort your hearts: but poor hearts, know
this, there is no true comfort but in God, Christ, and the river, and unless
you come to this river of pleasure, this soul-comforting water of life, ye
shall live comfortless, ye shall die comfortless, and be damnd for want of it.

God has decreed, true comfort shall be no where, but in himself, his Son, and
river. John 15.26. ye know, Christ promised his Disciples a comforter, and what
was that Comforter, I pray, but the Spirit, and the river mentioned.

O me thinks, I might persuade you to this river, a drop, a drop of it will
sweeten any condition; art thou poor, sick, weak, what aylest thou man, take a
drop, take a drop of this river, I will warrant you comfort? but here I would
invite, and not discourage, for a world, such poor Christians, that are heated
with temptations, and corruptions, that they go mourning and sighing by reason
hereof, and Satan's temptations filling them with fears and doubts, that they
cry out like David, O, I shall one day perish by corruption and temptation,
such a corruption says one, and such a corruption says another, me thinks
they grow stronger and stronger, and I fear at last will be my ruin.

O my friend, let me tell thee two things, and do thou remember them.

First, no soul is damnd for the presence of sin, but for the love of sin;
mark me, I say, it is not the presence of sin, but the love of sin, that damns.

My second word is this to thee, O complaining sinner; sin flutters most,
when it has its deaths wound, as soon as Christ's comes into our hearts, he
wounds sin to the heart, as I may so say, by giving a sight of it, a dislike
and hatred to it.

Well, thus Christ wounds sin, and it may be now, sin like some foul,
whose neck is broken, beats the wing, and flutters, as if it were, alive;
well, so does sin, whose neck Christ has broken in the soul, beats the
wing and fluters, keeps more sputter now then ever.

Well friend, remember these sputterings are the death pangs of sin, I, the
death pangs; and be but patient, thou shall plainly see them to be no
otherwise, and therefore do not fill thy heart with fears of ruin, for it
shall never be, for thou like David shall overcome Saul thine enemy; I mean
corruption; but in the mean time come away to the river, drink, drink, and
it will strengthen thee and cool thee.

O but now me thinks I hear some soul say, I would drink with all my heart,
but I am an unworthy, poor sinner. O friend, the more poor, the more worthy
to Christ; art thou poor, then go to Christ's door, he feeds the poor, but
the rich he sends empty away.

Again, Thou art unworthy; What do thou mean by unworthy? Thou see no
reason why Christ should give thee the water of life, nor the Spirit; I believe
thou do not; I verily believe thou art unworty in thy self, and cannot see
any reason, why Christ should give thee the water of life.

But, Friend, know, there is a worthynesse in Christ, and so thou may be
worthy, or any poor sinner, who lays hold on Christ's worthynesse, and so goes
to the Father in the worthynesse of the Son, for the water of life, and the
river.

But to be plain with thee, thou art indeed a proud sinner, thou art proud, I
say, and art ashamed to have this water of life on Christ's own terms freely,
but would feign buy the river, by a worthynesse in thy self; O let me see
thee, let me see thy face, o covetous man.

What would thou buy Christ's purchase over his head? that is the plain
english of it, get thee gone, O proud sinner, and come again beggar-like, with
a Bottle and a Dish, that is, a a poor, empty and unworthy soul; this is the
way man, if thou meanst to speed; for truly I think, for a sinner to bring any
thing of his own worthynesse to God and Christ, is as great a sin, as thou
can commit, this is an affronting sin, it affronts God and Christ, as if
they were sellers of the water of life, which they can as freely give to a
thirsty soul, as rain to the thirsty ground.

What cost, or charge, or labor, is it for God, to rain down showers, to
water the earth, when it lies gaping for it? I say, it is no charge, or labor
to God, who has his clouds and bottles full; and a word from God, and they
straight shower down, and do not give over till they have satisfied the dry
ground; so truly can, and will God, rain down this water of life, to a poor
and thirsty soul gaping for it; When the poor and needy cry for water, and
there is none, I the Lord will hear, Isaiah 41.

But again, I say as at first, this is an affront to God and Christ, to bring
any thing for a paile, yea, a soul full of the water of life, it is the
highway to overturne his free grace, which God will have exalted above the
heavens, and that it might be known in the earth; he freely sent, yea gave, his
Son, unsought uncravd and will he sell the river, think you, that is
purchased by his Son? do not think so, it overturnes the glory of his free
grace, freely offered unto all, that freely will accept it; and this was Gods
design, to make his glory known unto the sons of men, which they have little
minded; I say, the design of God from all eternity, was to set up his name,
his free grace, in giving Christ the bread of life, and the Spirit the water of
life, freely to the sons of men, John 6.48.32.33: and 48.9.10. John 4.20.21.
John 7.37.

O, God delights to make all his attributes known, his Justice, Power, Wisdom.
But the glory of his grace, freely giving Christ and the Spirit.

This is that which especially, he would have exalted in the world, and the
sons of men admire him in God would be admired for his bounty, to give so
like himself a Christ, a River of life freely; I say, God thinks not much to
give all this, for the magnifying of his free grace, that his bounty and
himself might be admired, and we the sons of men, cry out and say, who, who
is a God like unto thee? that pardons iniquity by forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin, giving life, Christ, and the Spirit freely. Now I say,
this was Gods design Before all worlds, and for this designs sake, even the
glory of his grace, John 3. v. 16. he gives his Son and Spirit freely.

Now when a Soul will not come to God, nor accept of God, his Son, the Spirit
freely, but would bring some kind of worthynesse for his Son, and river: thou
overturnest this grace, shearly overturnest it; O what a fearful thing is this
to buy Christ's river, I tell thee, thou buying Christian, Christ will not sell
one drop for Jewels, Gold, nor Silver, for he bought to give, and thou talkst
of buying by so much repentance, tears, and I know not what.

O but now me thinks, I hear some poor soul say, I see no worthynesse in my
self, neither look I after a worthynesse, or expect to have a drop of the
river of life, for any worthynesse of my own; I loath my self, and condemn
my self, for I find my self wholly carnal, fold under sin, and in the
self condemning way, have I like a Beggar waited at Christ's door, for the
bread and water of life, praying and craving Christ for it, night and day; but
I am still unserved, and yet I see thousands served, who have not waited half
so long as I.

Well friend, Beggars must be so served, that they may learn how to wait; if
you give a Beggar, he like a Fiddler, straight is gone, and many have served
Christ so; sometimes for a creature comfort, for a supply of help in time of
need, for a wife, for a child, sometimes given by Christ, sometimes spared by
Christ, from death in sickness, which as soon as Christ has given them, they
straight run away, and scarce say, I thank you Christ, but run straight
away, till they know not what to do for another such like Alms, and Friend:
many serve Christ so, for the river of life.

O, they would feign have the water of life, and are night and day at Christ's
door, by prayers, sermons, etc. When Christ has once served them with a
pretty deal of assurance about the river, and their souls, these beggars
straight are gone away into the worlds cares, and pleasures, where Christ
hears no more of them for the river, nor nothing else a long time after: but
this Christ takes very unkindly from them, that they should, as soon as ever
their own turn is served by Christ, come no more at Christ, till some great
necessity even drives them: and it may be Christ sees thee, that thou would
serve him so too, and therefore makes thee wait a little: a little do you call
it, when I have waited whilst many have been served, and some that I know very
well; but I am still unserved.

Well friend, do not be angry, if Christ makes the last first, and the first
last, by this they all learn to wait Christ's leisure, which is a lesson, he will
teach his poor, who beg for the bread of life, the river of life: and such
things I say he will learn them all; I, all to wait his leisure, first or last.

But stay my friend, it may be thou art served already, I have seen beggars
well served, and yet begging presently after, as if they were starved, it may
be thou do do so about the river, let me ask thee one question, and answer
me truly: have you never had no bread, nor water from Christ at no time?

Yes, I must confess the truth, and will, seeing you put me to it; I was one
time very earnestly begging in my closet all alone, by prayer, and then Christ
indeed, gave me a good draught of the water of life, the bread of life, I mean
the Spirit, which satisfied me for two or three days, and made my heart very
lightsom, and cheerful; And I will tell you of another time, when I was at a
sermon where I got a sup and a bit too: for he was speaking how freely Christ
did give poor sinners the river of life, the well of life, the Spirit inviting
thirsty sinners; crying, come, come to me ye weary sinners, ye thirsty sinners,
and so forth, and then he was speaking of that of Mat. 5. v. 3, 4. Blessed are
they that thirst for Christ, and mourn for sin: which my soul then did, and
truly, this proved a great deal of comfort to me.

But I remember many a time besides this, I have had much comfort by the word:
when ministers have clearly opened the Gospel-promises: but sometimes; yea,
many times, I hear such sweet Gospel-texts, and precious things held from them,
which has filled me, even as with marrow, and fatness, and I have even
thought with my self, all these comforts held forth by them, belong to me.

But as soon, as he had held forth his comforts, now says he, I will give
you some marks, and signs, how a poor soul may know this belongs to him.

I remember, I gave great attention to him, but before he had done with his
marks, and signs; I had lost my comfort again, by thinking, none of it,
belongs to me: for I had not so repented me of my sins, as he showed me.

True repentance there to be, which he said, was a turning from all sin to
Christ, and a forsaking of all my sin for Christ, and a sorrow for all my
sins, by which I had dishonored Christ: This one mark, he did so abundantly
branch out, that before he had done with this one mark and sign of that
sinner, to whom this comfort belongs, I had lost my comfort. I am sure: but he
went to twenty more marks and signs, I think, and at last said, if these marks
and fignes be in you, then these comforts belong unto you: but if they be not,
then you deceive your selves: but in the conclusion, he said indeed, if we
would repent, and wash away our sins by that, like David, forsake all our
sins, and bring our whole hearts to Christ, and deny the world, the
pleasures, and profits of the world, and abundance more which I cannot now
stand to name; but all this I am sure, he bad me, and others to do, before we
did presume to lay hold of any comfort, so that whereas I was in hopes of being
comforted, I was not; but rather cast down: but at some other time Christ
served me freely with comfort from his word, for which I bless his name, and
thus I have told you, what comfort Christ has given me ere now.

But yet, I will tell you of one or two ways more, by which Christ uses to
come, and serve me with comfort, giving the water of life to me.

One way in Christian meetings, commonly called, conventicles heretofore: but I
have in these meetings, found much of Christ, and comfort to my poor soul: at
our last meeting, I think, there was some twenty of us, all met in a friends
house, purposely to discourse of Christ, and wait on Christ, expecting all
comfort from Christ, and whilst we were speaking, and discoursing of Christ in
that place, I think verily, we were every one refreshed, only by telling how
Christ uses to serve us, sometimes presently, and sometimes not at all: but
seemed to be angry with us, for asking some carnal things; so at last, we
found many things Christ would never grant to any of us, but rather seemed to
frown upon us, for asking some things which we had all been a craving of him:
so at that time we considered, what might be got by begging, and parted; but
this I do remember, a scoffing Ishmael called it a tub preaching.

And one time, which I shall never forget, I was walking all alone by Christ's
door, in a way of meditation of his bounty, love, and franknesse to such poor
fellows as I, and while I was walking, thinking nothing, God knows: Christ
stepped out, and pulled me in, set me down, and himself by me, and supt with me; we
had whole flagons of wine then, of which I drank very freely, and I dare say, I
shall never forget this bout. So the next day, I told half a dozen Christians,
waiting at Christ's door in a sermon, how I had sped the day before, they bade
me, thank God, saying, they had never such good fortune, nor such discoveries
of Christ's love.

Friend, friend, I rejoice to hear these sweet relations of your experience:
but let me tell you, I am ashamed, and so may you well be; but however, I am,
to think how you complaind, nay, murmured but now, and said, Christ had never
served you of the water of life, but you had waited so long, and so long, and I
cannot tell how long you made me believe, and how Christ had served thousands,
and not you.

Friend, I am ashamed to think, how you have abused Christ, by your false
complaints of Christ; surely it is a great sin in you, I pray, do so no more.

But now me thinks I hear one say, but I am a poor thirsty soul, I do not
know when in prayer, sermon, christian conference, either I was so refreshed,
and therefore what would you have me do, who am even scorcht with heat and
thirst, I thirst for Christ, and would rather have him, then the world a
thousand times, if I know my own heart.

What would you have me do, do thou say? Let me tell thee, first, how well I
like this complaint of thine; Surely by this complaint of thine, and the high
prising of this river, it does argue his streams, strongly running in thy
soul.

Yea, let me tell thee my thoughts; This I do believe, it is from the presence
of Christ and the Spirit in the soul, that any soul living, is drawn forth
to desire Christ, or the Spirit; you know the natural man, desires not the
things of God, but is dead to every good work, or desire, and sure cannot
indeed desire any thing in a spiritual way, before God works it in his soul.
Now friend, if God, or Christ has wrought a strong desire after the well of
life, the river of life, the spirit; let me tell thee, I verily believe he has
given it thee already; for this desire in thy soul, is to me a strong evidence
of it.

I, for my part, do firmly conclude, when I hear any soul complain for want
of Christ, and the Spirit, saying, of Christ and the Spirit, his soul had
rather have Christ and the Spirit, then all the pleasures, profits of the
world, I say, I do conclude this to be the work of God in the soul.

This is true, a natural man may have a heart quame, and a heart wish to die
the death of the righteous, as wicked Balaam once said, O that I might die the
death of the righteous, and that my last end may be like theirs.

I say, A wicked man may desire to be ownd of Christ, nay more, to give all
the world for Christ at the last hour, when they come to see a necessity, and
their souls damned for want of Christ.

O how will a carnal man dying, mourn, and beg, and cry for Christ, and howl
for Christ too, though all in vain; but as these men have lived without him all
their lives, so must they die without him too; for I believe he will scarce own
the^ now, who never regarded him before; but yet as I said at first, so I do
conclude, there is comfort, yea, abundant deal of comfort belongs to thy
soul, or any soul in thy condition, and for this read Isaiah 41.17.

When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, and I will open Rivers in the
tops of Hills, and Fountains in the midst of the Valleys, and in her
Wilderness make pools of water, and her waste places Springs of water. Mark
this sweet and full promise, when the poor and needy seek water, and there is
none, their tongues cleaves for thirst: Friend, this Promise is to thee, as
sure as the Lord lives, and such as thee: for mark, when the poor and needy
seek water; art not thou poor, yes, it was thy very objection against thy self.

O, said thou, I am a poor soul, and do not know when I drank of the
water of life, and so forth. Well, thy very complaint does argue thee a needy
soul, yea, thou see the need of Christ, yea, absolute need of Christ, for
thou see thy soul undone without him, and this need of Christ, makes thee so
complain after Christ.

Well, Is it not so; yes truly, my soul stands in need of Christ, and is a
thirst, as David speaks, Yea, it pants for Christ, like the Heart after the
water Brooks in a barren wilderness, so pants my soul after him, whom my
soul thirsts for. Truly friend, you must learn to believe that, that shall
be, which seems most unlikely to be, so did Abraham, he believed in hope
against hope, and obtained the promise. O poor complaining sinner, believe
this promise of God to thy soul, so much against hope and reason; I say,
believe God will not only give thee the water thou desire of him, but will
open rivers of water in the tops of the Hills and Fountains in the valleys.

Well friend, you see here is Gods Promise to open up to a soul, a river of
water in Christ, who is the hill of our salvation; therefore says David, I
will look to the hills, from whence comes my salvation, or, I will open
rivers in the tops of the hills, that is, I think poor souls that are as far
from any springs of consolation, as tops of hills are from springs of water, but
I will open fountains in low grounds, or spirits in humble souls, that is the
valleys here meant.

O friend, believe thou this, that the Lord will open fountains of living
water, by making peace, or joy, or comfort, flow like living fountains in thy
soul; I say, believe this Promise, which shall be fulfilled in its season, and
then shall thou sing and say, Sing ye waste places of the earth, for the Lord
has comforted his people by making her wilderness become a Pool, and her wast
land springs of waters.

But why is the Spirit compared to a river, I John saw a pure river of water,
Why is it, for these and such like reasons I think.

First reason is, a river is strong and powerful, no stopping a river, but it
will overflow: ye know, if ye stop a river, it will do so, so are the
workings of Gods Spirit in his people, see in Daniel in whom they would have
stopped the Spirit of prayer by the ungodly decree of the King, but see how
Daniels spirit rises like a River, and now he will call upon his God with more
boldness then before. Many would have in our days dammed up this river by a
Form of prayer, but O these men are drowned; these foolish men are carried clean
away, like dry leaves by a mighty Land-flood, and what the Spirit is in prayer,
the same it is in preaching to a strong river; see in Peter, who was forbid by
the Scribes and Pharisees to preach Christ; but says he, I cannot but must
speak the things of Christ. Many have in our days paid dear for their
boldness this way.

Secondly, how powerful is this river in its conviction, when it runs in a way
of discovering Sin and wrath, who can stand before it, truly none: it bears
down young and old strong and stout, yea, oaks and ceders, as well as strawes.
Does this spirit like a flood bear away, when it runs in a way of conviction?
See in the Jailer who, I am persuaded was a stubborn crabbed knave: see how he
abuses the poor Disciples overnight even fleaed the skin off their backs;
well, the same night the flood breaks in upon his Spirit, and he cries out,
what shall I do to be saved? to the Disciples. Poor souls, they tell this
fellow, notwithstanding their usage, how he may escape drowning by wrath and
sin: and so Paul was overturned by this river, and carried back to Damascus
like a dead drowned man, yea so suddenly did this river break in upon his
spirit, that he was turned by it, like a straw in a whirlwind.

Thirdly, a river is powerful in its progress, a river is of that nature, that
it beats down all dammes ye can throw up, or else overflow as I said before,
etc. So did the Apostles bear down al opposition from threats and scorns,
scoffs, whips, stones, and the like.

Fourthly, a river is pleasant, and delightful, ye choose a river side to walk
by, whose streams with silence, sweetly glides trinkling along, and makes the
walk delightful, so is the Spirit in its discoveries, especially in such as
these. First the love of Christ which is seen passing by this river, or rather
looking in this river, where you see his love like a circle, and your Souls in
the midst, where is no way in nor out, I say by the Spirit ye shall see such a
love; a love from eternity to eternity, thy Soul looking both ways, like Janus
two faces, especially forward.

But as his love, so his loveliness the spirit streaming in the soul, presents
Christ over, and over to the Soul. Christ rides in this river, as in a barge of
State, whose various streams sweetly rows him up and down. The spirits of his
Saints like a Princes in her barge of pleasure, O how lovely is Christ in the
Soul, when in his glory discovered to the Soul by the Spirit, then is he indeed
the fairest of ten thousand, the chiefest of ten thousand, the sweetest of ten
thousand, yea altogether lovely.

Thirdly, it shows you your union to, which you may see walking by this river,
yea, all your relations to Christ, and his to you, he the vine, you the
branches, he the head, you the members, he the husband, you the spouse. I say,
this union you may see by the Spirit, the strength, length, glory and
sweetness of it, O says the Spirit, thy union is strong, O Christian, nothing
can dissolve or untie it; men cannot, Devils cannot, sin cannot, nay death it
self cannot, it is stronger then all, sin, death, men or devils, and as long
as strong it was from eternity to eternity, from eternity intentionally to
all eternity reallie, but it is more sweet, says the Spirit, then strong or
long. O the sweetness of all unions is but glimpse of this union. What is the
Father to the Son? the husband to the wife? but a shadow of Christ to the Soul;
yea, all relations with all the sweetness of them, and all the sweetness in
them is but as a drop to this ocean of sweetness, Christ's union with the
Saints.

Fourthly, the usefullnesse of Christ to the Soul, without me says Christ, ye
can do nothing, to his Disciples, Christ is all in the Soul, and all to the
Soul. A Christian can neither do, nor suffer any thing, but by Christ, by him
he can want and abound, ye do all things, as Paul speaks, through Christ, that
strengthens him. Any work is hard for a Christian in his own strength, a
difficult work is nothing when the strength of Christ comes in. O in his
strength, will a little David grapple with Goliath and foil him too.

But as he is strength to the Saints, so is he all indeed to them, yea all they
stand in need of him to be; he is a righteousness to cover them, and an
interceder to the Father for them, yea what shall I say more, he is an
everliving faithful high Priest, yea our King and Captain, our ark where we may
safely ride when a world lies round, destroyed, O Christ, O Christ, what shall
I say of thee? our ark, our pillar, our cloud by day, our pillar by night, our
rock and shadow in a weary land, our life, our all in all, and at all times.

Fifthly, it shows us our advantage by Christ, we are justified by his blood,
we are sanctified by his spirit, and saved by his merit. O the blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin, which the blood of bulls and goats could never do,
as the Apostle speaks.

Does Satan lay sin to your charge, tell him thou art justified by Christ? does
he lay great sins to thee, tell him, Christ justifies from all sins, of all
kinds, great and small; yea, tell him, thou art no sinner at all, neither does
the father look upon thee as one in his Sons righteousness. Truly when a poor
soul is carried by his power, thus to argue with Satan, we wind him as a man
does a child: but else he binds, and locks us up in bondage, fears, and
darkness, that our very souls are restless day and night, being filled with
doubts, and his accusements, he is therefore called the accuser of the
brethren, he accuses God to man, and man to God, envying both.

Sixthly, our glory with Christ.

And first, the certainty of it.

Secondly, the greatness.

O says the Spirit, thy glory is sure, its laid, and kept too for thy coming:
but as it is sure and safe laid up by Christ, so it is full and large, and
therefore called by Paul, a weight of glory.

Here we many times admire the light painted shadows of glory, and forget the
true substance God has laid up for us in his Son, and heavens, Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither ever entered into the heart of man, to conceive,
says Paul, what God has laid up for us. Eye has not seen sure, the eye has
seen Solomon's glory; yea, all the gloryes of this world too. O says Paul, that
is nothing, these things are nothing, but painted shadows and butterflies,
after which the fools of this world runs, like little children: and for the
ear too, what has that heard; surely of all that has been true, and as much
more too, by reports of fained gods, and glories in the Poets lying stories:
but were all these things true, yet God has laid up more glory for the
poorest Saints that walks in rags, then all that they have wrought, thou heard,
or thought; no, thou can not think, says Paul, nor no man living, what God
has laid up for them that fear him. Surely, men might fancy more then has
been seen or heard.

Well, says Paul, fancy all that this world has seen, or heard; yea, fancy
another world too, with as many joys and pleasures of this world, as griefs
and sorrows, yet all short, and nothing.

O Christian, little do thou think, and less the world, what God has laid
up in store for thee, and all his servants.

Fifthly, a river is advantageous, and useful; so is the Spirit, it helps our
infirmities, we know not what to pray for, as we ought: but the Spirit helps
us, with groans which cannot be uttered. O the Spirits groanings in us, are
powerful prayers before God for us, the promises are made to the Spirit
praying in us, and indeed those requests we are denied of God, are not from the
Spirit, but from flesh and blood; and therefore it is that they are lost for
the most part: but the Spirit who knows the mind of God, never draws forth a
Christian to ask any thing, but what is according to the mind of God, and
this he cannot but grant.

But thou complainest, thou art an ignorant soul, true; the natural man knows
nothing, but the spiritual new man in the natural man knows all things; yea,
the deep things of God, as the Apostle speaks, a natural man is said to be a
dead man every where in Scripture, and the dead, says Solomon, knows nothing,
he knows not he lies in the grave of sin and corruption, mouldering as it
were into dust: call him to come forth from worms and putrefaction, yet he
stirs not at all: even so the natural man, tell him his condition, he
believes it not, call him to come forth of the grave of nature, sin and
death, he stirs not, nor indeed cannot, he is bound up so by the power of the
Devil, sin and darkness.

Sixthly, a river runs silently, and makes little or no noise at all, have
you never found the Spirit running in a Sermon, at a prayer, in a conference,
but especially in a meditation with little noise, it sweetly turning thy very
blood in thy veins, making thy heart, as it were to wamble: I know you have
many times. Truly, when this river runs trickling up and down the Soul,
making little noise in the Soul, yea, dipping, and diving of her in Divine
delights, which many talking Christians are ignorant of.

Seventhly, a river is deep, so is the Spirit in its discoveries. He discovers
the deep things of God, and Christ, and the Gospel, which others cannot reach
nor fathom by wit nor Learning, no, it is out of their element, I have heard as
wise able men, at least so counted: and are so sure in civil things, in
lattine Law, or Fathers, speaking of this river, and the nature of it, but as
much out of the way, as any blind man ever was without his guide. The maskd man
turns and winds, but still beside the way: the Sinner does the like, following
carnal reason, to find out Christ and his river, and therefore, friend sit
down, it is midnight yet in thy soul: if the day break, and Christ the star
arise in thee, thou shall see this river, yea the depth of it in some measure,
a depth beyond all depths, thou ever metst withal. Here, one depth calls to
another, like the echo to the voice. Gods decrees and purposes answered by his
Son. These depths are clearly seen by looking into this river, and if thy
sight be strong indeed, then thou shall see the sons of men, like precious
stones, and pebbles lying in the bottom, from thence plummed up by Christ to
swim a top, as in a sea of pleasure.

Eighthly, a river is cool, and bathing, we go to rivers in Summer heats to cool
and bath our bodies. O come hither and bath your Souls, your heated Souls,
heated with sin, heated with guilt, heated with apprehensions too of wrath,
heated with Satan and temptations: truly, many a poor soul is heated by sin,
and then chased by Satan for his sin, so heard, that his soul even fainteh:
well friend, my advice is, come unto this river, for here thou may cool and
bath thee.

Ninthly, a river is always moving, and working, so is the Spirit, it is
active in the souls of Gods people, though sometimes not descerned. I sleep,
but my heart awaketh, says the Spouse in the Canticles. Thou art dead, and
dull in prayer many times, but the Spirit being wakefull, sees thee, and after
chides thee for it, sometimes thou art nodding in the creature, but the Spirit
wakes and jogges thee by secret calling on thee, which if thou refusest to
hear, then he says little for the present, but sends some afflictions to
thee, and if that do not do, then he sends another, and another, every one
sharper then the former, and so makes thee hear to the purpose, agine in the
tenth place.

A river is reflective, ye may see your self, or shadows in a river: and by
the Spirit, you may see your self, your face, your souls, your hearts, your
natures, and affections: the heart says Solomon who knows it truly, none but
the Spirit, and the Spirit dwelling in it therefore by the by.

Thou that say, and complainest of a hard and sinful heart, sure, it is the
Spirit in thy heart, that gives thee thus to see it, and all its windings from
God, which are more then the doors of Solomon's Temple.

Secondly, it shows you your nature and corruptions which have more sin in
it, then there is poison in the world: sin in nature, is like an old running
sore which cannot be stopped, or if it be, it breaks out again: so sin in
nature stops pride, and out comes covetousness: stop that, and out comes
pride, and prodigality, stop up that, and then back again to old unwearied
father worldling, drunkenness stopped, does the like, lust runs as long as it
can in old filthy fornicators, but when it is spent, they turn to baudy
talkers. I have seen old carnal fellows laugh and wiker at their youthful
pranks in the feasts and Iunkets, yea, such as have had one foot in the grave;
poor miserable men did they know their own condition, the reckoning they must
give for every idle word, and every sinful action, which Christ speaks in
Matthew, one thought, one serious thought of that would strike us dead as
Belshazzar that great King was at the handwriting, in the midst of his feast
with his Nobles, dinking healths in bowls of Gold his countenance fell, his
joints loosened, and his knees knockd one against another, no more, but
remember this filthy sinner.

Thirdly, it shows your affections, and which way they stream and run, a man
by nature can never see how wide they run from God and Christ, sometimes
biasse, drawn by a wife, a child, a husband, sometimes by the world, and the
worlds pleasures, profits, which like two strumpets entises all, not kept by
Christ, and as dangerously takes them as that strumpet, Solomon acquaints the
young man with, and how her paths go down to hell.

Again, by the Spirit you may see your name in the Lambs book, your wedding
robe, and Supper, with your rest and glory in the Throne of Christ.

O thou foolish man, that spendest thy days in gazing up and down the world,
let me exhort thee to come hither, for here is an object worth the seeing, and
thou O Christian friend, let me entreat thee also to look into this river,
this clear and Crystal river: but stay a little, me thinks I hear one say,
what is it to look into this river? First, it is not to look into your own
light, for that is blind, and has no reflection at all. Secondly, it is not to
look with another light, for that is, as if you would look by another eyes:
but to be short, if you would see this pure living river. First come in Gods
light to see, and then ye shall see; is it not a thousand better lights that
will show you the greatest light, a thousand candles cannot show the sun; nay
a thousand torches, nor a thousand stars cannot; you must see him by his own
light, or not at all: but first look into this river by the light of God, and
then it will be a river of pleasure indeed unto thy soul, all its streams will
be pleasurable and glad thy very heart. Psalm. 46.4. there is a river, the
streams thereof shall make glad the City of our God. Yea all its turnings will
delight thy soul.

Secondly, Look in this river by the light of Christ, he is the true light
that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and therefore called, the
light of lights, John 8.12. I, that is the right way indeed, if ye mean to see;
if men will neglect God and Christ's light, then let me tell them, they shall
never see, they shall never find this well of life, this river of life, let
them look their eyes out, let them look their lives out, wise men have tried,
wise men strived, but Oh, alas, in vain, for they could never find it, but
rather more were blinded.

The Father shows us the Son, and the Son shows us the Father; No man
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him; no man
knows the Son but the Father, and he to whom the Father does the like. So
likewise the Spirit shows the Son, Behold the Lamb of God, so says the
Son; Behold the River of God, as in this text; and all the world cannot show
us the Father but the Son; nor all the world cannot show us the Son but the
Father: Behold this day, says God, have I begotten him; nor all the world
cannot show us the Spirit, nor the River of life, the Well of life, nor the
Fountain of life but the Son; therefore says Christ, Buy of me eye salve
that ye may see, Rev. 3. last v.

How blind was Bartholmew till Christ came and opened his eyes; just so was thy
soul, and is thy soul without Christ? I am the light of the world, says
Christ, he that walks in me shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the
light of lights, John 6.

So says Paul, God that caused light to shine out of darkness, has given us
the knowledge of himself in the face of Jesus Christ, mark that; and indeed
John had all his visions by Jesus Christ, the golden candlesticks, new
Jerusalem, the Glory of God, the Throne of God, the Garment, the wedding
Supper, and all those heavenly things; and therefore get thee gone foolish man,
that stands dreaming to see this river in thy own light.

Get me gone, O but whither shall I go? whither; why, where thou should go,
and all others, that have any mind to see this pure, pleasant, living river.

Question. O but what shall I say to Christ when I come to him: What shall thou
say?

First, Tell him thou art a poor blind soul, and were born so; and that thou
can not see thy right hand from thy left; and withal, as to tell him how
blind thou art; so be sure to bewail thy self, and say, O Christ, I would see
the river of life, the well of life; why do not thou O man? why do not I, O
Christ, I am blind thou know, I am blind and cannot see; why how came it,
or what ailest thou? O Christ I was borne blind of my parents; yea, ring your
hands, weep, wail and cry, O unhappy man, O unhappy wretch, O unhappy soul, O
that I should be born blind, and have no eyes to see the Glory of God, the
Throne of God, the River of God, and say as I bid thee; O Christ I came blind
into the world, shall I die so too, far be it from thee, O thou God of mercy;
and be sure to, as I said, to bewail thy self, and then I will pawn my life
for it, Christ will come by, and say, what ailest thou man; and now Christ is
of a good nature, very pitiful, especially to poor souls, bemoaning and
lamenting themselves for want of life, legs, or limbs, or light, or sight, or
eyes, or any such like things, for Christ knows how useful such things are
for poor creatures, and how they are like to dead men in graves without them;
or just walking like ghosts in the shapes of men, which is as mere a delusion
as can be in the world; but as I was about to tell thee, be sure when Christ
comes by and asks thee why thou mournest, weepst and wringst thy hands; then
say, O Lord Jesus I am blind, I am blind, O that I might receive my sight,
sweet Jesus look upon me, O thou Son of David have mercy upon me; and if any
should reprove thee for troubling Christ, be sure you be not daunted or beaten
off for crying after him, but cry louder, yea, as loud as you are able, and
say, Lord Jesus if thou passest by and will not help, I will tell thy Father
of thee, who sent thee purposely to help such poor wretches as I am; and then
Christ will say to them that bid him let thee alone, I must go do my Fathers
work least he chide me.

And then they will say, do it to morrow, O but says Christ, I must do my
work while it is day, the night comes, when no man can work. John. 9. v. 4.

And then Christ will come and say, why did you cry so after me, O thou Son of
David? that I may receive my sight, and this will please Christ very well.

And thus you see what you get by my counsel in bemoaning your blind soul,
and crying after Christ, you are now made whole, and see as well as any, I dare
say, thou would not be in such a condition for a thousand pound; no truly,
not for a thousand worlds neither; for what would all the world have done me
good, if I had lived blind and darkly all my days, I must needs have been
ignorant of God and Christ, and the river of life, when as now, I thank God, I
see all these things, and I tell you, thousands of wise men do not, but are
just of my condition as can be; but sure they are bewitched, I think, for they
do not know their own condition, if they did, they would cry as I did.

O but from my soul, I thank, and I thank you Sir, my good friend, for
directing me to Christ, O sir, if you had not, I had been undone for ever and
ever: for I must needs have been damnd; for I must have died in my sins, which
I did not think of; alas, I was a man that minded nothing, the Lord knows,
till you fell a talking of the river of life, and speaking many things about
this river.

I came to ask you, how I might do to see it; for I remember, you were
speaking, how clear, how pure, how beautiful it was; and like wise, how sweet,
and useful, advantageous, and desirable it was, and a long discourse you know
to that purpose, so then I think, I asked you, how I might do to see this pure,
living, clear, and crystal river, and you told me, to my thinking, a
strange thing at the first. For you told me, I must not see it in mine own
light which made me stare and wonder at you; good Lord, thought I, what does
the man mean, would he lend me his eyes, thought I; nay, you told me further,
I must not go in the light of another man, God bless me, thought I, the man
is mad as sure as can be, I must not see in mine own light, nor another, but
then he told me, as I remember, how pure, how pleasant this river was. O said
he, it is a pure, living river, and an ever living river, an everlasting river,
and a great deal of discourse about this river, so that I thought indeed he
would never have done with this river.

But to be short, in my relation about this river; I think, I said, show me
this river; but says he, you cannot see it in your own light, O thought I in
my self, he counts me one of the blind men of the world, because I did never
much away with the new lights of our world, which was never half so many, I
think, as now, since the world stood.

But to come to my story, he told me as I could not see that Crystal river
by my own eyes, so no more could I see it by another man's, so I plainly saw, he
did not at all weigh the ministers, I mean the old Orthodox Divines, I think
these new fellows he did well approve of, and seem to own, saying, they were
clear Gospell-preachers, and did hold forth Christ very well: distingnishing
the difference between the two Covenants.

But then in relation to the river, he told me, if I would see it, I must, said
he, see it in Gods own light; and so quoted David saying, in thy light we shall
see light, and then he told me, I must see this river in Christ's light too,
saying thus, as God was Christ's light, so Christ was Gods light, said he to me,
no man can see the Father, but by the Son, and he to whom the Son does reveal
him.

And then he told me further, that the father reveals the son, and the son
the father, and both the spirit and the river, by giving of it to the sons of
men, and so indeed he lead me up and down in a mis-maze, for I had never in all
my life before heard so much talk of revealing, and I know not what, of the
father, son, and spirit, and the river, for so he called the spirit, saying,
it was a pure, clear, and living river, still talking of I know not how many
lights, and I never knew but of one here, which rules the day. So thought I,
what does this man mean by his lights, but he turned I know not how, about to a
light of God, and a light and life of Christ, or in Christ, I think he called
it, saying, it was the surest and safest, and the sweetest, the happiest, best,
and blessedest life of all lives that the soul lived, when it lived in God, the
fountain of light and life, endless light, and endless life.

For indeed, God is the life of our lives, the root of our lives, the fountain
of our lives, we live in our own element, said he, when we live in God, and
when we live out of him: we pilgrim like, wander up and down the world,
begging preservation of every poor creature, which is a sad condition for a
noble soul, yea we bury our selves as in a grave of darkness, which few loves,
being nothing, but wandering and rottenness, earth turning into earth: but in
one word, I wind up all, the river is the Spirit, the eternal spirit of God by
which he does all in the world, yea all his mighty works, he binds Kings and
looses Captives, breaks nations, and binds them up again, and as Kings and
Nations, private men and persons, are bound and loosed, comforted and wounded,
and all by this Spirit, Oh then does it concern all, high, low, rich and poor,
to embrace this spirit; for if ye slight him, he can smite you, wound you, kill
you, and damn soul and body, O then come and kiss this enlightening Son, as
David speaks of Christ in his second Psalm, lest that he be angry, its said of
this Sun that rules the day, that it shall one day break forth in such flames
of heat and brightness, that it shall scorch and burn up Mountains, the spirit
will do the same, yea, every man and woman, in one way or other, some in love,
most in dreadful wrath and vengeance, for neglecting and abusing the love,
grace and mercy, which he once freely tendered them, which they little minded,
being like the old world, buying, felling, marrying: all the time of Noah's
arkes building, yea, until the very flood came; but then how did they run and
tumble, O me thinks I see the whole world shifting, some to the hills, others
to the mountains, some climbing trees and cedars, and getting up to steeples,
whilst others wade to Noah: yea beg, and hang upon his Ark, crying Noah, Noah,
Noah, for pity take us in, but he is secure, and minds not all their skreeks
and cries, nor their doleful mourning for their drowned souls, this he little
minds, for he is safe, and his Ark arises by the mighty waters, in the which he
rides more and more steady, the higher that they rise, carrying him at last over
hills and mountains and all kinds of dangers.

And now he sings this unto himself, God has safely housed me, God has
safely kept me in a shelter from the raines, which the black and melancholy
heavens have weeped day and night for the sins of men, till they were drowned
with tears; well, Noah is yet safe, the hangers on the Ark washed off, screeks
and cries over, all swim up and down the deluge. Well, the mighty waters do
begin to beat, and the heavens smile by clearing up again; Noah sends out
his Dove, she soon returns, he again does the like, she brings in an Olive
branch, an Emblem of peace to all in the Ark. Well, this Ark is Christ, and
none there is but he, that can safely shelter from all kind of danger, and yet
this Ark is open, and ready to receive all that will come in at the Spirits
invitation; but what if they do not? the Spirit will break forth in dreadful
flames of fire, drying up the Seas, and burning of the Mountains, none, no not
one escaping but those in the Ark. Well friend mind this, Christ is the Ark,
the Spirit is the River, God the Fountain too, of light, life, and glory;
shall all be neglected, then thou art undone; O unhuppy soul, ill betide the
time, and cursed be the day that ever thou wast born.

Revel. chap. 22.4. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be written
upon their foreheads.
O Christians, from these words give me leave to speak a little my thoughts,
for to you is this promise, and if God give in the sweetness of it to you, it
will be as a little honey, yea, as a lick of that Manna which Christ will give
to his Saints to feed on, Revelations 2.17.

And first, these words they are a Promise of God to his people, who are the
persons to whom this Promise is made.

Secondly, The Promise it self, which is, They shall see my face; that is the
thing, O christian, promised hear.

Thirdly, For the time, that is a coming; they shall not yet, but they shall;
from whence denote the certainty of it.

And truly friends, if you did but consider this promise, and the certainty of
its accomplishment, it would be like Moses little stick which did sweeten the
bitter water which the Isralites could not drink, before he had thrown in his
stick: So I think it would sweeten any condition a Saint meets with in this
world, though never so bitter; be thou sick, be thou weak, be thou poor, for
these conditions are they subject too as well as any, therefore has God made a
thousand of such kind of promises to his Saints, to support them here.

Sometimes he tells them, They shall drink of the River of his pleasure, and be
abundantly satisfied with the fatnes of his house, Psa. 36.8.

A second Promise to them is this, They shall eat of the Manna that is hid.

A third, They shall see my face.

I will speak no more of them, pray remember these three in all your troubles;
by faith feed your souls on them, they will not only comfort your hearts, but
consolate your troubled souls. O, they will make you well in sickness, they
will also make you rich in poverty, they will make you feast in hunger, they
will make you sing in prison, live in death, yea, triumph over death, yea, all
kinds of death.

Christians you know this, I know ye know it in some measure; but what is the
reason you do not make use of these and such like Scripture, sweet promises in
the times of troubles? You will say you do; you do quoth he, ye do not to
any purpose; witness your whining, pining, sithing, and continually sorrowing,
after a husband, a wise, a child. And how, does another complain for loss of
trading; O my poverty comes on me like an armed man, mistake me not, I know
christians have bowels of compassion more then any, and may moderately
complain for friends and want; but should they, should they greive, as men
unhappy, without hope of ever enjoying of that they they have lost? No, no,
they should not; my Husband is dead, but my Christ is alive, and lives for
ever; my Wife is dead, yet am I the Spouse of Christ, and because he lives, I
shall live, John 17. I have lost my Child, but yet am I the Child of God, the
Son of God, Heirs, joynt-Heires with Christ; my estate is spent, and because
of that the world will not smile, friends look strange because of poverty I was
wont, but now cannot see their faces in my distress; well, what of that, art
thou troubled at this? O happy christian, God has promised that thou shall see
his, And they shall see my face, says God, Rev. 22.4. the words I first named;
what is that thou calst thy face? O my God: what is it? this, my glory, man.

O Lord how wonderful is that, Heaven and earth is full of thy Glory, Psalm.
8.9. all the glories of this world are but shadows of thy glory; yea, all the
glory of Heaven, Angels and Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims are but the
reflecting shadows of thy glory, thy uncreated glory, thy increated glory: O
my God, when Moses begged to see this, thou would not; alas, poor soul, he
could not, No man can see my glory and live, but time is a coming when they
shall see my glory, my naked glory, and live; yea, live by seeing, and see by
living, by living in it, by living to it, in singing praises always before it;
and then, O happy Christian: shall thou forget all former things, all former
sorrows, all former fears, all former griefs.

O how then will these things pass away and be forgot, as if they had never
been.

I remember, Peter having but a glimpse of Moses and Elias glory in the mount,
desired then to live, and to die in that mount; but thou, O precious Christian,
shall live and never dye in this mount, mount Sion, heavenly Jerusalem, where
thou shall see Moses, yea, a thousand Moses, and ten thousand times ten
thousand glorious Saints, as well as he, with as many Angels with God and
Christ, excelling all ten thousand times over, and over again. O but when will
that day come, that I a poor Gentile sinner shall see this glory, Heavens,
Saints, and Angels excelling glory: will it come? do thou say it will come,
and it will make amends for all, it is now a coming; Paul says, We see now
but darkly, as in a glass, we shall see him then naked as he is.

Christ tells thee friend, in John 17: 22. And the glory that thou have given
me, I have given them, that they may be one, O Father, as we are one. Here thou
see, that Christ prays for this day, and yet thou as kest, shall this day
ever come?

O friend, know this, that what ever Christ prays for, he wills, and what he
wills shall come to pass; as in John 17.24. Father I will that all these thou
have given me, may be with me, even where I am, to behold my glory. Christ's
glory is Gods glory, and Gods glory is Christ's glory; and this wills Christ that
ye may see.

O, said the Queen of Sheba once to Solomon. Happy are those that tend thee,
and see thy glory.

Thrice happy, yea, ten thousand times thrice happy are they, O Christ, whom
thou will shall see thy glory in thy Kingdom, in thy Throne. O my Christ, it
is said, that the Kings and the Captains too, shall hide themselves in their
dens, and among the rocks, and mountains, crying to the rocks, and calling to
the mountains to fall on them, from thy glory, and thy presence. Revel. 6.15.

And this I will, says Christ, to confound mine enemies, which will not that I
should reign over them, or in them; had they hearkened to me, or accepted of
me, my righteousness when time was, they should not have need to be ashamed
of their nakedness, or call and cry to the hills to cover their poor souls:
but this is just, seeing, they did when time was, reject me, this in one day
shall come on them: but when these things shall come on them like travels on a
woman, ye shall lift up your heads with boldness, because my glory and yours
too, draws near.

O frinds, no marveile, that wicked men shall run to the caves and dens, and
rocks, to hide themselves in: for the Saints shall in that day shine as so many
suns, and Christ as a sun to all.

O glorious day, O day of days, that is now a coming, this is that day, that
the righteous shall shine in the kingdom of their Father. Matthew. 13.43. Then
when they see the face of God and Christ, and this is nothing but the reflects
of Gods glory, beaming out on the Saints, in the beholding of his face, but yet
this glory is not all that is implied, when God says, Ye shall see my face,
For it implies as well as his glory, his love, and delight, which you know are
most apparent in the face; for you judge of men's love and affections, by the
face and countenance: so that, to see this face, is to see his love, and
delight in you, and on you, Delight arises out of love, and flows from love,
as affections from relations.

But of this love and delight, what shall I say, and first for this love, this
pure love, flowing from the fountain of love, yea, divien love. Secondly, it
is sweet love, yea, sweeter then the honey, or the honey-combe. Thirdly, it is
strong love, and long love, first, it is strong love, for it so binds the
Saint, yea, so strongly binds him by its discoveries to him, that as with
coards his soul is drawn to love, and bound, and cannot but love; yea, love
still more and more, this is that love, that is stronger then death; yea, then
death that kills all things: but cannot this love, nor never shall; O death I
will be thy death, says Christ, so says love, I am, and still will be: but
thou, like fading time, shall be no more, The Angel swore, that time should be
no more. Revel. 10. v. 6.

But for love, Christ wills, that it shall be for ever, John 17. v. 23. let the
world know, says Christ to the Father, that thou have loved them, as thou
lovedst me. O when God shall cease to love his Christ, then Christ shall cease
to love his Saints.

O friend, God cannot but love his Son, nor he, but love his Father, nor both,
but love the Saints; and they that be wrapped thus up in love, must needs, and
cannot, but love again, and thus this love binds up in one a Saint in Christ,
a Christ in God; and thus a Saint, a Christ, and God is one, as Christ says.
John. 17.21.23. Father, I will that they in me, and I in thee may be one.

O glorious union, A Saint in Christ, a Christ in God, here is Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity. O earth, earth; how art thou joynd to heaven,
and by hearing the word of God, I mean his Christ.

And now Adam, Adam, made of dust, where art thou now man, in the garden of
God, or in God himself? O happy change, O happy man, O happy fall, from God to
Eden, and then to earth, and thence raised up to God again.

O mortality, how art thou swallowed up by immortality, no changes now no more
can be, me thinks, I see thee, O yesterday-creature, sitting with the Aneient
of days, like youg Samuel with old Eli. Me thinks, I hear thee now, as once,
the Angel swearing, time shall be no more, as in the Revelations, nor sin, nor
sorrow, nor pain, nor labor, and now, thou may truly say, what Babylon the
great did, Revel. I sit as a queen, and shall see no sorrow; yea, I am a Queen,
and a Queen of queens; for my husband is Christ, the King of kings, and now,
come and worship me, fall down at the soles of my feet, call me Sion, the holy
One of Israel, my husband says, ye shall. Isaiah. 60, 14. For I must now be an
eternal glory, and a joy, from generation to generation. Isaiah 60.15. and
19.20. A joy to my Father, a joy to my husband, a joy to the heavens, a joy to
the Angels, and all that therein is.

First, a joy to my Father, as a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so will I
rejoice over my people, as in Isaiah. Secondly, a joy to my husband, Father, I
will that they may be with me, that my joy may be in them: This Christ prays,
and he being answered in all his prayers, says, Father, I thank thee, for that
thou always hear me.

And now, come away, my love, my dove, winter is past, storms are over,
singing of birds, and the spring is come. Cant. Let me see thee, let me see
thy face; for thou have been absent, but now I have thee. I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee; come along with me my love from Lebon. Cant. 48, Come
along with me my dear, we will to my fathers wine-seller, and I will banner thee
over with love, O my Spouse, thou art fair, thou art fair. Cant. 6.3. O, I
will kiss thee, I will embrace thee, and carry thee to my fathers house, I
will marry thee there. And now, ye Angels, and all the host of heaven, O ye
innumerable company, come and sing, come and sing Hallelujah, Hallelujah: for
the Lord God omnipotent reigns, lot us be glad, and rejoice, and give glory
to him, for the marriage of the Lamb. Revel. 19 v. 6, 7. is come, and his wife
has made her self ready, she shall be ara yed like a Princess, in pure white
linen, which is the rignteousnesse of Saints; blessed are all they that come
to the Supper of the Lamb. Break forth in singing.

O heavens, do ye begin, ye holy Apostles, and Prophets do ye follow next.
Rev. 18.20. and also Rev. 19.1. and come ye innumer able comprny of heavenly
hosts, Sing ye, sing ye, what shall ye sing: Glory, honor, unto the Lord, and
unto the Lamb.

And come ye four and twenty Elders, down with your crowns, and come worship
God, and sing Allelujah, Allelujah. Rev, 19.4. Moses where art thou, come away,
come away, and sing thy song to: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty. O thou
King of Saints, who would not fear thee, O thou Just and true: Just and true
are thy ways, thou have avenged the blood of thy Saints, who would not fear
thee, and glorify thy Name; for thou art only holy, and all nations shall
worship thee. Rev. 15.3, 4. O ye that brought the news at first, come ye that
brought the news of this match, sing ye your song again, glory to God on high,
peace, and good will to men, as in Luke 2.13, 14. but let the burden of your
song, be the burden of all your songs, Free grace, free grace.

Thirdly, whereas God says, ye shall see my face, it does imply, God will one
day discover himself in a familiar way unto his Saints. It was nothing but
sin that made a strangeness between God, and man; for before man had sinned,
there was no strangeness between God and man, but since sin came, there has
been a strangeness all along, but before there was none: for when God made man
first, he was not at all afraid of God; for God before sin came, took our
father Adam, and led him by the hand, as it were, and put him into the garden
of Eden, as a father would his son into a vineyard Genesis 2.15. So God led, or
put Adam into the garden of Eden, and bids him eat of all the fruit of the
garden, only the tree of good and evil excepted, and then Adam goes to naming
of the creatures of God. Genesis 2.20.

O here was no fear at all in Adam yet, for he goes and sets names on all the
creatures, which God had made, just like a child naming his fathers works; but
as soon as Adam had sinned, he is filled with fear, and timerousnesse, and
hearing then the voice of God in the gatden, he runs and hides himself from
God, and is afraid of God; witness his running from God, to hide himself from
God. Just so have all the sons of Adam done all along, to this day, so that
though God would be familiar with them, yet they cannot be so with him, there
is sin got into the flesh, and to that, God is a consuming fire of holiness,
so that now, God must speak in a secondary way, by an Angel, or by a messenger,
and that too they are afraid of, as the shepherds were of the Angel, that bids
them, fear not, saying, I am come to bring glad tidings of great joy to all
nations; for unto you a Savior is this day born, and ye shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. Luke 2.9, 10.

And now, God being clothed in flesh, man he draws near to God, which before
cried out in every discovery, like Isaiah 6.5. I am undone, I have seen the
Lord: but God being not willing, that man should be strange to him, or he to
man, sends his own Son unto us, to tell us, he is not at all angry with us,
nor will at once harm us, but rather feign would have us to be as at first,
his familial creatures; yea, more, to be his sons and daughters, and to come
live again in his paradise; nay, more, to live in himself, and with himself:
and this is clear, by his coming down to live with us; nay, in us by his Son.
And this is the way, by which God will again discover himself, and show his
face, his pleasant face, in a fatherly way unto us.

O great and wonderful, O mystery of mysteries, who would have thought of
such a way as this, to have found a blessed God again. O Adam! lost! could
thou have thought of this way? O angels, all ye angels, could ye have thought
of this way? no, no, I dare say no, nor all the world besides you; it is said
by Paul, when Angels heard of this mystery, Gods coming down into flesh, to
find and bring back man, lost man again, it was such a mystery to the Angels,
that they desired to peep into it, Oh how far was Joseph carried from good
old Jacob, but yet at last he saw his face again.

So far and further, yea ten thousand times, furthermore were ye sold by Eve,
and carried by Satan; but God like Jacob comes down, though not for want, yet
for his love, to bring ye back to your own place, it is said, when the
Israelites were delivered out of Balon, they were as men in a dream, they had
been so long in Captivity, and were so suddenly delivered unepxected, Psalm
137. But lost man, thou less expectedst, if less could be, thy great
deliverance, that God by Christ, should bring back thee from Pharaoh, in Egypt,
a strange land to Christ in Canaan, where plenty, and all fulness dwells, and
now will God again become your God, and dwell with you, now it may be truly
said, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself will be there God with them, Rev. 21.3.
Mark this, God himself will be with them; this being with them, denotes Gods
familiarity to them: where strangeness is, there can be no familiarity, but
strangeness now shall be no more; for God will dwell with them, and they with
him. O they must needs see his face, who dwell in his presence, In thy presence
O God, is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, so says David in Psalm.
36.8.

Here is a fulness indeed, First, a feeding fulness, Secondly, a filling
fulness, Thirdly, an overflowing fullness. First, a feeding fulness, O
Christian, it shall feed thy very soul, to see the face of God and Christ,
Secondly, a filling fullness, it shall fill thy heart, yea every corner of thy
heart and soul too: it shall so fill thee, that thou shall be, as David said in
his Psalm. filled with marrow and fatness. Thirdly, an overflowing fullness,
for thou shall be so filled with the sight of thy God, that thou shall overflow
with delight.

Here the discoveries of God, have an emptiness in the soul, that there is
still an emptiness in thee, but in that day, thou shall be as a vessel
brim-full, and not so, but overflow with the fullness of Gods discoveries to
thy soul, he shall so immediately discover himself to thee. Here Gods
discoveries, are in a secondary way, but then thou shall have them immediately
from himself, and not by any hand conveyed, but by himself; his presence with
thee, shall be a flowing fatness: yea an overflowing fullness in thee: and in
that day, thou shall know the relations thy soul stands in to God, thou shall
know him to be a father indeed, he shall so fatherly discover himself to thee.
Here God carries himself sometimes to his children, as Joseph did to his
brethren, rough and strange; but then God shall say to his children, O my dear
children, how do I love you, yea, I love you more and more, I loved you before,
and now I cannot hide my bowels from you; yea, I cannot but show my love to
you, come my dear children for whom I prepared Glory before the world was, as
Christ speaks, John; come, sit down by me, I will tell you over my love, I
loved you before I had you, but now I have you, I cannot but embrace you, ye
were my delight long before the world was, I rolled you in my thoughts, I had
you in my eye, and carried you in my purpose, and bought you by my Christ, O my
dear children, let me wipe away all tears from your eyes, Rev. 21.4.

You were wont to mourn, but now rejoice and sing, and let no man take your joy
from you, as Christ speaks, John 16.20. you wont to grieve, but grief shall be
no more, nor pain, nor sorrow, nor any such thing, shall ever be again, I have
you now, and I will no more nurse you abroad, but ye shall live in my presence,
and because I live, ye shall live also, as Christ speaks in John 16. O dear
children, how did I long for this day, that I might have you in my presence,
and dandle you on my knee, and speak with you, and to you, the world was wont
to snib you, Ioh. 20.33. therefore I plagued it: the world abused you, and
mifused you, but I said, I would reckon with her for that: the world knew you
not, and therefore hated you, but I knew you, and therefore loved you; yea,
loved you more and more, I cannot but love, ye are my sons and daughters, my
Jewels, my preasure, my treasure, my purchase, my lot, my inheritance, and now
what will you that I do for you, show us thy face, and it suffices us, John
14.8. O my sons, and daughters, I will show you my face, and glory, my heart,
and all the secrets of my soul, if that will satisfy you: O God, it is our
desire to see thy face, thy pleasant face, thy glory, thy transcendent glory:
but thy heart O God, what is that? my love, my entire love, my surpassingand
indearing love; and for my thoughts, I mean my purpose, my purpose toward you,
which was of old, as David speaks of old; before time; yea, before time was at
all; for before the world was no time, and then were you in my thoughts and
purpose; I had a purpose of you, and on you: of you to make you my sons and
daughters, and a habitation for my glory, that ye in ages to come might know,
I loved you above all, and chose you out of all the Nations of the world, that
I might show the exceeding riches of my grace to you, and for my purpose on
you, it was to raise my glory by you, in showing it unto you, for if you had
not seen my face, how could you know my glory, but this I will that ye may
know, how much I loved you, carrying you in my thoughts, time, and time all
along, yea, and long before time too, Christ and I was contracting your
salvation, little did you once know my transactions, concerning your souls, but
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, John 5.19. But now ye see
my face, and my transactions too, all which you do admire; and more, and more
you shall, to think how once I made you, and after that I lost you, yet back
again I bought you, and now to my self have brought you, all this you must
admire.

When Jonas was in the deep, and his head wrapped with reeds and rushes, little
did he think to have ever seen the shore again, less, if less could be, did
your souls think to have seen this day, which now you see; what I can do and
bring about, that you might prize my face at last.

But in the fourth place, whereas God does promise, they shall see his face; It
does imply that great reward, by which he will reward his servants that serve
him; so that Christians do not fight, as if there was no crown; nor work, as
if no wages. O says Paul, I have fought the good fight, I have finished the
course, and henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of life, and not for me
only, but for all that love his appearance too. And therefore Christian, be
thou faithful unto the death, and thou shall have the Crown of life. Revel.
2.10. Where Christ promised it unto thee, for the encouraging of thee;
Christminded his own glory, and so may thou as well as Moses; see, Christ
speaks of it, yea, demands the Crown, John 16.1. I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do, and now glorify thy son, or reward thy son, and then
it is said, I have glorified thee, and I will glorify thee.

O Friends, you are now glorified as you sit, by your union with Christ, in the
glory of God, which shines round the heavens, and makes them to be heavens
indeed: well friends, this is the glory into which you must be taken to behold
his face, and then will not this be a reward, a full reward ineeed, ten
thousand times beyond all your doings, and all your sufferings: yea equal unto
Christ his merits, and to thine hearts desire; a Saints desire is to see God,
and enjoy God, nothing does a Saint desire in comparison of that, with our
souls have we desired thee, says the Prophet Isaiah, yea, and this is the
desire of every soul, every gracious soul. O when the sense of Gods eternal
love, glory, sweetness, lies boiling in it, how strong does the desire rise.

O friends, no desire under heaven, rises and heaves so like to mighty waters
in the Soul, as this desire, when the sense of Gods love and glory lies
boiling in it, and the mighty Spirit stirring of it, thunders do not more
shake the cloudie air, nor earthquakes move the dungie earth, then these
desires the soul of man, when it is strongly rocking there. O says Moses, show
me thy face, or glory, while his soul was filled with the sense of it, he
would fain see it, though he died the death for it, but God spares Moses his
life by hiding him and his glory for the present; well-knowing Moses was less
able for to see this glory, which he requests he might, then we to see the
Sun through and through: but shall Moses never see this glory therefore,
because of weakness; yes, yes, he shall, he does, he now sees it, and so shall
thou, O happy Christian, ere it be long: what was it that took Peter, when he
had a glimpse of Moses on the Mount, but the beams of this glory, sparkling on
his back, like glittering suns and stars.

Well friends, you wish and would, but time shall pass, and time shall come,
and you enjoy the thing you wish and crave, and often breaths after, namely,
that glory that Moses then appeared in, namely, on the mount; well, you shall,
I say, you shall, as sure as the Lord lives have it, one day have it, and be
clothed by it, as with a garment down to the ground, like the white robe, Rev.
19.14. and then like Moses will your appearance be, as clothed with twinkling
stars from Phoebus beams.

And now hearken, O heavens, and give ear O earth, earth, earth, with all that
dwells therein, high, low, rich, poor, how God will glorify his Son; and his
Son, his Saints, to their hearts desire, with men and Angels admirations, and
astonishments too. Well may David say, O Lord, I have none in heaven, but thee:
and there is none in earth that I desire in comparison of thee; nay, Lord, in
comparison of thee, I scorn crowns, and kingdoms, yea, ten thousand tuns of
Jewels; mark, none in heaven, nor in earth, says a David, in comparison of
thee, and thus God rewards a Saint according to his hearts desire: when he
promises to show his face unto them.

O this reward will make amends for all, for all your sufferings, for all your
sorrows; and now, in the hopes of this, raise your selves, your souls, in all
your troubles, and castings down; and indeed nothing but this consideration
will do it to any purpose, for if, by the loss of one creature you raise your
selves by another; What will you then do, when all creature comforts shall be
taken away from you, which God, at first or last will surely do.

And then, what will ye then do; ye all of you, whose hearts are bound up in
the creatures, and things of this life: But mourn, mourn bitterly, like
Babylon, crying, alas, alas, Revel 18.10. How in one day have I lost all my
hopes, my creature comforts, my friends, my children, my wife and husband, my
life and soul, and Christ more worth then all, ten thousand times over and over
again.

O unhappy man that I am, O unhappy soul, how wast thou deluded, how was I
deceived, to think my self happy in a few dying creature-enjoyments, O my
bewitched soul, who deluded thee, who deceived thee? time was thou heardst of
God and Christ; and had thou then minded him, and served him, as thou did
thy King, thy lust, and pleasures, he would not now have left thee, as dying
Wolsey once said, that great Cardinal, in his despair and horror.

But thou, O precious Christian, whose heart and hopes are placed in God, shall
dying say? my hopes, my heart, and expectation lives, for it was not here, nor
here below, in dying things: but a living Christ, and now my soul shall live
with him, and because he lives, I shall live also. John 14.19. ye live in his
presence, and live in his sight; and now my soul, my happy soul, tell thou
the world, thy friends, and all that mournes for thy departure, thy life, thy
life for which they mourn, its sure and safe, its hid with God in Christ, our
lives are hid with God in Christ, and when he shall appear, we shall appear
with him also, as the Apostle speaks. John 1.3.2. O glorious day, O day of
days, unthought, unminded by most of men: now it appears not what we are, but
then it shall, when the dust of this body, more precious then the seed of stars
and jewels shall be gathered, and be carefully picked up by Angels, sent forth
by Christ from all the winds for that same purpose, then my life was hid; but
now it is found, where first it was in God and Christ, in my own root, and that
to my dear souls content; and therefore let me go to my home, to my father, to
my husband, to my God, to my Christ, and to my brethren; for sure, I shall be
welcome, as Jacob was to Joseph.

Welcome for relations sake, O friends, there is such a near relation between
Christ and a Christian, he is the head, and you the members, he is the
Bridegroom, and you the Bride, he is the vine, and you the branches, Christ
cannot but bid you welcome; nor the father neither, for you are all his
children; how welcome is a friend, a child, a husband, after seven years
voyage, when returned; what love, what embraces does then pass between them,
pouring heart into heart, as it were? How sweetly did Joseph's, and his
brethrens bowels yerne one toward another.

O friends, Christ will one day embrace you in his arms, with his rolling
bowels, like a husband his beloved wife, after seven years absence, and you
him with tears and kisses of joy and love. How glad was Did queen of
Carthage, when she had Aeneas prince of Troy to look on and embrace. Well
friends, time will come, when thou shall have thy Christ to embrace and look
on, who has endured more broiles ten thousand times then all Aeneas feigned
ones. Here Christ to look on, is admirable, and lovely too in broiles. O says
the Spouse, Who is this that coms from Bozrah, with his garments dipped in
blood. Isaiah, 63.1.2. traveling in the greatness of his strength.

Christ the prince and Captain of our salvation, comes from the fields of
slaughter like some noble champion, and has his bloody arms, which does
declare him conqueror; so Christ here travels from Bozra, a field of
slaughter; this I take to be the cross of Christ, on which he might be well
said, and did conquer all the Churches enemies, yea, naild them to the cross,
as Paul speaks, by triumphing over them openly upon the cross.

Well, in this field Christ slayes the law, sin and death, making this saying
good, O death, I will be thy death. 1 Cor. 15.55. And now comes in warlick
vestures, which are dipped in this blood, declaring him to be the mighty
conqueror,

Well, the Spouse sits and sees him at her window, coming from the field,
which is the Spirit in the soul, through which she looks upon these mighty
champions, Christ, Sin, Death and Devils.

Well, Christ foyls and spoils all, by trampling on all, which being done, he
leaves them dead, and comes away to refresh himself in glory; the Spouse spies
him in the way, and cries out, who is this? not that she did not know Christ
well enough, but she is taken with Christ, in the beholding of Christ, thus
bravely wins the field, which Christ never quited til all foild and spoild and
the day his own.

Well, Is the Soul now so taken with the gallentry of Christ, that she cries
out for joy and wonder? O then, how will thou be taken, when thou shall see
this Christ again, which hear is promised? yea, stroke the face of this
Champion, Christ the Prince of our salvation; how will she be taken with him
then? saying, O my dear Christ, it was my enemies thou engaged in Bozra, and
if thou had not conquered, my soul and thousands more, had been undone for
ever; but seeing thou did win the day, we will name and style thee, most
high, and excellent, and mighty Conqueror, King of Saints, Prince and Captain
of our salvation, which thou for ever shall be called, by Saints and Angels,
men and Devils; poor drooping sinner, what do thou think of this day, and
this Christ, who is thy Champion, thy Captain and Salvation.

I say, what do thou think O malencholy Christian of this day, when thou
shall see the face of this Prince and Savior, will thou not make one, to sing
his praises, to sing his victories over sin, death, hell, men and devils,
which Angels now are doing, and so shall thou; and this shall be thy reward
too, a full reward indeed, for all thou ever did, or suffredst.

In the mean time bear up, bear up thy head, O drooping Christian, Christ has
conquered sin, death, men and devils, and yet it may be thou fear all; O
foolish sinner, weak in faith, men are bound, sin and satan wounded, yea,
death and sin slain too, and all by Christ in Bozra: what meanst thou to be
troubled? O but Sir, Sir, me thinks I see sin alive, and Satan loose, yea,
both in me; I will not deny, but thou may think so; but all is not true that
men do think; but grant both these be in thee, yet if sin be wounded and
Satan bound, one cannot long live, nor the other do much mischeife; if sin
be wounded it is to the heart, be sure of that.

And when Christ was wounded there by sin he straight died; well, I am sure
Christ has wounded sin there too, and it cannot live long; O Sir, Sir, it is
livelier then ever, it struggles more then ever. O friend, that is to me as
clear as the day, that sin is just a dying, every thing in nature will do
the like; what do thou see dying willing but a Saint, and he I must confess,
on this consideration, that he shall live with God and Christ, and behold the
face of God and Christ, as in the first words; I say, on this consideration,
happily he may with a great deal of willingness die.

But who besides the Saint will? will man, or beast, or fish, or foul, or any
other creature? No, no, the fish yawns and gapes, the foul flutters, the beast
beats it self and yels, though bound and musled, man mournes and cries, alas,
alas; why, must I die, and leave my hopes, my wife, my child, my lands and
livings, nay, friends and all? fetch the Doctor, quickly fetch the Doctor, save
me if it be possible, I feign would live a little longer; and thus he mournes
to think on death; and when it comes and draws near to him, then he growns,
and gasps, and grinnes, and stares, still striving with it while breath does
last.

Well friend, the fish yawns and gapes, the foul flutters, the beast yels, man
mournes and cries alas; what shall sin do nothing, it were contrary unto
nature, if it should die without its throws in thy soul.

But stay, you said Satan was bound; I, I did so, and so he is in two respects,
Christ has bound him up from hurting thee; Christ has bound him up from
forcing thee.

First, From hurting thee, you know if the most notorious theeving rogue in the
world lies bound in a lone woman's house, hand and foot; there was no ground,
nor cause of fear, he is bound hand and foot, what can he now do, but curse
and swear? well, she being a weak woman, is troubled and frighted,
notwithstanding, but when her husband comes home, her fears cease and are
gone.

Well friends know this, Christ has bound Satan for a thousand years, yea,
for ever, from mischeiving his Saints and Servants; and if he be in thee he is
bound.

O no, me thinks he is loose, he does so tempt me and accuse me, I do not know
what to do; it may be so, he does tempt and accuse thee; I did not say Christ
had bound Satan's tongue, no, he has not, nor never will, whilst the world
stands; Satan shall have his tongue loose to tempt some of his Saints, and to
accuse others, for diverse good reasons.

This is one, When he calls on thee to commit this, or that great sin, thou
may call on Christ to keep thee from sin.

A second reason is this, When he accuses thee for thy sin, Christ would
have thee pray and crave his pardon for thy sin; yea, believe it is pardoned,
notwithstanding his accusing thee, which when thy soul does by his power and
strength in thee, it brings much honor to Christ, yea, very much; but I will
not stand now, to give thee any more reasons, why Christ will not tie the
Devils tongue.

But remember these two, but the thing I said, was, Christ has bound Satan
hand and foot, and so he has from doing thee any mischeife, fast enough; and
yet it may be, he lies thus bound in the middle of the floor, as I said before;
and raves, and curses thee, and stares at thee in thy house about thy calling,
and this causes a great deal of trouble in thy soul; but when thy husband
Christ comes home, which will be at noon in his discoveries, thy fear will be
gone, and thou with joy wilt tell thy neighbors, I mean, thy christian
friends.

Again, Satan is bound from forcing thee; if a maid should be tempted day and
night, to part with her virginity, yet if she consent not, and the other have
no power, but by consent, what is she the worse, or her chastity the lesser,
no, it is rather greater if you will. So I say to thee, who talkst of Satan's
temptations, what if Satan tempt thee day and night to part with thy virginity,
or resolution against such and such a sin.

Well, Satan tempts to yield, yea, tempts thee day and night; do not yield by
no means if he should go to force thee, Christ will come and help thee, or at
least excuse thee, saying, thou art yet his chaste and beloved Spouse, and will
not hide his face from thee, for all that.

But in the fifth and last place, whereas God says, They shall see my face; It
does imply that great and sweet delight that God takes in his peoples presence.

God delights in all his works, but especially in his own people, O Israel
whom I have created; God created all things for his praise, but Israel
especially, more then all his whole creation; God said of all his works, that
they were good, serving some design, or other, but Israel his glory: O Jacob
my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen, Isa. 44.1, 2, 3. Fear not, O Jacob
my servant, and Jeshurum whom I have chosen; yea, thou art chosen before all
times and worlds, Jacob have I loved, says God, before Jacob had a being; but
he is now brought forth by creation, for the glory of his grace, that he might
show the greatness of his love to them, in discovering of himself to be their
God and Father, which he does in Jesus Christ, who is the express Image of his
Fathers person, and so the very face of God, as I may so say. For in Christ he
shows himself to the Saints a Father of love and sweetness, yea, and a God,
and fountain too of all delights.

God discovers nothing in his Son, but love, delight and sweetness to the
sons of men: So that whereas God says, he will show his face, he means, he
will show you Christ, and in him his love, delight and pleasure: which when it
is once discovered to the soul, it so takes the soul, that it cries out, O
God, who is a God like unto thee? as Moses once said, How great, O God, is this
goodness, which thou have laid up for them that serve, love and fear thee; As
David once said, O God in thy presence is life, and thy loving kindness is
better then life it self, Psalm. And therefore my lips shall praise thee;
nothing is better then life, but his favor is better and sweeter too, ten
thousand times.

Does the favor and smiles of a Prince, so take the flattering Courtier, that
he blesses himself, as it were, in the obtaining of it, and says, he is now a
happy man, he has now the Princes eye and ear; he more delights in me, then
all his noble favorites.

O happy christian, favorite of God and Christ, the Prince of princes, and
nations too, as well as King of Saints; how will thou be delighted in these
delights of God set on thee, and shown unto thee in his Son. It is said of
him, I will make my first born higher then the princes of the earth; this is
spoken of Christ, but it is as true of the Saints, in their creation, being the
chief of it; well God sets up these higher then the Princes of the earth, as
they are set up in his favor by his Son, for his own glory, to make himself a
name by them.

Children, says Solomon, are the glory of their parents, and so are the Saints
too of God; namely, the glory of his grace; by which he gets himself a Name,
and praise in the earth: O Israel praise the Lord, that made thee of nothing. O
house of Jacob, praise ye the Lord, O all ye servants of his praise him day and
night, for he has magnified you, by his grace in his Son, and set you above
men and Angels, in respect of union; and now, where would the riches of this
grace appear to the world, but for the Saints.

The world is blind, and sees no glory, love, nor sweetness in him; but they,
in Christ, see all, namely, a glory beyond all glories, a love surpassing all,
a sweetness like a sea, and they in the midst, which fills the souls with
admiration, and makes them like David cry out, and say, how great is thy
goodness, which thou have laid up in store for them that fear, and serve thee.

God has laid up in store Jewels, Crowns, kingdoms; nay more, his own favor
in Jesus Christ, which they shall one day see, and seeing, say as once the
queen of Sheba did to Solomon, I have heard of thee, but not of half thy
glory. So shall the Saints say, we have heard much of thee, O God and Father,
and of thy glory: but never the half that we now see. One said, thou art a God
of love, and sweetness; and another, of all delights and pleasures, but we
never heard half we now see, and find thee to be to our souls. O had the
world known thee, they would have ownd thee, and counted thy favor better then
life it self, or heaven either: for it is thy presence, love, and favor makes
the heavens, heavens indeed to our souls. O God we met with springs of it in
the valley of tears, but they were fountains to us, and filled our souls with
delights. Psalm. 84. v. 6. But now our joys are double, and fountains too,
like seas, which breaks up every moment with new and fresh discoveries, and
makes our souls admire and overflow with joy, which we have in thy presence
every moment, fresh and green, by seeing of thy face, which is the joy of
heaven, and Saints, and Angels too: with all that do behold thee, as we thy
servants do, which once did live in darkness, and saw thee not at all: but in
the shadowey creature, which hinted something to us, but short of what we see,
or ever did imagine. O says Paul, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor ever
has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has laid up for
them that love him, this made us think, it was wonderful, but now we find it
so; yea, wonderful indeed, beyond all wonders too, which Saints and Angels
shall ever find.

And now in admiration of this wonder, we all, as one, cry out, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty; Almighty in thy glory, Almighty in thy loves, and also
for delights to us thy poor creatures, now swallowed up by pleasures in the
beholding of thee.

O sea of endless sweetness, and sun of all delights, and fountain too of
glory, what shall we say more of thee; thou art the heaven of heavens, and
glory too of Saints, who now will sing thy praise, and ever thee admire for all
thy beauty, sweetness, and endless life and glory, which Song shall all join
in, and make the heavens ring for ever in thy presence.

But Lord, I do thy glory darken, to speak such low things of it, one star
cannot the heavens show, nor thousand suns, thy glory; much less a poor worm,
hint out those seas of sweetness, which lies hid in thy presence, till thou
shall show thy face to worms, dust, and ashes, created for thy praise.

But let me wind up all in two words, one to the careless sinner, and another
to the Saint, who is the man, to whom this promise is, of seeing his face: but
what shall I say to thee? O happy Christian, that servest God, more then is
said in these words, they shall see my face. Which does imply his glory, love,
sweetness, reward, and pleasure, which he takes in you.

This promise is sure enough indeed to bear up thy Spirit against all frowns,
jeares, and scorns, that thou may meet with in the service of this God. I
say this promise sure, is enough to encourage thee.

And therefore, O precious Christian, bear up, bear up, and be not weary of
well doing, for in due time, thou shall have thy reward, if thou faintest not,
which is to see his face.

What will men do for the favor of a prince, and yet his favor is but a
changeable thing, but the favor, and loving kindness of God, abides for
ever; it is a favor from everlasting abiding to everlasting, running out in
diverse springs, election, creation, justification, and glorification in the
highest heavens, with Saints and Angels for ever more, which is thy crown,
reward, and wages for all thy work for God and Christ. What will thou now sit
still? or will thou give over running, as one that's weary, and sit thee down
with men and sinners in creature vanities, which are a lie, and does deceive
all expectations, and ever will.

But why should I be jealous of thee, O precious Christian, sure, thou can
not think of seeing his face, glory, love, and sweetness: but thy resolutions
are doubled in thee, to believe that God will so abundantly reward thee, for
all thou ever did, or sufferedst for his sake, or Name.

But I shall close up all with one word to the careless sinner, for whom my
soul does even weep to think upon that day; when he shall be banished from
the face of this God, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and pleasures for
ever more, as David speaks in his Psalms.

But in his absence is misery upon misery: O said Absalom once, Let me see my
fathers face, though he kill me. 2. Sam. 14.32. with what a longing was here
now in Absalom to see David's face, who heretofore rebelliously sought his life.

Well, know this, O rebellious sinner, time will come, that thou shall weep;
yea, bitterly weep as once Esau did for Jacobs blessing; so thou, for a glimpse
of this face, glory, love, and sweetness of God; yea, thou shall weep, and say
as Absalom, let me see thy face, O God, though thou kill me, and damn me too.

But will this prevail, no it will not, damned thou shall be, but never see his
face.

It is said, the wicked shall not see God, no nor never shall to their comfort.
O said Christ once to the Jews, Ye shall seek me, but shall not find me, for
whither I go, ye cannot come, John 7.34.

God will one day say the same, to every proud rebellious sinner, ye shall
seek me, but shall not find me, no, though you seek me with bitter tears, yet
it will be all in vain, you may weep like Esau but not prevail; though seas,
and seas again to that be shed with sense of misery, and bitter cries for
sight; yea, one glimmering sight of my face and glory, love and sweetness, it
will be vain, yea all in vain.

You might once, but must not see it now, no nor cannot for sighs and sobs with
tears and cries; and then thy soul with heavy heart will mourning say, O my
unhappie soul, what will thou now do, God will not be seen, but is wrapped up
in displeasure for ever, if this Sun should do the like, how would man and
beast mourn, (though but for a mouth) and prize him too, when it again should
shine: but O my poor soul, from thee is hid this Sun, yea, this Suns
Sun, and glory, Angels are this Suns Sun, and God the Sun and glory
too of Angels; but what is this to me, seeing he has wrapped himself in
displeasure, and me in darknesss, by hiding of his face: Which when David once
had a conceit of, mark what bitter groans, and sad complaints does his
dolourous soul then make, O says he, restore me to the light of thy
countenance, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice, Mark this good
man's expressions at the conceit of the loss of Gods favor, O restore it,
says he, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. O friend, what a
sense was here in David, of a loss that he should in the sense of it think all
his bones were broken.

Who knows the pain of one broken bone? much less of all his bones at once,
well, if thou should know all thy bones broken, yea and broken over again,
is less painful, then the loss of this love, and favor which is seen in the
face of God, though careless sinners little mind it for the present; but when
the sense of it shall break in upon thy spirit like mighty seas, how will thou
be drowned for ever, hoping or expecting it again. O this loss must needs break
thy bones, yea, heart and soul too, over and over again.

The child mourns for his fathers absence, but more when he hides his face, and
so the wife for her husband, but what is their grief or loss to thine, unhappie
sinner, thou have lost a father indeed, or at least, one that would have been
a Father to thee when time was, in Jesus Christ; yea, a sweet and loving Father
for them that have found him, have found him so to be, yea, a Father as far
excelling all relations and Fathers too for sweetness, as the universal
sweetness does the single Pink.

Men may talk of losses by wife and children, husbands, friends and Parents:
but all is nothing unto thine, O unhappie sinner, they have lost pebbles, but
thou have lost a Jewel, yea a God as far excelling Jewels, Crowns and
Kingdoms, as they for luster, beauty, worth and sweetness, love, and
loveliness, excel straw, and stubble, chafe, and vanity. Yea, and lost it
too for nothing, which must needs cut the soul and split thy Spirit too, when
it thinks on it. O says a poor Soul, I have lost the heaven of heavens, for
dust and ashes; a few dying creatures says the worlding, and I too, says the
wanton, for my Dalilah, this or that sin which at the last betrayed me
Iudas-like, in-into mine enemies hands, death, hell and Devils, where I must
lie, yea weep and wail, and see no God, no hope, no help, nor pity, for
millions of years as that young man the Apothecarie once said to his servant
in his despair and horror.

And if then too, there were but any hopes to see God at last, it would be some
comfort, but this everlasting departure and never seeing more, is a hell to
hell, and a hell in hell to think upon, which every careless sinner will one
day find, though he now makes a ship of God, and thinks there is no danger of
finding him, or at least finding him when he needs, he is so merciful, that if
he cry but Lord, Lord, in a dying hour, God is so near and merciful, that he
will be straight found.

I will not lessen his mercy, and say absolutely thou shall not; but friend,
let me tell thee, thousands, and ten thousands have found it otherwise,
witness Francis Spira, and those despairing Sinners, which thou see daily
dying so, which would give a thousand worlds might they live a little longer. O
says one in his burning fever would I could live to see God, a reconciled God
in the face of Jesus Christ, I would be contented to lie a thousand years in
this Fever; and I too, says another in this Gout; and I too, says a third,
with his bowels twisted in his belly, which pains are all intolerable, yet
all would fain live in them to find a God before they die.

O foolish man, O foolish sinner, what shall I like thee unto, but unto that
simple man, that built his house upon the sands of peradventure. I hope, and
think to find God when I die; for all these Puritans be so stritkt, though I
take my pleasure, and live in my sins, and do as my neighbors, Mr. Custom,
and the rest; well friend, I will take thee at thy word, peradventure thou
may: But will thou venture thy soul, thy dear and precious soul, upon a
peradventure? O foolish sinner, have thou ever another soul to save if this
miscarry? do not thou lose all, and for a peradventure, which may take, and
yet it is a thousand to one if it does?

But with this parable, before mentioned, I shall conclude; and now for thy
souls sake, hearken to me whoever thou art, that read these lines, and this
little book, mind me, for it is a truth, and shall be so, when thou and I am
rotten, that Christ is the rock, yea, the rock of ages, and whoever builds on
him shall stand; yea stand, and stand firm, when the winds blow and whistle,
and raines fall like hailstones driven by the wind, and the storms beat, yet
thou shall stand, and stand firm, in all these storms, and troubles, and
afflictions, and temptations; yea, in death and judgment too, shall thou
stand, where millions, yea, and millious too, shall fall whilst thou stands
firm on thy rock Christ, thy sure foundation, and see the face of God too for
thy comfort; after all these storms, like the Sun after an April shower, or
a haven after many weary leagues by day and night, like Paul upon the Seas of
Creet, Acts 28.38. But how thou must build upon this rock know, and let all the
world know, it is by the mighty power of faith wrought in the heart, by the
eternal Spirit of the mighty God, and not by the works which we do, or can
do, by all created power.

Here follows a brief Exhortation which I gave in my own house, at my wifes
Funeral, to our friends then present.
FRiends, and Neighbors, I am beholding to you all for your love, and loving
presence, at this time. I have one request to you, yea, all of you, which I
hope no one will be offended at: It is to join with me to speak a word to God,
after a word to you, and to my own heart, which if I know. It is not through
pride, nor any self-seeking end; and could this Corpse have been conveniently
longer kept, I would have had Mr. Sedgwick, whom she loved, heard, and profited
by, to have preached her Funeral Sermon But seeing it is as it is, and my self
am more concernd in this, then all the world; I take leave from you, without
any more request to you, hoping you will take my meaning to be good, where my
expressions are short and broken; for I had neither time, nor a quiet mind, but
a few hours meditation last night, when want of sleep had much besotted me.
But what improvement shall we now make by this my wife, your sister, friend,
and harmless neighbor, Anne Blakes death? And to improve it, First, see what
is your end, a grave, a coffin, will house you all: O call in then your
thoughts, your wide and wandering thoughts, and mind your change with
seriousness before it comes, which will not be long, you may be confident.
Secondly, see what you, yea, all of you must part with, at first, or last; your
friends, your nearest, dearest, sweetest friends; your sons and daughters; your
wives and husbands. O this grave, and death, will have them all, which once I
little minded; but now I must, and cannot but mind this death, this cruel
death, which has so haunted me, and will do you ere it be long; but I hope he
will not be so quick with none of you; a son, a daughter, a loving wife, in
six weeks space. O nimble, quick, and cruel death! how have thou stolen my
nearest, sweet, and dearest comforts? Odeath, where had thou this full and
large Commission? Was it given thee by chance? O no, I know it was not; thou
can not take by that Commission, a bird, a sparrow; much less a daughter,
son, and wife. O death, this Commission it was from the Lord, for he gives
and takes, Job the first, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, and blessed be
his name. O friends, death has no Commission but from him, the Lord, that
gives, and takes, and blessed be his name; yea, blessed (I say) be his holy
name; for what he has now taken from me, he first did give unto me. Why should
I not then praise his name? Oh that I could, and you my friends, for all he
gives, and all he takes! And that we may know first it is your duty; yea, I
say, is your duty, and all theirs that truly fear God, to submit with patience
to his will, and bless his name for all his dispensations, the which I will
prove by some examples. I could give you many instances; as first, that of old
Eli, concerning his Sons, which you may read in Samuel, the first Book, Chap.
3. verse. 18. O with what a sweet spirit does he receive that sad message
concerning his sons, It is the Lord, let him do with me what he please. O
sweet and sour! A sad message is told good old Eli concerning his sons; yea, a
very sad one, at which the ears of men should tingle: But yet says Eli unto
Samuel, It is the Lord, and let him do what seems him good. A second
instance, is that of David, 2 Samuel Chap. 15. verse. 26. Who was feign to fly,
with the Ark of God, and his servants, for his life, from his habitation, by
reason of Absolom's unnatural and deceitful Rebellion. Well, many weep for
this good man's danger and affliction and so does he, for he goes from Jerusalem
with his head covered, and his eyes weeping; but yet sweetly thus saying, If he
have any pleasure in me, he will bring me back again; otherwise, lo, here I
am, let him do with me what he please. O what a sweet and Saint-like Spirit
was here in David! Let him do what he please, lo, here am I to submit. A
third instance, is that of Paul, who makes this his desire, To glorify Christ
in his body: But whether it be by life or death, Paul cares not, so Christ be
glorified. I could instance above all in Christ, the pattern of all, who
sweetly says thus in the Garden, Not my will, but thine be done. But I shall
only mention in Job, whose sweet submission to God in his great afflictions, I
little minded, till within these few days. I don't remember scarce when I read
one of Jobs Chapters. O how many sad messages was brought to him; not in one
week after another, like mine; but in one day did his sad messengers come
tumbling in with heavy messages, concerning his sheep, oxen, servants, sons and
daughters: well, says Job, The Lord gives and takes, and blessed be his name.
What fuller submission could there be in a gracious heart, then here is in
these words? But let me give you three or four reasons why a gracious heart
should sweetly submit to Gods will; and the first reason shall be this, the
Holiness of his will; a Saint sees in the will of God a holiness, and
therefore let things go how they will, yet thou remainest holy, O thou that
inhabitest Eternity. Paul says, he works all things according to the counsel
of his own will; surely, that must needs be holy, that is wrought according to
the will and counsel of a holy God. A second reason why a gracious heart
should sweetly submit to the will of God, is the Soveraignity of Gods will
above the creature; he does what ever he will, and all what ever he will; and
therefore says Paul, who has resisted his will? Shall the potsheard strive
with the Potter, or the creature with the Creator? No, nor the servant with his
Master neither; much less a gracious heart with his God and Maker Teach me to
do thy will O God (says David, and every gracious heart too. It is our prayer
to say, Thy will be done, and it would be our perfection to submit. A third
reason why a gracious heart should submit to Gods will, is the goodness of
Gods will, the will of God is good in all his working to his people. So says
Paul, all things work together for the best to them that fear God. Yea, those
workings of Gods will, which most cross nature, does he see a goodness in. O
that I had more ability to see this to; but however a gracious heart sees a
goodness in conclusion, which he does acknovvledge in the will of God; It was
good for me (says David) that I was afflicted, for before I went astray. And
truly, affliction does often cause a Saint to look to his ways, which he is
too apt in prosperity to be mindlesse of. Let us search, and try our ways,
(says the Church) in afflictions; and so says a gracious heart in every smart
affliction. O how good is that will of God, that wills thy affliction for so
good an end! And thus you see three reasons why a gracious heart should sweetly
submit to Gods Will; because of its Holiness, its Soveraignity, and Goodness.
One word or two more, and then I hvae done. First then, labor with your own
hearts to submit to Gods Will, for in every submission, ye serve some glorious
design of God; and for this reasons sake, labor quietly to submit. O that my
soul did know well his design, and reason, why he has dealt so with me as
he has, in a way of affliction! my afflictions are yet like the black side of
a cloud. O that I could see the bright side, the glory of God, which every
strong Christian sees, and by seeing, quietly submit. 2ly. Let us labor to
submit our wills to Gods, for conformities sake; and here let vveake Christians
take the example of strong, and they, the example of Christ. Who for the Glory
that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame. Thirdly,
let us submit our wills to God, for it is the surest way, and the safest.
First, it is the surest, if you would not offend God, for if ye storm ye
sin, and offend God, which a gracious heart should be careful of. Secondly,
it is the safest way; the sturdy oaks resist the vvinde, and are split; but
the gentle reed, by yielding, stands. Does God take a child? yield. Does he
take another? yield. Does he take all? yield. Does he take a Wife, a Husband?
yield. If thou do not, he can take thy soul, and throvv it into
apprehensions of his wrath, which will make thee roar, as if thy bones
were broken, yea, all thy bones; but especially yield to God, for he cannot
only take all thy comforts from thee, but thy very soul, and throw it into
hell too.

O my friends, let us yield to God, for there is safety in it, I have heard
some ministers say of Augustine, Lord says he, cut me, hack me, kill me, so
thou save my soul, he has dealt so by my wife, she has had cutting afflictions
two or three days traveling by a child as with Samuel, which some of you, my
friends, well know, and as many by his loss, his loss, and the rest, must
needs be cutting; well, thus was this poor woman cut, and at last cut of life
too: O all cut, but her soul saved, and that I verily believe on good grounds,
and now though here lies before us her body coffind, yet my soul cannot but
rejoice in her souls salvation, one thing a little troubles me, and another
thing would have split my very heart, if I did not believe it confidently;
that, that a little troubles me is, that I should be no more kind to so good a
body, yet I hope and do believe, none, no not one of all you can condemn me
but my heart does a little, I thought to enjoy her when we were old, and to be
so kind to her as we might be all along, my advice, O husbands and wives, is,
yea, I wish you, pray you, entreat you, to look on one another as as parting
dying yoake-fellows, and if you do, how sweet, how kind, how loving will you
be, when brethren are called to part far asunder, the one to cross the seas,
and the other to go a prentise, how sweetly will they embrace one the other;
do ye so, I pray ye do so, it is a duty well pleasing to God, no love but Gods
and Christ's love, should be above this mutual love of wife and husbands love.
O says Paul, love your wives as Christ loved his Church, that is, for
sincerity and constancy, I, and quantity too: but that is impossible, how
ever, it holds forth that greatness of affection that should be betvveen the
Wife and husband. But the main thing, as I said before, which grievs me to
think, is, how unfaithful a husband I have been to her soul, and that in
these particulars. First, that I should put up so few prayers, and them so
cold; I have been as apt to say, I hope God will bless us in our estates, I
friends, I was as apt to say so, and come love, let us look to the World, as
often as to say, look to thy soul and Christ, either more worth then ten
thousand Worlds. O my friends, I hope you be not guilty like me, in this
particular, if you be, it may trouble you more, then you are aware of one day.
O if I had doubted that her soul had miscarried, how heavy, heavy would this
have been; yea, how sadly should I have followed her corpse to the garve; a body
miscarrying, is not easily born; but a soul miscarrying, who can bear it. O
friends, love your wives, and husbands souls, as much above their bodies, as
ye do their bodies above their clothes; it will do the wife good to think,
that the husbands soul is in heaven smiling, whilst she and her friends are
mourning for the corpse in the coffin: when my wife was sick, and I thought it
might be unto death, then, then I thought how many nights my poor wife would
call on me in the night watch, sweetheart, husband, let us talk of Christ a
little, lets have some spiritual discourse, pray, be not so sleepy, but talk
to me; to which, I like a dead man, a stock, or stone would say nothing many
times, or else I am weary, or sleepy, or some such kind of sluggish answer,
and so neglect a spiritual and sweet opportunity, in which I might have done
her soul and mine own good, David speaks of communing with his own heart in the
night season. The wives, the husbands heart should be as one speaking to one
another, being always mindful of each one another welfare, especially in a
spiritual sense, and indeed this was the main end and reason, why I desired
leave from you to speak a few words to you, my friends; and truly, if I were
now to be coffind for the grave to morrow, this should be my advice to you, my
last and solemn advice to you; yea, to all of you my friends, to take all
advantages by night and day, to do one another souls good. O if that be
saved; how will it comfort and rejoice your hearts, when you in a melancholy
way walk to view again the grave of your wife, your husband: how will the
heart be lifted up with such kind of sweet thoughts as these, though here lies
rotting the flesh and bones of my wife, my husband, yet their fouls are with
God and Christ, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God, singing,
farewell all sin and sorrow, which now shall be no more.

Oh, how do the souls there sing its triumphs over sin, and sorrow, death,
hell, and misery, devils, men, and dangers. The absence of a friend is not so
much a grief, as the condition of him in his absence: if a friend be in
prosperity, ye only mourn for his absence, but if ye doubt he is in misery,
ye mourn double. Truly an absent soul doubted to be lost is the greatest
trouble; yea, the greatest that can be in this World. I think it, I, in my
conscience really think it; and on this consideration, my soul did even weep,
weep, till God did further fully confirm my faith, in her souls salvation, if
she should die: But I had reason to believe this of her before, for many a time
had I seen her weep for want of Christ; for sin and corruption; for sin,
Blessed are they that mourn for sin, for they shall be comforted, which I now
believe she is, and believing this; truly, my soul cannot but now rejoice in
her souls salvation, whose body lies here coffind, I say, her souls salvation,
I do rejoice in, who never did much work for Christ, but brought glory to
Christ, by believing strongly in Christ to the very last moment.

And that ye may know I do not flatter, which I would not for any good in the
World, in such a case as this. I will read you a little of what she believed
concerning her self, and what she spoke concerning others the night before she
died, and of this I will read something to you, which I writ down, thinking it
would be sweet and comfortable to read another day, when I should think upon
her.

O God, not my will, but thy will be done. Lord, what is this that lies so
bitter here, pointing to her stomach.

Lord, if it be thy will, remove it. O Lord, thou have removed many bitter
pains from me in my days, blessed be thy holy Name.

I rejoice to hear thy sweet expressions. O sweet heart. I am full, I am full
within; but so weak, not able to speak what I enjoy.

O, that all my friends in the world were here, I would bid them live to
Christ, and live in Christ; but alas, they cannot by their own strength. Well,
I am willing to leave all, to go to Christ, indeed I am, indeed I am. What
will all things avail me, but Christ; the Lord has not threatened me with
death, nor sin; furely, the Lord has been good to me above all women.

I asked her once again of her assurance, she seemed a little troubled,
saying, O Lord, sweet heart, why, do you not believe me, when I have told you
so often, I have peace in my conscience, and am verily persuaded of Gods love
in Christ to my soul.

If I were not, what would it do me good to tell you a lie, and say, I am. The
Lord has not laid one sin to my charge, the Lord does not lay sin to our
charge: But I mean, he has not suffered Satan to do it; for surely he would
if the Lord would have suffered him; but he has not, no, there is not so much
as one sin brought to my mind, so as to doubt of the pardon of it, no not so
much as one sin of all my many sins. Satan was wont in my former lying, into
tempt me, and accuse me; but God has now chaind him up In my first lying in,
the nurse having carelessely one night left me alone, supposing, I had been
asleep, Satan comes then, and mightily accused me, and tempted me strongly, to
make away my self; so I knocked, and called for the nurse, or somebody, for two
or three hours, no body heard me, well then I arose out of my bed, and laid
every thing out of the way, which Satan would have had me mischief my self, or
child, who was then in the cradle; which having done, I went into my bed again,
and sweat, and prayed, and cried with all my strength; yet notwithstanding,
Satan continued still his temptation, and told me, look, there lies thy
garters, which I presently caught, and threw away, and continued praying by the
strength of God, so at last the nurse came, and Satan left tempting me.

God that brought me to this weakness, can raise me, and will, or take me to
himself.

One asked, if she was confirmed in the faith; yes truly, I am confirmed; ye
are a poor creature, said he, nay, I am rich in Christ. O I wait with patience,
to see what God will do with me.

Sweet heart, I am persuaded, you will go to Christ, as sure as Abraham and
Isaac are with him.

I said she, so I am too, or else I were a miserable creature to lie here as I
do.

I have both inward, and outward comfort; I praise my God.

O my dear husband, serve God with sincerity of heart, and he will bless thee
and thy little family.

Cousin Barwick, I pray, certify my friends, all my friends in the country,
that my husband has been a loving husband to me all along.

I do not flatter in my speaking, but what God brings to my thoughts, I speak
to you.

I thank God, I am not afraid to die, I have trembled ere now to think of death.

O how has Christ led me by the hand through this wilderness of my afflictions
all along.

My dear husband, marry one that fears God, and loves thee very well, or else
she will quickly bring thee to my condition.

Keep this maid, for she is a gracious maid.

To all my friends, I wish eternal happiness: but they live in a heathenish
place.

She called her apprentise, said, Robert, see you serve God, read the
Scriptures, search the Scriptures, you will find the sweetness of them when you
are old. Remember what I say, they are the words of a dying mistress, do not
neglect the Scriptures, nor thy masters business, nor be deluded with idle
boys; and so pulled off a ring, and gave it him, willing him not to forget her
counsel, and to serve his master, not with eye-service; but with singleness
of heart, pleasing God.

She called for a Christian friend, who did often visit her, who answered, she
was there O said she, I have all my comforts about me: God who is all in all,
and you my creature comforts, who are a comfort to me so long as I am in this
tabernacle of flesh. O I am a going, but before you, and all you must follow
after.

To a friend, she said, pray, be you not troubled, if God should lay his hand
of affliction, and take some, or al your children away, as he has mine, ye may
find a comfort in it, when ye come to die.

God has done great things for me, for he has taken me by the hand, and led
me through the wilderness, I, and that by a hand of love, and not by an iron
rod.

She sent for a neighbor, and said, in love I send for you, and in love I
desire you to serve Jesus Christ. O but you cannot by your own strength: but he
will give you strength, if you can lay hold on his Promises, ye are of a good
nature, but do not let men, and company abuse that; but serve God, and he will
lead you through the wilderness by his hand when ye come to die, as he does
now me; and therefore serve him; naturally you cannot, but he will give you
strength. O search the Scriptures for there you will find eternal happiness,
I hope you will, and if God give you strength to do it, then he will bless
you, and also bless your family: I pray, remember the words of a dying
neighbor; I pray God you may.

A friend asking how she did, answered, I do well, I have no pain; but joy,
and peace, and comfort. A friend coming late at night, asking her, how it was
with her, she answered, I am well, I praise God, and have a full assurance and
accomplishment of all the promises made good, holding up her hand, being the
last friend that visited her that night; The Doctor coming to see her, said,
God catches some, and some he draws by degrees. I find that, said she, for I
am going to Christ.

After a kind of trance, in which I thought she would have departed, she said,
Sweet heart, Satan and I had a bout just now, but I got the better of it, for I
got hold on Christ, and would not let him go.

A little while after, lifting up her hands, after another trance, she said, O
Christ, and by and by, O Christ, and again with a softly voice, O Christ, I
will not let thee go, and about a quarter of an hour after, being a little
before she died, I asked, if she had Christ and her comforts still, she
answered, I I, which were the last words she spoke.

FINIS.
Christian friend, I pray, mend these faults, which happened in the printing.

Page 26. line 18. for settled. read situated. p. 29. l. 22. for rivers. read
river. p. 73. l. 22 for death. read deaf. p. 100 l. 12. read. conceive Christ.
p. 100. l. 17. for with seeing. read, where he saw. p. 182. l. 15. leave out
with. p. 186 for a ship. read make slight. Many faults more you will find, and
them it may be mine.


