Mr HVMPHREYS SECOND VINDICATION OF A Disciplinary Anti-Erastian, Orthodox,
Free-admission TO THE Lord's Supper, Taken into Consideration, in a Letter
occasionally written By Mr Blake Pastor of Tamworth, AND By a Friend of Truth
made public.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Abel Roper at the Sign of the Sun in
Fleetstreet, near St Dunstans-Church, MDCLVI.

TO THE READER.
THe ensuing Letter, with the Answer falling into my hands, and finding Mr
Blake (to whom I owe much) so much concerned in them, and the truth, to which
all owe most, most of all interessed; I have taken the boldness to make them
public. Mr Humphreys seems much to value his judgment, (as indeed it is to be
valued) and I believe that thou will see that it is to be equally valued, where
he dissents from him, as, where he agrees with him. It is the thoughts of some,
that his Arguments have not been satisfyingly answered, insomuch that there is
no small triumph with many, who are resolvedly on his party. If now it shall
appear by that which follows (referring to that which in a larger Treatise has
been already published) that, though it should be granted, that he had spoke
much to his adversary, with whom he is especially engaged; yet, the cause is
not by him notwithstanding gained; the Authors pains may well be deservedly
acceptable, to all those that with him are dissatisfied with promiscuous
Administrations, however there be not that full and desired agreement in the
way in which they oppose it. If the cause be propugned (as by our Author it
is) let not any be troubled that it is not done with his weapon; Sure I am,
that not a few truly pious and judicious, profess already much satisfaction. In
conclusion it is left to thee aequa lance to determine, by which party Truth is
most advanced, and which way fairliest tends to set up the Ordinance in it is
due honor, with the peace and comfort both of the Dispenser and Receiver,
which was the whole design of the Author, as it is the hearty desire of

Thy Servant in any Christian office S. E.

For the Reverend Mr Thomas Blake Minister of Tamworth.
REVEREND SIR,
HAving lately Printed a little Piece of Mr. Humfrey's, being a second
Vindication of a free Admission to the Lords Supper, and knowing how much he
values your Judgment, both by the frequent mention he makes of you in his
Book, and also by what I have formerly heard him discourse of you, I have taken
the boldness to present you with one of them, desiring one line from you, which
may signify you have received it, and how you approve of his endeavor in it,
I am sure I shall gratify the Author by giving him some account of your
thoughts, and you will in giving me the opportunity much oblige,

Your loving Friend and Servant EDWARD BLACKMORE.
Sir, What Errata you meet with in the Book, you must ascribe to the Authors
absence.



These for Mr Edward Blackmore Stationer at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard.
SIR,
I Have received that Book of Learned Mr Humphreys, which you were pleased to
send me by our Carrier; for which I give you hearty thanks; I have taken the
first occasion that my business would suffer, to read it over; but as for my
Judgment, which you desire of the Work, it is not of that worth as to be
regarded; being made public, it will undergo the Censure of more piercing
eyes; To me, I confess, there is that to be found in his Writings, which is
too much wanting in the Works of many, perspicuity of style, perspicacity of
Judgment, and much Candor in expressions. If all Controversies were carried on
in this way, Disputes might be brought into a more narrow compass, but that is
not to be expected; Some, it is to be feared, do not intend it, others may
endeavor pro modulo suo, that which they cannot reach. Many Scriptures, (if I
can judge any thing) as well in the Book, as the Postscript, are both obiter,
and ex industria much cleared, which I have ever thought to have been
impertinently brought into this Dispute; yet though I must join with him (the
force of Truth evincing it) as to the acknowledgment of the invalidity of some
Arguments, and impertinency of some Scriptures, alleged against his Tenent;
yet I cannot do so, in his conclusion; But still am where I was, and must
profess my dissatisfaction; Some things in reference to my self, I shall take
the boldness to animadvert, and afterward happily offer somewhat more, very
briefly as I shall find occasion.

Page 31. Taking notice of the Title of my Treatise of the Sacraments, viz.
[The Covenant sealed] he says it is in reference to my former [The Covenant
opened] But if that Treatise did open the Covenant, and this Seal it, then
this does again conceal, obsure, and darken it: For that is the use of sealing
as it opposed to opening, as I have showed, Treat. of the Sacram. Page 327. I
had thought that all would have known, that this Title [The Covenant sealed]
had reference to that which I expressed in my former Title Page [The Covenant of
God entered with man-kind] There I hold forth Gods entrance into Covenant, and
here his sealing or Ratification of it.

Page 32. He quotes somewhat out of my Treatise of the Sacraments, where I set
down the minimum quod sic in knowledge, which in my thoughts may give
admittance to the Lords Supper; But that which he quotes is clothed in his
own, and not my language: and when I go as low as I durst, and lower then
perhaps some will allow, any that strictly compares my words with his
Quotation, may see that he makes me to go yet lower then my self.

Page 59. Ad finem. He has these words [ The Sacrament is appointed for the
Church, the Church consists of unregenerate, as well as others, which is a
firm and solid probation, and is indeed that strong bottom ( as Mr Bl.
acknowledges it, Cov. Seal. p. 247. whatsoever others have said thereof) on
which not only my Book, but both his too, so far as concerns this matter are
founded] 1. These two assertions (whether we take them jointly or severally)
are no bottom on which an administration unto all Church Members,
promiscuously may be grounded; either according to Mr H. or my opinion. He puts
in his limits to exclude some Church Members, I exclude the same, and put in
limits to exclude others, though not from the right, yet from the use. 2. I
have nothing at all to say in that place, to either of those Assertions, which
he styles a strong bottom, but only to the words of his Text [ Mar. 14.33.]
on which he built his whole discourse. 3. The words in my Book indeed are
[strongly bottomed] but I intended, and so it was in my Copy [strangely
bottomed] and accordingly in the Errata it is corrected, which easily also
might be gathered from my words immediately following, where I set out not the
strength, but the weakness of that bottom; which is to be wondered, that Mr
H. saw not, seeing in his Postscript Sect. 1. he goes about a vindication of it
from the same objection that I there make against it. I there also say, that I
had in my thoughts to have given a brief answer to his Scriptures and Reasons,
and can he think that I would say, that I intended a refutation, and with the
same breath affirm that it was built upon a strong bottom.

Page 109. He assumes to himself an Anti-Erastian, Orthodox, free admission to
the Lords Table, when that is the thing under dispute, whether such admission
be Orthodox or Heterodox; And in the same place charges upon me, a kind of
Erastian indisciplinary suspension. Here I would demand, 1. Whether all be
Erastians, as to opposition of Church Discipline, that assert suspension from
the Lords Supper, (if you will so call it) by a sole ministerial power, taking
in what assistance they can for the better discharge of their duty: Were the
Fathers and Schoolmen, universally Erastian? and in their Times engaged
against all Ecclesiastical Discipline? Was the Church of England also in like
sort Erastian from the first Reformation? We have been highly charged for not
reforming Discipline, but I never heard, that we were charged for abolishing of
all Discipline; They were all (so far as I can possibly understand) of the same
opinion that I have declared in this thing; And when they were all free from
Erastianisme, how can I in following their steps, stand charged as an Erastian;
or any kind of an Erastian? How is that withholding of the Sacrament, which I
assert charged as indisciplinary? when I professedly affirmed that all that I
say must not any way be understood, as prejudicial to Church Government, or
the power of Church Censures, giving in my Reasons, withal asserting Church
Government (as I was able) with Arguments and answer of Objections; though Mr
H. plainly hints in the same place, that he thinks that he has done it
somewhat better: But I am well content that it be done, whosoever it is that
has done it. 2. That that which I have said, is not to make to the prejudice
of the Office of ruling Elders, concerning whom there has been in the Church
so hot disputes, and after some enquiry into men's different thoughts about
them, and the different bottomes on which those that do stand for them, set
them; I conclude that on what bottom soever they stand, that which I have said
can nothing prejudice them. Lastly, That nothing that I have said, may exempt
admission to, or exclusion from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in
particular, from cognizance of Church power, nor take it out of the verge of
their Censures: which may be further seen in my Treat. of the Sacram. p. 265.
to p. 272, I do not indeed make it any part of Discipline, yet am careful to
keep it within the reach of it, whereas [indisciplinary] as I suppose is that
which is without Discipline; not that which is not Discipline. Mr H. preaching,
praying, fasting, Sabbath Observations, public Collections, private
Admonitions, are not Discipline, yet I suppose that he will not say that they
may be fairly called indisciplinary. 3. Was Erastus ever so high against
promiscuous admission to the Sacrament, that he that opposes it, and would have
Ministers withold it from some, that are neither Infant, Idiot or distracted;
eo nomine suffer in his Name as an Erastian, or as any kind of Erastian. I have
not Erastus, and when I desired the Book, I could not buy it with money, and it
is now several years since I read it; But I shall appeal to any indifferent
Arbitrator to determine, whether Mr H. or I, in the point of admission to the
Sacrament, more oppose or side with him. In that of excommnication we both
differ from him, and otherwise I think he is much rather then I, an Erastian;
though I would not hastily put any such Character or Brand upon him.

Page 103. He has these words [ That there is a possibility (upon what is
said) of edification to all intelligent Church Members, though scandalous, (
Covena. Seal. p. 240.) or ignorant (p. 133.) Mr B. cannot ingenously deny.]
Intelligent, ignorant Church Members, will be the wonder of many, unless the
terms were better explained, and with some distinction further cleared. I
suppose that by [Intelligent] he understands one of the principles and use of
Reason, a man that is no Infant, Idiot or distracted person, as he is wont to
explain himself; And that by [Ignorant] he means such a one as is not seen,
but wholly or grossly to seek in Christian Mysteries; This is the most
favorable Interpretation that I can give of this strange conjunction of
intelligence, and ignorance in the same person. But when a man is otherwise
intelligent, and of as acute parts, as Mr H. can reasonably imagine, but versus
hoc, respective to Christ and Christian Mysteries, knowing nothing; I suppose
there is no more hopes of his edification in his communicating in this
Ordinance, then if he were in Mr H. his sense non intelligent If an intelligent
rational man, shall undertake the employment of a Tailor, but wholly ignorant
how to shape a Garment, such a one that knows the use neither of sheares no
needle; I shall no less keep him out of my work, then if he were an Infant,
Idiot, or distracted; And I suppose a man of parallel ignorance in Christian
Mysteries, should be in like manner dealt with at the Lords Table, according to
Mr Hs. own principles, who still yields that non-intelligent men should be
denied admittance. But Mr H. says, that I cannot ingenuously deny a
possibility of the edification of such intelligent ignorant persons by the
Sacrament. Certain it is that I do deny it, whether ingenuously or
disingenuously, I must leave it to others to determine; you or he, if you
please may consult what I have said, p. 230. of my Treat. of the Sacrament,
where you may find in the Margent these words, (grossly ignorant are in an
incapacity) viz. of edification at the Lords Table. And whereas p. 233. is
quoted (where he says I confess a possibility of such edification) I wish
that the place may be seen, and then it will soon appear, that I there speak
of edification by the Word, accompanying the Sacrament (as the objection there
made, led me to it) at the instant of Receiving, and not by the Sacrament it
self: And as to that I say indeed, I will not determine an absolute
impossibility, but withal affirm, little moral probability, or possibility;
that a man coming in his ignorance for the Lords Supper (as is there objected)
should receive such instruction, at that instant from the word; as to come a
knowing man at that time to the participation of it; and if it do happen, I say
it is to a wonder, if not to a miracle. So that this concession of mine (I
suppose) the Reader will judge might well have been spared, and when these
things are laid together, some happily will think that the most harsh of his
adversaries (as he styles some) have found more candid dealing from his Pen
then my self, whom yet he seems willing through a great part of his Treatise
to represent as of his own party.

Page 112. He is pleased to bring an Argument against me, to prove that
ignorant men are in a capacity to edify by the Sacrament, and so to be
admitted, which he also touches upon, p. 35. Were not those words (says he) of
our Lord to his Disciples? This is my Body broken for you, This is the New
Testament in my Blood which was shed for remission of sins, teaching words,
informing them of his death and mystery of our Redemption. Who can deny this?
And were not the Disciples ignorant at that time of his death and mystery of
our Redemption? Mark. 9.31, 32. Luke 9 44, 45. with Luke 24.7, 8. Joh. 20.9.
And what then will follow for the ignorant is clear. But if the intelligent
Reader please to take a view of those Scriptures, he will soon see, that they
do not show, that the Disciples were ignorant of his death; at the time of the
institution of this Supper, as is affirmed, but of his Resurrection only; And
not simply ignorant or unbelieving in the Doctrine of the Resurrection (being
not of the party of the Sadduces, and well knowing, that in this Christ had
opposed them, Mat. 22.23. Mark. 12.18.) but of his Resurrection on the third
day. They were seen in the Mysteries of Redemption, according to the measure of
the dispensation of Gospel Mysteries, in the time that they lived, and it is
not to be doubted, but that they were better seen in it, then those that at the
time of Christ's birth waited for Redemption in Israel, Luk 2.38. Those did
expect a Redemption by a Messiah in Gods way; which yet was not explicitly made
known: And the twelve might well further believe it and expect it to be by his
death whom they had received as their Messiah, though as yet they understood
not, that he should rise the third day from the dead, as those Scriptures
speak: That more dim light is therefore no plea for their blindness, that in
the clear daylight see nothing.

Page 25. Mr H. in his own defense distinguishes between the non inteligent as
Infants, idiots, and distracted, and ignorant ones, respective to their
admission to the Lords Table, affirming that it is the ignorant man's duty to
communicate: he is under an Obligation to it, whereas it is no duty of those,
that are thus non intelligent, they are upon that account disobliged. And is it
not their duty in like sort not to be ignorant? as in duty they should
communicate, so in duty they ought to be qualified to communicate: They are not
to be admitted to one part of their duty, when another part (which is greater
and more necessary) is so grossly and visibly neglected. Every one that is under
Obligation to duty is not immediately to act according to that duty. An unclean
Israelite was under an Obligation to receive the Passover, and yet not to be
admitted in his uncleanness. It must be confessed, that it is an ignorant man's
duty (bearing the Name Christian) to receive the Lords Supper, but he is to do
his duty and the Pastor to see quantum in se that he orderly do it, which
cannot be done without helping him to some precious knowledge. Suppose a
distracted person has brought himself into that condition, by his own pride,
inordinate passion, or otherwise, as I have known the case visibly of too many,
I suppose such a one is no less under an Obligation to communicate, then an
ignorant man, who by his own negligence is held in blindness: yet I believe Mr
H. does not think that in this distraction he is to have admission.

Page 100. Bending himself especially against those that look upon suspension
from the Sacrament, as a judicial Censure, he takes notice of some other
Divines that look upon it only as a prudentiall, pastoral duty; which [some]
he may well take notice to be the far greater party, especially if he look
back to former Ages, and either of both of these are his opposites, neither of
them judging his promiscuous free admission (as he judges it) to be Orthodox;
Both agree that there should be a bar, though there is not so full an
Argument, whether it be juridically to be laid, as a penalty, or incumbent on
the Pastors care, as the prudentiall discharge of his duty: I wish Mr H. to
take into consideration, how much it is that he yields to the latter, and how
much cause he has, wholly to come up to them, and not they to him: He
confesses that a Pastoral inspection into the state of the Flock is needful,
that as other Ordinances, so, this of the Sacrament is to be so administered as
that all may be edified, that actual Church Members by the Pastors care must
be excluded, that are in an unedifying condition; instancing in Infants,
idiots, and distracted. Now every Pastor that judges that ignorance obstructs
edification as well as Infancy, ideotisme, and distraction, is as well to take
care for the non-admission of the ignorant as he is for the non-admission of
the other, which (as I think) he calls non-intelligent: This is my case, and
therefore I dare not admit (and as I think I may not according to Mr H. his
principles) without some cognizance had of their knowledge that offer
themselves to communicate; having so largely (as he knows) made it appear
that such are in no present capacity of edification. Some ignorant ones I think
are not to be juridically censured, yet none that may be justly termed
ignorant, in Christian Mystries, can to their benefit (as I conceive) be
received; As for the scandalous, when Mr H. grants p. 114, 115. that a
forbearance of the Lords Supper may be advised many times to unprepared unfit
persons when we judge it Christian prudence, conducible through a more solemn
address thereunto, toward a further improvement of it to their souls, and so
may the same be asserted happily as I judge of it, (says he,) ex quadam
convenientia ob majorem reverentiam, as the Schoolmen speak in some other cases
out of the Sacrament, To which that of his p. 34. may be added, Indeed I
conceive a forbearance sometimes, for all this may be pionsly advised, upon the
account of prudence, and the solemnity of the Ordinance to do more good by it.
When he I say yields thus much, Divines that have the same thoughts, and
further think (as they believe there is just cause) that men of a profligate
course do not only meanly esteem of the Sacrament (as it appears Mr H.
thinks) and bring a hard report upon the Church where they reside, but also
declare themselves resolved against the terms or duties required in that
Covenant, that this Ordinance seals; may well believe that this prudence is
to arise to a necessity (for the right discharge of their duty) of their
present non-admission. And for Reasons that I have given, I still believe that
such have little comfort in coming; nor their Pastors in admitting, unless
they be brought to acknowledgement, and promise of amendment; And in such
cases, where there is any such work or willingness professed, this is a
further engaging Ordinance, and lays yet a greater tie upon men's spirits,
though happily it may be justly feared, that a through change through grace, is
not as yet wrought, What others have seen I know not, I believe that I have
through Gods mercy seen much fruit to my comfort, in this way of engagement of
such men, rather then to have waited till I could say, I fully believed a
through sanctifying work.

There is one assertion which Mr H. often reiterates, The same qualifications
are required to effectual prayer, and other parts of Gods worship, as to the
Sacrament; and as the want hereof puts no bar to the one, no more does it to
the other; It is manifest that the same grace is required of a person to be
accepted of God in one part of Gods worship, as in another. There is the same
outward privilege, and the same inward qualification held forth alike in the
Scripture unto this and other Ordinances. Page 47.102.105. Those Phrases of
[effectuall prayer, acceptance of God] seem to be put in for a blind. If it be
understood of efficacy, to present prevalency in prayer, or acceptance of God
to salvation, then it is not to be doubted, but the grace of faith and
repentance are required in our attendance on all Ordinances appointed of God.
But will Mr H. say, that like qualifications are required in all Ordinances for
the attainment of any benefit or profit in them, which is the thing in
question, he will then meet with many dissenters: If this be his judgment,
then as soon as he puts his Child to his Catechism, he must take him to the
Sacrament: And as soon as with his approbation any Child comes to be
chatechised; he must call on him, or his Parents for him to come also for this
Sacramental Communion. Will he affirm that the same qualifications are
required in one that feeds on Milk, as in him that feeds on strong Meat: I am
sure that the Apostle was not of that mind, Heb. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. Nor yet our
Savior Christ, Mark. 4.33. Christ did prudentially consider the qualifications
of his Disciples, and upon account of their deficiency held them off for a time
from some higher duties, Mat. 9.15, 16. Luke 5.37.38. And St Paul advises the
like prudence, Romans 14.1. If there be no more expected in a Communicant then is
of each person in their respective addresses to all other, even the first
leading Ordinances, and all Ordinances call for equal abilities in every one
that profits by them, I think most Pastors have hitherto much erred in their
judgment, and more is needful to be spoken then yet has been said by Mr H.
for the rectifying of them: and till that be made known, a further care I think
is required in Pastors, then as yet by him is willingly confessed.

In the mean time Mr Humphrey's candor is by all to be acknowledged, and much
magnified, in giving so much reverence and respect to those whom he judges in
this thing to be his greatest adversaryes, Which by them indeed is so highly
deserved, and especially his tender respect had both to such Pastors that
differ from him in opinion; and the people committed to them, expressed in his
Postscript Sect. 9. Professing himself to reverence the piety, zeal, and pains
of many Ministers that prudentially take this occasion to look into the state
of their Flocks, for their admonition and institution, And bewayling as he
says the frowardness and offwardnesse of most unto so easy a submission,
utterly disliking at the bottom of his heart the spirits of such Christians,
who either out of consciousnesse of their own ignorance, or haughtiness of
their minds, will be contented to be deprived of the Sacrament, rather then
give an account of their Faith to those that ask it in the spirit of meekness
for their edification. This I cannot but note for his honor, heartily wishing
that all that approve of his judgment would be followers of him in this
likewise. Taking to heart his pious advice, that they do not run their Souls
upon their great spiritual disadvantage. Thus I have endeavored, as briefly
and plainly as I can to satisfy your desires. Let all due respects I pray you,
as you have opportunity be tendered to him from

His and your loving Friend THOMAS BLAKE.
Tamworth July 15.
FINIS.

