A BLOODY FIGHT IN IRELAND: BETWEEN, The Lord Deputies Forces, and the Earl of
Casclehaven's; Wherein, were 1300 killed and taken prisoners; the whole Army
routed, and all their Ordnance, Ammunition, Bag and Baggage taken.

ALSO, Major General Masseys advance into Brunt Island, against the Lord
Generals Forces, the manner of the Ordnance playing for three days together:
And a perfect Narrative of the proceedings of both Armies.

TOGETHER, With Major Ceneral Montgomery's advance Westward, and what happened
upon our Forces march to meet him.

Published according to Order.

June. 16th. LONDON, Printed by R.W. for George Horton. 1651

The persect Copies of several remarkble Letters, sent from very eminent
persons in Scotland.
SIR,
I Know your expectations are much raised concerning us; all ears are greedy to
hear something from hence, that may give rest to their dis-setled hopes. But it
will be our wisdom to reflect upon former experiences; It was never better with
us, then when we were stripped of al human advantages, and in a submissive
posture of waiting upon God. That has been our old Refuge in all our straits,
and we always found it to be of blessed use. It may not seem strange to any,
that we are exercised with difficulties and disapointments; Thereby God has
manisested forth his glory, and accomplished his great desines. Some hasty
spirits may think it too too late, ere we enter upon Action: But to such we
say, that we have learnt to hang upon our God, and to observe his Providence.
When the Enemies motion gives us an opportunity, we shall not be backward to
make use of it. We have received very credible information, that they are very
near unto some sudden Atempt; The common fame is for England; but we cannot tell
what to judge of it. Their Parliament yet continues; nothing of moment has
been produced; A late Act is put forth, for the bringing in often thousand
Bowls of meal into their stores at Sterlin. There is much endeavoring to
repeal the Act of Classes; but it is not effected; the K. is unwilling to
disoblige any P^r^y; or to do that which may occasion Factions and
Animosities. Besides the Levies that are going forwardin the North, they are
busy in raising men in the West to recruit their Army. We have at last
condescended to return their Records unto them; They would have done us little
good, and some blemish might have lien upon us, they pretending a breach of
promise. We are very sensible of little miscarriages, though their dealings
toward us are very unhandsome. Yet, we believe that Wariston will not again
return unto them, he dis-relisheth their present conjunction and designs; and
he will either retire into some corner within our Quarters, or else get a pass
for Foragin parts, Col. Cowper a Nottinghamshire Cavaleir, is gone unto the
Enemy, and they have bestowed a Regiment upon him, Colonel Alured is also
commanded hither out of Galloway and the horse that were Eastward at Dunbar,
etc. are come to Edinburgh, and are in their Tents between Edinburgh and Leith.
The Enemy contiruis yet in their Leaguer in Sterlin-Park: they are still
raising men Northward, and also as many as they can from the West; which speaks
as if they intended a party for the security of Sterlin, and their Body for
England,

Edinburgh, June 5. 1651.
The true Copy of a Letter, from an Eminent Commander in the Army.
SIR,
SOme few days since, a party of Scots horse (about a thousand in number) fell
into some of our out quarters, and took diverse horse, and some few prisoners;
Whereupon, we having about 60 Wagons out; which were sent with a small Convoy
to carry provisions to Boyhal, we were doubtful lest those horse should have
notice of them, and so surprise them: Hereupon, by order from the General, some
Regiments were appointed to be drawn out, to secure the said Cariages, in case
the Enemy should attempt any thing against them; but before they had marched
many miles, they met the Wagons returning, having safely delivered the
provisions: But the Enemies design was against Conworth, where they took a
whole Troop of Dragoons horse which they found grazing without any Guard; but
the Captain and his men are all in safety. The King of Scots is still at
Sterling, where there is a Committee of War continually sitting. They are still
purging the Officers of their Army, and have put out the Earl of Wems, and put
in a notorious Cavleir to command in his place. Middletons additional forces
are not yet come up, till when, it is conceived, that Lesley will not march
with the Van, lest they should leave those parts too naked. They have not
hitherto made any attempt against us, but if our forces use means to invite
them to engage, they will have one trick or other to divert it. There is great
want of money amongst the Scots, and Committees sit in each County to collect
Assessements, but the people are very backward in their payment. The King and
Parliament have agreed to null the former Act against Malignants, and concluded
that the name of Malignant should be buried in Oblivion; and do take in those
Cavaleirs now, that formerly were made incapable by that Act. The Town of
Dundee has contributed largely to their Kings assistance, and given him a very
stately Tent, and six Brass pieces of Ordnance; and have also at their own
charges, raised him a complete Regiment of horse. Massey is very active, and
has invented diverse Fireworks, and other warlike Engines, and is also
contriving to make several great Guns of Leather, to be always with the Horse.
He does likewise employ men to make certain Fireworks to be carried on the top
of their Pikes, to gall our horse with, when they attempt to charge them, with
diverse other destructive instruments; thinking with the help of these, to
destroy us; but our trust is only in the Lord, who is of power to abate their
pride, assuage their malice, and confound their devices.

Edinburgh, June the 7. 1651.
Another Letter from a person of good Quality.
SIR,
THe last Lords day in the morning, we had an alarm in our quarters, from the
Scots, whom we heard were abroad with a strong party; And we were informed,
that they intended to seize upon our Magazine and Garrison in Hamilton;
whereupon it was concluded at a Council of Officers, that Commissary Genesis
Whaley, with six Regiments of Horse, should secure that Garrison, which he forth
with did, and brought off all the men, Ordnance, and Ammunition, the Enemy
facing them all the time, yet not daring to attempt any thing against them. The
Scots have generally taken the Sacrament, and their King has given Sir Robert
Montgomery commission to raise forces in the West, who came as far as
Kilmenock, and Dumfrize, and took diverse Dragoon horses which were negligently
left at grass, and some few prisoners; but hearing of Major General Harisons
advance, he made no stay in those parts. A party of our foot were designed for
Brunt Island, but the Enemy having intelligence thereof, Massey was commanded
to secure that Island; Admiral Dean, has continually for three days together
made about 100 shot against the Royal Sconce, and received as many from them,
but neither of them did much execution; We daily expect to engage with the
Enemy, but there is small probability they will be drawn to it, unless
necessity compels them thereunto.

Edinburgh, June the 9. 1651.
The Copy of a Letter from Ireland.
Sir,
I Received yours of the 18 of May, and it is a great comfort to us, to hear
your affairs go on so prosperously in Scotland, for the Enemy reported here
clean contrary. In my last, I certified you, how the Lord Deputy Ireton had
taken the field, and that he was marching with a gallant Army against the
Rebels; who hearing of his advance, declined engagement, and endeavored to
weary out our men with tedious marches; but they being old soldiers, and
i^ur'd to hardness, were rather sttengthened then tired: Insomuch, that Cast
ehaven (who commanded in chief) seeing they should be necessitated to fight,
chose out his ground, and expected our approach: Our Army being all come up,
they were drawn into a Body, and fell pell-mell upon the Enemy; the Fight
continued very fierce for two hours, but at last the Rebels began to retreat,
and give ground; which our men perceiving, persued them so fiercely, that they
totally routed their whole Army: We had not numbered the prisoners at the close
of my Letter, but I conceive there was about 500 killed upon the place, and some
7 or 800 taken prisoners, amongst whom were diverse persons of quality,
Castlehaven himself very narrowly escaping. We also took all their Ordnance,
Ammunition, and Wagons, and persued them (doing execution) to the Lady
Dungerveys House at the mouth of the Shannon. My desire to be the first that
should present you with these glad tidings, made me impatient to wait for
particulars; but my next shall present you with a perfect List of the Officers
Names, and the number of men and Arms that were taken. Entreating you to excuse
the haste of

Your friend, H.O.

FINIS.

