BLOODY BABYLON DISCOVERD. Or, the Mystery of Iniquity Revealed, Written long
since.

And now Published for the Instruction and Information of Great Britain in
general; more particularly intended for that once Famous Flourishing, and, for
Civil Government, Admired Honorable City of LONDON.

By CHRISTIANUS LONDINATUS.

Melius est inter Barbaros sub specie Captivitatis esse liber, quam sub specie
liber^atis esse Captivus.

Salv. de gub. Dei. Quaerendum est mihi apud Barbaros Angliae humanitatem, quia
apud Anglos barbaram inhumanitatem far non Possum.

Salv. If thou warn the Wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor
from his wicked way, he shall dye in his Iniquity, but thou have delivered thy
soul.

Ezekiel. Chap. 3. verse. 19. Printed in the year 1659.

The Mystery of Iniquity REVEALED.
AS the Compassionate bowels of a tenderly-affecting father toward his Sons
(though refractorie, in their demeanours; un-naturall in their returns of
expressive unsonne-like disobedience, for his dear expressions of a father-like
affection) still continue wooing, with intermixed sighs and tears, those
obstinately wicked Children, (Nature working, as it were against Nature) his
natural affection, as a father prevailing over his angry inclination, by
nature as a man; with weeping Rhetoric, persuading their return from those
self-destroying paths: By such winning means, inviting them, to the avoiding
of approaching misery, and enjoyment of their almost irrecoverably lo^t
felicity.

Even so, (Notwithstanding these lines, like that passionately wooing-father,
only aim at the temporal and eternal happiness, of all those, (whose past
and present worst of actions, so Obvious to the World's eye, need not, argito
Monstrari, plainer words to speak the concerned Persons) because for these
lines alone, I cannot but expect, to be met with by Envy (so unwilling, guilty
men are to read their Crimes, though but in a silently speaking line); pursued
by Malice (ill requital for really Conferred favors, to return discourteous
persequution); and overtaken by bloody revenge, though perchance, palliated
with that false and cheating veil of new-minted Law and Justice, (strange men
to endeavor the ruin of those, whose endeavors tend only to the
preservation of them from Ruin!)

My inward thoughts, Notwithstanding all these Contrary persuading dangers;
inhumane and un-christian requitalls; inclined me to a passionate Compassion of
my dearest Country, still (by the prevailing rule-lesse, overruling,
bloodily-destroying faction of that head-lesse, dismembered thing, falsely
styled Parliament, with the additionall treachery of some stupid passivenesse
of others) grasping those flames which already have sensibly destroyed their
once flourishing peace, consumed their formerly-happy government, into an ashy
heap, and ere long unavoidably will render each particular man, abounding in
nothing, but in the abundance of misery; wanting store of all things, but of
want; unhappy, even beyond the addition of greater unhappiness; being already
become Obedientiall slaves to the peremptory Commands, Wills, and Pleasures of
irrational, irreligious, lawless, blood thirsty, and Sacrilegious men; these
having, under unjust pretenses of freeing them from a former falsely-supposed
tyranny, freed them from hopes of being what formerly, (by virtue of the Law's
Protection) they were, Freemen indeed.

To this purpose, by the assistance of the God of Heaven, who is my shield,
buckler, and defense, now even while it is yet day; before the approaching
night of darkness overspread these three Kingdoms, with a general Cloud of
destruction; I shall, (by drawing the Curtain of error, which has overcast
the Judgments of the most, even to the visible deprivation of that
distinguishing Character between men and beasts, REASON) endeavor hominem
homini ostendere, show unreasonable man, himself in the glass of reason
again; dispelling also that thick Misty veyl of Atheism, (for it is no better,
let them give it what seeming The Cause of God.
Saint-like Title they please) which many, with as much boasting Confidence put
on, as if it were the white Robes of Christ's Righteousness. The Pulpit too
often wilfully declaring the irregular faction of that Monstrous House,
impudently Promulgating Painted Truths, which indeed are no other than real
falsities, and many people (but I hope ignorantly) embracing them instead of
Substantial verities, being lead by these Independent Pratlers.
Lights, which like the last blaze of a spent Taper, quickly vanishing, leaves
them as lost men in the dark, in stead of that glorious Sun of Light, (Christ
Jesus) whose unmixt pure beams, apparent only in his revealed will, (the holy
Scriptures) are the directing means, able alone to guide them to that
celestial place, where there is eternity of light for evermore.

And because these Kingdoms (notwithstanding those many Recipe's for spiritual
diseases, left us by the Physician of our souls in the Cabinet of the
Scriptures, and these repeated in almost a daily application by true Protestant
Divines, his faithful servants) continue still sick of obstinately progressive
sins, which, like insensibility of a disease in a diseased man, is a sure
presage of destruction.

I shall, by reviving some medicines proper for our present distemper (for what
are truely-Orthodox Books, but like Physic to consuming bodies, as so many
restoratives to a languishing Nation?) endeavor the recovery of them to a
re-possession of their former peace, now breathing their last: The re-enjoyment
of truth, Gospell-truth, lost almost under a confused heap of Heretical,
Schismatic, and Atheistical errors; and the return of their not-long since
admired plenty, now declining into a necessitous, and almost unavoidable
poverty.

But because man is but a dully persuading Orator, unless the God of spirits
speak effectually also to their obdurate hearts; Therefore,

O thou Omnipotent, Omniscient, All-working Lord God, the fountain from whence
streameth every good thing, in whose hands are the hearts of all men, and can
turn and wind them at thy pleasure; Cause all the people of England, Scotland,
and Ireland to return unto Thee, by an obedientiall subscription to thy
everlasting truth, and a practical obedience according to its direction: In
exchange for their hearts of stone, give them, O Lord, hearts of flesh,
mollifi'd by thy gently, yet prevalently, malleating Spirit. Throw down all
those bulwarks of prejudice, raised against the truth of Reason, and the reason
of thy religious Truth. Level, O level, those high-built Forts of perverse
resolves, wilfully to persist in ill-begun courses, because success for a time
waits upon attempts; as if the commanding bloody Sword had (by its prevalency)
power as easy to create new commandments, and evangelicall truths, as by
treachery, dissimulation, tyranny, and oppression, it has had, to overthrow an
ancient Government; and, as if a short prosperity in wickedness were the
certain mark of those that travel in the high way to eternal happiness: When
as thou, O Lord, have said, Psalm. 92.7
that though the wicked spring as grass, and the workers of iniquity do
flourish, yet they shall be destroyed for ever? Summon them by the effectually
sounding Trumpet of thy Spirit, to a condescension to thy blessed will and
pleasure, which is but their reasonable service; and cause their returned
answers to speak nothing, but, O Lord God most merciful, we prostrate our
selves at thy feet, and confess our former numberless number of sins, of
rebellion against thee our God, in sleighting thy precepts, in fighting against
thine Anointed Servant, our Sovereign and supreme Governor the King; in
destroying our fellow subjects, their persons and estates, which we should have
preserved, offending contrary to the principles of our Religion, the practice
and commands of Christ Jesus, and the established Laws of England. For all
which, we repent, we repent, we repent, and cast our selves into thy arms of
mercy. Thus do, good Father, to all such, who have erred and gone astray from
thy paths; and this even before thy battering decree, for an everlasting
destruction both of soul and body, issues forth. And all this grant for the
only merits of thy Son, our Savior, Christ Jesus.

Because in the original of this bloody Rebellion, the plot (like the former,
and, until now, unparalled- Powder Plot) Gunpowder-Treason.
was laid so deep under ground, covered over with more seemingly innocent
materials, to make it thereby more invisible to the eye, That indeed being
intentionally this very design acted; and this, but that conspiracy actually
effected. In the first were combining Papists, fighting under the bloody
Banner, and obeying the commands of Antichrist, the Pope. In the second are
pretending Protestants, being such only, nomine, non re, making use of the
same Papisticall and Antichristian bloody principles, means, and method; both
of them obedient children of the same father of lies, the devil, and enemies
to the Gospel of Christ Jesus. In the first, they resolved at one blow, by
their suddenly consuming powder, to destroy Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regionem,
Religionem; but execution was, by the miraculous mercy of the God of Heaven,
prevented. In the second, These, with a kind of unthought-of whiter Powder,
(Pretenses of a glorious Reformation, and setting Christ upon his Throne,
Christi nomine armati, tamen con^ra Christum dimicantes) have, by the
permission of the same God, now displeased and angry with a sinful people,
actually brought to pass; and accordingly have ruined the King's Majesty,
destroyed our Government, Religion, Laws, and Liberties. But, How long, Lord,
how long? will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire? See,
O Lord, we are all thy people; Isa. 64.9, 10, 11.
thy holy Cities are a wilderness, Zion and Jerusalem are a desolation. Our
holy and our beautiful houses where our fathers praised thee, are destroyed,
and our pleasant things laid waste. O remember not against us former
iniquities; let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very
low.

Because this Rebellious Design in the beginning, was, I say, a mystery to
most of the common people, I shall now unveil it, that so all such who formerly
have been misleadd, or still ignorantly persist in such bloody ways, may
return, repent, and do their first works, lest God come against them in
judgment in this world, and they receive the reward of Traitors with Faulks,
Percy, and their accomplices, here; or, with Corah and his company, be in an
instant swallowed up into an eternal grave.

Because former, ancient, and mere, or, if you will, Athesticall Politicians,
like your Watermen on the Thames, seldom or never directed their faces the
same way they steered their courses, until they were arrived at the pretended
end of their short voyage, their primarily resolved ends: And in regard our
modern Politicians have walked in the self same paths, trod those very steps,
with this addition only, that they have gone beyond all former Presidents, in
their excessive and accumulative wickedness, themselves being become the only
black and bloody copies, for the imitation of the worst of men in future ages:
yet, if it be possible, these times (which cannot easily find place in my
belief) can produce a generation of men so impudently bad, that will not look
pale, and start at such unparalled patterns of superlative villainies,
reserving choice of them for their exemplary presidents. For, in respect of
comparison,

I challenge the whole world, since the reduction of the first rude Chaos into
an orderly division, until this new Chaos of Anarchicall confusion, in these
days of ours; Let the best traveling brain therein, whose busy studies have
been only Historically employed, in collecting the successive vices of all
generations; let him sum up all those collections, and out of them abstract the
quintessence of Hypocrisy and Ambition, the poison of Rebellion and Treason,
the rancour of Envy and Hatred, the venom of malicious Murderers, and of all
other conglomer ata facinora, monstrous sins, heinous crimes that ever were
committed, and let him contract the spirits of all those into one entire heap,
nay, let him by his chymicall brain once more distill the quintessence of that
hypocritical and ambitious quintessence, the poison of that treacherous and
rebellious poison, the venom of that maliciously murdering venom: yet after all
this, the comparison will not hold in the least proportion. These worst and
latest times, by their over-ballancing ponderous weighty crimes, will mount
those lighter faults of former ages into the air. Tam ingeniose sumus literis
diabolicis diserti; men are grown such proficients in destructive bloody
doctrines, and diabolical actions. Thus, Lord, are sinners, by addition of sin
to sin, and aggravation of that addition by an obstinately continuance therein,
become incomparably sinful. But, Father of mercies, reward us not according to
our deserts; but spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed
with thy most precious blood.

Now at last, and the better to make a progression in my intended purpose, I
shall show you the method of these latter Politicians, styling themselves
Christians, agreeing with the former professed Atheistical ones, with the
premised addition, that these titular Christians have out-stripp'd the
antiquated Atheists, in their most unchristian, hypocritical, and bloody
practices.

To this end I shall, by a seeming way of propounding questions, give a
resolution to all unprejudiced eyes and ears in that respect.

Can any age afford a people, professing so seemingly well, and acting so
really desperately ill?

Review the then Petition, December. 1642.
accompanying that grand Remonstrance, or rather that plotted foundation of
sedition, laid purposely for other intended superstructures, to cheat the
common sort of people into an assisting conspiracy; there you shall find them
petitioning for the uniting of all loyal and obedient Subjects: Who are these?
but Subjects by the Law declared to the supreme Governor, the King.

Obedient Subjects, that join together in the same fundamental truths, against
a Popish faction, who had (as in the Declaration is pretended) a resolution to
alter the Religion of the Kingdom. Who can these be? but true Protestants of
England, the only prevailing parties against the Popish and Jesuitized
strongest holds: Yet in their united actions, and doctrinall principles, how do
these two factions join together against the real Protestants, who only
maintain truths fundamental against Jesuiticall, Heretical, and Schismatical
tenants; witness the new-coined distinction of these Jesuitized factious
persons, between the Kings Vertuall, and Personal power.

To this purpose, how have they bawled out their pretenses, of fighting for the
Kings personal defense, yet brought Armies to fight against his Person; an
Argument left only to be maintained by the cruel, yet silly
non-distinguishing Bullet, or others, as irrational as it.

How often have they in their Pamphlets declared, that they only took up Arms
against his Majesty's evil Council; when as they could produce no witness,
nor example of any Counsel, that was evil, unless it were ill for a man to
be Rational, a Christian, or a Loyal Subject?

How have they (Notwithstanding their Declarations, of making him a most
Glorious King, excelling all his Royal Predecessors, First Collect. Ord. Par.
F. 21.
Protesting to maintain his Honor Crown and Dignity, yet) baited him with
Propositions altogether destructive to his Honor and Power as a King; 19. Prop.
the end of their taking up of Arms, appearing nothing less then the end of
their pretenses. Unless they intended thereby, (as indeed some of them have
done) to make him a Glorious Saint in Heaven. And all this, nay more than this,
acted, not by heathens, who knew no better, nor by professed Papists, whose
rebelliously-religious Principles teach no better; but, by
Pretending-Protestants!

O let not this be told in Gath, nor published in the streets of Askelon; lest
the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, and the Daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph.

How have they rattled out Resolves, to maintain the established Laws, vid.
Collect Ord. Parl.
especially, that part thereof, which concerns the liberty of the Subject?
View all their Declarations; not one but speaks somewhat to that pretended
purpose.

Nevertheless, how have they in the beginning, and progression of their
design, trod down all appearance of Law? Witness their unjust imprisonments,
Sequestrations, Taxes, and Excise, and many more illegal squeezing Engines;
Contracting the liberty of each particular subject by a written Law, his own
Right, into the narrow Compass of some few men's unwritten Lawless Wills; nay
Is not the Liberties of Nineteen Parts of the People of Great Britain,
swallowed up by an One twentieth? who revell it in Libertinism, upon the Ruins
of their liberties, and the unjust possession of the Estates. Handling Englands
liberties Confirmed.
Magna Charta, so absurdly in their furious and hot declarations, that, like
Parchment against the fire, it is now shrunck up almost to a Nonappearance.

How have some men of all degrees actively contributed their assistance in Men,
Money and Plate, upon invitations literally different from the ends of these
Eradicating Conspiratours? although, I must acquaint them, upon no real
grounds of Reason, Religion, or Law; but my Charity tells me, they were
abused by such specious pretenses, into such ill actions.

Witness that Ordinance of the 12th. January, 1641. whereby Skippon was made
Sergeant Major General of London, who commanded the employment of the Trained
Bands for the real (they are the words of that Ordinance) good Service of his
Majesty, the Parliament and City; according to his Duty, Protestation, and
Laws of the Land. --

Fine words truly in appearance! but deeds lurking under, as black as hell.
Witness the progressive and Conclusive part of their ugly Design.

Again, 19. Prop. Coll. Ord. Parl. page 173.
in their Declaration of the 5th. of May, 1642, concerning the Militia; all
men's obedience is invited to the Execution of their Commands, according to the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; as they tender (says that Ordinance) the
upholding of the True Protestant Religion,

The safety of his Majesty's Person --

And his Royal Posterity, with the Peace of the Kingdom --

Alas! what fundamental laws do they mean? Aerie laws surely! whose
existence is no where to be found, but in their mere verbal asseverations; and
that also in a real opposition to those Laws, whose Established foundation
(as Laws indeed should) plainly appear to every Loyal Subject's Obedientiall
eye.

True Protestant religion (says the Ordinance) -- But more truly, Erroneous
Protestant religion, falsely by them styled True; whose practical principles,
overthrow the principles of all religious truth, and fight against the
practical piety of the true Protestant Religion Established, and the practice
of all the primitive Christians, and truly-Christian Mr. John Bradford. advised
all to be obedient to the Queen, and by no means to resist. vid. Book Martyr.
fol. 1491. 1477.
Martyrs.

Safety of his Majesty's Person, and Royal issue!

Dangerous safety of their Royal Persons, whose security must depend on the
sure rock of Certain danger, opposing Armies (under pretense of their
preservation) with ready-drawn Swords, and surely-destroying bullets,
endeavoring their absolute ruin.

O strange Paper-protection, vain and weak! from a pretended hazard, of being
untimely deprived of life; thus to expose them to a real danger, of an
unnatural Death.

Peace.) Stranger peace! whose fruits must be a bloody war, Ord.
and its effects nothing but murder, perjury, sacrilege, oppression, tyranny,
and, indeed, a general poverty.

Kingdom. A dumb Kingdom without a speaking King; Ord.
) or rather, (to expound their then intended monstrous sense, mystical only
to the common people) a deformed Anarchy, in place of an unparalle'd Reformed
Monarchy.

But, O Lord of Hosts, that judge righteously, Jer. 11.20.
and tryest the reins and the heart, grant them sudden repentance, or let thy
servants see thy vengeance on all such obstinately persisting sinners; for unto
Thee I have, and shall, open Great- Brittain's cause. Consider, Isaiah 29.13.
O Father, how these people seem to come near to thee, the God of truth, with
their mouth, and to honor thee with their lips, but their hearts are far from
thee.

Again, In the Propositions and Orders of the Two Houses, (for as yet the
Presb. Indep.
Factions, like Simeon and Levi, remained united in the bonds of iniquity) for
bringing in of Plate and Money, to maintain Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, etc. you
were all promised, (you, I mean, the contributers upon such quaintly-deceiving
invitations) that your money, so brought in, shall only be employed to maintain
the Protestant Religion, the King's authority, and his person in his royal
dignity.

A free course of Justice, Collect Ore. Parl. fol. 343. June 1642.
the Laws of the Land, and the Peace of the Kingdom -- when as in the
prosecution of their Rooting design, the irreligiously religious Turk and
Pagans, by their actions, may rather claim them as adherents to their
Principles; nay, the Jesuit embrace them as his dearest dear obedientiall
darlings, than the Protestant Church of England own them as her children.

The Kings Authority and Person after a retrograde manner by them maintained;
their Ordinances, Declarations, Oaths, and actions, speaking a denial of their
obedience to the one, and but a verbal protection only of the other;
themselves not then so much as allowing him the least protecting assistance
from any of his loyal Subjects, whose religious conscientiousnesse only
invited them to the security of his royal Person. More than this, the Jesuit
himself could not have done.

Free course of Justice (that Ordinance promises.)

Good God! what free course of Justice do they mean, when they themselves
obstruct the freedom of all Justice? and amidst their own consultations in
public, will not admit of any negative Reply, (though never so rational and
religious) which opposes the free course of their bloody design.

What Law is their guide, whose practice opposes all Law, both Divine and
Humane? I need not insert any exemplary particular proof; their own general
and palpably-known actions, speak themselves sufficiently guilty of opposing
the Law of the Land, the current of whose sense runs contrary to their
actions; not a line, almost, but enjoyneth the Subjects, not a conditional, as
they pretend, but an absolute indispensable obedience, omnibus licitis, in all
lawful actions, to our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors; not
the least tittle therein, though racked to a confession by the most
ingeniously-rebellious brain, giving them so much as a supposititious ground
for their undertakings.

And for the Law of God, How have they slighted it? the very Pulpits in many
places, thundering out defiance to the moral observation thereof, declaring
against his Majesty's defensive Arms, and his loyal Subjects obedience to
his just commands, with as much unblushing impudence, as the traitorous Presses
did in their black lying Declarations; most blasphemously (the better to
persuade others to their rebellious assistance) styling their rooting design,
The Cause of God -- when as neither Old nor New Testament, Law nor Gospel,
Prophets nor Apostles, substantially or circumstantially, gave the least
warrant for such a bloody and rebellious Invitation.

Lastly -- For I will rake no longer in this bloody puddle of Hypocrisy, but
refer the Reader to the perusal of all their Ordinances and Declarations,
published, Anno 1641, 1642, 1643, 1644. containing asseverations and pretended
protestations, to defend his Majesty's royal Person, Honor, Crown, and
Dignity, the Protestant Religion, and the established Laws of England.

And turn my discoursive Pen in a more particular manner, by way of
expostulation, to you Citizens of London -- You, quos natura diligere jub^t;
quamvis culpare ratio, religioque redar guere, imperat -- You, whom natural
affection to your City commands my affectionate pity, it being the place,
ubi primam vitalem haust auram; where I first stepped out of the dark, yet
quiet, prison of the womb, into this lighter and larger prison of a world of
miseries: Although I cannot but blame you for your irregular, irreligious,
rebellious, and bloody practices against your Sovereign, and your own Native
Country, ripping up the very bowels of your dear Mother with swords and
spears. You, I mean, who have danced after the alluring Summons of these
paper-Ordinances, or, if you will, abortive Laws; you, who have been
ignorant-adherents (for so my charity styleth you) to this root and branch
rooting-faction, cheated into a forwardly assistance of their ugly design, by
those specious pretenses formerly mentioned.

In a pretended prosecution of which, some years passed, you Entrenched your
City, raised your Bulwarks, consumed both your time and estates, for the better
security of your selves, and safety of your City, as relates the Ordinance to
that purpose.

But how, my dear Countrymen, Collectors. P^^.
has this been made good by you, or endeavored by the contrivers of that
Ordinance on your behalf?

Did your mudd-walls secure your City against a domineering Army of your own
raising and paying, July 1647.
resolving upon a violent entrance, if denied conditional admission? when as
some of your Citizens and others, paid too dearly for their forward, yet too
late, resistance.

Tichburn. Wollasion. Fouk, Eastwick, Andrews.
How was your City secured, when the Independent, rooting, factious Aldermen,
and Common-councellmen, sprung out of the bowels of factious
Presbyterian-Rooters, betrayed you by so dull and stale a stratagem, as any,
but such Citizens, expressing your selves witty in nothing but Treason and
Rebellion, (as senssesse, I think, as your earthy Bulwarks, though less
effectually powerful for opposition) would have resented and prevented.

What piece of treachery could be more obvious to any eye, easier to be read
without spectacles, than that?

The then-Presbyterian prevailing party within your City, and the two Houses,
unitingly declaiming against an insolently-menacing Army without, raised by the
wealth of the one, and authority, although unjust, of the other. The
Presbyterian party, by their thundering Orders and Ordinances, commanding the
Army's obedience. The Army again, not only denying obedience to their
commands, but commanding them to obey their particular contrary commands.

Now amidst this dispute, observe, observe, you Citizens, how ye were
degreeingly cheated into the slavery of the Sword, by Creatures fostered under
your own wings.

A Commanding Pack of the Independent factious Aldermen, and Common Council,
with some few conjoined Presbyterians, (who indeed like Ciphers were of no
value) must treat for a reconciliation, between the much abused City, and the
absurdly abusing, and doubly died, rebellious Army, I mean the Independent
faction of the Army. -- A quaint deceit! Was it ever known, that a known
Thief sat Judge upon the bench, to Condemn his fellow, complotting villainy? I
leave the application to each man's breast. O London, London! how wast thou
then fooled into what thou now art too sensible of, but then would nor
believe, the resignation of thy Liberty and Honor? The insolent Army the next
day after this odd kind of reconciliation (or rather Confirmation of thy
servitude) marching thorough thy streets in Triumph forgetting thy formerly
assisting Riches, and scorning thee for thy Present Pusillanimous
Condescension. And what accumulations of Taxes, Abuses, Impriso^ments, Murders,
have succeeded this, scribere dolet; or rather, the thought of them grieveth me
so much, that grief will not suffer me to mention them, but leave them to the
Consideration of the Citie's too too sad experimental knowledge.

But I proceed -- The Result of the hot Contestation of these * divided
dividers, Fresh. Inde^
Concluded in this -- That the Power of Commanding in the Two houses being at
first, thus, (as you have read) peremptorily demanded, was at last wrested from
them, by that Army whom they first gave only power to act for them as
servants, in prosecution of their first-resolv'd upon Presbyterian design --
Where, by the way, I shall only glance this Observation to the perusuall of
the moderatly-judging readers.

Members of the house Commons.
That those persons whose obedience would not stoop to the Just Command of their
lawful Sovereign, the King, though persuaded and engaged thereunto by the Law
of God, the written Law of the Land; Oath upon Oath of Alleagiance, Supreamacy,
and their own Composed and enjoined Protestation, Knowingly, Cordially and
Confessedly taken by them; are Commanded obedience to their own Creatures, and
of Commanding Masters become Servants; nay Submissive Slaves to the imperious
Propositions of their own Created Servants.

That they who in prosecution of an unchristian, unlawful, bloody design of
taking away the power of the King, justly by law and reason declared His; of
forcing away his Negative Voice in a Lawful Parliament, depriving him of the
Command of the Militia; of bloodily changing the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government from Monarchical to Aristocraticall, from Episcopal to
Presbyterian. Witness the transactions (to pass over other Treaties) of that
too-late, tedious, and most unfortunate Treaty in the Isle of Wight, in the
managing whereof neither Law, Reason, nor Religion, urged by our dear Sovereign
could work the Commissionated Treatours, or rather the factious
Commissionating, Rooting Traitors in the House, to Condescentions more than
what ran parallel and agreed with their most unjust demands of all his Regal
Power and wholly altering the government of his Kingdoms. Witness also, the
first insisted-on Proposition; wherein, Good Prince, before they will proceed,
He must, contrary to Reason, Religion, and Law, declaratorily Justify their
unjust Actions of Rebellion and treason against him, and Condemn his own Just
defense as unjust.

The prevaling faction in the Houses still upon Receipt of his Majesty's
Concessions and Answers to their demanding Propositions,) Voting Not
Satisfactory, Not Satisfactory (O fatal Word! Not) until his Princely tender
Care of his Subjects (perceiving the First Plotters.
Faction's resolutions to perfect their bloody design) and his desire of
Peace, reconciliation, and stopping of that issue of blond by themselves first
made in his Kingdoms; at last (his own Royal Interest laid aside) condescended
so much to their demands that as a King he had nothing more to condescend unto,
nor they more of his Regal Power to demand.

These men (who thus unlawfully prosecuted and persecuted his Sacred Majesty
with distroying Armies, thereby to wr^st away his lawful power upon Pretenses
of a Fundamental Law never heard of, never practiced before in the Houses, not
so much as groundded upon the least imaginary authority of Common Reason, much
less the law of the Land and the Protestant Religion, had all their bloudily
acquired power. snatched from them by Army.
those I say, whom first they empowered to offer bloody force to his Majesty
upon grounds as ayry, groundless, and unlawful; as, pretenses of Common Right,
and distribution of Justice: as if Confusion were that Right, and unparalelld
injustice were the distribution of Common right and Justice.



Some of these, I say, Parl.
were as absurdly thrust out of the House by Pride and his Accomplices, the
army's imps, birds of their own hatching; instruments of their own framing,
upon accusation of being fomenters of a New War, hinderers of Perfecting an
intended Reformation, or, more truly, of Com-pleating a pre-resolved
resolution, or rather a Jesuitized independent design somewhat more bloody than
the Presbyterian.

Thus, Deus omnipotens in aetennum Justus, Thy actions, O Lord, are all
Justice, and thy deeds Righteousness it self; Thou therefore, the fountain of
all wisdom, that do oftentimes proportion and symbolize, both for quality
and quantity, men's punishments to their Sins; thereby, by plain demonstrative
signs, inviting them to repentance; -- Grant, good Father, that all such
guilty persons thus reading their iniquities in their punishment, may repent
them of their fo mer Sins, that so thou may pardon their transgressions and
remember their offenses no more.

To this purpose, restore, O Lord, unto them, the Purity of reason as men; A
Zealous unmoved fixednesse in thy true religion the Christian Protestant faith
--; Loyalty and faithful obedience to their undoubted Sovereign and Lawful
King, Cha. -- the Second, etc. and these not verbally, but really expressed by
actions beseeming men, whose reason not humorous opinion is their guide.

By deeds befitting Christian Protestants whose Scripture.
directing rule is the unerring Word, and not groundless faincyed revelations,
the Suggestions of the deceiving Angelical Devil, and not the Persuasions of
thee, who art the God of Spirits.

By actions becoming Subjects, whose obedience without interruption willingly
follows the smooth Current of an Established Law, not hurryed along by the
tumultuous Torrents of arbitrary Ordinances, nor Obedientially swimming in the
troublesome Waters of men's Corupt wills. O Father of mercyes, whatsoever
punishments Thou, in thy Just judgment, for our manifold sins, shall inflict
upon us -- give us not over to a general infatuation of Spirit, a
benummednesse in our Understanding and Reason, lest we degenerating into the
nature of beasts with Nebuchadnezzar be designed to graze in the feilds with
beasts that perish.

O everliving God, Deprive us not of thy Candlestick, thy gospel of truth,
lest, for want of true guides, we all become blind; and, like them leading one
another, irrecoverably fall into the Ditch of everlasting destruction.

O Let not my Lord be angry, and thy Servant shall speak but this Once.

Father of Mercies, as we desire that thy word may still Continue a Lanthorn to
our feet, and thy Precepts a directing Light to our Paths; so we humbly beseech
thee, that out of thy infinite Loving kindness thou would look upon us, and
not take from us our Established ancient, fundamental Laws; That so our
Corrupt Natures may still by them be rectified, the extravagant excurrences of
our Obstinate perverse Wills and actions may be limited, lest Ambition,
Sedition, Treason, Perjury, Rebellion, Murder, Sacrilege, Regicidism, Envy,
Hatred, Tyranny, Oppression, and all manner of wickedness, becoming particular
Commanding Laws, we, like Ravenous Wolves, devour one another -- And, in order
to this great mercy, good God, restore unto us our great Lawmaker, Preserver,
and Protector, thy Servant our Sovereign, the much wronged Princely Son of a
more injured Murdered Martyred Royal Father, Cha -- the Second, of Great
Britain King etc. Put the Sword and Scepter into his hands; Place the Crown
upon his Head, Thou, who art able, and Powerful in Extremities, in this his
extremity show thy Ability and Power.

O Lord, as thou have designed him our Supreme Governor; so, in order to his
possession of thine own designed Government, prepare the hearts of all his
Subjects with submissive obedience unto him, as to thy Vicegerent on earth;
work into their spirits a sensiblenesse of their former erroneous practices
against his Royal father, and let their endeavors (for the restoration of his
Princely son to his father's Throne) evidence to the world their unfeigned
repentance for their sins, committed against Thee the King of kings, in
rebelling against their lawful Sovereign, contrary to thy indispensable Law;
the Law of Reason; and the established Laws of England.

What, Lord, although the furious Multitude, like the wild boares of the
forest, have trod down the hedge of our Government, Our Laws; and like
rebellious Waves, with mad rolling actions, locally removed the Royal
supporting pillars of our Nation? Yet thou can in an instance fyle the teeth
of the one, -- and again raise up our defending and protecting Pales, with a
word of thy Mouth; Can command back these furious Waves to their proper
Center of obedience; and again, fix our removed Pillars in their own
appointed place, there to remain like a rock immovable; O Lord, Grant these
petitions to thy poor unworthy servants, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake; O God
of our Salvation, hear us: O thou, the hope of all the ends of the Earth, give
us help against our trouble; for without Thee, vain is the help of Man --

But to return to my former Method --

I could enlarge in such kind of exemplary additions, and acquaint the World,
how several others of the first practical * rooting Faction, Presbyt.
Plotters.
have met with sinne-speaking Punishment, by the Practices of these secondugly
Rooters; how like Pinns, though supposedly rivetted for a settled Continuance,
some Presbyterians have been knocked out, and others cut off, only to make way
for more bloody Independent successors; and in this respect could
Patricularize some of all degrees, whose Lives, Reputations, or Estates, have
been exposed to the Block, Defamation, and Sequestration, by the Commands of
these Monstrous Indep. Faction.
Tyrants, who from them received their first Power of Command. Witness, --
etc. the Pallace-yard, Blood-speaking Scaffolds, and elsewhere.

But because such kind of discourses may perchance, by the over-angry Judgment
of some, be censured, as inclining to an uncharitable Upbraiding; (although my
intent herein is only like the Surgeon, who Lanceth his wounded Patients,
even to a displeased frown and angry Exclamations, to prevent the festring of
his Wounds within, which would endanger the whole body) thus, by such sharp
lines to render the cure more certain, beyond doubt of Relapse) I shall
therefore silently pass over such particular Persons, not mentioning their
Names at all; for I delight not in such Repetitions; God, the searcher of
hearts, knows that I write truth, rather wishing all guilty Conspiratours,
and Frontiers, in this rebellion, a serious and sudden repentance, (it being
the sole design of this book) than the death, Ruin, or exemplary punishment of
any, either in Estates or Persons --

Thus I have laid before you the Religious vizards, the Pious Cheats of these
rebellious Designers, and Complotting Rooters; in such plain selfe-confessing
and condemning Demonstrations, that every one that will not obstinately close
the eye of his reason, cannot but confess them undeniable truths --

Having thus far proceeded, and at this time being no less confident, than
charitable in my hopes, that all abused, misleadd, formerly of the Presbyterian
Parry, are upon a penitential return, I shall in the next place answer an
Objection, or rather show the fallacy of a new-invented Proposition, much
discoursed of by the present Ruling Rule-less Independent Faction, and
swallowed down with much ease by many, whose ignorance makes them insensible
of such digestions, or hasty-complying cowardice, altogether careless of their
Tastes -- And it is this.

That the present commanding Power exercise, Potestatem dominandi -- their
governing, but more truly tyrannizing, power, over the people of England, as
having right thereunto by Conquest, say they, having subdued them by the sword.

For the solution of which, it will be pains unnecessary to meddle much with
those Argumenta Cardinalia, Arguments primae magnitudinis, of the first rank;
at which their Plea of Conquest, at one touch (like aged tenants of the grave)
would fall and moulder into ashes.

Therefore although I cannot be altogether silent, yet I shall be but brief in
acquainting you,

That it is against the principles of all Governments, for any Party
whatsoever, by force to endeavor an alteration of an established Government,
contrary to the fundamental practice of that Nation.

Now the fundamental power of any Nation will appear thus.

Where the power of making and repealing all kind of Laws, of convening and
dismissing Councills of Life and Death, etc. are settled, received, and
practically acknowledged; there is the fundamental Power of a Nation.

Now that this Power is settled in a free-Parliament, summoned by the King's
command (without which, they could not assemble, and without whom, vide
J.Jenkens
no new Laws can be enacted, nor Old ones repealed, He being the sole
enlivener of all Law, and our supreme Governor --) is a truth, which all the
Laws of England, received and practiced, do confirm.

Again, that there is an indispensible necessity of maintaining this Principle,
That all Governments must remain as they are established, until the
fundamentally practiced power of that Nation shall change the same, common
reason will plead for me.

For consider -- In all Governments there is an empowered Party Governing, and
Persons Governed -- Now for the upholding and maintaining this Party, governing
in security, to act accordingly, and whereby they may be enabled to preserve
their Persons governed, in unity, peace, and concord; and for preventing the
ambitious combinations of seditious and discontented persons, from endeavoring
any thing, that may tend to the disturbance of the public peace; that is, both
the Power governing, and the Persons governed -- Laws are made, and those also
Penal, that such disturbers are no less than Traitors and Rebels, against
such a Constitution of Government --

Witness the good Laws of England against all manner of Sedition, J.Jenkens
Treason, and Rebellion. Nay, witness those bastard-Laws of these latter
days, not that they deserve the title of Laws; for Laws, rightly so entitled,
are only such, which receive their immediate direction from the Law of God, or
else are Emanant from some circumstantiall branch thereof, not any way standing
in opposition to the substance of the Law Divine; that is, the Ten
Commandments, and all Evangelicall Precepts; although such Laws are made and
executed by men, as instruments. But these new-minted Laws are rather,
Rapacitatis than Pacis, forced-up Bulwarks to preserve an unjust Power in
tyranny and oppression.

To this purpose, you had the military House of Commons publishing the like,
upon the Martyrdom of our dear Sovereign the King.

Their Ordinances and Proclamations, prohibiting all correspondency with, and
assistance of, his Royal Son, Now our Sovereign Lord and King.

Their erection of that high Court of Ironicall Justice, and their proceedings
therein.

Their enjoining of Subscriptions to their Engagements. All which implicitly
contain such a confessed Principle. Nay, were not this a truth essential to
the fundamental constitution of a Government, as it is, and so confessed and
maintained to be by all lawful Powers; nay, made use of by Usurpers
themselves; and the worst of such Usurpers, Rebellious Subjects; and the
bloudiest of such Rebels, those who, exceeding their cruelty in the Gospel,
not only abuse the Servants, but have murdered the Lord of England's Vineyard,
Mark 12.
pursuing his Heir apparent even unto Resolves of his death, that so the
Inheritance may be solely in their possession.

This, O God, thou have seen; O keep not silence, O Lord of our salvaion. Hide
thy servant, our Sovereign, and all his loyal Subjects, from the conspiracy of
the wicked, and from the rage of these bloody men, that compass them about
with words of hatred, and fight against them without a cause.

Were not, I say, this Principle granted, as it is by all Governments, it would
out of necessity follow, that Maxims of Rebellion and Treason, were implicitly
contained in such a fundamental constitution; not maintained, I say, that a
Government lawfully established must so remain, until alteration be made by
the selfsame fundamental Power which established the same. Such a shadowy
Government being like an Image, whose head's composed of gold, breast of
silver, thighs of brass; but all this supported only by legs and feet of
clay, easy to be uncontrollably-shivered in pieces, by the least
malitiously-seditious and ambitious touch.

Although I must confess, that when ambitiously-seditious spirits complot the
ruin of an established Government; suchlike destructive tenants as these, of
which I shall give an instance, practiced by the rebellious Politicians of our
days, are divulged to deceive the common people, and invite then to their
assistance.

As, that the two Houses may assume a power, etc. in case of the King's default
in governing.

That the two Houses have power to dispose of the Militia, in case the King
consent not, although it be to enable the One twentieth part of his Kingdom
with power, to destroy the other Nineteen parts, Himself, and Royal posterity.

That the King must consent to whatsoever the two Houses shall propound,
although never so irrational, irreligious, and prejudicial to Himself and
subjects.

That, in case his Majesty will not condescend thus, the two Houses may
exercise the Regal power, not only without him, but against him.

Pretty Principles indeed! equally destructive to people governed, as to Kings
and Governors ruling.

Nevertheless it is true, that these, and such like Tenants a these are, are
not professedly, nay, not so much as implicitly maintained by any Power
whatsoever, either just or unjust; but are only pretendedly divulged, I say,
to catch the lesse-knowing multitude into a Pecuniary and Soldiery assistance,
the better to effect the ends of such ambitious Designers.

The truth of this being made good, and plainly appearing to every willing eye
that will peruse it, and unprejudiced judgment that will remain satisfied with
reason.

Let us (with the eyes of our judicious memory, fixed upon what is already
premised) lay the Cr. Fact. Arm. House.
present ruling Power in one scale, and their Actions, Edicts, and Ordinances
in another; and then judge, whether or no the actions of these worst of men
weigh not down their own judgments, with a self-condemning weight.

For, that they have plotted, nay, effected, a forcible destruction of an
established Government, contrary to the Principles of all Governments, Law of
God, Reason, and of the Kingdom; swimming to their ends in continual streams
of English Christian blood, until at last they arrived at the destruction of
our C. R. I.
our Royal Fountain, is lachrymabile verum, too too sad a truth, so appearing
also by what I have already written.

That the same ruling bloody power, since they have had the sole power to Rule,
have declared all those to be Traitors and Rebels, in their construction,
against them, who shall oppose them in this their unjust possession of the
King's Majesty's most just Rights, and undeniable Power; their own Ordinances,
or rather bloody Acts, confirm it true: witness that cruel piece of cruelty,
murdering massacre of those Martyrs on earth, now glorious Saints in Heaven,
Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, the Lord Capell, the Earl of Derby, Sir
Henry Hiae, Colonel Andrews, and several others; whose loyal actions only
endeavored to relieve the oppressed, and restore unto us our Religion, Laws,
and Liberties, the ends of all just Wars.

In brief, take both these together in this plain undeniable Syllogism.

They are Rebels and Traitors, deserving to die an ignominious death upon the
Gallows, (this is the sense of their Ordinances, and final result of their
bloodily erected High Court) who shall disturb the * Governors or Government
of their Commonwealth, Bloody Fact.
say they.

These very persons have not only disturbed, but ruined the whole fabric of
out Government, murdered the sup ream Governor the King, destroyed the Kingdom
and its Laws, by bloody Arms, Oppression, and Tyranny.

Ergo, these are Rebels and Traitors, deserving to die an ignominious death
upon the gallows, by their own confession, practices, and commands.

Thus, Reos confitentes habetis; secundum sua ipsorum verba, fiat Justitia.
They plead guilty; may justice be done, according to their merits. Yet because,
non sanguinis homo, -- may they by repentance find mercy, etc.

Now consider (my abused Countrymen); Where are the men, who style themselves
conquerors? Or, who can be so senssesse, as well as heartlesse, to term them
so, when as, according to the construction of reason, they confess themselves
to be but Rebels and Traitors?

Indeed, many unjust Conquests there have been in the world, which truly were,
as a prudent K. James.
King styleth them, but furta regalia, latrocinia speciosa, Royal robberies,
occasioned by the boundless ambitious spirits of some Princes, who many times
have been repayed with the loss of their own Kingdoms. But did you ever read
or hear that rebellious Subjects, bloody Traitors, mounted into a commanding
power, by the mis-employed wealth, and deceived assistance of their fellow
Subjects, were ever styled Conquerors over them?

More plainly, for I would not have the people of England swallow such gross
absurdities, supposing themselves out of a just necessity engaged to subscribe
to this unjust Power. Therefore,

By way of a brief repetition, That there was at first a conspiracy and design
of changing the Government of the three Kingdoms by force, if not willingly
condescended unto by his late Majesty, Witness 19 Propositions, cum reliquis.
is so plain, that the meanest capacity cannot but condescend to it as truth.

That this design was veyled with specious pretenses, thereby to deceive the
judgments of the multitude, and create a military assisting power, I have also
made good.

That, in common reason, without these pretenses, it had been impossible for
these Conspirators to have compassed their ends, any rational man will, I am
confident, confess.

For, Can any man believe that if these rooting-Plotters in the very beginning
of this Fatal Parliament (for then it had the face of such a Court) had
declared to the World their intentions, to extirpate Episcopacy; abolish the
book of Common Prayer alter the government of England; nay to Murder the King
and Destroy his Royal offspring; infringe the liberties of their Persons and
Estates; burden them with Taxes upon taxes; and domineer only by the
Tyrannizing Sword; Can a man be so senselessy Stupid as to Suppose that any one
man in England would have contributed the least assistance tending to such
destructive ends? -- Surely not; Their Plotts had been as abortive-births, dead
in the very womb; Like letters written on Sand, invisible at the next windy
blast; and themselves had met with the reward of Traitors, in the Original of
their Treason.

But I say, they must out of a Politic necessity by Pretenses of a reformation
etc. prepare the Common people for a Compliance, and upon their deceived
Compliance, hammer out by degrees their ugly Plot to a perfection.

Away then with your most blasphemous entitling God's approbation to your
Succeeding Villainies; when as it is not Smiling Providence that waits upon
your designs, as you would make the people believe, but the Graduall Effects
of your politic Knaveries, and methodical Treasons.

Indeed, the All-just and wise God has long suffered you to deceive the people
of England, and them to be so deceived. But Gods design thereby is to Chastise
them for their instability, and disobedience, in not valuing, or else lightly
esteeming the blessings of Peace; and punish them for their not prizing the
Enjoyment of the Gospel of Peace; and that you your selves by your additionall
Sins, might be left inexcusable at that great day of Account, when the Judge
of Heaven and Earth shall pronounce that unrepealable doom, Ite Maledicti; Go,
ye Cursed, into Everlasting burnings.

Again, to make this appear more plain, take a further hint of their Rebellious
Method; which course had they not observed, they could have done nothing
tending to the acquisition of their designed Ends.

In the first place they, though falsely, suggested into the Multitude's belief,
an alteration of our religion on his Majesty's part.

And these ungrounded Pretenses made way for Jealous and Suspicious thoughts
among the Common people: and these, though caussesse, Jealousies occasion the
Multitude, constant in nothing but in Inconstancy, to Stagger in their Sworn
Alleagiance.

In the next Place, following Machiavells irreligious rule (Vehementer
increpate et aliquid adhaerebit) they back them with lying invectives and ray
ling exclamations against his Majesty, and his indeed Peaceable Just and
Merciful Government, whereby the affections of many began to totter and their
duty to shake, and their needless fears to increase.

Again, they Publicly cried up themselves, though most untruly, as Assertours,
Maintainers and Preservers of our Religion) and the Laws. And these false
allures, attract the Aguish Judgments of too too many to incline to them in
their belief, and blinded Obedience.

Again (the more to ingratiate themselves with the Common People and hoodwinck
them with Suppositions that they were Persons affecting Justice --) they Press
for Execution of Pretended Justice upon some Supposed Delinquents; who indeed
were no other, but immovable Loyal Rocks, hindering their Progressive
Rebellious Plotts. And upon this account, the incomparable Earl of Strafford,
and the unparalled Archbishop of Canterbury, (two main supporting pillars of
Church and State) were offered, as bloody sacrifices, to the common people's
ignorant zeal, and the conspirator's designs.

In the next place, they vilify the honor of the King's person, advising the
rabble of the City rudely to press into his Court, bawling for Justice, which
never was denied; and by this means, the respect and honor due to his Majesty
was weakened, the illmanner'd people, following the counsel of their teachers,
(apt scholars of their black mouthed master the devil) began to revile the
King, despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities.

With these and such like additionall insolent deportments of the City-scum,
his wearied Majesty was enforced, for his own safety, to leave London. After
which, these rooting-Plotters persecute him with dethroning Propositions, under
the notion of Reformation, delivered most commonly out of a Cannon's mouth; or
mockingly tormenting him with vid Collect Parl. Ord.
humble and loyal Petitions of Subjects, presented upon the point of a bloody
Sword -- Pretty Subjects indeed!

Thus, thus, England, thou wast gulled into a rebellious Army, to bring to
pass their Conspirator's designs, upon the score of thy own destruction, the
loss of our peace, dishonor of our Religion, ruin of the King's Majesty, and
the Laws of England.

This done, Blasphemy.
the Pulpit-Dragoons must interest the Deity in their quarrel; Rebellion must
be styled, The Cause of God -- O horrible blasphemy! as if the righteous and
all-just God gave precepts, for the commission of the most unrighteous, unjust,
Caedem faciunt Scriptur a^um ad materiam suam.
and wicked actions that ever were committed. To this bad purpose, they cut and
mangle, multiply and diminish, the holy Scriptures, wresting them to a corrupt
sense, proper only to their designs, notwithstanding that Anathema, Revel.
22. verse. 18, 19, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this book; and if any shall diminish the
words of this prophecy, God hall take away his part out of the book of life.
And by this means the poor people were seduced in matter of conscience, obeying
the politic Pulpit-directions, quite opposite to the commands of God, and
their own former judgments and practices.

All this while, Lying. Dissimu^^tion.
the rooting Engineers of State, were busily busied in abusing the King, and
cheating the people, senslesly in their Declarations, dividing the power of the
King from the King's person; as if there possibly could be (in a true sense)
the exercise of a Kingly power, without the person of a King. But seasonable it
was for them so to do, when as they unjustly made use of power without, (nay,
contrary to) his commands; and maintained Armies to fight against his Person.

Next to this, Perjury.
succeed new obliging Oaths and Covenants, correspondent to the sense of their
design, and dissonant from the legal, rational, and religious sense of all
former lawful Oaths; witness their Negative Oath, their first and second Vow
and Covenant, with their last and worst, the Engagement; all which must be as
chains to the people's consciences, with which being once shackled, many of the
Pulpits speak nothing, but a performance of these Oaths and Engagements, in the
Rooters destructive sense; as if such politic State-Engines carried more truth
in them, than the Scriptures themselves. Thus they made human policy Mistress
of Divinity, nay, to tyrannize over her. Indeed, the Scots-Covenant, as it was
styled, carried a compound sense; in some Articles speaking seemingly-loyall
and religious pretenses; but they were but seeming ones; although in other,
nothing but an enforced change of, both Ecclesiastical and Civil Government.
Which, compared with precedent and subsequent actions, even until his Majesty
was snatched away from the Presbyterian Power, Isle Wight
makes me grieve with admiration, and admire with grief, at many, who still
continue adherents to those first begun erroneous Principles, of extirpation of
Governments by bloody force.

Some affirming, strangely and falsely, that they did oppose the tyranny of the
late martyred King, but never the Title or Office; which, to my mean
apprehension, (and I could wish some of the Presbyterian party would otherwise
inform my judgment) seems to oppugn reason it self; his Majesty having,
before ever sword was drawn, granted all things necessary to the well-beeing,
quiet, and peaceable living of the lowest, as well as the highest, of his
Subjects, their possession on of their lives, Confessed by themselves, Collect.
Parl. Ord
liberties, and estates, and a just reformation in Religion: He himself having
raised such Bulwarks for us to this purpose, that nothing was left for the
people of England to desire, as additionall to their future security and
happiness. And had not this Presb.
Kingly-power rooting-partie stepped in, or, in their own irregular demands,
been but modestly moderate, these second bloodiest-rooting Independents had
never commandingly appeared to the world's eye, but England had still remained
the glory of Nations, an earthly Paradi^e, and not an habitation of Bats and
Owls, Foxes and devouring Wolves; blind ignorance, heresy, s^hism, and
Jesuiticall bloody-minded men: Besides, the former, and still wilfully
continuing Presbyterians, having neither reason in Law, nor ground in Religion,
for such their a^ first undertakings, or still continuing inolinations
thereunto, as I have already made good -- Makes me to pray, that God would
more clearly open the Eyes of their understandings and in the bowels of Christ
Jesus desire them that they would weigh all things by the balance of the
Sanctuary without interjection of the least part of a grain of Private
Interest* and affect^onate cleaving to Parties in any thing unwarrantable by
the Everlasting Standard of Gods word -- and at last return from whence they
were fallen, and do their first works.

But this by the way -- However if ^n this I have displeased any man, I ^am
Confident I have herein neither displeased nor dishonored the God of truth,
and therefore shall be bold to tell them that they do not well to be angry with
me for speaking the truth.

I return to my former Method --

Why, think you, were so many Reverend Bishops and other Orthodox Divines as
Dr. Featly, Dr. Oldsworth, Mr. Shute, with many others disgraced or imprisoned;
not because the Law spoke them guilty, but because they were as so many walls
of Brass able to Oppose their Proceedings; and would if suffered to Preach,
have informed, the people their better duties and thereby prevented the
progress of their desigues. --

Garraway.
Why were so many Lords Imprisoned, the Mayor of London, some Aldermen, outed
and dispersed unto Several Confining Castles --? Why were most of the Common
Council ^men disgracefully thrown out of the Court? But only to make way for
the more factious Spirits; who would more readily comply in their turnings and
windings with the first Moving Wheels of the Rooting-faction.

Why did they then, and still do, both admit and tolerate ignorant-Laymen to
belch out new fangled false Opinions, Heretical and Schismatic positions?
but thereby to bring the Clergy into dishonor and disrespect with the people,
distracting the brains and dividing the affections of the Multitude: well
knowing Machiavells rule divide et impera; for rebellion and treason will never
harbor in breasts united by the bond of true religion: they that
conscientiously affect Christ and his Church, will not be wrought upon to
destroy his Servants the Pastors, or any Member thereof; nor ever give ear to
such babblers, the Devill's Chaplains. --

Nay their Present toleration of all in matters of religion; Indep. Faction.
under the Pretense of having a regard to tender Consciences, is only done out
of Policy, or, if you will, rebellious Knavery; not that they intend you (after
that you have been isntrumental to their compassed Ends) such a liberty out of
a conscientious Courtesy. But hear, hear, you deceived people of England! Their
Reason is;

Lest the Ignorant Rabble (the walking isntrumental feet and active hands of
their design,) like your less knowing Papists, taking all things by the hand
of an implicit belief; should, being denied any one thing, grow into a
discontent, which (seconded with a Serious Repentance and its effects a
desertion of these Plotters, manifested by a general insurrection, their only
fears) should occasion these Rooters sudden downfall and utter destruction. For
a division in opinions and affection at first raised them a Power enabling them
to raze down Englands Monarchical government; So a unity in iniquity; a Linck'd
wicked brotherhood must settle them in this their destructive power. But, O
Lord, notwithstanding thy enemies have taken Crafty counsel against thy people,
and have consulted against thy Secret Ones; although they say, Come, let us cut
them off from being a Nation, and let not the Name of a Christian Protestant,
King or people, be any more in Remembrance; Give not thou the Soul of thy
Turtle dove unto the Beast and forget not the Congregation of thy Servants.
Consider thy Covenant; for many Places in England, Scotland and Ireland are
full of the habitations of Cruel men. Judge the Cause of the fatherless and
oppressed; Arise, arise, O God, maintain thy own Cause here, help and deliver
us. So we thy People and sheep of thy Pasture shall praise thee for evermore.

Let us descend to examples of a Lower nature.

Why, suppose you, is Lilly so much employed by these bloody Statists? but only
to unhindg the faith of the common people from adhearing to the Doctrine of the
holy Scriptures, which like a two-edged sword, would soon cut their design in
pieces; for, had the people's faith been kept to a close dependence on the Word
of God, and their actions only regulated thereby; or, had Presbyt.
others more knowing, or at least pretending to more knowledge, weighed all
their undertakings (without the addition of unbridled passion, and irregular,
though seemingly zealous, affections) exactly, according to this everlastingly
just Standard; so many formerly (now penitential men, I hope) had not then
been deceived into a rebellious Army; nor would so many continue their
Adherents at this very day.

But no wonder if those men (who first rebel against the King of Heaven, and
his Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, fight against his commands, the practice of
the whole Army of Martyrs the glorious company of the Apostles and Prophets,
the example of the holy Church thorough the whole world) no wonder if such
destroy and murder their Sovereign, God's Vicegerent on earth, and all true
Christians, and faithful Subjects. No wonder if such men, having thus forsaken
the fountain of living waters, (the Scriptures), do frame to themselves new
Cisterns, even broken cisterns of dependence on Lilly's politic discourses,
which will neither hold water upon Scripture-tryall at present, nor be able to
save or satisfy a poor soul at the great day of trial, of particular persons
at the hour of death, or that general Day of Judgment, when the world shall be
no more.

But, let me desire of all such Stargazers, and Star-believers, seriously to
ponder that place of Scripture, in the 47th Chapter of Isaiah, from the first
verse to the end, and lean no longer upon such broken Reeds, which will deceive
their dependence into a self-destruction. Babylon there had trusted in the
multitude of divinations, and the great abundance of inchanters; saying to her
self, I am, and none else; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the
loss of children, as the Rooters do. We are the only Saints, we shall
prevail. Upon no other ground, but their own strength, and the trust which they
put in their prosperous wickedness.

Now observe God's manner of denouncing his judgments.

Therefore, says the Text, verse the 11th: That is, because you have thus
sinned, in punting confidence in these Star-gazers, and forsaken me the God of
the Scars, and my unerring precepts, shall destruction come upon thee, and thou
shall not know the morning thereof; Ruin shall fall upon thee, which thou
shall not be able to put away; destruction shall come on thee suddenly
unawares --

Where, by the way, take notice, that as the Church's extremity is God's
opportunity for deliverance, when their hearts are saddest, and indeed almost
hopeless, if they consult only with flesh and blood; So, the destruction of
the wicked shall come upon them, when they are at the highest of their hopes,
and dream not of a change; then, even then, unawares, shall sudden destruction
fall upon them -- The Text says, They shall not know the morning thereof; that
is, not the time of their ruin: but after they have slept, as it were, a whose
night in security, supposing all to be settled for a continuance, by the
prosperity of their wickedness; then shall God in the morning, unthought-of,
unexpected, come against them in judgment, and destroy them in his fury.

Further, in the 12th verse, upon their approaching ruin, observe, how God
does upbraid them with their sins: Stand now among thy inchanters, and in the
multitude of thy soothsayers, with whom thou have wearied thy self, if so be
thou may have profit or strength. Let the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, verse.
13. and Prognosticators now stand up, and save thee from these things that
shall come upon thee. That is, see if these your confidents can be a preserving
skreen between you and my destroying anger. No, no, hopes of help from them are
but vain, for in-the 14th and 15th verses, see the judgment of heaven denounced
against the Star-gazers themselves; Behold, says the Text, they shall be as
stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver their own lives from
the power of the flame, etc. Every one shall wander to his own quarter, none
shall save them, etc.

Thus shall God say, Do you that adhere to the politic spirit of Lilly, and
forsake the commands and directions of the God of spirits; even in that day,
when you have filled full the measure of your sins, when the Harvest of your
full-grown iniquities is ripe, then shall God enter in with his sickle of
judgment, and cut you off; and even then your consciences shall upbraid you,
and bid you go to Lilly, in whom you have trusted, see whether he can save you
in that your extremity, try whether or no he can administer the least hopes of
comfort to your souls for the future; but all in vain -- O my brethren, there
will be sad thoughts at such a time, and at the hour of death, when your souls
are ready to take their flight from their fleshy cages -- Therefore consider of
these things betimes, before the hour-glasses of your lives are shivered into
pieces. Repent and return, in your dependence only upon the God of truth, and
his revealed will, the holy Scriptures; lest you exchange this life, for an
eternally-continuing death, with those never-dying damned in hell.

To what end, think you, were, and still are, your lying Pamphlets, and daily
flying Diurnalls sent abroad, but, like so many petty pieces of the same
deceiving spirit, thereby to continue the poor people in a disaffection to the
King, and his so just a cause, and working of them into an approbation of the
Conspirator's designs* casting in them sable lines of dishonor, on the white
innocence of his Majesty's actions; and covering over the rotten wall of their
own black undertakings, with a seeming whiteness witness that apostatizing
Politicus, alias Necum.
Lucifer, fallen from the heaven-approving height of truth and loyalty, to the
deepest hell of perjury, falsehood, rebellion, and treason; whose lines are
nothing else but lying invectives, murderers of Religion and Reason, as well as
of Royalty and Loyalty.

What, suppose you, my abused countrymen, is the reason why the Conspirators
endeavors tug so much to engage all, if it were possible, to be equally guilty
with them, some by perjurious oaths and engagements; others, by sacrilegious
barterings for the Churches Lands; some, by unjust possession of his Malesty's
Revenues and Royal Estate, with the Lands of his loyal Subjects; and not a
few Judases, Accuser of Col. Andrews, and many others.
exchanging their souls with the devil by apostasy and treachery, for a
pecuniary reward.

It is only that they may be as numerosi proditione, so form dolosi numero;
that their number may seem terrible; and what they cannot maintain as just by
Reason, Religion, or Law, they may seem to justify the maintenance thereof by
the irreligious Sword. But do thou, O Lord God of Hosts, scatter those people
that delight in war, that speak not peace, but devise deceitful matters
against the quiet of the land --. They smite down thy people, O God, and
trouble thine heritage; they slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the
fatherless. O Lord God the avenger, O God the avenger, show thy self clearly.
Lord, how long, how long, Lord, shall the wicked triumph, and the workers of
iniquity vaunt themselves? --

Lastly, I shall contract all these into a narrow compass; and, as I have
already made it appear, Indep. Faction.
that the * present ruling Powers are so far from being entitled Conquerors,
that they have confessed themselves to be Rebels and Traitors; so all others
shall affirm them (as to be such, so also) the bloodiest of Cheaters, and
State-juglers.

And this I shall do, first, by inserting a sad modern story, and then taking a
comparative notice of the parties employed, with the end of their then
employment, and these Rooting-cheaters, who would be styled Conquerors.

I have been informed, that in Ireland, at the first arise of that bloody
Rebellion, there were some of the Papisticall faction resolved upon the
surprisall of a Protestant Justice of Peace, (where, by the way, take notice,
that some of his servants were privy to the conspiracy), the death of him,
ruin of his family, and possession of his Castle. But they supposing it in
vain to attempt it by force, resolved upon a more subtle way, (by putting on
the vizor of Justice, and of former Acquaintance, upon their deceitful
intentions) thereby to compass their ends; in this manner.

The Combinators bind the hands of some of their fellow-villains, take with
them a Constable and other Officers, insensible of the plot; knock at the
Castle-gate, pretend they came for justice against these bound men. Some of the
servants, as well of the combination, as others that were ignorant of their
design (however, being both acquainted with the Constable, and many of the
rest) admit them into the presence of their Master. Which was no sooner done,
but, after some pretended flourishes for justice, they unbind their
fellow-villains, and all unanimously murder the Justice, his family, faithful
servants, and the well-meaning Constable, and keep possession of the Castle.

Now let any rational man resolve me. Do these men deserve to be esteemed as
real Landlords, when as, had they not thus pretended justice, thereby even
deceiving the Justice himself, it had been impossible for them to have effected
their designs? Or will you not rather confess, that they were the worst of
deceivers, and bloodiest of murderers? Or can any man be so senseless to
affirm, that, because they were actually possessed of this Castle, their
possession therefore was just? Surely no. Or if any afterward shall combine
with these villans, in this Castle so unjustly possessed, will not all rational
men judge them equally guilty? Certainly yes.

Now, mutatis nominibus de Anglia fabula narratur. To make good the comparison.

Who are these Papisticall bloody Conspirators, but the Rooting-faction (though
different in title) in the House and Army?

Who this Protestant Justice of Peace, and faithful servants? but our late
dear Sovereign, and loy all Subjects, whom they have murdered? and the Laws of
England, which they have destroyed?

Who those ignorantly assisting Constables and Officers? but the mislead
deceived Presbyterian party -- mislead, I say, for there were plotters among
them too, (whom, in this parallel I ^ntend not.)

Who are those treacherous servants? Mildmay. Vanes.
but those of his Majesty's own household. What is meant by this Castle? but the
three Kingdoms.

How and by what means possessed, which otherwise could not have been obtained?
but under pretenses of desiring Justice. Now for the unlawfulness of the act,
I leave to every man's nearer application; only know thus much for truth, --
That prosperous villainy entitleth nothing to be therefore just and equitable,
because successful. What though As two Friars termed the murder of Henry the
French King, Heroicum factum, and donum Sp^ritus sancti
prosperum scelus Virtus vo catur, yet really it is not so; it is but the
corrupt gloss of wicked men, and bloody Tyrants, who would seem to have power
to dethrone the Majesty of Religions Reason in man, as some have had to destroy
Kings and Governments themselves.

Thus, thus, England, these Rooting factious Conspirators have ( gradatim, step
by step) juggled themselves into a Supremacy, and abused you into a slavish
subjection.

By this time, I presume, all are satisfied in these Men's deserving titles:
and let them receive their due characters: The unparalled Impostours. Unheard
of State-cheaters. Bloodiest of Rebellious Tyrannical Subjects, but not
Conquerors.


Now let me appeal to all English hearts, and true-hearted Protestants:

What ingenious spirit will not blush, after he apprehends himself to be
consened by the cunning insinuations and actions of any men, though in matters
of lesser consequence?

What repairings are there to the Lawyers for advice?

What earnest endeavors are there employed, either for a Restitution or
Vindication. To this purpose, no means are left unattempted, no money
unexpended, no friends neglected, or un-made use of, that may be prevalent to
such an end.

And will you, you Englishmen, being thus cheated, not of toys and trifles,
but of things substantial and essential, both to your temporal and eternal
welfares. Your King, the Supreme Governor being murdered, and his Royal Son,
our surviving Sovereign Persecuted, prosecuted with murdering Resolutions, and
destroying Armies. Your Laws, they being abolished; your Religion, that being
dishonored and corrupted with Heresy, Schism, and all manner of Profane
opinions; your Liberties and Lives, they lying at the beck, and command of
these cheating Tyrants: Will you continue further instruments, to the absolute
destruction of all these, wherein you are concerned as Christians, and
freeborn Englishmen? Will you subscribe your selves willingly passive slaves
to these active impostors? Nay, will you engage your selves in obedientiall
Engagement.
promises to such an unjust power, enchaining thereby your souls to their
monstrous sins; Quos similes culpa coinquinat par quoque paena constringet.
and, unless repentance prevent, linking your selves to their punishments? For
God will be just.

Let me persuade you therefore, my dear brethren and Countrymen, in the
bowels of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as you tender your eternal
welfare and everlasting happiness, not to be yoked together with these
perfidious creatures; for, what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? what communion has light with darkness? what concord has
Christ with Belial? what agreement has innocent loyalty with bloodily guilty
perjury? Separate your selves from their wicked actions, come out from among
them, be no longer partakers of their Sins least you receive of their plagues.

Now at the last stand fast in the faith, quit yourselves like men and
bestrong, withstand the Devil and he will fly. Ille Christi miles qui pugnat,
non qui fugit.
It is your Pusillanimity and Complying Cowardice that spirits these Rooters to
a progression in their ugly defignes -- By this only they Work,

Do you ever hope to be freemen again, Free by virtue of a Certainly Protecting
and directing Law, so Long as you are possessed with such aguish spirits? No
no, be assured while you retain this Puny spiritedness, expect nothing but a
multiplication of oppressive Taxes, like waves upon the Sea shore, tumbling one
upon the neck of another, until you be all over whelmed with irrecoverable
poverty. Away then with this slavish fear; why will you rather subscribe to be
Companions in sin with these men, than to be Champions for the true cause of
Jesus Christ, the Laws of England and your own liberties. Let me persuade you
to throw away these dull weights, which like Plummets tied to the feet of
flying birds, press down your winged desires of Restoration and rein joyment
of Peace and Truth. It is these Plummets of fear that more keep you under
hatches of slavery than their often reiterated tyrannical oppression. --

Indeed it is true that a general impoverishment of all degrees of men (but
those of their lincked conspiracy) is the high rode of Policy on their parts.
For by this the oppressed (men's spirits many times declining with their
Estates) in continuance of time are deprived of means to obtain their freedom,
and at last through mere necessity enforced, contrary to their own reason and
consciences, to enroll themselves as Soldiers in a Rebellious army. --

But shall They be so Politic as first to work us into a necessitous
condition, and then work upon that necessity, their own ends, in our Ruin?
and shall not We (seeing our selves thus driven into a pit of destruction)
endeavor so much as to struggle for our own Security and prevention of our
enforced ruin --? Nay, shall we become assistants to the destruction of our
remaining loyal fellow Subjects, who by such cowardice have our selves only
occasioned our own Ruin --? O Stupid generation of people, who have bewitched
us! Hear oh England, and O London harken; now at last return, return, return,
to the God of heaven by repentance for thy often repeated Sins to your
Sovereign and the Laws of England, by a willing and Real obedience to your
fellow country men in mutual embraces of unity and cordial affections.

But, methinks I hear some whispering a commendation of the Plotters charity;
that, notwithstanding they have reduced many into an impoverished condition,
yet they are careful in making provision for them in Now erected Hospitalls.

For answer, Let me tell you this truth: that their care it expressed to none
but such who first have cripled their souls as well as maimed their bodies in
their bloody design (strange dealing to cut off men's legs purposly to
shewtheir charity in the gift of a pair of crutches!)

But grant their care were more general and extended to others, whom their
cruelty, plunderings, taxes and necessary expenses only to buy bread (wanting
Suplies through the want of Trade, their only way of Subsisting, lost by their
Rebellious wars) had reduced to Extremity of Poverty.

All though this, I am confident, proceeds not from any principle of
Christian charity neither, but pure policy; thereby to lull asleep the cries of
the maimed, the Widows, and fatherless; which if too publikly heard, might
occasion others to be fearful, how they become either actively or passively
contributary to their assistance, from whom they can after all expect nothing
but to be Famished for a Reward.

Yet alas, poor England, must thou be first beggered by these Plotters, that
they may express a cruel kind of charity to thy misery, by them only
occasioned? Miserable Charity sure! To Rob and Spoil men of their own Estates
that they, their wives, and children, may become Pensioners in an Hospital. --

But I Proceed.

Having thus laid down, the Equity and Justice on his Majesty's part, the
Rebellious method and Traiterous means which these Conspiratours have made use
of, as so many ascending stepps assisting the accomplishment of their bloody
design, hoping that all rational men are very well satisfied how they have
been abused by these deceivers into the commission of unlawful actions, and
are resolved for a Serious repentance and Sudden amendment, that so the God of
heaven may Restore unto us our Sovereign on his throne; Our religion to its
Practical Purity; and our selves to the enjoyment of our Laws and Liberties:

I shall in the next place, acquaint the world with the unlawfullnesse of that
Politic piece of Combinatory villainy (the Engagement), that trod upon the
heels of other preceding actions, in order to their design; as naturally as
the shadow of man, on a sunny day, waits upon the body.

January 1648.
To this Purpose therefore take notice that after they had Murdered the King in
their rode of Bloody policy, immediately Issued forth first that
Monarchy-distroying Ordinance, and an utter extirpation of his Majesty's
Royal family, not so much as mentioned in any of their preceding Declarations
-- Nor indeed was it seasonable they should -- But when they had run through
all their Scenes of Hypocritical Pretenses of setting up of Christ Jesus,
though Murdering again thereby the Lord of life by their manifold sins; at last
most Barbarously they killed the Lord's Anointed, the King: He must have his
bloody Exit out of this world, to make way for their Return upon the bloodied
stage of his Kingdoms, there to act their continuing parts of destruction upon
the Royal Persons of his Posterity, and to contrive the ruin of all loyal
and faithful Subjects, and true Christian Protestants.

And now having brought them hither (their first resolved end, thorough all
their vain turnings, and politic windings); Take a view, how they begin to
settle themselves in their bloodily-acquired Power, endeavoring to lock others
in an unjust obedience unto them, by commanding subscriptions to that
complication of Treason and Rebellion, the Engagement, and by these commands to
distinguish affection, that so Rooters.
they may more readily make way for the ruin of all true Christians, in their
persons and estates, thereby to require those of their more near and bloody
faction; as also, that such, and none but such, most desperate villains, may be
interessed in all employments, both in Church and State. Thus much may be
collected very easily, by the Resolves of the Parliament (say they; but
traitorous Conspirators, say I) enjoining subscription thereunto, Yet, Oct. 1649
by the way, let me tell them, that though hereby they seem to distinguish
persons, yet their hearts and souls they cannot -- Alas, this seeming Tie --
although for my own part, I disapprove the subscription of any one whomsoever,
because hereby, men seem more to fear Man than God, love their golden earth, a
little perishing wealth, more than the rich treasurs that are laid up in
Heaven, for those that fight the good fight of faith, and persevere unto the
end, to whom only Crowns of everlasting glory are promised as rewards. I am
afraid, ^ugitius nulla Cor^na.
that their sins of subscription will occasion the continuance of our
punishments; although, say I, this Tie, in reference to the persons obliged
unto, will prove but like sandy ropes, which the alteration of the wind will
soon scatter into nothing.

Before I come to dissect the Engagement it self, and lay it open to the
world's eye, that so all that will, or are not as yet given over to a reprobate
sense, may therein read the present sin, and future everlasting danger (without
repentance) of the subscribers.

I must, by way of repetition, premise these confessed, and already-maintained
principles.

vid. Judge. Jenkins's Collect.
That the King's Majesty, now Charles the second, by the fundamental law of
England, is our Supreme Governor.

That, as this his Supremacy is incorporated in our Laws, so the acknowledgment
thereof is imbodied in our Religion, (the true Christian Protestant faith)
maintained in the XXXIX Doctrinall Articles of the Church of England, and this
consonant to the Word of God.

That this acknowledgment is confirmed by Precept, Practice, Oath upon Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, was a truth confessed by all English Protestants,
until these latter times, wherein these bloody and seditious seeds (like those
tares in the Gospel, sown in the night while others slept) are scattered
abroad, as it were, in the night also, by these devilish instruments, when all
Orthodox Ministers were forced either to silence, or else cast into dark
prisons, like so many shining Suns, by them forced under clouds, the great
reason of this our present night of ignorance, and hellish errors. However,
this truth still remains (notwithstanding so many bloody storms, and
rebelliously opposing waves) like a Rock unshaken, being built, not on sandy
foundations, but on sure Principles of undeniable Reason, pure undefiled
Religion, and Laws, like Rivers from their fountains streaming forth, and
remaining apparently established at this very day;

That a bloody and enforced extirpation of a Government by Subjects, contrary
to the power, and commands, and against the Person of their lawful Sovereign,
and the fundamental Law of the Kingdom, is the highest degree of Treason and
Rebellion, by their own confession.

That such practices are against the principles of all Governments, therefore
condemnable by the Law of Nations.

From all which confessed Positions, we may collect this Truth in general,

That in reference to the opposition of powers by Law, Reason, and Religion
(the Touchstone of all Powers, that is, Governments, whatsoever) maintained
just, such as the King's Supremacy and Regal Power is, no obedience active
ought to be rendered to Powers, or rather Persons unjustly usurping a Power,
such as these rooting-Conspirators are, having neither warrant by Religion nor
Law to command such an opposing obedience, much less to do as they have done,
viz. to murder and dethrone Kings, subvert our Religion and Laws, endeavoring
to vassalize us to a submission unto their unlawful commands. For it is better
to obey God than man; that is, when our refusal of obedience to man's unlawful
commands, are warrantable by his all-commanding Law --

But let us examine the Scripture. Every soul must be subject unto the higher
power, Romans 13
says the Scripture, that is, There is no power but of God, if they be godly
powers. Bad Rulers are by the permission, not the ordination of God.
those just Powers whom God has ordained for the good government of his
people, and have right and title to be styled Governors, being regularly
received, settled, practiced, and confirmed in a Nation, as the Government of
England was by King, Lords, and Commons, all acting orderly in their several
Spears, yet all meeting in an unanimous agreement^ for the general good both
of Prince and People. And these thus meeting and consulting together, the High
Court is rightly entitled a PARLIAMENT, a name in it self venerable, and to be
greatly esteemed by all true Christian hearts. Such a PARLIAMENT, O God of
mercies, restore unto poor decaying and dying England. Now that this command of
subjection must concern only the lawful governing Power, and not rebellious
Subjects, who, by treachery, blood, and deceit, have snatched away the power of
governing from the lawful Governors, and exercise it by a ryrannicall
usurpation, both over Prince and People, the subsequent words of the Text
confirms.

For, to what end were that advice of the Apostle, That Princes are not to be
feared for good works, but for evil? That is, if people governed be obedient,
and act in their places things unblamable, the Prince and the Law need not to
be feared by them, in a way of condemnation and punishment.

But if Subjects (to speak in the words of the Apostle) shall do evil, by
infringing the Law of God, by rebelling against the lawful Government and
Governor, (as this prevailing faction has done) then the Prince, he bearth
not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on such
evil doers, that is, to punish them according to their demerits.

Now do I wonder, how any man can be so unblushingly impudent, needham
Politicus.
as to make use of this Scripture, conscientiously to engage the common people
of England's subjection to this present Rule-lesse Ruling Power, when as on the
contrary they are hereby obliged to be assisting to their Prince, that so he
may be the better enabled to discharge that duty, which God and the Law
requires from him, and to punish these workers of iniquity. The current of the
Text running clearly for subjection to lawful Governors, from the people who
are to be governed.

Nullius prohibitio valet divinis obvia^e praeceptis, Gods precepts may not be
countermanded by man's prohibitions; nor God's prohibitions prejudiced by man's
precepts.

Again, 1 Pet. 2.
we are exhorted to submit our selves to every Ordinance (that is, lawful
Ordinance) of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as to the
superior, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent of him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. Where, pray
take notice, the Apostle's advice is quite opposite to the practice, either of
the Conspirator's, or the subjecting Subscribers of these days; for we are not
commanded to submit our selves to every wicked Ordinance, by which good men are
only injured, and the worst of men commended; nor are we to obey the now The
King being Supreme in his own Kingdom, the people can be but Subjects; and if
Subjects have no power to command, but by way of derivation from the King,
therefore the present ruling Faction have no just power to command, but fall
under the notion of wicked and evil doers, whom the King ought to punish, and
all good men should be assisting thereunto -- This is the doctrine of the
Apostle.
domineering Power, (but the King as Supreme) therefore not these who are but
Subjects, nor any of their Agents, whose commands and actions already have
murdered the King, our Supreme Governor, and still continue to destroy his
Royal Son, and all others, who will not walk in the same bloody paths with
them. Is this, think you, to submit to the King as Supreme? In brief, the
Scripture enjoyneth us to obey the King and his servants; The Faction
commands us to obey them (subjects) against the Kings commands destroying Him
and all his faithful servants, O monstrum, horrendum -- *

Are these the good works which the Apostle commands us to perform, in the
11th verse of the same Chapter, that God may be glorified by us in the day of
visitation? And is this our honest conversation, whereby we may stop the mouth
of evil speakers? Surely no, my dear Countrymen, It were blasphemy only to
suppose so.

Is the wilful sleighting and neglecting of God's precepts, and the dethroning
of Kings, the way to obey God and honor the King, as we are commanded in the
same Chapter?

Did our Savior Jesus Christ command, Matthew. Mar.
that those things which belonged unto Caesar should be given unto him, and
shall the Faction not only command the contrary, but themselves plunder all
from him, depriving him of his Honor, Regality, Revenues, nay, Life and all?

Shall the Preacher advertise us to obey the Kings commands, Eccles. 8.
in regard of our Oaths; and shall the Faction command us to disobey his
commands? nay, engage us by contrary Oaths, thereby making us guilty of a
double perjury?

Nay, shall the people of England, upon, as it were, the first invitation of
these Conspirators, rush into the sin, and yet think to escape punishment?
Surely no. Though God be merciful, yet he is also just. Read the 17th of
Ezekiel, from the 12th verse to the end of the Chapter; there see how God
denounces his woeful judgment against perjury; and repent before it is too
late.

Shall the Wise man advise us, Prove. 30.
that against the King there is no rising up?

Shall the Faction persuade us that for the Kings protection there must be no
rising at all?

Must not we curse the King in our hearts? Eccles. 10
and nevertheless do these Murder him with their bloody hands? nay, put him to
variety of death with their Pens and Tongues sharper than two edged Swords.

Shall the Apostle exhort, that first of all Supplication and Prayers be made
for Kings etc. And shall the Prayer-haters, though pretended affecters, command
us not to pray for the King at all? Nay shall we obedientially comply with
these Scripture-murderers; as well as King Religion and Law-destroyers?

Although the Scripture acquainteth us, Prove. 24.
that he which provokes the King to anger sins against his own Soul; -- Yet
these Conspiratours think it no Sin to imbrue their hands in the blood of
Kings. -- O my God, consider how these men of blood blaspheme thy Name; sinning
with an high hand against thee, the all-powerful Lord of heaven and earth,
contrary to the Precept and Practice of thy Son Christ Jesus, thy holy
Prophets, and Apostles. But, O my soul, partake not thou of their counsels,
nor follow thou their rebellious steps.

By this time I presume it will be granted, 1 Samuel 24.6.
that we must submit to all lawful powers, yielding ready obedience unto them
in all things that are lawful; but must not subject our selves in an active
obedience to Powers unlawful, (such as these Rooters are) by way of opposition
to his Majesty's lawful and Scripture-approved Supremacy. So that, in brief,
Fact. Indep
* These being neither lawful Powers, nor commanding lawful Acts, must not be
obeyed, unless we resolve to sin against the light of Reason, the Law of God,
and all Evangelical Precepts.

Now, by the way, let me desire all you Subscribers to the Engagement,
seriously to read and consider what you have done, (not that I say, you are
obliged thereby to any performance; for, contra Scripturas nulla obligatio, the
Scriptures engage you only to a repentance.) However, take notice, how you have
frolick'd away the innocence and integrity of your conscience, sinning against
the God of heaven.

Let such also weight these things in the scale of the Sanctuary, forbearing
addition of one grain of their self-by-ass'd ends, or private corrupt
interests, who foolishly sooth up themselves in their vain conceit, that the
Engagement is but a civil thing, and not in a religious sense to be taken
notice of. That any man may subscribe it, and accordingly express an active
obedience to these Rooters, during the time of their command; and when another
Power succeeds this, be obedient to that likewise. A pretty sort of earthly
Christians! for assuredly heaven nor heavenly things these mind not. What? Is
perjury no sin? Is not a combination to destroy your Religion, your King, the
widow, fatherless, your fellow subjects, no sin? Do you make it but a kind of
a complement thus to serve the devil, who has been a murderer and a liar from
the beginning? See, Joh.8.44.
my friendly Countrymen, with what glassy cords you bind up your eternal
happiness? on what icie bridges you adventure the everlasting welfare of your
souls?

These things being premised, I shall unravell this bloody-twisted piece of
Perjury, Murder, Rebellion, Engagem.
and Treason, as it is intentionally meant by the Composers, although I am
confident, not so resolvedly taken by most of the Subscribers; although, let
them also wrest or mince the sense as they please, they cannot excuse
themselves from the guilt of sin in subscribing.

First, I shall present it you in gross. I do declare and promise, October,
1649.
that I will be faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as the same is now
established without a King or House of Lords.

And now I shall give it you in its several pieces; and, with them, a
rational exposition of their most irrational, irreligious, intentions therein.

I -- that is, I, a subject bound by the Law of 1. Pet. 2. Romans 12.1 Eccles 8.
vid. J. Jenkins Collections.
God and Man, and by several additionall Allegiance. Supremacy. Protestation.
Oaths, to be true and faithful to my Sovereign Lord King Charles, his Hairs
and Successors, the Kings and Queens of England; to be aiding to Him in my life
and fortune against all Rebels and Traitors whomsoever; 11th. Hen. the 7th.
cap. 1.
to disclose all conspiracies against his Person, Honor, Crown, and Dignity.

I being thus conscientiously, religiously, and legally pre-ingaged;
nevertheless, I do declare and promise, that I will be true and faithful;
Engagement.
that is, faithfully true in my obedience and subjection, to the Commonwealth,
(but more truly, common-Woe-creating Rooters) that is, To an inconsiderable
number of bloody perjured Traitors, irreligious, sacrilegious persons,
congregated (contrary to all Law, Reason, Justice, and Equity) and met together
under the sals veil of Parliament, who, by specious pretenses of Reformation,
have deceived the common people of England into destructive Arms, by whose
ignorantly assisting power, these deceiving Conspirators have overthrown our
admirably well-composed Government, destroyed our Religion, introduced Atheism,
and all manner of damnable Errors and Heresies whatsoever ruined our Liberties,
commanding, and enforcing the people of England, their fellow subjects, to
kill, slay, and destroy one another, in their persons and estates. Nay, stand
amazed all the world (scribere pallesco) at this monstrous relation, murdered
their Sovereign, their King, the best and most religiously pious of Princes,
endeavoring utterly to destroy root and branch his Royal Posterity; robbing,
spoiling, giving, selling away, his Royal Revenues, and Prince-like Palaces:
Extirpating the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, sacrilegiously
plundering the Church of Bishops, Pastors, and Patrimony; the Kingdom of
Religion, Liberty, Peace, and Truth, turning the pious and charitable gifts of
former Ages, from the Donor's first religious intents, into irreligious rewards
of their fellow-confederates, for their bloody service.

Now, my too too forward sinful Countrymen, Do you well, think you, to
subscribe your approbation and future assistance to these things --? Surely no.
O therefore, if you have (as certainly you have) offended with St. Peter, in
denying, not only your temporal earthly Sovereign, but your heavenly King and
Lord; these lines (like that admonishing Cock) thus giving you notice of your
errors, Go out with him, repent, and weep bitterly.

I --; that is, I, a freeborn Englishman; free, Engagem.
in respect of my dear Sovereign's protection of my self, life, and estate, by
direction of the written Laws of the Land; in which, as my native inheritance,
I have an undoubted right and propriety, by which only I am differenced from a
slave.

Yet I (notwithstanding these bulwarks of my freedom) do subject my self, life,
and estate, to the arbitrary commands, perverse resolutions, wicked actions,
and corrupt affections of these * men, whose will are their Laws, whose
Religion is Rebellion, Faction ^n ep.
whose Faith is Faction, whose protection is destruction, whose preservation is
desolation, whose justice is tyranny and oppression, whose greatest mercy is
the extremity of cruelty. And shall I commend you for such your subscriptions?
No, I commend you not, but rather advise you to be mindful, how much herein
you have degenerated from the former honor of Englishmen; earnestly desiring
you a last to return to your first practiced principles of loyal valor, and
Christian fortitude.

As the same is now established without a King and House of Lords. Engagem.


That is, King, Capell, Canterbury with the rest. Sir. Geor. Lis^^, etc.
Chaloner, Thomson, Alder. Garraway.
as they have begun to settle it upon the already-laid foundation of Royal
Blood, the murder of not a few Noblemen and Lords, the death and imprisonment
of several reverend Bishops, learned Doctors, and other Pastors of the Church
of Christ; the destruction of many Knights and Gentlemen, the ruin of some
Aldermen and Citizens of London, and several penitential deceived persons,
first of their own party, with the loss of many thousand English-men's lives;
all whose bloods have been shed to mix with the cursed * Lime of these persons;
by which, Designs.
with the additionall assistance of their sacrilegious Church-plunderings, they
suppose their usurped power will be the closer cemented. But, good Father, cut
them off in the height of their hopes; let not these bloody men prosper any
longer, lest the Heathen blaspheme and say, Where is the God of England?

As the same is now established without Engagent.
a King and House of Lords -- without a King and House of Lords? there is the
bloody extirpation of England 's ancient Government.

That is, as they resolve, (for as yet, it is not established) to accomplish
the establishment thereof; intending (rather than restore the Nation to its
former Government, by King, Lords, and Commons) to continue this their bloody
building, upon the utter destruction of those remaining ruins of the Nobility,
Gentry, Clergy, and Commons of England.

The corruption of the two once flourishing Academies, Oxford. Cambridge.
famous for the purity of doctrine, excellency of discipline; now pestered with
heresies, schisms, and factions; that so their Church hereafter (it God shall
suffer them, for the punishment of Englands sins, long to continue) may be as
apt to instruct the people in all manner of errors, as they to govern them by
all kind of wicked rules of policy. Upon the ruin of all Learning, destruction
of all Arts, overthrowing of all Schools and Nurseries of good education; that
so ignorance may be once more famous, or rather infamous, in this Nation, and
we again shake hands with the Papists; concluding Ignorance to be the mother of
Devotion, and by degrees confirming the common people into a belief of such
blind doctrins.

Upon the utter extirpation of the purity of the Gospel, and the Orthodox
preachers thereof, by the advancing ignorant Laymen to be directors of others
toward heaven; when (too sad a truth it is) they know not how to set one true
step forward, leading undoubtedly thither themselves; until at last all divine
Precepts shall be commanded attendance upon their principles of Policy, and
England at last, by their means, usher in the Pope, and his whole Antichristian
faction, the only way of his re-enter; for be assured, all the back doors are
wide open, ready for his readmission, nothing wanting, but a fit opportunity
for his more generally visible appearance; for long he has, and at this
present still does covertly walk; sometimes under a silly Independent
longwasted doublet, sometimes ruffling it in a long sword, watching his, etc.
for entrance upon England's stage.

Again, upon the breach of all the privileges of Corporations, Protege
Londinum Domine.
upon which rush in a confusion of Trades, and poverty unawares thereupon
steals upon City and Country; and, by this, Per scelera semper sceleribus
tutum estiter.
the Faction gain soldiers, their only supporters.

Nay, much I fear, their desperate resolves may extend to the firing of Cities,
Towns, Villages; a promiscuous destruction of whole Families, not minding the
innocent cries of Infants, the wooing tears of the Widow and Fatherless, the
pitiful complaints of the Aged; because they being men, passed beyond the
limits of reconciliation, never resolving upon repentance, will not apprehend
themselves secure, but by the additionall commission of greater sins. But, O
Lord God Almighty, let not these wicked men have their desire. Rescue thy poor
distressed flock from these devouring woolves. Protect thine own Vine, the
truly Christian Protestant Church of England, and all members thereof, from the
rooting Bores of the Antichristian Forest, and the destroying wiles of subtle
Foxes; that so they may live to praise thy Name from generation to generation,
whose mercies endure for forever.

Thus having made it plainly appear, that the very act of subscription to the
Engagement is absolutely unlawful, as also, that without a serious repentance,
the Subscribers will pull upon themselves the guilt of a complication of all
those monstrous sins, already committed by the Grandees of the bloody Faction.

And if they actually persist therein by their actions, adhereing to them, will
be liable to give an account for all the innocent English blood, that, for the
future shall be shed by these destroying Rooters. Besides, they will but
continue isntrumental supporters of Englard's continuing miseries, if not
hastening procurers of its utter desolation; Which, may the God of heaven, out
of his infinite mercy, prevent.

But here I meet with an Objection, or rather a propounded Question.

What would you have me do? I am but one. Should I not subscribe the
Engagement, and swim in the same stream with each successive faction; I fear
that I should lose my estare.

O my Brethren, a strange Question! That is a cheap Religion sure, of little
esteem, that must rather be parted with than a little pelf to preserve it. Are
your souls of no greater value, than thus eternally to be battered away upon
grounds of fear, that you shall lose your wealth, which cannot benefit you
after death? Remember and weigh well that place, Revel. 21. There, among other
sinners, you shall find, that the fearful are cast into hell; that is, such,
who, for fear of men, loss of their estates, will bid adieu to the God of
heaven, and his commands.

You could, in the beginning of this bloody war, upon no rational grounds, but
vain pretenses of Politicians, deceiving you for their own ends, One it, and
One it freely, in your persons and purses, even until many united, multiplied
themselves into several Armies.

And now finding your selves so much abused and deceived by these Rooters, can
you not One it in your return, by a serious and fuddain repentance? Do you
think the way to pacify an angry God, is, to add sin to sin? There is no peace
to the wicked, faith he by the Prophet Isaiah; and can you expect public,
private, external, or internal peace, if you continue in your wickedness? It
is too too apparent, that you have all sinned, and you will never be recti in
curia, until you repent; upon which condition, God has only promised pardon
and forgiveness.

Do you expect to be restored to the re-injoyment of freedom and liberty in
your persons and estates, which you can only challenge by virtue of the Laws
established (your certain-protectors against Instruments of tyranny and
oppression) while you tamely thus sit crouching under their persons, whose
studied work it is to tyrannize over all Laws, your estates, liberties, and
persons, loading you with successive Taxes, which would crack the patience of
the most patient, and cannot but at last exhaust the wealth of them, who, as
yet, are accounted the most wealthy.

Again, 16^1. Witness K. March from Scot. to fatal Worcest.
methinks I hear another sort of people, as Governors of Cities, Forts,
Castles, Admiralls, etc. pleading, that they are entrusted by the present
Faction, and we must not betray our trust.

For answer, Know thus much, That if the Trustors be justly possessed of what
they entrust others with, none are then to betray their trust, by delivery of
what they are trusted with, to any man that has not right thereunto. But if
these Trustors have no right themselves, nor can lay a just claim to the
possession of what they entrust others with; but (of right, justice, and
equity) the things belong to another; then it concerns any man so trusted, in
conscience, justice, and equity, to deliver them to such who have a right title
thereunto; otherwise, the trusted will make themselves doubly guilty; of
deteining what is not their own, by their own confession, from the just owner;
and also of patronizing others also in their unjust possessions.

To apply this. How many, contrary to their own judgments, have kept possession
of his Majesty's Ships, Castles, Forts, and Towns, who, being summoned to a
restoration, of what these employed Instruments unjustly detained from him,
Fatal Worcest.
their greatest reason of refusal was, Because they were trusted -- and what,
shall they betray their trust?

Hear, you self deceiving, and soul-destroying Pleaders -- let me expostulate
with you: Should a man entrust you with stolen goods, could you keep them from
the just owners, only upon this slender plea, because you are entrusted? --
No, no, the Law, you know, comprehends you, equally guilty of theft. The case
is all one, only admitting this distinction; This is a private theft, the
other public, a robbery of an higher nature, because the injured concerned
persons are of an higher degree, the King, nay, the whole Kingdom: and
condemned both by the Law of God and man. The command is positive, Thou sha^t
not steal. Now theft is nothing else but a taking away, and detaining contrary
to Law, that which belongs to another, purposely to deprive him of it,
contrary to his will and mind.

You plead a trust committed; Show me the established Law, that gave them power
to trust you with his Majesty's Castles, Towns, Ships, etc. By the plain Letter
and equity of the Law, they belong to the King, upon which account, his demand
of restitution was just.

Neither you nor your imployers have a just right or title thereunto by the
Law; therefore you are but robbers of the King and Kingdom. By you, his Majesty
is detained from his just rights, his subjects from their liberties and
estates; heresy, schism, and profaneness are continued; perjury, blood,
oppression; and a connivance at, if not a toleration of, all manner of sins in
the Nation, and thereby you are guilty of the breach of all the commandments.

Remember that Curse, Deuter. 27. Cursed is he that hinders the right of the
stranger, fatherless, and widow. And, Cursed is he that continues not in all
things that are written in the Law to do them. That is, Cursed is he that
knowingly, resolvedly, wilfully, breaks all or any of the commandments, as
the faction have done, to compass their ends --. Lord have mercy upon sinful
England, etc.

But I will draw toward a conclusion: Therefore by way of a brief
recapitulation.

It cannot be denied, but that, according to the premised rules of Reason, as a
man; Religion, as a Christian, Protestant; and established Laws, both the guide
and protection of all subjects:

That the Plotters, and continuing adhearers to this design, are guilty of all
the aforementioned fins.

Therefore consider further, that out of necessity you must repent, in a
rational sense, as Men; in a religious sense, as Christians.

Confider also the vanity of supposing, there will be truth, peace, and
prosperity in this Nation, without this double repentance.

To invite you hereunto, pray seriously ponder the exemplary judgments of God
upon Nations, Families, Particular persons, for their obstinate progression in
known sins; read Jeremiah 7th and 8th chapters; Zephnia the 1st chapter; nay,
all the Prophets and Apostles, are full in examples and judgments, executed
upon, and threatened against, impenitentiall sinners.

Again, consider, that a partial repentance will not serve the turn, such as
has been the repentance of too many of your leading Presbyterians, who return
not to those Christian Principles from whence they at first did deviate, but to
the Covenant, Scot's Covenant.
in their first begun bloody destructive sense, of altering a lawfully
established Government by force; of which sort, the Prophet complains, that
many did return, but not to the God of heaven; so they return, but it is only
to their private interests, or public faction, to which they at first
adheared; they would seem to serve God by an outside repentance, but are
really servants to the Beliall of the Presbyterian first Designers.

Again, consider the vanity of pleading success as argumentative, to make Good
the War on the Faction's part, or Just; therefore entitle not God as an
approver of your actions, because of success --

First, in respect of Reason, as men; because a multitude, by united powers,
may overcome a lesser number, were their cause never so just.

That, in that sense, the Turks and Heathens, in their almost continual
prevalency against the Christians, only by their numerous Armies, may be
supposed to have the better cause -- which is no less than blasphemy to
maintain.

To this purpose consider, the rational probability of Cromwell's, and the
Faction's success, having, by deceiving policy, as I have already showed,
gained a Power: Inregard that the greatest part of their Soldiers (let them
pretend what they please) fight not out of an affection to parties, but in a
Mercenary way as mere Soldiers (a Crying sin of this Nation) as if blood and
murder were a lawful trade; and the Scripture, like an Almanac out of date,
to be laid a side in the time of War.

Again, the Faction always had, and still possess, all possible means tending
to this end. As at first, in having the Command of London, that Magazin of money
and men, and with them a great part of the Nation, and now all under their
power: besides his Majesty's Revenues; Palaces; Bishops lands; the Estates of
many of his loyall-Subjects; Excise, and other Contributions; by which helps,
the Faction has rather bought victories than really fought for them; the
Silver Bullet burying more of the King's Army alive in prisons, than the
Enemy's Cannons did ever wound in the field.

Again, consider that his Majesty's party excepting some few Judasses, did
fight out of a religious Conscienciousnesse, and loyal affection to their God,
Sovereign, and Country; and not for a pecuniary reward only.

Consider also, that his Majesty wanted those means and ways of procuring men
and money, which the Faction had always in abundance.

That his armies were but as an handful; the Faction's numerous.

However, take serious notice that the King and his party have Scripture,
Reason, and Law, on their Side; but the Faction, neither. Therefore look to it,
you Continuing Sinful adherers. Never did National Sins long escape the heavy
hand of an Avenging God; and if England -- London, expect to be freed, their
hopes will deceive them.

Isaiah 30th -- 1, 2 etc.

Jerem 9th 13, 14, 15.

Further, Consider the Vanity of pleading success also; a way of justification
of the worst of actions. In respect of religion as Christians; The people of
God almost in all ages having been worsted in that respect. God's intent in
suffering the enemies of his Church to prevail being only to try the faith and
patience of his children, to make them humble, Acts 14.22. Gal. 6.14.
fitting them thereby for Himself. In respect of their Eternal well being in
heaven, and in reference to his own honor upon earth, that so his People
coming as it were like pure gold out of the furnace of affliction, they may be
as shining and burning lamps for after-ages to walk by.

Again, consider that the flock of Christ always was little; therefore to have
Sucesse by power of a multitude, is no argument of being Christians.

That (as I have already inserted) for the most part the Church was under
Persecution and affliction; therefore Prosperity is no ground of Saintship, as
the Faction pretend. Hebr. 12 2. Math. 5.4.

Be advised, therefore, my dear Countrymen; beware of acting and maintaining
any thing against right Reason: In it self both a sin and a punishment.

How many men, so contrary to common sense and reason, did, following the
deceiving sense of the Faction, account, and highly cry up, Cromwell's marching
into Scotland? No invasion of that Kingdom; where he could not ground the least
pretense of a quarrel, 1650.
in his own unjust construction; the end of his march being only in
prosecution of his first resolv'd-upon Design of ruining his Majesty and
Royal Family, destroying our and their Laws and Liberties, only to mount
himself into the chair of Supremacy.

Nevertheless, many were possessed with such a sottish kind of stupidity,
Futall Worcest.
(a sure presager of utter destruction) as to esteem his majesty's last March
out of Scotland into England, (with resolves only to Regain his right and that
he might restore his subjects to their Religion Laws and Liberties) to be an
Invasion of England, O Anglia Anglia, quae vos dementia cepit!

Be for the future, therefore, advised, keep closer to the Scriptures and right
reason: Approve, follow, and act nothing but what they warrant, or is deducible
from them: for if you once but slipp from that firm Square, you Tumble from
once error to another, like a man fallen from the top of a Steep hill, never
resting until you come to the bottom; where, without the Infinitely preserving
mercy of God, you will receive the reward of Such your wilful Neglect, even
destruction. Isaiah 30th. 12,th and 13. verses,

Again, If God should continue still punishing England, beware of making your
selves Instrumentall-scourging Rodds in his hands; which, his will being
performed, he always casts into the fire. But, O holy blessed and glorious
Trinity, have mercy upon us miserable sinners: Remember not, Lord, our
offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers; neither take thou any further
vengeance of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have
redeemed with thy precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever --. To this
pupose we beseech thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
Sins, negligences, and ignorances; and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives acording to thy holy Word.

For my part, I call heaven and earth to witness; I have now set before you
life and death, blessing and cursing; Choose life; for why will you die, O
England? why will you destroy your selves, O people of Great Britain? Why will
you not turn to the God of heaven, with whom are treasures of mercy? O ye
Citizens of London; Turn ye, Turn ye, from your evil ways by a serious
sudden and unfeigned repentance, that so God may return unto us in loving
kindness, by restoring to us our Governors as in former days, K. Charles.
and cause us again to fit peaceably under our own vines; That our religion in
purity, may practically be revived; That we may enjoy Pastors and Teachers that
may again feed us with true knowledge and understanding; That our laws and
liberties may be continued: That Great Britain may be preserved from this
Imminent and Eminent Menacing Ruin -- That God may be glorified in our
preservation and not in our absolute destruction.

That all our Souls at the great day of Account may be everlastingly saved.

Amen, Amen, Amen.
FINIS

