Blessed is be that considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of
Trouble,

Psalm 41.1.
BESTOW ONE PENNY FOR THE LORDS SAKE.
And buy this Paper for the POOR'S Sake. Place it over the POOR'S Box, in your
Church or House, Shop or Inn, etc.
Remember the Poor
In Leone Judae Spes

Gala: 6.9.10. As we have opportunity let us do good unto all men, especially
unto them who are of the household of faith; And let us not be weary in
well-doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not. God shall supply
all our need, according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus.

Phil: 4.19. Grace acted is the Souls celestial Feast,
Where Graces are bestowed by Christ the Guest,
Therefore now act your Faith, Hope, Love, yea more:
Oblige our God, by giving to the Poor.
That Fruit smells sweet to him, God cannot forget
Your Love therein, but counts your Gift his Debt.
Glory to God in the highest



TO do good and to distribute forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is
well-pleased, Heb. 13.16. Cast thy Bread upon the waters: for thou shall find
it after many days. Give a portion to Seven, and also to Eight; for thou
know not what evil shall be upon the Earth, Eccl. 1.2. If there be among you
a Poor man, of one of thy Brethren, within any of thy Gates, thou shall not
harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy Poor Brother. But thou shall
open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his
need, in that which he wants. Thou shall surely give him, and thine heart
shall not be grieved when thou give unto him: because that for this thing the
LORD thy GOD shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put
thy hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8. And if thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and
satisfy the afflicted Soul, then the LORD shall guide thee continually, and
satisfy thy Soul in Drought, and make fat thy Bones: and thou shall be like a
watered Garden, and like a Spring of water, whose waters fail not, Isa. 58.10,
11. Honor the LORD with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase. So shall thy Barnes be filled with plenty, and thy Presses shall
burst out with new Wine, Pro. 3.9, 10. He that has pity upon the Poor, lends
unto the LORD, and that which he has given, will he pay him again, Pro. 19.17.
He which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: And he which sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Every man according as he purposes in his
heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful Giver, 2 Cor. 9.6, 7.

LEt your Light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father, which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. And as ye would that men
should do to you, do you also to them likewise, Luke 6.31. Give, and it shall
be given unto you, good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running
over, shall men give into your bosom, Luke 6.38. Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.18. There is that scatters, and yet increases, and there is that
withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to Poverty. The liberal Soul
shall be made fat: And he that waters shall be watered also himself, Prove.
11.24, 25. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that
when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9.
Sell that ye have, and give Alms, provide your selves Baggs which wax not old,
a treasure in the Heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither
moth corrupts, Luke 12.33. As it is written, He has dispersed abroad: he
has given to the Poor, his Righteousness remains for ever: his Horn shall
be exalted with Honor, 2 Cor. 9.9. For God is not unrighteous to forget your
Work and Labor of Love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have
ministered to the Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6.10. Ye shall be recompensed at
the Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14.14.

He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy,

James 2.13.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, and are to be sold at his House near
Doctors Commons. 1658.


