A Blazing Star seen JN THE WEST At Totneis in Devonshire, on the
foureteenth of this instant November, 1642.

VVherin is manifested how Master Ralph Ashley, a deboyst Cavalier, attemted to
ravish a young Virgin, the Daughter of Mr. Adam Fisher, inhabiting near the
said Town.

Also how at that instant, a fearful Comet appeared, to the terror and
amazment of all the Country thereabouts.

Likewise declaring how he persisting in his damnable attemt, was struck with a
flaming-Sword, which issued from the Comet, so that he dyed a fearful example
to al his fellow Cavaliers.

nouemb: 25th LONDON, Printed for Jonas Wright, and I. H. 1642.

A Blazing Star in the West, or fearful Comet seen in the Air at Totneis
in Devonshire, on the foureteenth of this instant November, 1642.
SO it happened on Monday the 14th of this instant November, that a young
Virgin, Daughter to Master Adam Fisher, inhabitant in Devonshire, within a
mile of Totneyes, upon some particular occasions happened to go to the said
Town, where being busied, partly about her occasions, and partly in visiting
some Friends and Kinsfolks, she was belated, so that her Friends were
importunate to have her stay all night, but she replied, that her Father would
be discontented if she should be absent without his leave. the times being so
dangerous, and so many Cavaliers abroad, wherefore she was resolved hap what
might hap, to go home that night.

Notwithstanding all these reasons which she alleged, her Friend grew
importunate to have her stay, telling her that there were many deboyst
Covaliers abroad, so that they could not pass securely in the day time, much
less in the night, for all this she would not be persuaded, but replied, that
God was above the Devil, and that she feared not, but that that God which she
trusted in, could, and would defend her from all her Enemies.

With thie resolution she set forward, but before she could get the half of
the way to her fathers house it grew very dark, so that she could scarce
discern her hand, thus she went on, sometime listening whether she could hear
any Body, upon the way, on a sudden she heard the noise of a Horse galloping
toward her, at which she began to be afraid.

But at last she plucked up a good heart and went forward, till she met with
this Gentleman M.r Ralph Ashley, a Gentleman which knew her well, and she knew
him, meeting with this Gentleman, he asked her whether she was going so late,
she told him home to her fathers, he demanded who that was, she told him Master
Adam Fisher, with that he called to mind her beauty, and the Devil strait
furnished him with a device to obtain his wicked purpose, sweet heart quoth he
I know thy father well, and for his sake J will see the safe at thy fathers
House, for the times are dangerous, and but a little before there are soldiers
which J have cause to suspect, will do the some outrage, the maid hearing him
say so, was won to condescend to him, partly by her knowledge of his supposed
friendship to her father, and partly by her desire to get home without any
further danger, to be short, the maid being won by his speciour pretenses of
love and friendship, applied her self to get up, he having her behind him rode
clean out of the Road, (pretending that he did so to avoid the soldiers) till
he was got out of the hoaring of any inhabitant.

Where being arrived, he fained an excuse to light, with that she slipped off the
horse back, and he alighted, then presently he laid His hands on her, and
began to woe her to grant his desire, but she denying him with unlimited
resolution, he went about to ravish her, taking a grievous oath that no power
in heaven or earth could save her from his lust, with that the poor virgin,
with pittious shrikes and cries spoke these words O Lord God of Hosts, it is in
thy power to deliver me, help Lord or J perish, in the mean time he continued
cursing and swearing that her prayers were in vain, for there was no power
could redeem her, the words were no sooner uttered, but immediately a fearful
Commet burst out in the air, so that it was as light as at high noone, this
sudden apparition struck him and all the inhabitants into a great fear, and
the poor virgin was intranced, the wretch casting his eye about and seeing her
lie upon the ground as if he had meant to dane damnation took a great oath
swearing God-Damme-him. alive or deadhe would jnjoy her.

And as he was going about to lay hands of her intranced Body, A stream of
fire struck from the Comet, in the perfect shape, and exact resemblance of a
flaming Sword, so that he fell down staggering, several poor shepherds
which were in the field, foulding their slockes, these being amazed, seeing the
flame of the Comet strike at the Earth, as they conceived, made to the place as
near as they could, where they heard a man blaspheming, and belching forth
many damnable imprecations, and coming to the place, demanding how he came so
wounded, he voluntarily related his intention, and what had happened to him by
the perverseness of that Round-headed-whore, so he died raving and blaspheming
to the terror and amazement of the beholders.

The men presently took up the Maid. supposing she had been dead, and carried
her home to her fathers House, where they were entertained, though with great
sorrow for their daughters supposed death, the maid having continued intranced
thus almost all that night, at length she began to draw her breath, and when
she came to her self, the very first words that she spoke were these, Lord
thon art Just in thy Judgments and merciful in the midest of thy justice,
wherefore J beseech the let not this sin be imputed to his Charge, in the day
of Judgment.

Reader hear is a president for all those that are customary blasphemers, and
live after the lusts of their flesh. especially all those Cavaliers which
esteem murder and rapine the chief Principalls of their religion, for
doubtless this is but a beginning of Gods vengance for not only he, but they,
and we, and all of us, except we repent, we shall all likewise perish.

FINIS.

