A BLOODY FIGHT AT Pontefract Castle IN YORKSHIRE ON Sunday morning last,
between the Kings Forces, and the Parliaments; Showing, the manner how they
sallyed out of the Castle with 400. Horse and Foot, fell upon the Parliaments
Guards, beat them out of their Works, ruined a Troop of horse, and routed two
Guards of Foot.

WITH The full particulars of the said Fight, a List of the number killed and
taken prisoners; and a great Blow given by the most loyal Patriot to His King
and Country, renowned Col. Rainsborough.

ALSO, Another bloody Fight near the City of York, 30 killed upon the place,
and one hundred taken prisoners. And an unexpected Victory obtained by the
Royalists near Newark upon Trent.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

A BLOODY FIGHT IN THE NORTH
Between The Kings Forces in Pomfret Castle, and the Parliamentters, their
routing of the Horse guard, and carrying several prisoners into the Castle.
SIR,
ON Friday last the Kings Forces fallied out of the Castle with a strong party
of Horse and foot, and fell upon our Horse and Foot Guards near the lower
Church, with such undanted courage, that they soon surprised many of the
Soldiery, beating them off from their Works, and seizing upon their Arms,
still embracing the pursuiz, till they came almost to the Market place,
thinking to have become sole Conquerors of the Besiegers, and indeed had
endangered the raising of the siege, had not Collonell Rainsborough appeared in
the nick of time, who charged the enemies chief Body, consisting of seventy
horse and one hundred foot, disputed the place with exceeding gallantry, but
they were most puissantly received by the other party, who charged the Colonel
in an excellent Military Posture, some of their musketeers flanking the horse,
the rest firing in the Van of them, and wheeling off betwixt the Files.

During which dispute, diverse fell on both sides, and at last Colonel
Rainsborough fore't his passage through their Body of Horse, which caused them
to retreat in a very disorderly manner, most of the Foot being left engaged.

The Colonel pursued them to the very Castle gates where a morter-piece charged
with Grenades were fired at them, which did some execution: whereupon they
were remanded back to a further distance, insomuch that the Enemy attempted
another salley, thinking to carry off their wounded men, but being sore galled
with our musketeers, retreated in again, and left them to the mercy of our
soldiers, who brought them prisoners into the high town, procured Chyrurgeons
to dress their wounds, and after examination were committed to safe custody.

In this Conflict we lost about 20 men, one gallant Troop of Horse totally
ruined, the Captain Lieutenant, the Cornet, and about thirty Troopers taken
prisoners.

Of the enemies side were slain, near upon fifteen, and twenty of their Foor
soldiers, a Lientenant and eight troopers taken.

Colonel Bonivant who commanded the Van of the Enemies Horse, was shot in the
left arm, Since which time he has made another salley forth of the Castle,
and killed ten of our men upon the place; and often times adventures ten or
twelve miles into the Country and bring in the Gentry thereof prisoners, and
other Booty and provision, without any opposition: So that this siege is
managed very absurdly, if not treacherously, for the enemies forces are
exceedingly increased within; but dare not take their progress as formerly,
being limited to a narrower distance, since the conjnnction of our Forces with
Colonel Rainsborough.

This morning they attempted another salley Captain Huddleston commanding in
chief, our foot guards received them, and gave them a volley; which was
answered again by the Enemies Foot: and after some dispute the enemy retreated;
but being within Command of their Canon, durst not follow the pursuit; so that
they re-possessed themselves of their Sanctuary with the loss of five men: on
our part were slain two and three wounded. The great Ordnance from their
several Towers does very much annoy us, doing execution on our men as they lie
in their Forts and trenches, etc.

Pontefract Vpper-town 20 October. 1648.
A new Remonstrance.
Whereas the Laws of God, Man, and Nature justify the people in opposing,
fighting against, and imprisoning of Kings, who act contrary to their Oaths,
and the trust imposed on them by the people; and that the same Laws as much
justify them in opposing the power of Parliament, when they betray their
trust, in pleading the interest, and justifying the cause of such princes, join
with them to levy war against the poor people, whose Trustees they are only and
by whose Votes and Election tdey sit in Parliament, to preserve, and not to
destroy them, to condemn, and not justify their Enemies, who have been drunk
with the blood of Saints, and have confessed themselves guilty of the blood of
three hundred thousand souls that have perished by war in the three Kingdoms.

So that by this, the Reader may clearly discern the inference of the free born
people of England upon the whole, resolving to toss their Ball amongst the
Presbyterians, (that so each judgment may catch at it) wherein is wound up
several undeniable Arguments as follows.

1. That the King may err, notwithstanding the maxim in the Law, Lex non
potest errari, ^y laying illegal taxes upon the people, introducing Popery,
and levying War against them. 2 That in committing such errors, he falsifies
the trust which the people of the Land repose in Him, and then His Commands
being unlawful and destructive, it is lawful for the people to disohey them:
and on the contrary, it is no less then sin, and the forfeiture of all the
Liberties, Freedoms, and Birth rights of the people to give obedience
thereunto. 3 That it is lawful and of necessity for the people to levy war
against their King, and all that adhere unto him, for defense of themselves,
and preservation of their birthrighte and freedoms, having once broken the
trust reposed in Him, and put them out of his protection, by levying war
against them, ruling them as a tyrant at his pleasure, and not as a King by the
Law of the Nation. 4 That it is lawful for the peoples Truslees in Parliament
to declare to the Nation the miscarriages of such a tyrannous Prince, and to
state the matters of fact by way of Charge against him. 5 That it is a breach
of trust in the peoples Trustees, and a great dishonor for the English Nation,
to charge the King with such high Crimes, and neither to prove them against
him, nor to clear him of them. 6 It is a great breach of the Trust, and the
National League and Covenant, not to bring Delinquents to condign punishment,
there being no person exempt by the same.
The Demands of the People to the Parliament.
First, That a Parliament by breach of Covenant, Treaties, and Acts of
Parliament, voting and acting against the Covenant, and siding with, and
pleading the interest of the enemies thereof, and of that Nation for which they
are Trustees may err. Secondly, that by breach thereof they have forfeited
their trusts to the people for whom they serve, and by whom they were elected.
Thirdly, that it is lawful fog the people of that Nation to levy war against
them, for the maintenance of their lives and freedoms, which that parliament
endeaxours to give to their enemies, and make them and their posterity slaves
for ever. The said party does further declare, That they desire to be governed
by a King, but such a Prince who shall be governed by the Laws of his people;
and in case he acts contrary to the said Laws, to be as liable to the
punishment thereof, as the poorest Commoner or subject whatsoever.
Letters from the North further say, That Col. Sanders Regiment has lately
fallen upon 200 of the dispersed Cavalry in Gilsland beyond York, and after a
bloody fight routed them, killed 30. and took 80 prisoners, with the lose of 15
men.

And from Newark upon Trent it is likewise said, that a party of the
Parliamenteers riding from thence toward Nottingham, were set upon by a Company
of Royalists, and being three to one became victorious, killed two, disarmed
the rest, and so hasted toward Belvoir Castle, where a party of the Lord
Grey's horse are pursuing them.

Newark 21 October. 1648.
FINIS.

