

BLOODY NEWS FROM NORWICH: OR, A True Relation of a bloody attempt of the
Papists in Norwich, to consume the whole City by fire.

Which they had begun to put in practice setting a house a fire, at the lower
end of High-Bridge-street, burning it to the ground, but by Gods mercy, they
were hindered from doing any more mischief.

Likewise here is added the last bloody News from Jreland. Consisting of a
bloody Tragedy acted upon the body of the Lord Coffeld a Protestant, conspired
by Sir Philip Moneale a Treacherous and bloody Rebel, With the like cruelty
done to Mr. Jronmonger, by the Rebels, also after what manner he being slain,
they committed his Father to prison, and threw his wife and children out of
doors naked.

With the Relation of how many VVagons went out of London, laden with
ammunition to be conveyed to Ireland, for the use of our distressed Brethren,
the Protestants the 2. of December.

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.

News from Nerwich.
WIll mourning never cease, nor lamentation have an end? Will Treachery never be
exiled this Land, but still have its harbor here: O ye blood thirsty Papists,
what are your intents? Do you think that there is not a just God above, who
does see and behold all your wicked designs? Have you bin fostered up in this
Nation as Aesops Ploughman did the Sneake which he redeemed from the oppression
of the cold to destroy us? How often has God repelled the force of your wicked
machinations and damnable Plots and yet will you take no warning? Do you
think because you escape punishment for a time that God will suffer you for
ever? No no assure your selves that Jehovah is just? Do not you duly read
your wicked enterprises presented to the common view of the whole world, and
yet will you daily increase your mischievous Plots, one of which I am to
declare intended for the destruction of Norwichs

Upon the 17. day of November. 1641, was there a great uproare in Norwich
concurning the Papists arising there, they being intended to burn the whole
City without any remorse, two being appointed privily for the same purpose, one
to begin at one end of the City, and the second at the other end, the one was
discovered being about to set fire to a tharcht house, the other he set the
house on fire joining to High Bridge street, which was burnt to the ground, to
the great assonishment of the whole City, but now there, is strong watching and
warding in every corner of the City to prevent further danger.

From Ireland the 25. of November.
TO what a miserable height of wickedness is this world grown too, when one
friend shall not know how to trust the other, as shall now by this ensuing
bloody Story be discovered.

My Lord Coffeld and Sir Philip Moneale being very intimate and familiar
friends, were wont constantly once in two weeks to visit each other, my Lord
coming to his house with some 6. men attending on him, and so likewise, Sir
Pilip with the same attendance, my Lord having bin at the house of Sir Philip,
desired Sir Philip to come upon a time appointed unto him, within a fortnight
St Philip according to his promise, came to visit Lord Cofeld but it proved a
very bloody visitation, yet not-with handing they second all to be very metry
and frolic at the first, but Sr. Philip would always be looking out of the
window into the yard, whereupon the Lord Coffeld called to Sir Philip to come
unto the fire because it was cold, but Sir Philip had a secret fire burning in
his breast which warmed him, wherefore fire still continued looking out of the
window, where he perceived men ent^t in to the Lord Coffelds house, by
several numbers, sometime four at a time, othertimes 6 or 7, till they came
to the number of about three hundred, but as they came they went in at a back
door, which St. Philip Moneale perceiving, he spako to the Lord Coffeld
saying, now my Lord you are my Prisoner, but he taking it as a jest, spoke
merrily: nay Sr. Philip you are my Prisoner, meaning because he was in his
Lordships house at that present, upon which words Sr Philip had the doors
opened, then entered in the Rebels and seized upon the Lord Cofields person,
dismounting his Ordinance from his house top, and afterward slew him, and
pillaged his house.

O yuheard of treachery against so loving a friend, but J must not stand in
admiration of this because I have as bloody to relate.

The Rebels hearts in Jreland are set upon nothing but mischiefs, and bloody
villainy, came into the house of Mr. Jronmonger, and acted such a Tragedy (...)
should the bloody Chronicle wherein is registered all the inhumane acts whichever
were done be searched, this act of theirs is not to be paraleld. Which was thus.

They (the Rebels I mean) entering into the house, seized upon the old man Mr.
Jremongers father, and haled him out of the house to prison.

Then did they drag the man himself, from the fide of his tender wife, and
children, and threw him upon the table, where before his wifes face with a
hatchet, in a most Lamentable manner, cut off his head, and then with the same
harchet did they mangle his quarters, which being done, they rance upon his
wife, and children, and naked as they were, threw them out of doors.

Thus do these bloody minded Rebels, daily act their villainy, by persecuting
and murdering the poor Protestants.

But now by the help of God, we do not fear but their forces shall be over
thrown, and their villainies have a period, insomuch as upon Thursday being the
second of December. there went out of London, above forty wagons laden with
Powder, Match, and Bullets, which are to be conveyed to Westchester, and so
by ship to be transported to Ireland, to arm those poor oppressed Protestants
which stand in need of them.

O God of thy great mercy comfort them speedily, least their Enemies boast, and
say, where is now now their God.

FINIS.
O hone, O hone.



