A BLOODY MASACRE PLOTTED BY THE PAPISTS intended first against the City of
London, and consequently against the whole Land.

Discovered by the care of Alderman Towes, and some other godly and well
affected Citizens.

With a Relation of the great uprore on Monday last: First occasioned by some
words between the late Bishop of Lincoln (now Archbishop of York) and some
London-Apprentices and secondly by Lunsford and his Company.

And the bloody skirmish at Westminster Abbey on Tuesday night.

With the combustion then in the City, and shutting of the City Gates.

With the Noble courage and valor, expressed by Sir Richard Wiseman at the same
Time.

LONDON: Printed for M.R. 1641.

A BLOODY PLOT INTENDED BY THE PAPISTS to massacre the City of London, and
(consequently) the whole Kingdom, etc.
ON Friday night last, (being Christmas Eve) a French man passed through the
Watch, and being examined as the manner is, who went there; he answered
something chubbedly: but being pressed upon the matter where he had been, he said
at Summerset-House. And being asked what he did there so late, he answered,
that he had been at Mass: then being as ked what he did at Mass so late, he
said because it was Christmas Eve; to celebrate the Eve of Christmas, which he
said, was a work of the night.

Then they demanded of him, if he had not been about some Popish plot against
us; And he made answer peremptorily, That he had been about such a plot as they
should hear further on before the Twelve days were expired. This man was heard
to speak thus by Alderman Towes, and others that were then present; and was
therefore committed to the Counter: and the next day being brought before the
Lord Major, he was examined, and put in Bail to the Lord Major: upon which he
was released, till he be called for again to be further examined.

There were also two Frenchmen coming to London by water, who did discourse in
French, now the water-man did undestand French, but took no notice of what they
discoursed, but carried himself as if he did not understand any thing at all.
Thus he rowed them along: and when he had landed his Fair, and taken his money,
he tied his boat to the stairs, and went after them, and caused them to be
apprehended, and carried before a Justice: so they went before Sir John Lenton:
To whom the water-man did testify, that they did talk to this effect, that the
Catholics did intend to make Monday and Tuesday to be the bloodiest days and
nights in the City of London, that ever was in this place; upon this he should
have been committed, but he sent for Bail. And so upon security for his forth
coming, was discharged till be be again called for.

There was also a letter sent from a Gentleman in France to a Citizen (a friend
of his in London) to this effect: That he would desire him to make what speed
he could out of England, and especially out of London, as he tendered his life:
for he was verily persuaded by the rumors he heard in France, that before
Twelft day, there would be bloody designs wrought in this kingdom of England
by the Papists, and especially in the City of London, which place the Papists
malign most.

Now the City has been the more distracted since the placing of Colonel
Lunsford to be the Lieutenant of the Tower, which the City did conceive to be
of dangerous consequence; and that in these and diverse other respects. 1.
Because he is held to be a Papist. 2. He has been Colonel under the King of
France. 3. He is so desperate a man, that to pick out one to run ine the mouth
of a Cannon, or to perform some desperate design, h^ is held to be the only
man in the whole kingdom. 4. The Ordnance are placed against the City upon the
Tower, and want nothing but only mounting, which with help may be done in two
or three hours; and on a sudden (for ought we know) batter down our houses
over our heads ere we be aware. 5. He has been a shedder of blood in this
Land. 6. When the Lord Major that now is, was Shoriffe of London, he was his
prisoner then in Newgate: besides other prisons that he has been in. 7. He is
so deboyst a man, that he is generally reported to be as lascivious even as Sir
John Suckling, or, etc.


Upon the great and just complaint against him, it pleased his gracious
Majesty to put him out again, and to put in one Sir Johnn Biroon, whom we hope
is better affected*

ON Monday being Saint John's day, there was a great uprore at Westminster,
caused by the aforesaid Lunsford.

About noon the said Monday, the Archbishop of York, the late Bishop of
Lincoln, passing to the Parliament House, by many Apprentices of London; some
of those Apprentices expressed themselves, that their desires was to have
Bishops removed, no Bishops. At which the Archbishop was very, angry; and
turning to wards them, seemed as if he would have struck some of them. But they
were not any thing daunted with him, but stood to the matter, yet offering him
no abuse, only crying, No Bishops.

Then turned a Gentleman like man and drew his sword, as if he would fall upon
them, or to defend the Bishop, lest they should have fallen upon him. The mean
while the Prelate gat away. Now whilst this Spark was vapouring with his blade,
an honest man, fearing some mutiny might ensue herefrom, laid hands upon him,
and with some other aid, he was orderly carried before the House of Commons.

About two or three hours after came Colonel Lunsford, and with him about 30.
men more all with Swords and Rapiers, who came in through the great Gate at
Westminster Hall; and taking great notice of the Citizens Apprentices, and
Sailors, that were there passed by them quite through to the further door, and
some means being used for the shutting of the further door, returned back
again, as if they would have gone forth. But having passed all the people, they
turned back on a sudden, and all drew their swords and Rapiers, and fell upon
the people with great violence. The people being for the most part unweaponed,
fled before them, and when they came to the further gate it was shut; and so
they could not pass out that way, but were forced some to run into one Court,
some into another: others came up stairs into the Court of Request, where was
Sir Richard Wiseman, who seeing this sudden mutiny, and perceiving how it went,
spoke most bravely to animate them to return with such weapons as they had. I
will (quoth Sir Richard) spend my dearest and best blood in defense of the
House of Commons, come (quoth he) fall on; There were Sailors that had good
Trunchions in their hands, and Sir Richard with his Sword fell upon them as
well as he could. But Sir Richard Wiseman was sore put to it, for he did not
only hold play with two of them, but again the third also did run full at him
with his Rapier: (but God prevented them) and Sir Richard with his sword struck
at the others Rapier, and did make it fly in two pieces.

One of the Sailers was foiled with 4. or 5. of them at once having no other
weapon, save only a trunchion wherewith he quit himsel very stoutly aginst them
all.

And (such was the Providence of Almighty God) by this time, those Citizens and
Apprentises (having no weapons about them, had brough down Brick-battes in the
lappes of there clokes, which they had pulled up in the Court of Requests, and
with there thowing of the said Brick-bates, did (immediately) cause Lunsford,
and his Company to Retreat, and forced them to fly: But some of them were
raken and carried before the House:

Lunsford himself was sain to wade above the deepnesse of his boots to take
bore and so made an escape by water.

Hereupon the City was again distracted, the Train. band and Watch and Ward was
raised, the Gates of the City were shut up and every man bestird him self, for
his our defense.

There were some 8. or 9. Citizens carried unto the Garchouse by an Officer in
Westmilster, but he did foone (again) release them.

On Tuesday being Childermas Day there was some Apprentises in the Abbey at.
Westminster, upon whom certain in the Abbey with some of the Bishop of York,
(late Bishop of Lincoln) his Scollers or Attendants or some appointed (as it
seems) for that design.

About 5. of the clock at night they were shut into the Abbey as Prisoners: And
what they have done with them, God knows.

Sir Richard Wiseman and M. Lilhorn and some others hearing of it, went to
inquire after them and when they came to the Abbey: Those within the Abbey shot
at them, and some of them also came forth with naked swords and after a cruel
and a most Bucherly manner fell upon them, and have wounded Sir Richard and M.
Lilborne and diverse others: and what the event will be, God knows.

The Lord protect us, (...) AMEN

FINIS.

