THE BLOODY FIELD, OR, The great Engagement of the English and Scottish Forces
beyond Sterling; with the manner how Major Genesis Massey's Lieu colonel led on
the Forlorn Hope against Col. Morgan, and charged each other with abundance of
Courage and Resolution.

The Particulars of the Fight, the event and success thereof, the number
killed, taken, and wounded on both sides, and the Commissions granted in the
name of the King of Scots, to the English Red coats that come in to his
assistance.

Likewise, the imbodying of the two Armies on both sides, the interposing of
General Monk near the Mountains, the advancing of Col. Lilburn to his
assistance, the besieging of one of our chief Castles, and the marching of some
of the Cavalry toward Cumberland.

Imprinted at London for George Horton, 1654.

SIR,
SInce my last of the 15 instant, here has happened a great change and
alteration; no less then 1000 new foot are gone in to the enemy, and General
Middleton has taken the whole charge of the Army, resolving to force his
passage through our forces, if he can, and to march Southward. The whole body
is drawn up into a Regimental way, and Col. Massey's Lieu. col. is commander in
chief of the English Cavalry, consisting of about 1500 horse with whom he made
his way through into Ross, where little Col. Morgan attended his motion, and
drew out a considerable party to receiv them, but being over powered, and having
received a desperate charge, were forced to wheel off toward Dingwel, which
the little Col perceiving immediately advanced with 700 horse, and coming near
them, gave Order, that not a man should fire til he came within a horse length
of the enemy, and then to throw their pistols in their faces, and so to fall in
with their swords, which accordingly they did, and after a tedious and sharp
Conflict, dispierced these valiant Heroes, took about 100 prisoners, and killed
many upon the place; but not without some loss. Nevertheless, coming to a Pass
5 miles from Dingwel, they rallyed, and so consequently may be able to defend
it til the Army comes up.

Maj. Genesis Dylar has besieged Sinclair Castle with 900 foot, and five Troops of
Horse, and summoned the Governor; who returned an Answer from the mouth of the
Canon, and is resolved to dispute it with fiery Arguments. Lieu. Col. Irwin is
returned from the Borders of England with some prisoners, and as he passed by
Aberfoy Castle gave them a Volley, but made no further attempt. Ruthin Castle
is in some danger; but supplies are gone both in the Primrose and Sparrow. The
people are mad from all parts to be engaged, and we fear the further spreading
of this great insurrection, notwithstanding the great overthrow given to the
Earl of Selkeith, and the Load Noughton, whose parties were so dissipated that
not ten men were left in a company, besides above 250 (as we hear) were slain
upon the place. Sundry other disputes has happened, and many desperate
engagements, wherein our Achievements (sometimes has been crovvn'd with
tryumphant success.

For Col. Fitch advancing to a Pass, and conceiving it feasible, made so
dexterious an attempt, that after an hours dispute, he beat them out of their
Trenches, possessed the Works, took four picces of Canons, killed diverse, and
took about 150 prisoners; but not without some loss.

Since which time, Genesis Middleton has had a randevouz in Southerland, unto
whose assistance the Earl of Seafort, and the Lord Mac-Aldow are come in with
eleven hundred horse and foot; so that they now speak themselves to be no less
then 12000 horse and foot: But we deem them to be not above 5000; and their
main Body continues in Southerland; against whom Col. Monk is marched with 850
Horse, and 2000 Foot, which the enemy perceiving, drew forth about 1500 horse
and foot, under the Command of Sir Arthur Forbis, who marched up in three
several Bodies to maintain a Pass against our forces, and to fight them:
insomuch, that upon Major Bridges advance with our Forlorn-Hope, Sir George
drew forth above 300 English that had deserted their Colors, and charged in
person with them very puissantly; but they were as gallantly received, and
charged each other through and through: yet so dubious was the conflict, that
for a time it seemed very disputable, till at last, the additional Forces came
up, and put a period to the dispute, taking diverse prisoners, and killing many;
and it is said, that Monro escaped narrowly: In this Conflict we lost about 20
men, and 30 wounded. The enemies loss is conceived to be treble.

As soon as the additional forces come up, We intend to take the field, and
interpose, if possible, between General Middleton, Glencairn, Kenmore, and
Loftus, who threaten fire and sword to all that will not come in and rise with
them. And they give out, that they will rather engage with Us then hazard
going through the Hills, they being so mountainous and impassable, knowing that
it will be the ruin of their horses, and most of their Foot.

We expect a sudden Engagement, and the additional Forces and new Levies on
both sides are drawing up to dispute the quarrel: so that consequently it may
prove as desperate an en^agement as ever yet happened. The justness of the Cause
carry it.

Edenborough April 26. 1654.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
UPon the close of the precedent Letter, arrived a Post from the North, who
intimates, that his Excellency General Monk is got beyond the Enemy, and
interposes between the mountains and General Middleton, so that now a sudden
engagement is expected between the two main Bodies, and some notable Passes has
already been disputed, but not with too much Conquest on either side: For,
those English that have deserted Us, are as full of policy as valor, and fight
with great courage and resolution, and for the encouragement of others, diverse
are made Officers, and to that end, several Commissions are issued forth in the
name of Charles Stuart. Col. Lilburn, Col. Daniel, and Col. Fitches Regiments
are marching toward Dingwel, and our Design is to surround them (if we can)
and then engage them.

FINIS.

