Bloody NEVVES FROM SEA: A perfect Narrative of a great and bloody Fight
between the English Fleet commanded by General Blake, and the Dutch Navy upon
the Northern SEAS.

With the particulars thereof, the occasion and manner of their Engagement, and
the number of ships sunk and taken.

Also, A great Victory obtained against the Hollanders by Sir George Ascue upon
the Coast of France, the manner of the Fight, and the number of ships burnt,
sunk, and taken by the English there.

LIKEWISE, Vantrump's Challenge, sent to General Blake, to fight him on the
coast of Flanders, or the Narrow-Seas: With the great preparations that are
making in Holland of men, money, and other provisions to resist the English.

LONDON: Printed by B. A. 1652.

Several great FIGHTS AT SEA Between The English and the Hollander, with the
particulars thereof, and the number sunk and taken.
SIR,
THe Ambassadors of the United Provinces having been long in Treaty with the
Parliament, and yet notwithstanding have given no reasonable satisfaction to
the just demands of this Commonwealth, and being since remanded by their
masters the States; his Excellency General Blake thought it not good any longer
to protract time, but vigorously (for the honor of this Commonwealth) to
prosecute the work in hand, and to fight the Hollanders wheresoever he can meet
them; with this resolution he set sail with a gallant Fleet of ships toward
the Northern seas, there to disturb and give a check to the insolency of the
Dutch, whom he understood in great numbers to be fishing upon our English seas;
leaving Sir George Ascue to command the rest of the Fleet in the Downs.

He had not sailed far, but that he made a discovery of certain Hollanders,
whom he pursued so close that he forced them to engage, and after some small
dispute, he boarded four, two whereof were men of war, the other were Merchants
ships, laden with many rich commodities, all the rest were dispersed up and
down, being not able in that have to keep company with each other.

His Excellency then set forward in his course Northward, and according to his
intelligence, he found the Dutch fishing, with many men of war that attended
them for their present guard, and to convoy them home; his Excellency coming
near them, saluted them first with one single gun, thereby willing them (it
being the custom at sea) to lore their Topsails, and submit to the
Commonwealth of England, but (their spirits being heightened with the
presumption of their own strength) they refused, answering him with a broad
side, and after that with another, whereupon both parties engaged, maintaining
a gallant dispute with great resolution, for a good space; for having before
elevated their spirits with Brandy wine, viz. Strong-water, they stoutly
maintained their decks; but it pleased the Lord of Hosts at last to crown our
Fleet with victory, so that they sunk two, took four, all men of war, with
about an hundred sail of Fishermen, which they brought all safe into our
Harbors in Scotland.

From aboard the James, July the 1. 1652.
A Letter from Rotterdam.
SIR,
WE hear no talk now but of making great preparations to defend our selves and
ships against your ships, who we hear take all they can meet withal at sea;
this has caused a general alarm throughout the Country, and men and money
are raising apace to make our party good against you; for by your last answer
given to our Ambassadors with you, we do conceive that you intend war to this
State; who in most places of this Country are no ways sorry for it; for till we
have beaten you at sea, we think we shall never be able with treating to bring
you to accept of such terms of our own, as we have given to other nations by
being Masters at sea. We think out selves capable and sufficient to do it, or
else we would never have begun with you: and whereas you expect satisfaction,
we may chance to demand the like of you with double interest for the charges
you have now put us to, by your lofty carriage at sea, this has so much
incensed our common sort of people, that unless some sudden course be taken by
the Magistrates to right them against the English, they will raise
insurrections, and revenge themselves on the Magistrates, who dare hardly walk
the streets for fear of being misused by the peeple in general.

A Letter from Dublin in Ireland.
SIR,
I Promised you an account of the laying down of arms by the enemy upon this
last agreement; but my puddering business does so turmoil me, that I know not
whether I have performed that task or no, my fickle memory in the hurty of
affairs, does not inform me concerning my performance of that promise; but to
be sure, I shas now give you a full account, as briefly as may be: Dungon,
Scurlock, Westmeath, and the Lord of Clonmaleer, did bring in part of the
forces, in all about the number of 800 at the most; the rest, being near so
many thousands, still does refuse to submit, being they are not pardoned for
their murders, and we are as well contented that the war is now clearly stated
upon that account. The Lord of Clanrickard is about Letrim with a considerable
Army, my Lord President, and Commissary General Reynolds, are both at Slego to
take that in, Colonel Venables is fortifying Belturbet, the Lieut. General, and
Major General, and the Lord of Broghil are all gone into Kerry to subdue
Muskerry: The Lord Taaff is hereabouts with the Byrons, Coals, Conways and
Grace, who all keep in several great fastnesses, and by means of the great
Woods and Mountains, easily escape me; but I am fortifying several places near
them, and now an finishing Tullon, from whence I newly came hither for some
accommodations to fortify Dedrum. As I lay at Tullon last week, there was an
ambush laid by Captain Conway, and Captain Line, for Colonel Pretty, who was
coming from Carlow to me, with a guard of ren horse: I did hear of it, and
dispatched away two parties from my Camp; the enemy had engaged Colonel
Pretty, killed two, and took Captain Miller and four Troopers prisoners, but
Colonel Pretty escaped; the parties dispatched out pursued them close, and
killed four, released Captain Miller, took Captain Line and one more, and
sixteen good horses, their riders escaped in the Bogs. That night I sent out a
party of horse and foot to the Briscales, who killed above forty, and took
thirty good horse, and returned; here Mr. Phelim sent his Trumpetter to me for
to grant Captain Line a Parol, I returned him no answer, owning him as a
murderer and woodkern, and upon that score intend to prosecute him, sent him
word that I would not give nor take quarter with him, nor any of his party, and
by a Proclamation which I sent him by his Trumper, offered 200 li. for any to
execute him upon his own lentence of not coming in upon the Agreement, but
standing out as a murderer, therefore if any should bring me his body or head,
I would give them 200. li.

Sir, I am Your humble Servant J. H.
Dublin, June 20. 1652. Postiscript.
Since I writ this Letter, I have certain intelligence, that Slego is
surrendered, and that Sir Theophilus Jones with a party of Horse of Dragoons,
killed two Colonels, ten Captains, and three hundred of a party of three
thousand he met with in the County of Cavan, and took all their horse; and that
the Liev. Genesis Ludlow fell upon a party of the enemy near the Lough, killed
many, took a great quantity of powder and ammunition, and 60 horse.

From the Downs we received intelligence, that Sir George Ascue, whom General
Blake left to command the rest of the English Fleet in the Downs, is very
active and vigilant to discharge the trust reposed in him, and receiving
intelligence of about 45 fail of Hollanders, that were on the coast of France,
he resolved to fight them; so setting sail toward them, it was not long before
he descried them, and coming near them, he presented them with a broadside,
they answered him with the like, whereupon happened a very desperate engagement,
but after a very hot and bloody dispute, which continued for about 2 hours with
great gallantry and resolution, Sir G. Ascue became victor, took 7 of them,
sunk and burned four, and forced about twenty four more of them to run on
ground on the French shore, all which we conceive cannot possible escape
shipwreck. The rest of the Hollanders Sir George is in very hot pursuit of. It
is reported by some that the Rubey is sunk, which (if true) would prove a very
great loss, she carrying 42 guns, and about 480 men. It is also reported that
Vantrump has sent a letter to Gen Blake, wherein he challenges him to fight
him upon equal terms, upon the coast of Flanders or the narrow seas; but it is
believed his heart will hardly serve him to make good his challenge.



FINIS.

