A TRUE RELATION Of the late Great SEA FIGHT As it was sent in a Letter to his
EXCELLENCY THE LORD GENERAL Cromwell, From Genesis BLAKE and Genesis MONCK.

Wherein is a List of what Dutch Ships were taken and Sunk, with the number of
Prisoners.

Likewise the number of what men were slain and wounded on our side.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to sold at his house in Py-Corner, and
by Thomas Brewster at the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

FOR HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General CROMWELL.
May it please your Excellency,
YOUR Lordships of the second instant, with the enclosed Intelligence, we this
day received, and, according to your Excellencies apprehensions thereon, we
have engaged with the Dutch Fleet; A brief account of the first days action we
have already sent unto your Lordship; The next day, being the third instant, we
did what we could to re-ingage them, and having the wind (which was but little)
about Noon we came within shot; After four hours dispute with them, or
thereabouts, they endeavored what they could to get away from us; but having
then a pretty fresh gale of wind, we pressed so hard upon them, that we sunk
and took many of them, as appears by the enclosed List, and do suppose we
should have destroyed most of them, but that it grew dark, and being off of
Ostend among the sands, we durst not be to bold, especially with the great
Ships; So that it was thought fit we should Anchor all night, which we
accordingly did about ten of the Clock.

This Morning some of our Ships descryed the Enemy again a far off, steering
toward the Willings; Whereupon a Council of War being called, it was resolved
we should forthwith set fail with the whole Fleet toward the VVillings, so
far as with safety we might, and so to range along the Coast till we came to
the Texell (the better to improve the present Victory the Lord has given unto
us) unless we shall see cause to divert our course. We shall not further
trouble your Lordship, but subscribe our selves

From on board the Resolution at Sea off of Ostend North East, June 4. 1653.
Your Excellencies most humble Servants, Robert Blake, George Monck.


A List of the Dutch Ships taken and sunk, with the number of Prisoners;
Likewise the number of men slain, and wounded in our own Fleet, viz.
On Thursday.
Four or five Dutch Ships sunk.
On Friday.
Dutch Prisoners 1350. Whereof six Captains. Dutch Ships taken, 11. Sunk, six.
Water Hoys taken, two. Dutch Ships blownup amongst their own Fleet, two. Sunk
by that Disaster, one. Men slain in our own Fleet, 126. Whereof one Captain.
Wounded, 236. Not one Ship lost on our part.
FINIS.

