A GREAT FIGHT AT Market-Harborough in Liecestershire, BETWIXT The
Presbyterians and Independents, some declaring for his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax; others for the late elected Generals, Massy and Points.

WITH, The number that were slain and wounded, and the manner how the
Presbyterians were put to flight.

depiction of two gentlemen on horseback

Aug: 14 ^^^don, Printed for Nathan^^l Ginnings, 1647.

Upon Tuesday being the tenth of this instant Month of August, a great Company
of young men and others, were gathered together at the sign of the Crown
(being the chiefest Inn in the town) at which Inn, most of the Rooms were
filled, and many strong arguments there held, some approving of the late
Engagement of Poyntz, and Massy, others detesting the same, saying they would
live and dye with his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and that so long as
breath remained within their Bodies, they would sacrifice all their lives, for
Himself, the Army and Kingdoms Cause.

At which expression, the presbyterian party began to tremble, and showed
themselves with most inveterate Cullers, whereupon, great divisions arose, and
many vehement blows ensued, for the forenamed parties who declared themselves
for the aforesaid Generals, immediately retired out of their Rooms, and betook
themselves to the back yard toward the Windmill, where was a very sudden
engagement of a most desperate and hot Encounter, some crying out, that they
would live and dye for the true Worship and Discipline of Presbytery; others
saying, that they would spend their dearest blood for the divine Worship of
Independency; insomuch, that at the last the Encounter began to be so hot, that
the adverse party began to practice the moving motion, and fain would have
deserted the place, but could not, by reason of the close pursuit, whereupon
they immediately threw down their arms, viz. Swords, clubs, and such like
weapons, crying peccavi for the former Engagement, protesting never to do the
like again.

Some were wounded, but not many slain except two or three.

After the fight was ended, each man betook himself toward his own home, and
those that were wounded attended upon my cozen Blague the Surgeon.

Our Country is now in a gallant posture of peace, etc.

Thus, for the present, I humbly take my leave, only I entreat you to vouchsafe
the intelligence of these our later times, and to annexe hereunto, a copy of
the late Articles in printed, as also the further proceedings of hie
Excellency, etc.

Vale, vale, Tho: Blagne.
Harborough, 6. of August, 1647.
The Articles follows, viz.
I.
HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, being advanced near the City of London,
with a gallant and puissant Army, occasioned by the late disturbances, and
tumultuous Risings of diverse disaffected persons within this City, sent
several Messages to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, for a
speedy composall of all things in love, for the preservation and safety of this
famous City, and for the preventing of a second War.

Whereupon the Right Honorable the Lord Major, together with the Aldermen, and
Common Council of the said City, seriously consulting and debating thereupon,
after some time spent in debate thereof, resolved to send Commissioners to his
Excellency, to treat with him, and his Council of War, which was accordingly
done, and the said Commissioners dispatched away, insomuch that there began a
happy treaty, and after two or three days spent in consultation concerning the
great and weighty affairs of the Kingdom, the fourth day produced happy
tidings of a peace, all things being agreed upon betwixt the City and the Army,
which Agreement, or Articles, were to this effect, viz.

1. That the For^es and Ordnance be forthwith drawn off from the
Fortifications and Bulwarks about the Lines of Communication.

2. That a speedy course may be taken for the quitting of all Forts on
Southwark side, which are not as yet in the possession of the Forces under
command of his Excellency.

3. That Giles Fort, the two Forts at Foxe-Hall, and the rest of the Forts down
to the Water side, be surrendered to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or any
other whom he shall please to appoint.

All which particulars were agreed upon, and assented to by the Lord Major,
Aldermen and Commons of the City of London.

The Copy of another Letter concerning the proceedings of the Presbyterians in
the North.
SIR,
THe Convention of the Estates at Edinburgh is newly begun, but we hear not of
any resolves as yet, there be some that urge with great vehemence the necessity
there is for that Kingdom to assist their Brethren that keep the covenant in
England, in which the Clergy have done their parts, and by order of the Clergy
upon an apprehension of some great danger to Religion in England and Scotland
the 25 of July last, a general Fast was kept throughout Scotland, that God
would direct the Committee of Estates and general Assembly of that Kingdom in
preserving thereof, and being helpful to England, this many men believe does
carry a design which is of a higher nature then every ordinary capacity
attained to and the committee of Estates themselves, stumble at the design of
engaging against England, for that the invitation ^s not sufficient, nor a
party in England sufficient to countenance such an undertaking, yet the busy
headed clergy endeavor what they can in their Pulpits to move and stire up the
People to take up Arms, and some think it is not without good cause, for if
Presbytery does not prosper well in England, they doubt of a continued good
success thereof in Scotland.

FINIS.

