A Bloody Independent PLOT DISCOVERED.

PROSECVTED By the open Malice and Fury of diverse Agitators, Levellers,
Anabaptists, Brownists and other Sectaries and London Agents.

1 To Murder the King. 2 To Divide the Army. 3 To Level the Nobillity and
Gentry. 4 To Abolish the Protestant Religion. 5 To Act any Design that shall be
destructive to all these; accounting it a wilful sin against God if they do
it not, if their Consciences shall dictate it unto them.
Those five were committed by the House of Commons, Nov. 25. for prosecuting
these most horrid Designs before mentioned.

(Viz.)

Thomas Prince, Cheese-monger. Samuel Chidley, Stocken-seller committed to the
Gate House. Jeremy Jves. Will: Larner. Book-binder. And Thomas Tailor. Committed
to Newgate
Printed in the year of the Saints Treason, 1647.

A Bloody Independent Plot.
AS a ship whilst it is upon the main sea, is in a manner a Castle, or
Commonwealth by it self, and having all the sayls hoysted up, and swollen with
the wind, and the Banners displayed, with a lofty show danceth upon the waves,
and allureth every eye to behold the pride thereof: But when it comes into the
Haven, it is straight ransacked by the Searcher, forced to pay custom, the
sayls and banners taken in, the ship lies at Rode, and is little regarded.

So this Ship without a Pilot, this Parliament without a King, this body
without a head so long as it sayls upon the surges of worldly vanities, and
follows the tide of a consciensllesse course, may range uncontroled, having
many favorable gales to waft them for war, and honors and pomp to set them
onward to their journies end, so long they may be admired and looked on by the
people; but whenever they come into the Haven, they must expect Searchers,
they must cast Ancor, pay customs, their sayls gathered in, their glory
disgraced, or little or nothing set by. So long as we enjoyed all blessings,
plenty of peace, plenty of the Gospel, plenty of bread, plenty of all things,
we were free from Sects, Schisms, Rebellions, Murders, and the like, then we
were admired by all nations, but when we were once driven by contrary winds
upon the raging surges of the People, Discensions, Schismy, and the like, we
were quickly shipwrackt, drove upon a Rock, and split, and soon became a Prise
for the merciless waves.

This is Englands case at this day for these enemies of al our blessings may
fitly be compared to the Libard, that bears so deadly a hatred unto man, that
at first sight it flies in his face; to avoid the rage thereof, the custom is
to show him a man's Picture, which he no sooner sees, but he rendeth and
tareth, showing thereby how eagerly it is bent against man it self, whose
Image it cannot abide, So it is with these Anabaptists, Levellers, and
Sectaries, when they cannot break their cursed malice against the King to
murder him, then they seek to rend and divide that Army, which should be his
chief strength and defense.

1. For their cruel and cursed intentions to murder the King. I could explain
my self at large, and tell you of the man hired to do that bloody and
abhorred act, tell you their meetings about the same at Aldersgate at the sign
of the Mouth, at the Windmill Tavern at Old-Jury end, in Foster-lane, and
Friday-street where they conspired his death, and made no question of engaging
Master Peter's and Master Dell therein; who had often termed him a Dead Dog: For
justification of this I refer you to the Letter sent to His Majesty, to desire
him to provide for the safety of his person.

May it please your Majesty,
IN discharge of my duty J cannot omit to acquaint you that my brother was at a
meeting last night with eight or nine Agitators who in debate of the obstacle
which did most hinder the speedy effecting of their designs, did conclude it
was Your Majesty; and as long as your Majesty does live you would be so; and
therefore resolved, for the good of the Kindome, to take your life away; and
that to that action they were well assured that Master Dell, and Master Peter's
(two of their Peachers) would willingly bear them company, for they had often
said to these Agitators, Your Najesty is but a dead Dog: My prayers are for
your Majesty's safety; but do too much fear it cannot be whilst you are in
those hands.

J wish with my soul Your Majesty were at my house in Broadstreet, where I am
confident I could keep you in private till this storm were over, but beg Your
Majesty's pardon, and shall not presume to offer it us an advice, it is only my
constant zeal to Your Service, who am, Your Majesty's dutiful Subject,
November. 9. 1647.

E. R.


2. For their pernicious Plot to divide the Army, it was carried on with a
desperate Resolution, the working of it by the London Agents, showed how active
they were to effect the same, I will refer you for the truth hereof to Sir
Thomas Fairfax, his Letter to the Lords and Commons written with his own hand,
verbatim, from the Rendezvous near Hartford.

SIR, I thought it my duty to give you an account of our Rendezvous yesterday
near Hartford, where I have given order for my own Regiment of Horse, the
Lieutenants General Regiment of Hose, and some other Regiments of Horse and
foot (to the number of seven) to apreare) but Colonel Harrisons Regiment of
Horse were so abused by some London Agents, that contrary to order, they came
to the Rendezvous in a very tumultuous manner, and with papers in their Hat,
called, The agreement of the people, and on the out side, in Capital Letters
was printed, Englands Freedom, Soldiers Rights. Colonel Lilburns Regiment of
Foot, was also exceedingly abused by the said London Agents, so that they came
also contrary to order in a mutinous manner, and had driven away all their
prime Officers, the chief Officer conducting them being a Captain Lieutenant,
who is secured to be tried by a Council. A great number of the papers before
mentioned were dispersed, but upon command the Soldiers pulled them out of
their Hats; diverse private soldiers of the chief Mutiners of Colonel
Lilburns Regiment were taken, and three condemned by a Council of war and
one by lot sh^t to death at the head of the Regiment, Coll. Rainsborough
delivered a Petition in the names of many, which had engaged against the
command. Every one praying, that the agreement of the People annexed thereto
might be promoted, etc. Major Scot, a Member of the House was there very
active, and secured, and sent up to the Parliament. These things being a little
over, the General made a Declaration in the head of each Regiment, and they
cheerfully, and unanimously declared again. That they would serve the
Parliament, and b^ obedient to the old way of Discipline, under His Excellency,
signed

Hartford, Nov. 18. THO. FAIRFAX.


For their design to beguile the Common people and soldiers under pretense of
Liberty: I refer you to their engagement, which I here insert for your better
satisfaction therein.

An Agreement of the People, for a firm and present Peace upon Grounds of
Common Right and Freedom.
HAving by our late labors and hazards made it appear to the world at how
high a rate we value our just freedom; and God having so far owa^d our
cause, as to deliver the Enemies thereof into our hands. We do now hold our
selves bound in mutual duty to each other, to take the best care we can for the
future, to avoid both the danger of returning into a slavish condition, and the
chargeable remedy of another war: for as it cannot be imagined that as so many
of our Country men would have opposed us in this quarrel, if they had
understood their own good, so we may easily promise to our selves that when our
Common Rights and libertyes shall be cleared, their endeavors will be
disappointed that seek to make themselves our Masters; since therefore our
former oppressions and scarce yet ended troubles has been occasioned, either
by want of frequent National meetings in Counsel, or by rendering those
meetings ineffectuall. We are fully agreed and resolved to provide that
hereafter our Representatives be neither left to any uncertainty for the time,
nor made useless to the ends for which they are intended: in order whereunto
we declare.

1. That the people of England, being at this day very unequally distributed by
Counties, Cities and Burrouhs for the election of their Deputies in Parliament
ought to be more indifferently proportioned according to the number of the
Inhabitants; the circumstance whereof, for number, place, and manner, are to be
set down before the end of this present Parliament.

2. That to prevent the many inconveniences apparently rising, from the long
continuance of the same persons in authority, this present Parliament be
dissolved upon the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, 1648.

3. That the people do of course choose themselves a Parliament once in two
years, viz. upon the first Thursday in every second March as shall be
prescribed before the end of this present Parliament, to begin to fit upon the
first Thursday in April following at Westminster, or such other place as shall
be appointed from time to time by the preceding Representatives; and to
continue till the last day of September, then next ensuing and no longer.

4. That the power of this and all future Representatives of this Nation, is
inferior, only to theirs which choose them, and does extend without the
consent or concurrence of any other person or persons to the enacting,
altering, and repealing of Laws, to the erecting and abolishing of Officers
and Courts, to the appointing, removing and calling to account Magistrates and
Officers, of all degrees: to the making War and Peace, to the treating with
foreign States. And generally, to whatsoever is not expressly, or implyedly
reserved by the represented to themselves.

Which are as follows.

1. THat matters of Religion and the ways of Gods Worship, are not at all
entrusted to us by any humane power, because therein we cannot remit or exceed
a tittle of what our Consciences dictate to be the mind of God without wilful
sin: nevertheless the public way of instructing the Nation (so it be not
compulsive) is referred to their discretion.

2. That the matter of impresting and constraining any of us to serve in the
wars is against our freedom; and therefore we do not allow it in our
Representatives; the rather, because money (the sinews of war) being always at
their disposal they can never want numbers of men apt enough to engage in any
just cause.

3. That after the dissolution of this present Parliament, no person be at any
time questioned for any thing said or done, in reference to the late public
differences, otherwise then in execution of the Judgments of the present
Representatives, or House of Commons.

4. That in all Laws made or to be made, every person may be bound alike and
that no Tenure, Estate, Charter, Degree, Birth, or place, do confer any
exemption from the ordinary course of Legal proceedings, whereunto others are
subjected.

5. That as the Laws ought to be equal, so they must be good, and not
evidently destructive, to the safety and well-being of the People. THese things
we declare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and resolved to
maintain them with our utmost possibilities, against all oppositions
whatsoever, bring compelled thereunto not only by the examples of our
Ancestors, whose blood was often spent in vain for the recovery of their
Freedoms, suffering themselves through fraudulent Accomodations, to be still
deluded of the fruit of their Victories, but also by our own woeful experience,
who having long expected, and dearly earned the establishment of these certain
rules of Government are yet made to depend for the settlement of our peace and
freedom, upon Him that intended our bondage, and brought a cruel Wardage upon
us.

If you truly and impartially ponder this engagement, called an Agreement of
the people for present peace upon grounds of Commonwealth and Freedom. Be
pleased therefore to consider, that these are those, that whilst they cry out
Liberty, Liberty, Freedom, Freedom do bring silly souls into Captivity,
Thraldom and Bondage, by their subtle wiles and insinuations, even whilst
all you have become a prey unto their unsatiable Consciences, that will (if they
should prevail (as God forbid) Lord it over you with more tyranny then the
very Turks and Infidels that never knew God. Therefore first let me desire you
to know what people these are that pretend peace upon grounds of Common-Rights
and Freedom, and you shall find they are even pernicious and factious spirited
Sectaries, Anabaptists, Brownists, and the like, that never were good to any
body, but their own Fraternity or Faction; and are a people so thoroughly
Iesuited in their destructive Principles, that they stick not to murder any,
though Christian Kings, or any else that are without, as they term it: One
example is yet fresh in our memories, of a most bloody and inhumane Massacre
committed upon the body of one Master Loyonell Danel, by one of their Brethren
named Deane, and others of the zealous Independent Cluster; when after they had
dogged him a long way, and coming into Elbowlane, most barbarously knocked him
down with a Poul-axe, and after with a knife cut his throat; in a mockery,
calling out, Lights, Lights hoe, and when the people arise to their windows,
and asked the reason of their so calling out; They made answer, Here Is a thing
like a man, has lost his soul, and cannot see which way it is gone: And so (as
they thought) fled from the hand of deserved Justice to Oxford, into the Kings
quarters for refuge, which no sooner was made known unto his Majesty, but most
Christianly, and justly he caused them presently to be apprehended, and
delivered up, being a King that never would pardon Murder and hated to protect
such blood thirsty Homicides; From the profane nursery of Oxford, they were
removed to their native Collodge of Newgate; and after commenced (for so
barbarous an act) at Tyburn, at Doctor Stories Cap, which makes the rest of
their Il-dependent Brethren ever since cry out against, and so eagerly strive
to pull down humane Learning; Thus much to show you the nature of them all,
even from Cromwell to Lilburne, from Jreton to Overton, and so over all the
rest of these Gunpowder Saints; how many Christians think you has that Town
Bull of Ely (in his foming zeal) goar'd to death with his rebellious Horns? was
it not a right Christian part think you of the Defender of the Faith, John
Lilburn after his soldiers had surprised that honest and godly Christian
Gentleman, Master William Hagar, as he was walking after evening prayer on the
Lords day in his Garden, stripped him to the bare skin, and so drove him before
them ten miles, till he came in the presence of this holy Colonel, who was so
void of all Christian Compassion, that he espying a Ring upon the Gentleman's
finger, he checked his soldiers that they took it not off: They making
answer, they could not get it off, it having been so long worn by the
Gentleman, that the flesh had over-growne it; John Lilburne makes answer, Then
take off finger and all. This was but for a Ring; think you not then, that if
John and his holy Brethren will cut off a finger for a Ring, that they will not
kill a King for less then a Crown.

3. For levelling the Nobility and Gentry, is as apparent as the Sun, for do
they not intend the destruction of the Nobility, when they seek to take away
their negative voice, and to make the supreme power to be in the Common People;
they intend also to level all Estates, and people, and to that end they bring
this Argument in defense thereof.

In the beginning (say they) God made man perfect, and gave him Paradise, where
he had abundance of all things, but after he fell, man was cursed, and then he
was to eat his bread in the sweat of his brows, etc. Then where is the blessing
for the Children of God, except it be to have the abundance of all things as at
the Creation. For the Curse of the wicked is, with labor, and industry of body
to get their livings. Ergo. The righteous are not under the Curse, therefore
must in joy abundance of all things.

4. That they intend the overthrow the Protestant Religion, it is evident; for
all their Books express inveterat hatred and malice against the same, raving,
railing and venting all spleen and malice against both it, the Ministers
thereof, and against both Woship, Government and Discipline belonging thereto,
impiously terming both It, and them Antichristian and Diabolical, etc.

5. If their Consciences shall dictate any thing to them, as to murder, rob,
commit adultery, equivocate or the like, and act any thing, though never so
evil, so it be destructive to those that are without, (as they term them) that
is, That have no Community with them; they are bound to do it, because their
Conscience dictates it unto them; Nay, they wilfully sin against God if they
do it not, as their own tongues confess in their Areement with the People:
And moreover in the last clause of the said Agreement, they do as good as tell
us. That they have deerly earned the establishment of their (pernicious and
Traiterous) Rules of Government; and will no longer depend for the settlement
of their Peace, and their Freedom upon Him, (King CHARLES) that b^ought Bondage
and cruel War upon them, Though indeed these Sectaries have been the most
Active for bloodshed in these abhorred wars, and like their elder brother
Faux, (though more subtly) have under a pretense of Liberty and Freedom,
blown us up into that ruin, misery and slavery, that no Nation or Age (since
Christianity became a Profession,) ever groaned under the like Bondaage and
Tyranny.

How desperately bold and audacious these Incendiaries are let all reasonable
people judge, when they do promote their seditious designs even to the very
faces of the Parliament, in the name of the people as may appear by these
votes following.

Die Martis, 9. Novem. 1647.
A Paper directed, to the Supreme Authority of the Nation, The Commons in
Parliament assembled, and styled, the just and earnest Petition of those whose
names are subscribed, in behalf of themselves, and all the Freeborn People of
Englund; together with a printed Paper annexed, entitled, An Agreement of the
People for a firm and present Peace, upon grounds of Common Right, were read.

Resolved, etc.

That the matters contained in these Papers, are destructive to the Being of
Parliaments, and to the Fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc,

That a Letter be sent to the General, and these Papers enclosed, together
with the Vote of the House upon them; And that he be desired to examine the
proceeding of this business in the Army, and return an account hereof to this
House.

Die Martis, 23. November. 1647.
A Petition directed, To the Supreme Authority of England, The Commons in
Parliament assembled, and entitled, The humble Petion of many Freeborn People
of England, sent in a Letter directed to Master Speaker, and opened by a
Committee thereunto appointed, was read the first and second time.

Resolved upon the Question.

That this Petition is a seditious and contemptuous avowing and prosecution of
a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the People,
formerly adjudged by this House to be destructive to the Being of Parliaments,
and Fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc.

That Thomas Prince Cheesemonger, and Samuel Chidley, o^ forthwith committed
Prisoners to the Prison of the Gatehouse, there to remain Prisoners during the
pleasure of this House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
People, formerly adjudged by this House to be destructive to the Being of
Parliaments, and Fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc.

That Jeremy Jves, Thomas Tailor, and William Larner, be forthwith committed to
the Prison of Newgate, there to remain Prisoners during the pleasure of this
House, for a Seditious and Contemptuous avowing and prosecution of a former
Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the People, formerly
adjudged by this House to be destructive to the Being of Parliaments, and
Fundamental Government of the Ringdom.

Resolved, etc.

That a Letter be prepared and sent to the General, taking notice of his
proceedings in the execution, according to the Rules of War (of a mutinous
person) at the Rendezvous near Ware, and to give him thanks for it; and to
desire him to prosecute the Examinations of that business to the bottom, and to
bring such guilty persons as he shall think fit to condign and exemplary
punishment.

Since these Votes, the persons are juggld away, and not imprisoned, the
Commons know they love the King, etc.
Postscript.
LET all good Christians, that are true Protestants be no longer blinded by
these seditious Hypocrites, but Resolve to fetch back the Arc of our Israel
from these ^ursed Philistin^s; to maintain the true Protestant Religion,
professed in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James of famous memory, to
defend our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles (next under God, supreme head
and Governor) from all execrable Attempt, and destructive plots of Brownists,
Anabaptists, and other Heretics that have been prosecuted with so much fury
for the ruin of both; to defend His honorable Crown and Dignity; the persons
and estates of His Royal Consort and Princely Jssue, to restore His Majesty
to all his just Rights, Power, Prerogative and Greatness; to maintain the
just Privileges of Parliament, the just Liberties and Properties of the
Subject, to reduce all matters to be tried by the known Laws of this
Kingdom, and to live in all Christian obedience, and subjection to his
Majesty, and be governed by him, (as our Allegiance binds us) according to
the Laws.

Let this be the Agreement of all the peole of England from the highest to the
lowest; let them show themselves once more, Englishmen, after these seven years
of blindness and bondage; and be no more cheated and deluded of all their
happinesse-but steadfastly endeavor to settle a firm peace in all His
Majesty's Dominiout, that so we may take away that reproach that is cast upon
us by all nations (by reason of these unnatural Divisions) and restore this
Nation to its ancient Honor and Renown.

FINIS.

