BLOODY NEVVES FROM KENT BEING A Relation of the great Fight at Rochester and
Maidstone, betwixt the Parliaments Army under the command of the Lord General
Fairfax, and the Kentish Forces commanded by General Hales.

With the number that were slain and taken prisoners, and a List of the Kentish
Commanders, and the town of Maidstone taken.

Squire Hales General. Sir Thomas Peyton Lieutenant General. The Lord Goring.
Col. Washington. Sir George Lisle. Col. Dudley. Sir William Compton. Col.
Hacker. Col. Tracy. Col. Hales. Col. Dorrell. Col. Godfrey. Col. Hammond. Col.
Hardresse. Col. Lee.
Likewise, the proceedings and Resolution of Col. Cook and his Regiment of
Butchers.

London, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

BLOODY NEWS FROM KENT
Honored Sir,
SInce my last, here has happened a great Engagement betwixt the two Armies, the
manner thus; The Lord General having entered Kent, and forced the Enemy to
withdraw from Deptford, Greenwich, Blacke-Heath, and other places, they pursued
teem toward Rochester, where the Enemy with the greatest part of their Forces
made a stand, and drew up into two distinct Bodies and after some consultation,
they resolved not to fight in the field, but to make good Rochester bridge, and
the River and Foords at Maidstone, and Alsbury: this was unanimonsly assented
to, and the Kentish forces presently marched over Rochester bridge, and left as
many horse and foot to defend the place, as the town could contain and the rest
of the forces marched to make good the passages at Maidstone, and other places;
and in the Rivers where the horse might possible get through, they fastened
barrows, and many sharp stakes in the bottom. At Rochester they bestirred
themselves to the almost, to make their Fortisications good; drawing us the
Bridge, and casting up works where need was, and planted 4 piece of Ordnance
at the bridge foot: they also planted 40 of their greatest pieces upon the
works near the River, ad about the town for the defense of themselves against
the Army, whom they expected hourly; and upon Thursday night last, the Lord
General with his forces drew near the town, which gave a strong allarm to the
Kentish-men, but yet they resolved to stand to it the army was divided into
parties, some of them being designed to fall on at Maidstone, another party at
Alesford, and the main body to fall an at Rochester, which they did, and faught
gallantly against the Kentish-forces at Rochester bridge, the K^^tishmen also
stood it out stoutly, and often cried out, hey for King Charles, this dispute
lasted long, and many men were stain on both sides, it is said, about 500. some
of them being persons of quality, as a Colonel, a Captane, and many others;
like wise many are dangerously wounded, and it is feared, much blood will be
spilt before the bridge can be taken: this business by some is thought to be
much greater then it is; for they give out, that when the Parliaments Forces
were engaging at Rochester bridge that the ship called the Swallow lying above
the bridge, and the Rainbow lying below the bridge, charged with case-shot,
discharged themselves upon the Parliaments Forces, and killed 500. of them,
insomuch that the soldiery were forced to retreat; which the Kentish men
perceiving, sallied out of Rochester with their whole body of house, pursued
them, took 12, piece of Ordnance, some arms some prisoners, all their
Carriages, Also they say, that Col. Barkestead, Col. Rich, and diverse others
are slain; but I give you this Relation not for any real truth I suppose to be
in it, but that you may see the various rumors that are spead abroad,
therefore you may take it rather for a report of those that would have it so,
then for a certainty that it is so.

Many Butchers are gone to the Kentish forces, most of them from London, and
some from other places one Cook is their Colonel, who leads them on, and
incourages them, their Regiment cousists of about 600. their Colors are red,
and their Motto, For Ring Charles and Kent, in the upper end of their Cullers
is the station of the Butchers Steel in white,

Graves-end, 2. June, 1648.
Another Letter touching the Kentish Army.
SIR,
THE Kentish Army is retreated as far as Rochester, Maidstone, and other towns
adjacent, they consist of about 14000. but are divided into two Bodies, most of
them being armed; but they cannot coucord and agree about their Commanders in
chief, some say, that they desire Col. Washigton may be their General; others
give out, that they will have the Lord Culpepper.

This day the General had a Randezvouz upon the Heath beyond this town, where
appeared of horse and foot 8000. The Kentish-men have sent Propositions to the
General, touching a treaty, but the General returned answer, that he knew not
of any order of Parliament directing him to treat, and whereas he finds the
Gentlemen of Kent, and others in Arms, and persisting therein, without, and
against the authority of Parliament, and doing many Acts of Hostility, to the
great damage of their Neighbors, he cannot captiulate while they are so in
arms, nor lose time in prosecution; but if they forthwith lay down, and go
home, he doubt not but the Parliament with pardon the seduced, and punish the
seducers for example to others.

The Regiment, and are very numerous in horse, few men of quality to be seen,
but as is apprehended, gathered in Arms; some skirmishes hay been and at
several times near 100. prisoners taken.

A small party of Col. Riches horse sallying out, met with a party of the
Kentish foot, fought with them, and put them to a rout, taking 36 prisoners,
with the loss of one man, having but 7 in number.

But on Wednesday last a party of the Kentish men came up unto a Guard of the
Parliaments Forces, they fought well, diverse of them were slain, others taken,
among the rest two young Gentlemen, who were brave in Gold and Silver Lace,
with whom the Soldiers changed. The General has a party of horse in the wild
of Kent, who desire to relieve Dover Castle besieged by them, to whom are
joined some hundreds of the Kentish, who have made some spoil among the other
Kentish, and have taken Col. Culpepper, and many others. They say there is with
the Kentish-men one of the Gorings, and that they increase hourly.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR, Since the writing of my last, we have received intelligence, that the
party of horse that went to relieve Dover Castle, have had a great fight with
the Kentish Horse near Canterbury, and have taken diverse prisoners, and killed
many, with the loss of two or thee men, and have totally routed the whole
party. They also skirmished with another party of the Kentish Horse, commanded
by a Colonel formerly in the Kings Army, and after some short dispute, took the
said Colonel, and 30 of his men prisoners, The great Fort at Dover is
re-taken, and now in possession of he Parliaments Forces.

A List of the Commanders in chief belonging to the Kentish Army.
Squire Hales General. Sir Thomas Peyton Lieutenant General. The Lord Goring.
Colonel Washington. Sir George Lisle. Col. Dudley. Sir William Compton. Sir
John Mainy. Colonel Hacker. Col. Tracy. Sir Thomas Palmer. Col. Hales. Col.
Dorrell. Col. Godfry. Col. Hardresse. Col. Hammond. Col. Lee.
It is reported, that their Army is 16000. or thereabouts, and do daily
increase. Upon Tuesday last about 30. eminent Commanders came out of Essex, and
joined with the Kentish Forces. It is said they expect 5000. from Surry.

Upon Friday being the 2. of this instant June, the Parliaments Army fell upon
the Kentish forces at Maidstone, and after a desperate and bloody fight, took
the said town, together with 200 prisoners, and 200 horse: there was slain near
upon 200. of the enemy with the loss of 80 men.



Imprimatur G.M.

FINIS.

