A BLOODY FIGHT AT DVBLIN in IRELAND, BETWEEN The Marquess of Ormond, and Col.
Jones, and a List of the Officers and Soldiers killed and taken on both sides,
with the manner of the fight, and the Lord Moon's revolting from the Parliament
to the Prince, and joining his horse with the said Marquess; Together with
Col. Trevor, Col. Yearmond, and diverse of Sir Thomas Armstrong's horse,
deserting of Col. Jones, and declaring for the King of Scots; and the uniting
of the Irish Armies against the Parliament.

July.6.
depiction of battle at Dublin, Ireland

LONDON, Printed for R. Williamson, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. 1649

A GREAT FIGHT AT Dublin in Ireland, between the Marquess of Ormond, and Col.
Jones, with a List of the chief Officers killed and taken on both sides.
THe Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin with 14000 Horse and Foot, have
entrenched themselves (in many places) within Sacre shot of the Walls, and by
their strong allarums keeps us in continual action: the last night their
Pioneers wrought exceeding hard, and raised an half Moon within musket shot of
the North Port, where was placed about 200 musketeers, and four pieces of
Ordnance; it was contrived very artificially and strong, with a running Trench
from their frontier incampings: this morning we sallyed out upon them, with a
resolution to beat them off from the said Fort; but finding too much opposition
retreated to our Redout, which was within Pistol shot thereof; about 4 of the
clock several parties of horse and foot were drawn forth on both sides, who
engaged each other, and after a sharp conflict disputed with great gallantry
the enemy retreated, and having a Reserve ready at hand our men durst not
embrace the pursuit, but returned Victors with 7 prisoners, 9 horses, and left
dead and wounded upon the place about 15 with the loss of 9 men, which the
enemy in the night time set off and buried.

In one of our former Sallies, Capt. Glyn with a party of 30 horse fell upon a
desperate party of the Besiegers, and after a sharp dispute took prisoners
Lieut. Colonel Dungan. Major Williams. Captain O Brian. Captain Talbot.
Lieutenant Ogleby. Cornet Bembrick. And about 12 Troopers.
killed
Major Dungan, brother to the aforesaid Lieu. Col. Dungan. Captain Willkinson.
Quartermaster Mackart. Corporal Pemerton. And about 7 men.


Of Col. Jones party killed
Quartermaster Smith, Quartermaster to his own troop. Corporal Reyner. And 3
troopers.
wounded,
Lieutenant Brabson. Cornet Jenkins. Corporal Armstrong. And 4 or 5 private
men.


We are seldom out of action, and our renowned Governor is infinitely tired
out, having not been in his bed these ten nights, and most part of the day is
viewing the enemy, or repairing our Works and Fortifications, and planting
pieces round the Line: the Irish Officers have made choice of a great Episcopal
Bishop to be their chief Engineer, who acts and studies very politikely both
spiritually and temporally.

Our condition being dangerous, causes fadnesse unto us, every day the enemy
being strong, and our men many of them perfidious, most dishonorable,
betraying their trust, the Lord Moon with a gallant troop of horse, is gone to
the enemy, who upon a salley forth, pretended to engage against them, but when
he was within pistol shot, faced about, and fell upon a party of our own
horse, a troop of Sir Thomas Armstrongs run away also, and Col. Yeamonds troop
moulter away, and desert us extremely; the enemy has besieged what Garrisons we
have not slighted, Drogedan is in great danger of losing, many others will be
lost, for we cannot stir from this City to help them without better store of
Forces for their relief. Col. Trevor has likewise deserted us, and is gone to
the enemy, where he entered into protestation to the Marquess, declaring, That
he would use all the interest that possible he could, for the calling away of
his Regiment, and that he was assured of their coming, with many othhrs also,
the enemy continues drawing nearer this place, hindering all Mark^s, so that we
are brought very low, every thing being extraordinary dear, and the Inhabitants
so taxed for support of the Soldiers, as that they will be undone. God in
mercy look upon us, and help us.

From bleeding Dublin the fourth of July, 1649.
SIR,
Upon mature deliberation of the present transaction of affairs, in reference
to the proceedings between Prince and People, I thought requisite to illustre
the demonstration thereof, to your public view, by displaying Truth in its
^spotted Colors under the Banner of Impartiality, and representing those
things that are of greatest concernment, and said to be the main Object on
which the Eyes of all Europe are now fixed upon, which by a serious glance,
over these ensuing lines, the splendour thereof appears as follows:

The Parliament of Scotland seem to be exceedingly discontented at the
transaction of affairs in England, and at the present proceedings of their
young King (as they say) and have sent a Message to the queen of Sweden, with a
large Narative of what they did jointly with the Parliament of England, where
they fell off, how they detest their late proceedings, in reference to the
executing of their late Sovereign Lord the King, how their young King is
seduced by evil Council, and from thence has not given their Commissioners
satisfaction necessary for his own and the Kingdoms Weal, desiring her Majesty
to send an Embassy unto him, to persuade him to a Condescension, and speedy
Agreement; but this seems a mystery to many, diverse concei^^^^ing it to be one
of Jockies new Riddles.

For it is frequently said, that the Articles of Agreement are already
concluded of, and that they begin to cast this Mist, only to obscure tho
eyesight of the English, until they have brought to maturity their design in
hand, for the raising of 15000 Horse and Foot to join with the 5000 already i^
Arms, which they pretend to be for the safety of that kingdom against foreign
Invasion. Only Genesis Lesley de^^ies the Generalship, the Marq. of Argyle its
conceived will be chosen Commander in chief.

His Excellency General Lesley being desired to deliver up the strong Castle
of Edinburgh, returned answer, That he was resolved to keep it for the
succession of those who had entrusted him, meaning the late King of Great
Britain, Charles the first.

The Parliament are very private in their debates, and (say some) are resolved
to shake the foundation of Heresy.

We hear; That the declared King of Scotland, accompanied by the Prince of
Orange, half way to Antwerp, was met by some eminent persons appointed for that
purpose, who presented him from the Arch Duke, with a most sumptuous Caroach
studded with massy silver, and fix gallant Flanders horses of great value,
such as a King of bare Scotland was never master of before, probably Genit's or
of the Nerpolitan race, when he was come to Antwerp the Magistrates conducted
him to the high street, called Mair and lodged him in a starely Palace, he
remained in Antwerp two days and two nights during which time he was welcomed
with all imaginable expressions of honor and respect, and at the Castle, which
he had the honor to be invited to, he was entertained as if the King of Spain
had been, there himself, he went to see the Town and the rarieties of the
Churches; which as anciently, so now exceeds all others in those Countries, if
not in Christendom, at his departure, happy was he that could kiss his cloak,
which by accident hung out of the Coach as he past away: Friday morning he
departed hence, having dined at Machlin he came to Bruxels that night, where he
was, as all along, most largely welcomed, and royally entertained, and had
been more, had not his coming been at a time when the Archduke was so deeply
engaged in the relief of his dearest Mistress Cambray, which as some Letters
come at this instant to this place say is to the great prejudice of the French,
the certeinty whereof expect by the next.

Lieutenant Colonel Hobson is come to Edinburgh, his business is variously
spoken, some whisper that he desires passage for some to go for Ireland, others
to make way for some farther overture from Parl of England, what ever it is he
is looked upon with a jealous eye.

From the Isle of Man our Intelligence says, That Sir Lewis Dives, and many
other English Gallants, have made great preparations in that Island against the
Parliament of England, and are resolved for Ireland, to assist the Marquess of
Ormond, and strengthen the siege at Dublin; from whence it is said, that the
Parliaments party is reduced to Dublin, Dredah, Dundale, Trim, and
Londonderry, the first and last being besieged; by Ormonds coming up to Dublin
he has got the greatest part of five Counties from Col. Jones, which afforded
him many thousand pounds contribution.

We hear that Genesis Oneal is united with Ormond, and has strengthened his Camp
with 4000 Foot, the E. of Clanrickard and Col. Monro is expected there with
another Brigade, by which means they will be both potent and powerful, the
Army amounting to above 20000 Horse and Foot.

Chester 5. July, 1649.
FINIS.

