BLOODY NEVVES FROM COLCHESTER CONCERNING The late Fight on Tuesday last,
between the Forces under the command of Sir Charles Lucas, and the Suffolk
Forces, near the Eastgate; with the manner of the Fight, and the number that
were slain and taken prisoners.

Likewise, the Proclamation of the Earl of Norwich, and Sir Charles Lucas,
concerning the Duke of York's coming to Coulchester, and their proclaiming of
it at the Head of each Regiment throughout the Town.

Together with the Lord Generals Propositions to the Earl of Norwich, and Sir
Charles Lucas, touching a general peace. And their Answer thereunto,
concerning his Excellencies Army.

LONDON: Printed for R. W. 1648.

PROPOSITIONS FOR PEACE SENT By His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, to
the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capell, Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the
Commanders in chief, etc.
THe Lord General Fairfax having seriously weighed and considered the sad
event of war, and the effusion of more Christian and innocent blood, occasioned
by the present Engagement of the two Armies at Colchester; for prevention
whereof, and for the future preserving of the peace and tranquillity both of
that County and Kingdom, his Excellenc^^ has agreed upon certain Propositions
to be sent to the Commanders in chief of the Kings Forces in Colchester, a
copy whereof follows, viz.

My Lords,
I Shall here let you know what your selves and those under you may expect from
me (which for the restoring of quiet to this County, and the Kingdom, without
more bloodshed, and for the saving so eminent a Town from the chance of War) I
shall offer, viz.

1. That if your selves, and the rest with you in Colchester, shall within 24.
hours after notice hereof, lay down Arms and surrender the Town, the common
Soldiers, and men of that rank, shall have liberty to depart to their several
homes, and there quietly to remain, submitting unto the authority of
Parliament, and this I shall make good however, to so many of that sort
respectively, as shall accept thereof, and do accordingly.

2. That your selves, and the Officers and Gentlemen engaged with you in the
Town shall have liberty and passes to go beyond Sea, with equipage befitting
their qualities, engaging themselves not to return into this Kingdom without
leave from both or either Houses of Parliament.

3. That all of both sorts, with the Inhabitants of the town, shall be free
from plunder or violence of the Soldiers, their Arms, Ammunition, and
Furniture of War within the town, and also their Horses employed to Military
service (except such horses and swords, as shall be fit to be allowed to
Captain, or superior Officers, and Gentlemen of quality, for their removal)
being first delivered up without imbezelment, in an orderly manner, as shall be
further set down, and the Forces under my command, or such as I shall appoint,
being admitted a peaceable entrance into the town. I desire that the Gentlemen
of the Committee may be acquainted herewith, and that it be not concealed from
any that are concerned in it.

T. Fairfax.

The Answer to the Propositions for Peace.
My Lord,
THose conditions you proffer to the Officers and Soldiers on our part, we do
hereby make offer of to the Officers and Soldiers on your part. We shall in
this occasion deal plainly, we do not without evident reason conceive our
selves to be in a condition all the force you can make, and thereby to give
courage and opportunity to all true-hearted Englishmen, to recover their
ancient and known Laws, or if you shall adventure to attaque us, we doubt not
but by the mercy and assistance of Almighty God so give you such a repulse, as
shall give testimony of our force and courage, and at how high a rate we value
the general peace of the kingdom. And as for that clause, touching the
communicating of it to those whom it may concern, we conceive you intend the
Inhabitants of Colchester, We were very unworthy persons if any should exceed
us in our care for this good town.

Norwich, Charles Lucas.

Sir, Since my last dated June 24. we have had several skirmishes with the
enemy, they have often times approached near our Guards, but have been
repulsed and beaten in again.

The Enemy is very resolute, and takes all the advantages that may be in
sallying out upon us; they have made several attempts upon the Suffolk Forces,
and have salled out at the Eastgate, beating them from their Works, and
falling in amongst their trenches; but after a sharp dispute, the enemy were
forced to retreat, and the Suffolk Forces pursued, doing great execution.

Captain Green ( a Suffolk Gentleman) deported himself with much courage and
gallantry, in this conflict, charging with two hundred musketeers, against
three hundred of the enemies Horse and Foot, worsted them, killed fifteen upon
the place, and took near upon thirsty prisoners, with the loss of eight men,
three slain, and five wounded.

Some of the prisoners, upon their examination, confessed, that their Commander
in chief, Colonel Lunsford, give order, that no man should give quarter to any
of the Suffolk traitors, but that they should put every man to the sword, which
cruelty and Barbarism, has not a little stirred up the spirits of the
Suffolk-men, insomuch, that they will adventure to the very Walls and Gates of
the town, to restrain the enemy of their liberty, and on Tuesday morning last,
captain Fisher with his trooy of horse, and captain Green with his Foot
company fell upon a party of the enemies near Eastgate, who were guarding of a
Heard of Cattle, but they perceiving the resolution of the Suffolk men to
engage, caused the cattle to be drove into the town, and advanced toward
captain Fishers troop, but kept within command of their canon, whereupon six
of captain Fishers troupers rode out, and gave fire, a party of the enemies met
them, and did the like, and at the lact both Bodies engaged, and a resolute
charge received and given by each other; but the enemy perceiving the Suffolk
Foot coming up, retreated nearer the walls, and discharged four pieces of
Ordnance, which did little harm, except the loss of one man, and two horses;
and captain Fisher perceiving that the enemy would not engage, unless upon
great advantage, made good his retreat within the Line, and endeavors to make
his approaches nearer the town.

We keep them with continual allarms on all sides, which causes much
murmuring amongst the common soldiers, and diverse come in unto us, who have
confessed, that many hundreds would have come had it not been for a paper which
the Lord Goring, sir Charles Lucus, and the rest of the Commanders in chief
caused to be read at the head of each Regiment, through out the town; a copy
whereof I have here sent you enclosed, viz.

All Gentlemen and Soldiers, who have listed themselves under the immediate
command of Sir Charles Lucas, General of the Kings Forces, raised for the
defense and preservation of His Majesty's Royal Person, Crown, and Kingdom,
are required to stand firm to their first principles and engagement, and to
defend this town against all opposition, being assured, that within few days,
His Highness James Duke of York, will come in to our assistance, with a
considerable Army from Holland.

But Since the proclaiming of this Paper, diverse have disserted them, and are
resolved to be no longer carried on by their hypocritical suggestions, and
false Delusions.

This day the enemy made a salley out upon Stanway side with a great party of
Horse and Foot, commanded by sir Charles Lucas, and col. Beal, and with great
fury, advanced toward a Body of ours, but finding the hedges ambuscado'd
retreated and would not engage, our men pursued, kiled three, and took six
prisoners.

From the Leagure before Colchester, June 27. 1648.
FINIS.

