A BLOODY FIGHT NEAR NEWARK, BETWEEN The Kings Forces commanded by two Scottish
Colonels, and the Parliaments. Forces commanded by Colonel Hacker, upon Friday
night last, July 28. With the number that were killed, wounded, and taken
prisoners, and their design to secure Nottingham Castle for the King.

Also, a Fight between Lieut. Genesis Cromwels Horse, and the Scottish Forces, and
the event thereof. And the revolting of the strong Castle of Scarborough in
Yorkshire, from the obedience of Parliament, and declaring for the King, and
their hanging out a Flag of Defiance against all Independent Government.

Likewise, the further Desires of the Citizens of London, to both Houses of
Parliament, concerning the Listing of Forces within the City, and their Treaty
at Guild Hall. And the Resolution of the House of Peers to live and die with
the Citizens.

London, Printed for G. W. and are to be sold near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1648.

A dangerous FIGHT NEAR NEWARK Between the Parliaments Forces, and the Scotch
Cavaleers, and how they would have surprised Nowark and Nottingham Castle.
SIR,
THe Scots Allarm has awakened the stupid spirits of these Counties, they are
putting themselves into a posture to receive them, and the three Counties of
Northampton shire, Liecester shire, and Rutland, are joined in a mutual League
and Association, to preserve the peace of their native Counties, and to hinner
the Scots advancing Southward, and being in a great forwardness of faciliating
the said Work, the Royalists began to endeavor the eclipsing thereof, and had
several private meetings in diverse parts of these Counties, for the listing of
men invisible and to gather a Head, whereby they might oppose and obstruct the
proceedings of the well-affected party, and to that end had gathered many
hundreds together, secured Worten Hall, fix miles from Nottingham, and were
promised to have had Newark Castle betrayed to them, but by provividence
prevented.

And upon Friday night last, a party of them approached near the town,
according to instructions, where Col. Hackers troop advanced toward them, and
sending out a party, to discover what they were, three of the Royalists rode
out, and fired, Col. Hackers Scouts answered them again, and retreated to the
troop. About 8. of the clock at night, both parties bodied, and disputed the
place with hard service within half a mile of the town; after some conflict,
the Royalists retreat, the Parliaments Forces pursue, doing execution, killed
eleven, and took 7 prisoners, with the loss of three men and one Cornet
wounded; and had not the night appeared too fast upon us, we had taken many
more: this allarm has forced them to quit Worten Hall, and are retreated up
toward Boston, where Col. Hacker is in pursuit of them.

Some of the prisoners taken, confess, That their Commanders in chief were
Scotch-men, and diverse of the Soldiers, who had taken up their habitation in
these parts ever since the last Leagure at Newark.

They further purported, that they expected the Earl of ^alender to be with
them before the 2. of August. and that he was to bring an Army of 8000 Horse
and Foot with him: which if they do, our Forces are resolved to fight them,
part of them being advanced toward Trent.

In these three associated Counties there are said to be raised at the least
ten thousand Horse and Foot, the Lord Gray of Groby being Commander in chief,
who deports himself with much gallantry, and is very vigilant and careful to
preserve the peace and quiet of these Counties.

The new raised Forces of this Association, are drawn into a Regimental posture
of Discipline, and all Officers from the highest to the lowest have entered into
their several places of command.

Diverse Ministers are made choice of for Captains, who stiss up the Soldiers
and Inhabitants exceedingly, both in field and Pulpit, to be unanimous and
courageous in this great Work of the Lord, against the prevalent and insolent
party, who endeavors the subversion of the truth of Jesus Christ in the Church
of England.

We have waded through many difficulties since the first raising of our Forces,
and met with much opposition, yet appeased and quieted our enemies.

We have had several Commotions and Insurrections, to retard the great Work in
hand; but most of them are now laid and dissolved.

By the last Post from Lincoln it is advertized, That the impregnable and
strong Castle of Starborough in Yorkshire is revolted from the obedience of the
Parliament and have declared for the King, which occasions much distractions
and fears in the West Riding, diverse resorting thither from several parts
adjacent, who declares their Resolution to fight for the Kings Majesty, and to
re invest His Royal Person.

It is feared much blood will be spilt before this place be reduced, they have
hung forth a flag of Defiance with this Motto, Down with Independency.

Some conjecture that the Prince of Wales will be invited thither, and that the
Scots will hasten their march Southward, which is all at present, from

Your most assured friend, John Reynardson.
Mounstril 29. July, 1648.
From the North July 30. 1648.
DUke Hamilton is upon his march toward Bows and Stainmore, and thought to
have forced his way at Stainmore passage, but was presented; for Major General
Lambert having placed a very considerable party to secure the said Bridge and
passage, and a Briggade of the Scots coming up, thinking to pass the River,
found opposition, and the quarrel disputed for the space of two hours, and had
not another Briggade of the Scots come up, we had been Masters of the day; but
seeing our selves over-powred, made an honorable retreat toward Barnard
Castle, which was six or seven miles distant from us, the enemy pursued about
three miles, but at a distant, they over-powr us exceedingly in Foot, and have
great numbers of horse. In this conflict we lost about 30. men, and brought off
about 20 which were wounded; the loss of the enemy is thought to be far more.

We are daily in action, and have hard duty, our numbers being not potent
enough. We expect Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell and his Forces daily, whom the Scots
say they will soundly cudgel, and are resolved to fight him, though he be
never so strong. Indeed, they have a very potent Army, besides, they expect
3000. from Major General Monro, and another Army from Scotland, to march by
the way of Berwick.

The Earl of Calendar Lieut. Genesis to Duke Hambleton is marched over Berwick
bridge into England, with a second Army consisting of about 8000. with whom
comes Dear Saundy Hambleton the famous Engineer, the L. Lanerick is Governor
of the town of Berwick. We hear that they have fallen upon Col. Lilburns
quarters in Northumberland, took about 27. prisoners, 50. horse, and two
Cullers. It is said, that they intend to march directly for Colchecter, etc.

Major Genesis Lambert is loath to engage his main Body with the Scots, until
Lieutenant General Cromwell and the additionall Forces are come up, who are
said to be on their march as far as Ashby-de-la-zouch. The Horse which came
from Penbroke are united with the Lancashire Forces, and have fallen upon a
party of the Scots within six miles of Barnard Castle, took some of their
little Hobbies, many Blew-Caps, and some Arms, killed six or seven, and
wounded as many.

Ferrie-bridge July 28. 1648.
Upon Satterday last diverse of the Common Council of the City of London
presented a Petition from the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons, in
Common-counbell assembled, to the honorable houses o^ Parliament, setting
forth therein how much the City of London was unsatisfied and jealous of the
Listing of Horse and Foot, under the command of Major Genesis Skippon, and
therefore humbly desire, That no more listings under him may be permitted,
unless by him and the Committee of the Militia of London, and that such as are
lished already under him may be dumist and disbanded. The House willing to give
the Petitioners any reasonable satisfaction, Ordered that a Committee of the
house of Commons should consider of the said Petition, and confer with a
Common Council of the City of London about the same, and the grounds and
reasons thereof, and of the said jealousy, and to report to the House with all
convenient speed. They further Ordered that the Lord Major of the City of
London should be desired to call a Common Council against Monday next in the
afternoon to confer with a Committee of the House of Commons concerning the
grounds and reasons of the last Petition of the City. The Lords gave the
Petitioners great satisfaction in their Answer to it, adding that their
Lordships would live and dye with them.

FINIS.

