THE Covenant Sealed OR, A TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENTS of both COVENANTS,
POLEMICALL and PRACTICAL.

ESPECIALLY Of the Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace.

IN WHICH, The nature of them is laid open, The adaequate subject is largely
inquired into, respective to right and proper interest. to fitness for
admission to actual participation.
Their necessity is made known. Their whole Use and Efficacy is set forth.
Their number in Old and New Testament-times is determined. With several
necessary and useful Corollaries.


Together with a brief Answer to Reverend Mr. Baxter's Apology, in defense of
the Treatise of the Covenant.

By Thomas Blake, M. A. Pastor of Tamworth, in the Counties of Stafford and
Warwick.

Davenant. de morte Christi, page 1. Neque tam pugnam meditor, aut
dimicationem; quam planam and pacatam totius rei explicationem, ad conflictum
cum nullo host ventures, nisi ita se nobis obviam dederit; ut non possumus
aliter, quam pugnando, viam ad veritatem aperire.

London, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sun against Danstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1655.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir FRANCIS NETHERSOLE of Nethersole in the County
of Kent, Knight.
THe great engagements in which I stand by many favors received, to much
Honored friends of yours, put me on, to send forth a former Treatise into
public view under their names. This being of so near affinity, I thought it
meet that it should come abroad under the Patronage of one of so near alliance.
I need not mention my particular engagements, which you do not desire I know to
hear. Since the time, that after your great employments has at home and
abroad, in affairs of State God has been pleased to seat you in these parts;
your singular candor toward all those that labor in the Work, to which
through grace I am called is eminently seen. You were tenderly conscientious,
without great caution put, to adventure on the purchase of a Manor to which an
Impropriation was annexed, which yet for many reasons you could not without
great inconvenience avoid. And notwithstanding a Vicarage there endowed, which
others (though not you) would have judged a competency, your great care was as
soon as you were fully possessed, finding an Incumbent there, whom you had no
reason to encourage, nor power to remove, to superinduce others, one after
other, in a more happy, and edifying way; to carry on that work. It was no
sooner void, but you took care to settle one of eminent gifts and graces, with
that liberal munificence, that a free School for poor children, built at your
proper cost, being provided for, little remains yours, of that part of your
purchase. Your sollicitous care is still, no less (whereof there are many
knowing witnesses) how to settle it with all possible speed upon posterity, in
such a way, that God may be most honored, and piety advanced by it. Which also
(as I have heard from your own mouth) your much honored and pious Lady
deceased, did often persuade to hasten; although she well knew, that out of
your love to her, you had by your last Will and Testament devised to her, that
whole Lordship of Polesworth (to a fourth part whereof she was heir) and all
the rest of your Estate in these parts, for an increase of her Jointure. If the
Lord Christ tells us, that the cost which that Pious woman spent on him, should
be told for a memorial of her, wheresoever in the world the Gospel should be
preached; I suppose that this which you have done, may be mentioned for your
honor, with hers, that rests in the Lord: wheresoever this small piece by
Providence shall come to be read. I may well look upon you, as one of the most
acute of my Readers: If therefore this may gain your favor, I shall have less
cause to fear others censure; Though in so great variety of things, as are here
touched upon, and so much controversal, I cannot expect that any one should
subscribe to every piece. The whole may be serviceable, though some part remain
under dispute. As it fares with me in reading the Labors of many others, so I
may well expect that it will be with others, in reading any thing of mine. Your
great zeal, as to the whole of the worship of God, so to this part here treated
of, where you are known, cannot be hid. Your complaint has often been, of the
sad neglect of the Lords Supper; and it lies as a sad burden on the spirits of
many eminently Pious servants of Jesus Christ, that they see not a door opened
for their comfortable, and orderly administration and participation of it. If
any thing be here said to give any further light in these sacred mysteries, and
to facilitate the way of administration to pious dispensers, so, as the honor
of the Ordinance may be preserved, and the edification of souls promoted, I
have that which I desire, and have made my endeavor. The Lord honor your
hoare hairs with everlasting days, and give you the comfort of all that you
have done, in, and for his Name: Sir, I am

From my Study in Tamworth, Jun. 5. 1655. Your Servant in any Christian Office,
Thomas Blake.

Worthy Reader,
THe holy Scripture puts an eminent character, Acts 18.24, 25, etc. upon
Apollos, then but an alphabetarian in the Gospel-doctrine, That he was an
eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures of the Old Testament. And if I would
cut by this pattern, and that either the Reverend Author, whose learned Works
have already spoken him to the Church: Or this Judicious Treatise which now
fitly follows its elder brother under the name of the Covenant sealed, stood
in need of an Epistle Commendatory, I should not be ashamed, both to testify
my honor of the man, and my valuation of his Work; and yet neither I, nor any
other man in this case ought to be interpreted, as (...), a propugnatour of
every opinion in the book by him commended to the Press; no more than the
Midwife is accountable for every imperfection of the child by her brought forth
to light.

I confess I had the liberty and honor afforded me to peruse this Treatise
before it saw the Press; but my indisposition of body prohibited me of making
a full survey: only my greedy eye led me so far as that I could make
observation of two things: 1. The predominant scope of the Author in this
work. 2. The pursuance thereof as to the main. The scope is rare, viz. An Essay
to find a way of regular admission unto, and holy administration of the Lords
Supper, between those extremes of promiscuous intrusion on the one hand, and
the total forbearance of it on the other, both which do afflict the spirits of
the godly that are cast into broken Congregations all the Land over without
Card or Compass to steer by to their comfort; and so it is very likely to be a
word spoken upon his wheels to many Ministers, who may find here a thread to
direct them out of those labyrinths and perplexities out of which they find it
hard to extricate themselves.

And then in pursuance of this main scope, and indeed in all the parts of the
Treatise that I have read: Scriptures are balanced and pondered so Judiciously,
and there is so much demonstration of acuteness of judgment, solidity of
reason, sweetness and candor of spirit, that if thou in reading dislodge
prejudice, and hold the scale even, I hope thou shall not write upon thy pains,
Labor in vain. Vale, fruere.

Laurence-Jury, London, June 12. 1655. Thine in the Lord, Ri. Vines.

The PREFACE.
GOds Covenant is the ground of all our comfort; it is (as I may call it) the
Grand Charter, by which all our Christian rights and privileges are conveyed
unto us. Then (says the Lord) will I remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also
my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abraham will I remember, and
I will remember the Land, Levit. 26.41. Remember, break not thy Covenant with
us, say the people of God unto him, Jer. 14.21. O Israel, fear not, says he;
why? Thou art mine, Isai. 43.1. How? I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou
becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. I am thine, save me, says David unto him, Psalm.
119.94. building his confidence upon this, that he was in Covenant with God,
and was his by Covenant. I am the Lord thy God, says he, viz. Genesis 17.7. Jer.
31.33.
by Covenant; what then? Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10.
As if he should say, Seeing thou have such Covenant Interest in me, enlarge thy
desires as much as thou can, and I will satisfy them. As Christ said to his
Disciples, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask what you will, and
it shall be done unto you, Joh. 15.7. Hereupon Jehoshaphat pleaded with God in
his distress, saying, Art not thou, our God? 2 Chronicles. 20.7. O our God, wilt
not thou judge them? for we have no might against this great multitude, neither
know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee, verse 12. So likewise Asa cried
unto the Lord his God, saying, Help us, O Lord our God, etc. 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
This was the ground of the everlasting happiness of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
that God was in Covenant with them, and was their God by Covenant. Thence
Christ inferred, that they were not so dead, but that their souls did still
live, and that their b^dies also at last should be raised up, and both souls
and bodies live for ever, Matthew. 22.32. Gods Covenant is an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. He is a God that
keeps Covenant, Neh. 1.5. He will ever be mindful of his Covenant, Psalm.
111.5. He is Elohe, Amen, the God of truth, Isai. 65.16. (...), God that cannot
lie, Tit. 1.2. He has given his Son to be a Medaitour of the new Covenant,
Heb. 12.24. In him all the Promises are Yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. And
to confirm the Covenant the more unto us, God has so condescended to our
weakness, as to vouchsafe us not only his Word, but also his Sacraments, as
signs and seals of his Covenant. The word Sacrament Christians have borrowed
from Heathens. Pliny the younger, a heathen Author, uses the word with
reference unto Christians, yet with no respect (I suppose) to either of the
Sacraments, but only according to the usual (though here metaphorical)
acception of the word among the heathens. Seque Sacramento non in scelus
al^quod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent,
etc. Pl n. Epist. 97. ad Trajan.
He says, That Christians assembling together did use to bind themselves by
Sacrament, (or oath, did solemnly and religiously bind themselves, as Soldiers
were wont to bind themselves to their General) not to any wickedness, but
against the committing of any theft, or robbery, or adultery, etc. Tertullian
does frequently use the word, but whether at any time in that strict notion, as
it is now used, I cannot easily say. Sometimes he uses it in allusion to that
Military oath which the Heathens called Sacramentum. Credimusne humanum
Sacramentum Divino superinduci licere et in alium Dominum respondere post
Christum? T^rt. de Cor. Mil. cap. 11. Commun^catio pacis, et appellatio
fraternitat^s, et contesseratio hospitalitatis; quae jura non al^a ratio regit,
quam ejusdem Sacramenti traditio. De Praescr. c. 20.
Do we think (says he) that after a divine Sacrament it is lawful to
superinduce one that is humane, and after Christ to acknowledge another Lord?
And again, The Communication of peace, and the appellation of brotherhood, and
the contesseration of hospitality, are rights, which no other reason does rule,
but the tradition of the same Sacrament. Recte hic Macereus Sacramentum vertit
Gallice juramentum. Alludit enim ad jusjurandum, quo tanquam Sacramento
militari in Baptismo nos obstringimus. Pamel. in Annot.
Upon which place Pamelius says, that Macereus did rightly render Sacramentum
an oath; for that Tertullian did allude to the oath, (the solemn obligation he
means) by which as by a military Sacrament (or oath) we bind our selves in
Baptism. Sometimes by Sacrament in Tertullian is meant Faith, or Doctrine, as
when he says of Heresies, Nullo modo Apostol^cae ob diversitatem Sacramenti,
De Praescript. cap. 22.
that they are no way Apostolical, because of the diversity of the Sacrament;
that is, as Pamelius does well expound it, the diversity of Faith: for
otherwise Heretics may have the same Sacraments with the Catholics.
Sometimes Tertullian speaking of Sacraments, does instance indeed in Baptism
and the Lords Supper; Ipsas quoque res Sacramentorum Divinorum in idolorum
mysteriis emulatur, nempe Diabolu^. Tingit et ipse, etc. -- Habet et Virgins,
habet et Continentes. De Praescript. cap. 40.
but so also in diverse other things, some whereof the Romanists themselves do
not reckon among Sacraments, as Virginity and continency, which Pamelius takes
no notice of, when he pretends to find all their seven Sacraments, except
Extreme Unction, there asserted by Tertullian. An ancient Bishop, though after
Tertullian, viz. Firmilianus, Nulla quippe d^fferentia est inter
Pseudoprophetam, and Haereticum. Nam ut ille in nomine Dei, aut Christi, ita
iste in Sacramento Baprismi fallit. Epist. 7^. inter Epistolas Cypriani. Circa
celebrandos dies Paschae, and circa multa alia divinae rei Sacramenta, etc.
Ibid.
in an Epistle to Cyprian does sometimes mention the Sacrament of Baptism; but
whether he does take the word strictly, or largely, may be a question, because
in the same Epistle he speaks of many Sacraments, and names the Celebration
of Easter as one of them. That Treatise de Cardinalibus Christi Operibus, one
part whereof is de Baptismo Christi, wherein Baptism is called a Sacrament,
that Treatise is found to be none of Cyprians: Pamel. in Annotat. Bellar. de
Scriptor.
and though Pamelius and Bellarmine suppose that the Author was ancient, and of
the same time with Cyprian, because the title speaks it as if it had been
directed to Cornelius, who was Bishop of Rome in Cyprian's time, yet B. Usher
observes, that in old Manuscripts, B. Usher in the Catalogue of Authors, cited
in his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge.
Arnoldus Carnotensis Abbas Bonevallis, who was many hundred years after
Cyprian, viz. in the year 1160. is mentioned as the Author. Hilarie about 100
years after Cyprian, Quam autem in eo per Sacramentum communicate carnis and
sanguinis simus, etc. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 8.
speaks of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. Ambrose about the same time
with Hilary, or but a little after, has written six Books De Sacramentis; and,
which is observable, he treats therein only of Baptism, Accedit verbum ad
elementum, and fit Sacramentum, etiam ipsum tanquam visibile verbum, Aug. in
Joh. Tract. 80.
and the Lords Supper. Austine writing not much after Ambrose, (by whom he came
to the knowledge of the truth) often uses the word, and that in the most
strict acception. The Word (says he) being added to the Element, there is made
a Sacrament; which is also it self as it were a visible Word. And again, Quid
sunt aliud quaeque corporalia Sacramenta, nisi quaedam quasi verba visib^lia?
Contra Faust. l. 19. c. 16.
What else are all corporal Sacraments, but as it were certain visible words?
And having said, that Christ did institute Sacraments, in number very few, for
observation very easy, Christus Sacramentis numero paucissimis, observatione
facillimis, significatione praestantissimis, societatem novi populi colligavit,
sicut est Bapt^smus, et Communicatio corporis et sanguinis ipsius, etsi quid
aliud in Scripturis Canonicis commendatur. Epist. ad Jan. 118. cap. 1.
and for signification most excellent, he expressly says, that these Sacraments
are Baptism and the Lords Supper; adding indeed, and if there be any other
commended in the Canonical Scriptures. But that there is any other Sacrament
besides Baptism and the Lords Supper, commended in the Scripture, Hoc tempore
posteaquam resurrectione Domini nostri Jesu Christi manifestissimum indic^um
libertatis nostrae illuxit, nec little quidem signorum, quae jam intelligimus,
operatione gravi onerati sumus, sed quaedam pauca pro multis, eadamque factu
facillima, et intellectu augustissima, et observatione castissima, ipse
Dominus, et Apostolica tradidit discipl na; sicuti est Baptismi Sacramentum, et
Celebratio corporis, et sanguinis Domini. De doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 9.
he does not affirm. Yea, in another place having used the like words
concerning the Sacraments of the New Testaments he mentions these two only,
leaving no suspicion at all, as if there were any other. Besides, when he
affirms the Sacraments to be as it were visible words, (as in the places
before cited) he plainly enough excludes those Popish Sacraments, Penance and
Matrimony. Satis est ad Sacramenti naturam quatenus signum est sensibile, ut
al^quo sensu percipiatur, nec debet excludi sensus audiendi, etc. Bellar. de
Sacr. in genesis l. 1. c. 14.
Bellarmine would have it suffice, if the outward sign be any way sensible,
though it be perceived only by the sense of Hearing. But (as Chamier well
observes) Austine needed not to have mollified his speeches with as it were, if
he had not taken the word visible properly, and as distinct from that which is
perceived by any other sense then that of Seeing. Si de Sacramentis secundum
aliquas conditiones, quas haeretici requirunt, loqueremur, neque nos diceremus
esse tam multa, quam ponimus. Greg. de Valent. apud Cham. tom. 4. lib. 4. cap.
6.
Gregorius de Valentia (as Chamier cites him) grants, That Sacraments being
considered in respect of some conditions, which Protestants (whom he, as their
manner is, terms Heretics) require, so there are not so many, as otherwise
they hold there are. So though Bellarmine (in the place above cited) will not
admit Sacraments to be seals, Fatemur Sacramenta novae Legis esse signa, seu
sigilla quodammodo promissionis divinae. And again, Sacramenta vetera fuerunt
velut sigilla quaedam, quibus est obsignata, et firmata apud homines Divina
promissio. Greg. de Valent. apud Cham. tom. 4. lib. 2. cap. 9.
yet this other Jesuit Valentia is not so straitlac'd, but does acknowledge,
that they are after a sort seals of Gods promise, whereby it is confirmed unto
us. So the Council of Trents Catechism does make this one reason why
Sacraments were ordained, Altera vero causa est, quod animus noster haud facile
commovetur ad ea, quae nobis promittuntur, credenda. -- Quemadmodum igitur in
Veteri Testamento Deus fecerat, ut magni alicujus promissi constantiam s^gnis
testificaretur: Ita etiam in nova lege Christus Salvator noster, cum nobis
peccatorum veniam, coelestem gratiam, Spiritus Sancti communicationem
pollicitus est, quaedam signa oculis, et sensibus subjecta instituit, quibus
quasi pignoribus obligatum haberemus, atque ita fidelem in promissis futurum
dubitare nunquam possemus. Catech. Trid. de Sacram.
viz. because we are slow to believe, and therefore Sacraments are not only
signs, but as pledges to assure us of those things which are promised unto us.
And as the Apostle calls Circumcision a seal, Romans 4.11. So Abrabaneel, a
famous late Rabbine among the Jews, in his Commentary on Esaias 52.13, etc.
speaking of Circumcision, does call it, chotham berith, that is, the seal of
the Covenant. It is true, he speaks of it only as a seal, whereby Abraham did
assure himself unto God, to be his, whereas the Apostle speaks of it as a
seal, whereby God did confirm his Covenant unto Abraham. But the Covenant being
mutual, wherein God does engage himself unto man, and man does engage himself
unto God, the Sacraments as seals of the Covenant, serve to confirm both the
one and the other engagement. Now the Sacraments thus having respect unto the
Covenant, and standing in a subserviency unto it, this reverend Author (Mr.
Blake) having by Divine assistance composed and published a Treatise of the
Covenant, which deservedly has found good acceptance, by the good hand of his
God still upon him does now offer to public view a Treatise of the Sacraments,
which (I presume) will be no less accepted. The Authors former Works do
sufficiently speak his worth; he needs not my Elogie, neither can it add any
thing unto him. Yet having been more then ordinarily acquainted with him above
20 years, (though more then half of this time the great distance, whereat
Providence has set us, has much hindered the improvement of our acquaintance)
this I cannot but say, that I always held him one, whose judgment in any
matter of Divinity is very much to be esteemed. What Casaubon said of Persius,
may truly be said of him, Fatemur erudissimum Poetam eruditionem ubique
ostendere, usquam ostentare negamus. Casau^. Prol^g. in Pe^s.
as this Treatise, and his other Writings does show, He is one that does rather
show Learning, then make a show of it. They that in some things dissent from
him, I think will do him so much right, as to acknowledge, that he is no
Theologaster, no Smatterer in Divinity, no superficiary, or unstudied Divine.
Neither is he rash and forward to vent his notions; or one that does affect
novelty and singularity in opinion, which is the garb of many wanton Wits in
these times. It is very rare, if he decline that which is generally, received;
yet does he not rely upon the authority of others neither, but Disceptatione
si potes, vince, vince ratione. Cyprian. ad Demetrian.
reasons and argumenes are the things, which sway with him. Where he does a
little step aside out of the road, he does it not out of any humor of
contradiction, not with any uncivil censure, or petulant expression, but as
with some rational plea, so with much modest deportment. As here in this
Treatise, where he holds, that the Sacraments as appendants to the Word, may be
profitable to the unregenerate, and isntrumental to Conversion. And yet he
does withal largely and learnedly impugn the Physical operation of
Sacraments, which does no more follow upon the other (as some perhaps may
imagine) then the Physical operation of the Word, which all explode, and yet
confess that the Word is an instrument, or means of regeneration. And so (me
thinks) this learned and judicious Author has here competently evinced, that
the Sacraments may be, not solely by themselves, but as accompanied with the
Word, and as being after a sort visible words, holding out that to the eye,
which the Word does to the ear, and setting forth both Law and Gospel to those
that understand the meaning of them. Some one or other particular there is
besides, wherein this Author is apt to meet with either Opposers, or
Dissenters: but as he is not unfurnished with grounds and reasons to support
his opinion, so neither is he desirous to impose upon any further then strength
of argument shall prevail. Some Digressions he has, but they are not
heterogoneal to the subject in hand, and he was moreover enforced to them, as
also to those Disputes in the Poscript. Before Mr. Baxters Apology came forth,
hearing of his intentions, he expressed in a letter to me how much it troubled
him, that he should have him Antagonist, whom in diverse respects he did so
love and honor. And surely his Book of the Covenant does sufficiently declare
how unwilling he was to appear in a way of opposition to that worthy man. (...)
Arist. Ethic. ad Nicom. lib. 1. cap. 6.
But the saying of Aristotle (though not in those words, yet to that effect) is
well known and no less approved, Though Socrates be a friend, and Plato a
friend, yet Truth is so much more. If in this Contest he sometimes show some
acrimonie which is not usual with him, it is not to be considered how he was
provoked. As Soon as I perused his Treatise of the Covenant, being not
unacquainted with Mr. Baxters Aphorisms, I could not but observe how he does
scarce ever name Mr. Baxter (though he name him often) but where he does
approve and commend him: when he does dissent from him, and oppose him (as he
does many times) it is still so (excepting only, I think, where he speaks of
the mannee how the Sacraments do seal; and there he could not but alter his
course) at to conceal his name, and to deal merely with his opinion. Whereas
Mr. Baxter on the other side in his Apology (...), as they say, with open face
does fall upon Mr. Blake, and that also oftentimes in such sort, that some,
favorably enough affected to Mr. Baxter, and his Writings, have to my
knowledge expressed no small dislike of him for it. He that will speak his
pleasure, Qui quod vult, loquitur, quod non vult audiet.
(they say) must look to hear something to his displeasure. I hope Mr. Baxter
will not interpret me so, as if I spoke thus to exasperate him, or to heighten
the difference betwixt him and Mr. Blake; Thas is far from my thoughts: I
desire only to apologize (if need be) for my ancient friend, so far as the
justness of the cause does require. Upon this account I shall makt bold to
advertise the Reader, that peradventure now and then (though very seldom, I
dare say) he may meet with some circumstantial mistake, which as it is nothing
at all to the main, so neither is it any more then that which is incident to
the best Writers. Thus, page 581. that is ascribed to Granatensis, -- Non ego
paucis
Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura.
Horat. de Art. Poet.
which belongs not indeed to him, but to another, namely, Michael ab Isselt,
who does preface to that piece of Granatensis, which is entitled Dux
Peccatorum. I might say more concerning this Author, and the Treatise here set
forth, but I would not be over-tedious. I shall therefore take off, only
praying that the Lord will be pleased to make both this Work profitable, and
also the Author still more and more serviceable to Himself, and to his people.
Amen.

Christopher Cartwright.

To the READER.
THe overture which I gave in the Treatise of the Covenant, of my intentions by
Gods assistance, to send forth the like of the Sacraments; not a few have
endeavored to turn into a promise, and have much solicited me for
performance. Which at last through many difficulties and interruptions is now
done, and exposed to thy censure; which I expect to be different, according as
it shall meet with men aforehand principled. If contention shall hereby
unhappily be increased (as is too often seen in writings of this nature) my
intentions will be altogether disappointed, and expectations frustrated. I had
never appeared on this subject, had I not seen the best of men in their
thoughts much divided, if not perplexed; and conceived some possible hopes of
contributing somewhat toward satisfaction, and settlement. That great
Ordinance of the Lords Supper appointed of Jesus Christ for a more near union;
through men's mistakes (and not from the nature of the Ordinance it self) has
proved the greatest distraction. How mighty contentions, and vehement disputes
have of a long time been held about Christ's presence? First, with those of the
Romish party; afterward with the Lutheran Churches? When there is a full
agreement of parties that Christ is there, (supposing an administration
according to his institution) the manner of his presence has occasioned all
the difference: When, if men would consider, as they confess; that it is a
Sacrament about which all this contention is thus driven on, they could not but
see, that Christ's presence with, or in, the Elements, can be no more then
Sacramental, in which the sign is still put for the thing signified. The bead
is the body, and the cup the blood of Christ, no otherwise then the rock in the
wilderness was Christ. In the explication of Sacramental signs, there can be
expected no other then Sacramental speeches: And therefore that great Lutheran
Logician was much mistaken, in charging the transgression of his maxim upon
Calvinists, that the proper sense of Scripture is ever to be held, unless the
contrary can be evidently proved, in their leaving of the letter in the words
of the Supper, sive (...), as he speaks: Taking it for granted, that no such
necessity can be shown. When it is enough to evince the necessity of a trope,
that the words are an explanation of a Sacramental sign, We must not put this
Sacrament at such a distance from all others, as to make the whole here rigidly
proper, and all others Sacramental. Words must be fitted to the nature of the
subject. But to help himself out, he wisely borrowes from Bellarmine an
assertion, that Reasons are not to be demanded of any that hold the proper
sense, why they keep to it. Both of them, it seems, despairing of giving any
reason that is satisfying. But methinks he might blush in the use of the
Simile, that he has also borrowed to make his assertion good. This were, (say
they) as if any should ask of those that are in a journey, why they hold the
old beaten way; and why they go in at the door, and not at the window? When
they, or either of them, can make it appear, that the old way of interpretation
of Sacramental speeches is, to understand them properly, without any Metonymie,
then I shall say, that the letter here is not to be left, but in the strictest
rigor to be followed: But till then I shall believe them to be both out of the
way. And all Sacraments being appendants to promises, it will likewise follow,
that Christ's presence with him that in faith takes these Elements, is no other
then a presence in Spirit. Where these things are happily accorded, and all
scruple laid aside, a new quarrel is raised about the subject of Sacraments.
That they are institutions of Christ, and gifts vouchsafed by him to his Church
is acknowledged: But to whom they belong, and who of right can make his claim
to them, is not determined; when yet the visibility of the Ordinances, and
trust reposed in man for dispensation of them, (whose sight is more weak then
to discern that which is invisible) necessarily concludes that they belong to
visible Church Members, not in a select way picked out of other Churches, (which
is a way that no Scripture-Saint ever trod) but in as great a latitude as the
profession of the Christian faith. In this, Scripture is so plain, that it is
wonder, that ever it was made a controversy. Either the Jew outwardly was
mis-nam'd, when the title of Circumcision was given him; and a foul misprision
run upon, when a proselyte was circumcised, or a new convert in Scripture-way
baptized; or else this must necessarily be granted. So that, as to title, and
right of claim, if Scriptures may judge, the Covenant-grant is clear. Yet as
there are many that have their just right in Legacies, and inheritances, who
are not judged meet for present fruition: It would be many a man's loss, even
to ruin, to have that presently put into his hands, which justly might be
claimed as his own. So it fares in this great Ordinance of the Lords Supper,
which all that partake of, are to look upon, and improve as a memorial of
Christ's death; for which all are not in any possible capacity, as they are not
for some other duties: And here in all reason, they that are to dispense this
Ordinance, are most concerned to distinguish. And if Regeneration be the mark
by which they are to be steered, it is not like a Sea-boy, appointed for the
Pilot's guide, floting on the top of the water, but rather, as one hid in the
bottom, which necessarily involves both dispenser and receiver in inextricable
difficulties and perplexities. And when most confess that men free from
ignorance, error and scandal, though unregenerate, must have admission; and
all acknowledge, that such (will we, nill we) will enter. If it be concluded,
that unregeneration is an undeniable and invincible bar to all possible
benefit, and blank paper is always sealed whenever such take it; it is not
yet made known how it may be dispensed by those in whose hands it is entrusted
with any possible comfort. A great part of this work is, to render the way here
more comfortably passable, in giving the doubting soul hopes, that yet sees not
concluding evidence, in his own thoughts, of a new birth: (many of which upon
principles that they have taken in, sadly reason against themselves in
participation of this Ordinance) and withal, to put courage into the hands of
the Ministers of Christ, to press the power of this soul-humbling Ordinance of
God, on the hearts of intelligent hearers, competently instructed in Gospel
principles, whom yet they may justly have in jealousy not yet to have come up
to this great and blessed work of a thorough change wrought, in the mean space
differing little or nothing from the common received opinion as to the
qualifications of those that are to be, or are not to be denied admittance. Yet
I thought not meet that they should go alone, but to send out upon this
occasion into public view, a just Tractate of Sacraments, which occasionally
is grown into a bigger bulk then I ever intended. That which appears clear to
my sight, I doubt not but will seem otherwise in the eyes of some others. And
therefore I put it upon my account to meet, not only with dislike (as every
one does that deals in works of this nature) but also with opposition. I hear
indeed that as of old it has been said, that unregenerate men have no true
right in the sight of God, to any of his creatures; and that all such
possessors are usurpers; so, also it is now maintained that all such,
notwithstanding their visible Church-interest, are without all right to any
Church Priviledges. Though they make use of them, as unregenerate men do of the
creatures, and by command from God must make use of them, so that their neglect
of them is justly charged as their sin, yet they are still without any true
right to them, or title in them. This I confess with me is a strange
assertion. I should think that those immunities which Jesus Christ (to whom
all power is given in heaven, and in earth) of his good pleasure, does
vouchsafe to men of mere visible Church-interest, in order to bring them to an
invisible right and title, and which unregenerate men enjoy, in order to work
them to a Regenerate state, are their true ana proper right; as the immunities
which the highest power grants to civil incorporations; in order to bring them
to a further honor and luster, are their just inheritance. When Moses
commanded the congregation of Jacob a law, this is called their inheritance
Deuteronomy. 33.4. By virtue of the grand charter from God himself, who herein
differenced them from all other nations. It is true, that the gross abuse of
civil immunities granted to incorporate bodies, may justly move the highest
power to disfranchize them: but whilst the grant remains, the privilege is
theirs: and the like abuses of Church Priviledges, may justly move Christ
Jesus, and has moved him, to dischurch a people, and take his Kingdom from
among them, removing his Candlestick from them; but whilst his Kingdom
remains, and their light by his long suffering-holds, their right continues.
The Regenerate make a more blessed use, but the unregenerate have an equal
right. There was no difference in the right of Apostleship between Peter and
Judas, how great soever the difference was in their respective improvement of
it. The barren tree whilst it has a place in the Vineyard, is within the
verge of the servants care, and has right to be dug, and dung'd, as well as
the fruitful. To draw toward an end, and not to hold thee longer from the work
it self; as to the whole that thou shall find here delivered, the great thing
that I crave at thy hands is, that those two great enemies to a right
apprehension of truth, Prejudice and Respect of Persons may be laid aside, that
so my reasons may gain, (which otherwise they will be denied) an indiffent
hearing: and that nothing may be charged as mine (upon any supppsed want of
distinct explication) which I do not clearly own, and which men may have reason
to believe that I shall disclaim. For prevention of which, so far as may be in
me, I have given in a list of Erratas, which I pray thee to correct before, or
as thou read, if it be not already done to thy hand, as in most CoppieS, I
hope, care will be taken of those that are more foul: many of which do not
only destroy the sense, which were more tolerable: but lead to a contrary
sense. Other smaller faults, merely literal or mispointings, or such mistakes;
in a word, where that which was intended is clearly obvious, I hope I need not
entreat thy candor. As for any that shall please to appear against me (as in
almost every part of the work I know, that I have some of one interest or other
that are adversaries) I only desire that they deal with me, as I have made it
my business to deal with others. Personal invectives, Sarcasmes and Jeers,
though upon the fairest supposed advantage, falsifications, wrestings of
sentences, industrious concealment of the strength of arguments may possibly
cloud an adversary, but shall never advance the glory of truth; which stands
not in need either of men's passion, or fraudulency, which will be found no
better then his folly. And what name soever may be gained, where truth gains
nothing, let those enjoy that look after it: I desire not to be any share in
it. So far as I yet see (and I think I see much reason for it) I intend here to
set down my staff, and to travel no further in this troublesome way, resolving
not to change my purpose unless I shall either be convinced by truth, and so
shall manifest the change of my mind; or else see the truth in danger to
suffer, which I do not yet see in any thing, which is published against me, and
not answered by me. And in such case I shall endeavor to take that way that
truth may be best cleared, and the Reader least troubled, which will be, as
much as is possible, to examine adversaries arguments, and decline personal
concernments. The Lord grant, that all that is here spoke for truth, may be
succesful for thy Spiritual good! And if any thing, through mistake, be let
fall against it, that it may speedily be discovered, that nothing here may be
thy Spiritual detriment.

Thomas Blake.

Errata.
The Title of Chap. 5. Sect. 3. is by mistake put on the head of the leaf to
the following Section; and the title of Chap. 7. Section 16. is by like mistake
put to the two following Sections likewise.

Page 300. It is said by inadvertancy that Circumcision was taken up again in
the Wilderness, Josh. 5.2. when indeed it was when they had passed Jordan and
were in Canaan, I desire that the Reader may look upon this as expunged.

Words to be blotted out. Page 94. line 14 dele to be, p. 313 l. 6. a fine,
del. it, p. 385. l. 13. a fine, dele done, p. 443. l. penult. dele and. p. 461
l. 10 dele There follows. p 613 l. 5 dele know. p. 617 l. 18 dele the.

Words to be added. Page 37. line 4. add, is not mentioned, p. 121 l. 9 are
obliged. p. 164 l. 10 the minor Proposition in a syllogism is left out, and
must be thus supplied [But men short of faith which justifies are Christians]
p. 167 l. 11. to be, p. 240 l. 30 speaks so. p. 242 l 2 are apt. p. 305 l. 26
Let us so do it as. p. 314 l. 15 These may, p. 345 l. 11 a fine any thing. p.
376 l. 9 a fine where no bar is put. p. 465 l 7. they little thought that, p.
481 l. ult. or Justification. P. 485 l. 20 and thus argue. p. 540 l. 9 he, p.
574 l. 8 a fine speaks of. p. 634 l 12 have not.

Words to be changed. Page 16 line 24 r. last. p. 26 l. 13, 14 r. 6. p. 40 l.
15. r. Noah. p. 29. l. 24 r. of. p. 35 l. ult. uncircumcision. p. 37 l. 6 a
fine Divinity. p. 41 l. 14 unavoidably, irresistibly, l. ult. wonders. p. 56 l.
penult. nor, p. 69 l. 33 though he. p. 105 l. 4 a fine which as. p. 136 l. 6 a
fine lost. p 142 l. 3 mere. p. 175 l. 12 accept. p, 184 l. 16 Few. p. 193 l.
13, to p. 195 l. 8 a fine taking often. p. 196 l. 6 load. p. 229 l. 7 a fine
bereft p. 236 l. 18 years. p. 238 l. 11 lest. p. 240 l. 26 commonly. p. 244 l.
14 were, p. 247. l. 3 a fine strangely, p. 284 l. 14 that all, p 280 l 16 or
produce a, p. 307 l. 10 persistest, p 341 l. 12 a fine the soul, p. 357 l. 19
led, p. 359 l 8 read ver. 15, p. 360 l. 6 Those, p. 396 l. 6 a regenerate, p.
400 l. 10 a fine deviations, p. 416 l. 3 flowing, p 429 l. 10 a fine the, p.
430 l. 15 a fine Pharisees, p 445 l. 12 a fine speak, p. 448 l. 19 is most, p.
449 l. 18 says, p. 445 l. 21 Ilart, p. 463 l. 7 or, p. 468 l. 6 a fine
deal^ng, p. 472 l. 8 justification, p. 525 l 3, 4. In order to our enquiry into
it, this, l. 17 never, l. 23 scope, p. 550 l. 15 You, p. 567 l. 22 His blood,
p. 570 l. 12 member, l. 22 before me, p. 573 l. 22 Tome, page 576 marg.
directly, page 579 l. 6 ascribes, p. 584 up to Ibid. nor, p 588 l. 7 older, p.
589 l. 4 less, l. 5 more, p. 590 l. 19 which, page 606 line 10 a fine
Travelers, page 611 l. 11 takes off the force of the Law condemning, p. 614 l.
4 a fine Then, p. 648 l. 20 wait.

THE Covenant sealed. OR, A TREATISE of the Sacraments of both COVENANTS,
Polemical, and Practical.
CHAP. I. Of the word Sacrament.
THe mutual relation between the Covenant of God entered with man, and the
Sacraments by him instituted and appointed, is generally acknowledged.
Sacraments are in that way bottomed on the institution, that both Sacrament and
institution have respect to the Covenant; Though some to keep back such from
all interest in any Sacrament, that they know not how to deny to be in
Covenant, have made it their business (had it been feasible) to have made a
divorce between them: Having therefore by Gods assistance, published a Treatise
of the Covenant, I would willingly add somewhat (the subject being of so near
affinity) of the nature and use of the Sacraments, of which I know much is
already said, by men of all parties and interests. Though few have written
industriously of the Covenant, (and several books that carry that title have
very little of the thing) yet they are almost above number that have treated of
the Sacraments. He that would have a List of names may consult Chamierde
Sacramentis, pointing the authors out, as they have dealt in the several heads
of this Controversy; as also Vorstius, Enchirid. Controversiarum: and to
complete the Catalogue (especially in the addition of English Writers) Dr.
Wilkins his Ecclesiastes: yet notwithstanding this plenty, (in which abundance
of more light by Gods mercy has been brought forth) I suppose I may say, That
much is left to be further spoken, especially in the particulars in our times
most in agitation, where I think there is least need, I shall be more brief;
and if in any thing I shall have hopes to add any strength to the truth, or
light where it is not so clear, I would be more large. And before I come to
speak of the thing it self, it may be expected that I should premise somewhat
of the name by which these Ordinances are ordinarily known. The word Sacrament
vindicated.
In which Papists (says Chamier) have disputed much, Catholics little,
giving the reason, Because the mysteries of Divinity are not contained in
words. Some have manifested their dislike of the word, seeing it is not a name
given of God, nor to be found in Scripture with application to these
Ordinances. Bellarmine will have it to be the same with Mystery, (...) in Greek
(says he) is to be translated Sacramentum in Latin, but confesses, That
though the word Mystery be frequent in Scripture, yet it is only once used in
Scripture in reference to any of the Sacraments, and that is, Ephesians. 5.32. in
reference to Matrimony. But neither is Matrimony a Sacrament, (as hereafter may
be shown) nor yet has the word Mystery in that place reference to it, (in
which according to Durand there is no Mystery) but to the Conjunction of Christ
with his Church. And upon this account that Scripture uses it not in this
sense, (as is confessed by Protestants) some lay aside all use of it, as we find
in the practice of our Dissenting brethren. As they differ from us in the
subject of the Sacraments, so they differ from us in the name. One with them is
dipping, the other is breaking of bread, but neither of them with them is a
Sacrament, to both of which terms, I have spoken somewhat. Bellarmine lib. 1.
De Sacrament. Cap. 7. lays the dislike of this name, to the charge of many of
our Divines, as Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, Calvin; But falsely, says
Whitaker Praelect. De Sacramentis, page 4. And Chamier dealing with him about
it, entitles the first Chapter of his first Book de Sacramentis in genere, De
Sacramenti nomine Calumnia.
The Calumny about the name of Sacrament, in which he acquits these Authors,
and with Whitaker admits the use of the word, as it is commonly received. So
also Vossius, These. 13.14. De Sacrament. Efficacia; and Vorstius speaking in
the name of Protestants in general, in the entrance of this Controversy,
taking notice of Bellarmine's defense of the use of the word, says; Nostri hic
facile assentiuntur, licet id quod de Graecae vocis aequipollentia dicitur non
omnino admittant: uti nec ca omnia, quae de etymologia Hebraea and Latina
dicuntur.
Here our Divines willingly assent, only he says they make some
animadversions on some passages of his making Mystery and Sacrament to be
equipollent, as also his Etymology of the Hebrew word Razi, and the Chaldee
word Raza. Fallit ergo and fallitur Bellarminus, cum Luthero, Zuinglio litem
movet, quasi absolute a vocibus illis abhorruissent.
Bellarmine is deceived, and does deceive (say the Leyden Professors, Disput.
43.) when he contends with Luther, Zuinglius, as though they had absolutely
condemned those words. And their unanimous practice speaks their opinion; In
Treatises, Catechismes, Sermons, constantly making use of the word, without the
least scruple about it. Religion not consisting in words, but things; when
there is consent in the thing, there is not contention to be raised about the
word. In case we had a word in Scripture from the Pen of the Holy Ghost fitted
to the thing it self, and comprizing these ordinances, in that generality as
the word Sacrament does, in the common use of it, I should then quit this name,
and take to that. But seeing there is no such word, And Tertullian the most
ancient of all the Latin Fathers, (whose works are extant) using it, as
Vossius observes, These. 6. De Sacrament. and since his time in the successive
ages of the Church it is continued, and now generally received; it were too
much affectation of singularity to recede from it; yet I would put this caution
upon the use of it; That it must serve only to denote the thing, that we treat
about, and that no argument from the word, be drawn to hold out the nature of
these Mysteries. The reason of the word enquired after.


But those that upon this, and the like grounds, do freely admit the use of the
word, cannot so easily agree of the reason of it; how it comes to pass, that
these Ordinances came to have this term, or name put upon them; why Baptism
and the Lords Supper should be called by the name of Sacraments. There are
only three opinions, that I meet withal, that are worthy to be taken notice
of; and these drawn from three several acceptations of the word Sacrament, in
profane Authors.

First, The depositing of money by men striving for Masteries, in Consecrated
places, (upon those terms, that he that conquered should take away his part;
and he that was conquered should leave his with the Priest) according to Varro
was called a Sacrament. They collected therefore, that the Sacrament signifies
our depositing of our selves (as I may say) with God, or our yielding up of our
selves to him. As they that strive for mastery, did leave for a pledge a sum
of money, so we leave our selves as a pledge with God. But this use of the word
Sacrament, I suppose is more obscure; and the analogy not so clear, and
therefore Divines in ancient times, would scarce borrow this word from thence,
so few understanding the allusion, or the application of it.

Secondly, The oath which anciently Soldiers took, when they listed themselves
to the Emperor; for faith and obedience, was called by the name of Sacrament.
Therefore others judge it very probable, that these Ordinances are called
Sacraments; in that in them every Christian Soldier does tie himself to his
Captain Christ Jesus. This is far more probable, for three Reasons. 1. The use
of the word in this sense, was more common and received, and therefore more apt
to give occasion to the like use of it in these Sacred Ordinances. 2. The
application is more clear, seeing our Sacraments (as God willing shall be
shown) are engagements. 3. Heathen Writers make such allusion; Deo oportebat
and nos jurare and milites Caesar.
It behooves us (says one of them) to swear to God, and Soldiers to Caesar.
And the Fathers used the word Sacrament with this allusion, as Vossius out of
Tertullian quotes two passages, Vocati sumus ad militiam Dei vivi jam tunc, cum
in Sacramenti verba respondimus.
We are at that instant called to the warfare of the true God, when we answer
in the words of the Sacrament; and elsewhere, Ut Sacramento benedictionis
exauctoretur, nunquam in castra Ecclesiae reversu^us.
That he may be disbanded and shut out from the blessings of the Sacraments,
never more to return into the tents of the Church. To which may be added a
third quoted by Bellarmine; The Devil imitates the very things of Divine
Sacraments, in idol-Mysteries, he washes some, and signs other of his
Soldiers in their foreheads. And Austine in his Preface to the 181 Sermon De
tempore says, Notum est dilectissimi quod beneficia temporalia a temporalibus
Dominis accepturi, prius Sacramentis militaribus obligantur and Dominis suis
fidem se servaturos profitentur. Quanto magis ergo aeterno Regi militaturi and
aeterna praemia percepturi debent Sacramentis coelestibus oligari and fidem per
quam ei placituri sunt public profiteri.
It is known, Beloved, that the Soldiers being to receive temporal rewards
from their temporal Masters, do first tie themselves with military Sacraments,
and profess faithful service to their Lords. How much more should those that
war under an Eternal King, and are to receive rewards from him, bind themselves
with heavenly Sacraments, and publicly profess that faith whereby they may
please him. In this Rivet rests satisfied, as appears in his Cathol. Orthodox.
Tract. 3. Quaest. 2. Vox Latina Sacramentum deducta est a verbo Sacrare, and a
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis Latinis a militia desumpta fuit, in qua juramentum
quo milites duci obstringebantur, vocabatur Sacramentum. Refert Claris. Ed.
Leigh. Crit. Sac. page 270.
The Latin word Sacrament (says he) is borrowed from the verb Sacrare, and by
Ecclesiastical Latin Writers, is taken from proceedings in war, in which the
Oath wherewith Soldiers were tied to their Captain, was called a Sacrament.

Thirdly, There being so great affinity between Mystery among the Greeks, and
Sacrament among the Latins, Mystery signifying that which is secret of any
kind whether sacred or profane, of which there are many instances given; and
Sacrament signifying that which is made sacred, or consecrate, words seldom
long holding their signification; Mystery began to be taken more strictly for
holy secrets; and so Sacraments for Sacred secrets; afterward the word Mystery
and with it Sacrament began to be used for sacred things held forth in outward
signs. The vision of the seven Candlesticks setting out seven Churches, are
called Mysteries, Revel. 1.20. The conjunction in marriage of man and wife,
setting forth the union between Christ and his Church, is called a Mystery,
Ephesians. 5.32. And when Divines found no word in Scripture, to set out these
Ordinances of the Old and New Testament, Circumcision, Passover, Baptism, the
Lords Supper, they gave them the name of Sacraments, further restraining their
signification to holy secrets, held forth in outward signs, and sealing
spiritual grace to us. This Vossius takes to be most satisfactory. Though I
profess my self scarce satisfied with the reason that he gives, These. 16. and
comparing it with what he has said in his 6th. Thesis, it may seem to speak as
much in favor of the second opinion, which he rejects, as this third which he
follows. The reason that he assigns as taking with him is, Latinos in variis
Sacramenti notionibus, secutos esse Graecos, qui and ipsi (...) nunc rem
arcanam appellant; nunc rem arcanam sacram; nunc rem arcanam symbolicam; nunc
denique rem arcanam sacram symbolicam, gratiae spiritualis significativam.
That the Latin Fathers in the use of the word Sacrament, had much respect to
the use of the Greek word Mystery. And so in several places by him produced
they had respect unto the military use of it in like manner. Here it is not for
me to interpose, I suppose none is able to speak any more then conjecture, In
which I leave the Reader to use his own liberty, assenting to Vossius, that
those are weak arguments that are drawn from the use of the word, either in the
first or second acceptance; and concluding that they are as weak, that are
drawn from the use of it according to the third opinion; There must be a better
bottom for an argument, then the bare denotation of the word, especially when
it is of humane, not of Divine imposition. And the use of the word being thus
taken up by man, the acceptance or use of it upon that account has been very
various, and ambiguous, insomuch that when Writers speak of Sacraments, the
Reader is often at a stand what they mean by them. The various acceptance of
the word.
Sometimes every thing that is secret is called by the name of Sacrament;
therefore the vulgar Latin (which appears to be more ancient than their number
of seven Sacraments) does not only render the word (...), Sacramentum, in Ephesians.
5.32. (upon which they take advantage to bring in marriage into the number) but
frequently elsewhere, when nothing toward a Sacrament by their own confession
is intended. Having made known to us the Sacrament of his will, Ephesians. 1.9. By
revelation he made known to me the Sacrament, Ephesians. 3.3. To make all men see
what is the fellowship of the Sacrament, Ephesians. 3.9. To whom God would make known
what is the riches of the glory of this Sacrament, among the Gentiles, Col.
1.27 Great is the Sacrament of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. The Sacrament of the
seven stars, Rev. 1.20. I will tell thee the Sacrament of the woman, and the
beast that carries her, Rev. 17.7. And Tertullian speaking of Christianity,
calls it, Religionis Christianae Sacramentum.
The Sacrament of Christian Religion: and Jerome says, Sacramenta. Dei sunt
praedicare, benedicere, confirmare, communionem reddere, visitare infirmos,
orare. Refert Gerardus de Sacram. cap. 1.
The Sacraments of God are to preach, to bless, to strengthen, and establish,
to hold communion, to visit the sick, and pray. Allegorical interpretations of
Scripture also are called by the Ancients, by the name of Sacraments. Sometimes
every outward sign of any thing that is holy is called by the name of
Sacrament. And as they began to borrow rites from the Jews in Baptism, they
called them by the name of Sacraments. Their Ointments and Chrismes (yea the
Cross it self, which the Church of Rome makes no more then a ceremony in
Sacraments) are called by the name of Sacraments. But these acceptations of the
word are grown obsolete, and are so far from holding out the nature of those
Ordinances, which now pass under the name of Sacraments, that men cannot be
brought to any mistake in reading of them. The word Sacrament is ordinarily now
taken in that sense as Austine does define it. An outward visible sign of an
inward spiritual grace, that is a sign instituted of God to hold out and seal
saving grace to the soul, as afterward (God willing) may be more largely held
forth. Now in every Ordinance of this nature, there is, first, an outward sign
open to the senses; secondly, there is a spiritual grace; thirdly, an order
established and declared between the sign and the thing signified, and some of
these still give the denomination. Sometimes the outward sign is taken for the
Sacrament, and therefore the distinction is ordinary between Sacramentum and
rem Sacramenti. And it can be no more than a bare sign, when the thing
signified is apart considered and put in opposition to it. Sometimes the
outward sign and the thing signified, considered jointly, are called by the
name of a Sacrament, and this Gerard says is the most proper and most usual
acceptance. Sometimes the order or analogy that is betwixt the sign and the
thing signified, is called by the name of Sacrament; and therefore Keckerman
defines a Sacrament to be Sacramentum est ordo sanctus inter rem externam in
sensus incurrentem, et visus imprimis objectum tanquam ^^gnum, et inter rem
spiritualem, tanquam signatum, a Christo Mediatore institutus ad obsignandam
fidelibus redemptionis certitudinem et simul beneficia quae ex redemptione
fluunt, tum significanda tum confirmanda.
an holy order between the outward element obvious to the sense, especially to
the sight and the spiritual grace as the thing signified, instituted of Christ
the Mediator to seal to Believers the assurance of redemption, and with it all
benefits that flow from redemption. So that he makes neither the outward sign,
nor yet the thing signified apart considered to be the Sacrament in that
definition, nor yet the outward sign and thing signified jointly considered,
but the order or analogy that is held between them. Lastly, the word Sacrament
is taken for the outward sign, with relation had to the thing signified,
leading to it, and by way of seal confirming it, and in this sense it is taken
by Divines when they treat exactly about it. And in that sense the Apostle
takes circumcision, when he defines it to be A sign and seal of the
righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. The use and office of the cutting off the
foreskin of the flesh, as by way of sign and seal it stands in relation to the
righteousness of faith is there held forth. This therefore we may well judge
to be the most proper acceptance of it. Keckerman therefore as soon as he had
defined a Sacrament, as before, presently tells us, that Sacramenti vox per se
concreta est, et significat rem sive subjectum, cum modo rei, id est, cum rel
tione rei addita: interim tamen potest etiam usurpari pro Ipso abstracto, id
est, pro relatione ut nos quidem in definitione usurpavimus.
the word of it self is a concrete, and signifies the thing or subject with the
manner of it, that is, says he, with the relation added to it: yet it may be
taken for the abstract, that is, for the relation as (says he) we have put
into the definition. But seeing the word of it self, by our Authors confession,
is no abstract, but a concrete, and the Apostle in his definition does so
consider it, we have just reason in that sense to speak to it; and so in this
whole Treatise I shall take it. And before I proceed in any further Enquiry,
the Reader may justly expect such a definition as may serve as a thread through
the whole Discourse. But my intention being to enquire something into the
nature of Sacraments in man's integrity, (that so the Work may answer the Title)
A Treatise of the Sacraments, but mainly to insist on those that are appointed
by God for his people in the Covenant of Grace, I am necessitated to put off
the enquiry after such a definition that may give satisfaction, till I come to
that which I intend as my principal Subject. Yet that by the way he may not be
wholly left unsatisfied, I shall here offer such a definition that may
comprehend all Sacraments as well in the Covenant of Works, as in the Covenant
of Grace; entreating him to forbear any strict enquiry into the reasons of it,
until he come into the full Body of the Discourse, where by the definition,
which (God willing) shall be given of Sacraments in the Covenant of Grace, and
from Scripture at large confirmed, he may easily judge of the definition of
Sacraments in general, and thus I suppose it may be held out. A Sacrament is a
sign instituted of God for the use of his people in Covenant, to signify and
seal his Promises upon Terms and Propositions by himself prescribed and
appointed.

CHAP. II.
Sect. I. Of Sacraments in man's state of integrity.
I shall leave the word which is of least moment, being not of divine original,
and come to enquire after the thing which must be distinguished before it can
be defined either in the general what a Sacrament is, or what this or that
Sacrament, viz. Baptism or the Supper of the Lord is in particular. Now
Sacraments (being instituted of God for the use of men) in tendency toward
their happiness must be considered according to the several states of man, and
dispensations in which God has manifested himself to him. Distribution of
Sacraments.
And man may be considered either in his state of integrity, or in his fall,
either before sin, or under it. For the state of integrity enquiry is made,
whether man enjoyed any Sacrament at all, or were in capacity of any? In which
we have Thomas Aquinas his conclusion, Part 3. Quest. 16. art. 2. in the
negative, In statu innocentiae homo non indigebat Sacramentis, nec pro remedio
peccati nec pro perfectione animae.

The tr^e of life and the tree of the knowl^dge of good and evil were
Sacraments.


That man in innocence needed no Sacrament, neither for any remedy of sin, or
perfection of his soul. His followers (it seems) not satisfied, with his
determination, unless they themselves may have the interpretation of it (yet
not daring to adventure on a contradiction of their master) are at odds among
themselves about his meaning, enquiring what he means by necessity, and what by
innocence: whether he means Adams own state, in which he actually stood, or
that which he should have attained if he had stood in his integrity? A labor
worthy of their pains, had they before hand had assurance that an unerring
oracle had uttered it: But others have concluded, that the tree of life in
Paradise was no other then a Sacrament to our first parents, and it is marvel
that Aquinas who denies it, hit not on that of Austin, to have made up at least
a fourth objection, that Erat homini in lignis aliis alimentum, in hos Sac
amentum.
In other trees there was nourishment, but in this a Sacrament. For the
clearing of this point I shall lay down several propositions.

First, Positions tending to the illustration and c^nfi^mation f^t.
That all Sacraments whether in the state of integrity or under sin, must
answer to the Covenant which they are appointed for to ratify and confirm. Now
the Covenant of God entered with man in his state of integrity, was for his
preservation, not for his reparation, as I have showed in a Treatise of the
Covenant, Chap. 3. page 10. and so must this tree of life in case it have the
nature of a Sacrament be a Sacrament of preservation, not restitution. And so
Thomas Aquinas his foundation, on which he builds, that man in integrity needed
no Sacrament, because the whole need not the Physician, but those that are
sick, Matthew. 9.12. is answered. There being a Covenant for man's preservation as
well as his restoration, there may be a suitable Sacrament for preservation
also, and so there is a plain fallacy in his argument, a dicto secundum quid,
ad dictum simpliciter, because our Sacraments in the state of sin are for
recovery from the disease of sin, he will have it to be so in all Sacraments
even before our fall into sin. Chamier returning answer to this argument,
distinguishes of persons subject to sickness; Resp. aegrotos, alios actutales
dici, qua les omnes homines post pecatum, al^os potentia, in quorum natura
principium est morbi propinquum vel remotum.
Some are actually sick so are all men (says he) in the state of sin; some are
in possibility or danger of sickness, having a principle in them capable of
it, either more immediate or remote; so it was with man in integrity, he needed
Physic for prevention, not for cure; to keep him in the state in which he
stood that he might not fall: not to recover him out of evil being fallen.

Secondly, The Covenant of works passing between God and man in an immediate
way without any reference had to Christ, (as has been largely shown, and
objections answered, Treatise of the Covenant, page 13. etc.) the Sacraments
annexed must needs be without reference to Christ likewise: I know many learned
men suppose that Christ was a Mediator between God and the Angels, and between
God and man in his integrity: and these will have the tree of life, Genesis 2.9.
to be a symbol of Christ, as the bread and wine in the Lords supper, which
indeed necessarily follows upon that supposition: but that falling all the
supposed relation of sign and thing signified between the tree of life and
Christ falls with it. That opinion of theirs referring the tree of life to
Christ they suppose has strength from that speech of Christ to the Church of
Ephesus; To him that overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of life which is
in the midst of the Paradise of God, Revel. 2.7. which all Interpreters refer
to Christ, seeing there is no life but in Christ, 1 John 5.12. He that has the
Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life. As also from Revel.
22.2. speaking of the new Jerusalem, it is said, In the midst of the street of
it and of either side of the river was the tree of life, etc. which can be no
other but that Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. But
neither of these places serve their purpose, nor is the argument drawn from
thence at all cogent. The tree of life in the literal Paradise was a symbol of
immortality, and everlasting bliss, which man persisting in obedience should
have enjoyed, whether on earth or in heaven, still remained in Gods choice to
determine; In the state of sin this could not be without Christ, and every
symbol of it, therefore in this state leads to Christ. But it follows not
that it was so in man's state of integrity. He should then have enjoyed it, by
ah immediate gift from God, and not through Christ, whose whole work was not to
keep man in statu quo, as before sin, but to recover from sin into which he was
fallen. In those places of the Revelation there is (after the manner of the
visions of that book) an allusion borrowed from that tree in Paradise, which as
Ravanellus observes was a type of immortality. This tree assured man of it in
Paradise on terms of bedience. In the state of sin the same is to be had
through Christ on Gospel terms and conditions. In case any will assign the
work of man's support in any transcendent way to the second person in the
Trinity, who is said to uphold all things by the word of his power, without any
reference to his wotk of mediation, as to be incarnate: as I dare not assert
it, so I will not contend about it. But in this I am confident the substance of
our Sacraments is Christ incarnate, and all the benefits of them is through and
by christ, but so it was not in the Sacraments in Paradise.

Thirdly, The life promised in the Covenant of works to man in case of
obedience, was not barely a prorogation of his being or preservation from
dissolution to an immortality in nature. This he might have enjoyed and have
continued for ever perfectly wretched, and so the performance of the promise
should have been a curse, and no blessing. As it was said by our Savior of
Judas upon his great sin of betraying Christ, It had been good for that man
that he had never been born, Matthew. 26.24. So it might have been said of Adam,
though he had never sinned it had been good for him that he had never been
created, and therefore those that see no more toward bliss, in this promise of
life then a perpetuation in being, according to the vulgar acceptance of it,
understand that speech of God concerning our first Parents, Genesis 3.22. And now
lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and
live for ever, to be a speech of mercy to keep man from an immortality of
misery: and according to that opinion the curse threatened for transgression
had been suffered, and the blessing affixt to obedience at once enjoyed, which
is the greatest of paradoxes; life then (as elsewhere I have showed) in the
promise comprises true blessedness, a fruition of all that serves to make happy,
and a freedom from all that tends to misery, so that man lived no longer then
he stood and sinned not; death in its measure immediately seized, though the
full execution in the highest degree to some is delayed, to others the whole
reversd.

Fourthly, The names given to these respective trees must not be accounted vain
(as it fares many times with names given by men) seeing the Spirit of God has
affixed these names to them. But something must be found in the trees, or from
God by the trees, answering the names that they carry: When God gave Abram the
name of Abraham, which signifies a father of multitudes, Genesis 17.5. the event
we find answered, how improbable soever (when the name was given him) it
appeared; Therefore (says the Apostle) sprang there even of one, and him as
good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand
which is by the seashore innumerable, Heb. 11.12. Solomon was called Jedidiah,
2 Samuel 12.25. which signifies beloved of the Lord, and was not barely so named,
but indeed beloved, Nehem. 13.26. Among many Nations there was no King like him
who was beloved of his God. The name of that wonderful birth, Esaias 7.14. was
Immanuel, which the Spirit of God has interpreted, God with us, Matthew. 1.23.
he was so named, and this he did effect, 2 Cor. 5.29. God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. Our
first Parents therefore were to expect some way both life and knowledge from
these trees: They had their names in reality, and not by way of fiction, or
fancy given to them.

Fifthly, This tree of life with that other of the knowledge of good and evil
had not any natural power or innate efficacious vigor, to answer their names in
giving life by the taste, or eating of them, as Satan bore the woman in hand
concerning the one of them. This I know has been the opinion of some, which
false supposition has occasioned an hot and curious dispute, whether this tree
should have given man life totally and wholly to a full immortality? or whether
it should have preserved his life to some definite time of some thousands of
years? But the contrary is plain both by reason and experience, and so the
ground of this dispute is taken away.

This appears, first by reason. Arbores enim infra homines sunt, imo infra an
malia, quia ne sensus quidem capaces fuere ergo propter aliud and ex
institutione, adeoque Sacrameenta.
Trees (as Chamier well observes) are below men, yea, below other creatures
that were made for the use of man, being capable of a vegetative life, only
for growth, but not of sense, and so could not confer on man by any power from
themselves either life or knowledge. Some that stickle for this opinion see the
force of this reason, and therefore yield that it is above them to produce any
such effect directly. But indirectly they say there may be such an efficacy;
Meats that are singularly suitable to nature have their work, in a direct way
on the animal spirits for a life of nature, and indirectly upon the organs of
the inward senses. A good constitution (which a wholesome diet works) serves to
the preservation of health, and has hereupon its work upon the faculties of
the mind, and consequently preserves life, and increases and quickneth
knowledge. Sed hac ratione omnes arbores horti potussent arbores scientiae boni
and mali appellari. Par est enim credere, Deum qui ad e^um hominis in sta^u
integritatis constituti arbores illas creaverat, eis etiam talem vim and succum
ind^d^sse quo hominis innocentis corpus non gravaretur sed alacrius esset ad
omnes suas functiones, and per consequens o^gana sensuum, etc.
But (as Rivet well observes) all the trees of the garden might in this sense
have been called trees of life, and trees of knowledge of good and evil, as
well as those two trees in the midst of the garden: All of them being for food,
and to keep men in a due temperature both of body and mind.

As the truth of this appears in reason, so also by experience, in that tree
forbidden; when Eve listened to Satan and did eat of it (and her husband by her
solicitation) knowledge was not gained but lost, which mankind sadly knows;
For that speech of the Lord before mentioned, Genesis 3.22, 23, 24. And the Lord
God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. And
now least he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat and
live for ever. Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden,
to till the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man, and
placed at the East of the, garden of Eden Cherubims and a flaming sword, which
turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life; which may seem to imply
that in case man had been permitted to have put forth his hand, and eaten of
the tree of life, he had lived for ever, in such an interpretation we should
scarce conceive the tree to be any creature of God, but an omnipotent agent,
standing in opposition against God, when God for sin had denounced against man
the sentence of death, this tree against this sentence would give him life;
Quid audimus? an suam Adae incorruptionem a qua jam deciderat restituere
peterit fructus ille?
What is it that we hear? (says Calvln) can that fruit restore te Adam the
integrity that he had lost? Me thinks the former part of the two and twentieth
verse serves well to interpret the latter. Behold, man is become like one of
us. Even as the tree of knowledge of good and evil made man like God, in a full
omniscience, so the tree of life would have rendered him equally like in
immortality. If we confess an Irony in the former, as is concluded by
Interpreters, we must understand the like, or somewhat much like it, in the
latter. Man will have like immortality in sin, as he had omniscience by sin.
Therefore he puts, and keeps him out of Paradise, that now being deprived of
the thing, he might not delude himself in the outward sign or Sacramental
representation of it.

Sixthly, It remains therefore that these trees were set apart of God from
other trees of the garden for a Sacramental use, having no more power of
themselves to confer life or knowledge then water in Baptism or bread and wine
in the Lords Supper to confer pardon of sin or spiritual life on the soul.
Arbor igitur vitae non ab in sita vivificandi facultate sed a Sacramentali
signif^c^tione sic dicta est.
The tree of life was so called (says Wollebius) not from any innate quickening
faculty, but from a Sacramental signification. Paraeus indeed putting it to the
question whether the tree of life be so called by reason of the effect that it
had produced had man stood, or by way of signification? says, these two
opinions in his judgment may be joined, and says, Sine dubio habitura erat
haec arbor seu ut cibus seu ut medicina vim conservandi hominis sanitatem and
vitam, ne corpora vergerent in senium, aut sentirent defec^um, donec in
coelestem immortalitatem transirent.

Deinde data fuit homini in vitae Sacramentum.


The tree might give life as food or as physic, and preserve from age till man
should be translated into an heavenly immortality, and then proceeds to show
how it is a Sacrament of life. But sure these opinions are altogether
inconsistent, Sacraments are so signs that they are not physical causes of the
thing that is signified. If they had any such effect in nature, then all
mystery in the Sacrament ceased and there needed no word from God to clear it,
every man would know that food has a natural tendency to life, and physic to
health, if there were no Scripture. If we were able to make it good that they
were physical causes of life and knowledge, then we must disclaim their
Sacramental use; but seeing that cannot appear, and the contrary is evident;
This other must be asserted, It may easily be made out that the tree of life
was a Sacramen. Man was to put forth his hand to eat of it, as the Jews did
the Passover, and we do the Lords Supper. Voluit igitur hominem quoties
fructum arboris illius gustaret in memoriam revorareunde vitam haberet: ut se
agnosceret non propria virtute, sed Dei unius beneficio vivere; Neq^e esse
intrinsecum bonum ut vulgo loquuntur sed a Deo provenire.
And as often as he ate of it, or had his eye upon it (as Calvin well observes)
he was to remember from whom he received life and bliss, and by whom he was
preserved and upheld, that he had no principle of life and bliss in himself,
but as he received it from God, so by his favor and free Grace it was
continued: And to mind himself of his duty on what terms he stood with God,
and upon what condition his life and bliss was continued: whilst he sinned
not he must not dye, as long as obedience lasted he must enjoy a life in
happiness. Others add that it shadowed out Christ, by whom both he and the
Angels stood in happiness: but I have already spoke my thoughts to that
particular. But how to bring that other tree of the knowledge of good and evil
so aptly to hold out the nature and use of a Sacrament, is not so easy: and I
find many Interpreters asserting it, but not any that I can meet with
demonstrating it. And it must be confessed that this Sacrament did herein differ
from all other Sacraments. Those did consist in their use; This in man's
abstinence from it. In this it is said thou, shall not eat: In the Passover
and the Lords Supper the communitants must eat. But God has it in his power to
institute Sacraments according to pleasure, by way of prohibition, as well as
by way of injunction. In other Sacraments in the due use, men attain to the
good that is promised: In this by abstinence man should have avoided the evil
threatened. In eating of the tree of life, while man persisted in obedience, he
was assured of life, that was a seal and pledge of it. And while he abstained
from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, he had like assurance of
freedom from death. This alone was a negative Sacrament, and it was proper to
this Sacrament only, that not the fruition of good, but the avoydance of evil
was the thing signified. The reason of the name is the enquiry of many why it
was called the tree of the knowledge of good and evil? Some that would deny it
to be any Sacrament, say that it had the name from the natural effect that it
was apt to produce, being created to quicken or ripen man in the use of his
reason, conceiving that our first Parents were created weak in knowledge, of an
infant understanding: And to know good and evil (that is, choose the good, and
refuse the evil) in the Hebrew phrase setting out the use of reason, as, Esaias
7.16. Before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good: They
say this tree was to work them to this maturity in knowledge. How false this is
of our first Parents weakness in knowledge is clear by the names that man gave
to all creatures upon sight, as he had dominion over them, so he understood the
nature of them, as also in that speech that he uttered concerning Eve, when the
Lord upon her creation brought her to him to give her in marriage. The Wise man
says that God made man upright, Eccles. 7.29. And this uprightnes comprizes
man's whole conformity to God in all in which his image does consist, which was
as the Apostle tells us, in knowledge, as in righteousness and true holiness,
Col. 3.10. To avoid suspicion of inclination to any such opinion, some when
they speak of man's first estate, purposely avoid the word innocence, and choose
to use the word integrity. And how unapt the fruit of a tree could possibly be
in nature to produce any such effect, that which was spoken concerning the tree
of life being applied hither may demonstrate. And whence this opinion came but
from the Devil I cannot tell, who told our mother Eve, that God did know that
in the day that they eat thereof their eyes should be opened, and they should
be like unto gods, knowing both good and evil, Genesis 3.5. He was the first that
vented it, and she was the first that believed it; when she saw that the tree
was good for food and pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to make one
wise; she did take and eat thereof, Genesis 3.6. The taste it seems was the taking
quality; the other trees were good for food, and doubtless lovely to the eye,
but this alone answerable to the name with the Devils comment upon it was a
tree to be desired for this end, but she found the contrary; light was not only
not increased, but put out, so that man now is a beast by his own knowledge;
others therefore conclude that it had name, not from any such effect that in
nature it was apt to produce, but by reason of the event that followed, and
upon the taste of it must of necessity follow; now they experimentally know the
good which they had by sin lost, and the evil which they had incurred.
Quemadmodum qui medicus est theoretice vim morbi and sanitatis bonum cognoscit,
in morbum delapsus amissa sanitate nova quadam ratione, per experientiam bonum
sanitatis, and malum morbi cognoscit.
As a Physician (faith Ri vet) that has the theory of health, and sickness,
understanding what health is to desire it, and what sickness is to shun it,
yet falling into sickness he has another manner of knowledge out of his own
experience. Pererius the Jesuit dislikes this Interpretation; he that pleases
may read his reason on these words, and Rivets vindication, Exer. 18. in Genesis
He fixes upon a third, that this name was given to this tree, upon occasion of
the speech of Satan, bearing Eve in hand, that in eating of it, she should gain
the wisdom of God, to know both good and evil; And therefore it had the name of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. But whosoever gave the name,
whether God himself who placed the tree in the garden, or Adam who to his cost
knew it, or Moses that wrote of it, it is not probable they would borrow a name
from Satan's delusion; The former therefore which the Jesuit confessed to be an
opinion most received, I judge to be most probable, and till I see more shall
not recede from it.

SECT. II. Corollaries from the former assertion.
FIrst, hence we see the necessity of the use of means, Necessity of the use of
means for our help and streng^h in the way of fai h and obedience.
for our help and strength in ways of faith and obedience, in all the ways
prescribed and appointed by God, In case our first Parents in their integrity
were to make use of a Sabbath to give God a time in a more solemn way as we
see, Genesis 2.2,3. and also of Sacraments; who are we, that we should cast off
Sabbath and Sacraments? that our faith and obedience should be risen to that
growth, and arrived at that height, that all helps should be laid aside? It is
no marvel, that upon this account, so many that seemed to be somewhat, refusing
the assistance of God provided, wholly degenerate and come to nothing: In case
it be replied, that Adam was left to his own keeping, carried his life in his
own hands, but we have another manner of support and defense; We are kept by
the mighty power of God through faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. and so we
need not to be so sollicitous of our selves. I answer, though there be truth in
that which is objected, yet the objection is to no purpose, as easily may be
manifested: Jesus Christ would not have provided Ordinances in
New-Testament-times, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the
body of Christ: in case he would not have his to make use of them, and had not
seen that they stand in need of them: we are not so kept, that we should sit
still, no more then Israel was in the conquest of the promised Land. Gods power
in o^r preservation, and our diligent (though not diffident) and anxious care
very well stands together: Else Peter had not from thence inferred, wherefore
gird up the loins of your mind, be sober and hope to the end, for the grace
that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13.
Nor yet having set out Satan's vigilance annexed that exhortation, Whom resist
steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. nor yet had the Apostle John told us that He
that is begotten of God keeps himself, and the evil one touches him not, 1 John 1.18. Soldiers are taught to go out and fight in the Name of the Lord,
and that he covers their head in the day of battle; yet this does not abate any
thing of their watchfulness, or diligence; they do not cast off weapons either
offensive, or defensive. This is an artifice of Satan, to lay men's throats open
to him for slaughter, and destruction, under pretense of Divine protection.

Sacraments are without Spiritual profit to those that live in breach of
Covenant.
Secondly, Know that there is no saving benefit received by any Sacraments which
are seals of the Covenant, longer then men in Covenant, make it their business
to keep up to the terms of it; Adam was in a Covenant of life from God, upon
terms of preserving himself from sin, and had it by a Sacrament confirmed to
him, he wilfully runs upon sin; the tree of life now can no more give life to
him: Satan then persuades to believe, that in eating of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, they should as gods know both good and evil. He now
persuades, that being baptized in water, which holds forth the Spirit and blood
of Christ (if they understand any such symbolical representation) they partake
of the Spirit, and blood of Christ: And that taking the Bread and Cup, they
enjoy all that they signify and hold forth: That no more then a Sacrament,
needs to make up a Christian complete. This is an outward work, that may be
done, and all lust alive within; An easy work to go through, and here man
would fain rest; but look further to the duty, to which these engage; otherwise
thou will find no more of Christ in the Sacrament, then Adam found of life in
the tree of life. See Mr. Burges Spiritual Refining, Ser. 19.

Covenant failing all Sacraments relating to it necessarily fall with (...).
Thirdly, It yet further follows, That a Covenant falling to which Sacraments
are annexed as signs, and seals, the Srcraments fall together with it. The
Covenant of works being no longer of use to the attainment of Salvation; the
Sacraments which under that Covenant were appointed, are taken out of the way,
and no use of them remaint. I know that it is asserted by as learned hand, that
Christ does not absolutely make null or repeal the Covenant of works, but that
it still continues, to command, prohibit, promise, and threaten; yet
confessing this assertion to be difficult, and disputable, to which I readily
yield; and therefore in a business of no greater moment then this is, I had
rather suspend, then either subscribe or oppose. He and I are wholly agreed, as
to that for which it is here produced, seeing he says, We must neither take
that Covenant as a may to life; as though we must get Salvation by our
fulfilling of its conditions; nor must we look upon its curse, as lying upon as
remedilessely. This is as much as I assert, or rather imply in that which I
say, that the Covenant of works is of no use to the attainment of Salvation:
upon which the Sacraments of that Covenant, the sea are laid aside with it: we
hear no more of a tree of life, or the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Rivet Exer. 40. on those words. Lest he put forth his hand, and take of the
tree of life, and live for ever, Observes a resemblance between that proceeding
of God, and the Churches proceeding in keeping unworthy men from the Sacrament:
The Quemadmodum nunc ex Dei instituto a Sacramentis arcentur indigni ne sibi
Symbola sumant ad judicium and condemnationem, ita hac prohibitione usus est
Deus tanquam ex communicatione minori quam abstensionem vocant, ad hominem
magis and magis humiliandum, ut se indignum agnosceret vita qui a vitae Symbolo
arcebatur.
unworthy (says he) are kept from the Sacrament, lest they should eat of those
signs to their judgment: And so God made use of this prohibition as a lesser
excommunication called suspension, for the further humiliation of man, that he
might see himself to be unworthy of life, being kept from the outward symbol
or Sacrament of it. But me thinks this is so far from resemblance of that kind
of Excommunication which is called the lesser; that it is a sentence in terror
far above that which is highest, and greatest: And this it seems my Author
saw, and therefore adds: Praeterea tale Sacramentum, homini lapso, non erat
amplius aptum: quia arbor vitae non data erat ut vitam restitueret mortuo sed
ut viventem in statu vitae commodo conservaret. Ergo Adamo per peccatum mortuo
mutanda fuerunt Sacramenta.
Furthermore, such a Sacrament was unmeet, or unsuitable to fallen man; because
the tree of life was not given to restore a man dead to life, but to preserve
life in a living man; therefore Adam being dead by sin, and his condition
changed, the Sacraments were to be changed likewise. Two sorts of men then are
here fitly to be parallelled with Adam, in this proceeding of God against him.

1. Those that God casts out of Covenant, taking away their Candlestick, and
his Kingdom, refusing to be their God, or to own them as his people; God
denying them his Covenant, all must deny them the sign and seal of it.

2. Those that cast themselves out of Covenant, and apostatize from the faith
of Christ Jesus. Where there is no Covenant in which men may expect happiness,
where there is no profession of such expectation, there is to be no Sacrament;
there the seal is put to a blank, and these Sacred Mysteries are profaned:
Therefore I cannot but marvel at those, that deny the Church of Rome all being
of a Church; and affirm, that they are in no Covenant Relation to God; yet
yield that they have Baptism in truth among them, explaining themselves, that
it is as a true man's purse in the hand of a thief. But the purse, and the man
stand not in that relation as Covenant and Sacrament; the Covenant being gone,
the Sacrament has no truth of being remaining.

Satan's imitation of God in his precepts of worship to his followers.
Fourthly, Let us yet see, how forward Satan is to imitate God, in prescribing a
way of worship to his servants; and how ready the world is to follow Satan in
these things by him prescribed. God appointed a tree of life, as a sign and
pledge of immortality; in the due use of which man might have lived for ever,
and been preserved from the evils, and infirmities of age; and Satan among
those in the world, that are his for worship, has of old found out a fiction
of certain meats, called by them Ambrosia, and certain drinks named Nectar, and
Nepenthe; which the gods using to take, were preserved from age and death. It
cannot be imagined, how they should reach such a fancy, but that the posterity
of Noah, had scattered some Divine light of this tradition among them. Their
gods, who were but men, and some of them the worst of men, bringing all
wickedness to renown by their example, being supposed to have an immortal
being, must have some way or means to come up to immortality. As they had their
meats, and drinks, that made immortal; so also their fountains (found out by
Cadmus; to whom they ascribe the first invention of letters) Aganippe,
Hippocrene, Castalius near to Parnassus, at which their Muses drunk; which
raised them in eloquence. These they have borrowed from these symboles of the
tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good, and evil; dreaming of a
Physical operation, and not understanding any Sacramental efficacy: God also
instructed his people in the use of sacrifices, which we know was with his
people from the beginning; and I cannot believe with some Jesuits that this was
of the dictates of nature: which (as they say) led them without any revelation,
to the use of sacrifices: For in what sense soever we take sacrifices, Nature
could never teach man to give it unto God. If we take it more largely, for a
gift tendered, reason would tell, that the Divine Majesty stands in no need of
it: And in case we understand it more strictly, and make the destruction of
that which is offered essential to a sacrifice: how could this in reason enter
into any man's thoughts; that when a man had sinned, a beast must dye? And that
of the Apostle, Heb. 11. does fully contradict it, Abell offered by faith, and
faith is not of nature, but above it. This then was a worship of God by
institution, not commanded in the first, but second Commandment: and this Satan
is ready to follow. As there was scarce a Nation, as the Orator observed, but
worshipped a god: so there is scarce a Nation, that did not sacrifice to those
gods: and the Apostle gives us to understand, what those gods were: The things
that the Gentiles offer in sacrifice, they offer to Devils, and not to God, 1
Cor. 10. It is his worship, and he teaches his the way of it. As in duties of
worship, there is this imitation seen, so in wonders, and prodigies in like
manner, there is an emulation: God had his miracles in Egypt, and Satan his We
know the general Deluge in the sacred Histories; in which none were preserved
from death, but Noah and his family, by an Arc prescribed of God: Heathens
must have a fable in imitation, and tell us of drowning of the World, only
Deucalion, and his wife Pyrrha, in an Arc preserved likewise. And as Noah's
Arc rested on the Moutains of Ararat, upon the asswaging of the waters: so
theirs rested on the Mountain of Parnassus. We have a narrative of Jonah cast
into the Sea, and received by a Whale; and after three days, and three nights,
cast safe upon the shore: Satan must set up his Arion, and make him famous in
his Historians and Poets; A skillful Harper of Greece, having by excellency in
music, gained a great sum of money in Italy, and Sicilia, returning to his
own Country with his treasure; Mariners with whom he agreed for his Fare,
greedy of his money, cast him into the Sea: a Dolphin delighted with his
music, carries him safe, and landed him at Taenarus. See the relation and
application, elegantly brought home to this purpose by Dr. Abbot, Lect. 15. on
Jonah: making notable observations of Satan's policy. In case the Narrative
carry any truth in it by his wonders, so far as his art, and power can reach.
Satan then makes it his business, to disgrace Gods miracles, and cast dishonor
upon them by his imitation: though he falls far short of the Original, as he
there shows: and follows him as little Ascanius his Father, with very unequal
steps. And in case we take it, for a mere fiction: (which is his judgment upon
it) his art is no less observable to discredit, as far as in him lies, the
writings of Scriptures: When this miracle of Jonahs shall be Preached and
published in the world, Arions fable shall be produced, that like faith may be
yielded to either of both. See Mr. Burges Spiritual Refining, Page 131, 132.
Where this thing in many particulars is enlarged. And the more high the ways
of Religion are raised of God in a Spiritual way, the more easy it is for
Satan, who is a spirit, to delude. The Spirit is the great Gospel-promise, to
be poured out on all flesh; that is, on men of all sorts, Joel 2.28. God will
be served in types and shadows no longer, but in Spirit, and truth, Joh. 4.23.
When the Jews gloried of Circumcision, as that which did denominate them a
people of God, and distinguished them from all other Nations: and urged the
necessity of it to salvation: the Apostle tells us, that they are the
Circumcision, that worship God in Spirit, Phil. 3.3. Satan now on the other
hand, can take the hint, and heighten his way in a destructive manner to Gospel
ways. All outward Ordinances shall now be decryed as forms, and beggarly
rudiments: and with Circumcision in the letter laid aside, though they be
Ordinances of the Spirit it self; in which the Spirit expresses its power and
efficacy. 1. The written Word, which was dictated by the Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.19.
(is the sword of the Spirit, by which it exercises his power on the soul) must
be laid aside as a dead letter, and over carnal. The Ministers of the Word,
that great gift from the Fathers right hand, Ephesians. 4.11. set over the flocks
by the holy Ghost, Act. 20.28. on this pretense are to be cast off with Moses
and Aaron; taking too much upon them, when all the Congregation is holy:
notwithstanding for a real confutation, when this Spirit was first given in
glory, it came upon the heads of his Ministers, in form of tongues, fiery,
cloven, Act. 2.3. To let all know (is that great appearance that was there)
(that their tongues are sanctified of God, to Preach the Word in power and life
to all Nations. And as the gifts of the Spirit increased; so the Ministers of
the Spirit were multiplied; and that very title and name given Ministers of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. And the mind of Jesus Christ made known, that these in a
peculiar order, distinct from other men; are set apart to preach the Gospel, as
the Priests under the Law in a peculiar order were to wait at the Altar, 1 Cor.
9.13, 14. Upon the same pretense, Sacraments must be laid aside; the Baptism
of the Spirit is pleaded, for the overthrow of the Baptism of water: Though
the Apostle that first spoke by the Spirit after it was given in glory, does
argue the clean contrary, Act. 10.47. Who can forbid water, that these should
not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? They that
have the Spirit, will be raised in zeal for the honor, and establishment of
every Ordinance of God by the Spirit: the more spiritual men are, the more care
they will take to advance the Word, the Ministers of the Word, Sabbaths,
Sacraments. Let us then observe his imitations his falsifications: He vents
doctrine of his own, sets up ways of his own, that carry a resemblance of Gods
ways: And similitude, is matter erroris: we shall never heed them, as long as
we know they are the Devils: but when he transformes himself into an Angel of
light, and puts the stamp of God upon his own coin, we must not be ignorant of
his sleights; but to have our senses exercised, to discern between good and
evil.

CHAP. III. Whether there were any Sacraments from the fall to the institution
of Circumcision?
THe next consideration of Sacraments, is in man's fallen condition under a
Covenant, not of works, but grace; not for man's preservation in life, but his
restitution to life. A further distribution of Sac^aments.
And these are to be distinguished according to Gods way of dispensation of us
Covenant to his people; which is wont to be done into three periods. The first
is from the fall till Abraham, or unto the time that God entered Covenant with
him, and his seed: which Suarez, says, according to the common account, does
end at the giving of the Law by Moses, when the old Law began: yet Circumcision
(which was in use long before the Law) continuing the same under the Law; he
determines the law of nature at that time, when Circucision began. The second
from Abraham till Christ. The third, from the first coming of Christ in the
flesh, till the second coming of his to judgment. The first juncture of time,
has usually been known by the time of the Law of nature. The second, the time
of the Old. And the last, the time of the New Covenant. Why the first of these
should bear the name of the Law of nature, I can read of none that have given
satisfaction: The phrase should seem to imply, that then men had no more light,
then that of nature, for their guide in the ways of God. But this is evidently
false: God did not then begin by way of supernatural revelation, to speak to
men in the world. Suarez in tertiam partem Thomae, Tom. 3. Disput. 4. Sect. 1.
taking upon him to answer the question, has much to amuse the Reader, nothing
to satisfy him: he says, Lex naturae, intelligitur dictamen rationis, non
solum ex naturali, sed etiam ex supernaturali lumine ortum.
The law of nature, is the dictate of reason, arising not only out of natural,
but supernatural light. And in ihat sense the Gospel is the Law of nature.
Concerning this space of time; whatsoever is the period of it, much enquiry is
made, whether there were any Sacraments at all instituted of God, and enjoyed
by his people on earth? Concerning which, I shall deliver my thoughts in
several propositions.

God had his Church and people in that juncture of time.
First, That God had his Church and People, with a way of worship pleasing to,
and accepted by himself in those times. This evidently appears out of the
History: Abell, Henoch, Noah, Melchizedeck (who without all doubt lived in
those times; and Job as it is commonly received) spoke so much, and the
Apostles Comment, or observation of those times, Heb. 11. makes it more
evident: Abell offered to God a more excellent gift then Cain, and obtained
witness that he was righteous, Heb. 11.4. They both made Visible profession of
the same God, and both sacrificed to God: and God put a difference between
their gifts. An emblem of the Church in all succeeding ages, which is that
great house, where are vessels of honor, and dishonor. By faith Henoch was
translated, that he should not see death: and was not found, because God had
translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he
pleased God, Heb. 11.5. and as he affirms, that it was by faith that be was
thus translated: so he proves it he had this testimony, that he pleased God.
But without faith it is impossiblc to please him, verse, 6. Noah became heir of
the righteousness by faith, verse. 7. God had his worship then, as appears by
Abells, and Noah's sacrifice: and in Melchizedeks function, Genesis 14.18. Who was
a Priest of the most high God, taken from among men, and ordained for men, in
things appertaining to God, that he might both offer gifts and sacrifices, Heb.
5.1. The Woman had all that time her seed, and the Serpent his, who kept up
their mutual enmity: as Cain, and Abell, Noah, and the men of the world, Lot,
and the men of Sodom do give witness: God had a people of Covenant-holiness;
those Sons of God that saw thc daughters of men that they were fair, and took
of them wives of all which they chose, Genesis 6.1. He had a people truly holy:
Lot had that Epithete of just, 2 Pet. 2.7. the name of a righteous man: Noah
had that witness of God, that he saw him righteous, Genesis 7.1. and of Abel the
Apostle saitb, that his works were righteous.

Secondly, Scripture makes no mention of any Sacraments of Sacramental signs in
that ^ime.
We read not of any Sacrament appointed of God for these times, nor of any
Divine Ordinance or sign that comes up to the nature of a Sacrament. Those that
may be instanced in, with most color are, 1. That of sacrifice, both before,
and after the flood; and that of the Rainbow immediately upon the flood. That
of sacrifice comes more near up to the nature of a Sacrament, then that of the
Bow; But how both come short of the nature of a Sacrament, in the sense
generally received, and now to be spoken to, I shall God willing in a more fit
place make known.

Thirdly, Sacraments in substance of the same nature with the Covenant.
If there were any Sacraments in those days appointed of God, for his people
in Covenant, they must be of the same nature, as to the substance of them, and
thing signified by them, with those under the Law, and now in the days of the
Gospel. There was one common salvation, ours and theirs; one and the same
Savior, theirs and ours; we and they were under the same promises; Their
Sacraments then must seal these promises. Noah was an heir of righteousness of
faith: These supposed Sacraments could then sign and seal no other thing then
that righteousness.

Fourthly, Though we do not rest upon that argument a non dici ad non esse;
Scripture silence a most probable argument that in those times there was no
Sacrament.
because we read of no Sacarments in those days, to conclude, that there was
none then appointed or in use: yet we may conclude that it is an high
presumption in any in this last age of the world to undertake to assert any
Sacraments in those times. This were indeed contrary to that which the Apostle
warns, to presume above that which was written, 1 Cor. 4.6. Where Scripture is
silent, how dare we speak? Scripture silence affords an argument of far greater
probability for the negative, that in those times there was no Sacrament in
use, then all the imaginary conceits which men can invent or find. For the
affirmative, that there were Sacraments then appointed: The old Rabbines had
their traditions, concerning Gods transactions with his people in that age.
Weemse in his Divine exercitations, Exer. 16. page 61. tells us, that the
Hebrews say, that before the Law was written, God gave to Moses seven Precepts,
which he delivered by tradition to his posterity after him. These they call the
traditions of their fathers which he there reckons up; but not any one
concerning Sacraments. It is then sure a vain labor for us at such a distance,
to have any thoughts of finding them out. Many Jesuits bestirre their wits, to
conclude Sacraments in those times. To save labor of further search, for that
which is of no greater necessity: the Reader may find much of what they have
said, in Chamier, de Sacramentis in genere, lib. 1. cap. 8. which Chapter he
entitles, De Sacramentis in lege naturae: Suavez will by all means conclude,
that there was then some Sacrament for the remedy of Original sin, grounding
himself on this which he puts into his margin, Page 40. Colume 2. Divinae
providentiae est omni aetati providere.
That Divine providence is to take care of all ages; taking it fot granted,
that providence is defective: if a standing Sacrament in any age of the Church
be wanting, and that there is no way in Divine providence to save an infant
from Original sin, but the actual application of a Sacramental sign. Election
cannot obtain it, nor Regeneration, nor Justification by the Spirit and blood
of Christ effect it, without a Sacrament to make application of it. The Jesuit
might know, (and if Divines on our part might be heard, they would make known,)
that Sacraments are not the remedy against Original sin, but Christ, and the
righteousness of faith in Christ, which is the thing signified, and sealed in
the Sacrament: and the people of God enjoying means in those times to attain
this righteousness, Heb. 11.7. they were not without a remedy: Himself
ingenuously confesses there is nothing in Scripture, respective to those times,
nor in tradition, of any such Sacramental remedy; nor do any of the Fathers (as
he says) mention it, before Austin. And Austin (as he also acknowledges)
speaks of it doubtingly, and what he speaks by way of conjecture, is not
consistent (as he observes) with his own doctrine elsewhere: In which the
modesty of that Father is far to be preferred before the Jesuits boldness in
it; who concludes there was such a Sacramental remedy though not instituted of
God, but left to the Parents liberty to make use of some one, according to
their own will, when this assertion of his is as inconsistent with his own
doctrine as Austins can be; and that upon a manifold account, as might be
shown. 1. He scarce knows how to make it out, that Circumcision was any
remedy at all against Original sin: seeing that Sacrament did not confer
grace by the work done, but by the merit, or disposition of the doer; which is
not found in infants. 2. He himself confesses, that many infants dye in their
mothers womb; and yet have no remedy provided, either in the law of nature, or
the old Law, or Law of grace; that is, neither before the Law, under the Law,
or in Gospel Times. 3. Water is not always at hand (as he not absurdly hints,
though a Minister with them is scarce wanting, who set up Midwives for the
work) and then the infant dies remediless: All this he thinks to help with a
distinction. Quanquam enim non de singulis in particulari provideret, ut eis
efficaciter applicaretur romedium generaliter omnibus provisum: tamen quantum
in ipso est omnibus providet.
Though (says he) God has not provided for each one in particular, that the
remedy provided in general for all should be applied to them: yet he has
provided such a remedy as far as in him lies. But foreseeing, that there would
be some impediment to hinder the application of this Sacramental remedy to
some, this he permits. This is a speech beseeming a Jesuit, that God provided
(quantum in se) a remedy, as though it had been above him to have avoided these
impediments. If the Jesuits position must stand, that God is so tied up with
these limits, that he cannot take away Original sin from infants, without
application of somewhat that is sensible: He could have made such provision as
he forbade Sampsons mother, whilst with child the drinking of wine, or strong
drink, or eating any unclean thing, and that respective to the infant; because
he should be a Nazarite to God from the womb, to the day of his death, Judge.
13.7. so he could have enjoined the mother to have taken that, which might
through grace annexed, have had that efficacy in the infant in the womb, to
take away Original sin, as they conceive water has on an infant newborn; yea,
God is so far from doing, what in him lies, respective to many infants, for
provision of a remedy of this nature, that he orders that such a supposed
remedy, shall not be applied. He with much ado, makes Circumcision a remedy to
deliver from Original sin, Page 51. Yet God took order in his Law, that it
should not be administered before the eighth day, and in that interim, between
the birth, and the eighth day, it must needs be, that many dyed: and so by the
law of Heaven, they were debarred of a remedy through grace provided.

But here he is opposed by diverse of his own party, who hold that the faith of
the Parent, is sufficient to take away Original sin from the infant: for which
opinion he quotes Bonaventure, Did. 1. Art. 2. Quest. 2. Rich. art. 1. 5. 9.
1. and 2. And Chamier, lib. 1. cap. 8. de Sacramentis in genere, Sect. 6.
quotes also Vasquez for the same opinion. These place merit in the Parents
faith to work to the justification of the infant; a merit not ex condiguo, but
ex congruo: and for merit of this nature, a faith informed, void of Charity is
sufficient say they: Here our Author takes two exceptions against his friends.
1. says he, Sed hi authors in hoc, and falsum supponunt, quia revera ad
meritum de congruo non sufficit fides informis, and praesertim ad merendam
alteri gratiam and sanctitatem, and praeterea non satis explicant vim, and
radicem hujus remedii; quia ut esset infallibile, quod necessarium est, ut
esset verum remedium, non satis erat meritum de congruo, quia non semper and
infallibiliter effectum habet, sed necessaria erat divina promiscio, and hanc
oportet ostendere.
They argue from a false ground, for faith informed will not serve for this
kind of merits especially to merit grace for another. And secondly, they do not
(as he says) sufficiently set forth the force and efficacy of this remedy. To
make it infallible (as it must be, if it be a true remedy) merit de congruo is
not sufficient, seeing it has not always infallibly its effects: But a Divine
promise is necessary, and this promise (says he) they ought to show that
maintain it. So that one part gives too much to the application of a sensible
sign to the infant, and the other over much to the merit of the Parent.
Abuleusis on Matthew. 25. Quest. 677. comes nearer to Bonaventure, Richard,
Vasquez, then to Suarez; holding, that infants before Circumcision were
delivered from Original sin, in that they were born of believers, not requiring
(as Rivet observes, Exer. 88. in Genes.) any application of faith in the
Parents to the infants in any Sacrament for that work, who might be dead before
the Sacrament was administered to them. The same opinion is undertaken of late,
in behalf of the infants of Christians, to prove the infallibility of their
salvation, whether dying before or after Baptism. I have enough on my hands
already, and am not willing to launch out into this controversy: I only say.
1. I find infants of believers, not only of the faith of the Elect, but of
visible profession in Covenant; the Scripture is clear for a Covenant in this
latitude. 2. That salvation, according to Scripture ways, is within the verge
of the Covenant, and does not go beyond it. The Scripture leaves men out of
Covenant, in an hopeless condition. 3. As there is salvation for all sorts and
degrees of persons of age in Covenant, but not to be extended to all of those
sorts, and degrees, to reach every individual person; so in a parallel way we
may think of infants; I know no text giving us universal assurance of their
happiness; in case there were, I suppose there were much mare cause for
believers, to beg of God their infants death, then with David in prayer to
seek their life: there being full assurance of their happiness dying, and so
much fear of their condemnation, living to see the temptations to which in
their growth they are subject. We find salvation entailed upon qualifications
of grace, but not upon any age or period of life. 4. There is as much found in
Scripture giving us hopes of the salvation of the infants of all in Covenant
(as to their infant-state) as to the infants of those that are most exact in
keeping of Covenant: As much is said for the honor of infants of Parents of a
faith barely dogmatical, as of the infants of those that are actually in grace,
and justified by faith; The infants of all such (yea, of the worst of such) are
the servants of God, Levit. 25.42. they are born unto God, Ezekiel. 16.20. they
are the children of God, Ezekiel. 16.21. they are holy, Romans 11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14.
Either then we must carry it out to all the infants of the visible Church, or
else we cannot assure it to the infants of invisible members. And therefore the
Schoolmen before mentioned, justly ascribe as much to a faith informed, as to
that which is formed; respective to the good of the issue of such believers. 5.
All that is spoken in Scripture of the blessedness of the seed of the
righteous, may as fairly be extended to them through the whole course of their
lives, as to the times of their infancy, promises being not put with any such
restraint, as to have an end when their infancy is expired. The most ample of
promises which we find, is in Esaias 59.21. There it is promised, that the Spirit
shall not depart out of the mouth of thy seed or thy seeds seed; but this
rather belongs to them of years, then of an infant-condition. If it be said,
that many infants of the righteous persevere not, but cast off the seed of
grace received; I answer, the grace of perseverance is necessarily required to
make blessed, and blessedness is promised; we know temporal blessings are made
over by promise to the seed of such. His seed shall be mighty upon earth,
wealth and riches shall be in his house, Psalm. 112.2, 3. Psalm. 37.25, 26. I
have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread. He is ever merciful and lends, and his seed is
blessed. The opposition that is found between the letter of promises, of this
nature, and the event which the experience of every age observes, has wrought
a great conflict in men's spirits, how to reconcile them. And this has been the
result of all, that they are not to be understood without their due limits; and
several have been put. I shall not stand to enter into the dispute, only I
say, experience does as much oppose the literal meaning of true blessedness to
all the seed of the righteous, as of temporal prosperity; one must therefore
have its due limits, as well as the other. To wind up this whole discourse
concerning Sacraments in that juncture of time: God then had his Church in
which there was salvation. Henoch walked with God, and yet without faith it was
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Noah was an heir of the righteousness of
faith, Heb. 11.7. a righteousness in which the Apostle desired to be found for
salvation, Phil. 3.8. yet in all that juncture of time, there was no written
Word, in which the succeeding ages have everlasting life, Joh. 5.39. God had
other ways of discovery of himself to his people for life. So the Church might
answerably be without Sacraments: howsoever we judge salvation to be thereby
either conveyed or sealed. God that ties us to Ordinances, is himself free, and
in what way he pleases, may communicate bliss, and give assurance of it. The
likest conjecture that we can make of Gods ordering by providence, that in this
juncture of time (from the fall to the time of Abraham's call) there should be
no Sacrament, nor any such supposed remedy known, to acquit infants from Orinal
sin, is, ^o declare the freedom of God, that as he pleases to ordain
Sacramental signs, so he is not tied to them, or his hands bound up by them:
but as he saved without Sacraments before the flood, and after, to the time of
Abraham, and infants under the Law dying before the eighth day; so he still
saves in the want, though not in the sinful neglect, much less in the contempt
of these Ordinances.

CHAP. IV. Of the definition of a Sacrament.
THe next consideration of Sacraments in man's fallen condition is, from Abraham
unto Christ, in the time of the dispensation of the Old Covenant; In which
those known Sacraments, Circumcision, and the Passover were of force, and
given in charge of God to his people: and together with those Sacraments
extraordinary (or such as come near up to the nature of Sacraments,) The Cloud,
the Red Sea, Manna, and the Rock, Sacraments under the old and new Covenant of
one and the same nature.
1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. But intending to speak of Sacraments in general, and
there being no essential difference between the Sacraments, under the Old and
New Covenant: One and the same definition, containing whatsoever is essential
to a Sacrament in any of them, as many ways might be made manifest. Their
names are promiscuously used, the cloud that Israel was under, and the sea that
they passed through, is called by the name of Baptism, 1 Cor. 10.2. and so
also is Circumcision, Collos. 2.11, 12. The thing signified, and benefit
received, is in every one the same. The Apostle comparing those that did eat of
Manna, and drank of the Rock in the Wilderness, with believers in Gospel Times,
that partake of the Lords Supper says, They all ate the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Corrinthians. 10.3, 4.
And, we may say the same of those that did eat of the Passover, As Christ was
that bread that Manna did typifie, Joh. 6.49.50. so it was he that was held
out, and his death showed forth in the Passover, 1 Cor.. 5.7. I shall
therefore wave this different consideration of them, and make it my business
to enquire what a Sacramen is, and to make discovery of the general nature of
it which in case out of Scripture I can reach, that will serve for a bottom on
which all that I intend to speak may be grounded. Bellarmine spends a whole
Chap. in enquiry, whether a Sacrament can properly be defined? quoting several
Schoolmen for the negative; That it cannot be defined, because a Sacrament is
not one of it self, but an aggregatum; one by accident, or at least not ens
reale, no real being; and those things that are but one accidentally, or not
really, are below a definition. He quotes others in the affirmative; Some, that
it may be defined imperfectly; others, that it admits of a perfect definition.
After a distinction laid down very little to the purpose, (one member of the
distinction being by his own confession not considerable by Divines) he
concludes that a Sacrament morally considered (as it ought to be considered by
Divines) may be defined, having a real being, and according to its own way of
being, it is one. Moral Philosophers define (says he) a Kingdom, a City, a
Family, though they be not one physically, but by aggregation; so do Divines
define a Church, a Council, or Sacrament, which are one in being no other way.
Suarez agrees with him, Disput. 1a. de Sacramentis, Sect. 4ta. which Whitaker,
praelect. de Sacr. page 4. acknowledges to be true. A Sacrament may be defined.
So that he observes, it is agreed that they may be defined, and I wish we
could as well agree upon a definition. It would be an endless work to reckon
up, and it would no less then tire the Reader, to read all the definitions of
a Sacrament, which may be found among those that treat of this subject.
Bellarmine reckons up six several definitions of those that either really are,
or at least he would have to be of his party. Two of which, he says, are
gathered out of Austin, the third is from Hugo, de Sancto Victore, the fourth
is from the Master of the sentences, the fifth is the definition of the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, and the last, he says, is found with
Gratian. Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacramentis in genere Cap. 11. And Cap. 13. he
names two others, one of Scotus, and the other of Occam. which he says,
Chemnitius blames with the other; yet Cap. 14. observing a great difference
among us (as he says) in our definitions of a Sacrament, says it is an
evident argument that we are departed from the truth which is one, when his own
party can keep the truth, and differences with it. Whitaker confesses, that
Luther, Melanccton, Chemnitius, Martyr, do differently define a Sacrament, but
all their definitions (he says) come to one. He rests in the definition that
Calvin gives, lib. 4. Institut. Cap. 14. which he defends against the
objections of Bellarmine who spends the whole sixteenth chap. of his book
against it. And a definition indeed singularly exact. But seeing the Spirit of
God himself has furnished us with a definition of a Sacrament, which either
explicitly expresses, or virtually comprizeth all, that according to
Scriptures can be required in a Sacrament, I suppose that will carry most
authority, and this the Apostle delivers, Romans 4.11. And he received the sign
of Circumcision a seal of the righteousness of faith. This Whitaker says,
Haec br^vis ac perspicua definitio Sacramenti est, ut mihi videtur. Primo enim
(...) pro genere ponitur, hoc est, Signum externum aut ceremonia. Deinde (...),
hoc est, sigillum just^t^ae, quae ex fide scilicet est, rem Sacramenti and
finem and usum d clarat; Ut si possemus esse Scripturis contenti non meliorem
definitionem desideraremus.
is a plain and brief definition of a Sacrament, and if we could be content
with the Scriptures we should not desire a better. Praelect. de Sacram. Cap. 2.
page 3. See Parcus on the words, The adversaries quarrels (he says) has
forced Divines to look out further; but I think we shall best stop their
mouths, in holding fast to the letter of Scripture; And this is therefore my
Resolution. And Peter Martyr on Romans 4. says, I Scarce think there is any
place, in which the nature of Sacraments is so briefly and explicitly laid
down, as in those words of Paul, in which Circumcision is called a seal. But
before I come to the opening of this definition, (which may seem scarce full,
in case we look only to that which is explicitly delivered; I must take out of
the way some objections made against it.

First, It is plausibly objected, that this is a definition of Circumcision
only in particular, Vix puto ullum extare locum, quo tam breviter, tam
explicit natura S^cramentorum proponitur, quam his Pauli verbis quibus
circumcisio vocatur signatum.
and therefore can be no definition of a Sacrament in general. The collection
is not sound from the species to the Genus; If man be defined by reason, or
risibility, it will not follow, that Animal, every creature with life may be
so defined.

First, Objections against this d^finition.
To this Pareus in his answer to the sixth doubt on Romans 4 says, Quod omni
Spec^ei ine st toti generi recte tribuitur. Sicut igitur valet: Homo, Equus,
and quodv^s animal sentit, movetur: and sensus ac motus differentia sy statica
generis recte d^citur: sic valet: Circumcisio Pascha and quod vis signum
foederis est (...) addita foederi, obsignation is causa, Ergo omne signum
foederis est (...) justitiae fidei: and hoc pro generica differentia
Sacramentorum recte habetur.
That which belongs to every species, is rightly applied to the Genus; that
which belongs to every particular, is justly applied to all universally, A man,
A horse, and every other Creature of an animal life is sensible, moves, etc.
and therefore it is rightly said that every animal is sensible and moves: so it
is rightly said that the Passover, the Lords Supper, and every other Sacrament
is as a sign, (which adversaries confess) so a seal of this righteousness,
and therefore that which is said by the Apostle of this Sacrament in
particular, is true of all in general.

Secondly, I say, the Apostle mentions there nothing properly to Circumcision,
as distinguishing it from other Sacraments, all that is in the definition, with
equal reason belongs to all Sacraments, as well as to Circumcision, and
distinguishes them only from other Ordinances; what is said of Abraham in this
text, might be applied to the Eunuch, or the Jaylour, changing alone the name
of Circumcision into Baptism. He received the sign of Baptism, a seal of the
righteousness of the faith, that he had being unbaptized.

Secondly, It is further objected by Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacramentis, Cap 17.
and after him by others, that Circumcision is not here said to be a seal
universally to any faith, but only a seal of the individual faith of Abraham,
and then it can neither be a definition of a Sacrament in the general, nor yet
a definition of Circumcision, the distinct species of it, which is clear in
that it is expressly said, that it was a seal of the righteousness of the
faith that he had being yet uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all
them that believe. But only Abraham could be such a father, and therefore
Abraham's Circumcision, not every man's is here held forth.

This I have fully answered, Treatise of the Covenant, Chap. 26. page 187, 188.
in my assertion of the purity of the Old Covenant, and therefore I shall not
now stand to repeat.

Thirdly, It is objected, this will ill agree to the Circumcision of others,
that after Abraham did receive this Sacrament; It cannot be fairly said, that
Isaac received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the
faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised, seeing he was not in the faith
till after Circumcision; and that is no definition of Circumcision, that agrees
not to all men's Circumcision; that is no definition of the species, that agrees
not to every individuum.

Answ. Neither is it needful that that additionall particle which is proper to
Abraham, as a leading person in the Covenant, to enter into it, should agree to
all men's Circumcision: He was in the faith, and had it sealed; Isaac was
confederate with him in Covenant, and was upon that account to be circumcised,
which engaged to actual faith; and upon actual believing it sealed this
righteousness of faith to him: This precedence of faith is a separable adjunct,
and comes not into the definition. To make the definition full and clear, the
whole text of the Apostle is to be taken into consideration with the context,
and all that in the History, Genesis 17. to which it relates, has relation to it,
all which is vertually in the words comprised; where we may observe, 1. The
Person receiving, or by right interessed. 2. The thing received. 3. The end or
use. 4. The thing signified or sealed,


The Person receiving, or by right interessed is Abraham, and giving, and
receiving being relatives (as Pareus on the words observes) if Abraham received
it, it is necessarily employed, that there is some one that gave it; Christ
says, Joh. 7.22. Moses gave Circumcision to the Jews, because he delivered
unto them a Law concerning it, Levit. 12.3. but God gave it in charge to Moses,
as we may see there, verse. 1. as, Genesis 17.9, 10. he had before given it in
charge to Abraham; And therefore Christ says, that Circumcision was of the
Fathers. God is then the author, as Abraham the receiver of Circumcision.

Abraham that thus received Circumcision from the hand of God may be considered,

1. As a man, so he stood in no other relation to God, then barely as his
creature, and with others in the world was without God, and not within the
verge of his Covenant, and for seventy and five years he thus continued,

2. As a professor of the faith, and worshipper of the true God, renouncing the
gods that he had worshipped in Charran, and professedly serving the Lord
Jehovah only.

3. As a man upright, and sincere in the Covenant, coming up to the terms
proposed of God, and walking perfect before him. In all of these capacities
Abraham may be considered, as any other of the sons of Abraham that are sincere
and faithful. In the first capacity he had no right to Circumcision; all that
are in that condition, are called by the Apostle Circumcision: yet it was not
of necessity to his interest in the Covenant, or Circumcision, the sign and
seal of it, to be sincere in Covenant; though it be necessary to the
attainment of the grace of the Covenant, and mercy sealed in the Sacrament. As
others came into Covenant, and were entitled to the initiating sign and seal,
so might Abraham, but others came in upon a bare profession: as those
multitudes of Proselytes that joined themselves to Israel: One of which was
Doeg an Edomite, 1 Samuel 21.9. had he not been of Israel by profession, he had
not been detained in the Sanctuary before the Lord, upon any religious account,
as we find he was, ver. 7. And had he been right in the Covenant, he had not
had so many things in charge against him, neither had the Psalmist spoken in
that language that we read of him. The Eunuch, as we have cause to think, had
an heart right with God, but it was not so with Simon Magus, as Peter expressly
tells him, Act. 8.21. Abraham then is considered as a man professedly in
Covenant, when he received this sign of Circumcision.

The thing received is here Circumcision, which I shall speak to only, as of a
Sacramental kind; and not consider it in the individual nature of it, as the
initiating Sacrament of the Old Covenant, held out under that external rite of
cutting off the foreskin of the flesh.

The use of it is, to be a sign and seal for signification, and ratification to
those that received it.

The thing signified and sealed is, the righteousness of faith, so it is also
called, Heb. 11. Elsewhere it is called the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3.
being freely given to us of God, and only able to justify us in his sight;
but chiefly, because it is wrought by Christ, who was not mere man, nor barely
a creature, but the true God, as St. John styles him, 1 John 5.20. This
righteousness of God is applied to us, and made ours by faith, Phil. 3.9. and
therefore as it is called, the righteousness of God, so also here and
elsewhere, the righteousness of faith. This text being thus cleared, a full
and complete definition of a Sacrament may be found.

The definition of a Sacrament.
A Sacrament is a sign appointed of God, to be received of his Vovenant People,
to seal the righteousness of faith unto them.

I know there is somewhat put into the definition of a Sacrament by some that
treat of this subject, which is not here in words expressed, and therefore upon
that account, this definition may be challenged as defective; as 1. The
Minister by whom it is to be dispensed from God to man. But whether this be
essential in a Sacrament or otherwise, (as afterward is to be enquired into,)
it is sufficiently employed. In case it must be received from God by his people
in that way, and from that hand that he himself in his Word has appointed. 2.
The Sacraments contain as well a profession of our duty toward God, as Gods
tender and seal to man, of which here is nothing said. But this we shall find,
both in the sign and seal (which are both mentioned) necessarily included, and
as it appears that it is comprised, so to make it more clear and explicit, it
may by the Reader be added.

CHAP. V.
Sect. I. Of Sacramental signs.
I shall here purposely wave several Schoole-niceties, as in what predicament a
Sacrament is to be placed: Taking it in the whole nature of it (as consisting
of a twofold matter, the one outward and earthly, which is the visible sign;
the other inward and heavenly, which is the thing signified: and of a twofold
form; one outward, which is the due participation of it, according to the way
prescribed of God; the other inward, consisting in the analogy between the
sign, and the thing signified) it must needs be an Ens aggregatum, and so not
capable of any place in that series of being: And sign, and seal, being
clearly relatives; I shall leave the Reader to inform himself from learned
Keckerman, in the third Book and eighth Chapter of his Systeme of Philosophy:
what is the Relatum, the Correlatum, the relation it self, the foundation, and
the terminus in this Sacramental consideration; and shall go on to lay open the
several parts of this definition. The whole of it being comprised in this text
of the Apostle, every part affords some doctrinal Observation. In the first
place I shall observe that,

Sacraments are signs,

The truth of this observation is so clear of it self, that it needs no proof;
Taking the word Sacrament in the largest sense that we can speak of it (in
which it falls short of these Gospel Ordinances known by that name) it is yet
Sacrae rei Signum, the sign of an holy thing: And might be made good by a
particular induction, not only in those that we receive as Sacraments, whether
extraordinary as the Cloud, the Red Sea, Manna, and the Rock, which the Apostle
parallells with Baptism, and the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. But also in the
ordinary stated Sacraments, by a standing law to be observed. In Circumcision
there was a foreskin to be cut off, in the Passover a Lamb to be eaten: In
Baptism there is water to be applied, and in the Lords Supper bread and wine
to be taken, eaten, and drunk; God condescending in mercy to our weakness, by
earthly things to inform our judgments, and strengthen our faith in that which
is heavenly. Though Papists are much put to it, to find an outward sign in some
of their Sacraments, (as indeed in some of them there is none at all) yet they
yield to this truth; that Sacraments have their signs, knowing that to be a
true, though not a full definition, tnat a Sacrament is an outward visibie sign
of an inward spiritual grace. That we may come to a right understanding of
Sacramental signs, we must

First, know what a sign in general is.

Secondly, the several sorts and kinds of signs, so far at least as will
conduce to a right understanding of the point in hand; and Lastly enquire what
Sacramental signs are, and their properties.

What is meant by a sign.
A sign Austin has long since defined to be, that which shows it self to the
senses, and somewhat more besides it self to the understanding; and in other
words, Signum estres praeter speciem quam ingerit sensibus aliud aliquid ex
sefaciens in cogitationem venire.
A sign is a thing which brings to men's thoughts another thing, besides that
which it offers to the senses. As the Rain-bowe offers it self to the eyes (we
see the shape of it, and the colors in it) and brings the promise of God into
our minds, that the Flood shall no more return to destroy the earth. It were an
endless labor to undertake to lay down the several kinds of signs, with all
their sub-divisions: I never saw such a Scheme of them, but I have thought many
more might be added to them; Neque enim hujus generis quisquam enmeravit omnia,
nascuntur enim nova pro homi number arbitrio. Pulling. Deca. 5. Ser. 6. A
distribution of signs. Natural signs.
yet those at least that are notable may be reduced to certain heads. Some are
natural, some are prodigious, and some are signs by institution. Natural signs
are those that of themselves, and of their own nature are apt to signify
somewhat beyond themselves; As smoke signifies fire, a Rain-bowe showers,
palenese sickness, Tears trouble, and grief of mind; of these Christ speaks,
Matthew. 16.2, 3. When it is evening ye say, It will be fair weather, for the
sky is red; and in the morning, It will be foul weather to day, for the sky
is red and lowering. Now these signs are sometimes (as signs so also) causes
of the thing signified; As the Sun beams in the dawning are a sign, and also a
cause of the day approaching. The interposition of the Moon between us and the
Sun, and of the earth between the Sun and Moon (foreseen in their motions) are
signs, and causes of Eclipses. Sometimes they are effects of the thing that
they signify; As smoke is the effect of fire, and paleness of diseases. Some
are barely signs, and neither causes nor effects; as the color of the sky is
no cause of rain, but barely an indication that there are those watery vapors
in the air that will dissolve themselves on the earth: They may be effects of
that which is the, cause of the thing signified, but not the effects of that
which is a sign. The Rain-bowe is an effect of that which is a cause of rain;
Rules for the right understanding of natural signs. Remote causes are not signs.
Here we might lay down some rules or observations.

First, Remote causes (which have their effects at a great distance, so that
many things may interpose themselves as remoraes, cannot be looked upon by any
as signs. When that book of common prayer was imposed by authority upon
Scotland, upon counsel then overmuch heeded; it might have been easily
concluded upon, as a sign of troubles and dissensions in present there; But no
rational man could then have made it a prognostic of all those tragical stirs,
which in three Nations have already happened, and we yet know not upon the
flame kindled what may follow: The spark then kindled, might in probability
have been quenched. The Stars say our Stargazers, have their influence upon
men's bodies, and by consequence indirectly upon the operations of their souls.
Hereupon by the posture of the Stars at men's birth, they will conclude the
trade of life in which men shall be employed, the Arts that they shall profess,
the fortunes (as the world calls them) to which they shall be advanced, and the
very last period of their days. But here so many things may interpose, that
the child's Genius supposedly thus disposed, cannot sway all these things,
Parents, friends, ways of Education, thousands of obstacles, and
diversifications so intervene, that no judgment can be given. If more were
granted then ever will be proved of the heavens influence on men's minds and
bodies to incline, or dispose them; yet that of the Wise man would utterly
spoil all Predictions, Eccles. 9.11. The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to
them all.

Seeondly, Partial causes in nature cannot be looked upon as signs, Patrial
causes are no signs
but all must concur that have any influence. This (if I do not mis-remember)
good Mr. Perkins does set down in a similitude to this purpose. The heat of an
Hen sitting upon Eggs is the cause of a brood of young ones; but suppose an Hen
should sit on Eggs of diverse kinds, some of a Dove, some of a Partridge, some
of a Phesant, some of a Hawk, some of a Kite; who could now from the heat of
the Hen, give his judgment of what kind, the birds should be, that this heat
would hatch? would they not be different in kind according to the variety of
subjects that this heat works upon? If we see flint before us, this is no sign
of fire to be kindled, unless we see steel with it; nor yet flint and steel
without tinder; nor yet flint, steel and tinder, without a hand employed to
strike fire: all put together make up a sign, and not otherwise. To apply this
to our purpose.

First, Let it be granted, that the heavens have their operations on men's
bodies on earth, no otherwise then the heat of the Hen has for procreation of
such a kind, or the flint to the working of fire, yet the heavens have their
influence upon diverse, and diversified objects: not diversified by their
influence only, but done to their hands, we derive our being from Parents, not
only in our essentials, and integrals, but in a great measure in our
temperature of body and mind. Who sees not virtues and defects of body and mind
to be hereditary, and that from either sex, Children do patrizare, follow their
Parents inclination without any imitation? now the heavens were not in the same
posture, Mars, Jupiter, etc. were not in the same ascendent, in their birth as
in ours. A beggar is delivered under the same posture of the heavens with a
Noble-woman, shall the children of both be of the same trade and way?

Secondly, If the Stars and their influences were universal causes of what is
done in, and shall befall our persons, yet these men profess acquaintance only
with some few, and those almost only the Planets; The Stars of an unfixt
motion. Those innumerable Stars, which we call fixed, and have been said to be
in the eighth (which we call the starry) sphere, are not observed nor known in
their various postures, what some may incline to, others will thwart and
destroy.

For a third rule, Natural signs when causes unless an extraordi^a y power
inte^v^ne w^rk un^voydably.
those signs which fairly may be looked upon as causes in nature, have their
effects, and produce the thing signified unavoydable, irresistible; so that is
a labor in vain to use any ways, a tempting of God to make any addresses to
him for prevention; who ever prayed that the day and night should not be of an
equal length, at such a day in the Spring and Autumn, which are known to us by
the name of the aequinoctial; or, that the Sun shall not be eclipsed at such a
time when it is known that the body of the Moon will interpose it self in that
season? If the heavens are alike causes of man's vicious ways, and of the ruin
and bane of Nations, endeavors for prevention will be equally vain; whether it
be by prayer, or repentance. He that cannot make the Sun to stand still, or to
return backwards by prayer, let him not think to stand in the gap for a land,
or turn away Gods fiery indignation, seeing the course of nature appointed of
God, brings it about above resistance. I have heard of some Rabbis that pray
every night that the Sun may rise again, and the earth enjoy a new morning, as
though it were no otherwise in nature by the God of nature ordered, and settled,
but it lay in them to hinder it; but Christians have learned better, then to
think by their prayers to impose a new course on the way of nature. And knowing
that prayer and repentance are ways appointed of God, and by experience
succesfull for reversal of judgments, and prevention of National desolations,
they know that Stars in a way of nature cannot effect it, nor yet the sons or
disciples of nature foresee or foretell it.

Secondly, There are prodigious signs, 2. Prodigious sign.
such that are, either miraculous, exceeding all power of nature; or else
wounds and monsters in nature; And I know not the reason why Chamier, lib. 1.
Cap. 11. de Sacramentis in genere, should exclude them from the number of
signs; certainly the return of the Sun in Hezekiahs time, was to him a sign of
his recovery from sickness, and of his deliverance from the Assyrian, Isay. 3
S. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have
heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears, behold, I will add unto thy days,
fifteen years; And I will deliver thee and this City out of the hand of the
king of Assyria, and I will defend this City; And this shall be a sign unto
thee from the Lord, that the Lord will do this thing, that he has spoken;
Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees which is gone down in the
sun-dyal of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. The like may be said of Gideons fleece,
that had dew on it when all the earth was dry besides; and again the fleece dry
when upon all the ground else it was dew; This was to signify that the Lord
would deliver Israel by his hand; Those eclipses of the lights of heaven to the
Egyptians when there was light in Goshen to the Israelites, Exodus 10.21, 22.
and at Christ's death, when from the sixth hour there was darkness over all
the earth unto the ninth hour, Matthew. 27.45. was no other. I will show wonders
in the heavens, and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke, the
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before the great
and terrible day of the Lord, Joel 2.30, 31. There shall be signs in the Sun,
and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth distress of Nations, and
perplexity, the sea and the waves roaring, men's hearts failing them for fear,
and for looking after those things which are coming upon the earth, for the
powers of heaven shall be shaken, which Zanchius understands of those Comets,
which as wonders in nature, in several ages have appeared. He that pleases may
consult the Author himself treating de Cometarum prognosticis, lib. 3. de
operibus Dei, Cap. 2. These. 12.

Signs by Instition.
Thirdly, There are signs by institution: not so in nature, or by way of
prodigy, but as they are designed to signify: These are, 1. Of man, some by
imposition, man putting at pleasure such a signification upon them; words in
this sense are signs; no other reason of primitive names of things can be
given, but his pleasure that gave them; Some by custom, as an Ivy bush is a
sign of wine; Sometimes by covenant, or agreement, so the arrows that Jonathan
shot, with the words that he agreed to utter, were a sign to David that there
was peace, or that there was harm intended to him, 1 Samuel 20.20, etc. So the
Scarlet thread was a sign between Rahab and the spies, Joshua 2.18. A Soldiers
Colors, or the word that is given on his guard, or in fight is such a sign. 2.
There are signs by institution from God, such was the rainebowe; It may be a
natural sign of showers; but it is by institution, that it signifies, that
there shall not be any more a flood to destroy the earth, Genesis 9.11. These
instituted signs, whether of God, or man, admit of other distinctions, which
will be touched upon in the next place, in opening the nature, and showing the
properties of Sacramental signs. There are signs of a fourth sort which
might have been spoken to, namely those that are Diabolical or superstitious;
But I shall not trouble my self or the Reader with them.

SECT. II. The properties of Sacramental signs.
FIrst, Sacramental signs are external, and sensible, Sacramental signs
are, 1. Exte^nal and s^nsible.
such that do not immediately, but by the help of the senses, affect the
understanding. There are indeed such signs that immediately offer themselves
to the mind, which some call mental, or intellectual Signs; These are either
notions framed in the understanding, or actions that are past, and called into
the thoughts, Matthew. 12.39. An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a
sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet
Jonas. Though some Popish Writers have affirmed, that this sensibility of the
outward signs, is not of the essence of the Sacraments; seeing God might if he
had pleased have instituted Sacraments with signs merely spiritual, yet they
are disliked in this by their own party; and themselves also confess, that the
signs that God has instituted, are external and sensible; and we enquire not
after such as God might have given, had he pleased; but such that he has
pleased to give to his people.

Secondly, They are visible signs. 2. Visible.
It is not enough that they are the objects of other senses, as such that may
be heard, felt, tasted; but Sacramental signs must be the object of sight;
This is clear by the induction of particulars. The foreskin in Circumcision,
the lamb in the Passover, water in Baptism, bread and wine in the Lords
Supper, with all the actions of each of these are visible; And thus a Sacrament
by the Ancients has still been defined, An outward and visible sign of an
inward and Spiritual grace, which has never been excepted against as unsound;
but only as insufficient. It is too short, but in no part erroneous. And
Austin, lib. 19. Contra Faust. Cap. 25. as he is quoted by Bellarmine, demands,
what are all corporal Sacraments but certain visible words? Other senses may
accompany the sight, but nothing can be a Sacramental sign that excludes the
sight, nothing that is not in nature visible. And therefore sounds or words,
are no Sacramental signs, which being no object of sight, nor of any other
sense, but of that of hearing, they are not in any such capacity. Here a man
might think that Bellarmine and we were agreed, Seeing he so often gives
Sacramental signs that Epithete of visible; and, lib. 1. de Sacramen. Cap.
18. putting it to the question, whether Sacraments consist of things as their
matter, and words as their form? he determines affirmatively, and lays this
down for his second proposition, that, In Sacramentis omnibus novae legis
inveniuntur res ut materia, and verba ut forma.
In all Sacraments of the New Testament, things are found as the matter, and
words as the form, and none can doubt but things put in opposition to words
as the matter of Sacraments are visible. But he has his art to come off by
distinction, or rather contradiction. To the first he says, that Prima
particula, vel accipit elementum visibile and tractabile, pro qualibet re
sensibili, ut accipiant Catholicic and,
Catholics take the word visible, and tractable element, for any thing that
is any way sensible, that may be perceived by the ear, and not for that only,
which by the sight and touch only can be perceived, lib. 1. de Sacramentis in
genere, Cap. 14. And so a sound will make up his visible, and tractable sign,
which is of necessity in Sacraments; And he can explain that second proposition
with a fourth, which is, Ut Sacramenta constare dicantur rebus, and verbis, non
est necesse, ut res non sint verba, and verba non sint res, sed sat est, si
a^quid funga^ur vice rei, aliud vice verbi.
That Sacraments may be said to consist of things and words, but it is not
necessary that things be not words, nor words be not things; But it is enough
that somewhat supply the place of things or words, Cap. 18. And all this wild
stuff, which scarce I think can be parallelled in the most unlearned Writer,
to make it good that their Penance and Marriage are Sacraments; in both which
we must take words (which he says are the form of those Sacraments) for
visible signs, which also constitute the matter of them, or else we have no
visible sign at all, and consequently no Sacrament. Some here question the case
of blind people, by whom no sign can be seen; but it is one thing to be
visible, and the proper object of sight, and another thing to be actually seen
visible and visum differ one from another; It is in it self visible, though
through defect in the organ, it is not seen of some. Such are at a loss in
receiving, though not equal to the loss of deaf people in the Word, which is
to be heard, seeing when the Word is not heard, it affects no other of the
senses; but when bread and wine are not seen they are touched, and tasted; and
where blindness is not from the birth, there is some supply from the memory
likewise

Thirdly, they are Analogicall signs, 3. Analogicall.
such as carry Analogy and proportion with the thing signified; they have ever
an aptness in them for resemblance. That of Austin is famous, If Si enim
Sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum, quarum sunt Sacramenta, non
haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent.
Sacraments carry no resemblance of the things whereof they are Sacraments,
they are no Sacraments at all. Gerrard. de Sacramentis, Cap. 3. Sect. 3. in the
name of the Lutherane party does confess Non negamus signa Sacramentalia (...)
quandam cum fructu Sacramenti habere. Sed analogia illa significativa est
secundarium rei terrenae sive elementi in Sacramentis Novi T. officium;
primarium officium est ut sit (...), vehiculum and medium per quod res
coelestis exhibetur,
that there is such Analogy in Sacraments, but he says, that this Analogy in
the Sacraments of the New Testament, is but the secondary office of it. The
primary and chief office is to be a medium or vehicalum, a means for exhibition
of the grace of the Sacrament to the person; But gives us no reason. And Suarez
(as Chamier observes) denies this Analogy between sign and thing signified to
be necessary, yet confesses that in all Sacraments there is such Analogy found;
But, as Chamier demands, how shall an universal necessity be concluded, but by
particular experiments? and what is found in every one, we conclude to be of
necessity in all; finding upon observation this Analogy in every Sacrament, we
conclude it necessary in all Sacraments. There are some signs have their
signification wholly from their institution, and of themselves carry no
proportion. As the sound of a trumpet which is the sign of a troop of horse,
the sound of a Bell which is the sign of an Assembly, whether for civil, or
for sacred things; An Ivy bush the sign of wine to be fold. Distribution of
Analogicall signs.
There are other signs that of themselves declare their own signification as
the print of the foot on the ground whether of horse or man, is a sign of the
foot that made the impression; A shadow is a sign of a body that darkens the
place near to it. There are a third sort of signs of a middle nature, that
have their resemblance of the thing signified, but in that indeterminate
confused manner, that they may rather be said to be fit to signify that
whereof they are signs, then that of themselves without further declaration
added they do signify. And such are the signs in Sacraments, as Thomas
Aquinas observes, part. 3. quaest. 60. artic. 6. and after him Bellarmine lib.
1. de Sacramentis in genere; and Chamier gives his assent to both, lib. 1. de
Sacramentis in genere, Cap. 11. Water has a faculty to wash, as also to
refresh, and cool; when water is set apart for Baptism, though there be a
fitness in it to signify washing; yet there must be a word to explain that it
is to signify washing, and with it the thing that is cleansed.

4. Ritual.
Fourthly, They are not barely substantial signs, but rituall also. The outward
elements do not barely signify, but the instituted actions likewise are
significant. In Circumcision the foreskin alone was not a sign, but the cutting
of it off, in the way appointed of God, seems the chief in signification. In
the Passover there is not only a lamb, but rosting, eating, etc. all which
are significant. In Baptism there is not only water, but the application of
the person to the water in dipping, or the water to the person by infusion, or
sprinkling. The word in Scripture use comprizes any washing; and therefore in
Baptism it is of it self indifferent. In the Lords Supper there is not only
bread and wine, but the bread is broke, the bread and cup delivered, receiving,
eating, and drinking. Some indeed question, whether the breaking of the bread
be any Sacramental rite; or at all of the integrality of the Sacrament? but all
confess that in case it be within an institution, it is then necessary. About
the beginning of the reformation, some that stood for the ejection of
Ceremonies, pleaded for sitting at the Lords Supper, as an instituted
Sacramental rite, signifying our coheireship with Christ; But others that in
after times did manage the same cause, saw that mistake, and therefore urged
not the necessity of sitting upon that account, but only did except against
kneeling, either as Idolatrous, or carrying too great an appearance of it.

Fifthly, They are distinguishing and differencing signs, separating a people
that receive them, 5. Distingu^shing.
from all others that are not interessed in them; so they have the nature of
badges, or cognizances; Calvin justly rejects those that make the Sacraments no
more but bare testimonies of our profession, or distinguishing marks. That as a
Roman was known by his gown from a Grecian in his cloak; and in Rome the
several orders had their distinctions. The Senator was distinguished from the
Knight by his Purple, and the Knight from one of the Commonalty by his ring; as
with us a Knight of the Garter is distinguished by his blue Ribband, and a
Knight of the Bath by the red; yet they cannot be denied, but that they have
this distinguishing use. By these Sacramental signs the people of God are
known from others, which is herein plain, in that they are signs of the
Covenant, and by an usual metonomy called by the name of the Covenant, Genesis
17.20. Act. 7.8. And therefore distinguished those that received them from all
that are out of Covenant. So Circumcision distinguished a Jew from all others.
A man in uncircumcision was an heathen. Circumcision in the flesh did
denominate a Jew outwardly, as Circumcision of the heart (which is that to
which Circumcision in the letter did engage) did denominate a man a Jew
inwardly. That which Circumcision was in this respect, Baptism is: As soon as
any joined himself to Abraham's family, and afterward to the seed of Abraham in
Covenant, he was to be circumcised, Genesis 17.13. Exodus 12.48. None were to be as
one born in the land, but a circumcised man. As soon as any joined himself to
the body and society of Christians, he was baptized, so was Christ's Commission,
Disciple all Nations, baptizing them. No sooner was Paul, the Eunuch, the
Jaylour, Lydia, yea, Simon Magus made disciples, but they were forthwith
baptized, The Passover as well as Circumcision, the Lords Supper, as well as
Baptism are distinguishing signs. But these find men beforehand
distinguished. The preceding Sacraments whereby men are initiated and first
enrolled, are more properly distinguishing.

Sixthly, They are congregating, uniting and closing signs; 6. Congregating
this may seem contradictory to the former, which makes them distinguishing,
and differencing. To unite and difference are evidently contrary, but these
well enough agree, the contradiction being not ad idem. They are not the same
that they unite and difference; They distinguish men in Covenant from
strangers, and they unite men in Covenant as one among themselves. A Soldiers
Colors difference him from all other companies, and unite him to those of that
body into which he is received. As Philosophers say of heat, that it does
congregare homogenea, and dissipare heterogenea, gather together those things
that are of a like, and separate those that are of a different quality; so it
is with Sacraments. This the Apostle takes for granted, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. His business there is to take Christians off from joining with
heathens in their Idol-sacrifices, because such joining makes them one body
with those Idolaters. Which is clear in the 19, 20, 21. v. What say I then?
that the Idol is any thing? or that which is offered in sacrifice to Idols is
any thing? but I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to Devlls, and not to God; and I would not that ye should have
fellowship with Devils; ye cannot drink of the Cup of the Lord, and of the Cup
of Devils; ye cannot he partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of
Devils. And this he had also argued against, Chap. 8. Verse. 10. And he proves
that this makes them one Idolatrous body with Gentiles, in their sacrifices to
Devls, by way of an analogy with Christian and Jewish worship. Because joining
in the Lords Supper to partake of one bread, makes men one body Christian, and
partaking with Jews after the flesh, eating of their sacrifices, made
partakers of the Altar of the Jews and one body Jewish, verse. 17, 18.
therefore joining with heathens in their worship makes one body heathenish. A
text which some weakly enough have brought against mixed communions, to prove,
that none must join with a bad man in a Christian Sacrament, when it only
serves to prove that Christians may not join with Idolaters in the Devils
Sacraments. They difference us from all those that want, and join us unto all
those that enjoy these badges of a Christian profession.

7. Engaging.
Seventhly, They are engaging signs to answer the profession that we make, the
company or family to which we relate; The name that we bear, and to do the duty
that we owe. What the name of Christian, or servant, or people of God speaks,
the same these signs call for, As the Altar set up, Josh. 22.24. did witness,
that those two Tribes and a half did belong with the other Tribes to the God of
Israel; so these Sacramental signs witness the same thing likewise.

8. Remembrancing,
Eighthly, They ace remonstrative, and remembrancing signs; sometimes of mercy
conferred: The Passover was a sign of Isreal's freedom out of the land of
Egypt, Exodus 12.26, 27. The Lords Supper shows forth the Lords death until he
come, 1 Cor. 11.26. being appointed to be done in remembrance of Christ, Matthew.
26.26. Mar. 14, 20. Luke 22.29. 1 Cor. 11.24. of Christ dying, giving his body
and blood for us. As those twelve stones taken out of Jordan by twelve men, out
of every Tribe a man, were for a sign in ages following, a memorial unto the
children of Israel for ever, that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the
Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, when it passed over Jordan, Josh. 4.6, 7. So
these Sacramental signs are memorials of the mercy mentioned: They are always
memorials of the Covenant that we have entered, the duty in which we stand
engaged. The Apostle having showed, that Baptism does signify a death to sin,
and a life in righteousness, Romans 6.4. presently thence gives warning, he that
is dead is free from sin, verse. 6.

Ninethly, I might show that they are ratifying and confirming signs, but this
is distinctly mentioned. 9, Ratifying.
They are seals as well as signs which remains to be handled.

SECT. III. Corollaries from the former Doctrine.
SEveral consectaries follow from this observation, which contains one part of
the definition of a Sacrament.

First, The sign and thing signified are analogically one.
That the sign and the thing signified in every Sacrament are one, not properly
and really one, but in that manner one; as all those things that remain
distinct in nature one from other, yet bear proportion and resemblance one with
other are one; One, as Christ and a door, Christ and a vine are one; They are
so one, that one may be said to be the other; when yet one distinct thing from
other cannot be said to be the other in a sense that is proper, my hand is not
my writing, my writing is not my hand, but my hand is that which writes, and
writing is written with my hand; and so my writing is usually called my hand:
and these speeches are in all mouths vulgar, and common; and are so far from
being hard to understand, that indeed they help the understanding. A woman
shows a written piece of parchment, and says, Here is my Dower or Jointure;
when Dower, or Jointure is in Lands, not in Papers. Every one knows, that this
speech means, that it is that, which vests her in it; we show a paper, and say,
This is my will, not meaning that faculty of the soul it self, but a
manifestation of what our desire is should be done with our estate after our
decease; such a man lives on my trencher, that is on the meat which is laid on
the trencher at my table: so that men should bless God for that he condescends
to speak in such perspicuity, and not complain in such speeches of difficulty.
Upon account of this oneness between the sign and the thing signified,
sometimes the sign is said to be the thing signified, as that Bread is the body
of Christ, and the Cup the blood of Christ, Matthew. 26.26, 27, So that that of
Austin is famous, that Christ said, This is my body, when he gave the sign of
his body. Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17.9, 10, 11. Ast. 7.8. The
Lamb is called the Passover, Exodus 12.11, 21. Matthew. 26.28. And the trees
before spoken to, are called the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of
good and evil; see Ezekiel. 5.5. 1 Cor. 10.4. In all of these places, the sign
has the name of the thing signified; by reason of Analogy and representation,
and all by institution: sometimes on the other hand, the thing signified is
called by the name of, and is said to be the sign, as, 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us; so, Joh. 6.55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed; fitly resembled by meat and drink. Joh. 15.1. I am the
true vine, fitly resembled by a vine, see Joh. 10.10, 11. Sometimes the effect
which the thing signified does produce, is called by the name of the sign, so
in that speech of Ananias related by Paul, Act. 22.16. Arise, and be baptized,
and wash away thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord; when it was not the
water that he was then to use, but the blood of Christ, that could take away
sin, 1 John 1.7. so Baptism saves, 1 Pet. 3.21. when as the Apostle there (as
may be further shown) explains his own meaning: so the putting off the sins of
the flesh, is called by the name of Circumcision, and of Baptism, Colos. 2.11,
12. Sometimes that which is the proper work of the sign, is attributed to the
thing signified, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart,
and be not stiff necked. These, and such like speeches as these, would be
familiar with us, and we should be able to give an account of them, in case we
understood Sacramental relations, and other resemblances frequent in Scriptures.

Secondly, Then it further follows, There is no such things as
transubstantiation.
that there can be no such thing as transubstantiation: The sign and the thing
signified remain distinct, and cannot properly be the same in any Sacraments.
Of all Scripture-Sacraments, and all those additional forged Sacraments of the
Church of Rome, one only is by them thus honored. The Paschal Lamb was not
turned into the body of Christ, nor is water turned into the blood of Christ in
Baptism; Nor do any other of their supposed signs lose their nature, only in
the Lords Supper bread is not bread, (though it be still called bread) but
flesh; wine is not wine, (though called the fruit of the vine) but blood; we
see bread, we taste bread, we handle bread; and yet we must not give credit
either to our eyes, ears, taste, or touch, but we must believe it is no bread.
It has the natural properties of bread and wine; it gives natural nourishment
as bread and wine; the bread, if eaten in excess, and the wine drunken will
cause surfeit, and intoxicate as bread and wine. As the natural force, so the
natural defects of bread and wine, still remain after consecration. The bread
breeds worms, and the wine turns to vinegar; yet we must believe. that God by
miracle has taken away bread and wine, given blood and flesh, turned bread
into flesh, wine into blood, and yet still by miracles keeps up the natural
shape, properties and defects of these outward Elements. When God in Scripture
wrought miracles, the miracles were seen and known. There have been
transubstantiations, but those were never hidden; Moses his rod was turned into
a Serpent, and it was seen to be a Serpent; so that Moses on sight fled from
it, Exodus 4.3. It was turned again into a rod, and known to be a rod, verse. 4.
Christ turns water into wine. Joh. 2.9. that was not judged to be still water,
or called by that name, but by the taste known to be of the most precious wine,
verse. 10. But our senses having thus deceived us, and made us believe that
there is still bread and wine, when by miracle bread and wine is gone, where
shall we find any Word to ground our faith to believe this delusion? The words
of the institution or nothing must carry it.

This is my body, this Cup is my blood in the New Testament: But such an
interpretation, 1. Destroys the outward sign, and makes it no Sacrament. 2.
Makes the speech wholly not Sacramental. No Sacramental speech can be proper,
and we have enough from out adversaries to excuse our faith from the
acknowledgement of any such a change. If we look no further then three
testimonies quoted by learned Mr. Gataker, from three Romish Cardinals in his
discourse of transubstantiation, Page 2. 3. Cardinal Bellarmine (says he)
grants that these words, This is my body, may imply either such a real change
of the bread as the Catholics hold, or such a figurative change as the
Calvinists hold; but will not bear that sense that the Lutherans give it. And
Cardinal Cajetan acknowledges, and freely confesses, that there appears not
any thing out of the Gospel that may enforce us to understand those words. This
is my body properly. And he adds, that nothing in the text hinders, but that
those words may as well be taken in a metaphorical sense, as those words of the
Apostle, the Rock was Christ; and that the words of either proposition may well
be true, though the thing there spoken be not understood in a proper sense, but
in a metaphorical sense only. And he further q says, he finds alleged out
of Bishop Fisher (whom Bellar. lib. de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. Page 209. makes
both a Cardinal, and a Martyr) that there is not one word in St. Matthewes
Gospel from which the true presence of Christ's flesh and blood in our Mass may
be proved; out of Scripture it cannot be proved.

And being traduced for this quotation by an adversary, as taking king it out
of a nameless Author, ignorant, and unsincere in his assertions; In his defense
of the said discourse, Page 44. he tells his adversary, that his Author whom he
thus brands, as ignorant and unsincere, is Bishop Andrews, in his answer to
the Apology of Card. Bellar. against King James his admonitory preface, Chap.
1. and I find Musculus in his common places de Coena Domin. Page 365. quoting
the same words out of the same Author, and much more to the same purpose. -- He
that would be further furnished against this monster of transubstantiation, in
our own language; let him read the forementioned discourse of Mr. Gatakers,
together with the defense, as also Bishop Mortons his Treatise divided into
eight parts of the institution of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.

Gods goodness seen in his condescension to our weakness.
Thirdly, We may see the goodness of God, in this way of condescension by
earthly things, carnal, sensible, and suitable to our natures, to help our
understandings, and strengthen our faith in things heavenly. If we were mere
incorporeal substances, and had spirits not shut up, and imprisoned in bodies,
then (says Chrysostom) we should have had spiritual things in an answerable
way, nakedly in themselves held out unto us; then Parables had not been used,
nor similitudes borrowed, nor Sacramental signs instituted. But having souls
affixt to bodies, that which our spirits should learn, these things of earth
are employed of God to teach; God looked not at himself, when he chose this
method, It is far below him to fill up his sacred Oracles with these things,
but at our imbecility. In case he should speak as God, that is, in a language
answering the Majesty of God, we must be as gods to comprehend his words, and
understand his speech; but dealing with us that have bodies made up of earth,
and minds over eagerly addicted to earth, he is pleased in his transactions not
to deal (if I may so say) as God, but as with man, seeking glory only in
manifestation of his goodness, and tender regard of our weakness. Christ saw a
necessity of this way of dealing, not only as God, by his omniscience, but as
man, by his practical experience. He taught Nicodemus the nature of
regeneration by similitudes borrowed from water, and from the wind, Except a
man be borne of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes and whither it goes; So is every one that is
born of the Spirit. Joh. 3.5, 8. Notwithstanding all this endeavor of Christ
to clear this truth, Nicodemus still remains ignorant, he answers and says
to Christ, How can these things be? Christ after a sharp reproof, ver. 10. (
Art thou a master in Israel, and know not these things? not only a Scholar,
but a Teacher, and that not in any place of darkness, but in Israel that
valley of vision) adds, ver. 12. If I have told you earthly things, and ye
believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? Christ had
not read a Lecture to Nicodemus of the water, or of the wind, neither had
Nicodemus questioned either of those assertions, The wind blows where it
lists, thou know not whence it comes, nor whither it goes; that he should
on this account charge Nicedemus with not believing doctrine of this kind; But
the meaning is, If I speak of regeneration by earthly similitudes, and
expressions, obvious to the senses, and you are not able to apprehend, and
understand them; how then if I speak to you of heavenly things in an heavenly
manner, without any such sensible representation at all, would you then
understand? This interpretation of these words Maldonate does give,
notwithstanding Bullinger, Decad. 5 Ser. 6. had gone before him in it.
Ravanellus in his Thesaurus, and Mr. Burges in his Ser. 35. page 211. give the
same. In which we see our need of help this way, and the singular condescension
of Christ Jesus in dealing this way for our help, which place in my thoughts
serves to clear that speech of the Evangelist, Mar. 4.33. And with many such
parables spoke he the word unto them, as they were able to bear it; many are
there reckoned up, and more by Matthew, Matthew. 13. many more perhaps were
uttered, then either Matthew or Mark relate; as they were able to bear, says
the text, according to their capacities, say the larger Annotations. And so
Jansenius upon the words, Quo significat Dominum voluisse aptare suum sermonem
ad captum auditorum, and ob id locutum in parabolis, quod nudi sermonis nondum
essent capaces; at parabolas suas desumsiffe a rebus vulgaribus, per quas
idiotae utcunque induci and parari possunt ad mysteriorum captum.
Hereby he signifies that Christ would fit his speech to the capacity of the
hearers, because they were not capable of naked truths, and he borrowed his
speeches from vulgar things, by which the most unlearned might be fitted for
the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. Though some understand the words as
they were worthy to hear, and not to understand, parables being above the
common capacities, and put for hard and difficult speeches; As, Matthew. 13.10.
Christ being demanded, Why speak thou in parables? he answers, ver. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15. Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom
of heaven, but to them it is not given: for whosoever has, to him it shall be
given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever has not, from him shall
be taken away, even that he has. Therefore speak I to them in parables,
because they seeing see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they
understand. And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah which says, By
hearing ye shall hear, and not understand, and seeing ye shall see, and not
perceive: For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them. But blessed are your eyes, for
they see; and your ears, for they hear. But these texts may be reconciled; A
parable or Similitude, when men stay in the outward bark of it, is as a riddle,
nothing can be more obscure; Some mystery men know is hid under it, but they
know not what. Therefore Christ having uttered a parable to the multitude,
Matthew. 15.11. and Peter requesting, Declare unto us this parable, ver. 15.
says, Are ye also yet without understanding? Parables explained are the
plainest way of teaching, showing the face of heavenly things in earthly
glasses; and therefore the Lord to set out his dealing with his own people
faith, I have also spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and
used similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets, Hos. 12.10. But the scope be
not discerned, only that which is said of earthly things, and no more is
known. Now what words are to the ears in similitudes and comparisons, that
Sacramental signs are to the eyes; by both the understanding is helped, the
memory refresht, and as may (God willing) be unfolded, faith strengthened. The
cleansing from sin, we find in Scripture held forth under the metaphor of
pouring out water, Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you. To which the Apostle alludes, Ephesians. 5.26. where he says, Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it by the washing of water, by the word. Which was typified also in those
diverse washings mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 9.10. which the blood of Christ
does really work, Purging our consciences from dead works, to serve the living
God, cleansing us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. and therefore it is called the
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, 1 Pet. 1.2. In Baptism, in a standing
Ordinance, this is held out, The party interessed in Covenant is dipped in, or
washed with water, and the reason of it given, Acts 22.16. Arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord. Christ
promises to his Church living bread, and water whereof whosoever drinks shall
never thirst. He further explaines himself: The bread which I will give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world, Joh. 6.51. My flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, Joh. 6.55. Christ being to dye, holds
this out in outward signs, and with his own Comment upon them, Taking and
breaking bread, he says, This is my body; Taking the cup; he says, This is
the cup in the New Testament in my blood shed for them, and for many, for the
remission of sins. In elements of frequent use, ordinary, easy to be
compassed, these high mysteries and singular mercies are shadowed.

SECT. IV. A further Corollary drawn from the same Doctrine.
The necessity of explanation of Sacramental signs.
FOurthly, Then there is a necessity that these Sacramental signs be opened,
explained, the mystery cleared, the thing signified held out, and the Analogy
and proportion made known; otherwise the soul is still left in the dark, and no
benefit reaped, either for the help of our faith, or clearing of our
understanding. There is no Sacrament (as Calvin well observes) without a
promise preceding. The Sacrament is an appendant to the promise as a seal among
men is to a Covenant; an earnest to a bargain, or a ring has been to a
marriage; were there no promise, there were nothing in those signs; As where
there is no Covenant, there is nothing confirmed by a seal; where there is no
bargain, nothing is ratified by earnest given; where there is no matrimonial
consent, the ring would be but an imposture; the Word of promise gives being to
the Sacrament, according to that received speech, Accedit verbum ad elementum
and fit Sacramentum.
The Word to added to the Element, and it is made a Sacrament. And there can be
no improvement of the Sacrament, to any spiritual advantage, without
understanding of the promise. Were the signs, such as did proclaim their own
signification, as a footstep, the foot that made the impression, or a shadow
the body, then the signs might stand alone, and speak their own intentions;
But being creatures for civil uses, and having only an aptness in them to
hold out the thing that they signify, and (as has been said) equally apt to
other significations, a further explanation is necessary. Signs among men must
have their significations known as well as founds in musical, and military
instruments; otherwise as none could know in the one what is piped, or harped,
nor upon sound could prepare themselves to battle, 1 Cor. 14.7, 8. so in the
other, none can know what is shadowed out or resembled. There was a custom to
ratify Covenants by killing a calfe, and the Covenanters passage between the
parts of it; as you may see, Jerem. 34. He that understood not the meaning of
that ceremony, could know nothing of a Covenant, by that means between parties
to be solemnized, none understand any more then by sight, then many of us do
now by the reading of it. A garland at the door (if custom did not give us a
reason of it) would speak no more to a passenger without, then a flower in the
window within. To see Baptism, and the Lords Supper, acted in the highest way
of decency, and reverence, may possess with wonder, but not at all edify the
ignorant beholder. Here as almost every where we have those of the Church of
Rome our adversaries. And there has been no small contest, whether this word
which gives being to Sacraments, be Concionatorium, or Consecratorium, whether
it be a word for communicants instruction, or the elements consecration? He
that pleases may read Bellar. de Sacramentis in genere, lib. 1. Cap. 19, 20.
Suarez de Sacramentis, disput. 2. quaest. Sexages. art. 8. on the one part.
Chamier de Sacramentis in genere, Cap. 15. Whitaker praelect de Sacram. Cap. 6.
on the other part. All of which was occasioned (as Chamier observes) by a
speech of Calvin, lib. 4. Institut. Cap. 14. Sect. 4. who speaking to that
common saying, that a Sacrament does consist of a word, and outward sign,
says, Verbum enim intelligere debemus, non quod sine sensu, and fide
insusurratum, solo strepitu velut magica incantatione consecrandi elementi vim
habeat: Sed quod praedicatum intelligere nos faciat quid visibile signum sibi
velit. Quod ergo sub Papae Tyrannide factitatum est, non caruit ingenti
mysteriorum profanatione Putarunt enim satis esse si Sacerdos populo sine
intelligentia obstupente, consecrationis formulam obmurmuraret Imo id data
opera caverunt, ne quid doctrinae inde ad plebem proveniret om nia enim Latin
pronunciarunt aput homines illiteratos. Post ea, eousque erupit Superstitio, ut
consecrationem non nisi rauco murmr quod a paucis exaudiretur rite peragi
crederent.
We are to understand such a word, that has not power of consecration of the
element barely with a noise whispered, without sense or faith, as by a magical
spell; But such as being preached, or published, gives us to understand what
the visible sign means. Therefore that which is done (says he) under the
Tyranny of the Pope, is not without a notable profanation of the mysteries,
for they have thought it enough for the Priest to mutter the form of
consecration, while the people stand amazed, and without understanding; yea,
they puposely provide, that no help in knowledge should come to the people,
pronouncing all in Latin among illiterate men; yea, afterward superstition so
far prevailed, that they believed consecration to be done aright, when it was
done with a low muttering sound, which few could hear. A notable character
worthy of his pen, setting out to the life their art, to hold the world in
blindness. In stead of giving an account, what has been on both parts handled
in this Controversy, I shall lay down that which I will judge to be truth in
several propositions.

Explicatory Propositions.
A word of institution ne^essary.
First, That an institution from God, and words from his mouth, that hold out
such an institution of every Sacrament, is of absolute necessity, even to the
very being of a Sacrament; It were a dumb element, and a superstitious,
Ceremonious, observation without it, if we can find no institution for
water-Baptisme: our men that stand for a pure spirit-Baptisme, will have the
upper hand in that particular. But here our adversaries and we are at an
agreement.

Consecration respects not the elements but participants.
Secondly, That consecration, (if we may so call it) that is used in the
public solemnization of any Sacrament, is not in respect of the elements or
outward signs themselves, whose essence remains entire and unchanged: But it
is for their sakes that use these signs, and unto whom in their use, only
they suffer a change from common to sacred: And therefore being not for the
elements, Nam Catholici omnes docent, verbum Sacramenti esse pauca quaedum
verba a Deo praescripta quae super materiam a ministro pronuntianda sunt.
but for believers sakes, a magical incantation is not of use, but verbal
instruction. Therefore that of Bellarmine in the name of all the Catholics (as
he calls them) i That the word which makes a Sacrament, is only a few words
prescribed of God, to be pronounced by the Priest, over the matter of the
Sacrament, is not to be suffered. Those words might as well be concealed, as
thus muttered, the elements do not hear them, neither do they suffer any
change by them: That speech of Austin we willingly grant, that the word is
added to the element, and it is made a Sacrament: But not with a Romish Gloss
upon it, that by the word there should be understood, barely the uttering, or
(as they would rather have it) the muttering of a few words; But the word of
institution, holding forth a Divine designation of it to that end and use,
which is not to be concealed from those for whose use it is ordained (as though
it did work by way of a secret change) but in the plainest way to be made known
to them. So that those bare words in Baptism, I baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, etc. are not that which makes it up into a Sacrament: But the
command of Jesus Christ, by the application of water to baptize in that Name.
Neither is the uttering of those words, This is my body, This Cup in the New
Testament is my blood, sufficient, but the whole series of the institution, in
the words and actions of Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, For an orderly administration of the Sacrament, Repetition and
explanation of the words of institution singularly useful.
it is of singular use, that the institution be repeated, and that in
Scripture Language (which Bellarmine confesses we do always in Baptism, and
many of us at least out of 1 Cor. 11. at the Lords Supper,) and much for
edification, to have them briefly explained. This adds authority, and honor
to the administration, and the understanding of many deploredly ignorant is
hereby benefited. If Parents must teach their children, when they saw the rite
of the Passover, a reason of it, Exodus 12. then much, more should Ministers of
the Gospel teach it their people. Christians should act nothing in way of
worship of God, but they should see and know reason for their actings.

Fourthly, It is not essential to a Sacrament, A precise form of woe ds not
essential in a Sacrament.
that a precise form of words be observed in the administration of it, so that
the being of a Sacrament is lost if a word be changed; But it is sufficient,
that the sum and substance of the institution be held out, and repeated; and
the signs accordingly in the administration applied to the end for which, they
are ordained, to illustrate and seal the thing signified to those that partake
of it, (though a licentious freedom of variation of the words is to be avoided,
so the sense and meaning of the institution may be, if not lost, yet at least
obscured) there being no secret force in the syllables themselves, uttered with
all the consecrating intention that the Priest can imagine, to create a new
Sacrament.

Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Sacram. in genere, cap. 21. has a proposition to the
contrary, Non solum ses, sed etiam verba in Sacramentis novae legis is a Deo
determinata sunt, ut non liceat quickquam immutate.
Not only the things themselves, (says he) in the Sacraments under the New
Covenant, (of which he says, there is little difference between them and us)
but the words are so determinate, that they may not anything be changed; yet
when he has done, he is put to it, to limit his own proposition, and shows
there may be a variation six ways; in some of which the essence of a Sacrament
is lost, the substantial form being taken away; in others the accidental
form only, so that the essence continues notwithstanding such variation; so
that he does not only approve of the determination of Pope Zachary, who in an
Epistle to Bonifacius resolves, that when some out of ignorance of the Latin
tongue did baptize in nomine Patria, filia, and speritua sancta, that the
substantial form was not altered; But also acknowledges that the Baptism of
the Greeks was valid, and the substance not changed when they baptized in this
way, Let the servant of Christ be baptized in the Name, etc. yet allowing of
it, only upon that account, because the Church of Rome did tolerate it; so
that their toleration, or prohibition can give, or take away the very
substantial form of Sacraments: Arguments evincing the truth of the
proposition.
the essence of them is at their courtesy. The truth of this proposition is
clear. 1. No prescribed form of words is laid down in the Old Testament, as is
confessed; and therefore Bellarmine puts it into his proposition, That in the
Sacraments of the New Law, the words are so determinate, that nothing is to be
changed: And that the Apostles did use any such prescript form in so precise a
way, cannot be proved; yea, the contrary is more then probable, considering the
multitudes in so short a space baptized, Act. 2. Act. 8. Peter exhorts his
converts, to be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, Act. 2.38. And those
mentioned, Act. 19.5. were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. And
Bonaventure (as he is quoted by Whitaker) says that the Apostles baptized in
the name of Christ. And Scotus (as the same Author affirms) says, that if any
should baptize in that manner, he durst not say it were no Baptism, and this
with good reason; seeing Baptism in the Name of Christ, virtually comprizes
the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, His work being to reconcile man
unto God, essentially, and not personally considered. 2. Either the very
syllables themselves, in which the institution is set down, is the form, and
contains the essence of Baptism, or else the sense and meaning: But it is not
the very words and syllables themselves. This is clear in reason, and confessed
by the adversary. First, it is clear in reason, then the same words and
syllables must be used in which they were pronounced, when they were first
instituted; That was the Syriack Tongue, (as is believed) being the language in
Judea at that time, or at least the Greek, in which Tongue the words of the
institution were committed to writing. But the form of the Sacraments is never
tied to those Tongues, to neither of them. Papists officiate in Latin,
Orthodox Churches in their own language, in which the same thing in other
syllables is held forth. This is confessed by the adversary. Bellarmine approves
(as we have heard) the ratification of that Baptism, where scarce ever a word
was aright uttered, and that upon this account, that it might be easily
understood what he would have said, as well by the act of baptizing as by the
word, In nomine, In the name, for that was aright pronounced. It is not then
the words, but that which ought to be intended in the words that holds forth
the institution, which may be further from the Jesuit cleared, in that he
confesses, Scripture to be too short, to hold out the form of
Baptisme-institution, which Nos respondemus, illud (hoc facite) refer ad
totam actionem Christi, ita ut comprehendat etiam verba, Id quod (ut omittam
nunc alia argumenta) discimus ex traditione, and usu Catholicae Ecclesiae quae
traditio si non recipiatur in dubium revocabitur etiam forma baptismi, nam
unde, quaeso, colligitur, dum aqua aspergitur, dicenda esse illa verba: Baptizo
te in nomine Patris and filii and Spiritus sancti? Certe non aliunde quam ex
illis verbis Matthew. ult. Docete omnes gentes, baptizantes eos in nomine Patris
and Filii and Spiritus sancti. At ex hoc loco id non potest certe colligi nisi
recipiatur Ecclesiae traditio. Non enim Dominus ait, dicite Baptizo te in
nomine Patris, etc. Satis igitur erit si aspergentes aquam dicanus, innomine
Patris, and Filii, etc.
can be gathered from no place, he says, but that of Matthew. 28.19. Go teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost. But there it is not said, I baptize, (as he observes) nor does
Christ command to say, in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and holy Ghost;
but to baptize in the Name of the Father, etc. If it be done in that Name by
that authority, it were (says he) sufficient, had we not tradition to the
contrary, De Sacramentis in Genere, cap. 19. All which makes it appear, that an
institution is necessary, and not a certain number of words of absolute
necessity.

Fifthly, A Sermon formally so called, A Sermon formally so called is not
essential to a Sac^ament.
to be preached at the same time, as the Sacrament is administered, is no way of
the essence of Sacraments. This Chamier worthily rejects, as a calumny put upon
protestant Writers: No protestant Writer ever did affirm it: Bellarmine would
fain fasten it upon Calvin, and Beza, but confesses that Calvin speaks
doubtfully in it; And sometimes seems to speak of a Sermon, as distinct from
the Sacrament. They that hold this opinion, must not only conclude it to be
the greatest of prophanations to administer the elements when no Sermon is
preached; But whenever they administer any Sacrament, their Sermon must ever
be of that subject; for to make a Sermon essential to Sacraments, which treats
nothing about Sacraments, is to make the body of a bird essential to a beast.
That which we say, is, that every word in the institutions of Sacraments is for
instruction of communicants, and without such instruction, they can make no
actual improvement of them to any spiritual benefit, either of justification,
or sanctification; which yet is not of absolute necessity to be pressed, as often
as ever the Sacrament is taken; And words about the Sacrament teaching, and
consecrating are not (as they make them) of an opposite kind. All words tending
to consecration as [I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc. This is my
body, This Cup, etc.] are words as well to instruct, as to consecrate; are
Concionatoria as well, as Consecratoria: so that all words of consecration are
words for instruction (though all for instruction are not for consecration) as
might many ways be evidenced. 1. They are significant words, to be uttered by
the voice of a public teacher. 2. They are Scripture words, and whatsoever is
there written, is for our learning, Romans 15.4. why is it wrote if not for
reading? Why do we read if not for learning? 3. The Apostles to whom Christ
gave charge concerning the Sacrament, were to understand themselves what they
did, and to instruct those to whom they did commend it likewise. But they had
no other way to know the Sacraments, either of Baptism, or the Lords Supper,
but from the words of institution, which they call by the name of consecration.
4. The Apostle going about to reform the abuses about the Lords Supper, and to
teach the Corinthians a right way of celebration, repeates the whole
institution, and lays down exactly that which they say is of the essence of
consecration, and that to instruct, and not to consecrate. The words of
consecration are his words of instruction. 5. To this we may add that of
Austin, not barely his Authority, but the strength of his reason, Tract. 80. in
Jo. Commenting upon his own words, The word is added to the element, and it is
made a Sacrawent. Unde ista tanta virtus aquae, ut corpus tangat and cor
abluat, nisi faciente verbo? non quia dicitur sed quia creditur. Nam and in
ipso verbo, aliud est sonus transiens, aliud virtus manens. Hoc est verbum
fidei quod praedicumus ait Apostolus.
Whence is there that power (says he) that water should touch the body, and
the heart should be made clean, but the word working it, not upon that account
because it is spoken, but because it is believed? For in the word it self the
sound that passes is one thing, and the efficacy that remains is another; and
this (says he) is the word that is Preached. There is none can deny, but that
the words of the Sacrament are to be believed, and in case they are to be
believed, they are to be preached and heard, for who can believe on him of whom
they have not heard, and how can they hear without a Teacher? Romans 10.15. This
place of Austin, Locus hic mire torquere solet non nullos.
Bellarmine says, has troubled many, and Whitaker says, they have as much
troubled him as any other. He rejects Calvin's Interpretation of it, and then
rejects several Interpretations of his own party, and at last produces his own,
which Whitaker says, is wholly borrowed out of Allen, Dico igitur, Augustinum
hoc loco, non semper loqui de eodem verbo, sed nunc de Sacramentali, nunc de
concionali.
that Austin sometimes speaks of the Sacramental word, and sometimes of the
Word as Preached, which two with him are altogether different; and yet Austin
must by all means be acquit from Equivocation; we willingly yield that he does
not equivocate, and therefore the Sacramental word is a branch of that word
that is Preached. He that pleases may read Suarez and Bellarmines arguments
answered by Chamier, lib. 1. de Sacra. in genere, cap. 17, 18.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I. God is the Author of all Sacraments, and Sacramental rites.
THese Sacramental signs have God for their Author, as it follows in the
definition, and is employed (as we have heard) in the text of the Apostle,
Abraham receiving it, God appointed it, Genesis 17.10. So that the Observation is,
God is the Author of all Sacraments, and Sacramental rites.

This is clear of it self, and has scarce any adversary. Look through all
Sacraments, whether ordinary, or extraordinary, whether taken in the largest
signification for holy signs, or in the strictest sense, as here defined; we
shall still find that they were by Divine appointment; The Cloud, the Passage
through the Red Sea, Exodus 13. Manna, Exodus 16. The Rock, Exodus 17. The
Rainbowe, Genes. 9. Gideons fleece, Judge. 6. The shadow on Ahaz his dyal, Isa.
38. Circumcision, Genesis 17. The Passover, Exodus 12. Levit. 12. Baptism, Matthew.
28. The Lords Supper, Matthew. 26.1 Cor. 11. All of them are of Divine
institution; And though Popish Writers are much put to it, to find any Divine
institution for some of their Sacraments, (as may God willing be shown) yet
with a joint consent they acknowledge this that we say, and give their reasons
of it. Thomas Aquinas puts the question, part. 3. quaest. 64. art. 2. Whether
Sacraments be alone of Divine institution? and determines it in the
affirmative. Bellarmine spends the whole 23. Cap. of his first book, de Sacra.
in genere, to assert, that only Christ is the author of the Sacraments. And
Suarez, Quaest. 64. disput. 12. Sect. 1. lays down this conclusion, Christus
Dominus immediate ac per se institut omnia Sacramenta novae legis. Dico se
cundo, Sacramenta veteris legis omnia fuere ab ipso Deo immediate inst^tuta.
that the Lord Christ immediately, and by himself, did institute all the
Sacraments of the New Covenant; And adds a second conclusion, that all the
Sacraments of the old law were immediately instituted of God himself; either of
them both quote Canon. 1. sess. 7. of the Council of Trent, that thus
determines, Si quis dixerit Sacramenta novae legis non fuisse omnia a Jesu
Christo Demino nostro institua, Anthema sit.
If any shall say that the Sacraments of the New Covenant, were not in stituted
by Christ, let him be accursed; which Canon they both understand to thunder out
an ana thema against Protestants; seeing we hold that their extreme unction,
and confirmation were never instituted of Christ, (to which thiey may add
matrimony; for though the God of nature did ordain it, yet not Christ the
Mediator of the Covenant) which they affirm to be Sacraments, and I think
they did not mistake the meaning of the Council, seeing the Canon lays a
curse, not only on thole that shall deny that Christ was the author of all the
Sacraments, but also on those that shall say there were more or less then
seven, reckoning up their seven in order. But we may retort this curse upon
them, as well as they fling it at us, Baptismus Johannis ab ipso Johanne
institutus erat. Baptism of John of Divine institution.
seeing they deny the Baptism of John to be of Divine institution, and make it
merely humane, as Bellar. lib. 1. de Baptis. Cap. 20. which yet we know to be a
Sacrament, and able sufficiently to clear it, that God himself, and not John
was the Author of it; Let John himself speak whether he went on his own head,
on this work; He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me,
Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same
is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost, Joh. 1.33. The people of the Jews
certainly had another opinion of his Baptism, as appears by their reasoning,
when Christ demanded, The Baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of
men? and they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say from heaven, he
will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him? But if we shall say of men,
we fear the people; for all hold John as a Prophet, Matthew. 21.25.26. When the
opinion among the people was so general, that the Chief Priests and Elders
were afraid to oppose it, had it been an error doubtless Christ would not in
that way have nourished them in it; And to say with Bellarmine that Deus solum
in genere inspiravit, and inspiratione, illa mandavit ut baptizaret: sed ritum
in particulari quo baptizandum esset, ipse Johannes instituit, non a Deo prae
scriptum accepit.
God did command him to baptize, but the particular rite was left unto John
himself, is nothing. When Christ demanded of the Baptism of John, whether it
were from heaven, or of men? the Priests and Elders to whom he spoke,
understood the whole work, and to conceit that the work was commanded, and the
way of doing concealed, is an ungrounded fancy. All that are confessed to be
Sacraments, are (we see) yielded to be of Divine institution, which is further
plain in reason.

First Sacraments are parts of worship, a piece of the homage that is due from
man to God; And it is God, and not man that is to prescribe in his own worship;
here God has declared himself to be jealous, Exodus 20.5. that not any thing of
the invention of man come within that worship that is Divine. And if Nadab and
Abihu fell for adulterating the worship of God, bringing in strange fire, when
fire from heaven was provided to their hands; How shall they stand that coin a
worship it self, as do our adversaries, or put a new stamp upon it, when it is
set up of God, which is their way likewise? Marriage which is an Ordinance
without the Church, they make a Sacrament in the Church; Of duties they make
ordination, and repentance Sacraments; and in case Pharisees made the
Commandments of God void by their tradition, when they imposed a necessity of
washing of hands before meat, when yet they did not raise it to the honor of a
Sacrament; How much more had John offended, if out of his own fancy he had set
up such an Ordinance as Baptism? David has been charged that he appointed
singers, and other officers in the house of God, without any command or
direction from heaven; but the contrary to this appears, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. where
in the life of Hezekiah it is said, He set the Levites in the house of the
Lord, with Cymbals, with Psalteries, and with harpes, according to the
commandment of David, and of Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prophet; for
so was the Commandment of the Lord by his Prophets.

Secondly, Sacraments are notes of distinction between the people of God and
others that bear not that relation to him, as we have heard Circumcision and
uncircumcision divided the world. The Circumcised were a people of God, when
all others were children of a strange god, so we may say of all Sacraments; And
as men of place alone have power to give liveries to their own servants, to
distinguish them from those that have their dependence on others, so God has
alone power to give differencing Cognizances to his servants likewise.

Thirdly, God only can give strength and efficacy to the Sacraments; what that
is rests to be enquired, and is not a little controverted; but whatsoever it
is, that it is wholly of God was never doubted; and he only that can give
efficacy to them, is to ordain them. This is Thomas Aquinas his reason in the
place mentioned.

Fourthly, Sacraments are teaching signs, visible words, whereby man is
instructed in Divine mysteries; but God alone is the author of the Word; It is
given by inspiration of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. God alone therefore is the author
of Sacraments.

Fifthly, Sacraments are seals put to promise, annexed for confirmation of
Covenants, as shall be further shown. But he only that makes the promise and
appoints the Covenant, can give the seal. The Schoolman then (quoted by
Bullinger, de Sacr. Decad. 5. Ser. 6.) has well minded the Church, that she is
no Lady over the Sacraments, but barely a servant, and can no more appoint a
Sacrament, then abrogate a Divine Commandment. And Bellarmine puts this for
the first reason, that Ministers are Stewards of the Mysteries of God;
therefore they are not to institute them, but being instituted of God, are
only to administer them.

This holds true not only of Sacraments in their essence, that none may add
any to the number of those that God has instituted; But of all that is of the
integrality of Sacraments likewise there is not the least Sacramental rite,
that is to be of humane, but all of Divine institution. There is the same
reason of the whole, and of every part. He that may not appoint a Sacrament,
may appoint no piece of a Sacrament. A worship made up of Divine and humane
Commandments, stands in the Church like Nebuchadnezzars image, the head of
Gold, but the feet of earth. The Poets device of a man's neck joined to a horses
head is not so great a soloecisme. Thomas Aquinas saw that this might be
objected against much in the Sacraments in the Church of Rome, and therefore
when he had put the question, Whether Sacraments have their institution from
God? in the first place objecteth, Ea quae sunt divinitus instituta, t aduntur
nobis in sacra Scriptura, sed quaedam aguntur in Sacramentis, de quibus nulla
fit mentio in sacra Scriptura, puta de Chrismate, quo homines confirmantur, and
oleo quo Sacerdotes inunguntur, and de multis aliis tam verbis quam factis
quibus utimur in Sacramentis. Illa quae aguntur in Sacramentis, per homines
instituta, non sunt de necessitate Sacramenti, sed ad quandam solennitatem,
quae adhibetur Sacramentis ad excitandam devotionem and reverentiam in his qui
Sacramenta suscipiunt. Ea vero quae sunt de necessitate Sacramenti, ab ipso
Christo instituta sunt, qui est Deus and homo.
that there are some things done in the Church of which there is no mention in
Scripture, as Chrisme wherewith men are confirmed, and oil wherewith Priests
are ordained, and much else, as well words as actions (says he) which we use
in Sacraments; and answers, that those things which are done in Sacraments
instituted by man are not of the necessity of the Sacrament, but are used for
solemnity, and to beget devotion, and reverence in those that receive them. But
those things that are of necessity to Sacraments, are instituted of Christ, who
is God-man. But how the Angelical Doctor can be reconciled to himself, I
cannot see; when, part. 3. quaest. 72. art. 2. he concludes, that Chrisme
(which with him is oil mixed with Balsome,) is the matter of this Sacrament; as
also Bellarmine de Scramento Confirmationis, Cap. 8. prop. 1. which he says is
certain among Catholics from the Council of Florence, and the Council of
Trent. and gallantly proves it out of 2 Cor. 1.21. Now he which stablisheth us
with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God; And certainly the matter of a
Sacrament is of necessity to a Sacrament. And secondly, what devotion or
reverence the things that are instituted of man can beget in the Sacrament
appointed of God, can hardly be shown. It is as an addition of Tin, to
silver in our common coin; As Ahaz his Altar fetched from Damascus to the
worship at Jerusalem. It is true that a reverend way of solemnizing these
Ordinances in order, and decency, keeps up their honor, and adds to their
honor comparative, to that whith from some hands they had, and much is
variable about them in those things that are mere matter of order, in which
Scripture gives no precept; But no device of man adds any thing to the honor
of an institution of heaven; God writes no imperfect work to leave it to man to
add his supplement.

SECT. II. Corallaries from the former Doctrine.
Sacr^m nts must have the honor of divine Ordinances.
THen let them have that esteem that is due to the Ordinances, and institutions
of heaven; Let not our thoughts be below God, when our eyes are fixed on them,
or our hearts employed about them. If we look at the terrene part of these
institutions, our thoughts may then fall flat, and their esteem very low; many
a creature of God will stand in competition with them: Themselves being of
earth must needs fix our thoughts to earth, and so there will be no more then
bare formality in the work, perhaps a confused conceit of some holy thing which
is little understood, begetting a superstitious blind devotion: But when we
consider from whose hand they are, and the end for which they serve, as seals
appointed of God, to ratify to our souls his gift of Christ, pardon of sin by
him, and consequently glory with him; these despised Ordinances will be in more
honor. We look upon Parchment, Ink, Wax, in the shops where they are put to
sale, as common Commodities: thousand of shops have more high-prized wares; How
low do men look on them comparative to those things of which the Exchange
glories: But he that has one skin of this Parchment, made up into a pattent,
or deed with the Broad-seal to it; confirming a grant of some large revenue,
eyes it in another manner, and prizes it above thousands of all that we have
spoken of, as not with him to be named that day. We may look upon water as an
element, as mean as it is common, as low in our esteem, as it is in price; and
upon bread and wine as somewhat more noble: But a slender pittance of either,
is with us of slender value. But when they serve for a seal of all that the
Gospel tenders, and are made up into a seal of the Gospel grant, it should be,
and to a spiritual eye is, of more high, and honorable regard. If this were
duly considered, Sacraments would be had in more honor with us.

The contempt, or neglect of Baptismo censured.
First, The Sacrament of Baptism, that door of entrance into the Church of
Christ, our matriculation into the society of Saints; when other Ordinances are
over in the Congregation, and that entered upon, we see the way of a great
party immediately to post out: The Apostles thought it too low a business for
the Lord Christ to have to deal with infants that had not legs to carry them,
but must be brought in the arms of others; and therefore rebuked those that
brought them. These think it below them, to wait upon a business where such
only are concerned: Infant Ordinances are below their attendance. These are of
two sorts. 1. Those who out of judgment leave, and are so principled, that
they think they must leave, and declare their dissent from that practice. 2.
Those that out of neglect leave: They judge that infants of right ought to be
baptized: It is the Ministers duty to do it, and Parents and near friends and
neighbors are to see it done, but it might be done in a corner, with more or
fewer, it does not matter: when they are gone, it will be baptized, and what is
it to them to wait on the Baptism of it? The first of these that in
departing, act out of principles that they have laid, (and therefore in case
they were better principled, there is hope that they might act better) are of
two sorts. 1. Those that protest against all title of infants to this
Ordinance; and therefore upon that account refuse to honor it with their
presence: And their very departure from it speaks this language, Here is one
that is to be dedicated to God in an Ordinance that is of God, (For I speak not
of those that go above water-Baptisme, they hardly come into us, and therefore
do not on this account leave) but one that God will not own, being within no
Covenant of his, and therefore no member of that society that appertains to
him, to whom we say, in case God will not, who then must receive him: If he be
no member of this society, nor in capacity of it, then he is also in an
uncapacity to be saved? Act. 2.47. But they will not so determine, they say;
but leave him to his own Master; But denying him a Covenant interest, and all
title to Church Fellowship, they deny that Christ is his Master, (though that
expressly affirm it, Levit. 25.42. yet they peremptorily deny it) and so thrust
him from all interest in his redemption. Papists were the first in this cruel
infant-damning principle, That they are out of Covenant with God; Anabaptists
taking it from them, fight for it with their weapons. May we not think that
Papists laugh in their sleeves, to see these men of new light, dispute for
them, reform for them, separate with them? And do they not very well know,
that if by these men's help, they can bring into the Protestant Church their
premises, we shall never be able to avoid their conclusions. Others are not so
rigid against all infants, but appear more tender to some; Infants of believers
they judge to have their interest; when parents make good their part in the
Covenant, and are steady in it, then they judge the children to be in Covenant;
and this their charity (as well as it can) must determine. These might do well,
1. To examine those texts that themselves produce for the interest of such
infants, of whose Parents their charity thus hopefully determines, and see
whether those texts will not carry it for all the infants of professing
Parents. I am sure I know none but carry it as clear for all, as they do for
any. 2. Let them consider, whether children of God are not to be baptized?
These infants of whose Parents they have saddest thoughts, are children of God,
Ezekiel. 16.21. Whether servants of God ought not to be baptized? These children
of such Parents are servants of God. Levit. 25.42. Whether Saints are not to be
baptized? Such children are Saints, where one Parent is removed from an
infidel, 1 Cor. 7.14.

But the greatest part leave us not out of error, but neglect; not as being
misled in judgment, but profane: Let these seriously take to heart these
Queries. 1. Why did you join in any Ordinance in public, as that of praying,
hearing, singing? was it not upon that account, as of God, by his appointment?
Why then are those attended, and this (which you allow also to be of God)
neglected? 2. Is this the closing duty, does not a blessing follow upon this
Ordinance? quitting this you quit both; you will join with others in the duty:
but you will give them leave to be alone in receiving a blessing upon it. 3. Is
not he, she, or they, that now are to be received a fellow-member, or members?
must not thou, and they, make up one body? are not they a part of Christ
mystical, as thou? It is but a little honor that thou give them, when thou
have not patience to abide a few minutes, to be a witness of their happy
initiation. 4. Does not their case, upon this account call for thy prayers? the
Churches prayers.? It would scarce please that thy own child should be offered
to God in this Ordinance, without a word of prayer to God. They that consider
the great business that lies upon the hands of a Christian, that high
engagement to which this Ordinance ties, the manifold temptations that
accompany a Christian course cannot but confess, that their case calls for all
men's prayers. 5. Note the scandal, and offense that thou give; the censure
that thou leavest behind thee upon others that join in the duty; and on the
other hand, the censure that thou bear from them, in thus forsaking of them;
either Minister, and people do manifest their trifling folly, and so a taking
of Gods Name in vain in the open Congregation on the Lords day in his presence,
to wait upon such an Ordinance that is unworthy of the honor of thy presence;
or else thou manifest much sinful neglect in thy refusal, or with drawing of
thy self. Thou can not but think their continuance is vain, or else must
conclude thy own departure to be wicked. 6. Is there nothing of edification in
this Ordinance? no Word to be heard, by which thou may profit? do not thou
here see Gods engagement to thy soul, and thy souls engagement unto God? Does
Baptism save, as the Arc of Noah, and is there nothing in it, whereby thou
may be benefited?

But here is objected, weakness of body, or haste of business, that lies upon
them in that they can bear no longer.

Answer, 1. How is it, that these reasons do not send thee away from other
Ordinances, as well as barely from this? that thy weakness can bear, and thy
business stay just to this time, that thy patience is bespoke for this work:
when the Minister entreats to stay this Sacrament, a man might think men's ears
mistook, and they thought he said. Turn your backs, clap to your pew-doores,
tumble down the stayrs, haste, be gone, give your Amen to no more prayers, stay
for no blessing; If these were the words, many could make no more haste to be
gone, then they do on request to stay. 2. Let that text be well weighed, Ezekiel.
46.9, 10. where order is given, both for the coming in, and going out of the
public assembly. The Prince may ordinarily speak of as much
business-intanglements to hinder as any other, by reason of the burden of his
heavy employments, and yet he is to go in with the first, and stay in with the
last; and his example is pressed, that it may be a precedent to others. Some are
slow to come in, and as hasty to be gone; come as a Bear to the stake, and fly
away as an Ape from a whip. They are for Ordinances, and from Ordinances, as a
truantly boy is for school, and from school. These have none of Jacobs
thoughts, Surely God is in this place, Genesis 28.16. or that they have to deal
with God in all the Ordinances of the day, otherwise they would rise up early
(as Job to his sacrifices) to partake of them, and would not make any such
forward haste to be quit of them.

And this respect, that it has God for the Author, should move us not barely
to vouchsafe our presence in the occasional administration, which may be done
gazingly, carelessely, sleepily; An improvement is to be made of Baptism.
But we should make use of our own Baptism; being instituted of God as a
standing Ordinance of his Church; we should have other thoughts, then that as
soon as it is past in the act, it is over in the use: we should eye it all our
days as our inlet into the society of Saints, which is a greater honor then a
Kings Coronation, and as a high engagement unto duty: to faith in the blood of
Christ, to a death to sin, and a resurrection to righteousness by power of the
Spirit of Christ. Though it be low in the Ceremony, it is high in the
obligation, tying us fast to him whose name we bear by virtue of our baptism,
our whole business should be, that our conscience may answer this obligation;
as a seal put to, the promise for pardon of our sin, and salvation. If Baptism
saves by the resurrection of Christ (as the Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 3.21.)
there should be other improvement of it; were it aright considered, and duly
improved, it would neither suffer sin nor doubtings, it would not suffer any
way of sin, nor any prevalency of doubtings concerning our spiritual state and
condition.

Parents should look above civil decency and complement.
It should quicken Parents to think of more then bare Ceremony, civil decency,
and complement in the work: which is almost the whole of all that is regarded:
If friends in due order be invited, and in a way suitable to their place
entertained, that is the great care; any blessing on the Ordinance is but
little mattered. When they give a child in marriage, they do not neglect a
wedding-feast, and such civil appurtenances that usually attend: but their
great care, is about assurance for their livelihood: on this account counsel is
retained, friends consulted: But this being as the day of their espousal for
visible communion with Jesus Christ, little thought is taken of the weight of
that work, few prayers sent up, or sought for that purpose: did they think they
were dedicated to God, they would be at care, and would not grudge pains to
seek a blessing from God.

For the Lords Supper, that seems often to have a little honor, when that of
Baptism has none at all, being administered in times of men's growth, when the
other was over in men's infancy, carrying terror in the face of it by reason of
those explicit words of the Apostle upon the Corinthians profanation of it:
He that eats and drinks unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, and eats and drinks his own judgment. The examination called for
upon address unto it, and those lists of judgments that are upon record upon
the profanation of it, many weak, and many sick, and many sleeping: And
perhaps some relics of superstition not yet wholly outed, since that time
that a corporal presence was believed, and the bread worshipped: As is said of
some, that they receive so devoutly, as though God were in the bread; and they
live as though there were no God in heaven. But if the Author and nature of
this Sacrament were aright weighed, another reverence, a reverence beseeming
the glory of it, would be given it, which is not my business now to prosecute,
being to speak here of the general nature only of Sacraments. Men would then
be content, that the whole of the Administration should be carried on so as
becomes the honor of the Ordinance, and would make it their business to
promote a way that a due preparation might be made in fitting the communicants,
and taking cognizance of them that come, that they may be able to discern the
Lords body, and so honor, and not profane it. They would then take care to
avoid unworthiness, lest the Author of this Feast should detect them, as the
Master of the Feast did detect the man that came without his wedding garment;
we should see more reverence in the duty, more careful conscientious waiting
upon the duty.

CHAP. VII.
SECT. I. The adaequate subject of Sacraments.
THe next thing here to be considered in this definition of a Sacrament laid
down by the Apostle, is the subject of it, grounded upon the person that here
received this sign of Circumcision and considered, as accepting of the Covenant
of God, as we have heard: He entered the Covenant in his own name, and in the
name of all them that were confederates with him: And he received Circumcision
the sign of it: and they in their time respectively were also circumcised: and
from hence these Conclusions may be drawn.

1. The Vovenant People of God, are the adaequate subject of the Sacraments;
They, and they only, have their right and interest in them

2. Sacraments are not arbitrary, but necessary; they are not only privileges,
but duties: The Vovenant People of God may, and they must receive them.

3. Their efficacy depends upon their use; They are no Sacraments to those that
do not partake of them. Of these in their order.

The Covenant people of God are the adaequate subject of Sacraments.
First, The Vovenant People of God, are the adaequate subject of the Sacraments;
They, and they only, have their right and interest in them. There can be no
truth more clear then this, in case we look into the Scriptures, and for full
proof of it, I shall lay down these Positions.

Propositions evincing the truth of the Point.
First, It is upon the account of the Covenant, that any among the sons of men
are of the people of God; that they have any relation to him in order and
tendency to their everlasting welfare. Where the Covenant is not, all
relation-interest in God is wanting; these are without God, Ephesians. 2.12. Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11, 12, 13. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God; your
Captains of your tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of
Israel; your little ones, your wives, and the stranger that is in thy Camp,
from the hewer of wood, unto the drawer of thy water: that thou should enter
into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath which the Lord thy God
makes with thee this day; that he may stablish thee to day for a people to
himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he has said unto thee, and as
he has sworn unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. They that
were no people, by Covenant are made a people, as he that was no servant, by
Covenant is made a servant; and she that was no wife, made a wife: These are
nigh, when others are afar off, Ephesians. 2.17. Hereupon the Jews to whom the
Covenants pertained, Romans 9.4. have this glory, Psalm. 148.14. A people near
unto the Lord. A wife is called by the name of her husband, Esaias 4.1. And the
whole of the family, by the name of the Master of the family, so all of the
people of God in Covenant, are called by the Name of God. He owns them as his,
Ephesians. 3.15. God mentions it as a motive taking with him, to hear prayers, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people that are called by my Name, do humble themselves and
pray, I will hear: And the people of God urge it, as a motive to prevail that
they may be heard, Jer. 14.8, 9. O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in
time of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a
wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a night? why should thou be as
a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? yet thou, O Lord, art in the
midst of us, we are called by thy Name, leave us not, Esaias 64.18, 19. Our
adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary: we are thine: thou barest not rule
over them, they were never called by thy Name; upon terms of Covenant only
they are the Lords.

Secondly, It is upon the same account that they have any interest in the
Sacraments, which are the badges and marks of a people of God in profession.
When the Covenant was entered with Abraham, and his seed, Genesis 17. Circumcision
was forthwith instituted; These therefore were called the Circumcision, and all
others the Uncircumcision, Ephesians. 2.11. The title Jew did denote the people of
God, Thou art called a Jew, (says the Apostle) and restest in the law and
make thy boast of God, Romans 2.17. and Jew and Circumcision are the same, Romans
2.25, 26, 27. Romans 3.1. And hereupon, as Abraham entering Covenant was
circumcised, and his seed: so proselytes joining to them and their seed, were
circumcised. And the self same that had their title to Circumcision, had their
interest in the Passover, and only these, as to males, Exodus 2.43, 44, 45.
This is the ordinance of the Passover, there shall no stranger eat thereof:
But every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou have circumcised
him, then shall he eat thereof; A Forrener and an hired servant shall not eat
thereof. Rivet on the words concludes the Ergo Ben necar est homo alterius
populi qui neque in populo Dei natus est neque ascitus.
stranger to be every one that was not borne among the people of God, nor taken
in into them, Exodus 12.48, 49. And when a stranger shall sojourne with thee,
and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and
then let him come near, and he shall be as one born in the land; for no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. One law shall be to him that is
home-born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you; whence we see that
as the Covenant did entitle to Circumcision, which is called the Covenant, Genesis
17.10. Acts 7.8. so Circumcision did entitle to the Passover. Hereupon there
were ordinances enacted in Israel, for observation of it through Israel; as,
Levit. 23. Numb. 28. may be seen. After a long time of intermission of it, we
see a proclamation by Hezekiah throughout all Israel, to invite to it not only
those of his own subjects, but all the rest of the revolted tribes, 2 Chronicles.
30.5. The invitation reached to all in Covenant, and only to those in
Covenant, clearly showing that all Covenanters, and Covenanters alone, are
inrighted in the privilege of Sacraments. In New Testament times, it is as
clear, discipling and baptizing go together in Christ's commission: Disciple
Nations, and baptize them, Matthew. 28.19. as it did before the enlargement of
that commission, Joh. 4.1. When the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made, and baptized more disciples then John. Being made disciples, we see
they were baptized. And a disciple of Christ, converted to the faith, and in
profession a Saint, was never doubted to be in Covenant with Christ, being of
those that belong to Christ and bear his Name, as the thing it self speaks, and
the Evangelists compared show, Matthew. 10.42. Mar. 9.41. Upon conversion there
was no delay of Baptism, as appears through the history of the Acts, Chap.
2.41. Chap. 8. ver. 12, 13.38. Chap. 9.18. Chap. 10.48. Chap. 16. ver. 15, 33.
Chap. 18.8. Baptism inheriting the room and honor of Circumcision. As the
Covenant gave immediate title to Circumcision in the former dispensation: Now
it gives the like title to Baptism. For the Lords Supper, it was never doubted
but Christians made up into Churches by this Ordinance of Baptism, were
inrighted in it; and the Apostle plainly shows it, 1 Cor. 10.17. For we being
many are one bread, and one body; for we are partakers of that one bread. And
therefore Ravanellus in verbum Sacramentum, inquiring into the terminus cui,
and cujus, for which they are appointed, says, The terminus cui, the end for
whom they serve, is soli foederati, alone persons in Covenant; and then
explaines himself, that Inter foederatos autem Dei censentur omnes illi quisunt
in externa Ecclesiae Communione, et profitentur se in Christum credere: ar
vero, cum inter nos quidem possunt esse Hypocritae et impii, ideo Sacramenta in
Ecclesia communia sunt piis et impiis, ita tamen ut impii pro piis probabiliter
habeantur.
All these are reckoned within the Covenant, that are in the external Communion
of the Church; and profess to believe in Christ. And seeing that among those
there may be many hypocrites and ungodly, therefore the Sacraments in the
Church are common to the godly, and ungodly; quoting 1 Cor. 1.27, 29. and
giving instance, that Circumcision was thus conferred on Ishmael, Genesis 17.23.
on Hemor, Shichem, and the men of their Cities, Genesis 34.24. Baptism on Simon
Magus, Acts 8.15. and the Lords Supper on Judas the traitor, Luke 22.21. When
he says that the Sacraments are common to the godly and wicked, he presently
inserts indeed by way of parenthesis [So that the wicked are probably judged to
be godly;] In which he seems to mean no other, but that their very profession
is the probability, (as some say none can conclude any professor of
Christinity to be ungodly; there may (say they) be some sparks of grace under
ashes, and seed in due time to sprout out, yet lying under the clods, and not
appearing) else he contradicts himself in distinguishing ungodly and hypocrites
asunder, and the text also that he quotes; There was but little outward
probability of godliness in those that so profaned the Lords Supper, as in
that chap. is held forth. And though few in their Treatises of the Sacraments
in general, stand much on this particular, who they be that have their interest
in these privileges, nor do explicitly put it into the definition; yet we
have it almost from every pen, and sounding out of every pulpit; Are not
Sacraments called seals, and that of Gods Covenant? are not arguments drawn in
behalf of those, that some would exclude from Sacrament privileges, that they
are Foederati, and therefore should be Signati? They are in Covenant, and
therefore are entitled to the seals of the Covenant, which is an argument of
undeniable strength. So far as a man is vested in a grant, so far he is
entitled to the seal, for ratification of it, and may require it; why is there
a phrase borrowed from these proceedings among men, in case it be not so here
as it is in their proceedings? Look into all Grants, Patents, Charters, Deeds,
Leases, Bonds, Testaments, you shall still see the Covenant, and seal of equal
latitude.

Here indeed is somewhat objected which has over and over been answered.

First, That servants bought with money, and taken into Abraham's family, were
to be circumcised, Genesis 17.12, 13. and so also into the family of others in
Israel, Exodus 12.44.

Answ. 1. This is strangely brought to prove that men out of Covenant, should
be circumcised, when the text says, even of them, My Covenant shall be in
their flesh. Is the Covenant of God in the flesh of those that are out of
Covenant?

Secondly, It is no where enjoined to compel them to Circumcision, nor yet is
there any Example of such compulsion.

Thirdly, Every Masters duty was (as Abraham's practice) to Catechize their
families, and so, not to compel them, but to invite them into Covenant.
Cajetan, Cajetanus ergo qui necessitatem hanc supposuit, cum videret non
convenire Sacramento qua tali, ut ab in vito susciperetur, existimavit invitos
qu^dem fuisse circumcisos servos, sed ad fidei professionem non fuisse adactos:
notam vero istam fuisse, istis, etiam in vitis impressam quatenus erat signum
Reipub. politicum seu externum, quo Israelitae ab aliis gentibus discernebantur.
as he is quoted by Rivet on Exodus 12.43, 44. (supposing that the words sound
toward a compulsion) understands, that servants were compelled to receive
Circumcision, but only as a mark to distinguish them in a political way from
other Nations; seeing it agrees not with a Sacrament as a Sacrament to be
received against heart. Rivets own thoughts about it may be brought into four
heads. 1. That as to the cutting off the foreskin, and the smart suffered in
it, it was no injustice in Masters to compel them, seeing they were their
Money. 2. That he best approves of their opinion, That hold that the Law of
circumcising of Proselytes was on that condition, that they were willing to be
circumcised. 3. That Masters ought to make it their business to persuade them;
but not against heart to circumcise them. 4. If that any think that a necessity
lay upon Masters to circumcise all servants, it is safest to be of Cajetans
mind, to deny it to be any note of profession of the Jewish Religion.

Secondly, It is objected on the other hand, that some in Covenant were denied
Circumcision; as, 1. Infants before the 8th. day: But that is unworthy of any
answer. A stated day for it, is not any denial of it. 2. Females were not to
be circumcised, seeing the institution is only for the males. To which three
things may be answered. 1. For those that make use of this objection, they have
authors of their own, namely, Walafridus Strabo de rebus Ecclesiasticis (as he
is cited by a Lapide on Genes. 17.) affirming that they were circumcised. 2.
The reason of their exclusion from any actual participation, was their
incapacity of it. And thirdly, they were circumcised virtually, and so reputed
of that number, as appears in that they were admitted to the Passover, when
the law was express, no uncircumcised person must eat of it, Exodus 12.48. And
Samson was charged that he took a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines, Judge.
14.3. So that I say, a Covenanting people of God, and they only are entitled
to the right of Sacraments; when they are given to a people out of Covenant, a
seal is put to a blank, which must needs be an horrid profanation of the
seals of the Covenant of God. And when they are denied to those in Covenant,
(as not their right) they are injured from whom they are thus detayned.

SECT. II.
FOr further explanation of this point, several Propositions must be laid down.
Explicatory Propositions.

Proposition. 1.
First, A Covenant properly so called is entered between God and his people.
God enters a Covenant exactly and properly so called with his people. A
Covenant in the true nature of it, passes between God and man: I took this for
granted in the introduction into the Treatise of the Covenant of God entered
with mankind, where in its proper place it might have been handled, supposing
that there had been none that had denied it; But since that time I have seen my
mistake, and among the many questions that have been moved and agitated about
the Covenant, it is questioned whether there be any such thing as a Covenant
entered between God and any of the sons of men upon earth? Commands and
promises are confessed, but a Covenant is disputed. The way to make it good, is,
to prove from Scripture the name, and the thing; when these are proved, all is
clear. The word Covenant proved.
The word we find in places above number, Deuteronomy. 29.12. They stood that they
might enter into Covenant with the Lord God. God is often put in mind by his
people of his Covenant, Psalm. 74.20. and he promises, Levit. 26.42. to remember
his Covenant. These are then such transactions between God and his people that
are called by the name of a Covenant; when this cannot be d^nyed, the
impropriety of the word is objected, that the word of command given of God out
of Sovereignty, and the word of promise given out of mercy; they are called by
the name of a Covenant, when strictly so called they are (as is objected) no
Covenant at all. But to avoid this, the thing it self may be as easily proved
as the word, The thing it self proved
and when we have nomen and nominis rationem, then we have a Covenant not
aequivocally, but truly so called. And here I may deal liberally with any
adversary, and undertake to make proof not only of all the essentials of a
Covenant, but the usual adjuncts: not only all that makes up the nature, but
all accessories usually added to the solemnity of Covenants. For the essentials
of a Covenant, or real properties, they are (as Mr. Burges says) A mutual
consent and stipulation on both sides. In the essentialls of it.
Parties, consent, and mutual engagement is all that is required to the being
of a Covenant; when two parties agree, and either of them both have their
conditions to make good, there is a Covenant or bargain; see it exemplified in
several instances given, Treatise of the Covenant, Page 3. All of these we find
in that one place, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18, 19. in the Covenant that God enters with
his people, Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in
his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Judgments,
and to hearken to his voice: And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his
peculiar people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his
Commandments; And to make thee high above all Nations which he has made, in
praise, and in name, and in honor; and that thou may be an holy people unto
the Lord thy God, as he has spoken. There are the Covenanters, God and his
people. There is consent on both parties. Thou have avouched, the Lord has
avouched. And there is a stipulation on both sides; On Gods part, to make them
high above all Nations, which he has made, in praise, and in name, and in
honor: On the peoples part, to keep all his Commandments, to be an holy
people. There are Covenant-mercies from God to his people, unto which of grace
he engages himself; and there are Covenant-duties unto which man stands
engaged, Psalm. 103.17, 18. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens
children; to such as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his
Commandments. Let none say that this was a legal Covenant, in which man had
his conditions, but is freed from all in the Covenant Evangelical. Not to
mention what I have elsewhere said, Mr. Ball, Treatise of the Covenant, Page
102, 103, 104. Mr. Burges, Vindiciae legis, Page 224, 225. have abundantly
manifested the contrary, and most amply of all others (that I have read) Mr.
Cobbet in his Vindication, Page 60, to Page 70. where he delivers this
conclusion, that the body of the Jewish Church was under the Covenant of grace,
making it good with twelve arguments, and answering as many objections. Gods
engagements in Gospel Times none deny, man's restipulation is all the question.
And this is as clear in New Testament-times, as it was in the days of the Law;
that of Christ fully holds it out, Joh. 8.51. If any man keep my sayings, he
shall never see death. Christ's engagement there, is to keep from death; and
upon these terms, that man keep his sayings: Here is a full tender of a
Covenant, and Covenant-termes on Christ's part, he that accepts of Christ as his
Lord, and professes to keep his sayings, enters Covenant: he that has in him
such an heart as God wished in Israel, To fear him, and keep all his
Commandments always, Deuteronomy. 5.29. keeps Covenant. Gospel-Preachers hold out
Christ in Covenant, and they do not only tender mercies, but engage to duties:
Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give
repentance and remission of sins: and this duty of repentance is in order to
the privilege of remission of sins, as we find from Peter, Act. 3.19. Repent
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out: when the duty of the
Covenant is neglected, the mercy of the Covenant is lost. This caused them in
their Ministry, to be so zealous to urge men to it: Testifying both to the
Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Christ.

For the usual solemnities of a Covenant, In the usual accessories on
solemnities.
These are found in the transactions between God and his people, as well as the
essentials of it. 1. Covenants used to be written for memorial for posterity,
and so is the Covenant between God and man, as in Old, so in New
Testament-times. These things are written that you might believe, and that
believing you may have everlasting life, Joh. 20.31. 2. Covenants used to be
confirmed with outward visible signs, as the killing of beasts, Jo. 15. Jer.
34 This was done in the old administration, Exodus 24. Half of the blood was
sprinkled upon the Altar, to denote Gods entering of Covenant, verse. 6. The
people also were sprinkled with blood, to show their voluntary entering into
Covenant, verse. 8. And in the new dispensation, a new and unheard of
ratification was used, the blood of the Mediator of the Covenant, Matthew.
26.27, 28. This Cup is my blood in the New Testament which was shed for you,
and for many, for the remission of sins. This latter is a plain allusion to the
former, in which you may find, 1. A threefold agreement. Either of both these
were Covenants. 2. Either of both these had their ratifications and
confirmations. 3. Either of both were confirmed with blood. 2. A threefold
difference. 1. The former was the Old Covenant, which was antiquated; This is
the New. 2. The former was ratified, and sanctified with the blood of beasts:
This is ratified and sanctified in the blood of Christ. 3. That blood could
never take away sin, Heb. 10. This was shed many, for remission of sins.

Thirdly, Covenants use to be confirmed by seal: so is this Covenant between
God and his people, as remains to be spoken to. As the being of a Covenant is
thus plentifully proved by Scripture-testimony, so we might as amply prove it
by arguments drawn from thence. Arguments evincing a Covenant in the proper
nature of it.
The Churches of Christ are espoused unto Christ, Hos. 2.19, 20. And I will
betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies; I
will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord.
2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you to
Christ; and Spouses are in Covenant with their Bridegroom. The Churches of
Christ are married to Christ: Esaias 54.5. Thy maker is thine Husband, the Lord
of hosts is his Name, and thy Redeemer the holy One of Israel, the God of the
whole earth shall he be called. And wives are in Covenant with their husbands.
Their sins against God are branded with the names of Adulteries, Whoredoms;
and these are not barely disobedience of a Command, or neglect of a favor, but
breaches of Covenant. The Churches of Christ are servants of Christ, Levit. 25.
household servants, Ephesians. 2.19. and servants are their Masters by Covenant.
Their sins in this relation are not barely obstinacy, stubbornness, or
ingratitude, but they are charged with treachery, falsehood, dealing falsely in
Covenant, and their hearts being not steadfast in Covenant. It is above me to
conceive, how man can be a Covenant-breaker, not alone respective to man, but
God as he is frequently charged, when there has past no Covenant between God
and man. They may question whether there were ever any such thing as a Covenant
in the world.

SECT. III. Proposition. 2.
SEcondly, Whereas there is an usual distinction (almost in all that write or
speak of the Covenant) of a double Covenant between God and his people; one
external, and the other internal; one passing outwardly, and the other inwardly
kept and observed. Or (as Doctor Preston expresses it) a single and a double
Covenant, which I shall forbear to examine, seeing I know there is a right
meaning; though I much doubt whether there be in the Reader a right
understanding. My second Proposition shall be, that it is the external
Covenant, not the inward, that exactly and properly is called by the name of a
Covenant: and to which privileges of Ordinances and title to Sacraments are
annexed. This Proposition (occasioned by this received distinction) is of three
heads, which in case the Reader please, he may subdivide into three distinct
Positions.

1. The outward and not the inward Covenant is most exactly and properly called
by the name of a Covenant, The outward and not the inward Covenant, is properly
a Covenant.
which I thus make good: That Covenant to which the definition of a Covenant
does belong, has exactly and properly the nature of a Covenant, this none can
deny: The definition sets out the nature of the thing defined; But the
definition most actly belongs to the outward Covenant, not to the inward, this
is plain; An agreement of parties on terms and Propositions is the definition
of a Covenant: Now the outward Covenant, is an agreement on terms and
Propositions, as elsewhere I have abundantly declared. In that Covenant God
engages himself to man for his happiness; and man engages to faith and
obedience. The inward Covenant has no terms or Propositions at all for man to
make good upon account of his Covenanting: seeing the performance of the
conditions of the Scripture-Covenant, is his very entrance into the inward
Covenant. He that believes and repents keeps Covenant, nothing more is expected
of God, or promised by man: But believing and repenting is the first closing
with God in Covenant according to them that speak of an inward Covenant. A
Covenant to perform conditions is a Covenant properly so called; But the
outward Covenant, not the inward, is a Covenant to perform conditions, is
plain: The conditions in the inward Covenant are the Covenant. That which
confounds entrance into Covenant and keeping of Covenant, is no Covenant
properly so called; In a Covenant properly so called these are distinct: But
the inward Covenant confounds entrance into Covenant and keeping of Covenant,
and therefore in exact propriety of speech is no Covenant.

The outward Covenant is most usually in Scripture called by the name of
Covenant.
2. The outward and not the inward Covenant is most usually in Scripture called
by the name of a Covenant; which is plain, in that they that have no part or
portion in the inward Covenant, are still spoken of in Scripture as a people of
Covenant; God calls all Israel his people, and that upon Covenant terms; see
the place quoted, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. All of those that there thus
Covenanted with God, were not in the inward Covenant. This people at their
worst, and the worst among them, are called the people of God, as by those that
were strangers to this Covenant: These are the people of the Lord, (say the men
of Babylon) and are gonc forth out of his land, Ezekiel. 36.20. so also by the
Lord himself, Jer. 2.32. Can a Bride forget her attire? yet my people have
forgotten me days without number. How often does God own Israel as his people,
when he yet brands them as a rebellious, revolting, stiff-necked, treacherous,
and adulterous people. They that forsake the Covenant of God, that break
Covenant, that deal falsely in it, upon whom God brings a sword to avenge the
quarrel of his Covenant, are in the outward, not in the inward Covenant: But
such there be among Gods Vovenant People, as he frequently complains, that
break Covenant, etc. These are not then in his inward, but outward Covenant.

The great objection is, (and all that carries color against this) Jer. 31.32,
33. where the Lord differencing the Old and New Covenant, says, This is the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah: not
according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I
took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant
they brake, although I was an husband to them, says ^he Lord: But this shall
be my Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those days
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. That is alone the
inward Covenant, and the elect regenerate are alone within it. The inward
Covenant then is called in Scripture a Covenant, and is in exact propriety of
speech a Covenant.

For answer, I shall refer the Reader to what I have said, scil. Treatise of
the Covenant, Page 64, 65. 66. In this place only putting these Queries.

1. Whether those that carry this text to an unconditionate Covenant, and
restrain it to that which they call the inward Covenant, do not make the
Covenant in the time of the Law, and that in Gospel Times essentially
different, and consequently either make two Covenants of grace, distinct in
kind; or thrust those under the Old Covenant out of all hope of salvation,
contrary to all Interpreters, who make these Covenants one in substance? See
the last larger Annotations on the words.

2. Whether such an Interpretation do not utterly contradict
New-Testament-light, which holds out the New Covenant in like latitude with the
former, in which many are called, but few are chosen; and where conditions are
as explicitly, and fully required, as in Old-Testament-dispensations?

3. Whether when Scripture speaks of things in opposition to men's erroneous
conceits, and for a further explanation of them, and rectifying men's judgments
in them, it do usually lay down a full complete and formal definition, to which
nothing is to be added? or whether it does not usually supply that, in which
men through mistake were defective and short? And whether those texts, Esaias
58.6, 7. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that
thou bring the poor that are cast out into thy house, when thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh?
Jer. 22.15, 16. Did not thy father eat and drink, and do justice and judgment,
and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy, and
then it was well with him; was not this to know me, says the Lord? Jam. 1.27.
Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world, are not parallel to this text in their way of delivery. And in case
we cannot find a full definition of a religious Fast in that of Esaias, nor the
whole of it that makes up saving knowledge in that of Jeremy, nor the whole
that makes religion complete in that of James; why is it that we should
earnestly contend, that the full nature of a Covenant is in this text expressed,
being fully parallel in the way of delivery to those other texts.

Men enjoy privileges of ordinances and interest in Sacraments upon account of
the outward Covenant.
Thirdly, It is upon the account of the outward Covenant, and not the inward,
that men enjoy privileges of Ordinances, and interest in Sacraments; men that
are so far honored as to an outward Covenant, have just title to these
privileges. It is in behalf of the Jew outwardly that the Apostle, Romans 3.1.
puts the question; having so decried his condition, respective to the
approbation of God, he objects, What advantage has the Jew? what profit is
there of Circumcision? The Jew and Circumcision are there one; A Jew outwardly,
and Circumcision in the flesh go there in equal latitude. He that by nature is
a Jew (as Paul speaks, Gal. 2.15.) is of the Circumcision; And to these the
oracles of God are committed; The instruments, deeds and evidencos of the
Covenants, say the last Annotations. It was the privilege of Israel, Psalm.
147.19. Romans 3. and then the privilege of no other Nation; now it is the
privilege of all engraffed in their stead. This is confessed even by a great part
of those that understand the inward Covenant (or Covenant keeping to
acceptance,) almost whenever they mention a Covenant, in that they baptize
infants upon Covenant grounds, all their infants that make a Covenant
profession, and that upon just warranty: Scripture honoring them (as I have
shown) with the name of children, and servants of God. It is further plain in
reason. The outward Covenant must have privileges suitable to it, otherwise
there is no manner of benefit or advantage of it. This privilege of the
Sacrament is suitable, being outward as the Covenant is outward; And it was
sufficiently cleared in the proof of the main observation, where the Covenant
people of God are affirmed to be the adaequate subject of the Sacraments, and
all the Scriptures there urged, lead us to an outward Covenant, or (as some
speak) to the interest of an outward administration of it; So that in case any
will contend still, that it is an inward Covenant that Scripture usually
mentions and honors with that title, yet being here in (as for a great part we
seem) agreed, that privileges of Sacraments are annexed to the outward Covenant
or outward administration, we have what we desire.

When this was almost ready for the Press, Mr. Baxters Apology came forth, in
which, page 103. I am challenged for this distinction of an outward and inward
Covenant, as though I had been the Author of it, when all know that it is a
distinction, that of a long time among Divines has been in common use; and in
case it had not been commonly received, I should have forborne the use of it. As
I heard Mr. Ball once in discourse say, that he denied any such distinction of
an outward and an inward call to the Ministry, all calling being external,
unless the man called were a Prophet. That which men term an inward call,
being only qualifications fitting for the work: so I deny in exact propriety
of speech, that the inward Covenant is any Covenant, but the answer of the soul
unto that which the Covenant requires. And whereas Mr. Baxter says, It is
apparent that Mr. Blake distinguishes, ex part Dei, between the outward and
the inward Covenant; It is probable that he thus distributes them, from the
blessings promised, whereof some are inward, and some outward; for though he
explain not himself fully, yet I know no other sense that it will bear. I thus
distinguish them, to apply my self to the Readers understanding, that has been
accustomed so to call them; and I say indeed, that men that barely Covenant,
and keep not Covenant, have only privlledges that are outward, they are
visible Church Members, and they have visible Church Priviledges. And those who
answer to Covenant engagements (which usually is called the inward Covenant)
have privileges both outward and inward. A Jew outwardly had outward
privileges, A Jew inwardly (that is, he that answered to his outward
profession, that worshipped God in his spirit) has both those that were
outward and inward. It is there said, It is evident that his outward Covenant
has no seal; for it is a Covenant de sigillis conferendis; If therefore it
have a seal, it is either the same which is promised, or some other. What he
means, when he says, it is a Covenant de sigillis conferendis, I am to learn;
If he mean that the seal follows the Covenant, and is put to after the
Covenant, so it is in all Covenants whatsoever. He says, they no where tell us
what is the seal of their outward Covenant; me thinks we had no need to tell
what the seal of that Covenant was, that the Jew entered; was it not
Circumcision? and did there not another follow, viz. the Passover? Now I tell
him, that Circumcision and the Passover were, and Baptism and the Lords
Supper are seals of this Covenant. The Nation of the Jews were in Covenant,
as Mr. Baxter (though he would, yet) must not deny they were in no inward
Covenant; and yet they had these seals. Mr. Baxter says, we are bound to give
the seals to such, Apolo. 88. Vocation which is effectual only to bring men
to an outward profession of saving faith, is larger then election, and makes
men such, whom we are bound to baptize; And such we say have right to Baptism.
And to help Mr. Baxter, those men that he says the Church must baptize, though
without right, we say are truly in Covenant, and have right; when he knows
what child he is to baptize, he knows who we say are in Covenant, and have
Covenant right to Baptism; so that a second Covenant of which he speaks to
give right to a first, is a strange fancy. But of this I shall have further
occasion.

SECT. IV. Proposition. 3.
Fundamental rihgt and privilege of actual admission to be distinguished.
WE must yet distinguish between a fundamental right, and title to the
Sacraments, and the privilege of actual admission; between a first and second
right in them; between jus ad rem and jus in re. In civil titles this
distinction holds; A child in non-nage upon his Fathers death is entitled to
his inheritance; A post thumus child, whose Parents death prevents his birth
(which was the case of Asher the son of Ezron, 1. Chron. 2.24.) upon the first
instant that he sees the light, stands thus entitled, yet the law suffers not
his admission to an actual personal managing of it, till he be able to improve
and employ it to his own and the public benefit. The leper whom the Priest
had pronounced unclean; so that he must dwell alone without the Camp, in a
several house, severed from all company (which was the case of Vzziah King of
Judah, 2 Chronicles. 21.26. according to the law in that case provided, Levit.
13.46.) had in the mean space title to his house and his whole inheritance, and
upon his cleansing, was to be actually received unto it. There is a
Sequestration, and there is a confiscation, and proscription. Men that are held
from their estates upon just reasons, are not yet totally, and finally outed;
This distinction also holds in Ecclesiastical immunities, in that Passover
held in the Wilderness by Gods appointment, the fourteenth day of the first
month, there were certain men that were defiled by the dead body of a man,
that they could not keep the Passover on that day, and they came before Moses
and Aaron, and said unto them, We are defiled by the dead body of a man,
wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering to the Lord in
his appointed season? Numb. 9.6, 7. They stood equally entitled with the rest
of the children of Israel to that Ordinance, yet there was a bar in the way,
that they saw, to keep them back: They therefore plead their privilege, and
hold it as a matter of grievance, that there was any obstacle in their way.
This puts Moses to a stand, he cannot deny their right, yet by reason of the
bar in the way dares not give them admission: therefore he says, Stand
still, and I will hear what the Lord will command concerning you, ver. 8. And
the Lords order upon it was, If any man among you, or your posterity, shall be
unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey, a far off, yet shall he
keep the Passover unto the Lord, the fourteenth day of the second month, at
even shall he keep it, ver. 10, 11. Their right is there confessed by the Lord
himself, and the present bar also acknowledged. A physical bar is confessed,
when being distant in place, they cannot come; A legal bar is also confessed,
when in their present condition they are not fitted for it. And when some that
were under this law of suspension in Hezekiahs time, came to the Passover
otherwise then was written, having not cleansed themselves, even many of
Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulon, Hezekiah prayed for them, 2 Chronicles.
30.18, 19. The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God,
the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary; The answer of the Lord we have, ver. 20. The
Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people; which does either imply,
that they were struck of God for their sin, (as was Abimelech, his wife and
maid servants) and were healed by Hezekiahs prayer, (as they by Abraham's) or
else that by their sin they were in danger of Gods hand, and by Hezekiahs
prayer preserved; so that enough has been said for this distinction between a
first and second right, a fundamental right and privilege of actual admission.
There may be a true right when yet there is a bar that stands in force.

SECT. V. Proposition. 4.
AS the fundamental right to Sacraments must be grounded on the written Word of
God; so the bar to actual admission must be written likewise. Fundamental
right and bar to actual admission must be both written.
None may be admitted without known right, their visible Covenant-title must
appear; in such case a seal would be put to a blank, and the Ordinance
profaned. It was therefore provided that no uncircumcised person must eat of
the Passover, Exodus 12.48. and none in Covenant in right, that stand in any
visible relation to God, without a known bar may be kept back. There must be
a reason seen of their admission, and a reason seen of their suspension. The
sin of those of Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulon was; that they ate of
the Passover otherwise then was written. There was that bar upon them, that
according to the written Word they were not in present to eat of it. He that
gives warranty to his people to come, must also put in the exception against
those that are to be denied. No Person, no Church must take in, or refuse by
their own power; this were to Lord it over Gods heritage, and an high
usurpation of a power not put into their hands. Stewards in great houses are to
take in, and hold back from the family, not at their own will, but according to
their Masters pleasure

SECT. VI. Proposition. 5.
THis right unto, or bar put to detain from Sacramental participation, is not
always explicit, and express, Right unto, or bar to detain from
Sacramental participation, is not always and explicit.
it is sufficient that by a clear and full consequence from Scripture it may be
deduced. The fundamental title is clear, and before cleared. It is the Covenant
that gives a title, the outward Covenant is a sufficient title to all outward
privileges, prove a Covenant made, (kept or not kept, if not renounced) and
then a right stands. The right unto, or bar put to present acceptance, is
often more disputable, which the written Word in express terms or by
necessary consequence must also determine. When those were kept back by reason
of a touch of a dead body, from eating the Passover, Number. 9. there was no
express precept in the Law for such prohibition of them; but seeing such were
to be kept out of the Camp, Number. 5.2. and they must be clean that eat of the
offerings of the Lord, they were evidently included, and it appears that they
saw it. And when the Lord himself names those bars, which in after times
should withhold an Israelite from the Passover; the instances which he gives
are no sufficient explicit enumeration: It is there said, that he that is in a
journey could not eat of the Passover, neither could he that was in prison, or
employed in war, or under sickness: One legal uncleanness is there named,
which did defile; there were other defilements as well as that, which disabled
an Israelite actual participation, Number. 5.2. Only those that infer such
consequences, must be able to make good their consequences, and take heed of
framing principles of their own, and then deduce consequences from them: were
this heeded, the door would not be set so wide open, as many complain, not yet
kept too narrow, as perhaps there may be cause of complaint, according to many
men's rules, though according to their practice, perhaps there is no such great
cause of grievance; perhaps the grievance may be found on the other hand.

SECT. VII. Proposition. 6.
Rules for actual admission and bars put in Old Testament times were more
explicit and express.
IN Old Testament-times Scripture-rules for men's actual admission, and bars
put to detain them, were more explicitly delivered, When men (according to the
rule of the Sanctuary) were to be received, or denied (as other circumstances
of like nature) were then more punctually delivered, and fitted to the Churches
minority, which was taught, as a child with a feskue: In Gospel Times when
there is more light, and the Church has attained further growth (as it does
not need; so) we do not find such punctual direction. The nature and use of the
Sacraments being known, together with the end of their institution, general
Scripture-rules observed, (that all is to be done to edification) and the end
of the Ministerial function compared, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the body of Christ; It may be more easily collected, to whom the
Sacraments may be of use, and to whom they will be unserviceable.

SECT. VIII. Proposition. 7.
Admission unto the Sacrament of initiation is facile.
THere being a double Sacrament in the Church, both in the Old and New
Testament: one for initiation into the Church visible, the other for
confirmation: one in which it is sufficient having a due title to be passive,
and the other such in which we must be active. Admission unto the Sacrament of
initiation, seems more facile, whether it be of grown persons in the first
plantation of Churches, upon conversion from Gentilisme, Judaisme, or any other
way distinct from Christianity, or of infants that are confederate with their
parents; and though some lay it down as a Maxim, Adultorum eadem est ratio
utriusque, There is the same reason for admission of men of years to either
Sacrament; yet it is but gratis dictum. Neither any Scripture text, nor solid
argument drawn from thence does evince it. Less is expected in a child's entry
into the School, or a youths matriculation into the University, then in the
time of growth and further proficiency. Professed Disciples are taken into the
Church by Baptism to learn; but they must be proficients as shall appear,
before they are able to make improvement of the Supper.

For infants there can be no bar at all for their initiation. There is no
bar to the initiation of infants in confederation on with their Parents.
They that hold that Sacraments confer grace non ponenti obicem, that is,
upon all such that put no bar or obstacle to it, do withal conclude (and
undenyably if they can make good their Position) that all infants in Baptism,
are regenerate, seeing, they put no actual bar, either by sin or unbelief,
to the working of it for regeneration; so we that hold that infants are
confederate with their Parents, do conclude likewise, that they put no obstacle
or bar to their admission to the sign or seal. As there was no further
qualification required in an infant for title to Circumcision, then to be the
son of an Israelite, or one by Circumcision joined to Israel: so there was no
bar by reason of uncleanness, or want of previous purification mentioned
either in the command given to Abraham, Genesis 17. or in the Law given by Moses,
Levit. 12. There is mention made of the uncleanness of the Mother, that has
born a man child, Levit. 12.1, 2, 3. she was to continue in the blood of her
purifying thirty three days, and to touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the
Sactuary until the days of her purifying be fulfilled: but nothing said of
the uncleanness of the child, but on the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin
was to be circumcised; without mention either of uncleanness, or purification.
Those that can find no bar in the child tendered to Baptism, but seek for one
in the Parent, to withhold it from this initiating Ordinance, may here see that
when the Parent was personally polluted, the child was clean; when the Parent
might touch no hollowed thing, the child was yet to be circumcised. And moral
uncleanness in the Parent can have no more influence on the child, to
indispose for this privilege, then legal, when according to themselves
Original sin (though transfused by the Parent into the child) is no bar. In
vain do they make the Parents actual sins an obstacle, which is terminated in
the Parent as defiling the person, but transmitting no blot to posterity. It is
a most un-Scriptural way in those, that in their judgment are for Paedo
baptism, to inhibite the tender of infants, upon pretense of either their
Parents sin, or their want of Congregational membership. And here that supposed
great argument, to debar the infants of ignorant and scandalous persons from
Baptism, may have an easy answer; Such Parents, if they were now to be
Baptized, ought not to be Baptized; Ergo they cannot challenge it for their
children; Baptism belongs primarily to the Parent. The consequence is here
manifestly false, seeing such Parents have unquestionably a fundamental first
right, both to Baptism and the Lords Supper, in their respective order, by
virtue of their profession of the worship of God in Christ as their God, in
opposition to all false gods; and their profession of the ways of
Christianity, in opposition to all other ways; though their ignorance and
scandal do prove a bar to their present admission to either, and having this
right, and being to be Baptized, their children with them are enrighted; and
children putting in no bar, may be actually admitted. Privileges in Church,
and Commonwealth, are ex traduce, and so are not crimes. In this I have
delivered my self, Treatise of the Covenant, chap. 46. as also in my
Birth-priviledge, making good this position by several arguments, That the
children of all that by profession are Christian, are by virtue f
Covenant Interest to be received into the Church by Baptism; Enlarging my self
in several particular instances, in such whose seed some would debar, which
yet according to Scripture rules we ought to receive; Examining Mr. Firmins
grounds to the contrary in his serious question stated; Mr. Firmins appendix as
to the latitude of Infant Baptism examined.
And answering his arguments, he has been pleased in one day to read, and
undertake to refute what I have spoke. He must therefore give his Reader leave,
from his own mouth, to believe that it is a very hasty birth, and what need
there is that he should yet lick it over, the work it self will speak. I little
expected (I confess) so unfair dealing from a man of his candor, he might
easily have seen that all that I speak to him in this thing there, is by way of
Corollarie or inference drawn from that which by Scripture-testimony, and
arguments in several foregoing Chapters I had made good. Which (as it appears
from his own hand) when his refutation came out, he had never read, and
therefore (by his own acknowledgement) has taken my conclusion into
consideration, having never seen the premises, and so must judge according to
his own reason, only having never had any sight of mine. Before I come to give
answer to his exceptions against that which this Position affirms, I must
clear my self from some imputations of his, touching my dealing with him. The
Author cleared from some imputations.
I observe sometimes (says he) you dress my argument in such a fashion, that
I cannot know it to be mine but, disclaim it, then you find fault.

To give the Reader here an account, Mr. Firmin had framed this argument
against the power of mediate Parents to confer Baptism on posterity; If that
promise does give this power to predecessors, then though there were none to
educate this child (for the ignorant and profane Parents will not, but teach
them how to breaks Covenant; predecssours cannot, they are dead, and are not)
yet we must seal to the child. Having explained my self to avoid mistake, I
first answer, that Mr. Firmin himself here concludes such a child's interest. In
case he can be brought to break Covenant, he is interessed in the privileges
of the Covenant; to which he says nothing at all, but either in haste or
prudence passes it by, and dealing with Mr. Caudrey speaks fully to confirm
the strength of it: Interest in the Covenant of the Gospel (he says, Page 4.)
gives first right to Baptism. This child has this interest, otherwise he can
be in no capacity to break Covenant, he has therefore this first right, and
let Mr. F. see how he can deny an infant the second. I add in the second place,
let him make it up into a formal argument, and then it runs thus: That child
whose immediate Parents will not bring it up to the power of Godliness, has no
right to Baptism. Here his exception lies, and therefore he demands, Where
have I mentioned the power of Godliness, as a requisite in him who claims
Baptism? but to bring up a child in it, is harder matter. To which I reply, 1.
That here is a strange question, seeing we were not speaking to any
prerequisite for Baptism, but after education, which was his exception. 2.
Though he mentions not education in the power of godliness in words; yet in
case his meaning be not so, his argument answers it self; For the child of such
a parent that he mentions, shall infallibly (so far as man can judge) have
education in a away of Christianity, so far as to be of the Society of
professed Christians, under the dispensation of those Ordinances that are able
to save the soul, and are called by the Apostle the power of God to salvation,
Romans 1.16. He further adds, Sometimes your answer is a bare laying down your
own judgment, with a similitude added for illustration, quoting page 441. He
adds, we call for Scripture and reason, Similia ad pompam non ad pugnam. This
that he relates unto was thus occasioned: In his serious Question stated, page
8. he says, If the predecessor may by this promise give right to Baptism
without the immediate parent, then I pray tell us how far we may go for this
predecessor? how many generations? where has Gods Word limited Ministers?
you may go to this predecessor, and no further. After that I had replied, that
I knew but few that say the predecessor gives right, without the immediate
parent, but all concur in a joint way to communicate a Covenant interest; I
there for further satisfaction of his Question demand, in titles of honor and
inheritance of Lands which men claim by descent from their Ancestors, where is
it that they will stay? adding that it will soon be answered, that they stay,
when they can go no higher, to find out any other predecessor vested in such
honor, or inheritance; and then I bring it home by applicatian of Scripture
instances, full to our purpose. Some can make no claim at all from parents,
they are the first of their house in honor or inheritance; and this was the
case of Abraham, he had no interest in Covenant from Terah; such was the case
of the primitive converts; and such is the case of the Indians, that now by a
gracious providence are converted by the English. Some can go no further then
their immediate parents, they were the first in honor, or that gained an
inheritance to their house; This was the case of Isaac and those children
called by the Apostle, holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and will be the case of the children
of Indian converts. Others can rise to the third or fourth generation; others
can go as high as the conquest; some can claim beyond the conquest, by Deeds
without date: so it is with Christians, they may go as high as Ancestors have
been in Christianity. I here demand, whether there be not reason in this
parallel, seeing Christian privileges (as I have proved at large, and he never
denied) are descendable from parent to child, as are honors and inheritances,
and whether Scripture be wanting in that answer? I had proved at large, page
436. that mediate parents give this right: and I appeal now to the Reader,
whether that question of his, Where we may stay? has not a sufficient answer
both from Scripture and reason, so that he might have spared his call for it?

I tell Mr. F. that his first argument brought for the exclusion of infants of
ignorant and scaudalous persons from Baptism managed in the way that he does,
was Mr. Blackwoods argument before him, to debar all Infants from Baptism,
putting his own Medium into Syllogisticall form against him, with equal force
concluding against all Infant Baptism, which he says, Sir, is no clever way
of disputation, page 53. Then I am to learn how to dispute cleverly, if I may
not deal by retortion against a man, with his own weapon: did not Christ
dispute in a clever way with the Pharisees, when they charged him to cast out
devils by Beelzebub? answering them, By whom then do your children cast them
out? Matthew. 12.27. He answers for himself, that he never saw any thing of Mr.
Blackwoods, and I never had it in my thoughts to charge him with borrowing from
him, but only to show him that either his arguments might have an answer, or
else he must deny Baptism to all Infants, which is against both his own
judgment, and practice. He tells me that Mr. Johnson has answered the
argument before me, and I in his words, though he says, it may be I saw him
not, which to me is strange, that we should so hit in one, I having seen no
more of Mr. Johnson then he has done of Mr. Blackwood; but it is worth the
observing how he goes about to avoid it, as turned against himself; For he knew
well that I brought it not as an argument ad rem, (for he says, I have
answered it) but ad hominem. His argument is this, page 18. of his Serious
question, Such persons as de jure ought, and de facto are excluded by godly
Ministers from the Lords Supper, ought also to be excluded from their childrens
Baptism: But such persons as the question mentions, de jure ought, and de
facto are excluded from the Lords Supper: Ergo. The Major he proves thus, If
Baptism does seal to the same Covenant, which the Lords Supper does, and does
signify and seal as great blessings and privileges, as the Lords Supper does,
then those who are excluded from the Lords Supper, ought also to be excluded
from their childrens Baptism: But the antecedent is true: Ergo the consequent
is true. This in Mr. Blackwoods behalf I thus urge against him, If Baptism
does seal to the same Covenant, which the Lords Supper does, and does signify
and seal, as great blessings, and privileges as the Lords Supper does, then
those that are excluded from the Lords Supper ought also to be excluded from
Baptism: But all Infants are excluded from the Lords Supper eo nomine because
they are Infants; and therefore they are to be excluded from Baptism. Further
adding, when Mr. Firmin has given a fair, and a full answer to this
Syllogism, he may easily fit it to his own, to give like satisfaction.

All his answer is, My argument is not hurt at all, though the parent may be
suspended for a time, what is this to the suspension of three parts of a
Church, six or ten years together, and never proceed further? And I say, what
is this to the purpose? Though parents be suspended all their days, whether
justly, or injuriously, root and branch are not therefore under suspension.

Words of mine, page 426, 424. he challenges: Infants of parents that are
nomine tenus Christians have right to Baptism, if they profess the worship of
the true God, though nothing more of a Christian be in them. In which how much
my words are curtailed, for haste, I leave to the Reader, by comparing to find
out.

For answer, He speaks first by way of concession, I make no question but many
such nominal ones a Minister may baptize, and their children, though they have
not truth of grace in them; and goes on, But I perceive your scope is to spread
the Word very large, and that directly opposite to my question; If they will
say they are Christians, bear the Name of Christ, own his worship (though it be
but from the custom of the Nation, others do so, and so do they) though their
course and frame of conversation be like the infidels, or worse, yet they are
Christians nomine tenus, hence we must baptize if they have but fides, no
matter for observation. The great fault is, it seems, that I presume to go
opposite to his question, which I must ingenuously acknowledge; but seeing I am
allowed to baptize both parent and child, where there is no truth of grace in
the parent, and yet am chidden for being too large, I demand when I must stay?
in what latitude I may walk? Men of the Congregational way are wont to limit me
to parents one or both of the truth of grace, and will allow none but believers
children; If justifying faith be not in the parent, no baptismal water shall
come on the child. All other Christians from the beginning of Christianity
(those excepted that as of yesterday have opposed infant Baptism) look upon
them under what notion you will, have allowed to go as far as profession of
Christianity. Mr. Firmin that will be larger then the one, and narrower then
the other, must tell us where we must fix. He has my rule to except against, I
have not his to challenge. To let me understand my error in being too large, he
demands, But, Sir, I pray what if they be heretical about the natures of
Christ, as of old some deny the humanity of Christ, and some the Deity of
Christ? and then proceeds to further instances. To which I first answer,
Perhaps he may find some called Christians, that it is a contradiction in
adjecto to name them so, such that receive not the Gospel at all, but
professedly abhor it. If any such are intended, I shall say my meaning is
known. They that are no Turks, Infidels, Pagans, but in opposition to them of
the faith, worship, and way, that is Christian. Secondly, For the Heretics
instanced in, such as were of old, Mr. Firmin being so well verst in the way of
antiquity, I wish him to enquire what the Orthodox thought in those times of
their Baptism? Did they rebaptize those that had received their Baptism? Did
they deny their infants Baptism? They were to be trained to hear that Word
that was able to convince this error: And how much worse, respective to
salvation, were these tenants then that of the denial of the resurrection? yet
the Infants of some such were circumcised, (as I have shown) and of others
baptized. He goes on: What if they think Christ was a Woman? as (he says) he
has given instance in one; And indeed a wild one, of one who had a prayer
where this was often repeated, that Jesus was her name; perhaps he was a
Welsh-man, and then (according to their dialect) her is the Masculine gender.
This indeed were an error, full of folly, but not of such danger, for two
reasons. 1. Christ were yet of mankind, and had taken our nature, had he been
of that sex. 2. It were not likely that he should make over such an opinion to
his posterity: He leaves heresy, (which he might have spared, such shun our
Congregations) and falls to instance in ignorance What if he knew not whether
he was God or man, as before? what: if ten Gods? with abundance such stuff. I
say, the case of such is sad, and more sad in the degree, then I have met with
any of the use of reason, and in capacity for marriage society. I wish from my
soul that all means were sought that these blind might see; yet as long as God
is not hereby provoked to remove our Candlestick, but light still shines in our
Horizon, the Kingdom of God being not yet removed; so that when the parent is
blind, the child may see, as I have known many happy experiences, yea, the
ignorant parents glorying in it. There is not cause that we should be more
severe then the Lord himself, as to thrust out their posterity from the society
of the Lords people. This were to provoke them to shut their eyes, and not to
open them to receive the light that shines about them; I think it were to
exceed in our zeal against ignorance, as far as the disciples did against the
Samaritanes, when they would have fire to come down from heaven to consume
them, Luke. 9.54. I had instanced in ignorance in Church Members, not only
among the Jews, but Christians, as the H^brewes, Heb. 5.12. the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 15.34. That of the Hebrews, he says, he thinks hurts him not; That of
the 1 Cor. 15.34. (he says) is most likely, when I know not whether of these
two is more likely. To that concerning the Corinthians, some have not the
knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, (which he only thinks is worthy
of an answer) he says, 1. Sir, do you think it was such gross ignorance as I
have given instance? To which I answer, 1. That I know no more then the
Apostle tells me, and he says it was want of the knowledge of God. 2. I
demand, will you allow me to baptize the children of those that I find not
equalling such in ignorance that you mention, viz. the children of all that
know that God is one, and the Commandments ten? 2. He demands, Was not Paul
as true to his work as Abraham or the Jews were to be in admitting to
Circumcision? which I mention, page 445. To which I say, I do not think that
the admission of all was Paul's work, and that many were admitted, after he left
them, before he wrote this Epistle to them. 2. I know he admitted few among
them, their admission was by Baptism; and how many, or (if you will) how few
he baptized in Corinth, you may learn from himself, 1 Cor. 1.14, 16. 3. He
says, I have found so much ignorance that the persons deserved shame, but yet
dared not to keep them from the Lords Supper, because I found such a work on
their heart, though they could not express it in a definition. To which I say,
that I find so much ignorance in my self that deserves shame, and such that may
not be able to express the thing that might be in question, might pass with
me, for knowing men; Periti est artificis definire; But were they such that you
could say to their shame, that they had not the knowledge of God? and yet durst
you not exclude them from the Lords Supper? He tells us of many sad instances
of ignorance in fathers, upon which he refuses to give admission to infants;
But were it granted that such, as to all privileges were mere heathens, as it
was with those in Corinth mentioned by the Apostle that were joined in marriage
with believers, and their ignorance not only gross, but total, and in all
respects to be reckoned among those that were without God in the world (as I
shall not yield as long as the candlestick is not removed,) yet I do not hear
that he makes any enquiry after the mothers of those infants; that he takes the
pains to go to them in Childbed, to demand any account of their proficiency:
perhaps they might give as good an account, as some that he says he durst not
keep from the Lords Table. And then as in the Apostles judgment, they
sanctify their husbands in unbelief, as to the producing of an holy seed,
being no professed infidels, but in name Christians: So according to his own
judgment, as to that end, they sanctify their husbands in ignorance, being so
far knowing Christians.

SECT. IX. The seventh Proposition enlarged.
AS for those that are of years, Admission of men of years examined.
though we are not much concerned, scarce one unbaptized Person in an age,
being tendered to us, yet it is not meet wholly to omit it; when any in the
Primitive times upon the Preaching of the Apostles was ready to profess, and
willing to engage in a way of Christianity, he was straight (according to the
order of Christ) to be admitted by Baptism: the Commission it self speaks thus
much: Disciple all Nations, baptizing them is the charge; being discipled there
needs no further enquiry, and accordingly was the practice; the Eunuch upon
profession of faith, and water at hand was presently baptized by Philip, Act.
8. and the Jaylour the self same hour that he was converted, was baptized by
Paul and Silas, Act. 16. Those that limit Baptism to years of discretion,
appear to be wholly of this mind; Mr. Tombs, Examen. Page 159. is clear, that
profession of faith, and holiness is sufficient warrant to baptize. And for
their practice, let their Proselytes wheresoever they prevail speak, when such
as we see are admitted, we may well conclude, that in their judgment none are
to be refused. There are others that set up a new Church-door, having discipled
any in their way, they do not (as Christ enjoined concerning unbaptized
Heathens, or as others, concerning baptized Christians) baptize them, but they
tender a Covenant of Church Fellowship unto them, and that is their way of
Church entrance, when yet their infants keep the old rode of Baptism.

These at least some of them, are exceeding strict, and will have none admitted
but those that the quickest sighthed, Admission unto a Church Covenant and
membership looked into.
Eagle-eyed Christians judge (so far as they are able to apprehend) to have
both name, and thing of Christianity. And to add honor to this way, the world
must be born in hand, and that with attestation of no mean ones, that the
conversion of the Gentiles, and Jews, in that infinite number as we read in
the Acts of the Apostles, was all in reality, and that the whole Church of
Jerusalem, (consisting at least of eight thousand members) was an homogeneal
body, under the same light, conscience and tenderness; Of a more noble
homogeneity, and more pure constitution sure then ever came into Christ's
thoughts, to see his Kingdom attain unto upon earth: He compares it to a field
made up of a mixture of Tares and Wheat, Matthew. 13.24. to a Draw-net cast into
the Sea, which takes fishes of all kinds, both good and bad, Matthew. 13.47. And
in the close o^ two other Parables inferres, that many are called but few are
chosen, Matthew. 20.16. Matthew. 22.14. This he spoke in the ears of his Disciples;
and we may wonder if they should live to see it contradicted. He tells his
hearers, Luke 9.27. Matthew. 16.18. There be some standing here, which shall not
taste of death till they see the Kingdom of God. And can we think, that he
understood a Kingdom in that resplendent glory, which he had ever denied, when
he made it his business to decipher and hold it forth unto them? When they
hear of it, they hear of a field with tares and wheat, of a draw-net with fish
of all sorts; They live to see flourishing fields of pure wheat, full nets of
fishes that are only good; being told that many are called but few chosen,
they yet see myriads of thousands called and all chosen. Yea, Paul after he had
seen the contrary, and gained fellowship (according to these men in such an
homogeneal pure body) still symbolizes in like Parables, of a great house that
had vessels, some to honor, and some to dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. applying it to
the Elect and Reprobate in the Church of God. We are told that the complexion
of a visible Church under the Gospel is conversion; the constituted matter,
converted ones; and that this soul-complexion is the same in the whole body,
members having received the same Spirit of Adoption, owning and experiencing
the same grace of God. But it is plain that Christ did neither see, nor foresee
any such purity of complexion, nor can they that look upon Primitive Churches
in the glass of Scriptures see any more then Christ did discover. Those words
of Luke, Act. 15.3. And being brought on their way by the Church, they passed
through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles, and they
caused great joy unto all the brethren, is made a fundamental groundwork of
this building of such glory, as though all conversion by the Word were attended
by the changing work of the Spirit; which happy gloss (in case it would hold)
would turn all the grounds in the parable into good ground, and a co^nvert or
proselyte in an historical narrative, would ever be the same with elect or
regenerate. But the words going before, and following these (if they may be but
taken in) will serve to spoil all this supposed glory and purity. A sect rises
up and teaches the Brethren, that except they be circumcised after the manner
of Moses they cannot be saved, and what manner of men they were, and how their
Doctrine took, we may read in Paul's Epistles to the Philippians, Colossians,
and especially in that to the Churches of Galatia; it almost wrought to the
apostatizing of those Churches from the faith of Christ to another Gospel, If
ever these were one homogeneal body, respective to soul complexion; an abundant
proof is given in against the Saints perseverance and for their falling from
grace, Paul was not so enamoured with their beauty, when he tells them that he
is afraid of them, and travells again in birth of them. And whether he had such
high thoughts of the Corinthians, let sundry passages in his Epistles to them
witness. Great complexion spots may be seen, 1 Cor. Chap. 3.3. Chap. 6.8.
Chap. 11.18, 19, 21. Chap. 15.12, 34. 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. So that it is plain,
that in primitive times Jews and Pagans, being wrought upon (by the Word
heard, and miracles seen) to make profession of, and engage to a Christian
faith and life, were upon that account received: of which, as some had hearts
sincere toward Christ, so many were otherwise. Through the whole Scripture
there is no demurre put to the Baptism of any who made profession of the Name
of Christ, save Saul, concerning whom Ananias, (being warned of God to go to
him, and confer sight upon him, being struck blind) objects, the evil that he
had done to the Saints at Jerusalem; and that he had at present, authority
from the Chief Priests, to bind all that called on the Name of Christ, Acts
9.13, 14. And when he afterward assayed to join himself to the disciples that
were at Jerusalem, they were all (upon that account) afraid of him. Neither
Ananias at Damascus, nor the Church at Jerusalem, did put his sincerity in
grace to the question, upon that account they might have challenged thousands
of others; But they feared, that he only pretended conversion, upon a design
to advance his way of persecution. Let Mr. Cobbet from New England in this
particular be heard, who lays down this conclusion, That the Church in
dispensing an enjoined initiatory seal of the Covenant of grace, looks into
visibility of interest in the Covenant to guide her in the application thereof,
nor is the saving interest of the persons her rule by which she is to proceed.
There, we find in the affirmative, what that is that must lead, viz. visibility
of interest in the Covenant, and in the negative, what must not lead, and that
is, saving interest in the Covenant. And visibility of interest is certainly
theirs, who profess Christ, engage for Christ, and avouch themselves to be for
him, unless we will utterly confound Covenant entering, and Covenant keeping,
which Scripture so carefully distinguishes. I know Mr. Firmin in his reply to
Mr. Caudry speaking of Scandalous persons, Mr. F. appendix as to the admission
of men of years examined.
page 4. says, According to our Congregational principles, that which gives a
man the first right to a Sacrament, viz. his interest in the Covenant of the
Gospel, this man has not; for he does visibly declare to the Churches, that he
has no interest in the Covenant. That interest in the Covenant of the Gospel
gives a man the first right to a Sacrament, we willingly embrace; but that
censure of scandalous persons, that they visibly declare to the Churches, that
they have no interest in the Covenant, we must reject, as evidently contrary to
Scripture principles. Israel, of whom Moses gave that testimony, that the Lord
had not given them an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, or ears to hear,
speaking of the generality of them, had some that might have been judged
scandalous, yet they all of them even then entered Covenant with God, Captains
of their tribes, Elders, Officers, even all the men of Israel, from the hewer
of wood, to the drawer of water, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. Those that God owns as his
people in Covenant, and calls by the name of his people, I shall take to have
interest in the Covenant, though thousands say the contrary: But God ownes
these as his people, respective to Covenant interest; they that did steal,
murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense to other gods, and walk
after other gods, all men would judge to be scandalous, yet such come, and
stand before the Lord in his house, and profess themselves to be his people in
Covenant, and whether or no God does not so esteem them, let his own mouth
speak, Jer. 7.12. Chap. 6.26. Chap. 8.11. The Vineyard of the Lord consists of
a people in visible Covenant, yet with these we find not a few scandals and
scandalous ones, as Isay 5. is manifest; see, Hos. 4.6, 12. My people are
destroyed for lack of knowledge: my people ask counsel at their stocks and
their staff, declares unto them, for the spirit of whoredom has caused them
to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God. Shall we say they
were not Gods people, or shall we say that these were no scandals? to put all
out of question, the Apostle tells us, Romans 9.2, 3. that interest in the
Covenant pertaines to all Israel after the flesh, neither is it any otherwise
in Gospel times, 1 Cor. 5.11. If any man that is called a brother, be a
fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, etc. he that is called a brother is visibly in Covenant, but such
a one (we see) may be scandalous. The seven Golden Candlesticks are the seven
Churches, amidst which Christ walks, and whether there were not scandals among
these, read the Epistles to them. If visible interest in Covenant give a first
right, then these undoubtedly may claim it, their first right (according to
the forementioned principle) is undoubted; and for actual admission (as well
as the first right) to the Sacrament of initiation, let the same Mr. Cobbet
speak; John Baptist did, and lawfully might baptize those multitudes, albeit in
the general he knew that many, yea, most of them would prove false, and frothy
quoting, Matthew. 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and afterward, Albeit, we may
think in the general that to be sure in all visible Churches there will be some
vessels of dishonor sometimes, yet Ministers which are the Churches as well as
Christ's servants, are not therefore to refuse to dispense Church ordinances
since, they are in the face of the Church such utensills as the Lord may have
and has need of. Hence the Apostles (which are extraordinary persons knew the
guile of persons secret from the Church, witness, that act against Ananias and
Sapphira, Acts 5.1; etc.) yet in administering the Church seal of Baptism they
refused not Ananias and Sapphira no, nor Simon Magnus, Acts 8. Nor thousands of
other of the Jews, amongst whom how many proved false? Acts 2.41. and 4.1, 2,
3, 4. compared. 21.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 30, 31, 36. and 22.20, 22 and 23.12,
13. witness. So that we see Scripture gives precedents (if we judge them safe
to follow) of a very facile admission of those that profess and manifest their
willingness to engage in Christian ways.

Mr. Firmin says, If a bare profession of faith in Christ be sufficicient to
make a member of a Church, then no person can be justly excommunicated out of a
Church, for the vilest sins or heresies, provided he does but hold this
profession of his faith: The consequence is clear, the person is the same now,
which he was when you took him into the Church. To this I have answered, page
449. The consequence is clearly erroneous, for he made a profession of his
faith and not of his sin. To this Mr. Firmin replies, Then it seems the man
must profess his sin with his own mouth, as his faith, though Mr. Blake knows
he is a ranter, etc. The members of the Church witness it, yet because the
man's own mouth does not profess it, you admit him. I desire to know where
witnesses were called in for this purpose to speak what they had to say
against such and such a man's admission to Baptism, as now by an instrument
affixt on the door of the public place of meeting men are called to except,
(in case they have any thing to speak) against Ministers ordination. Had Paul
and Silas nothing against the Jaylour at Philippi? who was so serviceable to
those in power, that he thrust them into the inward prison, and made their feet
fast in the stocks, Acts 16.24. And whereas our author says elsewhere, that
there was a legal work on his conscience, so there is many a time on mariners
in a sea storm, which a calm will suddenly quiet. Can he imagine that the
lives of all the people, even the Publicanes and harlots that John baptized (
Matthew. 21.31. Luke 7.29. compared) were so inoffensive, that none could say
black to their eye? whatsoever John knew (in case they had been called in and
heard,) some could have said somewhat against these Publicanes and harlots, and
yet even these were admitted. As to that which follows, Then, Sir, though you
know the same abominations afterward, and your members testify it, witnesses
come in you must not cast him out, unless he will profess it. Though he is
pleased to say that this argument will cost me more then two lines, before it
be answered, yet a few words will show that it is a mere non sequitur. If a man
make it his request, upon the fame that he has heard, and the good that he
has seen in Mr. Firmins Family, to be admitted to serve him in it, confessing
his ways to have been bad, but now professes that he is resolved upon a new
way, and in order to it, desires to be received into such a Society, where
godliness may be learnt, may not he now admit him? and may he not afterward
upon breach of this engagement dismiss him? I will aver my similitude to be
fit, yet I confess it is not full; for when Mr. Firmin has dismissed this
servant, and put him out of doors, he has now no more relation to him. But
when a man upon profession to be for God, is once in Covenant, though his
wickedness deserves that the privileges of the family should be denied, yet
he is still in Covenant, though under breach of Covenant, and stands related to
the Church of God in title, otherwise, upon his repentance he must have a new
admission by Baptism. The Church, I say, may receive a man upon engagement of
amendment, (which must be done in baptism) to be baptized, and upon his return
to wickedness Excommunicate him: His profession gives him right to Baptism,
and his sin deserves excommunication. He tells us, Though we read not that
Philip required repentance, yet others did: But did they so require it, as in
reality to precede baptism? Or were they satisfied with a profession of it? If
they so required it as in reality to precede, they then must give a day over to
give evidence of it; and whether this was the manner in John's baptism, in
Philips, or the Apostles, let adversaries be Judges.

I cannot tell what should move Mr. F. when he had given me thanks, page 54.
for my courteous handling of him without scorn, to add in the next page, Sir,
I thought Christianity had taken in the heart, and outward conversation as well
as the head; a real Christian is one united to Christ, sound in the doctrine
concerning Christ, and walking as Christ did [we suppose an old Adam]. Let him
who is a nominal Christian appear like one, though he be not real. And I do
think that it is little below a scorn, to bear the world in hand that I think
otherwise; what have I said for him to Sir me in this particular? perhaps
because I somewhere speak of a profession of faith, not mentioning repentance;
so he may challenge Philip to be defective, who when the Eunuch demanded, What
does hinder me to be baptized? answered, If thou believe with all thine heart
thou may, Act. 8.37. And Paul and Silas likewise, who when the Jaylour
asked, What shall I do to be saved? answered as we know, Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thine household; Nay, will not the same
charge fall upon the head of our Savior himself, who in his Commission to the
Apostles, says, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved? None of
these mention repentance; what can be said for them, will excuse me: I am so
far from being against repentance in a Christian, that I expect some will think
that I have said too much for the necessity of it, and put too high an honor
upon it. He proceeds farther, and says, Let us view the Scripture in
administration of Baptism, Mar. 4. Baptism of Repentance, that is more then
Faith. More explicitly, but no more implicitly. Faith takes Christ to give
repentance, as well as a Savior to give remission of sins. They confessed
their sins, says he. 1. Some will have it to imply no verbal confession, but
virtual, coming for baptism for remission of sins, it was an acknowledgment
that they were guilty; which gloss carries strong probability with it, in
regard of the multitude, that in so short a space were baptized. 2. I require
more, an engagement to leave sin, which their taking upon them the Name of
Christ does imply, 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the Name of Christ
depart from iniquity. He goes on, Acts 2.37, 38. First Jews so had knowledge
not so ignorant as ours I believe. The Reader may believe the contrary, till he
see some proof. Secondly, having a legal work by the power of the Word: They
that had crucified Christ as a blasphemer, deceiver, must needs have some work
upon them before they would take him professedly for a Savior. Thirdly,
Receiving the Word; That implies no more then giving credit to what the Apostle
spoke, that Jesus whom they had crucified was Lord and Christ. Fourthly,
Repenting they are baptized, this is more still. And more then is expressed in
the Text. Baptism in his Name does indeed imply, that now they repented that
they had crucified him, otherwise, we read not of their repentance: Acts 8.
(says he) though there is not mention made of the Samaritans repentance, who
were apostatized from the Jews, but laid claim to the Patriarchs, Joh. 4.20.
expected Christ, verse 25. worshipped God, Ezra 4.2. yet that Philip should
know them to be so abominable in conversation, and yet baptize them, that is to
be proved, since that others required repentance. He may add to these Elogies
of the Samaritanes, that they worshipped they knew not what, Joh 4.22. and that
they bore that good will to the people of the Jews, that when they perceived
Christ with his Disciples to be for Jerusalem at the time of the Passover,
they would not let them have meat for money, Luke 9.51, 52. And I confess, as
much of repentance in them, as was required in any to the acceptance of
Baptism, namely, a renuntiation of their false way, and a professed
acceptance of the tender of the Gospel. There yet follows, If this be not a
giving of holy things to dogs, (which Tertullian and Austin give warning of
even in baptizing) I know not what is; Let a man be a notorious Ranter,
Sodomite, Scoffer at godliness, drunkard, no matter what; this is known and
proved, yet a Christian nomine tenus, therefore you must baptize him. Where I
pray do I speak of baptizing any that is nomine tenus a Christian? My opinion
is, that such that have the name Christian, are baptized already, I hope such
contradictions seldom come from my pen. That these are no words of mine, my
adversary will acknowledge, and that any such consequence can be gathered from
any thing that I have said, that I must baptize persons of this quality already
baptized, the Reader can scarce imagine; this I impute to haste or passion
preventing or obstructing the use of reason. He must then blot out Christian
nomine tenus, and insert instead of it, an Heathen, Jew or Pagan (otherwise he
is already a baptized person, and in incapacity for baptism) by the power of
the Word preached, brought to renounce his way of Paganism, Judaisme: and to
profess and engage to a Christian faith and conversation. These are the men
that I would have baptized, and if we must account them to be dogs, and swine,
all Scripture-baptizers are within the lash, they have given baptism to them.
That repentance as well as faith was required in baptism, appears (says he)
by the ages following the Apostles, yea, and in the Apostles time likewise. A
profession of both was indeed required, they that renounced heathen worship,
renounced heathen conversation with it; They engaged to a Christian faith, and
they engaged to a Christian conversation. Mr. F. adds, For those who would
live in their lusts, they deferred their baptism, knowing what that required.
I have read of the deferring of baptism in those times, and the reasons
assigned, why they put it off: But I have not met with this reason. Mr.
Marshall in his defense of Infant Baptism has given many reasons, why some
put off baptism. Some to be baptized at the age that Christ was baptized; Some
to be baptized in the river where he was baptized; Some to be baptized by some
special Bishop of eminent place; Some, (which it seems was most common) because
they conceived, that it takes away all sin, and therefore they would have it
delayed, till sin was well over, for which he quotes many authorities:
Tertullian (it appears) would have it delayed upon this ground, seeing he would
not have unmarried persons baptized, but to stay till lust were extinguished;
and dissuading from baptism in younger years, he has these words, Quid
festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum? de baptis. cap. 18. Yet
perhaps some might delay it upon the account that he mentions, though he quotes
no authority for it, but that Tertullian and Nazianzen intimate it, one of whom
was for delaying of baptism in the place quoted, the other against it, as I
find him cited. But in case any did delay it upon the grounds by him mentioned,
might it not be their fault that did administer it? in keeping the door too
narrow, as well as their sin who put off the time of it, seeing Mr. F. himself
complains of the rigor of some in New England, in holding men off from
entrance into Church Fellowship, by that door which is set up in the room and
place of baptism.

Mr. Firmin, as well in his Serious question stated, as in his Appendix against
me, vouches many authorities, first Presbyterians, instancing in his margin
Land. Min. Jus Div page 115. But in my book that page has no such thing;
Gillespies Aarons Rod quoting many pages, I can recompense him in setting up
some of the Congregational way against him. Mr. Gillesp. will not have a known
unregenerate man baptized; But Mr. Cobbet says, John did and might lawfully
baptize those multitudes, albeit in the general he knew that many, yea, most of
them would prove false and frothy; And makes visibility of interest in the
Covenant the Churches guide in application of Baptism, page 52. And how large
a visibility of interest is, is clear, and I have already shown, Let his words
before quoted be considered; and to these add that which he has, page 54, 55.
The initiatory seal is not primarily and properly the seal of man's faith, or
repentance, or obedience, but of Gods Covenant rather: The seal is to the
Covenant, even Abraham's Circumcision was not primarily a seal to his faith of
righteousness; but to the righteousness of faith exhibited and offered in the
Covenant; yea, to the Covenant it self, or promise, which he had believed unto
righteousness: hence the Covenant of grace is called the righteousness of
faith, Romans 10. Hence, Acts 2.38, 39. the seal of baptism is put to the
promise, as the choice matter and foundation in view, and as that was a ground
of repentance it self, Repent and be baptized, for the promise is to you: Not,
for you have repented, as if that were the thing to be firstly sealed by
baptism, but the promise rather.

Appendix, page 57. Mr. Firmin quotes in the Lump the Fathers, Councels,
Schoolmen, out of Gregory de Val. as if all were of that mind. In his Serious
question he quotes, Austin, Alexander Hales, Aquinas, Gregory de Valen. In his
appendix, Justin Martyr, Council. Naeocesar. Council. Nic. Council. Elib. as
strict in admission of their Catechumeni, concerning which I might have much to
say.

First, How would he like it in other things, to leave the clear rode and track
of Scriptures, to hunt after humane authorities? If we can but say, From the
beginning it was not so, In case the authorities were more in number, more
eminent in honor, we have sufficient. The Scripture-way taking in those that
the Word had brought to a profession of Christianity upon engagement to it, is
as clear as though it were written with a ray of the Sun.

Secondly, For Fathers and Schoolmen, their opinion about Baptism, on which
they ground the necessity of praerequisites to it, is known; and as he may
quote them against me, so I can quote them against him, and those of his party.
They maintain (and as unanimously as they do the thing in debate) that
Sacraments confer grace on the receiver, in case he put no obstacle, on which
account they expect not grace in the person for baptism, (which they believe
not to be possible, seeing the Sacrament is to work it) but a convenient
disposition to grace, which they call merit ex congruo. Let Suarez speak in the
name of the rest, having laid down this Proposition, Ut alicui digne detur
baptismus, praeter voluntatem suscipiendi Sacramentum necessaria est dispositio
conveniens sanctitati Sacramenti.
That Baptism may be worthily administered; besides a willingness to receive
the Sacrament, a disposition suitable to the holiness of the Sacrament is
required. And then answering the question, What this disposition is, he
answers, Resp. Eam sufficere and necessariam esse quae ad consequendum effectum
Baptismi fuerit sufficiens ac necessaria: quia cum per baptismum detur gratia,
si aliquis est recte dispositus ad effectum baptismi consequendum in instanti,
quo receperit baptismum perfectum, recipiet gratiam: Ergo cum sufficienti
dignitate and sanctitate recipit Sacramentum: Quia cum hoc sit Sacramentum
mortuorum non est ad illud digne suscipi^ndum prae exigenda gratia ad quam
conferendam ipsum est constitutum: Ergo sufficient illa dispositio, cum qua
Sacramentum conferet talem effectum.
That is necessary and sufficient, which is necessary and sufficient to attain
the effect of the Sacrament, and gives his reason, seeing by baptism grace is
given; If any one be rightly disposed to receive the effect of baptism, in the
instant that he receives perfect Baptism, he shall receive grace; therefore he
receives the Sacrament with sufficient dignity and sanctity; further adding,
Seeing this is a Sacrament of the dead, grace is not praerequired for the
receiving of it, being ordained to confer grace, that disposition is sufficient
upon which the Sacrament confers such an effect, Suarez in tertiam partem Thom.
Tom. 3. Q. 68. Dis. 24. art. 4. Sec. 2. p. 250. Our opinion being otherwise of
the work of baptism, it is otherwise concerning admission to baptism, when
men are willing to be received into the number of Christians, and will engage
for Christian ways, (which necessarily implies a profession of repentance of
all unchristian practices) we judge them to have right of admission.

Thirdly, How far rules laid down by some Fathers, and Councils for the way of
discipline did exceed in rigor, has been the complaint of many; not admitting
those that had been overtaken by temptation, to Church Fellowship:
notwithstanding any evidence of repentance, till after many years space of
humiliation; In which time how much advantage might be given to Satan, let men
of experience judge. Mr. F. himself dislikes their long deferring of their
Catechumeni from baptism, and may not others have liberty to manifest their
dislike as well as he?

Fourthly, Let it be taken into due consideration, whether such rigor in
holding converts off so long a space; and requiring such an height in
preparatory graces, were not a great remora to the progress of the Gospel? and
gaining in men to Christian profession? How speedy a progress the Gospel made
in the Apostles times we may see in the Acts of the Apostles, and
Ecclesiastical Story. Dr. Andrews in his Preface to his Work on the
Commandments, quotes a testimony of Egesippus, That by the diligent
instructing of the Church, there was no known Commonwealth of any part of the
world inhabited, but within 40 years after Christ's Passion received a great
shaking off of heathenish Religion. But how slowly it proceeded after some
time, is overplain: May not the difference of their way, that thus swerved from
the Apostles, and men in Apostolic times, be assigned as a great reason? We
find them facile in admission, but in the mean time exceeding plain in making
known what was required of them in order to the end of their professed faith,
their everlasting salvation that were admitted.

Fifthly, If it may be granted, (which according to Scripture rules can never
be denied) that men wrought off from Turcisme, Paganism, Judaisme, and brought
to a profession of Christianity, and a professed engagement to Christian ways,
have their right, and stand in title to baptism; If then upon observation of
inconveniences arising, (as jealousies conceived that they may offer themselves
out of design to work themselves into a fairer opportunity of persecution, as
was suspected in Paul) the Church in Prudence, for some space shall delay their
admission, I shall not contend; Only I assert their right, and justify their
practice, that proceed accordingly, and unless some great cause appear to the
Churches prejudice, tendering themselves they are actually to be received.

A Digression for Vindication of Chap. 32. of the Treatise of the Covenant,
from Mr. Baxters Exceptions touching the Faith that entitles to Baptism.
HEre I am put upon it to take into consideration, The occasion of this
Digression.
that which Learned Mr. Baxter in his Apology has been pleased to oppose
against me. Though he be large, I shall make it my business (if it may be) to
be more brief. I entitled the two and thirtieth Chapter of my Treatise of the
Covenant, in this manner, A dogmatical Faith entitles to Baptism: being a
Corollary, naturally (as I yet think) inferred from the Doctrine, that I had
before delivered, of the latitude of the Covenant; explaining my self, that I
meant such a faith, that assents to Gospel Truths, though not affecting the
heart, to a full choice of Christ, and therefore short of that Faith which is
justifying, and saving; ratifying it with several arguments. In which I might
well have thought, that I should have found my ancient friend, my Second,
rather then an Adversary, considering what he had delivered, page 224. of his
Treatise of Infants Church Membership. This opinion, Mr. Baxters concession.
that the Covenant of grace which Baptism seals, is only to the Elect, and
is not conditional, is one of the two master pillars in the Antinomian fabric:
and afterward, If any shall think that this affirming [that Christ has
brought the reprobate also into a Covenant of grace conditional] be any part of
the Arminian errors, as the whole scope of Scriptures is against them, so Mr.
Blake has said enough to satisfy: He that will deny reprobates to be so far
within the Covenant of grace, must not only deny infant Baptism, but all
Sacraments, till he be able infallibly to discern a man to be Elect. I did
never rise so high in words for my opinion as the Reader may here see my
adversary has done for me, and I shall have more occasion to observe his
concessions in this thing. But how to reconcile all, with that which, page 327.
of the same Treatise he delivers, I know not. If men be taught once that it is
a Faith short of justifying, and saving faith, which admits men to Baptism,
as having true right in foro Dei, it will make foul work in the Church. This he
asserts with five several arguments, to which in the Chapter quoted I gave a
brief answer, not once naming the Author, that (if it might be) such contests
with a man that I so much honor, might not have been observed, and yet the
truth not deserted. Before he enters upon any refutation of my arguments, or
vindication of his own, he is pleased to spend nine full pages, to show how
far he takes unregenerate men to be in Covenant, and to discover (as he
says) my mind in this point. Near to the close of that discourse, he says,
that what I mean by Covenanting, he despairs to know; which surely will be the
Readers wonder, that knows what he has said, page 224. before mentioned, I
speak impartially, according to my judgment, I think there is more true worth
in those two or three leaves of Mr. Blakes book in opening of the Covenant,
then in all, etc. And as he despaires to know my meaning, so I as much despair
ever to make it known to him. He quotes very many expressions of mine, and
knows my meaning in none of them, and some that I borrow from others, as Dr.
Preston and Pareus, and he knows neither my meaning nor theirs in them. And in
case I should make attempt, if it might be, to make it further clear, he has
still an art, to render it obscure. He observes, that I say, (that which I
think all say) that the accepting of the word [preacht is the note of the
Church] and gives his censure that that is a more laxe, and ambiguous term,
then the former. And seeing that I am not able to satisfy him with any notions
that I can reach, I shall endeavor at present to help his sight, in pointing
out to him, men in Covenant with God; that when he looks upon the men, and the
character given of God himself, of them, he may (if he please) guess at the
Covenant it self. Scripture-characters of men in Covenant.
Does Mr. Baxter know what Covenant that was, that the Captains of tribes,
Elders, Officers, with all the men of Israel, little ones, wives, strangers,
from the hewer of wood to the drawer of water entered into? Deuteronomy. 29. and what
kind of men they were that avouched the Lord to be their God, and whom God
avouched to be his peculiar people? Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Does he know who those be,
that throughout the Old Testament-Scriptures, the Lord calls his people, his
inheritance, his portion, his sons and daughters? And who those kinsmen of
Paul according to the flesh were, to whom pertained the Adoption, the glory,
and the Covenants? Romans 9.4. Does he know who those were in New
Testament-times, that were converted by thousands, myriads of thousands? then
he knows who God looks upon, as his in Covenant, and to whom Covenant
privileges appertain. And doubtless those hearers that Isaiah describes (and
from him all the Evangelists) of fat hearts, dim eyes, heavy ears, whilst
God had not removed his Candlestick, were included: They were in Covenrnt with
God. If it be said that these are said to be in Covenant equivocally; I answer,
1. I dare not charge the constant language of the Spirit of God in Scripture
with equivocation. 2. I am sure that they upon that account, really enjoyed the
privileges under dispute, were called by the name of a Church, Acts 7.38. and
had that elogy, a people near unto the Lord. And to say that these were in
Covenant with a quatenus, aliquo modo sic, aliquo modo non, when God testifies
that they avouch him to be their God, I think is too great boldness. That
those that rose no higher, then these mentioned, have no right to the great
blessings of the Covenant, as Christ, pardon, Justification, Adoption, glory,
upon that account, that they come not up to the faith called for in Covenant, I
freely with Mr. Baxter grant; Those are too high Favors for Covenant breakers,
yet I say, as all Israel did de facto enjoy, so all of the like faith in foro
Dei have their right of his free bounty to all those Church Priviledges that
serve to fit for glory. He is pleased to say, Mr. Bl. had done better, if, with
that moderate, reverend, godly man Mr. Stephen Marshall he had distinguished
between those two questions [who are Christians, or Church Members?] and [whom
we are to judge such and use as such?] and to bring in the latter rank only. I
know not where Mr. Marshall thus distinguishes. If he speaks of members of the
Church invisible, it is not at all to our purpose, we are not speaking to them:
And if he mean members of the Church visible, I know no use of such
distinction, we can well enough know such members, otherwise they were not
visible. Let Mr Baxter look upon those notes of a Churchmember which he
mentions, where he intended a confutation of my 31. chap. in case I had not
spoken to his mind, and the same things with him, and then see whether such
cannot be known? I think those of the Worcestershire combination, may know who
those be whom they take into Communion. In a parenthesis he is pleased to tell
me, that herein I join with Mr. Tombs. To which I reply, what animosity soever
he has against me, I shall not leave any one truth to shun agreement with
him, when Mr. Baxter himself affirms, that Mr. Tombs and he are agreed in that
particular that he there mentions, page 92. though most Divines, (as he there
says) are against them both; sure I may boldly join with him, when most
Divines are for us. He tells me, Those that profess to fear God, and love him,
we must love and honor as men, that do fear and love him: yet in different
degrees, as the signs of their graces are more or less probable. In some
common confessing Christians, we see but small probability: yet dare we not
exclude them from the Church, nor the number of true believers, as long as
there is any probability; Others that are more judicious, zealous, diligent and
upright of life, we have far stronger probability of: and therefore love and
honor them much more. All this is true, in case we were to enquire after the
fear of God in its power, or the image of God, renewed in sincerity; But when
it is applied to visible Church Membership, I know not what to make of it. Must
I more or less honor a man, accordingly as he appears more or less visibly
in Congregations? After a long discourse about the Covenant, and faith
dogmatical, which I shall have occasion further to touch upon, he concludes
thus, The words which Mr. Bl. questioneth, I confess are mine, against Dr.
Ward, The Author vindicated from singularity.
and I did not think in so gross an opinion Dr. Ward would have found any
second to undertake that cause. How this passage fell from his pen, may well
be to every intelligent Reader matter of admiration: not that he charge an
opinion from which he dissents, to be so notably gross, (which is not very
unusual) but that a man of such multiplicity of reading, should think that Dr.
Ward in this opinion would not have found a second, when if he has perused our
approved Authors about the question, especially since it came to a punctual
just debate, he may soon see that he has almost every one to appear for him if
this which he mentions be his opinion, unless perhaps he has been so held in
reading the Fathers, and other Writers for the first thirteen, or fourteen
hundred years (in which few will, I think, come out and vye with him,) that he
has not regarded what has been said this hundred and fifty years, in this
corner of the world, when his book came first out, I received a letter from as
learned an hand, as any I have to converse withal, noting this, as a singular
tenent; and when upon occasion I have mentioned it, that Mr. Baxter holds that
no faith that is short of that which justifies, gives title to Baptism, it
sounded so strange that I could not gain credit to the report of it. He that
has spent so much pains in that Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.14. cannot be ignorant of
that usual distinction, of Covenant holiness, and holiness habitual, and
personal. The former, (according to Divines and Mr. Baxter himself) is an
holiness of relation to God, and separation for him; which was found in all
the Nation of the Jews, and now is in all professed believers, and their seed.
The latter is an inherent quality, infused by regeneration, by which the man is
brought into conformity with the Law of God. The former (according to them, and
him in that Treatise) gives title to Baptism, even where the latter is
wanting. Those words therefore were more then needed: [If men be once taught,
that it is a faith short of that which is saving and justifying, which
admits to Baptisme] seeing it is in reformed Churches generally, and
universally taught, Mr. T. very well knowing, (as all do know) that in these
last ages it is a doctrine generally received: and setting himself to oppose
it, says, that he can derive its pedigree no higher than Zwinglius: but he
has heard of those that were Zwinglius his seniors, to be of the same mind, as
the Reader may see in my answer to his letter. The Jesuits generally charge it
upon Calvin, and Beza, and those of that party; and well they may, as their
opinion, but not as their invention. As to that charge, they stand acquitted by
their adversaries: Suarez in Thom. part. 3. tom. 3. q. 69. art. 8. dis. 27.
Sect. 1. speaking of this opinion, says, It is ancienter then Calvin, as
appears by Waldens. tom. de Sacram. tit. 3. cap. 53, 54. yet Calvin (says he)
either increased or revived it, as appears by Ruardus, Lindanus, Prateolus and
others. This easily may be yielded, and if Chamier may be heard, all
Protestants embraced, it. Mr. Baxter in the words before may see the opinion of
that Divine, whom he so deservedly magnifies, Mr. Cobbet full against him;
notwithstanding he lives where the greatest strength of that party is, that are
his opposites. Let the Reader observe his fourth conclusion, page 52. The
Church in dispensing an enjoined initiatory seal of the Covenant of grace,
looks unto visibility of interest in the Covenant, to guide her in the
application thereof; nor is it the saving interest of the persons in view, that
is her rule, by which she is therein to proceed. And compare with it the close
of his whole discourse upon it in these words: And I the more wonder, that any
which confess, that it is not to be denied that God would have infants of
believers in some sense to be accounted his, to belong to his Church, and
family, and not to the Devils, as true in facie Ecclesiae visibilis, etc. yet
do oppose us in this particular now in question. If he please to peruse Pareus,
1 Cor. 7.14. as he shall find Stapleton, in objections there produced, his
friend, so Pareus fully his adversary. And I shall add one testimony that
carries many more in the belly of it, in which the Reader may see that Dr. Ward
in this thing now in agitation, has the general vote of reformed Churches for
him, and against Mr. Baxter. Apollonius speaking to the question, Quaestio
quarta, An infantes quorum parents proximi solenni and Ecclesiastico foedere
alicui particulari Ecclesiae sese non adjungunt, in Ecclesia non sint
baptizandi, sed ut baptismi in capaces and privilegiorum Ecclesiae expertes
sint aestimandi? Resp. Existimant Reformati, quod federalis quaedam sanctitas,
qua jus habent illi qui hoc modo sancti sunt, ad media salutis and Sacramentum
Baptismi, and qua ab Ethnicis, Turcis, similibusque aliis infidelibus
separantur, 1 Cor. 7.14. toti nationi seu populo communicetur, cui Deus tabulas
sui foederis ita impertit ut easdem suscipiant, and profiteantur, quos ad
statum visibilis Ecclesiae suae vocat and ducit, Romans 11.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Haec foederalis sanctitas transfertur ad posteros non per proximorum parentum
sanctitatom inhaerentem, qui sua fide vel infidelitate eam posteriis proximis
vel tollerent vel stabilirent; sed misericordi Dei voluntate, qua foederis
illius privilegia externa parentibus etiam remotioribus promissa extendit and
constanter impertit in multas generationes posteris fidem profitentibus etiam
iis quorum parents proximi impii, and in foedere Dei perfidi fuere.
Whether infants whose immediate parents do not join themselves by any solemn
Ecclesiastical Covenant to any particular Church, are not to be baptized in the
Church, but are to be esteemed incapable of Baptism and void of Church
privileges? answers the question in these words: The reformed hold that a
certain foederall holiness, (whereby those that are in this manner holy, have
right to the means of salvation, and whereby they are differenced from
Heathens. Turks and other like infidels, 1 Cor. 7.14.) is communicated to the
whole Nation or people to whom God does so impart the tables of his Covenant,
that they receive and profess them, whom he calls and brings to the state of
his church visible, Romans 11.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. This foederall holiness is
transmitted to posterity (says he) not by the inherent holiness of immediate
parents, which either their faith or unbelief should take away, or establish,
to their immediate posterity: but by the good and gracious will of God, whereby
he extends and constantly bestows the outward privileges promised to more
remote parents, for many generations to posterity, professing the faith; even
to those whose immediate parents have been found wicked and false in their
Covenant, quoting these texts, Ps. 106.35, 36, 44, 45. Isa. 63.10, 11.51.1, 2,
3. Ezekiel. 20.8. And confirming this assertion with several arguments, the last
of which is this; Quia adulti omnes in Novo Testamento a Johanne Baptista and
Apostolis sunt baptizati, telonarii, milites and quicunque ex Judea and
circumjacentibus regionibus ad Baptismum devenerunt absque longiore examine, si
modo fidem profiterentur and peccata confiterentur; et si hypocritae, genimina
viperarum and homines malae frugis iter eos essent, proinde and infantes eorum
ad baptismum admittendi. Causam hanc pro praxi Ecclesiarum Reformatarum multis
disputat Cl. Walaeus, in locis communibus, operum in Folio, page 494, 495.
Because all of years in the New Testament were baptized by John Baptist and
the Apostles, as Publicanes Soldiers, and whosoever out of Judea, and the
regions round about came to Baptism, wit hout any further trial: provided that
they professed their faith and confessed their sins, though there were many
Hypocrites, generations of vipers and men of dissolute courses amongst them:
and therefore (says he) their infants are also to be admitted unto Baptism,
adding that learned Walaeus largely defends this cause for the practice of
reformed Churches in his Common places, page 494, 495. adding yet further,
Rejicimus igitur Antitheses eorum qui denegant Baptismum filiis eorum qui impie
vivunt and vita sua improba efficatiam baptismi sui irritam erga se reddunt.
Hisce opponimus judicium Leydensium in Synopsi Theol. ubi sic disserunt,
disput. 44. these. 50.
We therefore reject the contrary opinion of those which deny Baptism to the
children of those who live wickedly, and by their wicked life render the
efficacy of their baptism to themselves as null and vain. To those we oppose
(says he) the judgment of the professors of Leyden in their Synopsis of
Divinity, dis. 44. these. 50. If the Reader please to consult this quotation
from these Authors, he shall see it very full to the purpose; as also Walaeus
in the place before mentioned. So that Mr. Baxter may see that he has not
only me to oppose, together with the ashes of Dr. Ward, (whose memory yet is
to be had in reverence) but ancient Writers within these 1300. years, together
with the concurrent voice of Divines in the generality of them in these 150
years last past, which in other Points he confesses are his adversaries, on
whose side the truth is, whether on his few, or the Churches many, is further
to be enquired.

A Vindication of several Arguments in the Treatise of the Covenant.
Chap. 32. of my Treatise of the Covenant, I bring several Arguments to evince
this Proposition, [that A Faith which is short of Justifying, and saving,
admits to Baptism.] The first of which refers to that, which I had before
spoken at large, concerning the latitude of the Covenant, expressing my self in
this manner, [All that has been said for the latitude of the Covenant, may
fitly be applied for the like latitude of Baptisme]. To this Mr. Baxter
replies, Therefore did I say the more of the Covenant before, Covenant and Seal
commensurate.
to show your confusion and mistake in that. It is not every Covenant, or
Promise, that Baptism is the seal of. I desire no more of the judicious
Reader, but to reflect upon that which I have spoke, Chap. 27, 28. of that
Treatise, together with that which he has been pleased to speak so largely
against me: His distinctions of Covenants, and Promises; The several ways
that (according to him) men may be in Covenant: How unregenerate men may be in
Covenant, and how not; together with his multitude of Positions, (most of which
look not at all toward the business) and then consider whether he, or I,
stand more guilty of mistake or confusion, and whether he has brought any
thing home, after so tedious a discourse, for satisfaction, or to give any
color to it, that unregenerate men are not so in Covenant as thereby to have
interest in Baptism, which must be done, if he speak any thing in opposition
to me: My business being to prove that they are so in Covenant, that they have
upon Covenant-right, title to the seal; and if the Reader can find any thing
tending that way, let Mr. Baxter consider whether it be not in full opposition
to himself, who reckoning up Mr. Tombs his errors, makes this the fifth in
order: that he holds, That the Covenant whereof Baptism is the Seal, Mr.
Baxters Concessions of the latitude of the Covenant.
is the absolute Covenant of Grace made only to the Elect. Did not Mr. Baxter
then believe that those that are non-Elect were comprised in it? The conclusion
of his large discourse is laid down by himself, page 63. in these words, Though
wicked men have many Promises from God, especially the great conditional
Promise of life, if they will repent, and believe, and though they are also by
their imperfect equivocal covenanting with God; yet God remains still
unoblig'd to them. But how this stands with that which he has in dispute in
the place before mentioned, let him also take into further consideration; where
he charge this, as his adversaries fourth error: That every right
administration of Baptism, is not Gods sealing: Actually God seals not, but
when it is administered to a Believer. It may be called a right act of the
administrator, according to Gods appointment, but not Gods sealing. Against
which he thus disputes, page 222. If the Sacrament rightly administered to an
hypocrite, have all that is essential to Gods actual sealing, then it is his
actual sealing; But the Sacrament rightly administered to an hypocrite, has all
things essential to Gods actual sealing; Ergo. The Minor he proves at large, as
I may have occasion hereafter to make known. And whereas he so peremptorily
determines, that though wicked men oblige themselves, yet God still remains
disobliged, let him consider, God stands obliged to all that he does avouch his
people.
whether God be not some way obliged to all that he avoucheth to be his people.
If this be denied, there will be found no great happiness to a people, to have
the Lord for their God. But God avoucheth those to be his people, Deuteronomy. 26.17.
who are yet in an unregenerate estate. And if we look into Scriptures, we shall
see that this is Gods ordinary language. Are there many worse to be found in
any visible Church State, then those with whom God holds contest, Psalm. 50? Yet
to these he says, verse 7. Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and
I will testify against thee: I am God, even thy God: Together with those, Isa.
1. to whom he addresses himself under these titles, Rulers of Sodom, people of
Gomorrah: yet we see, verse 2. what language he speaks of them, Israel does not
know, my people do not understand. And whereas he states the Question as though
the whole of the dispute turned on this hinge; Whether these men be in Covenant
with God, as to Gods actual engagement to them; so far as that Gods promise is
in force for conveying actual right to them, as to the promised blessings? and
so whether it be a mutual Covenant, and both parties be actually obliged? And
thus I say that wicked men are not in Covenant with God, that is, God is not in
Covenant with them: Neither have they any right to the main blessings given by
the Covenant, viz. Christ, Pardon, Justification, Adoption, Glory. I know no
man that has spoke so much as himself toward the proof of it in the
affirmative: So long as they break not the Covenant-engagement, (in which he
confesses they have obliged themselves,) God stands engaged to them for the
greatest spiritual blessings. But according to him, they break not Covenant
until they arrive at final impenitence and unbelief. He very well knows that
I hold that every wicked man in the Church lives in continual breach of
Covenant, and is therefore under the curse and penalty of it; and that I should
think that God were actually engaged to give Christ, Pardon, Justification,
Adoption, Glory, to them, in that state and condition, were more then strange.
These may know by virtue of their Covenant-priviledges upon what terms they may
attain the mercies mentioned, and upon what terms God stands engaged to give
them, and they enjoy the power of Ordinances to work them up to the said terms,
which they do not, who are without Covenant, and therefore are afar off, when
men in Covenant are near. Did ever man, speak of an absolute tie in a
conditional Covenant, whether the conditions are kept or no? That therefore
before mentioned which he calls the great question between him and me; is no
question at all. It were madness to affirm that, which with these limits he
thus denies. Yet still I say, that the Covenant which Baptism seals, is made
with the unregenerate as well as regenerate persons; which as we have heard, he
makes Mr. Tombe's error to deny. And because the Covenant belongs to them,
Baptism in like sort belongs to them: and as upon that account we must baptize
them, so in foro Dei, according to the mind of Jesus Christ, they have right to
Baptism: Which in case Mr. Baxter shall deny, I shall desire him to reflect
upon the afore-cited passages of his own; together with that which, page 65 of
this Treatise he delivers. If it be the whole matter of Christianity that is
professed, but dissembledly: then as he is equivocally, or analogically a
believer, or Christian, so I yield he is a member of the Church visible. And
Church Membership is one of his own mediums to prove a right to Church-entrance
by Baptism, and here is a Faith not above dogmatical; At least, short of that
which is justifying, and yet such a faith as is real, having real fruits and
effects, and sometimes real miracles. If the argument hold when it is thus
enfeebled, how much more when it is put in its full strength? Such an one is
univocally in Covenant, whose dissimulation is no other then necessarily
attends an unregenerate estate: in case there be any thing in Scripture above
equivocation, They remembered that God is their Rock, the high God their
Redeemer, Psalm. 78.34. And whereas I stand charged in this discourse by Mr.
Baxter with several uncouth, if not wild, opinions and assertions about the
Covenant, and Mr. Baxter despairs (as we have heard) of understanding of my
meaning, I shall here endeavor, as to vindicate, so to explain my self in like
manner, that the Reader (if not Mr. Baxter) may be brought to a right
understanding; avoiding, as much as may be, both nicety, and multiplicity.

1. It is said, that I suppose certain Promises to go before the great Law of
Grace. Those that suppose such (says he) are of two sorts, 1. The Arminians
and Jesuits. 2. Such as Mr. Bl. about Church-Ordinances. And having spent many
lines upon the Arminians to show his dissent, and assent, so that the Reader
may well have forgotten both me and my charge, he says, 2. The Author
vindicated from a fiction imposed.
The second part of promises before the great Covenant of Grace is feigned by
Mr. Bl. (and if there be any other that go that way, as some do, and that with
some difference amongst themselves) and that is a promise of Church Priviledges
upon condition of a faith, not justifying, nor saving. One that Mr. Baxter will
not deny to be eminently learned, (and I think as well versed in his Writings,
and mine, as any man alive; Far better, I believe, then he in mine, or I in
his) upon observation of this passage, replied as by address to him, You
rather feign this of Mr. Bl. then find it in him. And I profess I know no man
whose brain ever either hatched, or vented such a crotchet. Neither do I know
how this mistake was ever entertained, (for I believe it was a mistake) unless
it be, that taking for granted that there is no Covenant of grace entered with
any out of the state of grace; and finding, that I assert, that
Church-Ordinances appertain to unregenerate Christians, and those that are
short of faith that is justifying, he here fancies a promise of these made to a
faith of this kind: Whereas that which I say is, That every acceptance of a
Gospel-tender (which tenders a man a Christian outwardly) actually vests him in
right to these Ordinances, as it did the Jew outwardly, Romans 3.1. And that
these Ordinances are necessarily requisite to bring men up to the fruition of
those happy privileges of Pardon, Justification, Adoption, Glorification. So
that I conceit no promise of these Ordinances made to such a faith, but an
actual investiture of every such believer in them. Neither do I know any
promises preceding the Covenant of Grace. Such must be made to mere Heathens,
or those that are in a parallel estate, aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel. Unless perhaps some such promise to some such, upon some particular
account may be found. Yet if he can work me to be of his mind, that Election,
Regeneration, and the Covenant of Grace, are commensurate, so that no non-elect
man is in Covenant, then shall I say that there are Promises made before the
Covenant. The Apostle speaking of the Jews, that for the generality of them,
were neither elect nor regenerate, says, To them appertained the Covenants. I
may therefore charge it upon him, with better reason then he upon me: Those
stand vested in promises, that, he says, are out of Covenant. The Promise is
said to belong to those Jews, Romans 9.4. on whom yet the Word took no saving
effect, verse 6. Hence by opposition to the Gentiles they were those that were
not strangers to the Church, but of it. They were not strangers to the Covenant
of Promise, but in the same, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Hence God, says he, makes his
Covenant with them all, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 12, 13, 14, 15. speaking there of that
solemn renewal of the Covenant of Grace, as Deuteronomy. 30.6, 10, 12, 13, 14.
compared with Romans 10.6, 7, 8. evinceth. So, Ezekiel. 16.8. he made a Covenant
with that Church and people, many whereof proved very base, as that Chapter
shows. Cobbet just vindicat. page 46. Where much more to this purpose from
many Texts of Scripture may be seen.

The Author further vindicated.
I am farther charged, that my common phrase is, That they (namely unregenerate
men) are in the outward Covenant, with this note upon it, what that is I cannot
tell. Who would not now think but that here were a phrase peculiarly mine: Upon
which the same learned hand as before, expresses himself in these words, I do
not see that that phrase is common with Mr. Bl. He rather uses it as from
others: which any may evidently see, if they consult page 189, 190. of my
Treatise of the Covenant. But of this I have spoke before, and therefore his
guesses upon it, that he believes that it is called outward, by reason of
outward blessings annexed to it, might have been spared. They that use it,
express their own meaning, The Covenant (they say) is but one and the same;
but all are not in the Covenant after one and the same manner: Some are only
in it by outward profession, to the present participation of outward
privileges; but some by cordial acceptance to the enjoyment of saving benefits
by means of these privileges. He says in the place quoted, I should have
thought it but reasonable for Mr. Bl. 1. To have told us what those outward
blessings are that this Covenant promises. But what need I to tell him, when,
page 61. he has told me, that it is a promise of Church Priviledges, and I now
tell him that these stand actually possessed of these privileges, and have all
the Promises, together with these privileges that the Gospel contains. And
that these privileges are appointed of God, to bring them in Gods way to the
possession of them. 2. Says he, That he would have it proved out of Scripture
that God has such a Covenant distinct from the Covenant of grace, which
promises Justification and Salvation, and having other conditions on our part.
To this I know not what to say; but that when Mr. Baxter has proved that there
are not only mountains of earth in his West side of England, viz. Wreakin,
Mawbourn, Clee, but also mountnins of Gold, I will endeavor the proof of this,
if I can tell how: for he has had as many thoughts of such golden Chimaera's,
as I have had of any such Covenant, distinct from the Covenant of Grace, which
in my name he here imagines. Having vindicated my self from these imposed
fancies that never entered into my thoughts, I shall now endeavor, if it may
be, further to clear my own meaning in these following Propositions.
Propositions tending to clear the Authors meaning.


1. Those that take upon themselves a Christian profession, being separate for
God, calling him by the name of Lord, that have Ordinances of God as their
inheritance, that acknowledge a Deity, and no other but the true Deity; a
necessity of worship, and none but the Christian worship, these with me are in
Covenant with God, as was Jews, and the whole face of the visible Church of
the Gentiles, that were engraffed in their stead. This to me is plain in that
they are the Church or Churches of God, Acts 7.8. Gal. 1.2. The called of God,
Mat. 22.14. The people of God, Isa. 1.2. Psalm. 90.7. They that sacrificed to
the true God, Psalm. 50.7. Are the sons of God, Genesis 6.1. Deuteronomy. 14.1. Romans 9.4.
Are a people nigh unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4.7. Psalm. 148. ult. God professing
himself to be their God, Psalm. 90.7. Are Children of the Covenant, Acts 3.35.
Saints, Psalm. 90.5. Act. 26.10. 1 Cor. 14.33. Believers, Act. 8.12, 13. Act.
21.20. Luke 8.13. Disciples, Matthew. 10.1, 4. Acts 9.1. and 15.10. Christians,
Act. 11.26. That all of these imply a Covenant-state; and that unregenerate men
have in Scripture all this honor, is clear. These therefore with me are in
Covenant. I know that as to all of these elogies it is answered in a word, that
they are equivocal. An answer that I can scarce take into my thoughts without
horror; As though Gods oracles were all over, from one end of the Bible to the
other, like those of Apollo, and there were no reality either in their
separation for God, or gifts that they receive from God, (which as to
illumination, conviction, faith, as well ordinary as extraordinary oftentimes
are many) or privileges that they enjoy: But this we shall have further
occasion to consider; and when there can be no plain denial that all of this
here mentioned argues Covenant-state, a quarrel seems to be picked, rather then
any direct answer given. For as I say, page 189 of my Treatise, That in
Old-Testament-times the Covenant was made with Israel in the uttermost latitude
of it, with all those that bore the name of Israel, making proof at large from
Deuteronomy. 29. as the Reader may see. Mr. Baxter quoting the place, takes notice of
no more then that it was made with all Israel: and infers, page 65. So that it
seems he takes all to be in Covenant that bear the name, Christian. And then
questions; What? Though they know not what Christ or Christianity is? Is taking
a name, entering into Covenant? The poor Indians that by thousands are forced by
the Spaniard to be baptized are said to know so little what they do, that some
of them forget the name of [a Christian] which they assumed. And does not he
think that a man may take as plausible exceptions against his word, where he
says, The rule is, That a serious professor of the faith is to be taken for a
true Believer; If he would travel as far as India for it, as he does here
against Gods Word? Do not we know, that force may make these poor Indians to
appear serious in their profession? And it is wonder that it should be so
strange with him, that taking a name should be entering Covenant, or at least
that it should imply a Covenant-state: Let him consult, Isa. 4.1. and those
manifold Scripture-Texts, which express the relation of Gods Vovenant People
to him, in these words, A people called by his Name; or on whom the Name of God
is called. And distinction should be put between children of the Covenant by
descent from parents in Covenant, whether Jews or Christians, (who continue
their Covenant relation, till they professedly cast it off, notwithstanding
their ignorance) and such that of mere aliens are to be received, having no
other title then their own present qualification. This ought to be voluntary,
as well in renouncing their old false way, as embracing the present, as we see
it was in those converts through the Acts of the Apostles. And it is not to be
without some competency of knowledge, discerning the evil of their former
course, and the happiness attainable in the present. And I am easily induced
to believe that more knowledge by the industry of teachers, is now required,
then was in the primitive times, seeing there is not so much of God by miracle
to persuade, and, as it were, to overrule: So that it is not a naked taking of
a name that is intended, but that which still attends upon it: As a wife is
called by her husbands name, and withal makes her abode in his house, so it is
with a Vovenant People, and was with Israel: They bore the name of God, and
they made abode in the Church of God, enjoying his Ordinannances as their
inheritance. Mr. Baxter says, For the Word of God, God often bestows it on
infidels, and in England there aremen that deride the truth of Scripture, and
esteem it: afliction, and yet for credit of men come ordinarily to the
Congregation. These have the Word given, and so have other unregenerate men,
but not by Covenant that I know of. That God does bestow his Word on infidells,
to me is strange: it is true that he often tenders it to them, but in case they
remain infidells, they put it away from them, and bestowing implies not only a
tender, but an acceptance. It is the great advantage of Israel above other
Nations that to them was committed the oracles of God, when others had not that
honor. And to speak of Gods giving his Word by Covenant, is a most improper
speech, seeing it is the very Covenant droughts; as though we should say, he
gives his Word, by his Word. And these sure are no open deriders that for the
credit of men make such a public profession: this would work restraint on the
one hand, as it puts upon profession on the other. And in case any such thing
be, though the Covenant is perfidiously broke, yet (as I conceive) not totally
cast off, as long as any open profession is continued. What shall we say of
those that take their sons, and daughters to give them to Moloch? this can be
no low crime, and an high departure from the true God, yet these bring forth
children unto God: and they are his children, that they thus sacrifice, Ezekiel.
16.20, 21. So also, Psalm. 106.35, etc. Israel was mingled among the Heathen,
and learned their works, and they served their Idols, which were a snare to
them; yea, they sacrificed their sons and daughters unto Devils, and shed
innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and daughters. Yet this, as
appears, casts them not out of Covenant; God notwithstanding remembered with
them his Covenant, ver. 45. This was therefore doubtless but a partial
apostasy; taking in the worship of Idols, they did not totally cast off the
worship of God: God was not totally cast off in Judah, neither did cast off
Judah. Ahaz was of the worst of Kings, and yet his posterity was reckoned among
the people of the Lord. Had the Jews then been as severe disputants against a
Covenant-state as are risen up now, the Church of God had wanted an Hezekiah,
he had never lived, much less wrought so happy a Reformation in the Church of
God.

Those that are looked upon by men, as in Covenant with God, and so ordinarily
judged (as the people of Israel were) by the name that they bear, their abode
in the Church, and profession that they make, and so accordingly styled, they
are truly, and really in Covenant. A man may know a man to appertain to such or
such a person, because he sees him in his family, hears him call him Master,
sees him, sometimes at least, in his work, and knows him to have the repute of
his servant; Though to know him to be a faithful servant requires more
diligence of enquiry, and a stricter scrutiny: So a man may be as easily known
to appertain to Jesus Christ; The same Characters make him known. For all that
is required to being in Covenant is visible, open, evident: but sincerity of
heart in covenanting is invisible and secret. And therefore the Jew outwardly,
Romans 2.28. is called by the Vulgar, Vatablus, Tremelius, Arias Montanus, and
Castalio, Judaeus in manifesto; by Calvin, Judaeus in aperto; by Beza, Judaeus
in propatulo: the Jew inwardly, Judaeus in abscondito, or, occulto: Their
Church, or Covenant-station giving them those great advantages after mentioned,
was open and manifest. Those that say, Lord, Lord, as, Matthew. 7.21. are of
those that avouch God to be their God, and God avoucheth them to be his people.
And therefore when they come with their sacrifices, though in their sins, and
God upon that account testifies against them; yet he says, I am God, even thy
God. It is confessed by Mr. Baxter, that we must judge those that make
profession, to be in Covenant with God: we must give them the name of
Christians, and men in Covenant with God, and we must use them as Christians in
works of charity and Ordinances, and Church Communion, and so must use their
Children as Christians children. And seeing reason to judge so, (according to
Scripture-character of men in Covenant) they are so. Either in this we judge
right, or else we proceed upon mistake. If we judge aright, then all is well:
If we mistake, then all in these proceedings is null. Water has been applied
to the child of such an one, but no Sacrament dispensed; And according to a
man's hopes, thoughts, or fears of his fathers regeneration, are his hopes,
thoughts and fears of his own baptism, and consequently of his interest in
Church Communion; for this stands or falls according to his fathers interest or
non-interest in the Covenant. When Mr. Baxter is urged with this, he uses to
refer to his Treatise of Infant Baptism, where he lays us down a grand Rule
or Maxim, and out of that extracts many others. His grand Rule is, That a
serious Professor of the faith is to be taken for a true Believer: and this
being laid down, he proceeds on. If this Proposition were a Scripture-Maxime,
then it would have born a farther superstruction; but being neither found
there, nor any proof made that it is any way deduced thence, mother and
daughters may all justly be called into question: and seeing he cannot but
know, that very many as to the thing for which it is produced, (which is in
order to admission to Ordinances) will utterly deny it, he might have done well
to have made some essay to have proved it. I do yield that charity is to hope
the best, but that we should put our charity to it, or our reason either, for
probability or certainty, when we are no where so taught, and have a more sure
rule for our preceding, I see no reason. I can scarce meet with a Minister
that says, (and I have put the question to many of the most eminent that I
know) that he baptizeth any Infant upon this ground of hope that the Parent is
regenerate, but still with earnest vehemence professes the contrary. I desire
the Reader to consider Mr. Cobbets third and fourth Conclusions in his just
Vindication, page 46, 52. There is a bare external being in the Covenant of
Grace, says he, of persons who possibly never shall be saved. Concl. 3d. The
Church in dispensing an enjoined initiatory seal of the Covenant of Grace
looks unto visibility of interest in the Covenant, to guide her in the
application thereof: Concl. 4th. Visibility of interest, and saving interest
are there opposed. See also Mr. Hudson, page 249. John Baptist did not in his
conscience think they had all actually, really and completely repented and
reformed themselves, whom he baptized, but he baptized them unto Repentance,
Matthew. 3.11. and they by receiving the same bound themselves to endeavor the
practice thereof. It were a sad case for Ministers, if they were bound to admit
none, or administer the Lords Supper to none, but such as were truly godly; or
that they judged in their conscience to be so, or were bound to eject all that
they judged were not so.

Man's obligation of himself in Covenant unto God, upon the terms by him
proposed, necessarily implies Gods obligation to man. Where God makes tenders
of the Gospel by his Ministers to any one out of Covenant, there he makes
tender of the Covenant; and where a person or people professedly accept, that
is, engage themselves, (as myriads of thousands did through the Acts of the
Apostles) this person, this people, each man of them is in Covenant. As
Scripture calls them by the name of Saints, Disciples, Believers, Christians,
so we may call them Covenanters. They have all a sanctity of separation, which
Camero says, is real, and Mr. Baxter disputed from thence to a right in
Baptism, from that Text, 1 Cor. 7.14. There is in most of them, if not in all,
some graces that are real, either common or saving, and a Covenant does not
wait till the terms be kept, and the conditions made good, before it has the
being of a Covenant. And whether these be every way sincere, or any way
dissembling, yet, as Mr. Baxter acknowledges, they really oblige themselves:
And God howsoever dissembles not, but is bound by himself upon his own terms
which they professedly accept to confer all that the Covenant holds forth. So
that wheresoever man is obliged, there a complete Covenant is made up. For Gods
tender goes before, and man is the last party, and compleats the Covenant.

Sincerity, and integrity of heart; or full reality in a man's intentions to
stand to the whole of a Covenant, is not of the essence, and being of it. Both
parties stand engaged upon their respective terms, though one part should have
unsincere intentions. A wife is a wife, and the marriage is complete, when both
parties have publicly expressed consent, though she hold a resolution to be
stubborn, refractory, profuse, etc. A man consenting to serve, whether in bare
words, or taking earnest, (as is most usual) or by hand and seal, (as in the
case of apprentices) is a servant, although he intend with Onesimus to purloyn,
or take his opportunity to be gone. Mr. Baxter thinks it makes for his
advantage, to say that unregenerate men are unsincere in Covenant; but that is
a concession, that utterly destroys him. If they be unsincere, or, as the
Psalmist speaks, not steadfast in Covenant, then they are in Covenant. A
Propositione secundi adjacentis ad propositionem primi adjacentis valet
argumentum. If it be true that Catiline is a seditious man, then it is true
that he is a man: that Peribomius is a vicious man, then he is a man; that
Judas is treacherous and perfidious in Covenant, then he is in Covenant: A man's
conviction that he is an unjust steward, or an unfaithful servant, does not
conclude him to be no servant, or no steward, but the contrary. And whereas,
page 66. he says, The differences, Mr. Bl. must take notice of, between humane
Covenants and ours with God; or else he will mar all. Men know not one
another hearts, and therefore make not Laws for hearts, nor impose conditions
on hearts: and therefore if both parties do confess consent, though
dissembledly, they are both obliged, and the Covenant is mutual. But God offers
to consent only on condition that our hearts consent to his terms, and
therefore if we profess consent, and do not consent, God consents not, nor
is, as it were, obliged. This were somewhat to purpose, in case he could make
it appear that Scripture denies all being of a Covenant, where the all-seeing
eye of God sees not all integrity and sincerity. But Scripture Language, which
is the safest for us to follow, being (as we have heard) far otherwise, there
is nothing marred in non-observance of any such supposed difference: For which
we shall presently hear again and again Mr. Baxters own confession.

5. There is a real and serious purpose in many unregenerate persons though
with Austin they have a great mind to delay, and often to put off the thought
of their more exact, and serious service; and too ordinarily think that they
keep Covenant, when they break it. Having not as yet any right knowledge,
either of their own hearts, or Gods commands: And in this posture in which they
thus stand before they come up any higher, yea, though they never come higher,
they reach unto graces in themselves real, true, and good, and also do the
works which God commands; and this sometimes is Mr. Baxters own thoughts. When
his business is, to inform his Hearers, or Readers, and not to make opposition
against others, then he can use the word [reall] and forbear the word
[equivocall] as appears in his Saints everlasting rest, Part 3. Sect. 6. There
is a common grace which is not saving, yet real, and so true, and good, and so
true grace as well as special grace which is saving. Which may be a fair answer
to that which himself has said, page 68. of this Treatise; Mr. Bl. in his
explication of this Dogmaticall faith, adds by way of exclusion [though not
affecting the heart to a full choice of Christ] where he seems to imply, though
he express it not, that the faith that he means does affect the heart to a
choice of Christ which is not full. But if so, then, 1. It is much more then
assent, or a mere Historical, Dogmatical Faith. 2. But is the choice, which he
intimates, real as to the act, and suited to the object? That is, the real
choice of such a Christ as is offered, and on such terms? If so, it is
justifying faith: If not, either it is counterfeit, as to the act, or but
nominal, as to the object, and is indeed no choosing of Christ. That which is
real and true, is neither counterfeit nor merely nominall, so far as they know
either Christ or their own hearts, they undissembledly choose and take to him,
as expecting to be happy in him, rather then any other object; though too often
it is upon misinformation: and when they come to a right understanding of the
terms, they are in danger to quit the way in which they might enjoy him. He
further says, Mr. Bl. thinks that there may be an undissembled profession,
which yet may not be of a saving faith; and adds, But then I conceive it is
not an entire profession of the whole essential object of Christian faith, viz.
of assent and consent. In which it does but cast dust in his Readers eyes, in
confounding the entirenesse of the object, and the integrity of the subject.
There may be an entire profession of the whole essential object of faith,
where the will is brought in to make no more full choice, or consent then has
been said. There is added, It will be an hard saying to many honest Christians,
to say, that a man not justified may believe every fundamental article, and
withal truly profess repentance of all his sins, and to take God for his
Sovereign to rule him, and his chief good to be enjoyed to his happiness, and
to take Christ for his Lord, and only Savior, and his Word for his Law and
Rule, and the Holy Ghost for his guide and sanctifier, and the rest which is
essential to Christianity. I think it will be nothing hard for any honest
Christian to say, that a man not justified may believe every fundamental
article, as to assent, and that he may be convinced of the necessity of such
repentance, and accordingly to make profession of it, as John's converts were
baptized into it. That such an one may freely yield that God has right of
Sovereignty and rule, and that he is the chief good to be enjoyed for
happiness, and that he ought to take Christ for his Lord, and Savior, etc.
and that this may be done truly, not only as to reality of assent, but as to
reality of purpose to make this choice, so far as the man knows his own heart,
or the mind of God in this work: though there be not that integrity to yield up
himself wholly, which yet by the power of Ordinances through the Spirit in Gods
time may be done, and through grace perfected.

Lastly, God setting up a visible Church upon earth in order to that And this
of it self in foro Dei, brings them into Covenant-right, and visible
Church Membership. And therefore according to the mind of God, and, as
Apollonius speaks, jure Dei in this estate are to be received; Though they
shall hit or miss of the mercy of the Covenant accordingly as by grace they
come up to, or by sin fall short of the Propositions contained in it. A Scholar
(says Mr. Hudson) that is admitted into a School, is not admitted because he
is doctus, but, ut sit doctus; and if he will submit to the rules of the
School, and apply himself to learn, it is enough for his admission. The like
may be said of the Church visible which is Christ's School; Vindicat. p. 248. To
which Mr. Baxter himself, if I understand him, has given his assent in his
Treatise of everlasting rest, Part 4. Sect. 3. The door of the visible Church
is incomparably wider then the door of heaven; and Christ is so tender, so
bountiful and forward to convey his grace, and the Gospel so free an offer, and
invitation to all, that surely Christ will keep no man off: if they will come
quite over in spirit to Christ, they shall be welcome: if they will come but
only to a visible profession, he will not deny them admittance. This seems to
speak the mind of Jesus Christ for their admittance, and that in foro Dei, as
well as in foro Ecclesiae, they stand in Covenant Relation, and have title to
Church Membership. Thus Mr. Baxter and the Reader may see my thoughts in this
thing: and though I doubt not, but that he will question much that I have said;
yet now at last I hope both he and others may know my meaning.

Argument 2. vindicated.
All the obsurdities following the restraint of the Covenant to the Elect, or
men of a saving Faith: follow upon this restraint of interest in baptism.] Mr.
Baxter answers, What absurdities follow such restraint of it to sound
believers, as I have asserted, I should be willing to know; though with some
labor I have searched for it. Bear with me therefore, whilst I examine what
you refer me to. It is, page 109. where you charge those absurdities. I
wonder that all this labor for search should need, when as he says, he has a
reference, and the Reader I think may see enough from Mr. Baxters own hand in
the places already mentioned; one part of the first absurdity which I have
pressed, Mr. Baxter is pleased to repeat; This restriction of the Covenant (to
shut out all the non-regenerate) makes an utter confusion betwixt the Covenant
it self and the conditions of it: The restriction of the Covenant to the
regenerate, confounds the Covenant and conditions together.
or (if the expression do not please) the Covenant it self, and the duties
required in it: between our entrance into covenant, and our observation of it,
or walking up in faithfulness to it. All know that a bargain for a Sum of
money, and the payment of that Sum: the covenant with a servant for labor,
and the labor according to this covenant, are different things. Faithful men
that make a bargain, keep it; enter covenant, and stand to it: But the making,
and keeping; the entering, and observing, are not the same: and according to
this opinion, Regeneration is our entrance into Covenant, and regeneration is
our keeping of Covenant: before regeneration we make no Covenant, after
regeneration we break no Covenant, there is no such thing as Covenant Breaking.
All this makes an utter confusion in the Covenant. After a charge big enough,
he says, I cannot give my judgment of the intolerablenesse, and great danger
of your mistake here manifested; without unmannerlinesse, I will therefore say
but this, It is in a very weighty point, near the foundation, wherein to err
cannot be safe. To which I only say, I wish he had spoken fully out, that the
intolerablenesse and supposed great danger of my mistake, might have been seen,
and I earnestly desire all my friends, that in case I err in this manner as I
stand charged, that they would afford me their help to discover my error; but I
trust I shall make it good, that my error at the highest is but equivocal. He
adds: In my Aphorisms, (page 265.) I gave my reasons for the contrary; we must
therefore see first what is said there, where he thus bespeaks his Reader.
Here let me mind you, of one useful observation more. The Covenanting on our
parts, is a principal part of the conditions of the Covenant, though this may
seem strange, that a covenanting and performing conditions, should be almost
all one: And indeed, I think all intelligent Readers will judge it to be far
more strange than true, though we are to hear of that which is more strange
presently, we are told of reasons in this page, but I find no piece of a reason
in it, but only, I say, instead of a reason; And I know not where any thing
toward a proof of this position may be found, unless it be in the Poets
Hyperbole, Dimidium facti, qui been coepit, habet; He that has well begun,
has half done; yet half is not almost all. He goes on. It is a truth so far
beyond all doubt, that our own Covenanting is a principal part of the condition
of the Covenant of grace, as that it is in other terms a great part of the
substance of the Gospel. Here are mysterious words. Is our covenanting a part
of the condition, or is the condition a part of the Covenant? The condition is
here made the integrum, and our Covenanting one part of the condition. This is
above my reason. And for the other part, I say, if our covenanting be a great
part of the substance of the Gospel, then the Jew outwardly did make a better
progress in Gospel-waies then we are yet aware of, or the Apostle understood
when he spoke so much as we read, Romans 2. concerning him, for he was in
Covenant, otherwise he had been no Jew at all, but a Pagan or Heathen. Having
told us, (I cannot guess to what end) that the same act is called our
conditions, as the performers; and Gods conditions, as the imposer, and
promiser: giving his blessings only on these imposed conditions, he adds,
Most properly they are called the conditions of Gods Covenant, or promise,
rather than of ours; for our own promise is the first part of them, and our
performance of that promise, but a secondary part: Is not here a convincing
reason? Our own promise is the first part, our performance the second part;
Ergo they are more properly the conditions of Gods, Covenant then of ours. I
deny not the thing, but wonder at the reason; but, speed it as it will, I
thence collect, that promises and performances are distinct things, and that is
enough for me. Our promising to God, I am sure, is our covenanting; this then
differs from Covenant-keeping, or performance, and is not to be confounded with
it. There follows, For, 2. Gods Covenant is a free gift of Christ, and life to
the World on condition of their acceptance: This our Divines against the
Papists, and the doctrine of merit have fully proved. That God does freely give
Christ to those that accept him, I freely yield, and that our Divines have
fully proved it against Papists, I confess, and that it must be asserted
against Antinomians; but what Divines have proved that Gods Covenant is his
free gift of Christ, and life to the world on condition that they will accept,
I know not: It is the first time (I think) that ever I heard it. This then is a
full definition of a Covenant, which I yet think comes short of it; and if it
be a truth, it well serves my purpose; many a Covenant is made, and conditions
never performed. After his expression of himself about the modification of our
acceptance of Christ by faith, he adds, Our acceptance or consent, is our
Covenanting and our Faith. So that our Covenanting with Christ, and our Faith
is the same thing: that is our accepting an offered Savior on his terms, or a
consent that he be ours, and we his on his terms. And who knows not that this
Faith or Covenanting, or consent is the condition by us to be performed, that
we may have right to Christ, and life offered. I do know the latter, and
therefore upon that account, (as upon diverse others) I deny the former. I know
that justifying faith is the condition by us to be performed; and I as well
know, that it is not our covenanting, but our making good our Covenant. That
Faith by which the Romans stood in Covenant with God, was such a faith that the
whole visible Church of the Gentiles had, and the Jews both, Romans 11. But this
was not a justifying faith, but short of it. To make justifying faith, and
Covenanting Synonyma is an error, I am confident, of what size I leave to
others to determine. If they were both one, Scripture would promiscuously speak
of them; but we find that it still distinguishes them, and gives us clearly to
understand, that the greatest part of Covenanters are short of Faith that is
saving and justifying. Ordinances in which the Covenant of grace is dispensed,
and which speak all those that entertain them to be in Covenant, are granted of
God to men short of justifying faith, as their proper inheritance, Romans 3.1.
Deuteronomy. 33.4. Titles implying a Covenant-state, (as I have abundantly showed) are
given of God to them that are short of this faith, viz. Christian, Disciple,
Saint, Believer, Called, Brethren: God imposes Covenant-conditions, makes
promise of Covenant-blessings upon these imposed conditions, to those that are
short of Faith that justifies; These therefore are in Covenant. Though I hear
neither of Scripture nor argument, nor any thing else but bare words in two or
three Paradoxes for my conviction, yet by a similitude I shall understand, that
our own Covenant-act is the primary condition of Gods Covenant. In his
Aphorisms he says, It may seem strange, but now a similitude shall render it
familiar, If a King (says he) will offer his Son in marriage to a condemned
woman, and a beggar, on condition that she will but have him, that is consent,
and so covenant and marry him; here her covenanting, consenting, or marrying of
him is the performance of the condition on her part, for obtaining her first
right in him and his: but for the continuance of her right is further
requisite. If we had had either Scripture or argument to have given us a first
light, then a Simile might have served for somewhat, and come in as a garnish;
but being served in alone, it may speak the Authors thoughts, but never settle
any in the truth. And I shall leave it to the Reader to judge whether the edge
of it may not easily be turned against himself, and whether when it is brought
home, it will not prove destructive to his own opinion. I must therefore tell
the Reader, that our relation to Christ whilst on earth, is more frequently
expressed in Scriptures, by espousals, then marriages: as we may see through
the book of Canticles, and Hos. 2.14. 2 Cor. 11.2. and that there is ordinarily
a relation of men to God, preceding faith that justifies. Now Mr. Baxter is not
so ill read in the Civil Law, but that he knows that there are sponsalia de
futuro, and sponsalia de praesenti. Those, God is pleased to take for his
people, that are his only in the first relation, and to honor them with
privileges to bring them on to the second. Whereas he says, Our Covenant
principally is to receive, nor is it only de futuro, but de praesenti. I may
answer, first, If our Covenant be to receive, then it does precede this
receiving; and secondly, if he mean, that it is our duty to receive Christ in
present, and not to delay the least moment of time, I shall readily yield; but
in case he say, that present profession and engagement to receive gives a
people no title to any Covenant Relation, before Christ be actually and
savingly received, I may well ask what we are to say to the whole body of Old
Testament-Scriptures? were not all Israel in Covenant? were they not all
visibly the people of the Lord? are they not owned of God for such, when they
were at the worst and lowest? How many thousands of Scripture-Texts may be
brought to evince it? Had they called themselves so, and valued themselves as
such, on this account to be a people nigh unto the Lord; and no people so nigh,
it might have been said to be their own vapor; but when God gives them that
testimony of honor, and has never done with it, sure he would have us to
believe it. There is a first right therefore, before that right in the
similitude contended for; and that is no other but a right of Covenant: to be
without God and without hope is the case of a mere heathen uncircumcised in the
flesh, Ephesians. 2.11. The state of visible relation is one step nearer, than aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel do enjoy; and yet too short of a state of
salvation. Mr. Baxter concludes, By this time I leave it to the Reader to judge
who it is that introduces confusion about the Covenant, and whether it be an
error of the lower size: And I am very well contented to sit down and hear his
judgment: and if it be upon this determined against me, I shall say the
authority of man is mightily prevalent. I have yet seen no title of Scripture,
nothing of reason, only that which I take to be Scripture-Paradoxes, are laid
down as Maxims. Restraint of Covenant denies any breach of Covenant.
There follows, As for that you add, that then there is no Covenant Breaking,
I reply, 1. quoad essentiam, et possibilitatem, there is, 2. quoad existentiam,
there is a breaking of mere verbal and erring half Covenants; but if you think,
that sound Covenanting may be utterly broke, then you are against the certainty
of perseverance. Real Covenants may be broke.
I desire to know whither this essence, possibility and existence refers,
whether to the Covenant, or to the breaking of Covenant. If it refer to the
Covenant, as the words seem plainly to imply, then here is a new piece of
learning, that the essence of a thing may be broke, and the existence stand
firm. I have learnt that existencies may be destroyed, and essences remain, and
instance is commonly given in Roses in winter; But I have not until now heard
the contrary. But if these refer to breaking of Covenant, then the meaning
is, there is a possibility, but there shall not be a futureity: But this is
flatly to gainsay the Scriptures, that complain so frequently of actual breach
of Covenant. Somewhat therefore is granted, and somewhat denied. It is granted
that there is a breaking of mere verbal, and of erring, half-Covenants; but I
am told, that if I think that sound Covenanting may be utterly broke, then I am
against the certainty of perseverance. If by sound Covenanting, truth of
Covenant be meant, this may be broke, and no Saint apostatize, but if integrity
of heart and such soul-qualifications as might be desired in Covenanters be
understood, the truth of a Covenant stands, where this is wanting: otherwise
none but upright, honest, sincere men, can ever make bargains. It follows, They
broke their particular Covenants about reforming Idolatry, and such particular
sins. And these particular Covenants were branches of their grand Covenants,
and so habemns reum confitentem. It is farther said, They broke their verbal,
and equivocal Covenant, or promise to God, whereby they seemed to accept him on
his own terms, but did not. But it should be remembered, that this Covenant they
broke was a marriage-Covenant, as is frequently testified in Scriptures, as,
Jer. 31.32. where the Lord speaking of the Covenant made with Israel when he
brought them out of the Land of Egypt: Which my Covenant they brake, says he,
although I was an husband unto them: which is further clear, Jer. 3.1, 14, 20.
Hos. 2.17. This then was a real, and no equivocal Covenant, or else Mr.
Baxters similitude, on which he puts so much stresse, is spoiled. And I never
knew, that verbal Covenants, where sincerity of intention for faithful
performance was wanting, were equivocal Covenants: much less where a man did
not fully understand himself in covenanting. All want of integrity is not
equivocation: Men may promise and not perform, men may promise and never mean
to perform, (which I think few unregenerate men directly do) and yet not
equivocate. If a Gentleman shall promise a Tenant a Lease for life, provided
that he will give him a dog, he brings him one, and accordingly expects his
Lease, the Landlord puts him off in telling him that he indented with him for a
dog star, or a dog-fish, here is equivocation; but had he directly promised and
broken faith, it had been no equivocation, but falsification. I have heard of
one of quality that often solicited one to serve him, after long importunity he
got a promise from the man, that such a day he would come and serve him, he
kept his day, and came and served a writ upon him: This was equivocation; but
if he had not come at all, as the son in the Parable did not work in the
Vineyard, when he had said he would, that had been plain falsification. If
those were equivocal Covenants, and no reality of the being of a Covenant
between God and them in them, then all the honor that followed upon them, and
mercies enjoyed were equivocal likewise. Then whenever God calls Israel his
people, we must understand him his equivocal people: when he calls them his
portion, we must understand it his equivocal portion: when he says, Judah is
his inheritance, we must understand his equivocal inheritance: and Christ's
word, Matthew. 8.12. The children of the Kingdom shall be cast out, must be
interpreted, the children of the equivocal Kingdom: and, Matthew. 22.14. Many are
equivocally called: and, Romans 9.4. the Apostle must be understood, To whom
pertains the equivocal adoption and the equivocal glory. These certainly
broke Covenant, and yet we have no example of Saints apostasy in them. When
the Jesuits forced Texts of Scripture to find (if it had been possible) one or
two equivocal speeches in our Saviors words, as Joh. 7.8. I go not yet up to
this feast, leaving out [Yet] that so there might be either an untruth, (for he
did go up) or an equivocation: as also in those words of his quoted from the
Psalmist, Joh. 10.34. I have said ye are gods: how would they have gloried, in
case they had learned, that Scripture was almost all over equivocal? Give them
this, and the day is theirs in the doctrine of equivocation.

Mr. Baxter adds, Your second absurdity is, That then there are no hypocrites,
and replies rather, Then all unregenerate professors are hypocrites. They
pretend merely to real proper covenanting, and they do covenant but verbally
and equivocally. But the great falsehood of this I have sufficiently discovered,
and therefore my Argument which he notably curtails still stands firm. It were
too tedious to trouble the Reader with all my words and his.

The third absurdity which I press, Mr. Baxter does not vouchsafe to name, but
only refers to his answer to Mr. T. I shall therefore let it alone, not
intending to interpose between them.

Argument 3. vindicated.
My third Argument to prove, [That a faith short of justifying may give title
to baptism, is, To make the visible seal of baptism which is the privilege
of the Church visible to be of equal latitude with the seal of the Spirit
which is peculiar to invisible members, is a Paradox.] To which he answers, The
seal of the Covenant, and the seal of the Spirit, not of equal latitude.
But you take it for granted, that we do so; which is too easy disputing: and
I may well take it for granted, seeing in the next words he yields it; where he
says, We give the seal of Baptism to all, that seem sound Believers, and
their seed; and we say, the seal of the sanctifying Spirit is only theirs that
are such believers. Their seeming faith works then only by way of cheat; to
procure that which is none of their right, and so both seals are of equal
latitude, which yet is more plainly expressed in his following words: But if you
speak only of Covenant-right to Baptism, coram Deo, by his gift of Covenant,
then I make them of the same extent; and I cannot tell what other
Covenant-right to speak of, but that in which God avoucheth a people to be his,
and himself to be their God, and I dare not have a thought of any thing but
reality in his words. For his distinction which he hints here, and plainly
delivers elsewhere, of right in foro Dei, and in foro Ecclesiae, both to
Covenant and Baptism, I suppose considerate men will pause upon it, before
they receive it, especially in the sense which he puts upon it: 1. They may
press him with his own rule, Vbi lex non distinguit, ^ibi non est
distinguendum. Such a right to visible Ordinances before men never granted of
God, I would learn. 2. They may demand whether it be the Will of God, that any
upon the latter right coram Ecclesia should be baptized by the Church. If it
be, then they have right coram Deo: If it be not his will, then they have no
right coram Ecclesia. I know no Court that God keeps respective to visible
Church Priviledges, but his Church. 3. They may tell him of the necessity that
is put upon Ministers to profane this Divine Ordinance, in putting this seal
ordinarily and unavoidably to mere blank paper, which is a most contumelious
abuse of it. Of many that are called, few are chosen; and yet all that are
visibly called, are thus sealed, when in Gods sight all title is wanting. 4.
They may tell him, that poor souls are thus miserably cheated in bearing them
in hand, that this great privilege, and consequently all further
Church Priviledges are theirs, when the conveyance is more fraudulent that
casts it upon them. 5. They may yet tell him, that a door is here opened to
Anabaptisme, or multiplication of Baptism. A new door, of which either nothing
or very little has ever been spoken. When discovery shall be made, (as
according to these principles it may be often made) that the title, when
Baptism was administered was barely seeming; then all was null ab initio in
such proceedings: and as such persons always were in the eye of God, so now in
the eye of men, they are unbaptized persons: And in case God ever vouchsafe the
grace of conversion to this man, he is now by Divine appointment to seek
baptism. In case Simon Magus, who after baptism did discover himself to be in
the gall of bitterness, by Gods grace should ever attain repentance and
forgiveness, (which Peter did not judge to be desperate) he must then upon
conversion afresh offer himself to Baptism. If Titius be admitted into
possessions presumed to be his true inheritance, and afterward it be made to
appear that it never appertained to him, but to Sempronius; when this appears
all is to be judged invalid. And if Titius ever gain due right, he must again
procure possession, and is not to hold on his former cracked and seeming title.
So that whenever a Minister converts a baptized man, he must look upon former
proceedings as null, and upon his conversion baptize him. Neither let
Anabaptists here triumph, as they may baptize whom we have baptized, when they
see them converted, so we may baptize whom they have baptized, too many of both
parties, manifesting over-evident signs of their unconversion. 6. They may tell
you that, that Scripture-distinction of circumcision in the flesh, and
circumcision in the heart, is hereby overthrown; seeing circumcision in the
flesh, where circumcision in the heart is wanting, is uncircumcision: which the
Apostle grants respective to true happiness, Romans 2. ult. but denies
respective to Church Priviledges, Romans 3.1. 7. They may tell him, that this
principle standing, all persons dying unregenerate, dye unbaptized; yea, all
that were baptized in infancy and after converted, remain still unbaptized. 8.
That it is much to be feared, if not certainly to be concluded, that the major
part by far of Worcestershire combination consists of unbaptized persons, there
being, I doubt, no good evidence of true conversion in the most considerable
part of them; subscription to the confession there, and consent to membership,
being all that is required; and whether it be enough for a good satisfying
evidence that a man or woman is in grace, that he or she has subscribed, or
put to their mark, let any judge. I am sure it is voyc'd, that the most
profane (where the Minister carries any authority) are as forward for
subscription as any. If all marriages were null, where grace were not in truth
in the parties, I fear that through the Christian world there would be more
adulterous, then marriage-copulations. And in case where there is no grace,
there is no subject for Baptism, there are as many unbaptized persons.

Argument 4. vindicated.
My fourth Argument is, The great condition to which Baptism engages, is not a
prerequisite to the being of Baptism.
[The great condition to which baptism engages, is not a prerequisite in
Baptism. This is plain, no man is bound to make good his condition before
engagement to conditions; no servant is tied to do his work, before he has
received earnest; no Soldier to fight, before he is listed, or has given in
his name. But faith that is justifying, to accept Christ is the condition to
which Baptism engages.] To this Mr. Baxter answers, What is the conclusion?
Therefore justifying faith is not a prerequisite in baptism, or according to
the Simile no man is bound to accept Christ to justification before he is
baptized: And then begins highly to Rhetoricate. I confess the reading of such
passages in Grave, Learned, Godly Divines, and that with such confidence
uttered, as undoubted truth, and that in zeal to save the Church from the
errors of us that are contrary minded, does very much convince me of humane
frailty, and that the best of men do know but in part, and in a little part
too. If Mr. Baxter seek an instance of humane frailty, he has made no
mischoice in casting his eyes upon me, he cannot see so many in me as I know;
but I am sorry, that he must put his wit upon the device of one, or at least
take hold on the most handsome seeming opportunity, to cry up one, and so to
give too much evidence (as one said upon the first sight of it) of his own
weakness. As to the conclusion, that justifying faith is no prerequisite in
Baptism, in the sense that every Reader may see I have given of it, I shall
maintain, and as Mr. Br. has heard, I have the strength of the reformed
Churches for my confirmation in it; but for the other, which serves only to
blind the Reader, and to bring me under a charge, that no man is bound to
accent of Christi before he be justified. I look upon it as an assertion, both
senseless and graceless. I believe it never came into the heart of any that
is either grave, A position by the Author disavowed and detested.
or godly to utter it, and that there is scarce any so witless, or graceless
as to believe it, and so Mr. Brs. volume of 31. Reasons, five, page 84, 85, 86.
Twenty six, page 94, to 107. are almost at one breath answered. Few of them
tending to oppose any thing that I hold, but in the far greatest part brought
against his own conceit; and no assertion, or opinion of mine. I suppose I
could easily furnish him with a large addition of reasons, to deny this fancy;
Faith is commanded in the moral Law, Reasons evincing that a man unbaptized is
bound to believe in Jesus Christ to justification.
as I have asserted Treat. of the Covenant, page 18. and I think no man
believes that Baptism does first put a man under such obligation. Some Papists
do charge upon us, that we maintain that Baptism delivers us from the moral
Law, and therefore the Council of Trent anathematizeth those that hold it, but
never any I think were charged to say, that Baptism is our first obligation to
it. 2. An unbaptized man is bound to endeavor to avoid damnation, but he that
believes not shall be damned. 3. He is bound to endeavor to obtain Salvation;
but we must believe with the heart, and confess with the mouth to Salvation.
4. Baptism presupposes the Covenant; but the Covenant, as I have often said,
engages to believing. 5. None can be exempted from believing, but they are
withal exempted from repentance; but unbaptised persons are to repent, Act.
17.30. 6. Faith in Christ has been actually required of the unbaptized, Act.
16.30. And therefore it is marvel that when Mr. Br. judges me to be overtaken
in this folly, he would spend so much time with me or so many words upon me,
transgressing the wise man's advice, Prove. 26.4. Answer not a fool according to
his folly. When he thought I had no more wit than to think that no man is bound
to accept Christ for justification before he be baptized, I marvel that he
would set his wit to mine. But what is it that I have said to induce him to
think that I am in that opinion. I have said? The great condition to which
Baptism engages, is not a prerequisite in Baptism; and can any man imagine
that I meant any more than that it is not required to the being of Baptism?
Can any man think that I ever meant that it is not required of the person that
is for Baptism, till after he be baptized? and have I not in the next page
cleared mine own meaning, where I say, that there is no necessity that
justifying faith go before, but a necessity that it must follow after Baptism:
further explaining my self, It is true that in men of years justifying faith
sometimes goes before Baptism, as in Abraham it went before Circumcision: but
it is not of necessity required to interest us into a rite either of baptism
or Circumcision; and doubtless I never thought that either Abraham or any
other was justified by that work that was never required at their hand. I say,
justifying faith, or grace in the truth of it, is no prerequisite in marriage;
and I further say, that a Minister in times past might, and a Magistrate at
this time may lawfully marry persons void of justifying faith or grace, and yet
he is no better than a graceless man, that thinks that persons unmarried are
not tied to faith and godliness. Grace is no prerequisite to buying and
selling. A bargain of sail stands firm, though there be no grace in them that
make the bargain. Men without grace may go to Kidderminster to buy hangings and
curtains, and those of that place may lawfully trade with them, and yet both
parties are before hand bound to grace and godliness. But though my assertion
is clear enough, yet some may say, my similitude darkens it. I say, No servant
is tied to do his work, before he has received his earnest; no Soldier to
fight, before he be listed, The Authors meaning in some mistaken expressions
cleared.
or has given in his name. To this I say, If my expressions which I thought
were clear, (well knowing my own meaning, yet) to others seemed dark, no candid
man would draw them further then the proposition which my argument was brought
to confirm, which is, That a faith dogmaticall, or as I explain it, a faith
short of justifying, entitles to Baptism. In my similitude I looked at the
resemblance that is between a Soldiers listing, a servants entertainment into
his Masters service, and a Christians Baptism. And as a Soldier is not bound
in order to listing, first to fight: nor a servant in order to his
entertainment, first to work: so a Christian is not bound in order to Baptism,
first to believe to justification. And thus I fully explained my self in the
next page but one. That faith which is the condition of the promise, is not the
condition in foro Dei of title to the seal, an acknowledgement of the necessity
of such faith with engagement to it is sufficient for a title to the seals and
the performance of the condition of like necessity to attain the thing sealed;
To promise service and fidelity in war is enough to get listed, as to do
service is of necessity to be rewarded. So that any Reader I think might
clearly have seen, and I hope now will more fully understand my meaning: Having
taken notice of Mr. Baxters great mistake, and upon it his injurious charge, I
think it most meet in this place to take notice of another (though under
another head) that so, at once I may vindicate my self from things of this
nature. I say, in my Treatise of the Covenant, chap. 16. page 111. Sincerity is
said to be the new rule, or the rule of the New Covenant. To this Mr. Baxter is
pleased to reply, When I first read these words which you write in a different
character, and father on me, I was ashamed of my nonsense, for they are no
better: but it came not into my thoughts, once to suspect a forgery in your
charge. Far was I from imagining that so reverend, pious, and dear a friend,
would tell the world in print, that I said that which never came into my
thoughts, and confute that soberly and deliberately as mine that I never wrote.
After many other words added, If when we are dead, men should read Mr. Bl. book
that never read mine, and there see it written that I said [sincerity is the
new rule, or the rule of the New Covenant] can any man blame them to believe
it, and report of me as from him, and say, what shall I not believe such and
such a man that reports it in express words? Can any man now think but that I
father this upon him; Mr. Baxter not injured by the Author as he is injuriously
charged.
and that I report it to the world in print, in express words, that he has
said it? will it not be said on Mr. Baxters credit that I said it, and wronged
him in it? But I desire the Reader to peruse the whole Chapter; and in case he
find not Mr. Baxters name there at all, then he must needs conclude that this
was spoken at least improvide et inconsulte, and some testimony of humane
frailty given in it. I recite indeed some passages of Mr. Baxters in that
Chapter without his name, being unwilling indeed to make it known that he was
in any such opinion, or that he had laid any such charge of intolerable
ignorance upon learned Divines as there he does. But of this he has heard
enough already from other hands; How can he tell that I mean him in those
passages, seeing I never named him, but that the words are his? And when these
words now in question (produced at a good distance from the other) are none, of
his, who can say that I meant him? much less can they say, that I have
expressly charged them upon him. If they be in any odd corner of his book
(as he says he knows not but that they may be), he then may be yet charged
with them, and therefore injuriously complains of any injurious charge upon
him. But to return to what we have in hand. Though in Mr. Baxters five first
Reasons, there is much very well worth animadversion, yet seeng there is
nothing, but that which has either already been spoken to, or else that tends
to the overthrow of that senseless sottish tenent, (which I profess to
abhor) I shall pass them by. For his additionall 26. Arguments which he
sets, (I know not for what reason) at a great distance from the rest; the
greatest part of them are brought, and mightily fortified to beat down that
which I think never any but himself set up. I think his misconceit first
hatched it, and I am well content to stand by; and see him murder it; For so
many of them as look at all in opposition to any thing that I hold, I shall
take them into consideration.

His two first arguments drawn from Authority, Arguments bowrrowed from humane
authority examined.
the first of the Assembly of Divines, and others of a number of Fathers, are
brought to prove that the profession of a justifying faith is required to
baptism; and what is that to me, who never denied it; but in plain words have
often affirmed it? It is sufficiently employed where I require a dogmatical
faith to Baptism. A dogmatical faith assents to that of Apollos, Jesus is the
Christ, and when I say that this entitles, I cannot mean, concealed or denied,
but openly professed. If I say that a man has six pence in his purse may dine
at such an ordinary, I do not mean with six pance concealed, or denied, but
produced and paid. Have I not both the words [professing] and [profession]
both in the margent and in the Index? seeing Mr. Baxter calls upon me to
declare my self further in this thing, I do believe, and profess to hold that,
he that upon hearing the Gospel preached and the truth of it published and
opened, shall professedly abjure all other opposite ways whatsoever, and
choose the Christian way for salvation, promising to follow the rules of it, is
to be baptized and his seed, and that upon a right not only coram Ecclesia,
but coram Deo; It being the mind of God that such should be admitted. The
authority of reverend Mr. Gataker against Dr. Ward is only worthy enquiring
into, citing Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Whitaker, as Mr. Baxter observes. But Mr.
Gataker himself understands not (as he says) what Dr. Ward means by the
initial faith and repentance which in the judgment of the Apostles gave right
to those that desired baptism, and upon that account I cannot directly tell
what that is that Mr. Gataker opposes. The authorities quoted by him, reach
not the thing that we contend about Luther says, He (meaning Philip) will not
baptize him unless he believe; I say the same: Neither Simon Magus nor any of
the Samaritans men or women could have baptism, before they believed. Calvin
says, He had not baptized him without true faith, which is doubtless to be
understood of fides quam, not qua credimus, as appears in his words before.
There is no doubt but Ananias had first faithfully instructed Paul in the
principles of godliness. A belief of such principles then Calvin means.
Bucer speaks only of profession of faith, and requiring of men to believe.
Neither is there any thing in Whitakers testimony that comes up to our purpose:
For Mr. Marshalls Sermon of unity that is added, I have it not, and there is
nothing quoted out of it. Whereas it is said, that an hundred might easily, and
truly be cited to this purpose: I say, if it be but to this purpose, it is not
to our present purpose. If they be brought to prove that justifying faith is
required of men before baptism, they may well prove that: but as I have said,
so I do say, I think never man denied it. Dr. Ward I believe never opposed it.
If they be brought to prove that no faith that is short of that which is
justifying gives title to baptism, and speak no more than those already
quoted, they speak not home to the purpose. And in case there be any that have
said, that Baptism still presupposes regeneration, and that we baptize
infants or men of age only upon this supposition as regenerate. As Mr. Baxter,
Append. page 71. says that, Learned Divines have given Papists great advantage
in mistaking the nature of justifying Faith, thinking that it consists in [a
belief of the pardon of my own sins;] So I may say, that those, whosoever they
are, that have confounded Covenant-holinesse, with that of regeneration and
inherent sanctification, have given as great advantage to others, yea, to the
Papists themselves. And as the former doctrine has perplexed many a weak soul,
being not able to make good their assurance, they conclude thereupon their want
of Faith; so these as much perplex the consciences of those that administer
this Ordinance, which I had rather express in Mr. Baxters words then mine own,
Append, page 70, 71. No Minister can groundedly administer the Sacraments to
any man, but to himself, because he can be certain of no man's justification,
being not certain of the sincerity of their faith. And if he should adventure
to administer upon probabilities or charitable conjectures, then should he be
guilty of profaning the Ordinance, and every time he mistaketh he should set
the seal of God to a lie: And who then durst ever administer a Sacrament, being
never certain but that he shall thus abuse it? adding further, I confess
ingenuously to you, that it was the ignorance of this one point, which chiefly
caused me to abstain from administering the Lords Supper for so many years. And
I confess as ingenuously, that in case he can work me to his opinion, I stand
resolved for present to baptize no Infant, as being unable to know the Parents
faith to justification; and further with Walaes concluding that the Parents
faith does not justify the child; but as Calvin resolves, lib. 4. instit. cap.
16. Sect. 20. they are baptized into future faith and repentance, which Walaeus
also says is the opinion of most others: Neither shall I baptize any man of
years till I have as high assurance, if not more, of his justification, than
Mr. Baxter seems to think any man can have of his own. If this must stand, then
Paedobaptists and Anabaptists must all leave their Principles; and both men and
women when they have learned to read that new name in the white stone, [that
is] have concluded their assurance, must turn Sebaptists, and then let us look
for as many counterfeits, as there were Jews in Christ's time with broad
Phylacteries. Those that bottom Baptism on the Covenant, holiness of
Covenant, distinct from that of sanctification, stand ensnared in none of these
difficulties or inextricable perplexities.

All the following Arguments to the 9th. may be easily granted, and that is
thus formed, Titles given by Apostles do not argue that in their thoughts they
were always answered with inherent grace.
If the Apostles use to communicate the proper titles of the justified to all
that are baptized, (till they see them prove apostates or hypocrites) then they
did take all the baptized to be probably justified, (though they might know
that there were hypocrites among them, yet either they knew them not, or might
not denominate the body from a few that they did know) But the antecedent is
true; Therefore. For the truth of the antecedent here laid down, [That the
Apostles use to communicate the proper titles of the justified to all that are
baptized,] I expect better proof then a naked affirmation. And all that is
brought for proof, is, I need not cite Scripture to prove, that the baptized ar
called by the Apostles Believers, Saints, Disciples, Christians; Mr. Bl. has
done it already, page 28. And he very well knows that I there make it good,
That those titles are not proper to the justified, but ordinarily given to
those that are not justified, nor in any saving condition. But if my words in
the place quoted, or elsewhere may not be heard, Mr. Baxters sure will take,
who in his Saints rest, Part 4. Sect. 3. p. 105. says, There are many Saints
(or sanctified men) that yet shall never come to heaven, who are only Saints
by their separation from Paganism into fellowship with the visible Church, but
not Saints in the strictest sense, by separation from the ungodly into the
fellowship of the mystical body of Christ, quoting these following Scriptures,
Heb. 10.29. Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 14.2, 21. and 26.19. and 28.9. Exodus 19.6. 1 Cor.
7.13, 14. Romans 11.16. Heb. 3.1. compared with verse. 12. 1 Cor. 3.17. and 14.33.
1 Cor. 1.2. compared with 11.20, 21. etc. Gal. 3.26. compared with Gal. 3.3, 4.
and 4.11 and 5.2, 3, 4. John 15.2. His demand therefore to me is strange: Now
who knows not that salvation is made the portion of Believers, Saints,
Disciples? when he himself affirms that there are Saints that never shall be
saved. He afterward puts a further question, Is it another sort of them? or
does the Scripture use to divide Saints as a genus into two species? Not that I
know of: It is but an aequivocum in sua aequivocata. The name belongs to them
but as the name of a Man to a Corpse, etc. Then it seems that there is nothing
of Reality in such Separations. Camero tells us otherwise, that there is a
reality in this Saintship by separation. In the relation of his dispute with
Courcellius he affirmed, that the Text of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.14. was without
doubt to be understood of real holiness. To which Courcellius replying, He
that is really holy has no need of regeneration and baptism: But Infants of
Believers after they are borne have need of baptism and regeneration; Ergo.
Which Camero answered, (as the relation says) by distinguishing of real
holiness, which is twofold: One consisting in the bare relation of the person
to the people of God, or the Church, and depends wholly upon birth within the
pale of the Church, and of parents embracing the Covenant. The other is, etc.
And it seems that the Scripture is still under the change of equivocal speeches
all over. As Camero has somewhere observed, that the word Saints in Scripture
is far more frequently taken for Saints on Earth, then for Saints in heaven; so
I doubt not but it may be maintained that it speaks far more frequently of
Saints by dedication, and separation, and so of Believers and Disciples by
profession, then by inherent qualification; and does it in all these places
speak equivocally? had it been affirmed to be Genus Analogum, in opposition to
uni vocum, Scripture Language real and not aequivocal.
as is said of Ens in respect of Substantia and Accidens, it had been less;
but to make nothing of this noble privilege of which Scripture speaks so
honorably, is too plainly to side against the truth it self. I would know for
my learning, what advantage or profit a dead Corpse is in Capacity to enjoy; I
think one at all: but these (as the Apostle tells us) have much every way, even
they that have no more then sanctity of this nature; If such equivocation be
found in the word [Saint] their the like is to be affirmed of the word
Believer, and believers having their denomination from their faith, that is
equivocal in like manner, and so our Common division of faith into dogmatical
or historical, temporary, miraculous, and justifying, is but a division of an
aequivocum in sua aequivocata, which I should think no man would affirm, much
less Mr. Baxter, who makes common and special graces to differ only
gradually, and then as cold in a remiss degree may grow to that which is
intense, so one aequivocatum may rise to the nature of another, animal
terrestre may become Sidus coeleste; one of our dogs that we use on Earth, may
become a star in heaven; then miraculous faith it self has only the name, and
nothing of the power and nature of faith in it. Judas had power given him to
cast out unclean spirits, Maetth. 10.1, 4. and he never had faith that
justifies; if his faith was only aequivocal, then the unclean Spirits were
equivocall likewise; I shall never believe that an aequivocal faith can cast
out a real devil. The Apostle tells us of faith to the remooval of Mountains
void of charity, 1 Cor. 13.2. If this were equivocall faith, those must be
equivocal Mountains. Mr. Baxter adds, To put the matter beyond doubt, I wish
Mr. Bl. to consider that it is not only these forementioned titles, but even
the rest which he will acknowledge proper to the regenerate, which are given by
the Apostles generally to the baptized. Instances given in Adoption, Gal. 3.26,
27. union with Christ and several others. If I will acknowledge this, I shall
be soon brought to yield up all. Is all Adoption proper to the regenerate? what
shall we say then to that of the Apostle, Romans 9.4. To them pertained the
Adoption? Had the Apostle that heaviness and continual sorrow of heart, for
Israel after the flesh, and does he yet give them that testimony that they are
regenerate? Gomarus on the place has these words, Lest any in this place
should mistake Adoption and acceptance for sons in Scripture is twofold,
general and special. General adoption is an outward destination or call into
the visible Church and Company of the Sons of God, upon which account many are
said to be the Sons of God, as opposite to the Sons of men, that is, aliens
from the Church, Genesis 6.2. And Israel this general way are called the sons of
God, not only those that were elect to life eternal and regenerate, but also
those that were reprobate and merely carnal, and therefore the Jews, Sons of
the kingdom, or the Church of God, are said to be cast into utter darkness,
Matthew. 8.12. And whether all union with Christ imply regeneration, let John
15.2. be consulted, where an union with Christ is clearly held out; yet Mr.
Baxter brings that text among others to prove that there are some Saints that
shall never be saved. Mr. Hudson and Mr. Cobbet tell us at large that, Christ
is the head of the Church visible, and has many unfruitful members. Other
phrases are there brought, or titles as proper to the regenerate; which are
well known in Scripture to be applied to such as have Apostatized, and are
brought by Arminians to prove falling away, and are answered by their
adversaries; Mr. Hudsons words are here worthy of consideration. Only the
invisible company have internal spiritual communion, and are elect, many of
those that have external communion and are visible members shall perish, and
yet by reason of their profession, are said, 2. These. 1. 1. to be in God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as Ames also confesses, Med. lib. 1. Cap.
32. art. 9. Such was the Church off Corinth and Ephesus, etc. wherein all were
not in Communion for life; and of such Christ speaks, John 15.2. Every branch
in me that bears not fruit, he takes away. and verse 6. If a man abides not
in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them and
cast them into the fire, and they are burned. These are said to be redeemed, 2
Pet. 2.1. denying the Lord that bought them; and sanctified, Heb. 10.29. yet
has accounted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an
unholy thing, and much more to this purpose, Vindi. page 5. And if the Apostle
give Testimonies to whole Churches holding out what they engage to be, ought to
be, and professedly were, this comes short of his purpose.

I find little or nothing in all the other Arguments but that which either
looks not at all toward any thing that I hold, Humane authorities vouched.
or else is already spoken to. His last only from humane authority is
observable. Our Divines against the Papists (says he) do generally plead that
Hypocrites are not true members of the universal Church, but as a wooden leg is
to the body. I must tell him that if they be Members of a particular Church
then they are true members of the Church universal, Taking universal and
particular in a Similar homogeneal way for the visible Church state, as we must
take them if we speak any thing to purpose. That which is pars partis, is pars
totius, if my finger be a part of my hand, it is a part of my body, and if Mr.
Baxter be an Inhabitant of Kederminster, then he is an Inhabitant of
Worcestershire, and if of Worcestershire, then an Inhabitant of England; and
let us see what they say of the Church visible indefinitely. Lord Duplesse in
his Treatise of the Church, page 3. says, The invisible Church contains none
but the good, the visible contains both the good and the bad; that only the
Elect, this all those indifferently that are brought into her by the preaching
of the truth. Visibilis Ecclesia est coetus communiter vocatotum tum electorum
tum reproborum.
Wollebius says, page 194. the visible Church is a company jointly called as
well of Elect as Reprobate. Ecclesia visibilis constat non solum ex electis and
vere piis, sed etiam ex reprobis and Hypocritis.
Ravanellus in verb. Eccles. The visible Church consists not only of the Elect
and truly Godly, but also of reprobates, and Hypocrites. Nostri Ecclesiam
universalem non invisibilem (quae solos electos and vere fideles complect^tur,
de quae Christus loquitur. Matthew. 16.) sed visibilem quae electis and
hypocritis constant intelligunt.
Gomarus Analysis, in 2 These. 2. Our Divines understand the Church universal
not invisible (which only contains the elect and truly faithful, of which
Christ speaks, Matthew. 16.) but the visible which consists of Elect and
Reprobate. Mr. Hudson, Vindication, page 7. In the same sense, that a visible
Church may be called a Mystical body of Christ, Christ may be also called a
Mystical head thereof, as Christ terms himself a Master, so he has evil,
slothful servants, and stewards, as a King he has rebels that will not have
him to rule over them, even in his Church, Matthew. 25.6. giving like instance,
as a shepherd, as an householder, as a bridegroom, a husbandman, a fisherman, a
vine, adding, Christ says, My people are foolish, they have not known me,
sottish children, etc. Alia est Ecclesia vocatorum promiscue bonis and malis,
fidelibus and hypocritis constans, Alia est Ecclesia electorum vere fid lilium
qui quidem in coetu vocatorum sunt.
Pareus, Revelation 3.1. The Church of the called is one consisting
promiscuously of good and bad, faithful and hypocrites; the Church of the elect
is another consisting of Elect and truly faithful, which indeed are of the
same company of those that are called. Ames. Anti Bell. T. 2. lib. 2. Cap. 1.
not. 5. when Bellarmine had stated the controversy between his party, and his
adversaries. Others he says require inward virtues, to make any a Church
member, Nosautem ut aliquis aliquo modo dici possit pars verae Ecclesiae de qua
Scripturae loquuntur, non putamus requiri ullam inteman virtutem.
But we (faith he) do not think that any inward virtue is required to make a
man in some sort a part of that true Church of which the Scripture speaks.
After discovery of his sophistry in the word after a sort, positively answers,
Falsum est, internas virtutes requirui a nobis, ut aliquis sit in Ecclesia quod
visibilem ejus statum.
It is false that inward virtues are required of us to put a man into the
Church according to the visible state of it. Abundant more like Testimonies
might be added if it would not be the Readers trouble. And lest all of this
should be evaded with this distinction, that respective to us they are members,
but they are not so in foro Dei, let us see what Ecclesiae Refor distinguunt
inter Ecclesiam Christi invisibilem myst^cam; quae coetus est hominum vocatorum
fidelium qui communionem habent cum Christo cui nulli hypocritae annumerari
possunt, and inter Ecclesiam Christi Visibilem externam, quae est societas
eorum qui veram fidem profitentur ad communionem and societatem Ecclesasticam
inter se exercendam.
Apollonius has in his answer to the question concerning qualification of
Church Members. He says, The reformed Churches distinguish between the
invisible Mystical Church of Christ which is the company of believers, called,
which have Communion with Christ, to which no hypocrite can be joined, etc. And
the outward visible Church, which is the society of those that profess the
true faith for the exercise of Ecclesiastical Communion and society among
themselves. And having expressed his judgment, as to the question, proves it
by three Arguments. The 3d. is Ex descriptione Ecclesiae visib^lis cujus nature
describitur in jure Dei, quod sit horreum in quo cum tritico and paleae
colliguntur, domus Dei in qua vasa aurea and ligne a sunt, rete quo pisces boni
and mali capiuntur.
from the description of the Church visible whose nature in the right of God is
described (says he) that it is a barn in which chafe is gathered with the
wheat, the house of God in which are vessels of Gold and wood, a net in which
are fishes good and bad. This distinction therefore as thus applied is here by
him denied, and to this end we may examine further the definitions given by
Divines of the visible Church: A definition compriseth no parts that are
Monstrous, adventitious, Excrementitious or barely equivocal, but those only
that are of the essence or at least integrality where it is an Integrum, as the
Church (as Mr. Hudson has showed) is, that is defined. We have heard Woll^bius
his definition before. Mr. Hudson, page 9th. says, The Church visible is a
company of people, called or separated by God, from Idols to the true Religion:
and yielding professed subjection to that call, which is true (says he) of the
godly as well as of the Hypocrites. The Leyden Professors, disput. 40. These.
32. give this definition. Visibilis Ecclesia est coetus eorum qui per verbum
externum, Sac amentorum ac disciplinae Ecclesiasticae usum, in unum externum
corpus coalescunt.
The visible Church is a Company of those which by the outward Word and use of
Sacraments and Ecclesiastical Discipline, are gathered into one outward body
and society. Explaining themselves in he 35. These. in the same manner as Mr.
Hudson before. The definition of Trelcatius junior little differs from it, page
432. And whereas Mr. Baxter says, that our Divines generally plead that
Hypocrites are not true members of the universal Church, but as a wooden Leg
to the body; I am almost confident that in turning over all his books, he can
produce but few such Testimonies. Had he said the Catholic Church instead of
universal, I believe he might have found many, Universal and Catholic in
Authors use of them d^stinguished.
but whether he can find them speaking in his terms, I somewhat question. When
Whitaker handles the question so voluminously, he states it of what sort of men
the Catholic Church consists, but not universal. Dr. John Reynolds,
maintaining that position, The holy Catholic Church which we believe is the
whole company of Gods Elect and Chosen, expresses himself by the word
Catholic, we see, in his Thesis, and adds, The wicked must needs be a part of
the Church, if the name of Church did signify the visible Church. Now I think
that scarce any will deny that the universal Church is visible, which Mr.
Hudson so largely has proved, cap. 5. Yet Whitaker as largely makes good that
the Catholic Church is invisible, quaest. 2. de Eccles.. If I be now sent to
my Dictionary to see whether Catholic and universal be not both one, and
demanded whether there be any more difference between them, then is between
Idolum and Imago, about which we have had so much stir with the Papists, the
one a Greek word, the other a Latin; I confess it is so in Grammar, but not
in their use of it that handle the question of the Church Catholic in this
manner, and when their Authority is quoted their sense must be inquired into.
And in case they took it for the same as universal, they could not make it
invisible, in which sense Hudson observes, Zanchy, Gerard, Whitaker, Chamier,
Ames, Dr. Wille^, do use it, to which Daverant, Trelcatius, with other might be
added. The distinction is usual into Catholic, and visible, and in that sense
a wicked man is no member of the Church Catholic, as opposite to vibsile, when
yet he is a true Member of the Church universal as opposite to particular; And
therefore I say that a bad man is a true Member of the Church visible, and I
think I am not gainsayed by any of our Divines, but seconded. But though they
may be true members of visible Churches, yet perhaps Mr. Baxter, has a way to
make them only as wooden legs respective to the true Church visible,
Churches with him being no true Churches, but aequivocally so called, owning
that Charge of Bellarmines, Confessionistae and Calvinus, docent duas esse
Ecclesias, veram quae est Sanctorum fide lium Congregatio: and externam quae
nomine tantum est Ecclesia, in qua boni and mali reperiuntur: sed malos esse in
Ecclesia, non de Eclesia.
where he says, that the Confessionists, and Calvin teach, that there are two
Churches, A true one, which is the Congregation of the holy and faithful: An
outward one, which is only a Church in name, in which good and bad are found,
but the bad are in the Church, not of the Church: But here he has Amesius his
adversary, who bettter understood the mind of Protestant Writers, and in this
is rather to be believed. He answers, Tom. 2. lib. 2. de Eccles. Cap. 1.
Calumnia est manifesta, quod impingitur illis duarum Ecclesiarum Militantium
fictio, non distribuunt Ecclesiam miltantem in duas species: sed duplicem
respectum aut considerationem unius and ejusdem Ecclesiae distinguunt ac
proponunt, unam quoad essentiam internam, and alteram quoad modum existendi ex
ternum.
This fiction of two Militant Churches which is put upon them, is a manifest
Calumny, they do not divide the Church Militant into two Species, but they
distinguish and hold forth a double respect or consideration of one and the
same Church: One according to the inward Essence, and the other according to
the outward manner of Existence. Yet this must be taken further into
Consideration, seeing from this distribution of the Church, Mr. Baxter has got
up an Argument to prove visible Churches to be no Churches, which is his
nineteenth Argument of his 26. and is thus framed: If the distribution of the
Church into visible and invisible be but of the subject into diverse adjuncts,
and not of a Genus into its Species, then that part or those Members, which are
merely visible, are indeed no part of the Members of the Church so distributed,
but are only Equivocally called a Church, Church Members, etc. The Antecedent
must be yielded him; the Consequence (he says) is undeniable, in that adjuncts
are no part of the Essence, much less the form, or the whole Essence; and
therefore cannot denominate, but aequivocally, instead of the essence.

To this I answer, the consequence might as fairly have been, that these
members which are invisible, are no parts or members of the Church so
distributed, seeing invisibility, or invisible (as is confessed) is an adjunct as
well as visibility or visible. There may be a distribution of man by hundreds
of adjuncts, either corpulent or lean, high or low, black or fair, old or
young, rich or poor, learned or unlearned, etc. If one of these so denominated
be a true man, shall the other then be only aequivocally a man? If a corpulent
man be a true man, is a lean man no man? If a tall, black or old man be a true
man, shall then a low, fair or young man be no man? This must needs follow as
well as the other. The reason given, that adjuncts are no part of the Essence,
is not at all to the purpose, seeing the subject that is denominated by such
adjuncts, has its Essence; though blackness be not of the essence of a man,
yet the man that is black has his essence; and though visibility be not of the
essence of the Church, yet the Church which is denominated visible has its
essence. And whereas we are warned to note, that visibile is not the same with
visum; so I can give warning that invisibile, is not the same with non visum,
though I know not to what purpose.

Secondly, I answer, the Church being an integrum, and that per aggregationem,
and only one, in exact propriety of speech, it cannot be capable of any such
distribution: so there must be one Church of one denomination, and another of
another, but it is a distribution of Church Members, which serve as parts to
make up the whole: some of which are only visible, that is all their honor,
to make a visible profession, and to enjoy the glory of Ordinances, and the
Divine protection of God over his vineyard; upon which account they are nigh,
when others are a far off. The other are invisible members; As they have all
the visible honor before mentioned, so they have an addition of a far greater
glory of invisible graces. The former I take to be the Church most properly
(though I know others are of another opinion) for two reasons. 1. When the
Church is an integrum (as Mr. Hudson has largely proved it) the visible Church
contains the whole, for the invisible part is also visible, invisible
respective to graces, but visible respective to profession and outward
privileges: The invisible is only one part, and so not the Church in its most
proper signification. 2. The Scripture almost wheresoever it speaks of a
Church, takes it in this acception, and that which is the ordinary and common
language of the holy Ghost, which he uses most often, almost always, is that
which is most proper. Some have said, that the word Church is not more then
once taken for the Church invisible, which is, Heb. 12.23. The Church of the
first born. If it should be granted, that there is two or three places more,
which will bear that acceptance of it, which is as much as can be pretended;
yet I dare say, there is not one for twenty, where the Church is taken for the
Church visible: And is the language of Scripture still all over aequivocal?
When Christ says, The Kingdom of heaven is like to a man that sowed good seed
in his field; is like to a draw-net: shall we say, the Kingdom of heaven
aequivocally taken? Stephen says, This was he that was in the Church in the
wilderness; must we understand it of the Church aequivocal? And when Paul gave
Timothy a directory, how to behave himself in the house of God, which he says,
is the Church of the living God; must we understand it of a Church aequivocal?
Such a one would be but a weak ground or pillar of the truth; we may say the
same of abundant other places. If all these aequivocals be granted, it will
shortly be questioned, whether there be any reality in Scripture language.

The Author vindicated from Arminianisme.
As the authority of our Divines is produced against the Papists, so also their
authority against the Arminians is brought forth. Our Divines against the
Arminians (says he) do suppose the first act of believing to be the first time
that God is as it were engaged to man in the Covenant of grace; and that it is
dangerous to make God to be in actual Covenant with men in the state of nature,
though the conditional Covenant may be made to them, and though he has
revealed his decree, for the sanctifying his elect. That God is then first
engaged for the graces of the Covenant I easily yield, for then the grand
condition by the help of grace is put in by the soul. But let us here take up
that which he is pleased to yield, and compare it with that which he has put
into the Index of his Treatise of Infant Baptism, where he notes this as Mr.
T. his Error; That the Covenant whereof Baptism is the seal, is only the
absolute Covenant made only to the Elect, which page 223. he confutes. And if
men in the state of nature be in that Covenant that Baptism seals, (viz) the
conditional Covenant, then men in the state of nature, and short of justifying
faith, have right to Baptism. It follows, In my opinion the transition is very
easy from Mr. Blakes opinion to Arminianisme, if not unavoidable save by
retreat, or by not seeing the connection of the consequence to the antecedent.
When this was charged upon me by another hand, I was acquitted by Mr. Br. and
he testified for me, that I had acquitted Mr. M. from any such charge. I marvel
therefore that now it should be fastened upon me. But let us hear his reason,
For grant once that common faith does coram Deo give right to Baptism, and it
is very easy to prove, that it gives right to the end of Baptism, God having
not instituted it to be an empty sign to those that have true right to it. What
is it that we hear, will it give immediate right to the end of Baptism? That
may be easily said, but I think hardly proved. It is no empty sign, if in the
right use of it, it may prove serviceable to it; I am sure the Jew outwardly
had right to the Oracles of God, and yet no immediate certain right to their
end, which is to be the power of God to salvation, It will be an hard task, to
prove the certainty of all their salvation, that in the right of God stand
entitled to any Ordinance of his: the reason will hold of all as well as one,
they are not empty and vain. The Jews had right to Circumcision in the flesh,
and none that was a Jew outwardly might neglect it, and yet were void of
Circumcision of the heart, or forgiveness of sin. The conclusion is, That it
will be no hard matter to prove, that it is some special grace that is the end
of Baptism, at least remission of sin. And so upon the right use of common
grace, God should be in Covenant obliged to give them special grace, which is
taken for Pelagianisme. It will far rather follow from that opinion, that a
common and special grace differ only gradually, not specifically; According to
that promise of our Savior, Matthew. 13.12. To him that has shall be given,
which our Divines have still understood of graces of the same, and not of a
different kind: he that has common graces and improves them, shall have a
larger measure of those graces; and he that has spiritual graces and improves
them, shall have a more large measure of spiritual gifts. And if they be both
of one kind, then Christ's promise holds from the one to the other. It will be
an hard matter I think to prove, that all that have right in Ordinances, though
they make no right use, shall attain to the end of them.

Argument 5. vindicated.
My fifth Argument was, An enquiry into Simon Maegus his Baptism.
[That faith upon which Simon Magus was in the Primitive times baptized, is
that which admits to Baptism: Simon himself believed and was baptized, Acts
8.13. But Simons faith fell short of saving and justifying.] To which a sudden
answer is given, Concedo totum, sed desideratur Conclusic. He is certainly much
to seek both in Syllogismes and Common reason that could not infer, and could
not know that I left the Reader to infer, that, Ergo a faith that is short of
justifying, entitles to Baptism. And so I have the whole in question yielded,
and that which was once said would make foul work in the Church if once
granted. But as soon as it is yielded me, a Means is unkindly used to take it
away from me. And it is further answered, That may be said to admit to Baptism
which so qualifieth the person as that we are bound to baptize him, as being
one that seems sound in believing as Simon did. If such liberty of
interpretation be yielded, who may not easily elude the sense of any
Scripture-Text? the Text says, that Simon believed, and was baptized: Is it
now enough for us to say he seemed to believe, and therefore those whom he thus
deceived were bound to baptize him? Let the whole Text be viewed, and the
former Verse taken in, and then let us see whether such a Gloss be fair. When
they believed Philip, preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women. Then Simon
himself believed also. That faith upon which all the other Samaritans were
admitted to Baptism, Simon was admitted upon also: But it was not a seeming to
believe, but a believing that admitted the other Samaritans; Therefore it was
believing, not a seeming to believe that admitted Simon. When the Holy Ghost
says, Simon believed, as he says other Samaritans believed, and his faith
satisfied Philip, full of the Holy Ghost, to give him admittance; How may we
that stand at this distance dare to call it into question? If the Seal were put
to a mere blank paper, why is not all reversed upon discovery of a Misprision
in proceeding? So any man would do that had put a Seal where no name was
written. Why was not all ipso facto made null? what reason could be given but
that Peter, had he been of that mind, should have said, Repent of this thy
wickedness, that upon testimony given of thine integrity thou may yet be
baptized? But when the Text says he did believe, and Philip upon that account
thus proceeded, and no retractation upon such discovery was made, I believe no
such Gloss is to be suffered. My sixth and last Argument was, [In case only
justifying faith give admission to Baptism, then none is able to baptize,
seeing this by none is discerned.] To which Mr. Baxter says very little, but
only refers to what he has said to Mr. Tombs; and I having had occasion
before, and may have occasion hereafter to speak of it, shall here make no
further defense of it.

Additional Arguments, that a faith short of that which justifies, gives title
to Baptism.
SEeing these Arguments have given Mr. Baxter so little satisfaction, I shall
endeavor to make some addition, only premising this, That Baptism is our
door of Entrance, or way of admission into the Church visible, which I shall
take for granted, seeing Mr. T. page 54. of his Apology, as Mr. Baxter
observes, has yielded it; and Mr. Baxter to my hand, Treatise of
Infant Baptism, page 24. by Arguments has proved it. If then I shall prove,
that such are to be received into the Church, I shall take the Conclusion to be
the same as if they said they were to be baptized; and proving their right to
be taken into the Church, I prove their right to be baptized.

1. They that have right in the sight of God, to many and Romans 3.1. The Jew
outwardly where Circumcision of heart was wanting, had every way much profit
and advantage, he had therefore right to Circumcision, and those with him that
are short of a faith that justifies, have right in the sight of God to Baptism.

2. Those that are a people by Gods gracious dispensations, Deuteronomy. 4.7. Psalm.
147.19, 20. and 148.14. Those therefore that are short of justifying faith,
have right in the sight of God to Admission to this nearer relation.

Deuteronomy. 26.18. these have therefore right to the signs and Cognisances of his
people, to admission into the society and fellowship of his people.

Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision, Romans 15.8. and he was sent to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. Those then of a faith short of that which is
justifying, have right in the sight of God to Baptism.

Levit. 25.41, 42. There every Israelite that was sold to any of the children
of Israel, and his children are called of God his servants, and that as
Israelites; of which a great part were void of that faith which justifies.
Therefore those that are short of faith which justifies, have right in the
sight of God to be thus received. This argument me thinks might be of force
with Mr. Baxter. when he had urged it for proof, that infants are servants, and
ought to be baptized, he adds, page 18. Is not here then direction enough to
help us to judge of the mind of God, whether infants are his Disciples, and
servants or no? Does not God call them his servants himself? What more should a
man expect to warrant him to do so? Men call for plain Scripture, and when they
have it, they will not receive it: so hard it is to inform a forestalled mind.
If God took such care upon that account, that they should not be held in
bondage under any of his people; he takes like care that they should not be
kept from the society of his people.

6. Those that bring forth children to God, have a right in Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.

7. Children of the Kingdom of God, or those that are subjects Br. has proved,
page 21. therefore I may save my pains. But those that are short of faith that
justifies, are children or subjects of this Kingdom, Matthew. 8.12. The children
of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness. Those therefore that are
short of justifying faith have right in the sight of God to be thus received.

8. The children of the Covenant have right in the sight of Act. 3.25. The
Apostle speaking to the people of the Jews, says, Ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our fathers.

9. Disciples of Christ have right in the sight of God to Baptism, Matthew.
28.19. But many are Disciples of Christ, that are short of a faith that
justifies. Therefore those that are short of faith that justifies, have right
in the sight of God to Baptism. If all that I have said, page 208. of the
Treatise of the Covenant, to prove this assumption be too weak, as I think it
is not, Mr. Brs. proof page 21. of his Treatise has sure strength sufficient;
there he proves that infants are Disciples, because they are subjects of
Christ's Kingdom, and what Kingdom he means, he there explaines himself. I speak
not here (says he) of his Kingdom in the largest sense, as it contains all
the world; nor yet in the strictest, as it contains only his Elect: But in
the middle sense as it contains the Church visible, as it is most commonly
used: And therefore by the way not aequivocally used. Those then of this middle
posture non-Elect are Disciples.

Brs. proposition in the page before quoted, and in reason is plain, Christians
must not be kept out of Christian fellowship. This is Mr. Baxters likewise in
the place quoted, he makes Disciples Christians, and subjects of Christ's
visible Kingdom, to be one and the same. Therefore those that are short of
justifying faith, have right in the sight of God to Baptism. If he object that
that particle in the sight of God is an addition, they have no such right being
but aequivocal Christians: yet as is the Christian with him, so is the Church
or Kingdom, as aequivocal Christians, they may have right to an aequivocal
Church or Kingdom.

Brs. page 23. and the medium of that argument which he makes the chief of all
he uses. But those that are short of justifying faith are members of the
Church visible. Ergo those that are short of justifying faith, are to be
admitted to Baptism. The assumption is his likewise, where he distinguishes
the visible Kingdom from the Elect, and no man can deny it that grants the
distinction of a Church into visible and invisible.

Genesis 6.2. The whole body of the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Those that
most provoked God amongst them; Those that revolted from Christ, for whom Paul
had so much heaviness in the flesh, Romans 9.4. If the way of their adoption, or
sonship be questioned; doubtless it ^s such as has with it an inheritance,
for a child is not adopted, but to be provided for. And what inheritance can be
conceived, but Church privileges? Greater will not be yielded, and lesser to
one thus related cannot be assigned, and what privilege can be inherited if
there be no door of admittance to it? Those therefore that are short of
justifying faith have right in the sight of God to Baptism.

13. Those whom God ingraffs by his power into the true Romans 11. Therefore
those that are short of a justifying faith, have right in the sight of God to
Baptism. I had thought to have ended here, but let me add two more.

14. All of those that professedly embrace a Gospel tender,

15. If the Apostle argue for a right to Baptism, from gifts Act. 10.47. Can
any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received
the holy Ghost as well as we? The holy Ghost there, is the gift of the holy
Ghost then poured out; the gift of tongues, as in the 45. and 46. verses is
held forth: which is a gift not only inferior to charity, but such as may be
severed from it, 1 Cor. 13.1. A gift of that kind, that men of a miraculous
faith ordinarily did, as in an instant confer. They are therefore gifts common
to the justified and unjustified. Those therefore of faith short of that which
is justifying have right to Baptism.

If the promise be to others besides believers then so is the seal; for to whom
God promises, to them he engages himself to perform. But the promise is to
others: Therefore the seal is to others. This will be evident, if it be once
understood, that it is only the conditional Covenant which God seals by the
Sacraments; for this promise is made to unbelievers, though the good promised
is not to be enjoyed by any but those that perform the condition.

If God do no more in his actual sealing to believers then he does when the
Sacrament is rightly applied to hypocrites, then he actually seals to
hypocrites: But God does no more in his actual sealing to believers then he
does when the Sacrament is rightly administered to hypocrites. The Minor is
proved by the enumeration of the several acts. 1. God makes a promise. 2. He
commands Ministers to publish it. 3. He has instituted the Sacraments, as
mutually engaging signs or seals. 4. He commands Ministers to deliver or apply
them to those that profess their consent and desire to enter or renew the
Covenant. These two last I confess I have borrowed, and that from Mr. Br. page
223. of his Infant Baptism, and whether they make for him or against him, to
prove or disprove their right which he here calls hypocrites, and distinguishes
from believers, I leave to the censure of the intelligent Reader.

Mr. Baxters Arguments reviewed, and his Vindication examined. Argument 1.
MR. Baxter argues, When Christ says, Make me Disciples of all Nations, Matthew.
28.29. Vindicated.
baptizing them, he meant sincere disciples, though we cannot know them to be
sincere. I have answered, that this discipleship which Christ here mentions is
such, of which whole Nations are in a Capacity, which was made plain by the
Commission, concluding. If whole Nations, yea, the whole universal visible
Church (consisting of discipled Nations) were all believers, it were a great
happiness, Christ on the contrary says, Many are called, but few chosen. Mr.
Baxter replies, If it be not sincere disciples that Christ means in that Text,
Then no Apostle was bound by that Commission and great Precept, to endeavor
the making of sincere Disciples; but only counterfeits, and half Christians:
But the Antecedent is false: Therefore. I am sorry to hear the Constitution of
visible Churches to suffer this brand of making counterfeit, and half
Christians. It is well known whose Language it is, That all charging or urging
of duty upon unregenerate persons, is only to bring them to hypocrisy. Do not
all know that the means necessarily conducible must be used in order to the end
proposed? In order to make men sincere disciples, they must be made visible
professing disciples. They may be half Christians (if Mr. Baxter will have it
so) in order to whole Christians. Dr. Ames (if I do not misremember) compares
visible Churches to rough stones taken out of the quarry, and invisible
Christians to stones hewed and polished; I am sure they must be taken out of
the quarry to be put into the building. It is said, that Melanchton used to
wish, that there were more hypocrites in the world, then there were; not that
he would have more dissembling among those that made profession of
Christianity, but more brought in to make profession. Profession being a good
step in the way to sincerity, which a man would think Mr. Baxter would not
dislike, who so far speaks the mind of Christ toward men, that if they will
come but only to a visible profession, he will not deny them admittance there,
because they intend to go no further, but will let them come as near as they
will. And what he says of Christ's readiness for admittance, I may say of
Ministers endeavors, they must bring them thus far, in order to a greater
work. Ministers are to be instrumental by the work of regeneration to make men
babes in Christ, and by remiss heat resembling smoking flax, to bring them up
to greater fervor; Shall we thence infer, that they are to make men lukewarm,
which is a temper that Christ will not bear? We therefore distinguish of
luke-warmnesse: 1. As a medium to further heat, so Ministers must bring men up
to it. 2. As a terminus, or end in which men rest: So considered, a Ministers
work is to bring men beyond it; the same we may say of a visible profession, as
a medium, not as a terminus, it must be all Ministers endeavors. Mr. Baxter
cannot be ignorant that Mr. Marshall, and others that are for Infant Baptism,
have proved, (and Mr. T^mb's has yielded) That this enlarged Commission given
here to the Apostles, is put in opposition to their limited Commission, Matthew.
10.5, 6. They were first sent unto a Nation discipled to their hands; entering,
as Christ tells them, into other men's labors, what that Nation was, they must
by their endeavors work all to be. That was a Nation of professed, disciples,
and hither they are by their Commission to bring all Nations. Mr. Baxter adds,
For your Argument, I grant the Conclusion, and what would ye have more? I wish
no more, so that you will stand to your word, and then visible disciples, of
which whole Nations consist, according to Christ's Commission, have right to
Baptism, and I think that is the thing in Question. He yet says, I grant the
Minor, taking the word disciples equivocally, as a Corpse is called a man, and I
confess it usual so to take the word, but otherwise I deny the Minor. But I
abhor that acceptance. Honest-meaning men do not use to say so, much less the
Holy Ghost, as though I should say, that I had kept twenty men in my house
these twenty years, and then come off with a tale of twenty pictures. I assert
a reality in that discipleship which you call aequivocal: As for that which
follows, To be Christ's Disciple (as to the Aged) is to be one that has
unfeignedly taken Christ for his Master to teach him and rule him, renouncing
the contrary guidance of the flesh, the devil, and the world, etc. This is
true as to the Inheritance of heaven, but not as to Inheritance of Ordinances;
in order to the further work of sincerity, that qualifies for heaven. The Jew
outwardly was not thus qualified, and yet he had upon that account just title
to Church Priviledges, and in particular to Circumcision. There follows to
your Confirmation, I deny the Minor, and I say that it is so new a doctrine to
affirm, that whole Nations are not capable of being sound believers, that it
deserved one word of proof: Much less should you have hid your Minor, and
turned it into a Negatio Existentiae, when it should have been but a Negatio
Capacitatis: Does it follow that a Nation is not capable of sound faith,
because they have it not? or will not have it? and afterward you say, If there
be any Nation incapable of faith, then God cannot make them believers. And so
in conclusion you will have stones to be in this capacity, for God can make
them disciples, as well as he can of them raise up Children to Abraham. But you
might easily know that I intended a Capacity to be brought into this state in
Gods ordinary regular way by the Apostles Ministry. And, Chap. 27. page 194. I
had before thus explained my self, That which a whole Nation in Gods ordinary
way of administration is in a Capacity to attain, and enter into, is only a
Covenant professed, visibly entered upon, and does not require any inward change
or work upon the soul to the being of it. This is plain, it cannot be expected
in Gods ordinary way, that a Nation should be brought forth at once, all
inwardly holy and sanctified, such a field without tares has not been seen,
such a floor without chafe, such a draw-Net without any fish that is bad; such
a feast and none without a wedding Garment. So that this is a doctrine so
clear, that proof needs not, where there never shall be any futuriety we may
well and fairly speak of an incapacity. Capacity is vain when it is known and
confessed, Existence shall never follow: But there must never be any such
existence, as appears in Christ's and the Apostles Parables of mixtures in
visible Churches, and hitherto all ages have had experience. Whereas you say,
Do you think Preachers yet be not bound to endeavor the saving conversion of
whole Nations? If you say, No; you take them off the work their Master has set
them on. If you say, Yea: Then you think they must endeavor to persuade men to
that which they have not a Capacity of. I think they are to bring them if
heathens to a visible profession, and as many as may be to through conversion.
That is somewhat remarkable which follows, Vocation uneffectual is common to
Pagans. Vocation thoroughly Effectual is of the same extent with justification,
and I think Election. A Pagan called according to Scripture, is a Contradiction
in adjecto. Calling in Scripture Phrase is not a bare tender, but accompanied
with a professed answer. That speech of Christ, Many are called, but few
chosen, is the close of two Parables, Matthew. 20.16. and 22.14. the one of
Laborers called into the vineyard, the other of Guests called to the wedding.
And in both applied to them that answered to the Call, that came and labored
in the vineyard, that came with other bidden ones to the Feast, and not to
those that refused. According to this doctrine there is no Medium between a
Pagan and a justified man, all Pagans and unjustified men are upon the same
terms, the Jew outwardly (whatsoever St. Paul says to the contrary) has no
profit or advantage above the heathen. When the Psalmist gives that Elogy to
the children of Israel, a people near unto the Lord, Psalm. 148.14. the same may
be said of every Pagan that is an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, if
once he has manifested so much stubbornness as to refuse a Gospel-tender.
Scripture makes visible Church Members nigh, when others are afar off, Ephesians.
2.13. and in visible Churches some according to Scriptures are more nigh then
others, Mark 12.34. when yet both are in an unjustified Condition.

Argument 2. reviewed.
Mar. 16.16. vindicated.
Mr. Baxters second Argument to prove, that only justifying Faith gives title
to Baptism is thus laid down, When he says, He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, here Faith goes before Baptism, and that not a common, but a
saving faith; for here is but one faith spoken of, and that is before Baptism.
I have answered, that this is the weakest of all Arguments, to reason for a
precedence of one before another from the order in which they are placed in
Scripture, and gave diverse Instances not needful to repeat. Upon which Mr.
Baxter confesses, there may be an Hysteron Proteron: and then if Hysterons and
Proterons be any a thing to our present purpose, it rests upon him to prove
that here is none. 2. I know not how this figure of Rhetoric came to be talked
on, I think no such thing is here to be asserted. So I should say Baptism does
always lead, and Faith follow. I only said that all that can be collected
hence, is, that in Gods ordinary way of conferring salvation we must have both
Faith and Baptism, though (as our Divines have generally observed against the
Papists) there is not one and the same kind of necessity, which they confirm by
the words that follow. If Mr. Baxter will contend for an exact order, then he
must say that Faith always precedes, and never follows after Baptism,
against the common observation, that sometimes it precedes, sometimes it
accompanies, sometimes it follows, and he must also say that without inversion
of a Divine order no baptized man can be converted to a Faith that is
justifying; And then he may preach in England to build up Converts, but not to
convert: or at least when he has converted, he must baptize his convert; the
seal is null that goes before a Covenant. I gave instance in that place of
Peter, 1 Pet. 3.21. where the restipulation or answer of a good conscience
follows upon Baptism, affirming that justifying Faith is that restipulation,
or at least a principal branch of it; and therefore there is no necessity that
it should precede; but a necessity that it should follow; In which I did not
imply that a man before Baptism may not believe, as I gave instance in Abraham
to the contrary, but that it tyeth him to the faith, at least to follow after.
Mr. Baxter says, I gratefully accept your Concession, that justifying faith is
that restipulation, which is your Minor, (that is, justifying faith professed)
and thence I conclude, that justifying faith is essential to the Mutual
Covenant, and so without it God is not in Covenant with men. It is very well
worth our enquiry how this can follow which is thus made good. Who knows not
that ever read Civil Law, that there is no stipulation sine promissione, which
you call, and so do other Divines, Restipulation. And that this Restipulation
is an essential part of the Contract called stipulation, This being past
doubt, it follows, that justifying faith being our Restipulation, is an
Essential part of the Contract or Baptismall Covenant. They only (it seems)
that have read the Civil Law, can see a necessity of this Conclusion. I, and
other Divines, call this promise Restipulation; and I (though other Divines do
not) say that justifying faith is this Restipulation or promise. And so the
Promise being essential, Faith is essential to our being in Covenant likewise.
But can Mr. Baxter think that it is the Promise or Restipulation strictly so
called, or that I so intended it? then this is a true Proposition, justifying
faith is a Promise; can any think that I ever intended so egregious a piece of
affected nonsense? Justifying faith with me is the thing promised, or that to
which we restipulate. Who that has read Rhetoric, or heard any man speak,
does not know that the promise is ordinarily put for the thing promised? and
then the Conclusion will follow the clean contrary way. If you could prove out
of the Civil Law or elsewhere, that there is no Pollicitatio sine Praestatione,
that every man that enters Covenant eo nomine makes good his Covenant. Then you
hit the nayl on the head, and till that is done, you have done nothing.

Arg. 3. reviewed.
Mr. Baxters third Argument is, That faith to which the promise of remission,
and justification is made, must also be sealed to (or that faith which is the
Condition of the promise is the condition, in foro dei, of the title to the
seal): But it is only solid true faith which is the condition of the promise
(of remission): In what sense faith is the condition of the Promise.
Therefore it is that which gives right, in foro Dei, to the seal. To this I
have answered, faith is not sealed to, but remission of sins, or Salvation upon
condition of faith; and when I come to speak of the sealing of Sacraments, I
shall God willing make this more evident, that the Sacrament qua seal
immediately respects our privileges, and not duties, and I refer the Reader
thither. When I say a professor of faith may engage to a lively working faith,
I am followed with this Dilemma. You mean either a professor of that lively
faith or a professor of a dead, not working faith. If the first, it is a
contradiction to say he professes to have a lively faith, and he only
ingageth so to believe hereafter. For if he profess to have it already, then
he can engage only to the continuation, and not to the inception of it. If you
mean the latter, then I shall show you anon, that a man professing a dead, not
working faith, is not in Scripture called to Covenant with God in Baptism, to
believe lively for the future, (inceptive) and to believe for the future with a
working faith. I shall first second this dilemma with another of like nature,
and then answer. He that thus professes to have a lively faith, either
professes it knowingly, so that he is assured that he speaks the truth, or
with haesitations, doubts and fears, so that he questions the truth of all that
himself says. The latter doubtless can give no title according to Mr. Baxter.
For a man to profess, and remain wholly uncertain of the truth of such
profession, can give no such title as is required; if the former be intended,
that every man professing must know the truth of his profession, then none that
are below assurance that in present they savingly believe, have any right to
Baptism, and then you see how high we are gone. Some think it is too much to
require a full assurance of Grace from all that enter or are allowed to
possess their places in the Ministry, much more of all that enter into
Christianity. For a direct answer, I therefore say, It is not profession to say
that we have this faith, but a profession of our assent to the necessity of it,
with engagement to it that gives this title. There follows, You suppose then,
such a professor as this coming to Baptism, saying, Lord, I believe that thou
art God alone, and Christ the only Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost the guide and
sanctifier of thy people, and that the world, flesh and devil is to be
renounced for thee: but at present there are lusts so dear to me, that I will
not forsake them for thee. I will not take thee for my God, to rule me, or be
my happiness; nor will I take Christ to govern me, and save me in his way;
nor will I be guided, or sanctified by the Holy Ghost; but hereafter I will,
and therefore I come to be baptized. If I say such have right to baptism, and
you say we are bound to baptize them, how do you mend the matter? do not you
conclude your forty sixth Section with these words? Vocation which is effectual
only to bring men to an outward profession of saving faith, is larger then
election, and makes men such whom we are bound to baptize. 2. I say and do
profess of those that have those secret reservations wrapped up in their breasts,
and not yet from under the power of lusts, yet convinced of their duty, and
acknowledging the necessity, that it is the mind of God that they should be
baptized, and have admission to ordinances, in order to bring them more
sincerely and unreservedly to God. And this being the will of God, as you seem
to yield when you say we are bound to baptize them; I say they have right in
the sight of God to Baptism, and it were ill with the Church if those in
Austins case, that would pray, Da castitatem, da temperantiam Domine, sed non
modo, should be denied all investiture in Church privileges. Where Mr. Baxter
says, that faith which is the condition of the promise is the condition in
foro Dei of title to the seal: And I say, that I judge the contrary to be
undeniable; After many words which are needless to repeat, we have his
reasons, with a complaint that I have given no reason of my denial. To which I
say, That which in a parenthesis without reason is affirmed, may without
rendering any reason be denied. But before I come to consider of his reasons, it
is necessary that the terms be looked into, and the question rightly stated,
that there may be no misunderstanding. When Mr Baxter speaks of the condition
of the promise, I suppose he means the condition called for, in order to the
attainment of the thing promised, the promise for the object of the promise, as
it is taken, Heb. 11.13. Otherwise the promise it self properly taken has no
condition. There was no condition inducing God to make promise of Christ, nor
to make tender of any such promise. But he promises glory by Christ on his own
terms and propositions. Now for the reasons themselves to make good that; that
which is the condition of the promise, is the condition of title to the seal.
The first is, The seal is but an affix to the promise: therefore that which is
the condition of the promise, is, the condition of the seal. The seal is no
affix to the thing promised, but it is often separated from it. It is a means
to convey, and a way to confirm it upon Gods terms to those that have their
Interest in the Covenant. 2. The use of the seal is to confirm the promise to
him to whom it is sealed: Therefore the condition of the promise is the
condition of the seal. When it is granted that the use of the seal is to
confirm the thing promised, it will not therefore follow that there is the same
condition required for interest in the seal as for interest in the thing in
promise. If a man will engage under seal to give me one hundred pounds,
provided that I will come to such a place and accept it, my professed
willingness will Interest me in the seal, my actual acceptance in the Moneys.
3. If the promise and seal have two distinct conditions, then there are two
distinct Covenants, (for from the conditions most commonly are contracts
specified; and therefore Wesenbechius and such like Logical Civilians, call it
the form of the contract, or stipulation, to be either pura, vel in diem, vel
sub conditiene, and those subconditions are specified often from their various
conditions) But there is not two Covenants: Therefore. I know not well how to
reach this. Is there not one thing needful to interest me in a bargain, or to
make me a Covenanter, and another thing to obtain the benefit accruing by such
conditional bargain or Covenant? 4. Is it not against the nature and common use
of sealing that it should be in order before the promise or Covenant? And that
men should first have right to that seal on one condition before they have
right to the promise, and then have right to the promise after on another
condition. But sure it is not against the nature of seals to be before the
mercy covenanted for, and promised. And I beseech you take this into serious
consideration, and do not slightly pass it. Justifying faith with you is the
Covenant, and do not you preach to work men up to it? and I hope your labors
are happily successeful. Yet all of these to whom you preach (perhaps not a man
excepted) has this seal, and is baptized. Do you now in all your Ministerial
labors go against the nature and common use of sealing? To keep a due order we
must then forbear baptizing, not only till men profess to believe, but are
actually in the faith, in a way that justifies. 5. If it be so undeniable that
that faith which is the condition of the promise, is not the condition in foro
Dei of title to the seal, as you affirm, why then do ye build so much against
Mr. Tombs, on that Argument from Acts 2. The promise is to you and your
Children, arguing a right to the seal from an interest in the promise? I Argue
not from an interest in the seal to an interest in the thing promised, but
require something further. By this it appears that you take the promise
properly, and not for the thing promised, and then I pray you reconcile this to
your second reason; The use of a seal is not to confirm in this that I have a
promise, but that I shall have interest in the good that is promised. 6. Where
you say that an acknowledgement of the necessity of such faith with engagement
to it is sufficient for a title to the seal; I reply then those that at present
renounce Christ so it be against their knowledge, and conscience, and will
engage to own him sincerely for the future, have a title to Baptism. How comes
I pray you that [future] in? you manifest much reading in the Law, and I have
heard this as a Maxim, In obligationibus ubi nullus certus statuitur dies,
quovis die debetur, There is no day overtaken but the engagement is for
present; though God in mercy except when for a long time the engagement has
been presumptuously neglected. But bring me a man that in his heart is
convinced that Jesus is the Christ, with his mouth professes him, and ingages
for him, and in the mean space actually renounceth him, and I will do what you
would have me with him; That is, a man that is falling headlong down a ladder,
at the same instant he is climbing up it. When I bring this similitude for
illustration of the point in hand, that a promised service and fidelity in war
is enough to get listed, and to do service is of necessity to be rewarded, I am
told that this runs upon the great mistake which I have been so often told of,
and am further informed that the formal reason and denomination of a condition
is from the donors constitution, or imposition, giving this benefit only on
the terms by him assigned, and not upon our promise to perform them. If I have
been told of it often, it is well if I can be convinced of it now. I utterly
deny that the denomination of conditions of a Covenant in actual being, is from
the one, and not from the other, that is, exclusively to the other. I well know
the donour is to prescribe, and the receiver is to accept without putting in
Exceptions. But if there be no acceptance of terms, there is no Covenant; and
there being no Covenant, there can be no Covenant conditions, as is plain by
the usual definition of Covenants; where the Gospel is preached, and no
entertainment at all given, there is no Covenant people of God, they stand
bound by Law precepts, but are under no obligations to Covenant conditions.

Argument 4. reviewed.
The next Argument in which I am concerned, and the last which in this thing is
produced, is, That the Eunuch must first believe, and then be baptized; upon
his desire of Baptism, Philip says, If thou believe with all thy heart,
thou may. This I have confessed carries more color then all the former; and
indeed I never met with any thing, either in Scripture, or reason produced,
that carries with me so much as any color for it, this excepted. Yet this is
not unanswerable. One difficult text does not use to take us off our hold of
many plain ones. I answer, 1. Philip may call for that de been esse, when the
Eunuch was to be admitted, which was not yet essential to his admittance. Those
that preach preparatory Sermons for the Lords Supper, call for allthat may give
the highest comforts, and not barely for that which is the Minimum quod sic, to
give admission. 2. As I have said, so I say still, that dogmatical faith is a
true faith, and to prevent needless Criticisms, it is truly a divine faith, so
that none can say that Jesus is the Christ (can believingly subscribe that
Article) but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. And whosoever says with assent of
judgment and understanding, that Jesus the Son of Mary is Christ, the Son of
the living God, speaks more then flesh and blood can suggest, and is not
attainable but by Divine revelation. And whereas it is objected, that it is a
false faith, when it pretends to be that which Scripture calls faith in Christ,
and denominateth believors; I answer, 1. I have showed before, that our
prosession qualifying for Baptism, is not a profession that we have such
faith, (which cannot be done without an eminence of faith to assurance) but a
profession of the necessity of it to salvation, and an engagement to it. 2. It
denominates believers in the ordinary and common language of Scriptures, and
wheresoever believer is put in opposition to unbeliever or infidel, faith of
this nature is still understood. In that famous text, 1 Cor. 7.14. every man
and woman is a believer, that was removed from heathenish Idolatry to the
profession of Christianity, or (as Paulinus, whom Jerome so much magnifies,
speaks) was a baptized person. Otherwise the case there put about the validity
of marriage, and lawfulness of marriage society were not between an infidel and
a professor of Christianity, but between a regenerate man whom this language
only makes a believer, and one unregenerate, which in this language are
infidels, which were a case never yet put to question. When mention is made
through the History of the Acts of so many thousands that upon the Apostles
preaching believed, it can denote no more then the embracing of the way of
Christianity, in opposition to Judaisme or Heathenisme. If it imply a through
Regeneration of the soul, there could be no unregenerate ones among them, which
is wholly against the nature of visible Churches, and all experience, as has
been abundantly manifested. As for that distinction (which seems to be hinted)
between believing Christ, and believing in Christ, Mr. Ball in his Treatise of
Faith, page 5. has sufficiently showed the groundlesnesse of it, pointing out
Scriptures where a preposition is added to the word believe, when nothing but
assent of mind is signified; And where it is put without a preposition, when
trust and confidence is employed. Abraham believed God, Romans 4.3. (where no
preposition is added) and it was counted to him for righteousness. And on the
contrary the Rulers believed (...), in or on Christ, and loved the praise of
men more then the praise of God, Joh. 12.42, 43. It follows, I think if a man
say, This is the Son, the Heir, Come let us kill him, and the inheritance shall
be ours, we will not have this man reign over us, that these are not true
believers, nor have right to Baptism, though their belief that he was the heir
be a dogmaticall faith true in its kind. I am sorry that such things should be
mentioned, where inquiry after truth is contended, and contention not studied.
It is well known, that I speak to a faith of profession, which is theirs that
take to that party which is for Christ, and not with those that professedly go
in a full opposition against him, and are in a high rode (any such conviction
of spirit supposed) of sin against the Holy Ghost. I know not why Dr. Ames
should be brought in, telling us, that in those places where saving faith is
spoke to, trust in the Messiah is ever included: seeing we are speaking of a
faith that is short of saving, nor yet that I should be told that words of
knowledge and assent do in Scripture often imply affection and consent, unless
that it be to let me know that it does not generally hold; which in case I were
in a strait, and at want for a present answer, would well help me out. And
whereas I am demanded, whether I do not know how ordinarily saving faith it
self is denominated from the Intellectual act alone? I answer, that I do know
it, and if I were ignorant of it before, Mr. Burgess has taught me the same
thing, with the same reason of it in his Spiritual Refining, page 170, 171.
Pos. 8. And I know also, that it has its denomination often from the act of
the will alone; But will it follow that the understanding is never fully
persuaded for assent, but the will is also (not alone somewhat moved, but)
thoroughly inclined for consent and acceptance. If the understanding at any time
be brought to a real assent whilst the will is swayed by lusts and takes to
other objects, that is to me sufficient. Or will it follow that either the
Eunuch did or must necessarily be presumed to understand, upon that little
acquaintance that it seems he yet had in the Gospel, the whole of those choice
observations? or can it be any way certainly collected, that such a Confession
that he made was accompanied with a present saving work? But Mr. Baxter has
singularly engaged me to him, quoting those Texts, John 11.25, 26, 27. John
1.49, 50. 1 John 4.15. he adds, Here is more then right to Baptism. Then a
man may have right to Baptism that is short of those great privileges of
dwelling in God, and being born of God; and I scarce know what to say more for
my own opinion. It further follows, If you think (as you seem by your answer
to do) that a man may assent to the truth of the Gospel with all his heart, and
yet be void of justifying faith, you do not lightly err. It follows not (I
think) from any thing that I have said, that I am in any such opinion. That
Expression is in Philips words, and I have told you he might require de been
esse, that which is not necessary to the esse of Baptism. But in case I be in
any so heavy an Error, I am thus helped out of it. Though an unregenerate man
may believe as many truths as the regenerate, yet not with all his heart;
Christ says, Matthew. 13. The Word has not rooting in him. It is then granted,
that he may believe all truths, and that which is added to prove that he cannot
believe them with his whole heart, is not with me convincing. The Word had not
root: not because they did not entirely from the heart assent to it; But
because they received it not in the love of it. They received the light to
inform their judgments, not any through heat for the warmth of their affections.
There follows, Doubtless whether or no the practical understanding do
unavoidably determine the will, yet God does not sanctify the understanding
truly, and leave the will unsanctified: which must be said, if the dogmatical
faith that is the Intellectual assent of a wicked man, be as strong as that of
a true believer. Here is suggested that I say, that the Intellectual assent of
a wicked man is as strong as that of a true believer. I know not where I have
said it, or any thing that implies it. It may be a true assent, though not of
that strength. But if I had said it will it thence follow, that God does
sanctify the understanding truly, and leave the will unsanctified? I trow not.
Is every strong Intellectual assent sanctified? is every Intellectual assent
which is of equal strength with that in the regenerate truly sanctified?
Clearness of light commands assent to truths, when corruption of affections
will not suffer that at least pro hic and nunc, that the goodness or bestnesse
(if I may so say) should be believed. I believe it is as strong in the Devils
as in any Regenerate man in the world. I know not how it fares with some whom
God may exercise more gently respective to temptations and Satan's Buffettings,
I am sure that there are those that would sometimes freely give up all that is
dear to them in the world, to be as clear in some fundamental truths as Satan
himself; he doubtless injects Scruples where himself is without scruple. I
know some question whether there be any such thing as faith in devils,
notwithstanding James says, The Devils believe and tremble. But certain it is,
there is an Intellectual assent to Divine truth in the Devils, as we may see,
Matthew. 8.29. Mark 3.11. Luke 4.41. Acts 19.15. and yet there is no
sanctification wrought. And therefore though the wicked match the regenerate in
assent in their understanding, it will not follow that their understandings
therefore are truly sanctified. I am further referred to Dr. Downam against Mr.
Pemble, which is not in my hands, and whether my answer be equal to silence, as
is in the close affirmed, I must leave to the Reader to determine.

Advertisements given to Mr. Baxter, touching his undertaking for Mr. Firmin.
IN a distinct Section Mr. Baxter lets us know, how good a mind he had to have
appeared in this cause for Mr. Firmin, which wonderful change in him, may well
be my admiration: All know that have looked into my Birth-priviledge, that I
delivered the same things there, as, in my Treatise of the Covenant, I have
asserted against Mr. Firmin; and that past with Mr. Baxter (if reports have not
deceived me) with good approbation. I communicated to him a considerable part
of my defense of it, against Mr. T. his letter in Manuscripts, and I blush not
to tell the Reader that he applauded it. And besides what I have produced
already out of him, I have a witness of reverend esteem; that he has said
that I had given him in discourse full satisfaction, of the title of
unregenerate men (or some phrase par^llell) to Sacraments. But in case upon
change of judgment, he will appear for Mr. Firmin in this particular, and that
merely (as he says) in love of the truth, least the reputation of man should
cloud it; and in love to the Church, and the luster of the Christian name, lest
this fearful gap should let in that pollution that may make Christianity seem
no better then the other Religions of the world. Further explaining himself,
For I fear, this loose doctrine (so he is pleased to call it) of Baptism will
do more to the pollution of the Church, then others loose doctrine of the Lords
Supper, or as much. If upon these specious pretenses he has still a mind to
it, I shall crave leave to offer some words by way of advice to him.

First, To reconcile himself to Mr. F. they being as yet so far from agreement,
either in judgment or in practice; both of them are gone out of the road of the
Reformed Churches, but Mr. Baxters friend (for whom he is about to undertake)
as to his judgment is yet in the lower form, when he is in the upper. Mr. F.
requires not truth of grace to make a visible Churchmember, but declares
himself very largely against it; he requires not truth of grace in a parent to
entitle his child in the right of Baptism. It is enough with him that he be a
man of knowledge, and free from scandal, which he well knows to be the case of
many in unregeneration. And though Mr. Baxter is thus gone beyond him in
judgment, yet he sits down far short of him in practice, and says that we are
bound to baptize all those that make an outward profession, and consequently
their children; when Mr. F. upon tender, conscienciously refuses many of them.
Mr. F. and I are, as I suppose, upon nearer terms of accord, then Mr. F. and
Mr. Baxter, both of us agreeing that unregenerate men have their title, and a
faith that is short of justifying may give interest.

Secondly, To reconcile Mr. Firmin to himself, Mr. Baxter much honors him (as
also many others) for his book against the separation, and he tells reverend
Mr. Cawdrey (who has wrote against him in this subject) that possibly he may
make use of his book about the separation against him; and Mr. Cawdrey has in
readiness (as I am informed from his own mouth) not a few contradictions to
charge upon him, and this I can tell both Mr. Baxter, and Mr. F. that the best
friends that I ever met with of them both, confess, that he is a far other man
in these writings then when he wrote against the separation.

Thirdly, To help him out of the principles of Anabaptisme into which he is
also observed by his friends to be fallen, in making the interest of the seed
in Covenant-title, to be peculiar to the Jewish Nation.

Fourthly, to take further care to shut the door against a new flood of
Anabaptisme, which (as I have showed) himself has set wide open; If
unregenerate persons be void of all right to Baptism, then their Baptism is
null, and upon regeneration are to be baptized.

Fifthly, To consider with himself how he will answer the breach he makes in
the Church of Christ, having the whole face and practice (as Apollonius speaks)
of reformed Churches against him. That Black ink which he casts, not only on
me, and reverend Mr. Cawdrey, (who have appeared in this cause against Mr.
Firmin) but on the face of so many Churches so glorious, is unworthy of his
pen; what man of name in all the reformed Churches that is not guilty of this
fearful pollution as he is pleased to call it? Amesius is a man not to be
suspected here of partiality, (in some things departing from the way of
discipline of those Churches where he lived,) yet he tells the world, That it
is false that they require inward virtues to make a man a visible
Churchmember: in which he is Mr. Baxters adversary: and what liberty he
allows (which Mr. F. denies) for the Baptism of the Infants of wicked
Parents, of Infants of illegitimate birth, of Infants of excommunicate persons,
let him be consulted, Cases of Conscience, lib. 5. Cap. 27. Wallaeus excluding
from Baptism the Infants of such Parents that profess they will bring them up
in impiety, heresy, and idolatry, But out of this case (says he) we judge
that Baptism belongs to all those Infants which are born of a Christian race,
Extra vero hunc casum judicamus omnibus illis insantibus competere Baptismum
qui ex sti^pe Christiani nati sunt, si secundum ordinem consuetum Ecclesiae ad
Baptismum offerantur, etsi proximi eorum parents vel vitae improbitate, vel
haeresi laborant, vel idolatriae crimine adversus secundam tabulam; nam
idololatria adversus primam tabulam potius apostasia est. En praxis manifesta
and perpetua totius Ecclesiae Israeliticae in adm^nistratione Circumcisionis.
if they be tendered to baptism, according to the Churches custom, although
their immediate Parents remain lewd in conversation, or lie under heresy, or
the crime of idolatry against the second Commandment; for Idolatry against the
first Commandment is rather apostasy: fortifying it with several arguments,
the first of which is, The manifest practice of the Church of Israel in the
administration of Circumcision. The Professors of Leyden in their Synopsis of
more pure Divinity, are as far guilty of this supposed pollution as any,
Disput. 44. Sect. 50. Neither (say they) do we exclude those Infants from
participation of this Sacrament, Nec tamen excludimus ab hujus Sacramenti
communione Infantes eos, qui ex Christiana stirpe and baptizatis parentibus
nati sunt, etsi ipsorum parents per vitam improbam, aut fidem impuram foederis
in baptismo obsignati efficaciam adversus se irritam reddant; si ab iisdem
parentibus aut eorum propinquis, sub quorum potestate sunt juxta ordinem in
Ecclesiis nostris consuetum baptismo offeruntur; quia sub novo foedere filius
non fert iniquitatem patris, and Deus nihilominus manet ejusmodi liberorum
Deus, quemadmodum ipse testatur, Ezekiel. 16.20. Ubi impiorum Israelitarum liberos
filios suos vocat, quos Deo genuerant, ersi eos Molocho offerrent; Unde and
ejusmodi Israelitarum, quorum multi in impietate sua fuerant mortui, non minus
quam piorum liberos circumcidi jussit, Josh. 5.4, and 6. quod etiam Ecclesia
Israelitica and Christiana Primitiva faciendum esse extra controversiam semper
habuit.
who are born of Parents of a Christian race, and baptized, although their
parents by their wicked life, or impure faith, render the efficacy of the
Covenant sealed in Baptism as utterly void to them, if they be offered by
those parents or other kindred under whose power they are according to the
order accustomed in our Churches, because under the New Covenant the son does
not bear the iniquity of the father, and God nevertheless remains the God of
such children, as he himself witnesses, Ezekiel. 16.20. where he calls the
children of those wicked Israelites his sons, which they had brought forth unto
God, although they had offered them to Moloch, whereupon he commanded the
children of those Israelites whereof many of them dyed in their sin in the
wilderness, as well as the children of the godly to be circumcised, Josh. 5.4,
6. which also the Church of Israel and the Christian Primitive Church never
questioned. Mr. Baxter says he will consult Dr. Drake, to find who they be,
that those of his judgment admit to the Lords Supper, and I would have him
withal at the same time to enquire whether he do not profess that it is their
practice to baptize promiscuously? which is directly against Mr. Firmins way;
and let him read Mr. Goodwins Evangelical Communicant; and how high soever he
goes to keep many from the Lords Table, yet he is as large as either Mr.
Cawdrey or my self, in admission to baptism; let him look upon the practice I
may say almost universal in the Nation, and see what course they generally
hold, and I have not heard that they have yet learnt to distinguish between the
Infants right, and the Churches obligation; that the Infants of such or such
Parents are without any right, and yet the Church stands bound to give them
admission. Mr. Firmin does sufficiently declare how sensible he is of his
dissent from his brethren, let Mr. Baxter then undertaking for him, see how
wide a breach he is like to make instead of union. If that complement therefore
which is cast upon me by Mr. Baxter, Si pace tanti viri dixerim, had been
tantorum virorum, and had spoken out who those be that he so heavily charges as
before, to obscure the Church, and the luster of the Christian name, etc. and
plainly told us that it is the generality of all that go under the name of
Churches reformed, the speech does not now appear so modest, but then it would
have been as arrogant.

Sixthly, That he make some provision for tender and scrupulous consciences
that shall admit his principles, 1. In taking in of members into
Church Fellowship, as it is called. A man without grace in a visible Church
according to him is as a wooden leg in the body; how great a deformity this is,
and how great a trouble to have such instead of those that are of flesh and
bone, it is easy to judge, and yet how many of these necessarily will and must
be received? 2. In baptism of Infants. To baptize an Infant is with him, not
only to espouse, but to solemnize a full and actual marriage with Christ
Jesus, and that in words not de futuro, but de praesenti, and what further
glory then they may expect from his hand I scarce can tell. An illustrious
Prince will have none but of noble and Royal blood, and Christ will have none
to be thus, in marriage relation given to him but the seed of regenerate, and
graciously qualified persons. How shall I get intelligence that this or that
infant is descended of such a race? where shall I learn his or her pedigree,
that I may thus give to Christ Jesus? And in case probabilities must lead us,
we have need of further help then yet we see, to judge of such probability.
Must we find those qualifications in the man, who himself is for Baptism or
his child, that may move us to conclude that in all reason and possible
appearance here is a child of God, or an Infant of a regenerate person? Or will
it serve our turn, and satisfy our consciences, that we cannot certainly
conclude the contrary? If the first be required, it will put all the Ministers
of Christ hard to it, and prove such a snare that I know not how they will
extricate themselves; If the latter be that which we must receive, here is then
a loose rule for to lead in so high proceedings. For men will be so laxe in
their own marriage choice, as for to take any into that society, if they be not
able to conclude her a strumpet or desperately wicked; we have hitherto
believed that Jesus Christ is pleased to receive in a greater latitude into
visible relation.

Seventhly, I desire Mr. Baxter to tell us how he has mended the matter, and
provided for the honor and luster of the Christian name, or made up at all
that gappe of which he speaks. He says the Church is bound to baptize as
largely, as I say men have right to Baptism. I think here he will find little
or no difference; and when he refuses none that I receive, and where I say they
have right, he says, we are bound to baptize without right; how will this make
Christianity to look with any better face? how much will Worcestershire
Congregations, where this is received, exceed other Congregations, where
unanimously it is denied? I would have him to reflect on his 18th. Argument,
and see whether the force of it be not evidently as much against hinself as it
is against me, against whom it is brought. It is thus framed; That doctrine
which makes it the regular way in Baptism, for all men to promise that which
they can neither sincerely promise nor perform, is unsound. But such is Mr.
Blakes: Ergo. And after much work to explain himself, it comes to this, that
unregenerate men cannot resolve or sincerely promise to love, believe or obey,
and therefore upon that account are without right to baptism. Let it be taken
into consideration, that when I say these men that in their present state are
thus unable to love, believe, and obey, have notwithstanding right to Baptism,
and he says that this inability notwithstanding, they ought to be baptized,
how is the matter mended? If my Doctrine upon this account be unsound, his
doctrine and practice will be found unsound likewise. Mr. Baxter says, Vocation
which is effectual only to bring men to an outward profession of faith, is
larger then election, and makes men such whom we are bound to baptize.

Eighthly, I shall desire some Scripture text or cogent reason to make it
appear that we are bound to baptize those that in the sight of God have no
right to Baptism, the command given will argue with me their right, unless I
hear an injunction from heaven that notwithstanding their want of right we are
to baptize them. Peter argues the right of those, Acts 10.47. for their
admission to Baptism, which had been more then needed, in case without any
such right the water in Baptism might have been applied unto them; and I
marvel that Mr. Baxter should so tenaciously hold to Philips speech to the
Eunuch, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may; seeing he believes
as well as I that faith short of this which he says these words necessarily
imply, might have admitted him, and put a necessity on Philip to have baptized
him, though it would not have given him right to Baptism. His actual
admission, and not his right, is there put to the question. If these things be
well considered, Mr. Baxter may see cause to begin with a confutation of Mr. F.
before he undertakes a defense; and I suppose the Reader will see that he had
small cause to censure my Arguments to be so dilute unless he himself had
brought some of greater strength.

Lastly, I would have Mr. Baxter seriously consider, whether that which we have
observed already out of him, and might yet further be gathered, may not make up
a forcible Argument, and conclusive of this title to Baptism, in those who yet
rise not up to the Faith that is justifying, when they are separate from
Paganism into fellowship with the visible Church, as he asserts, Saints Rest,
Part 4. Sect. 3. page 105. and with them their issue, as he has concluded from
1 Cor. 7.14. when they attain to graces real, and true, as we have seen from
him; I am sure the Apostle, as has been said, Act. 10.47. argues from such
qualifications, to an interest in Baptism; when they have their interest in
the Covenant of grace, as a fruit of Christ's death, as he says, doubtless
reprobates have, Treatise of Infant Baptism, page 224. when their Baptism
has all that is essential to Gods sealing, as he asserts it has page 222. All
of this laid together, with more that may be taken up, will in all indifferent
Readers eyes conclude a title: And further, whether he have not spoken as much
in plain words, terminis terminantibus for the interest of unregenerate men, or
men of a mere visible profession in Baptism, let his words be considered,
Saints Rest, Part 4. Sect. 3. page 104, 105. Where giving holy, and seasonable
advice to beware the company of sensual, and ungodly men, he limits it with
Cautions, least it should be thought, that he persuades, as he rightly styles
it, unto an ungodly separation, he adds, As I never found one word in
Scripture, where either Christ or his Apostles denied admittance to any man
that desired to be a member of the Church, though but only professing to
repent and believe; so neither did I ever there find that any but convicted
Heretics, or scandalous ones (and that for the most part after due admonition)
were to be avoided, or debarred our fellowship. And whereas it is urged, that
they are to prove their interest to the privileges that they lay claim to, and
not we to desprove it; I answer, If that were granted, yet their mere sober
professing to Repent and believe in Christ, is a sufficient evidence of their
interest to Church Membership, and admittance thereto by Baptism (supposing
them not admitted before:) and their being baptized persons, (if at age) or
members of the universal visible Church, (into which it is that they are
baptized) is sufficient evidence of their interest to the Supper, till they do
by heresy, or scandal blot that evidence; which evidence if they do produce,
yea, though they are yet weak in the faith of Christ, who is he that dare
refuse to receive them? And, this after much doubting, dispute, and study of
the Scriptures, I speak as confidently, as almost any truth of equal moment;
so plain is the Scripture in this point, to a man that brings his understanding
to the model of Scripture, and does not bring a model in his brain, and reduce
all he reads to that model. What have I spoke more then here is said? and did I
ever speak with more and higher confidence? I say, that a faith which is short
of justifying gives title to Baptism; and he says, Such give sufficient
evidence of their interest to Church Membership, and consequently admittance to
Baptism; so that if my doctrine herein be loose, (as he charge it) the
Reader will hardly find his to be fast; and it hears not well, to play fast
and loose. The evasion of equivocal will not here serve, that will utterly
spoil the whole strength of his Caution, and put men amain on this separation,
as it will contradict his assertion, of their grace as real, and true: They
will say, They will have no fellowship with a dead Corpse, instead of a real
man; for that is his expression of the difference between what is real, and
what is equivocal. Neither can he here come off by the help of his distinction
of forum Dei, and forum Ecclesiae. These gifts and graces from God, these
privileges vouchsafed of God, and purchased by Christ, plainly enough speak a
right in the sight of God. Neither is there (as we have heard) in this
Controversy any such distinction to be admitted. I am therefore in this no
further to blame, then he has been; and if he see cause to recede from, yet I
see all reason to persist in my opinion.

SECT. X. Proposition. 8.
FOr the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, No such vast difference between
baptism and the Lords Supper: that the one should be a privilege of the
Church visible, and the other peculiar, to the Church invisible.
there cannot be that vast difference and disproportion between it and
baptism, that the one should be a privilege of the Church visible, and the
other peculiar and proper to the Church invisible: that all in the outward
administration of the Covenant (as some speak) should be interessed in the one,
and only those that come up to the terms of the Covenant should have any
interest in the other. Christ gave order that Disciples should be baptized,
Matthew. 28.19. and he delivered his Supper to Disciples, Matthew. 26.26, 27. and
it is more then strange that disciples should be taken in that aequivocall way,
as to hold out all in outward profession, confoederation. and visible Church
communion, in the one, (as is almost generally agreed upon between
Paedobaptists and their adversaries) and to be restrained to those that answer
to their profession in the other; so that in the administration of the one, the
dispensers have a firm rule to lead them, viz. visibility of interest (as Mr.
Cobbet has largely shown in his Vindication, page 52. Cou. 4.) and in the
other can have nothing for their guide, but an invisible work, left to their
charity to conjecture. Disciple therefore respective to either of the
Sacraments (which are outward visible ordinances and visible Church
privileges) can be no more then a man of visible interest. When Christ sat
down to the Passover, it is said he sat down with the twelve, only they had
right to eat of it in his company, Exodus 12.3. being of his family; And, as he
was eating he gave the Supper, but then the phrase is changed, he gave it to
his Disciples, only the twelve were occasionally there, but it was instituted
in behalf of all Disciples, of which the number could not be small; considering
how many John had made and baptized, and Christ had made and baptized more then
he, though not in person, but by his Disciples, Joh. 4.1, 2. A reverend brother
makes this practice of Christ at the first institution and administration of
the Supper, to be a directory for future, to receive such only to it, as are
the Disciples of Christ. To which I willingly condescend, provided that the
word be aright understood. I know the word is sometimes taken in a restrained
sense, for those that indeed do the duty of disciples, Joh. 8.31. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed; and, Luke 14.33.
Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my
Disciple. As the word Israelite is sometimes taken for those that do the duty
of Israelites, and are such as Israelites ought to be, Joh. 1.47. Behold, an
Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile; when respective to fruition of
Church ordinances (of what nature soever) all that were of Israel according to
the flesh or visible Church Members in Israel, are expressed by it. Disciple,
or Israelite, is a man of outward Covenant interest. The latitude of it,
according to Scripture expressions, I have shown, Treatise of the Covenant,
page 208. All that were Christ's family Disciples, did eat of the Passover with
him, Matthew. 26.18. even Judas, as is acknowledged, and scarce to be doubted of
but he did eat of the Supper. It is more then strange, that as a Disciple he
should be taken into the Passover, and a few hours after, as no Disciple
should be put from the Supper. The Lords Supper is for the building of those
that Baptism takes in; But Baptism takes into the Church visible. Visible
Church members have then interest in the Supper. When Sacraments are in their
use distinguished, one for admittance into the Church, and the other for
growth; one as the Sacrament of our birth, and the other our nourishment, most
understand the first of admission into the Church visible (well knowing that
regeneration is not tied to baptism,) but the growth many will have to be in
the Church invisible, which inharmonious discord between Ordinances of the same
kind cannnot be suffered. To give notes of the Disciples of Christ, for
discovery of a Disciple in the former sense, by their affections to him, and
suffering of affliction for him, are of singular use: Christ himself has gone
before us in it. But upon the notation of the word, because Christ gave the
Bread and Cup to Disciples, to make the subject of that Sacrament to be only
those that reach these marks, is besides the holy Ghosts intention. All
outward Ordinances are for the Church in fieri, and not only in facto, for the
bringing of it on to Christ. I should desire to know where any outward sensible
Ordinance is made, or how in reason, and according to Scripture, it can be made
the proper peculiar right of invisible members.

SECT. XI. Proposition. 9,
THe Sacrament of the Supper (no more then other Ordinances) is not limited to
those that have received a new life in Christ by the Spirit, that are actually
regenerate, and in grace; The Lords Supper is not limited to those that have
received a new life by the Spirit.
others as they may be admitted without sin, so they are in a capacity and
possbility, to receive benefit from it. This I am not ignorant that some will
question: But let these consider before they censure.

First, That it is an external Ordinance as has been said, is in him, and
therefore no marks for any others cognizance. For a Minister of Christ to
dispense by command the Sacrament to many, when he knows that it is of
possible use and benefit to some few, unto these it is food and nourishment
unto life; unto the others as Rats-bane, Poison, and only for death; is such a
snare that may hold him in his administration, in all horror and amazement. A
fad dilemma, either to lay aside an Ordinance of Christ, and so never come up
in his place to the whole of his duty; or else to deliver to them that which
will inevitably be the ruin and destruction of so many of them. I know no
possible way that can be supposed, or so much as pretended for avoidance; but
in the Name of Christ, to give warning to all, in whom this new life by the
Spirit is not, to abstain every man and woman not actually regenerate, on their
peril to keep off. Let them say, some know their danger in the highest terms
that can be uttered, and then if they come, their blood is on their own heads,
and the Minister of Christ has by this means delivered his soul. But to this I
have three things to say, 1. That it is, (as I suppose) without all
Scripture-precedent, to warn men upon account of want of a new life by the
Spirit, wholly to keep off from this, or any other Ordinance of Christ. I know
we must warn men of their sin, and the judgment hanging over their heads for
sin (in which let it be our prayer, that we may be more faithful) but that we
should warn men upon this account, upon this very ground, to hold off from all
address to Ordinances, I have not learnt. 2. I say, this does presuppose that
which is wont to be denied, unregenerate men to be in a capacity to examine
themselves respective to this Ordinance. How can we warn them upon want of
justifying faith, and the saving work of repentance, to hold back, when they
are in an incapacity upon trial to find themselves thus wanting? 3. Shall we
not hereby pluck the thorn out of our own sides, and as much as in us lies,
thrust it into the sides of many of our hungry, thirsty, and poor in spirit
people? How many may we suppose are in grace, through a work happily begun on
their souls? yet for several reasons are not able to see this grace, or reach
to any discovery of it. Sometimes by reason of the infancy of the work upon
their hearts, being yet babes, or rather embryo's in grace. The first that
appears upon light received, is an army of lusts and potent corruptions, as we
know Paul sets it out. This clouds for present any other weak work, that as
yet in present is wrought. In this time Satan is not wanting, he did not show
so much artifice before to lessen their sin, but he now makes use of as much to
aggravate it: and as he was industrious before to seduce, now he is as busy to
accuse. He led the incestuous man to incontinency, 1 Cor. 7.4. And we know Paul
fears, least upon continuance of the Church-censure, he would gain advantage
to swallow him up in overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.8, 11. These perhaps as yet are
not able to give an account of the nature of faith and repentance, or their
genuine fruits; much less are they able, by a reflex act to conclude the truth
of them in their souls. Sometimes by reason of some sharp conflict of
temptation, being under the shock and assault of it, and therefore whatsoever
they have seen of grace heretofore, or the favor of God, now it is under a
cloud (which I believe was Paul's case, when a messenger of Satan was sent to
buffet him, and a thorn in the flesh given him,) seeing it is put in
opposition to the abundance of revelations that he had being taken up into the
third heavens, 2 Cor. 12.) and therefore had need of Ordinances for support.
Sometimes on a soil received by temptation, of which his own heart, and not
the Church is witness; and therefore is at a loss of the joy of his
salvation, and stands in need of strength for recovery. Sometimes by overmuch
sloth, and rust contracted on his graces through negligence, which is supposed
to be the case of the spouse indulging her self too much in carnal ease, Cant.
5.2. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them? Sometimes God out of prerogative, withdrawing the rays of
his Spirit, and refusing to testify with our spirits, in which case the soul
that is most upright with God, and sincere in his fear, walks in darkness and
sees no light; in which there is need of all communications from God, and
attendance upon him in Ordinances. When these shall hear all in whom the work
of grace is not in truth, thus warned to keep back, and told of the high danger
of approaching to this Table in such away aggravated, will not they put in
their name, and say their souls are now spoke to? They must therefore absent
themselves, and so the smoking flax is quenched, and the bruised reed broke.
There, have not been a few hungry sad souls that I have known, that have born
the terror of the Lord, separate themselves for this reason. But it will be
replied by those that give this warning, that they mean not these, they are not
at all intended in their speech; these they would tender, and with all endeared
affection of love encourage, as those that have most need, and are most fit to
receive food, for their strength. But all of this helps not, when this
Proposition is laid down, That no man in whom justifying faith, and a new life
by the Spirit is not wrought, may dare, otherwise then on the peril of his
soul, to draw nigh hither: will not such a soul, necessarily assume? A new life
through the Spirit is not wrought in my soul; I am conscious to my self that I
am carnal: whatsoever endeavors I have used to believe, yet how far am I from
faith in strength and truth? I find my self all over doubts and fears, and
plunged in unbelief. And though I have made it my business to keep off from
sin, yet how far am I from a true change by repentance? I find my heart hard,
obdurate, even as an adamant; yea, the poor deserted soul will take to it self
the state of Cain, the condition of Judas: If there be any other high in
wickedness, they have matched, yea, they have exceeded them. They are to put
it to the question, whether they are in grace or no? whether they have a new
life wrought, or as yet are short of it? This they must either determine in the
affirmative, that they are in grace, at least there are those hopeful signs in
present, that they cannot but conclude it, and then they safely may come, upon
sight of this they may with cheerfulness make their address; or else they
must carry it in the negative, all that is yet wrought is not life, is not
grace, is not faith in its power, is not repentance in truth, as they can do no
other that walk in darkness, and see no light; that say, God has forgotten to
be gracious, and so they must keep off from the Ordinance, and debar themselves
from those cordials, those apples, those flagons that are there tendered: and
sick of love, yet dare not intermeddle with the Lords tokens that are tendered
to them: or in the third place suspend, and so sit down in doubtful fears,
whether they have grace or no; and then that of the Apostle, Romans 14.23. He
that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith, for
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, will soon come into their thoughts, and so
all that are short of fullness of assurance, must in dreadful horror separate
themselves.

Secondly, This Sacrament, in that it is a Sacrament, has the name and nature
of a seal, (as we see in the text, and God willing shall be shown) a visible
seal, entrusted in the hands of man; and therefore must needs be of a more
different latitude and large extent, then that seal which God reserves in his
own keeping, the seal of the Spirit, The Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy
2.19. But man is to seek who are the Lords, God knows how to put to his seal
to his own; man who has not this knowledge must needs be here allowed a greater
latitude; either men entrusted with it, must have the knowledge of God as to
this particular, who they are in whom a new life is, and grace wrought; or else
they must be allowed a greater latitude to take in men that make profession of
God, and as members in Church Communion may be edified by it: I know this
argument is carried another way, and that we conclude the contrary upon a
double account.

1. These seals of God (outward and inward) should answer each to other. Those
that have the outward seal, they are to have the inward; those that take into
their hand the seal of the Sacrament should have the impresse of the Spirit on
their souls. To which I answer, That the writing of the Word with Ink and
Paper in the Bible, and the writing in the heart by the Spirit, should answer
each the other: that is, every Christian should make it his business, to hide
that Word in his heart, that by the Ministry sounds in his ears: and yet
Christians are not warned, not to take a Bible into their hands, till the
impresse of that which is there is put on their hearts. The Word is delivered
in a greater latitude, and so also must the Sacrament.

2. Some say, this Sacrament seals Gospel-promises, only they therefore that
can claim the promise, and have their interest in it, can claim the seal,
otherwise the seal is put to a blank; there is a seal where there is no
Covenant-promise. 1. I answer, this argument thus carried, speaks sadly to the
hearts of all dispensers of the Sacraments: they must see there is a
Covenant-promise, or else they must not dare to put to a seal. To put any man's
seal to a blank paper where nothing is written, is a vain use of that seal; It
stands there as a cipher: Now to put Gods seal to a blank where nothing is
written, doubtless is as vain, and an high taking of Gods Name in vain:
according to these the Covenant is written in non-legible and invisible
characters. (This inward work is that white stone with a new name written,
which no man knows save he that receives it) Revel. 2.17. and so the
dispensers too often against convictions of conscience (always at hap-hazard)
must deliver them, any thing written or not written, whether a blank or filled
up, they cannot tells, but are all at uncertainties. 2. I answer, as is the
seal, so is the Covenant, both of them external, and one must answer to the
other: Now these in question (as has been demonstrated at large) are in
Covenant, An outward Covenant is by few questioned, and so the seal is put to
no blank, but given to one interested in Covenant. It seals the grace of the
Covenant, and mercy tendered in the promise on Gods terms and propositions. So
that the different latitude of the seal of the Spirit, and of the seal of the
Sacrament, do conclude that men of no more then visible Church-interest may
partake of it.

3. The Church de facto has enjoyed it in this latitude, not to instance in
some ages following the times of the Apostles, in which the Pastors called all
their people to daily Sacraments, and the use of it in Austins time, when
wicked ones in the Church were so numerous, that they durst not deal with
Church Censures; but look into the Scripture, though we are kept much in the
dark concerning their practice, (little mention being made of the
administration after the institution) yet we know that this Sacrament was the
privilege of visible members then in being, and it is clear enough, how far
many, even then were short of sincerity. If that of 1 Cor. 11. be well weighed,
we may well believe that the Primitive times were not acquainted with the
rigor of some persons.

4. There is no reason that this Ordinance should stand alone, that in all
other Ordinances there should be a greater latitude, (and men in an
unregenerate state admitted, and not held out with limit to men, in whom a life
of Sanctification through the Spirit is found) and this alone pent up in so
narrow a compass. I know somewhat is said for the latitude of some Ordinances,
that all are received to them, because they are Ordinances appointed for
conversion of men unconverted. But this Plea in many will not serve;
unregenerate men's admission to prayer, to thanksgiving, to fasts, has been
(that I know) questioned by few: And those that deny that the Lords Supper has
any influence to conversion, have not asserted these to have any such efficacy
or power: unregenerate men then must be admitted to the Supper, or else they
must be denied to come to fasts, thanksgiving and prayer. Here some do
distinguish between duties naturally Moral, and those that are of mere positive
institution. Moral duties, as prayer, thanksgiving, etc. are confessed to belong
in general unto all, but it is not so (as is objected) in duties of positive
institution; they are given with limit to some, and are not of universal
obligation. To which I answer, 1. By way of concession, positive Precepts bind
not all, because they are not given to all: the Gentile Nations were not tied
to the Law of Ceremonies given to the Jews, and mere Heathens are not now tied
to our Sacraments. 2. For a positive answer I say, Positive Precepts were never
given in charge with any such distinction as to bind the regenerate, and to
exclude men in unregeneration. Men under sin, and in nature, are bound to the
affirmative part of the second Commandment, to observe every way of worship
that shall be instituted by God: all of which are only of positive right. All
Israel were tied to sacrifice, as well as to hear, and pray; it was a sin not
to sacrifice, as not to fear an oath, Eccles. 9.2. And all Christians are now
under an obligation to the Law of the Sacraments, as they are to other duties.
And as to the thing in hand, this distinction of Moral, and Positive duties (as
I conceive) is of no use; for the positive Command being given, there is a
Moral tie to yield obedience. Instance may be given in purely Ceremonial
Precepts, that are seconded with this sanction, I am the Lord, Levit. 19.23,
24, 25. So that when a Precept merely Ceremonial was broke, immediately, yet
the first Command was broken interpretatively, and by way of necessary
consequence, the Law of nature tied Adam to abstain from the forbidden fruit,
when God had given him a Precept not to eat of it; and the young man in the
Gospel was also bound to sell all that he had, and give it to the poor, when
Christ had manifested that it was his pleasure. There are texts indeed
produced, seemingly taken of men under sin, from the performance of positive
duties, as, Math. 5.23, 24. and as much may be said concerning those that are
Moral, Ezekiel. 14.2, 3.20.2, 3. We read that the sacrifices of the wicked are an
abomination, Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. and as much is said of their prayers, Prove.
28.9. All which text^ sufficiently imply Gods dislike, when they are acted by
such hands; but none of them imply man's disobligation.

Fifthly, This limit of the Lords Supper to regenerate persons, as on the one
hand it will take with the consciences of many sanctified Christians, to hold
them back, as has been said, even with all that stand short of assurance of
grace; so on the other hand it will give encouragement to many unsanctified
ones, to make address to it: Broken hearts under the body of sin having not
yet attained to the light of Gods smiling face, will be so severe in their own
censure, as to hold themselves back. The generation of formal Professors pure
in their own eyes, and not yet cleansed from their filthiness, Prove. 30.11.
will flock to it. So that we must either find some other more sure rule, or
else the hearts of many precious ones, whom God would not have made sad, will
be sadned, and the hands of many in sin, upon their admission, will be
strengthened.

Objections answered.
I know there are Objections even without number multiplied, against this that
I have here delivered, and such that have taken with very many, to carry them
to determine the Point in hand in a contrary way: And in case I had not seen
that the weakness of them is more and more discerned, and that by men of
eminent parts and integrity, I should have been by the multitude as well of
Objections, as Objectors, discouraged to appear against them. The duties of the
Lords Supper are such, (say some) that only the sincere servants of Christ,
that are sanctified by Christ, are able to perform. The mercies of the
Sacrament are such, as they only can receive; and therefore only these are
the fit subjects of it. And these are driven on very far. The duties
preparatory to the work, cannot be done by others, (as is objected) as
self-examination, self-judging. The duties executory cannot be done, that
accompany the work it self. How specious soever this argument appears, and I
doubt not but it is with all sincerity of heart and integrity urged, yet I
desire it may yet be further considered,

First, That this Argument, thus urged, does disable all men not sanctified
from all other duties by the command of God incumbent upon them, as well as
from this duty; they must upon this account exclude themselves from every
Ordinance enjoined of God as well as from this; put the argument into form, and
this will easily appear. They that cannot do the duties charged upon those that
are put upon a work, nor receive the mercies given in promise to it, are to be
excluded from it: Now as these assume, An unsanctified man cannot discharge the
duties, nor receive the comforts of a Communicant; so will I with equal reason
assume, That an unsanctified man cannot perform the duties charged upon the
hearers of the Word, upon him that calls upon the Name of God, or returns
thanks to him; He cannot perform the duties that are charged puon him; that is,
to sanctify the Sabbath, to meditate, to instruct his family, rebuke his
brother, give alms, follow the duties of his calling. No unsanctified man does
all that is required in the performance of any of these, neither is any fit to
receive the mercies of these duties, that is unfit to receive the mercies of
that duty; Therefore it follows that he must neither hear, pray, give thanks,
sanctify the Sabbath, instruct or reprove any, give alms, labor in his
Calling, or any other work. If any think to come off by way of distinction,
That there is difference between this and other duties; Then the distinction
should have been put into the Proposition, and it not delivered in that
generality; and whenever that distinction shall be put, I shall not doubt but
an answer in the distinction will be suggested.

Secondly, Inabilities to perform duties, upon the bare account of natural
corruption, in a right way, and in that acceptable manner, as to receive the
comforts of them, do not discharge a man from obligation to the duty: In case
indeed it could be proved, that God never gave the Sacrament in charge to an
unsanctified man, but left this visible Ordinance, as a Legacy or charge to an
invisible Society, whom none but themselves, can distinguish, and few of them
able to distinguish themselves then the argument were of some force; but from
the inability to reason against obligation to the duty, to take men off from it
upon that account of weakness through natural corruption, will take all men
off that are unregenerate from all duties.

Thirdly, Those that in this way disable all men in nature from these duties
which are given in charge to a Communicant, upon that ground to keep them from
the Sacraments, yet confess they may do this work in order at least to their
own exclusion; they cannot examine themselves in order to receive, but they may
and must examine themselves in order to hold themselves off from it. When the
Apostle speaks to the whole visible Church of Corinth expressly, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. This
few (say they) can reach; but to examine, and not to eat, is in the power of
all the other.

Fourthly, Though these reach not the highest duties, and so come not up to the
ultimate end of the Sacrament, yet they perform in their measure several
duties, and reach the intermediate and subordinate end of it. They see Christ
there evidently set forth, and crucified before them: There they see the
highest aggravation of sin, Christ wounded for sin, bruised for transgression,
under the Fathers wrath for man's guilt, suffering for sin, the just for the
unjust. They see him bearing the sins of many, and they cannot nor may not
exclude themselves from the number. They see there a ransom paid for sin, a
discharge made to the Fathers Justice. They see Christ tendered, and offered:
They may further oblige themselves to all duties required, as well to the
interesting grace, which is faith, as to the qualifications of obedience; They
do believe, Acts 2.12, 13. Luke 8.13. Joh. 12.42, 43. 1 Timothy 1.19. This faith
is true in its kind, they do not only yield assent, but reach to some measure
of joy, and delight, Luke 8.13. They are in Christ, their way of inhesion or
implantation I shall not determine; But in the latitude as he is an head, he
has members that are inherent in him, he is an head of a Church visible, and
has many members suitable, as the Reader may see in Cobbet of Infant Baptism,
Conclus. 5. page 56. Whilst those hearers mentioned, Luke 8.13. believed, I
cannot think it was the seeds-mans office, who had sounded the Word in their
ears, to have withheld the visible Word from their eyes, or advised them to
have withdrawn themselves. And as they do duties incumbent on Communicants, so
also they receive mercies, many intermediate mercies, though in that state they
receive not the highest and choicest mercies. They partake of the fatness of
the Olive, Romans 11. even all that come into that state that the blinded Jews,
and the worst part among them did relinquish.

SECT. XII. Proposition 10.
THe Lords Supper (as all other Ordinances of Christ) must be so administered,
The Lords Supper must be so administered, that Communicants may be edified.
that the Kingdom of Christ may be most advanced, and the Church in her members
most edified. Let all be done to edification, is the Apostles rule, 1 Cor.
14.26. Not as an Apostolical Canon, (as Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policy
has observed; for then, if the Apostle had been silent, that injunction had
not been obliging) but as a necessary result from all that they had in charge
from Jesus Christ; Prophecy exceeds unknown tongues, because it edifies, 1
Cor. 14.4. And unknown tongues are without profit, and of no use, without
interpretation to edify, ver. 5. Therefore we have the Apostles resolution for
public prayers, ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my
spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful: what is it then? I will
pray with the Spirit, and with understanding also; I will sing with the Spirit,
and I will sing with the understanding also. Else when thou shall bless with
the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen at
thy giving of thanks? seeing he understands not what thou say; for thou
verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified. And for the preaching
of the Word, ver. 18, 19. I thank my God, I speak with tongues more then you
all; yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding,
that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue. Matters circumstantiall, and of themselves indifferent, if they
be not reduced to this end, prove inexpedient, and to the doer evil. All things
are lawful for me, but all things edify not, 1 Cor. 10.23. The whole of the
Ministerial work, and every appendant to it must be reduced hither; what have
builders to do but to edify? And if they edify not, what do they do? In what
other metaphor soever their work is set out, this is still their business, the
perfecting of the Saints, the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. When
they have done this, and made it their whole business, they may with
confidence speak to God in the words of Christ, I have glorified thee, I have
finished the work that thou gave me to do, Joh. 17.5. This thread, which runs
through the whole of the Ministerial work, is not to be excluded here. Those
of whom there is hopes that they are willing to learn Christ, are to be taken
into Christ's School by Baptism, and those are to be admitted to the Lords
Supper that knowingly will engage for continuance, and coming on in the ways
of Christ. Baptism is the entry door into the Church visible; no man must be
refused of whom there is reason of expectation that they will be professedly
Christ's. And the Lords Supper is the means of the growth of those that are thus
visibly and in the face of the Church received; where this may conduce to their
building up, it is not to be denied, so that the dispensers great enquiry must
be, whom the Lords Supper may benefit, where it may edify? which according to
Scripture rules may be discerned and determined, otherwise the Apostle had not
given this charge, Let all things be done to edification; and where it may
edify, to give it; and where it serves not for edification, to forbear it; not
whether regenerate or unregenerate (which is an undiscernable work), and
accordingly to admit or refuse.

SECT. XIII. Proposition. 11.
The Lords Supper with the Word as an appendant to it, may be serviceable to
bring a man of Covenant interest up to the terms of the Covenant.
THere is nothing hinders but that the Lords Supper with the Word as an
appendant to it, may be serviceable to bring up those of Covenant interest, to
the terms and propositions of the Covenant; may serve to work a man of
profession of faith, unto faith saving and justifying: a man in name the Lords,
to turn unfeignedly and sincerely to the Lord. This I shall endeavor by
Arguments to confirm.

First, Men of that interest, that baptism receives, as the intention of the
work in order to salvation; these the Lords Supper serves, to carry on by
sanctification to salvation, as the end of the work likewise: But Baptism
receives men of visible profession only, and visible interest, as the
intention of the work into the visible Church in order to salvation: Therefore
the Lords Supper carries on these by sanctification, as the intention of the
work to salvation. The Proposition cannot be denied, unless we will without
reason, bring in that vast difference between these two outward v^^^ble
Ordinances, both entrusted in the hands of man, as that the one shall be of
that latitude to receive men of visible interest, and the other restrained to
invisible members; The one according to the mind of God shall let many into the
Church for salvation, the other shall be in capacity to nourish, and bring on
very few. The Assumption cannot be denied, That Baptism receives men of
visible profession and visible interest in order to salvation, and has been
abundantly proved: we baptize infants upon the bare account of
Covenant-holiness, which is only a visible interest: men of years were
baptized, (and by just warrant yet may, in case not baptized) upon a visible
profession. The conclusion then follows, that the Lords Supper carries on
those as the intention of the work, that Baptism receives to salvation.

Secondly, If it be the mind of God in the Gospel revealed, that men of visible
interest having not yet attained to the grace of sanctification should have
admittance to the Lords Table, then it must needs follow that it serves as an
instrument with the Word to raise them up by faith, and sanctification to
salvation: But it is the mind of God in the Gospel revealed, that men of
visible interest having not yet reached unto sanctification, should have
admittance to the Lords Supper: The Lords Supper then serves to raise up men of
visible interest by faith and sanctification for salvation. The Proposition is
clear, unless we will make men's admission (most men's admission) merely vain,
having no power, nor any capacity to advance their happiness, but being wholly
in a tendency to increase their judgment. Whatsoever the secret will of God
(to us unknown) is, that in the event it shall prove; yet the work it self must
have a tendency and power, respective to those for whom it is appointed, for
edification, not for destruction. The Assumption is evident (that those of
visible interest, having not attained sanctification, according to the mind of
God revealed in his Word, should have admittance) by the bars that are
assigned for men's exclusion. The alone bars that are ordinarily assigned, to
hold men in Covenant Interest off from the Lords Table, are ignorance, Error,
and Scandal: But many that cannot be charged with ignorance, error, or
scandal, are yet short of sanctification: Many short of sanctification then
have no bar to their admission. Either visible interest, with capacity to
improve it, or saving interest in the Covenant must be the rule for admission:
But saving interest in ^he Covenant cannot; then (to use Mr Cobbets words,
Vindication, page 54. it would either necessitate Ministers to come under guilt
of sin, or anomie, breach of rule; or for avoiding of that which they must
needs do with such breach of rule, never to administer any Church ordinances,
since they sometimes shall break that rule in administering it to hypocrites;
and albeit they do sometimes administer them to elect ones, yet not being able
to know that secret infallibly, they observe not the rule in faith, but
doubtingly, and so can have little comfort of any such of their
administrations. If any reply, that saving interest in the Covenant, is the
rule, but we are not tied infallibly to come up to the rule, but as far as
our charity can judge men to be in grace, we must admit them to this seal of
grace; To this I have several things to reply. 1. God never puts men's charity
to this work, (as respective to admission to ordinances) to judge, whether in
grace or not, whether regenerate or in unregeneration. And indeed charity
(which is assigned by some to that place) is most unfit to judge. A Judge, or
Umpire in a business must be impartial, and have nothing to byasse him on any
hand. But charity would be ready to cover a multitude of sins, which is no
blemish of the grace, but a demonstration that this is none of its office. If
then man must judge, (as he is most unmeet) his reason, and not his love must
take the chair for it, and go as high as conjecture can reach. 2. If charity or
reason thus set up mistake, then the rule is broke; which though these will say
is not the admitters sin, seeing the thing is not so scibile, or of possibility
to be known, (and by the way we observe that he is therefore no competent
Judge) yet a seal is by this means put to a blank, which is no small
profanation, and the ordinance administered solely and necessarily for the
receivers judgment. 3. Though we infallibly know a man's unsanctified
condition, and were able to charge it; yet whilst it is not open, and breaks
not into scandal, we cannot upon this account (as is confessed) exclude him from
the Sacrament. That Judas received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper most of
the Ancient held, as Maldonate on Matthew. 7.6. observes; we have large lists
brought to our hands of names that go that way. The greater part of late
Writers are of the same mind; Ravanellus as the last man, in verb. Sacrament is
peremptory in it, and there concludes also the interest of all in Covenant, yet
Judas was known to Christ, to be a thief, a Devil, and yet he receives him.
Christ had doubtless power vested in him for his exclusion. The non-suspition
of the Apostles, nor the close carriage of his treachery, could not then have
excus^d his receiving, in case it had not been the mind of God that a man of
visible interest, though unsanctified, might be admitted. And to say that
Christ acted here as a Minister, and it was not fit that he should be both
Judge and witness, though it be a truth, yet it serves not to take off the
Argument. Had it not been the mind of God that men of his interest should be
received, then Christ would not at any hand have knowingly gone against it, and
given him admission to it. And what he did, according to the mind of God as a
Minister, by a Minister may be done. And to pronounce him at that time, that he
received it, such that had no right for admission, yet to admit him, were such
a precedent as Christ would not have given. Christ would not trust himself with
some upon that account, that the knew what was in them, Joh. 2.23, 24. and he
would not have trusted the Sacrament with such a one, in case he had not known
that it had been the mind of God, that men of that standing should partake of
it. If it be objected, that Christ knew that Judas was not in a capacity to
improve the Sacrament for sanctification and salvation, being a reprobate: I
answer, respective to his gifts wherewith he was endowed, he was in capacity of
improvement. The Sacrament is of use to those that were his inferiors, and an
eye is had to the tendency of the work according to Gods revealed will, and not
to that which is in Gods secret purpose. Let us sum up the argument briefly
into this form, Ministers must give the Sacrament, so as it may be to
edification and not certainly to destruction: But they must give it to some not
yet thoroughly sanctified: Therefore some not thoroughly sanctified may receive
it to edification, and not to destruction.

Thirdly the Law and Gospel in their joint strength, applied in power to the
understanding, may work men of Covenant interest up to the terms, conditions,
and propositions of the Covenant: may work men of profession of faith, to faith
saving, and justifying: may work a man that is only in name the Lords, to be
truly and savingly his. This none can deny, if Law and Gospel cannot do it, in
the way of instruments, and ordinances appointed of God, there is no way on
earth in which it can be done: But in the Lords Supper there is Law and Gospel,
the epitome and sum, the strength and vigor of Law and Gospel, applied in
power to the understanding: Therefore the conclusion follows, that the Lords
Supper may work men of Covenant interest up to the terms of the Covenant, men
of profession of Faith to Faith saving and justified. The Assumption is clear,
that in the Lords Supper there is Law and Gospel, the epitome and sum, the
strength and vigor both of Law and Gospel. There we have the curse of the Law
in the highest degree held out, Christ made a curse, and bearing all that the
Law denounces against sin, even all that which sin according to the Law did
demerit. There are sins bruises, transgressions wounds. There we have the sum
and substance of the Gospel held out, Christ's death for remission of sin laid
open. There we have Christ a curse, which is that which the law inflicts upon
transgression. There we have Christ a sacrifice, which is that which the Gospel
does promise; all brought home, and applied to the understanding of the
communicant.

Fourthly, That which is high in the aggravating of sin to the conscience,
and clear in holding out the pardon of sin, may work a man of Covenant
interest up to the terms and conditions of the Covenant, may work men of
profession of Faith to a Faith saving and justifying. This is clear, which way
else are men brought up to faith and sanctification but upon the sight of
sin, in its aggravations, and Gospel tenders for the removal of it? The
Assumption, that sin is in this ordinance in the highest way aggravated, and
the removal of it held out, is also clear, and may easily per parts be proved.
1. The highest aggravation of sin to the breaking of the heart, and the melting
of the soul is the looking upon him whom our sins have pierced, Zach. 12.10.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as
one that is in bitterness for his firstborn; and that we thus look upon him
in the Sacrament; I shall choose to set it out in the words of the Ministers,
and Elders met in the Provincial Assembly of London in their Vindication,
where speaking to those that join with them at the Lords Table, page 104. You
must so remember Christ, as to find power coming out of Christ Sacramental, to
break your hearts for all the sins you have committed against him. Christ is
presented in the Sacrament, as a broken Christ, his body broken, and his blood
poured out. And the very breaking of the bread, understandingly looked upon, is
a forcible Argument to break your hearts. Was Jesus Christ rent and torn in
pieces for you, and shall it not break your hearts that you should sin against
him? Was he crucified for you, and will you crucify him by your sins? And
besides, the breaking of the bread is not only ordained to be a motive unto
brokennesse of heart for sin, but also in the right use to effect that which it
does move unto. And, page 105. You must so remember Christ Sacramental, as to
find power coming out of Christ, to subdue all your sins and iniquities, as
the diseased woman felt virtue coming out of Christ to cure her bloody issue:
so there is power in an applicative and fiducial remembrance of Christ at the
Sacrament, to heal all the sinful issues of our souls; there is no sin so
strong but it is conquerable by a power derived from Christ crucified. And,
page 106. You must continue in remembering Christ in the Sacrament, till your
hearts be wrought up to a through contempt of the world, and all worldly
things. Christ instituted the Sacrament when he was going out of the world: and
when he was crucifying, the whole world was in darkness and obscurity: and he
is propounded in the Sacrament, as a persecuted, broken crucified Christ,
despising, and being despised of the World. And if you do practically remember
the Sacrament of his death, you will find virtue coming out thereof to make you
dead to the world, and all worldly things. And, page 107. Cease not remembering
Christ, till you be made partakers of the rare grace of humility. Of all the
graces that were in Christ in which he would have Christians to imitate him in,
humility is one of the chiefest, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am humble.
And Christ in the Sacrament is presented, as humbling himself to the death of
the cross for our sakes. And what a shame is it to remember an humble. Christ
with a proud heart? The practical remembrance of the humility of Christ
Sacramental, when sanctified, is mighty in operation to tame the pride of our
hearts. And, page 110. To endeavor that your eyes may affect your hearts, when
you are at the Sacrament. For as Christ in the Ministry of his Word, preaches
to the ear, and by the ear conveyeth himself into the heart: so in the
Sacrament he preaches to the eye, and by the eye conveyeth himself into the
heart. And therefore it is well called a visible Sermon. What can be more plain
then this to set the out the power of the Sacrament to soul contrition, true
humiliation, and mortification? Too many that profess Faith have their hearts
lift up, and live not by faith. Here is a way to bring them down, when they see
sin to be of such a provoking nature, that only the sufferings of the Son of
God are able to satisfy, that their demerit does put him upon a necessity of
all these woes. These are certainly heart melting considerations. If it be yet
objected, that the Provincial Assembly at London speak to their own
communicants, whom they suppose to be in grace. To this I reply, that in case
that should fail, and some at least should have their predominant lusts
lurking, and treachery against the Covenant (as in Judas against Christ)
harbored, it can be of no danger, to say that here is a means to work them on
to humiliation, and brokennesse of spirit. 2. If any yet say, that their
thoughts are otherwise of this Sacrament: I answer, their words best speak
their thoughts, and we see what they say. The very breaking of the bread (say
they) understandingly looked upon, is a forcible Argument to break your hearts,
and the breaking of the bread may be looked upon understandingly by an
unsanctified man: if there be truth in their Propositions, as I doubt not but
they are most true, then my Conclusion is true likewise. We may make up (if you
please) this part of the Argument thus: A sin aggravating ordinance is an heart
breaking and soul humbling ordinance: But the Sacrament of the Lords supper is
a sin aggravating ordinance: Therefore it is an heart breaking and soul
humbling ordinance. For the other branch of the Assumption, that this ordinance
is the holding out of the pardon of sin, needs no proof. This is my blood in
the New Testament shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sin,
Matthew. 26.

Fifthly, That which is annexed to the Word to second it, in that very thing,
which works the soul unto conversion to good, may bring the person of Covenant
interest, up to the terms of the Covenant; may work one of profession of faith
only, unto faith saving, and justifying. This none can deny: being added to
the Word, as it is second in such a work, it well may have an hand in the
working of it: But the Sacrament is annexed to the Word, to second it in that
very thing, which works the soul unto conversion to God. The Assumption is
manifest: If we consider what the Word does for conversion, and the whole, in
which the energy and power of it (as an Ordinance) is exercised, then we shall
soon see, that this Sacrament is added, as a second in that work. The Word
converts, in holding out sin in its defilements and danger; in the discovery of
the loathsome nature of it, and the cursed effects that follow upon it;
together with Christ in the promises to save from it. I know no other way that
the Word has to bring a soul in sin to God, but in setting forth the lost and
undone condition of it, and so to bring to conviction, compunction, and enquiry
what to do; and then to make tender of Christ. In this method, souls (as we
find on record) have been brought home to God, of which there might be frequent
instances. Now that this Sacrament is added to the Word, for further discovery
of sin, in the defilement and danger: to hold out Christ in his death, taking
away sin, need not to be proved. It is true that the first detection of sin is
by the rule of the Law, and therefore the Apostle says, By the Law is the
knowledge of sin. In case the question be put, whether this, or that act be
sin? then neither the tender of Christ in the Gospel, nor yet the Sacrament can
have any hand in the determination of it; but they both serve for the
aggravation of sin, to lay it open in the dimensions and danger of it. Sin is
no where so seen in its height, as in the sorrows and sufferings of Christ, as
is by all affirmed, and these sufferings we know the Word holds out for
conversion from sin. And the visible Word of the Sacrament seconds the Word in
this very thing, to set out Christ's death, to lay before our eyes Christ broken
for us, both for the aggravation of sin, and for the pardon of it. Thus if you
please you may put the argument; If the Sacrament does the same thing as the
Word does in conversion, then the Sacrament cannot be denied to have an hand in
conversion: But the Sacrament (as we see) does the same thing as the Word; it
serves to the heightning of sin, and the setting out of the pardon of sin:
Therefore it follows that the Sacrament may have an hand in conversion.

Sixthly, That which by frequent experience we see the Sacrament works toward,
and for ought we are able to judge works unto, that we may well conclude, it is
designed and appointed of God to work. This cannot fairly be denied; yet if any
think that this of it self is not of full strength, seeing our experience may
deceive us, we may conceive what is not, Let these then join to it what has
been already said. This experience added to so much evidence of reason, I doubt
not but will be found to have strength in it. And I put it for their sakes that
say, Let any give instance of any man or woman that has at any time been
converted by the Sacrament. And that there are frequent experiences of the
Sacraments working toward this thing is plain. How frequent is it with men to
have affrightings, soul-shakings, tremblings, strong present resolutions
against sin, upon their approach to this Ordinance? being convinced of it to be
a duty, that they ought to go to it. How mightily are their spirits often
affected in it? If we make that an argument of the power of the Word toward
wicked men in the affrighting and astonishment of them, in the terrifying and
amazement, stopping for present their full swinge in sin and wickedness, as we
know it is ordinarily with those that set out the power of the Word: see Dr.
Reynolds on Psalm. 110. page 150. why then should we not make the same effects
that we see ordinarily produced by the Sacrament, to be evidences of the like
power in the Sacrament? And as we read of an Ahab, a Felix, a Zedekiah, an
Herod thus startled by the Word: so we may see and know such as these alike
startled and affected at the Sacrament. Superstition perhaps works it in some:
But we find the work in others, in whom such superstition has no place. It can
be no other then the Majesty of the Ordinance, the high aggravation of sin,
and the glory of Christ set out in it. All this I confess many times comes to
nothing, it is a fit and so over; it has not the strength to bear down men's
lusts to a full change, and through mortification, and so it is with those also
that hear the Word. They are many times Sermon-sick, and yet all soon falls and
comes to nothing; yet in the nature of the work it self it has a tendency
toward a change. And that this sometimes works those of Covenant Interest unto
a true change, and through work of sanctification (so far as we are able to
judge,) there are not few experiments; I have known some bred only for jollity
and outward delights, that making address to the Sacrament have had those
soul-shakings and trembling amazements, that have put them upon a serious way
of enquiry, and the spark so kindled by Gods blessing, has been nourished up
into that burning heat, that their whole life has been spent in zeal for God,
and their name in life and death precious.

Seventhly, To these we add, the acknowledgement of eminent Divines of an
opposite judgment, who will have all admitted, present at the consecration of
the elements, to see the bread broke and divided. And to what purpose is their
presence, if not for their profit? and what profit can an unconverted man find
in any thing in a spiritual way, that works not toward his conversion, that is
no ways useful or improvable for it? What others may judge I know not; these
arguments to which some other might be added, have taken with me to conclude
the position before delivered.

SECT. XIV. Objections against the former Proposition answered.
I Know that objections here are multiplied. I have read many, which in case
they had been with me of weight, this that I am now upon, had been stifled in
the birth, and more doubtless has been said then I have seen, and more yet
happily will be raised. To go about to meet with all were to make no end of
words: I shall speak first to some general charges, General charges answered.
after to some particular arguments.

First, In case this holds, (say some) then all upon that bare account are to
be admitted to the Supper, who will hinder the conversion of any? yea even
Turks, Pagans, and the vilest varlots, may then come and join in this
Ordinance. To these I answer,

First, Were it of power, Promiscous admission follows not from it.
as an instrument in the hand of God for conversion of all, yet all were not to
be admitted, when the will and mind of God is known to be against it: The
Gospel in the mouths of the twelve, when they had their first commission,
might have been of power for the conversion of Samaritanes and Gentiles, yet
they are forbidden to make tender of it to them, Matthew. 11.5. Go not into the
way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritanes enter not. The word
in Paul's mouth might have been (respective to any operation in it self) the
conversion of souls in Asia and Bithynia, as well as in Macedonia, yet the
Spirit forbids them to go to the former, and sends them to preach to the other,
Act. 16.6.7, 10. If the mighty works which were done in Chorazin and Bethsaida,
had been done in Tire and Sidon they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes;
yet they were denied to those of Tire and Sidon, Matthew. 11.21. So that though
the Sacraments had a generally converting power, yet in case they be appointed
of God with limit to those of Covenant Interest, they may not in any greater
latitude be dispensed, and so Jews, Turks, and Pagans are excluded.

Secondly, The Word it self (which is confessed to be the power of God to
salvation, and of the most large efficacy of any Ordinance for conversion) is
not yet tendered to all, in any expectation of conversion by it. Not to speak of
those to whom God in his providence does deny it, (who are out of the pale of
the Church) but those, to whom the Church does not make mention of it: Infants,
Idiots, distracted ones, and deaf persons, no Minister applies himself to them,
to make tender of it for conversion; so that there must be not only a
commission to tender it, and a clear evidence, that men have (according to the
mind of God) an interest, but there must be a present capacity in such for
improvement. I am not ignorant that some (seeing it seems that this does lie
against them) have pleaded for a capacity in all these before mentioned, to
receive benefit by the Word, demanding, 1. Why are Infants, and pari ratione
distracted persons incapable of the Word? An answer me thinks is at hand,
because they are necessarily in the condition of the high-way-ground, to hear
and understand nothing. They profit no more then those, 1 Cor. 14. that hear
words in an unknown tongue. And in case they be in capacity (as is affirmed) to
receive benefit from the Word, the Minister occasionally is to make out a word
of exhortation to them, giving them their portion as well as others; which how
it would sound in the ears of those that are of growth, and have their senses
and understanding, let any judge. These further demand, Where has God said
they shall be kept from it? No more has he said that the swallow, or the
sparrow should be kept from it; by providenee they have been present, when
those that would have improved such an opportunity in a Spiritual way, have
been denied it. Yea, places are produced to show that God has commanded
infants to be present at Ordinances. But where is it commanded that Idiots,
distracted persons, etc. should be present? Reasons may be given of infants
presence at entry of Covenants, at solemn fasts, denuntiations of blessings and
curses, when yet they are in an incapacity to receive benefit by the Word.
Demand is yet further made, Who knows how God may work at the Word, though not
by the Word? may not the Word be an occasion of conversion unto infants, which
is an instrument of conversion to elder persons? Such queries will bring in the
most ignorant and scandalous to the Lords Supper; who knows but that which is
an instrument of nourishment of men converted, may prove an occasion of
conversion to men unconverted? So that this notwithstanding the position
delivered will not bear this inference that is drawn from it. Though the Lords
Supper (as an appendant to the Word) may serve to bring up those of
Covenant Interest to the terms and Propositions of the Covenant; may work a man
of profession of faith, to faith saving and justifying, yet there must be
somewhat more to give actual admission to it. Put in these two Cautions. 1.
That the persons in question have their interest and first right in it. 2. That
they be in a capacity to improve it for their benefit; with these cautions, and
not else, I am for a general admission.

Secondly, It is objected, That this makes the Lords Supper to be a converting
Ordinance as well as the Word, and how great an odium lies upon that opinion,
what those be that maintain it, and what interest they drive, is very well
known. To this I answer: The expression of a Converting Ordinance may be taken
two ways: First, As having power of it self, In what sense, and with what
limit, the Lords Supper may be called a converting Ordinance.
as a single instrument in the hand of God, in his ordinary way to work a
change in the heart or life. In this sense the converting power of it is to be
denied. Secondly, As having some influence for that work as seconding and
working with the Word, so I doubt not but that it may safely be owned, and
easily justified. I shall lay down my whole thoughts of it in some
Propositions. Explicatory Propositions. Affirmat.


First, In the Affirmative.

First, This Sacrament carries the soul on toward conversion, in doing the
same thing as the Word does for conversion, in holding forth Christ crucified,
in holding him out as our sin, and as our Savior, made a curse for us, and
delivering us from the curse.

Secondly, In further engaging the soul, or the soul upon receiving the
Sacrament engaging it self to that which the Word requires and calls for. If
Covenants in Israel, entered by reforming Princes, were judged to be of that
force for obligation of the soul to a change in their ways, putting stronger
ties on their slippery hearts, much more may we believe that the Sacraments in
a due order received, may have this efficacious power. They serve (says Mr.
Hooker) as bonds of obedience to God, strict obligations to the mutual exercise
of Christian charity, provocations to godliness, preservations from sin,
memorials of the principal benefits of Christ.

Thirdly, The Sacrament does this in an ordinary way according to the revealed
will of God in his Word, as the proper intention of the work, and not as any
thing extraordinary.

Fourthly, The Sacrament it self does it, in that relation in which it stands
to the Word, in its being and operation; and not the Sacramentals only, (as
they have been called) as the Word preached, and prayer, which yet have a
mighty influence on the Sacraments for this work.

Fifthly, It works as a second to the Word for habitual conversion, as well as
actual; In the way that the Word does work, for the infusion of the first
grace, and not barely for the exciting and stirring up of grace in the soul.
Their way of working I shall God willing in due place further enquire into.

Negat.
Secondly, In the Negative.

First, The Sacrament converts none by the bare work done. There is no such
power by receiving, to change the soul, as Papists believe there is by
consecration to change the elements. There is neither reason for it, nor
promise of it. I cannot believe (for I see no proof of it) any regenerating
power in the water in Infants Baptism, much less can I have reason to believe
such a converting power of grown persons in the Lords Supper. He shall be alone
for me that will appear in such Paradoxes.

Secondly, The command given, to take and eat of the bread, to drink of the
cup, has no such power to convert. None can see the reason of the change of
their ways in any such injunction; Conversion were an easy work in case this
could do it.

Thirdly, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper must by no means be parallelled
with the Word, in the work of conversion; but the Word many ways must have the
preeminence: 1. The Word may work to conversion without the Lords Supper; There
are many in saving grace, that did never partake of this Ordinance. Gods
engagement by word and oath holds up the faith, and is the ground of strong
consolation to those that never enjoyed this seal. But the Sacrament cannot
convert or do any thing toward it, without the Word. A Covenant may convey an
interest without a seal, when a seal can never do it without a Covenant. 2. The
Sacrament does nothing of its own strength, but by virtue from the Word; It
has its dependence on the Word for being, as a seal on a Covenant, and also
for the operation. The Word may go alone in the work of conversion, yet may
have assistance from the Sacrament; the Sacrament can never work alone without
the Word, but as an assistant to it. 3. The Word must qualify the soul for the
Sacrament, in laying open the nature and use of it; and the soul must attend
what the Sacrament holds out, otherwise there can be no improvement of it for
any spiritual benefit: And these things being premised, I wonder how any that
seem to appear most on the contrary part can justly be offended, that I affirm,
(and as I think, with so good reason prove) that the Lords Supper may be
assistant toward conversion in some, and may work with the Word, to carry the
soul professing Christ up to it, especially when it shall appear that I would
have the door of admission to stand at least little more wide then they
themselves: And perhaps not so wide, as according to the practice of many of
their judgment it stands already. Most of these acknowledge, that knowing
persons, free from gross errors and scandals, may be admitted; others say,
none but they, that in the judgment of charity appear to be indeed in Christ,
may be received; in which they yet confess that men may be easily deceived:
Either of these confess, that many unconverted partake with them, even when
rules of admission (according to their own mind) are most tenaciously held. And
in case it appear that these may receive benefit by the Sacrament, and their
conversion possibly helped on, especially if well followed on by the Word, why
should they be troubled? I confess it is to me no small trouble, to see godly
Ministers of the opposite way, so much ensnared in their own principles, and
necessitated to let in such (where most of order is held, and discipline
exercised) that of necessity further their damnation, and are in impossibility
(according to their tenants) to improve it toward salvation.

Thirdly, It is yet further objected, That in this doctrine we oppose the
unanimous judgment of Protestant Divines, who generally teach, that the
Sacraments are appointed of God and delivered to the Church, as sealing
Ordinances, not to give, but to testify what is given; not to make, but
confirm Saints; simply denying the instrumentality of Sacraments, that they are
appointed of God for working or giving grace where it is not. And that we
concur with Papists, who hold that the Sacraments are instruments, to confer,
give, or work, grace, ex opere operato. But how unjust this charge is, in both
the parts of it, might easily be made manifest.

In this we Symbolize not with Papists.
First, For that charge of joining with the Papists, let any judge, who comes
nearest to their doctrine of the efficacy of this Sacrament. Not to mention the
opus operatum, which is alike detested of both, (whatsoever is charged) but
enquire further what they deliver of the efficacy of it. Thomas Aquinas, Part
3. quaest. 73. art. 3. putting differences between Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, assigns this for one; Baptism is the beginning of spiritual life, and
the entrance of the Sacraments. The Eucharist is the consummation of spiritual
life, and the end of all Sacraments. And further, The receiving of Baptism is
necessary to begin spiritual life; The receiving of the Eucharist is necessary
for the consummation of it. The Council of Florence, quoted by Suarez, disput.
7. Quaest. 62. says, By Baptism we are spiritually born again, and are
nourished by the Divine Alimony of the Eucharist. Suarez, disput. 63. Quaest.
79. lays down this conclusion. This Sacrament is not instituted, per se to
confer the first grace; and confirms it by multiplicity of Authors, and the
Churches custom, who never used to give the Sacrament unless it be to those
whom she believes to be cleansed from sin by Baptism or penance. And thus
argues it by reason. The Sacrament (says he) does not suppose the effect that
it serves to work, but this Sacrament does suppose the man to be just that
receives it. 2. Meat (says he) is not ordained of it self to quicken or raise
the dead, but to nourish or strengthen a man already alive. But this Sacrament
is instituted, as meat and drink. And though he after affirms that this
Sacrament sometimes, and as by accident conferres the first grace, (which
according to his principles he has much a do to make out) yet he acknowledges
that many and grave Divines held the contrary, quoting, Gabriel, Alensis,
Bonaventure, and Major. And their distinction is well enough known. That as a
Sacrifice offered, it takes away sin; but as a Sacrament received, it only
nourishes, and increases spiritual life. By all which it appears how far
those of that part are from assent to this position; and no marvel, when they
will hold their communicants in that ignorance, as to look after no more then
consecration, to inquire nothing into the institution. The way of the
Sacraments work, as a visible Word, as a demonstrative sign in the aggravation
of sin, and tender of pardon, is to them a mystery.

As for the other part of the charge, Nor oppose the unanimous judgment of
Protestant Writers.
which is the opposition of the unanimous judgment of Protestant Authors; I
know many are produced speaking of the Sacraments, as no causes of spiritual
life, or vessels to convey it; but as seals and testimonies of Gods good will
toward us. To which I fully subscribe, as after shall (God willing) appear.
But how far most of them come short when they are thoroughly examined, of that
position which is laid down as their opinion, That they are appointed to seal
unto a man that saving interest in Christ and the Covenant of grace that he
has already, may easily be demonstrated. First, That position has that
confusion in it, that many of them will not own, and is inconsistent almost
with all their principles. This makes interest in the Covenant of grace, and
interest in Christ (which is understood of interest as a lively member) the
same, when it is well known that they make Covenant Interest far more large
then interest in Christ; see Mr. Cobbet in his Vindication, page 48. quoting
not alone Tertullian, Cyprian, Gregory, Nazianzen, Jerome, Austin, among the
Ancient; but also Amesius, Chamier, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Peter Martyr,
Bucer, Melanchton, Mr. Philpot, for this latitude of the Covenant. Pareus, (who
is not looked upon as any dissenting man from the rest of his brethren) speaks
fully. When it was objected that all Israel was not in Covenant with God, nor
all the infants of Christians, because some among them were, and are
reprobates, he answers, To be in Covenant, or to have interest in it, is taken
two ways, either according to the right of Covenant, or the benefit of it. He
is in Covenant that either obtaines the benefits of the Covenant, which are
pardon of sin, Adoption, regeneration, salvation, or which has only the right
or outward symbol of the Covenant. He applies his distinction that, that
proposition, That no reprobate is in Covenant with God, is only true of the
benefits of the Covenant, which heretofore were, and still are peculiar to the
Elect; but being understood of the right, and outward symbol of the Covenant
it is to be denied; for that indifferently belongs to all that are born in the
Church, among which many are reprobates, as the event does demonstrate; neither
is it lawful for the Church to exclude any, that by their own impiety do not
exclude themselves (which Israelites in times past did, and Apostatizing
Christians now do, to their greater damnation) whether they be of those that by
a true faith receive the benefits of the Covenant, or whether they be those
that remain hypocrites. All of his practice must necessarily be of his
judgment, unless we believe that their practice militates against their
principles. And that this is the practice of the reformed Churches in general,
needs not to be shown.

Secondly, They cannot then baptize any upon the account of Covenant-holinesse,
but only holiness of regeneration. This is plain. If the right be theirs
alone that have their interest as in Covenant, so also in Christ, only these
must be baptized, or else we must baptize without right. And that they do not
only baptize, but dispute for Baptism upon a bare Covenant Interest without
any further title is manifest.

Thirdly. This stands not with that which they hold concerning the way of the
Sacraments sealing, which according to them can be no evidence that he does
believe, as some assert, evidences of faith must be in the soul, and not in the
Sacrament; neither does it absolutely make up to the soul the benefit of the
Covenant, then no man without infallible revelation (such as it seems Ananias
had concerning Paul) could administer it. It seals the benefits of the Covenant
upon Gods terms and propositions, which when the soul makes good, there is Gods
seal for performance. That this is the judgment of Protestant Divines, I have
elsewhere declared, Treatise of the Covenant, page 35, 36. so that their
Doctrine of the Sacraments does not oppose the position delivered.

Hitherto I have considered some general charges against this position; now I
must look into some Arguments in form produced against it.

Several particular arguments answered.
First, Sacraments, (say some) are signs, as appears in their definition, and
not causes of what they signify; signs declaring and showing that we have
Faith in Christ, remission of sin by him and union with him.

To let that slip pass, making them no causes, because they are signs, as
though no sign were a cause of the thing signified: This to me is as strange
as new, that Sacramental signs declare, and show that we have faith and
remission of sins. The Sacrament now in question, is a sign of the body and
blood of Christ, in whom by faith remission of sins may be obtained I know; but
that it is a sign either that we do believe, or that we have remission of sin
otherwise then upon our believing, (to which this engages, but not presupposes)
I know not. Simon Magus had not Baptism, to signify that all his sins were
forgiven; but that by faith in the Name of Christ he might be forgiven. Mr.
Cobbet says well, Vindication, page 54. The initiatory seal, which holds true
of the other seal, is not primarily and properly the seal of man's faith, or
repentance, or obedience, but of Gods Covenant rather; the seal is to the
Covenant: even Abraham's Circumsion was not primarily a seal to Abraham's faith
of righteousness, but to the righteousness of faith exhibited and effected in
the Covenant; yea, to the Crvenant it self or promise, which had believed unto
righteousness: hence the Covenant of grace is called the righteousness of
faith, Romans 10. I confess it is a symbol of our profession of faith, but this
is not the faith spoken to, neither is remission of sins annexed unto it.

Secondly, That which necessarily supposes conversion and faith, does not work
conversion and faith: But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper supposes
conversion and faith. The Minor is proved, Mar. 16.16. Act. 2.38. Act. 8.36,
37. ver. 41. Act. 10.4.7. All which texts are spoken of Baptism, and not of
the Lords Supper. To that text, Mar. 16.16. I have spoken fully, Treatise of
the Covenant, page 243. To that, Act. 8.36, 37. I have spoken page 244. To that
of Act. 2.38. I have spoken, page 396. and there is no need that I should repeat
what I have said. For Act. 2.41. They that gladly received his Word, were
baptized, It speaks no more then ready acceptance of the tender of the Gospel;
and whether this necessarily implies saving faith, let Ezekiel. 33.31. Matthew.
13.20, 21. Gal. 4.15. be consulted. For, Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water,
that these should not be baptized, who have received the holy Ghost as well as
we? it proves that men of gifts from the Spirit have title, such gifts gave
Judas a title not only to baptism, but Apostleship; such a faith may be had,
and sanctification wanting.

Thirdly, That which gives us new food, supposes that we have the new birth,
and Spiritul life; and that we are not still dead in trespasses and sins: But
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper gives us new food: Ergo.

Ans. 1. Metaphors are ill materials to make up into syllogismes.

2. A difference may be put between ordinary food, and living and quickening
food: It may be true of the former, but not of the latter.

3. The Word as well as the Sacrament gives us new food, 1. Pet. 2.2. and yet
presupposes not new life. If any reply, that the Word is more then food; it is
seed as well as food, and it gives not new life as food, but as seed. I answer
that the Sacrament is more then food. There is a Sacramental work preceding our
taking and eating, which some say may be done to edification and profit, by
those that are not admitted to be partakers; where they divide I may
distinguish, and there Christ is set forth to the aggravation of sin: to carry
on the work of contrition and compunction.

Fourthly, That Ordinance which is instituted only for believers and justified
persons, is no converting, but a sealing Ordinance: But this Sacrament is
instituted only for believers and justified persons. The Minor is proved,
Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.17. much more
then Baptism; and if Baptism, much more the Lords Supper.

Ans. Upon this account it must needs follow, that as Abraham was a justified
man, so Ishmael was justified also, who according to the mind of God, and in
obedience to his commands was circumcised, Genesis 17.23. yea, every Proselyte
that joined himself to Israel, and every male in Israel according to this
Interpretation must be justified. 2. Howsoever Abraham was a justified person,
yet his Circumcision in that place is not made a proof of his justification,
but a distinct text of Scripture, Genesis 15.16. quoted by the Apostle, ver. 3.
And that Scripture setting out his justification to be by faith, and not by
works, the Apostles words only show that the Sacrament of Circumcision sealed
the Covenant, not of works, but of faith; so that Mr. Cobbets words quoted in
answer to the first argument, are a full answer here.

Fifthly, The Apostle argues, that Abraham the Father of the faithful, and
whose justification is a pattern of ours, was not justified by Circumcision.
Circumcision was not the cause, but the sign of his justification. Therefore no
Sacrament is a cause of our justication.

Ans. Though animadversions might be made on these words, yet if any will put
them into form, I shall grant the conclusion, when I say the Sacrament, as an
Appendix to the Word, may have its influence with the word upon a professor
offaith to work him to the truth of faith, I am far from saying it is any cause
of justification; I look on faith no otherwise, then as an instrument in the
work, and the Sacrament as an help, and not the principal to the work of faith.

Sixthly, There is an argument drawn from the necessity of examination which
before has received an answer.

Seventhly, That Ordinance unto which none may come without a wedding garment,
is no converting Ordinance: But the Supper of the Lord, the marriage feast of
the Kings Son, is an Ordinance unto which a man may not come without a wedding
argument.

Ans. 1. Arguments drawn from parables must be used with all tenderness. But
in this Argument here is much boldness, to make this Ordinance that
marriage feast. 2. We shall find if we look to the scope of it, that this feast
is the fruition of Christ in his Kingdom, as appears by those words that give
occasion to the Parable of the Supper, Luke 14.15. And when one of them that
sat at meat with him, heard these things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that
shall eat bread in the kingdom of God. Now those that pretend a forwardness
toward it and are not prepared and fitted for it, (according to the scope of
the Parable) shall be cast out from it. This therefore may fairly prove that
none that appear in Ordinances, and yet remain in their sins, shall come to
heaven; But it no more proves that a man cannot get saving good by this
Ordinance, then it proves that a man cannot get saving good by the Word; The
Word may lay as fair a claim to this wedding feast, as the Lords Supper.

Eighthly, That Ordinance which is not appointed to work faith, is no
converting Ordinance: But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not appointed to
work faith; Ergo. The Assumption is proved, Romans 10.14. Faith comes by
hearing, hearing by the Word of God; then not by seeing; if by the Word, then
not by the Sacrament.

Ans. If faith comes by hearing, will it therefore follow that hearing can
receive no help from, but must exclude seeing? Did the Bereans when they had
heard the Apostles, yet nothing toward faith by their search of the
Scriptures? Act. 17.11.12. or did they not make use of their eyes in the search
that they made? When Christ had Preached to the Jews not yet in the faith, and
commended to them the search of the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. can we think that
this search could be no step in their way of believing? Why were miracles
wrought, if they were of no use to the work of faith f What comment shall we
make on those words, Joh. 2.23. Many believed in his Name when they saw the
miracles that were done? If the Word do work faith, it will by no means follow,
but that it may take in assistance by miracles, and Sacraments, by signs
extraordinary and ordinary. That consequence, if by the Word, then not by the
Sacrament, will never hold, till the Word and Sacrament are proved to be
opposite, and not subordinate.

Ninthly, That Ordinance, which has neither the promise of the grace of
conversion annexed unto it, or any example in the Word of God of any converted
by it, is no converting Ordinance: But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper has
no such promise of the grace of conversion, neither is there such an example:
Ergo.

Answ. For Examples, though we could give instances of men being converted by
receiving of the Lords Supper, yet it would still be denied to have any
possible influence toward conversion; as the last Argument is an evident
witness. We bring Examples of men that have been brought to the faith by
seeing, and yet it is still denied that fight can be any help toward it. And
though we could bring a promise of such grace annexed, yet we should have little
hopes to be heard or heeded, seeing we can bring a Promise of blessedness to
reading, which is by sight, as to hearing, Rev. 3. Blessed is he that reads,
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy. 2. We have as many examples of
men's conversion by the Sacrament, as we have of their receiving strength and
nourishment: If one may be asserted without an example, then then other
likewise. 3. We have no particular precedents by name (except at first
institution) of any that were Communicants, and therefore we cannot expect
examples of conversion, or receiving of strength by communicating. 4. The
examples of conversion by the Word perhaps well examined, would prove short of
such conversion as here is intended. The conversion in Gospel narratives is to
a Christian profession. A man may evince calling thence, but not elctdion, and
this is the work of the Word without the Sacrament, seeing it must precede the
receiving of the Sacrament.

As to that of no promise made to it, 1. When the adversary shall bring a
promise made to the Sacrament for Spiritual strength, it will happily be found
of an equal force to the giving of a new life. 2. Though we have no promise
explicit, and express; yet we have promises implicit and virtual. Every
promise made to the Word is made to the Sacrament; The Sacrament being not
opposite, but subordinate to it, an appendant that receives strength from it.

Tenthly, That Ordinance whereof Christ would have no unworthy person to
partake, is not a converting Ordinance. But the Lords Supper is an Ordinance
whereof Christ would have no unworthy person to partake: Ergo. The Minor is
proved, 1 Cor. 11.27.

Answ. This Argument well followed will take off every Ordinance from that
honor of conversion, as well as this of the Lords Supper: seeing many Texts
may be produced, equally calling for qualifications for them as for this,
equally showing the danger of unworthy addresses. As to this for hearing the
Word, see 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, as new-burn babes desire the
sincere milk, of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. Jam. 1.21. Wherefore lay
apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with
meekness the engraffed Word, which is able to save your souls. Is not the
Word a favor of death unto death to such? 2 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. Shall i. not be
more tolerable for Tire and Zidon then for them? Matthew. 11.24. For prayer to
God, see James 1.6, 7. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that
wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed; for let
not that man think:; he shall receive any thing of the Lord, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will
therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and
doubting: Good will never be had by such men's prayers. Esaias 1.15. And when ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear, your hands are full of blood. Zach. 7.13. Therefore
it is come to pass, that he cried, and they would not hear: so they cried, and
I would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts. Shall we now say, that neither Word,
nor prayer is a converting Ordinance? But perhaps it will be said, Men unworthy
must hear, must pray to be made worthy, must come in unconversion to be
converted. But they must bring worthiness hither, or else this can have no
hand in making worthy they must bring conversion, or else this cannot convert.
This is a begging of the question. And as to prayer, there is no more ground,
or color to make it a converting Ordinance, then the Supper; we must pray in
faith, before we can pray, with acceptance of our persons, and so must the Word
be mixed with faith when we hear it, Heb. 4.2.

Eleventhly, That Ordinance which is eucharisticall and consolatory, supposes
such that partake of it to have part and portion in that thing for which thanks
is given, and are such as are fit to be comforted: But the Lords Supper is an
Ordinance eucharisticall and consolatory: Ergo.

Answ. And might not the Assumption. as well have been, That the Word and
Prayer are Ordinances eucharistical, and consolatory? I hope none will deny the
Gospel (our good tidings) to be eucharistical, and consolatory; nor yet
thanksgiving which is a branch of prayer. And then in case the Proposition be
of universal truth, both Word, Prayer, and Lords Supper, are excluded from any
power of conversion; The Proposition then must be understood with limit, and
restriction; That Ordinance, which in whole and in part is eucharistical and
consolatory, can have no hand in conversion, and then (though perhaps exception
might be taken at it) it had color in it: But then the Assumption, That this
Ordinance is in whole and in part eucharisticall and consolatory, must be
denied. It is for humbling, heartbreaking, as it is comforting: There we show
forth Christ's death, and see him broken for sin; and it is no matter of
consolation, but humiliation and horror to see our souls under that guilt
that brought upon Christ a necessity to suffer; Though it is a matter of
consolation, that guilt by suffering is removed, and an atonement made, in
which there is either present assurance, or at least a possibility of future
actual interest.

Twelfthly, That Ordiinance, unto which Christ calls none but such that have
spiritual gracious qualifications, is not a converting, but a sealing
Ordinance: But the Lords Supper is an Ordinance unto which Christ calls none
but such as have spiritual and gracious qualifications; Ergo. The Assumption is
proved, Matthew. 11. 28. Joh. 7.37. Isa. 55.1. Matthew. 22.12. 1 Cor. 11.28. Cant.
5.1.

Answ. Only one of these speaks of the Lords Supper, the rest have immediate
relation to Christ, not to this Ordinance, of the Supper and positive spiritual
qualifications, as preceding all coming, is not required in any of them; upon
sense of want, we may come to Christ for spiritual qualifications; (as wen may
come with them) though without positive spiritual qualifications there is no
assurance of interest in him. 2. As to that worthiness which is spoken to, in
that Text of the Corinthians, there is an usual distinction of worthiness of
merit, and worthiness suitable to the work in hand; It is the latter only,
that, as is confessed, is called for. There is yet a double suitableness to the
work: One is complete, answering to all that the work can call for, which
comprises grace, not only in the habit, but in the act; an actual improvement
of our graces for the participation of it; and this is alike required in other
Ordinances of hearing, praying, etc. as in this Orainance of communicating. The
other is a worthiness, respecting the person that does communicate: such a
worthiness of suitableness and convenience, whereby according to the measure
of grace vouchsafed (whether common; or saving) he addresseth himself to it.
Now though the regenerate man alone receives to the acceptance of his person,
as he only hears and prays with such acceptance: yet a man in unregeneration
may be so far suitably worthy for this work, that he may know himself called
untp it, and that it would be his sin to hold back from it: and he may
hopeuMlly expect blessing in it: and such a worthiness was in Christ's and John
Baptists hearers, so many of them as have their commendations in the Gospel for
such ready and forward hearing; and such a worthiness, as I take it, is
mentioned, Matthew. 10 11. Let the Learned Consider, whether either the word
(...), indigne, or the context in that place will necessarily take in every
unregenerate man, or rather the irreverend Profanation of that duty; and
whether arguments drawn from want of saving faith, and sincere repentance in
performance of this work, do not bring unregenerate men under like danger in
fasting, praying, thanksgiving, hearing, Sabbath-keeping, and every other duty
of worship whatsoever.

Thirteently, That Ordinance which is instituted for the Communion of Saints,
is intended only for such as are Saints, and not for unconverted sinners: But
the Lords Supper is an Ordinance instituted for the Communion of Saints, and
those that are members of the same body of Christ. The assumption proved, 1
Cor. 1016, 17. compared with 1 Cor. 1.2.

Answ. Saint, is either such that are so by calling and separation for God, or
else by qualifications and regeneration from God. In the former sense,
unconverted sinners, prosessing the Gospel, are Saints: as of old they were of
the people of God, and called by his Name: Saint is a New Testament-word,
taking in all of a Christian profession, and outward Covenant Interest, and
then the Proposition is to be denied; Saint being taken in the latter sense,
the assumption is false. This Lords Supper is a privilege of the Church as
visible, dispensed by visible officers, not as invisible, as those very Texts
quoted do manifest.

Fourteenthly, If Baptism it self (at least when administered to those that are
of age) is not a regenerating or converting Ordinance, far less is the Lords
Supper a regenerating or converting Ordinance: But Baptism it self (at least
when ministered to those that are of age) is not a regenerating or converting
Ordinance: Ergo.

Answ. This Argument seems to suppose an opinion of regeneration or
conversion, by the very work done in Baptism, and the Lords Supper; which
seeing I do not own, but in either of both disclaim, I need to give no further
answer.

Fifteenthly, If the Baptism even of those that are at age must necessarily
precede the receiving of the Lords Supper, then the Lords Supper is not a
converting, but a sealing Ordinance: But Baptism even of those that are of age
must necessarily precede the Lords Supper: Ergo.

Answ. I see no necessity of this consequence, unless I should believe that
all that are baptized, are ipso facto regenerate; and that not with an initial
regeneration (of which some speak) that may be lost, but the immortal seed of
the Spirit that abides for ever; But being not (as I am not) of that faith, I
suppose a baptized man may be (to use Pareus his phrase) Christianus non
regeneratus, sed regenerandus, a Christian not regenerate, but to be
regenerate: and so regeneration may, as ordinarily it does, not precede, but
follow Baptism.

Sixteenthly, There is an Argument drawn from the Parable of the Prodigal,
There is a robe ring, and shoes put upon him, and a fatted calf killed for him,
but this when he comes to himself, and says, Father, I have sinned, etc. But
this is done in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper more especially, and
manifestly then in any other Ordinace: Ergo.

Answ. All Ordinances (as I take it) are to bring a prodigal unto such a
returning posture, in the discovery of the hatefulness of sin against such a
Father, and the riches that are in his Fathers family. There are some Arguments
of this nature follow, which may seasonably be spoke to in the close of these
Propositions. I shall only here by the way, hint so much to the Reader, that
in case these Arguments had been framed against the power of this Sacrament,
for conversion the sense as generally the opposers of it understand it, that it
works, as a medicine to heal, and has an opus operatum in it: I should not at
all have undertaken them, how inconcluding soever I had judged them: But seeing
a tendency in them, to interest alone, men already in grace in this Ordinance,
and denying all hope of benefit by it, to the majority of those that men, of
all interests ordinarily admit to it, to the necessary ensnaring of all that
are concerned in the administration of it, I could not be silent; let the
Reader impartially weigh and determine.

SECT. XV. Proposition. 12.
THose that are in a present inaptitude, All of present incapacity to receive
benefits by the Lords Supper, are to be denied access to it.
and incapacity to improve this Sacrament to any spiritual advantage, but are
under an inevitable necessity, either to receive no good, or much danger, and
damage (whatsoever interest they may claim, or on their behalf be claimed) are
justly debarred from it, and in present denied admission to it. And on the
contrary, All that are in a present aptitude, and capacity to improve it for
spiritual advantages are regularly to be received and by no means to be denied.
This is plain, it must be administered to the Churches advantage, and
edification, unto every members possible advantage; They that are in an utter
incapacity to receive benefit, are in all reason to be denied it, and those of
capacity to be received to it. Some would have those debarred (or at least to
debar themselves) that hopefully may profit; and we may not plead for their
admission, that are, in the judgment of all reason, in an incapacity of
profiting. Those that stand in this present incapacity, are of two sorts; 1.
Such that through inabilities cannot make any improvement of it. 2. Such that
resolvedly, and obstinately will not.

Those that through inability cannot, are of four sorts.

First, Those that by reason of minority and nonage are not yet ripe for the
use of reason, as Infants, and younglings.

Secondly, Those that by providence are denied it, as natural idiots.

Thirdly, Those that are berest of it, as distracted persons, aged persons
grown children.

Fourthly, Those that by their gross neglect in spiritual things, never made
improvement of it.

First, Infants, These the Church, as well Popish, as reformed by an universal
received custom denies to admit; As the Disciples sometimes rebuked those that
brought infants to Christ to receive a blessing: so the Church now provides,
that none shall bring them to partake of this Sacrament. And though the
Disciples suffered a check from our Saviors mouth in the one. Infants having
title to, and being in a capacity to receive benefit by that Church-priviledg,
as being Churchmember: yet we believe the Church is free from reproof in the
other, upon the ground laid down before, viz. their incapacity to improve it to
their spiritual benefit. It is true that the practice in the Church for at
least some Churches) anciently was otherwise: as those know, that are verst in
antiquity; several quotations out of Dionysius Areo pagita, Cyprian, Austin,
the Council of Tolet, may be seen in Suarez, disput. 62. quaest. 79. Art. 8.
sect. 4. Though according to Thomas Aquinas Dionysius his words make not for
it, as may be seen, part. 3. quaest. 80. Art. 9. This custom Maldonate in Joh.
6.53. says continued in the Church, 600. years, but he only says it; and
Suarez in the place before quoted says, it was never received of the whole
Church, and perhaps (says he) the practice was not Common, seeing there is no
more mention of it among the Ancient; and quotes the opinion of some, that day,
The Fathers never observed this custom, but only tolerated it, because they
could not resist the multitude. And one that speaks enough in favor of it,
finds the practice of it in Africa, and Europe, but can bring no testimony out
of Asia for it; only he says, that he does not read, that the custom was
contrary in any part of Asia. The Schools have disputed infants capacity of
it; Thomas Aquinas, in the place quoted, is against it, together with many
others, whose names Suarez mentions. Suarez himself is for the affirmative,
that infants are in capacity of it, as that which (he says) is far the more
probable, and has most reason and authority for it. And in the conclusion has
much ado to excuse the Church of Rome for the neglect of it, as Jansenius has
for their Communion only in one kind, Harmon. Evang. cap. 131. when the
practice of all antiquity he confesses was otherwise; and Bellarmine for their
eating on fast days before the evenning against all Scripture precedent,
Bellar, de bon. oper. lib. 2. cap. 2. But the Church of Rome her self has
reformed this, and has not put our Reformers to the trouble of it, though a
man might wonder what moved them to it, giving so much to this Sacrament as
they do, to confer grace by the work done, and to fortify the foul against
Satan. But it is plain, that the high reverence they gave to their
transubstantiated elements, moved them to it, lest any thing unworthy of them
should befall them; upon the same account that they deny their cup to their
laity, they deny the bread to those that are in minority, see Jansenius ut
supra: an eminent Writer of the Protestants appears much in favor of this
practice, not upon the reasons that moved those Fathers, (which was a supposed
necessity of it grounded on those words of Christ, Joh. 6.53. Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you,
understanding it of Sacramental eating at the Lords Table) but on other
grounds, 1. Those that are partakers of the thing signified, are not to be
denied the sign. 2. Infants are of the Church, they serve to make up that body,
and Christ the Savior of the body. 3. Christ himself says. Suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of
heaven. And from each of these he draws up formal Arguments for infants
admittance. And he supposes that that text which is brought as a bar to hold
them back, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup, may be easily answered, that it is to be
understood of those only that are in danger to eat and drink unworthily, and
so to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, of which (says he) there is
no fear of infants. These Arguments undoubtedly are of strength to conclude
their fundamental right and title, as to baptism, so to the Lords Supper, but
they are two weak, to give them actual admission; They conclude their jus ad
rem, but not their jus in re; They have upon these grounds a first right, but
they must wait a further growth till they have a second. Baptism gives right
in the face of the Church to all Christian privileges, and this is a Christian
privilege; so also the hearing of the Mysteries of Faith, the highest of
Mysteries, to be taken into debate of doubts, of the highest nature are
Christian-priviledges, yet as every baptized person has not forthwith these
high Mysteries communicated to him, nor yet is admitted to such high debates,
as Christ was at the age of 12. years which is recorded as a miracle: so
neither are they therefore to be actually admitted to the Lords Table. And if
that text of preexamination may be avoided, yet sufficient may be said for a
bar to their admission. They cannot do that which is outwardly to be done at
this Table, they cannot take and eat; see Whitaker, page 373. And in case the
bread be put into their mouths, it is more like to be cast out then eaten.
They cannot answer the end of the Sacrament, to do it in remembrance of Christ,
or to show forth the Lords death in that ordinance; And so no possible benefit
can be conceived in reason to come to them by it. In baptism it is otherwise,
there is nothing required to be done by him that is baptized. It is sufficient
to be passive, there is advantage by it, the person (whether infant or of age)
is enrolled into the society of the people of God, is a member of the body of
Christ, visible, mystical: and upon that account interessed in the prayers and
blessings of the Church: is enrighted, and upon that account, as growth makes
fit, to be admitted to other privileges, and as soon as of any discretion to
discern, they know to what society they do belong, and accordingly to apply
themselves; And therefore infants have a bare fundamental right to the Lords
Table, but actual admission to Baptism. And where as it is objected, that
infants had not only right to the Passover, but were also actually admitted
to it, they had not only their jus ad rem, but their jus in re, and
consequently infants have like right to the Lords Supper: To this I answer, 1.
That infants properly so called, did not eat of the Passover, being by reason
of infancy in an incapacitie, for such solid meats, as Rivet observes. 2. It
no where appears, that infants did partake otherwise then as they were involved
in the household. There is no Ordinance requiring infants to repair to the
place that God chose for it; It is for those males (says Ainsworth) which were
freemen perfect, males in health, able to go up to the place of public
worship: quoting withal the Rabbis Authority, That all men are bound, except
the deaf and the dumb, and the fool, and the little child, and the blind, and
the lame, and the uncircumcised, and the old men, and the sick and the tender,
and the weak that were not able to go on their feet. When we read of the pains
that they took to go up to Jerusalem on these occasions, through the valley of
Baca, Psalm. 84.6. we hear nothing of their pains to carry along their infants,
which must have been their care if by Divine appointment the Paschal Lamb as a
Sacrament had been ordained for infants. 3. The Passover as Manna, and the
Rock is considered two ways. 1. As common food, and means of present
livelihood and subsistence. 2. As visible pledges of Gods abode among them, and
protect^on of them. As common food, and means of present livelihood, infants
did eat of the Manna, and drink of the water of the Rock, and so also did
their cattle, Number. 20.8. and young ones (as soon as able to digest it) of the
Passover, when they were present with the rest, of the household: But as
visible pledges of Gods abode among them, and protection of them, or
remembrance of their present deliverances; only professed believers, and
neither infants, nor bruit creatures could make use of it, and in this sense
only it was a Sacarment: so that we see infants title, and also their bar to
this Ordinance.

For those that by Providence are denied the use of reason, Natural Idiots.

Distracted persons are incapable


as natural Idiots, their case is the same with infants, as also those that are
best of it, as distracted persons, and those that by age, or disease are grown
as Children: Thomas Aquinas in the place quoted distinguishes of distracted
persons, some wholly want the use of reason, and some have only a weak use of
it; as some see not at all, and some have a weak sight. The latter in some case
being restored in part to the use of reason, he would not have to be denied; In
this case prudence must judge, in case before this stroke, by the hand of God
upon them, they were judged meet for this Ordinance, as they were for other
civil employments, and now upon recovery or upon their intervals (as many times
it happens) are able in some good measure to manage their business; as way is
given to them in one, so it is not to be denied them in the other.

For those that never made improvement of their reason in spirituals, but being
men of years, are still children in knowledge, they have their title or
fundamental right, Grossly ignorant ones a rein an incapacity.
(as I said before of infants) but they are no more meet for this Ordinance
then infants; such I mean, that for the time might be teachers, and yet have
need to be taught which be the first principles of the Oracles of God. If I
should demand, why boys and girls as soon as they can eat of the Bread, and
drink of the Cup, be not received to this Supper; but all in nonage by general
consent exempted, and therefore none offer themselves? No reason (to me
imaginable) can be given, but their inability of improvement of it to their
Spiritual advantage; years of discretion are expected, and then they are to be
admitted: and this is generally acknowledged to stand with reason, And what
reason is there that without any discretion they should be admitted at the
usual year of discretion? At one and twenty years men arrive at the age to
enter upon their possessions: yet when it may appear that at these years they
have not abilities to manage it for their benefit, the Law has provided that
they shall not be entrusted with it. The ignorance before mentioned in the
several kinds was ignorantia purae negationis, They understand not, because God
has denied them understanding: It is their defect or affliction, but it is not
their sin; this that we now mention, is ignorantia pravae dispositionis, a
withstanding of the light that is tendered and offered. All of these are in an
equal incapacitie of benefit by the Sacrament: but these last in a sinful
incapacitie. And when the former, whose ignorance is not their sin, are confessed
to be incapable, I do not see how sin can put the latter into a better
capacity of it. When a Covenant was entered in Israel, Nehem. 9.10. all sorts
and sexes having knowledge and understanding entered, Nehem. 10.28. If any had
sworn to the articles, and had not at all understood them, such an oath would
have done no service; therefore it was provided, that only they that
understood, subscribed, and sealed. They that receive this seal, and
consequently put to their seal, when they know not the articles of it, or any
use of these Sacramental signs, they see not themselves at all obliged, when
the Covenant of Israel was to be sealed understandingly, the Covenant of the
Gospel is not to be sealed ignorantly: A book in the hand of the unlearned that
cannot read, is of as much use as this Sacrament to him that does not
understand. It is to these, as the painted frontispices that we see in many
books, without any key to open them; they be full of mysteries, but the
ignorant beholder sees nothing but an outside. He may gaze an hour together,
and be as wise as before. Such an one sees bread and wine, but what they mean,
he knows nothing, nor any proportion between sign and thing signified, or what
the Ministers tender, or his own receiving speaks to him. These may (perhaps)
have some blind devotion toward this Sacrament (which Popish Schoolmen judge
sufficient, if not obstructed with mortal sin) by reason of the Churches
custom to receive it, and some high opinion of some hidden and unknown virtue
in it, but it is not the least account that they can give of any necessity of
it, as a reason of their devotion toward it, being scarce able to produce any
command for it, not knowing either the author, time, or end of the institution
of it; much less are they able to understand any need their souls have of it.
When the Corinthians came unworthily to the Lords Table, all is laid upon this,
that they discerned not the Lords body: I do not think that this is alone the
ignorant man's sin: All are in their measure guilty that do not considerately
observe the glory of that Ordinance, and of Christ in it. A man of rude
behavior, in a great Personages presence, is told that he knows not where he
is, or to whom he speaks, when he well enough knows, and needs no information;
but does not consider his distance: but I say there is a necessity of that
guilt in all that are ignorant. All do not consider as they ought, that know;
but none that does not know, can consider. This is to be done in remembrance of
Christ, which contains in it a calling into our thoughts all the work of his
sacrificing himself for sin, which is never done by the man that knows not
sin, that knows not the Law, which is transgrest by sin; that neither knows
the nature of sin, nor the guilt of attending it; that has not any possible
experimental sense of the danger of it, and that remains ignorant of Christ
that redeems from it; being able to give no account why the blood of Christ,
rather then the blood of any other should take away sin; or how this death has
any such satisfying temitting virtue, as to answer the Justice of God, or merit
his Grace; neither knowing the Person of Christ in his humanity, or Deity, nor
able to give account which Person in the Trinity took our nature, and gave
himself a ransom: perhaps they will say that Christ was God, and Man; and as
ready to say that the Father, the Holy Ghost, were God and man in like sort:
knowing as little or less of his offices, what he does as a King, or what he
does as a Priest, or what he does as a Prophet, for his Church. If you look on
the Sacrament as a spiritual medicine, they never knew their souls sickness,
nor ever understood any healing virtue in it. If you look upon it as spiritual
food, for the strengthening of graces, they never knew what hunger was, or any
strengthening virtue that here can be found: look upon it as a spiritual
cordial, and they never had sense of sin to any swooning fit, nor yet knew any
restaurative virtue to be found in it: look upon it as an heartbreaking,
soul-melting Ordinance, as the Law never discovered to them the danger of sin,
so they see nothing here held out for the aggravation of sin. They see what in
course the Minister does, and what the Communicants do; But any end, or reason
why he, or they do it, they know nothing. If the Word which is added to the
element to make up a Sacrament, were a bare Word of consecration, to be
muttered over the elements for their change, so that the bare participation
would serve turn, (as Physic works without any regard of the Patients
knowledge or ignorance) it were somewhat. But the Sacrament (as has been said)
is a seal appendant to the Covenant of God, and there is no improvement of it,
other wise then as the Covenant and the Promise is improved, (which must be
known before it can be believed and applied) ignorance is a necessary bar to
all benefit by it. Though I account it the weakest thing in the world, to make
ignorance of this nature in the parent, any just ground of non-admission of the
Infant to Baptism. There is no necessity to conclude, that the child (who is
born, and to be bred, in a valley of visions, and interested in Ordinances able
to save the soul,) should unavoidably be ever held with Parents in blindness;
yet I can Judge no otherwise, but that it is a just bar to the parents, when
it is enough for the Infant to be passive, in his first admission, the parent
must act and make use of his light, for further growth and confirmation. Some
(I know) have said, Who can tell but the person deemed to be ignorant, and
heretofore such indeed, yet making address to the Lords Table, and there
hearing that mystery laid open, and the use of those elements unfolded, and
cleared, may in that very time receive competent instruction, and be put into a
capacity for this Ordinance knowingly to partake of it. Whether or no there be
any absolute possibility in this, I will not determine. I am sure there is
little moral probability, or possibility, that a man that has lived under
Ordinances 20, 30, 40, 50, perhaps more years, and all of this time has been
confessedly ignorant; and upon that account, in an incapacity of this Sacrament
for his profit: that now at this time, in a few minutes he should grow such a
proficient as to fit himself for it; And in case any such thing, if not by
miracle, yet, to wonder and amazement, should happen, it will be little loss
for such a one, to delay his actual participation for once, that he may give an
account of his profiting, and upon a further progress in knowledge have
admittance the next time with greater satisfaction. If any do desire to know
the minimum quod sic, where is the lowest pitch of knowledge, that will put a
man into a capacity of improvement of this Ordinance to his advantage? this of
necessity must be lest to ministerial Christian prudence, in which there must
be much of care and tenderness, not to make blear-eyednesse, blindness, nor a
dim-light midnight darkness, where the wretchedness of sin is known, and
Christ (who is our remedy) so understood, that account can be given of his
person, and that there is no other name under heaven by which we can be saved,
and the Sacrament so understood, as that Christ crucified is there held but
under those elements, and tendered to believers: I durst not pass a vote to
have such a one excluded let this be got out of them, in language of any kind,
such that we may discern that they know it, though they can scarce express it:
in which also many circumstances should be prudently weighed, as the natural
ingeny of the party, if ripe in other things, it is an evidence of affected
ignorance, to be havy and dull here: The means that they have enjoyed for help
in their knowledge, the longer at School, the better the Master, the more
inexcusable the truant: The growth of years that he had upon him, when he first
manifested a care to know, age is unteachable in comparison, of youth, a low
measure of light sometimes draws on more strength of affections; But where sin
is not seen, nor Christ known, and consequently the soul is so in the dark,
that no use can be made of this ordinance, for spiritual advantage, the person
may justly be judged to be in a present incapacity. In which for the most part,
it will be more safe to delay, then deny to persuade the party to forbear a
little time: and in the mean while to commend means of further growth, by all
means to endeavor his help, that he may be fairly drawn on, and not driven
back from this Supper.

In the next place, those that resolvedly will not make improvement of this
Supper, but wilfully put a bar to their benefiting by it, are to be taken
into consideration. And his is done,

1. By error entertained in their judgments, by a taint in the faith that they
profess.

2. By viciousness of life, or a profligate course.

Now, either of both these (to speak a few words of them jointly) are either
such that are so in private and secret, or else openly and professedly. Those
that are indeed such, though in way most secret, in the present posture as they
stand, are in an equal incapacitie to make inprovement of this ordinance, with
him that most openly proclaims it; Judas was unfit when he did communicate, as
well as Barabbas, if he had communicated. But of these the dispensers of this
ordinance can take no cognizance, Men wicked in secret cannot be debarred from
the Sacrament.
they cannot follow men into their chambers, and closets much less can they
make a scrutiny into their hearts. Here may be a just bar, when yet none may
justly debar them. Here there is almost an universal agreement; those that
pretend to the the greatest care in their admissions, not dissenting, though it
give no small check to that glorious homogeneity of which they speak in the
Churches of Christ, and utterly overthrowes the definition given by many of the
Church visible. He that pleases may read Suarez in tertiam partem Thomae;
disput. 67. Sect. 4. putting this to the question, whether it be lawful to
deny the Sacrament to a secret sinner desiring it publicly, and by many
reasons determining it in the negative, as also in the following Section,
resolving the question: who is to be accounted a public, and who a private
offender? And what is spoken by him of sin, may be applied to error.

Those that are openly such, Excommunicate persons are to be judged to be in a
present inaptitude for the Sacrament.
by sufficient detection of their error or crime, are either such that are
under the Churches censure, and stand excommunicate, or else they are such that
the Church does tolerate, whether because that censure is not in use in the
place, or otherwise. Those that are under the Churches censure upon account of
that sentence, must be deemed in an incapacity, when the sentence, whether for
error or for scandal, has had its due work for reformation (as upon the
incestuous Corinthian) it must be supposed that the Church will again restore
them to their freedom: in the mean space, whether the Church has proceeded
right or wrong, be over rigid or just in her censure, it is not in any one
single Minister to determine. There is a famous story related by Mr. Hooker. in
His Ecclesiastical Policy, of one Bertelius, that was excommunicated by the
sentence of the Eldership of Geneva, and had procured from the Senate of the
place, by common consent, under their seal, a relaxation, further decreeing
(with strange absurdity, as the Author censures it) that it should belong to
the same Senate, to give final judgment in matter of excommunication, and to
absolve whom it pleased them. Calvin hearing the report of it, said, Before
this decree shall take place, either my blood or banishment shall sign it. And
two days before the Sacrament, kill me if ever this hand shall reach forth
that which is holy, to them whom the Church has judged despisers. Men under
public sentence must be deemed to be such, as by sentence they are adjudged.
But for others that stand free from censure, their present aptitude for this
ordinance is to be considered.

First, Error in judgment, and wickedness in life, equally indispose to this
ordinance.
As to them that are in error of judgment some (otherwise sufficiently
austere) would have all indulgence shown, and men of all judgments admitted,
enlarging liberty of conscience so far, that it should exempt men (respective
to their judgments) from any sentence secular, or Ecclesiastical; not
considering that as we find one ordered tO be sentenced for lewdness, 1 Cor.
5. so also others under the same sentence for errors, 1 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy
2.17, 18. And concealing (if it may be) that the same words that are produced
by them, for cleansing the Churches of wicked persons, 1. Cor. 5.6. A little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump, is by the Apostle applied in so many words, to
set out the danger of error, Gal. 6.9. upon which account, doubtesse it is that
some that profess so much zeal against looseness of life and plead for so
much indulgence, in difference in judgment, ever quote those words out of
Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, concealing that text to the Galatians, that
it may not appear that there is a like danger in either; But whilst some are
over indulgent, others must not be too severe, but carry an equal hand in
regard both of errors in judgment and in practice.

As for errors in judgment, they may be either immediately against these
Sacramental ordinances or against Christ the sum and substance of them, and
all Gospel promises in Christ. Errors of the first kind are, 1. Theirs that are
above ordinances, either upon pretense of the Spirits immediate work, without
any agent or instrument on earth, so that there needs not, either Word, prayer,
or Sacraments, the opinion of Swenkfeldius; or else because all is grown
corrupt, since the Apostles times, that a company cannot be found with whom
they may communicate, as Musculus speaks of one in his Common places, that had
not received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper of twelve ears, because he
could find no pure Church in which to observe it. I fear shortly we shall have
many such; But we need not here trouble our selves with these, seeing of their
own accord, they keep at a distance from us. 2. Theirs that look upon the
Sacraments as matters either antiquate and obsolete, as belonging to the
Churches infancy, in which it was indulged, those carnal observances, too low
(as they think) for grown Christians; or else as things of mere indifferency,
which may be used or neglected; such are unmeet to be received. If any such be
detected, seeing though the substance of religion be not in the Sacrament so
much as in the Covenant, yet a man of so low an opinion of this ordinance, of
necessity debarres himself of any benefit of it. a diffident opinion of a
medicine, or conceit against it, is said to hinder the working; I am sure it
will obstruct the working of the Sacraments, which have no innate physical
virtue, nor any other efficacy further then our understanding, and faith makes
improvement. For errors against Christ, the sum and substance of the
Sacraments, as every error is some way against him who is the foundation and
carries on the whole work of our salvation) that which I have delivered,
Treatise of the Covenant, page 232. (where I made it my business, to give
rules concerning separation, when we are to stay with a Church, and when to
leave it) may here be taken into consideration, weighing both the kind and
degree of these errors, and the place that they have got in the affections and
resolutions. Those errors that necessitate us to leave a Church, when it is in
the whole face of it tainted and polluted; may justly give occasion to deny a
member access, in case he tender himself to this ordinance. These (as has
been said) are either such that render Christ in an uncapacity to be our
Mediator and Savior, or such that are inconsistent in whole or in part with
his Mediatourship; of the former kind are those that are against his person. 1.
Those that impugn the Godhead of Christ, such that though they give him the
glory to be above Angels, yet will have him to be no more then a creature, a
God in title and place, as are Magistrates, not in nature or power; an opinion
that involves the Apostolic Church, and all Churches in succession, in
Idolatry; giving the honor of God, the worship due to God, unto him who by
nature is no God; a doctrine that will make Christ an impotent, and not an
omnipotent head, too weak for his work, to govern the world, to bring under
his enemies. 2. Those that deny his manhood, as having not taken our flesh, and
so no suitable head, but a phantastique, or seeming body. Those that are
against his Mediatorship, are either such that obscure, or some way eclipse it,
(as every error does that is any way considerable) or such that raze, if not
utterly overthrow it, in some of the necessary parts of it, his Kingdom,
Priesthood or Prophetical office. These are overthrown either directly, in
terms of full opposition, or else by consequence; and this either is immediate
and evident, (the truth being confessed, they cannot be denied) or else the
consequence more remote, and not so easily discerned. These things being
premised, we must bring it home to our purpose. 1. Where fundamental truths are
not only questioned, doubted, and disputed; but abjured and denied, errors
directly, Errors directly against the foundation, or by clear consequence,
opposing fundamental truths, tender the person incapable of benefit by the
Sacrament.
or by immediate clear consequence introduced, so that the fundamental truth
cannot be known, but the error must be seen; Here is such a flaw in the
Covenant, that no improvement can be made of the seal, to allude to that of the
Psalmist, Foundations are destroyed and what can the stewards of the mysteries
of God do? Such a soul has framed to it self, such a Christ as the Gospel
never held out for his salvation: These are such (of whom the Apostle speaks,
Col. 2.19.) that hold not the head, from which all the body by joints and
hands, having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the
increase of God: and how can they then find any spiritual nourishment? When
they thus withdraw from Christ, they are justly denied to sit at his Table. But
when the error is of an inferior nature, as neither rendering Christ in an
incapacity to be a Savior, nor yet wholly inconsistent with the work of his
Mediatorship; or at least, not such directly, but only by way of consequence;
and that not immediate and evident, but more obscure, and remote: so that it
may justly be hoped, that in case the consequence were seen, the conclusion
that they draw would be best, rather then the principle of truth denied, the
case is then otherwise. As we might live in such a Church, in case doctrine of
that kind were received and taught; so we may not refuse such a member, making
his farther conviction, our business; where ignorance may stand with grace,
there error is not wholly inconsistent with it: And where there is any fair
possibility that Christ may be, there this Ordinance is not to be denied. And
in case the opinion entertained, and contended for, be yet more soul, so that
we have just cause, as the Apostle of the Galatians, to say, that their
doctrine is inconsistent with grace; yet being not (as we can discern) fixedly
settled, and resolutely received, and concluded upon; but with hesitancy and
wavering, their faith rather staggered then destroyed; these should not hastily
be refused; But as the Apostle gives counsel respective (as I take it) to
private converse, After once or twice admonition reject: so let it be here,
make essay to regain a brother rather then lose him. It cannot be conceived
that the Apostle when he wrote his Epistle to the Churches of Galatia, would
upon the account of their error how dangerous soever, have discontinued this
ordinance as long as he saw any hopes of their reestablishment; though they
were in eminent danger to be dischurched, yet he would continue
Church-ordinances.

Men of a resolved profligate course of life, are incapable of benefit by the
Sacrament.
As for those that put a bar to their benefiting by the Sacrament by their
vicious life or profligate course, most men's verdict is soonest of all other
against them, with the Poets Peribomius, Morbum gressu incessuque fatentur,
they have their faults written in their foreheads. And certain it is, that
those men that are in their sin, and resolved for sin, in present can receive
no benefit by the Sacrament.

First, They that look upon Christ to receive benefit in the Sacrament look
upon him pierced by their sins, and that withal sorrow and grief of spirit:
The greatest grief in Family or Commonwealth is borrowed to express it, Zach.
12.10, 11. They shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son, and
shall be in bitterness for him, as one that in bitterness for his firstborn:
In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Had adrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. Which was the mourning upon occasion
of Josiah's slaughter, 2 Chronicles. 35.24. But these now look upon him suffering
for sins with all pleasurable delights and content in sin: they see him under
all this burden for our trangression; and in the mean time, take delight to add
to the weight of it, and so stand at the greatest distance from acceptance.

Secondly, They that worthily show forth his dearh, and acceptably keep a
memorial of it, will not without horror and trembling, have a thought of
drawing upon themselves the guilt of it; we would hot bear the guilt of the
blood of the meanest peasant in the world, not of such a one that Job would not
set with the dogs of his flock, Job 30.1. Such may with David, Deliver me from
blood guiltiness: How much less would we bear the guilt of the Prince of
life? To have this in our thoughts, that he must be our Judge, we have been his
murderers, may indeed set pricks in the heart, as it did in Peter's hearers,
Act. 2.37. These men of sin that come to the Sacrament in sin, wilfully,
furiously draw this guilt upon themselves, and become accessory to it: He that
slightly passes over the death of an innocent person, making a small matter
of it, either he makes the innocent, to be indeed nocent, one that has justly
deserved to be slain, who being slain deserves so little regard; or at least he
makes himself nocent, breeding ajust suspicion that he was, or would have been
consenting to that man's death, says M. Pemble, page 33. These in the sleighest
way pass it over, not with the least evidence of zeal or indignation against
it.

Thirdly, They that judge Christ fit to be numbered with malefactors and
transgressors, discern not his body, do not judge of him according to his glory
and excellency, and so cannot with comfort come to the Lords Table: But these
judge him fit to be numbered with transgressors, when in their foulest sins
they dare join themselves to him, and have communion with him: This is their
case that come in sin to the Lords Table.

Here some may object, that according to the principles laid down, the
Ordinance may be an hopeful means to take such off from their ways of sin;
having previous light to see what they do hear they may see high aggravation of
their wickedness; An heartbreaking, a soul-melting Ordinance being set before
them, there may be all hopes that it may be efficacious unto soul-melting and
heartbreaking; here they may see what their ugly sins have done, and who it is
that their sins have pierced and crucified, whereof a Publican or Harlot may
easilier be convinced then a Pharisee or justiciary. And Christ being here set
out both bearing sin, and a sacrifice for sin, the sight of their just demerit
in his suffering, and hopes of freedom from guile by his bloodshed; there may
be expectation of conviction, and contrition, and consequently somewhat at
least done toward conversion: and upon this account some would have the worst
of men admitted to the view, though not to participation in this Ordinance;
Others taking advantage of this admission of them to the view of it, and
knowing it to be a novel thing, that any should gaze, and not partake, they
conclude they are to be admitted unto both. The further improvement of it by
them seems at least some way hopeful, when to the ignorant and erroneous it is
impossible.

That I may speak my whole thoughts to this thing, somewhat is necessary to be
premised, both by way of concession and assertion. By way of concession it must
be yielded,

1. That there is more weight in this objection then personally has been
acknowledged, which I see upon conference with many godly learned is more and
more discerned. It is not so easy to evince all hopelesnesse of good in a bad
man's receiving the Sacrament, as in a man that is grossly ignorant; no text so
fully and clearly to any grounds to put a bar to men in sin, as to those that
are in ignorance; neither does the nature of the Sacrament so clearly evince
it. 2. Arguments usually brought to conclude against their admission to this
Ordinance that are in ways of sin, and under no sentence of excommunication,
seem to me scarce concluding. It were too long to name the Arguments, and point
out the exceptions: Some of them also perilously ensnaring, and upon several
accounts, 1. Their Arguments conclude equally against such men's, hearing,
praying, and attendance upon any other Ordinance, as they do against their
participation of the Lords Supper; the same Medium wherewith they conclude
against one, concludes against all, as has been shown. 2. These Arguments
intended: only against the scandalous to conclude a necessity of their
exclusion equally, conclude against all that are not actually in grace, when
yet the disputants themselves will not yield, that either actual grace or
positive signs of such grace should be any rule in such proceedings, as to
instance; some say that Ministers in holding out the Sacrament to wicked
persons whom they have excommunicated in the Word, showing that no unrighteous
person shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, they absolve them in the
Sacrament; and if this have any force in it, it must conclude in this manner;
None may be admitted but these that may be actually absolved, and while they
assume that the wicked may not be actually absolved, others will alike assume,
that no unregenerate man, how knowing civil and unblameable soever, may be
absolved. And the same guilt that these in their reasonings conclude that
Church Officers bring upon themselves in admission of the scandalous, they
contract that admit of any ungenerate ones.

By way of assertion it must be delivered, 1. 2. By way of assertion.
That the fundamental proper right unto, or interest in, this Ordinance is not
questioned, Church members lay a just claim to Church Ordinances, visible
members to visible Ordinances; If this be once denied we are in inextricable
snares. 2. Here can be no such profaneness in promiscuous administration of
this Ordinance, as the putting of Gods seal to blank paper: There is no blank,
but a name legibly written where there is a Covenant entered; and that there is
a Covenant entered with such, as it cannot be denied by any that will confess
that the Scripture should be umpeir; so it is yielded by all of those that
baptize the infants of such persons. The first right of parents that are such
is taken for granted, when their children are thus received. 3. It is then an
orderly edifying and prudential wa in administration that is here enquired
after, and this admits of a greater latitude then Covenant, and no Covenant
regenerate or, non-regenerate in which if an hairs breadth should miss there
were a transgression; as we discern the person to whom it is meet to give only
milk, and to whom to give strong meat, so we judgeof those that we admit only
to the Word and Prayer, and those that we admit to the Lords Table. And though
I see not concluding strength in several Arguments produced, but suppose they
are grounded on mistakes (which also apt to lead into danger, otherwise I had
been silent) yet I cannot recede from that ancient received opinion of Fathers,
Schoolmen, Protestants, whether of the Episcapal, Presbyterial, or
Congragational judgment; that scandalous person is are justly dibarred from
this Ordinance, seeing any possible hopes of gaining good is very low if any
which yet is all that can be pretended tor the expediency; and Arguments on the
other hand for the inconvenience and danger, are many and weighty. These
Sacramental signs are not barely teaching, but engaging signs; and not barely
signs, but seals, in which by acception of these seals, we engage to God to
make good his terms and propositions. The Minister of Christ therefore has
little encouragement, and slender hope: to tender it to such, or to admit such
to it, that are in a continual way of Covenant Breaking, and proclaim to all
their resolutions in it. A continued dissolute course of life speaks no better
then a full purpose, and settled resolution for sin; it can then little avail
such a one to take anew these symboles and badges of a Christian profession
upon him, and put himself on an hypocritical profession of tht service of
Christ, making discovery of such resolusion, it does appear to be in vain to
give this way and freedom to him. Knights of the post, that have often
forsworn themselves, are not by any prudent Judge permitted to swear; and
those that have so often desperately broken Covenant, and wilfully gone against
all former engagements, and still palpably appearing that way, are as unfit to
engagae; And the more clearly any that is produced as deponent appears to be
such, with more full resolution any prudential Judge will except against it.

And whereas it may be objected, that such upon the grounds here laid may as
well be admitted to the Lords Table, as to hear Sermons, join in Prayers,
observe Fasts: They are engaging Ordinances whilst they are done by persons in
Covenant, as is receiving of this Sacrament.

Answ. First, They are not certainly so highly and explicitly engaging; The
very name Christian is an engaging tie indeed to Christian duties and ways; To
enjoy any further Christian privilege is more; But to take these pledges on
the terms proposed, has ever heen accounted the highest.

Secondly, Though the Sacrament serve as has been said for aggravation of sin,
yet as the Word is the alone means in the discovery of sin, so it has
infinitely the advantage in the aggravation of it. The Sacrament does nothing
at all in this work without the Word, and the Word does exceedingly much more
then the Sacrament; and when it is clear, that the Word for so long has
wrought nothing for conviction, there is little hopes that the Sacrament will
work any thing to aggravation.

Thirdly, As the hope of good is either low or none at all, so the danger on
the other hand is high and full of terror, as we see it by the Apostle
aggravated, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28. The unworthy receiving of the Word is indeed of
danger, and a savor of death to death; But the hopes are fair by hearing to be
brought to worthiness. The danger of unworthy Communicants is far greater, and
the hopes little, if any at all.

Fourthly, The scandal here taken is exceeding great, and though happily
sometimes weak ones take more offense then is given, and are offended above
reason, yet when there is so little of good to be hoped in that in which they
are so scandalized, and so much danger in the offense, it is by no means to be
neglected.

Fifthly, There is more fair hopes of good to be done them upon their denial
then upon admittance to this Ordinance; when they see their own unworthiness
observed, and those proceedings upon it, they may more seriously reflect upon
their unworthiness. When a Physician shall forbid some meats upon observation
of a patients disease, it is a way to make him more sensible that he is in
danger; so when the Minister of Christ upon observation of men's ways, shall
deny this Ordinance, there may be hopes of an answerable work to bring the
person to some more sad and serious reflections upon his own state and
condition. If any think that these arguments singly considered, not to be of
that strength to evince a non-admission of men of openly sinful courses to
this Ordinance, I shall answer in the words of the Assembly of Divines, unto
the reasons of the Dsslenting brethren against the instance of many
Congragations in the Church of Ephesus: Arguments of necessity are to be
answerable to the things they prove, which as well holds int hsi of expediency
or inexpediency, to which I speak, as it does in matter of fact, of which they
speak; and so say they, Though the several particulars of this proof should be
singly but probabilities, yet being joined together make a sufficient proof, as
many concurring likelihoods in Courts amount to a good evidence, and many
lesser stars make up a Galaxia. They are with me at least so far prevailing,
That I believe that such are worthily excluded; and as they do not come without
scandal, so they cannot come to their advantage. In case after a former way in
sin, or sad fall to the scandal of the Church, upon admonition there appear,
convictions, and serious promises, the case is otherwise; there is all cause
then to take in such a one to this Ordinance, in which his sin appears in the
highest aggravation, and a tender and offer is made, and the way held forth of
pardon and forgiveness. Many of the Ancients were hasty enough to give the
Sacrament to men at the instant of their death, as a Viaticum to heaven, when
it was all too late to make any right improvement of it: But we are in the mean
space too slow, and over-rigid, in admission of professed penitents to it, as
appears in many examples. That of Serapion is notable mentioned by Eusebius,
who had lived a great while in the Church, without blame, but at last fell in
time of persocution; And often desiring to be received again by the Church, no
man hearkened to him, till at last being sick, and ready to dye, he sent a boy
suddenly to fetch a Priest, who was found sick by the messenger, that he could
not come to him: But he gave the boy a little of the Sacrament, and bid him put
it into the man's mouth; who when he had tasted of it, presently dyed. That was
expected here from the Sacrament, which it wanted, viz. some hidden power to
carry up the soul for heaven and glory; and in the mean space that was not seen
for which it was instituted, A provocation to repentance, and corroboration,
and strengthening of the soul in ways of holiness; when there was hopes of
good, to accrue by it, it was denied; and when all hopes were past, it was
indulged. After-ages appeared more facile, but then profession of repentance
was turned into a form of auricular confession; they might confess and take
penance, and be fit for the Sacrament; and sin as soon as it was over, and go
again to confession; That formality of confession put the Sacrament as they
thought into a posture of working, which sin unconfest did hinder. To deny
penitents, where there is any fair and possible hopes, by reason of conviction
wrought, is their sad discouragement; we see them lame, and weak, and we deny
them a Crutch that is provided for them. And to receive obstinate ones, that
without remorse carry it on in wickedness, seems dangerously to strengthen
them in their ways; and not at all to help them out of their ungodly courses.
From this that has been spoken, a fair answer therefore may be given to the
arguments before past by, concerning any power in this Ordinance for
conversion. And first, for that from the, Directory where the ignorant,
scandalous, and profane that live in any sin, or offense against their
conscience, are warned not to presume, to come nigh that holy Table, it is
meant of those that purposely resolve to hold their sin, and doubtless that
purpose standing, here is no comfort to be put into their hands. It is no other
then that counsel of our Savior, Matthew. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to
the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first he reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Sacraments will not be accepted from
that hand, where malice is seated in the heart, and implacably continued; but
it follows not but that where the soul is startled, and such resolutions for
sin do not appear, this maybe a means further to awake; and provoke to a
resolution against it. As to that of Communicating to Heathens, Pagans, enough
has been said before, It can neither be done with allowance, nor any possible
benefit. And for Excommunicate persons, they are supposed to be in an obstinate
way of wickedness. The last is only worthy of consideration. That Ordinance
that is not communicable nor lawful to be administered to any known impenitent
sinner under that notion, but only as penitent sinners truly repenting of
their sins, is not a converting but a sealing Ordinance: But the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper is not communicable nor lawful to be administered to any known
impenitent sinner, etc. Ergo. Here I might justly except against that
opposition that is still put between converting, and sealing Ordinances; as
though it must be taken for granted; that no sealing Ordinance could have any
hand in, or toward conversion. Gods seal added to his promise, may by the
blessing of God be serviceable here, as well as his oath, added for
confirmation; but this is grounded upon the mistake of the way of the
Sacraments sealing, in which I have sufficiently expressed my self. For answer
to the Argument it self, The major Proposition is not true, unless it be
understood with just limitation; Reproof is an Ordinance that may well be
reckoned among those that work to conversion, being the way of life, Prove.
6.23. and called the reproof of life, Prove. 13.31. an excellent oil, Psalm.
141.5. and upon that account to be used toward a brother in sin, Levit. 19.17.
And yet prudence must be used in the application of it. Every man is not a meet
subject to get good by it. There is no such wariness explicitly required in
the dispensing of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as there is in the
application of reproofs; nor yet any so punctually pointed out not to
communicate, as there is not to be reproved. The Wisemans observation is, that
He that reproves a scorner, gets to himself shame; and he that rebukes a
wicked man, gets to himself a blot: Therefore he gives advice upon it, ver.
8. Reprove, not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will
love thee. Every Ordinance therefore that is for conversion, is not meet to be
applied to every man in an unconverted condition: Rebukes set out the danger of
sin, and the Lords Supper is for the aggravation of it, in holding forth the
sad effects of it, yet neither of both meet to be applied to all in sin. That
charge of our Savior is deliveted in an universal way, Cast not holy things to
dogs, nor pearls before swine. The Proposition there included is general.
Nothing that is holy, nothing that is of the honor of a pearly, is to be cast
to any dog or swine; whence we may assume; But there is no converting
Ordinance, but it is of the number of holy things: Ergo. No converting
Ordinances are to be given to any that are dogs and swine, which way soever any
think to extricate themselves, by putting limits to any term in the
Proposition, they must necessarily be brought to yield, that all converting
Ordinances are not promiscuously to be applied to all in sin; But choice must
be made unto whom they may with profit be delivered. And thus I have spoke my
full thoughts of the subjects of this Ordinance, concluding without the least
hesitancy or scruple, That all in Covenant have a fundamental, or first right
to it, a jus ad rem, and making it my business to find out who they be that
may be admitted, in expectation of benefit by it, and who are justly detained
from it; In which I trust I have given just offense on no hand, either in
giving way to the admission of any that according to any Scripture-rule, or
just deduction thence should be held back, and so hardening them in any way of
ignorance or sin, in giving them any encouragement. I have a witness in
heaven, that I intended nothing in this but to find out the mind of Jesus
Christ, and to have this Ordinance so administered, that the edification of the
visible Members of Jesus Christ might be most prompted, and godliness
encouraged. And in case that this which I have done, may not be serviceable
this way, I desire that it may prove an abortive. I know there is a distinction
used by some, and applied to admission both of Infants to Baptism, and men of
growth to the Lords Table; that there is a twofold title, one in foro Dei, in
the Court of Heaven, and here only the Infants of the elect regenerate have
title (as they say) to Baptism, and the elect regenerate themselves to the
Lords Supper. The other in foro Ecclesiastico, in the Court of the Church, and
here all tiie Infants of professed believers have right in Baptism, and the
knowing and not scandalous, though unregenerate, to the Lords Supper. By the
favor of which; distinction, those of that judgment and I may be well enough
agreed; and as I think there is small difference about the persons to be
admitted to this Supper, yet for the distinction, I confess I do not
understand it; Both the Sacraments being Church-Ordinances, I suppose God keeps
no other Court about them, save the Court of his Church. If they have this
right in foro Ecclesiastico, then it is the mind of God that the Church should
admit them, and so they have right in foro Dei likewise. And I marvel how those
that bring this within the power of jurisdiction, can here apply this
distinction, seeing it overthrowes that which they apply hither, Whatsoever you
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever you loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. Many that are admitted ma want acceptance in heaven;
but having their right, and putting in no visible bar, their confessed
Ecclesiastical right concludes, that their admission is with acceptance of
heaven; and my great business has been for their comfort and encouragement
that give admittance, that their benefiting is possible that are thus admitted,
And here I might take into consideration the opinion of those that would have a
promiscuous admittance, and indeed I had it in my thoughts to have given a
brief answer to Mr. Humphrey's Scriptures, and Reasons, so much by some
applauded, and so strongly bottomed, Because all Communicants must drink of the
Cup, therefore all must communicate, with some limits, which being yielded, as
I have proved they must, will draw the limit necessarily, yet somewhat more
narrow. But this is by one hand already done, and I have lately had the
happiness to see a second learned Piece fitted for the Press; dealing largely
in it, which I doubt not may both satisfy the Adversary and the Reader, so
that my pains may well be spared; only I cannot but take notice of his fourth
Reason for a promiscuous admission, which he faith will arise from the vanity,
formality, impossibility of selecting people to this Ordinance: Look to the
heart of all these separations, they come to nothing: For put the case you will
have a gathered company, I pray who do you account indeed to be fit and worthy
receivers? If not all that make profession, as we do mixtly, then those only
that have an interest in Christ, and are true believers. Well, but how will you
be able to know them? The heart of man is deceitful above all things; who can
know it? And if we can hardly discover our own hearts, how shall we discern
others? so that all will come, but to these that have the fairest show, those
that seem such, and you cannot be secured, but there may, and will be some
hypocrites; and so this true partaking as all one body, and one blood, in such
an unmixt communion, as you pretend vanishes, and there can be no such matter:
But now if men stand here upon a formal purity, and will have the outward
purest Church they can, they go to separating again, and never leave separating
and separating, (as we have daily testimony) till they are quite separated one
from another; Even as in the peeling of an Onion, where you may peel, and peel,
till you have brought all to nothing, unless to a few tears perchance, with
which the eyes of good men must needs run over in the doing. To this I answer,
If the rule to take in this gathered company, be interest in Christ, to take in
those of a saving interest, and refuse all others, if regenerate, then he shall
be admitted; in case unregenerate, then he shall be refused; then I shall yield
his conclusion, I shall leave that distinction to him, that knows what is in
man. I should fear many a man of non-interest might be let in, and many a man
of true interest refused; a glozing tongue may here carry it, further then an
upright heart. And for his next of a formal purity, to get the Church as pure
as we can; though this ought to be our endeavor, to get the Church as pure,
not formally, but really, as possible; yet I make it no rule: But following the
Apostles rule, to do, as all things else, so this, to edification; though it be
a matter of much care and prudence, yet not vain and impossible in a good
measure, to determine it; upon this rule I pitch, till I hear something that
may take me off it.

SECT. XVI. An enquiry into the power authorized to judge of men's meetnesse for
the Lords Supper.
THe adaequate subject of Sacraments being found out, and some discovery made
of those, that according to Scripture principles stand in a present aptitude
for actual admission; A great question yet remains. Who must judge of this
fitness, Who are to judge of men's present aptitude.
so as to approve of men as such, and Authoritarively to refuse, or pass by
others; in which we may seem to be much in the dark, finding no one expressly
set up for that work, nor any Scripture-precedent of any that have taken upon
themselves such power. And herein men have been very different in their
thoughts; The various claims that are made to this power.
The Church of England heretofore has vested the Minister in sole power, as
appears in Canon 26. which provides. That no Minister shall in any wise admit
to the receiving of the holy communion, of his cure or flock, which be openly
known to live in sin, notorious without repentance nor any who have maliciously
and openly contended with their neighbors, untiil they shall be reconciled. As
also the Rubric to the same purpose. It is true that those that made it their
business to scrue up Episcopal power to that height that it could not bear,
did interpret this of such notorious offenders, that by the Ordinary had been
so adjudged, and under present censure, expressly contrary to the very words
of Canon 27. requiring every Minister so repelling any such upon complaint or
being required by the Ordinary to signify the cause unto him and therein obey
his direction; In case of such a preceding censure upon the person thus
refused, he had beforehand his direction, and complaint is then supposed to be
made only for his obedience, in refusing those that according to command
given, were to be denied. The Schoolmen generally go this way, putting the sole
power into the hands of a Minister, not so much disputing it, (so far as I
have read) as taking it for granted. Suarez putting it to the question, Utrum
teneantur Ministri hujus Sacramenti non dare illud homini existenti in p^c^ato
mortali?
Whether the Ministers of this Sacrament are bound not to give it to a man in
mortal sin? answers, respondetur certum esse habere Ministros hujus
Sacramenti hanc obligationem simpliciter and absolute loquendo.
That they are simply and absolutely under such an obligation, mentioning none
that are over them, or assistent to them in it. And in his first reason he
says, That Ex quibus sequitur primo, hanc obligationem oriri ex ipsa lege
naturali ac divina supposita tali Sacramenti institutione, and potestate ac
munere commisso Sacerdotibus.
this obligation does arise from natural and divine Law an institution of the
Sacrament being supposed, and such commission given to the Ministers; so that
he does no more question the Ministers authority in this thing, then he does
the institution of the Sacrament it self, Suarez in tertiam partem Thomae,
quaest. 89. disput. 67. sect. 1. And Thomas puts the question Utrum Sacerdos
debeat denegare corpus Christi peccatori petenti?
whether a Priest ought to give the body of Christ to a sinner seeking it?
part. tertia, quaest. 80. Art. 6 without mention of any other in power for it.
The Fathers were also of the same judgment, we need not quote testimonies from
them, of exclusion of men from the Sacraments, he that will be furnished. let
him read Mr. Gillespy Aarons rod, lib. 3. cap. 17. And we read of no other
joined with the Minister for that work. Dionysius Areo pagita, who is reckoned
amongst ancient Writers, though not of that standing to be Paul's Scholar,
Hierarch. Eccles. cap. 3. page 3 having spoken of those that were possessed with
Devils and tormented, called Energumeni, and of flagitious persons, says,
Primi igitur isti and quidem rectius quam illi Ministri officio and voce
separentur.
Let these therefore first, and much rather then the other, be separated by the
voice and office of the Minister. It was then accounted to be his office, to
see to that work. That of Chrysostom frequently quoted for exclusion of
scandalous persons from this Supper speaks fully to the power of dispensers for
it, Homil. 83. in Matthew. Let no cruel one, no unmerciful one, none any way
impure, come unto it. I speak these things to you that do receive, and also to
you that do administer, even to you this is necessary to be told, that with
great care and heedfulnesse you distribute these gifts: there does no small
punishment abide you, if you permit any to partake of this Table, whose
wickedness you know, for his blood shall be required at your hands. Other
reformed Churches place, for the greater part, this power in the Eldership,
preaching and ruling Elders joined together in Consistory. Those of the
independent Congregational way, judge it meet, that the whole Church, even all
the body of the faithful, should have their vote in it. The best way for the
discovery of truth, is to hear what each part have to say for themselves, and
then to examine proofs brought, together with inconveniences that may be
objected, and are like to follow from any one of these, by whom power is
claimed: and lastly, to pitch upon that which we judge to be most suitable to
Scripture, and to answer the inconveniences charged upon it. For that party
that can speak most of reason according to Scripture-rule, and whose way is
followed with fewest inconveniences, may in all reason lay the fairest claim to
it. But to do this thoroughly, were an endless labor, in which we might take
in the whole dispute about Church Government, which would be an outlet, far
bigger then this whole work. Those that vest the Pastor in this power, say,

1. He is the steward of the Mysteries of God, 2 Cor. 4.1. Allegations for a
Ministers sole power.
And as stewards in great families, have the care of ordering the food of the
whole household: so they being called to this honor, are to have the like
power in the Church of God.

2. They alone are to dispense this ordinance, as upon a manifold account may
be made good, and in due place (God willing) shall be spoken to.

3. The administration of Sacraments belongs to the power of order, wherewith
Ministers are solely vested, and not to jurisdiction, as is granted; and
therefore his prudence must guide him in discerning the parties that are to
partake of it. A faithful and wise steward, discerns the season when to give
portions of meat to the household, Luke 12.42. as also the persons to whom he
is to impart it. This learned Mr. Jeans says, is the opinion of the Schoolmen,
though he is pleased to say, They are extremely out in it, in denying the
debarring from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to notorious offenders, to be
an act of jurisdiction; and and so they (says he) put it into the hands and
power of a Minister to deny it those that he judges to be gosse and scandalous
sinners. page 46. quoting a full and pertinent passage out of Suarez. in
tertiam partem Thomae. tom. 3. disput. 67. Sect. 3. Haec dispensatio vel
denegatio Sacramenti non est consideranda, ut actio jucialis, vel inflictiva
poenae, sed solum, ut prudens ac fidelis administratio Sacramenti; and ideo non
pendet ex testibus aut probantionibus, sed solum ex ea Scientia and cognitio ne
quae prudenti existimatione secundum occu^entes circumstantias judicatur
sufficiens ut sine inc^mmodo possit, and debeat negari Sacramentum.
This dispensation, or denial of the Sacrament, is no judicial act, or
imposition of a penalty; but only a prudent and faithful administration of it,
and therefore does not depend on witnesses or proofs, but only on such a
knowledge and understanding of the thing; which by a prudential estimate
according to emergent circumstances may be judged sufficient that without any
inconvenience the Sacrament may be denied.

4. If this power be denied to aM inister, many times it so falls out, that of
necessity, either the administration of the Sacrament must be wholly suspended,
(which some of reverend worth have largely showed to be of dangerous
consequence) or else the Minister must be necessitated to dispense it to those
that are most unfit to partake of it. In abundance of places no such power of
jurisdiction is set up, nor can be expected, and food is necessary when we want
a rod.

Allegations for the power of an Eldership.
Those that contend for the Elderships power in it, affirming that it belong to
them and no other; First, distinguish of the administration of the Sacrament,
and admission to it; confessing that administration belongs to the power of
order; but admission, as they say, belongs to jurisdiction. Now jurisdiction is
in Elders, together with the Pastor, not so narrow, as to be seated solely in
the Pastor; nor so large, as to take in all the people. Secondly, They dispute
largely from the inconveniences that will follow, in case it be left solely in
the hands of the Minister, or put promiscuously into the hands of the people;
and therefore to avoid both of these extremes, they vest the whole Eldership,
and only the Eldership in power with it.

Allegations for the power of the people.
Those that plead for the power of the people, say; First, that they must in
duty avoid such in their converse, that are thus under censure; and therefore
are to have a hand in, and to be called to counsel about it. Secondly, That in
excommunication the people are to have a hand, (we find the Apostles direction
for it, 1 Cor. 5.4.) and consequently insuspension, and so they conclude, that
the power is in all the faithful. I must freely profess, that the first of
these (which has been longest in use) takes most with my judgment, as that
which has most strength of reason for it, and attended (for ought I can yet
see) with least inconveniences. In which (I suppose) I should yet have
concealed my self, had not the present juncture of time, and state of things,
put some necessity upon me (treating of these things) to speak my thoughts.
Were Elderships in Congragations settled in their desired power, and that order
set up, and accordingly followed, I should so have prized the peace of the
Church, as not to have cast any bone of contention in a business of this
nature so disputable; and where an error of that hand is, of no so great
danger. As I have without scruple acted in that way, so I am not willing to
cast scruples into the thoughts of any; my reasons will afterward sufficiently
appear; But things being in that posture as now they are, and for ought is
seen, like enough to continue; Sacraments must be wholly discontinued, or
anabsolute promiscuous liberty granted to any man, woman, or child, to receive
it; unless it may appear that the Pastor according to prudence may manage it.
I shall therefore endeavor, 1. To satisfy the claims that are made on the
contrary for other interests. 2. I shall give answer to the objections brought
against a Ministers sole and single power. 3. I shall limit this Doctrine with
some needful cautions to avoid mistake. First, I must speak to them that say,
power is committed of Jesus non uni, sed unitati; not to any single preaching
Elder or Pastor, but to an Eldership; preaching and ruling Elders joined
together, for which (excepting the arguments drawn from the inconveniences of
placing it only in one) this is the sum of all that I find spoken;
Allegations for the power of an Eldership taken into consideration.
That the power of Discipline is given by Christ, not to one Elder, but to the
united company of Elders; and for one Minister to assume this power to himself,
is to make himself the Church, it is to make himself a Congregational Pope: It
is a bringing in of a power into the Church, that would have some resemblance
(as is objected) to auricular confession. This argument takes that for granted
which is most in question, (and that which Mr. Jeans says, the Schoolmen do
deny, that this is an act of jurisdiction,) and belongs to the power of
Discipline; and this being barely affirmed, or rather only supposed, it may be
as easily denied. But I would give some reasons of my denial of it, and then
the whole of the argument falls.

First, Reasons evincing that admission to the Lo^ds Supper is no act of
jurisdiction.
This power of jurisdiction supposed to be in the whole Eldership, is either
respective to the whole business of the Sacrament, or else solely to the
admission or refusal of men for participation of it. If it respect the whole
work, then those that are not commissioned to preach Gospel-promises, may yet
apply Covenant-seales. They that have no call to open and show forth the
Mystery, have authority to dispense the Elements, we had expressly the mind of
Christ to the contrary) it will appear to be the greatest of soloecisms, to
give a man commission for a work, and then to leave him to the courtesy of
others, not otherwise interested in it, for the exercise of it. There did a
complaint lie against Bishops, giving commission in Ordination large enough to
preach the Gospel; yet afterward would not suffer it, without a license from
their Courts to be put into action. This at the first sight looks much like it;
when Ministers shall receive power of order, which comprizes Word and
Sacrament: the Gospel with the seal; yet may not act in it, without an
Eldership to oversee it, who as to administration are wholly Heterogeneous.

Secondly, If no other Ministerial act, is to be preregulated Ergo there is no
reason singly and singularly to subject this of Sacramental administration to
it.

Thirdly, If the dispensation of the promises be committed were not only to
come to Baptism, but to the Lords Supper. 3. That they do not openly and
resolvedly in their course of life go against their engagements in them. In
such case the promise may be tendered to Heathens, to grossly ignorant and
flagitious ones, and yet the seal for present upon these grounds withheld.

Fourthly, Where power for any work is committed to one,

Fifthly, If Ministers have not only been vested with power Saul ought to have
done for Samuel) before administration: But Ministers have not only been in
power for administration of Sacraments, but have actually administered with
approbation without any jurisdiction: They have done it in unofficed Churches,
where no jurisdiction had place; this is evident. To say nothing of John's
Baptism, instance might be given in the baptism administered by Christ's
Disciples we find the Eunuch, the Jayler, and others baptized, and no Eldership
consulted. Christ delivered the Lords Supper where no Eldership was set up; and
in case, Act. 2.42. be understood of the Lords Supper, (as is generally
conceived) there can be no contradiction; seeing that it is not imaginable that
as yet that order was established with them.

If any shall object,

To this I answer, to the place appointed for it; Better that Saul and Vzziah
had let sacrifice alone, then any to whom it did not appertain, should have
undertaken it. This therefore with me is not cogent, unless it be confessed,
that there is no precept respective to such jurisdiction, when there is a
command for administration. I never saw sufficient reason given, that a man
should break an express rule given in Command from God, rather then omit a
duty of mere positive institution: Jeroboam must rather have no sacrifice then
that Dan or Bethel should be the place for it: And in case such necessity may
dspense with irregularities, why may we not on the other hand be irregular? and
in such necessary want of a full and complete order, the Minister who is one,
and the first in the number of such an Eldership, to take upon him the whole
work, rather then on the one hand the administration should wholly cease, or on
the other hand promiscuously dispensed, where there can be no possible benefit
received. To this I confess, I was for some time much inclined, till that upon
further examination and debate, reason enforced me to conclude, that the
Minister by Divine appointment is authoritatively himself vested in power for
admission or denial. And if I be driven out of this, and all these arguments
here laid down fully satisfied, I shall rather believe that the Minister who is
one party in the power pleaded for, as before, may rather act alone in such
necessity, then either the authority it self be wholly laid aside, or
Sacraments totally discontinued.



Paul Ordained Timothy by laying on of hands, but not alone, but as associated
in a Presbytery, his hands were laid upon him, 2 Timothy 1.6. and the hands of the
Presbytery were laid upon him, 1 Timothy 4.4. He ordered the incestuous
Corinthians excommunication; but this he did not alone, but with the
Church Officers, 1 Cor. 5. And if the Apostles Office had virtually all in it,
yet it may be questioned whether it were so with Philip, unless we can make it
good (which is by few believed) that he was Philip the Apostle.

Sixthly, That which has neither any law in Scripture for it,

7thly, If those must be kept back from the Sacrament in a prudential Ergo.

Eighthly, The detaining of that from, or denial of it to any, would be his
present livelihood and comfort; is indeed a penalty or juridick censure; as to
sequester a man from his house and Lands, to disfranchise a man of his Trade,
etc. But for a Parent, a Nurse or Physician, to order diet as most for health,
and to withdraw some food when digestion will not bear it, and it evidently
appears to be of danger, is an act of prudence, and no censure; and so a
Minister is considered in the, administration of Word and Sacraments.

Matthew. 9. Romans 14. is left to prudence, and not to the exercise of any
juridick power: Ergo.

Israel, to put out of the Camp every leper, and every one that has an issue,
or is defiled by the dead, Numb. 5.1, 2. or else it must be such as is deduced
by fair consequence from the nature and use of the Sacrament, or preparation to
it, or benefit received by it; That there is no Ordinance in such plain, full
words, needs not to be doubted; In all that enquiry into this so much
controverted business, it would have been long since produced. In case it be
deduced from any such consequence as has been spoken, it will hardly be made
good to be an instituted Law, or constituted Ordinance. Mr. Firmin has well
excepted against the proof of institutions by syllogismes, though to his great
disadvantage, in that dispute of a Church Covenant. Where there is an Ordinance
in power, (as there was for exclusion from the Passover) proof may be made up
by consequence for the latitude to discern who those be that are within the
verge of it, and concerned in it. But consequences will hardly prove the
enacting, and instituting of it: I shall be willing to gratify Mr. Tombs in
this, that parity of reason will set up no institution. A good cause is
wronged, when Ordinances of this nature are pretended, and cannot be produced;
and on the other hand, when a Ministerial prudence in the Stewards of Christ
is undervalued, which might supply it. Let it be granted, that there is no
Ordinance to debar an unexcommunicated man from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, yet a promiscuous admission will not follow; when the end and use of
the Sacrament is considered, it will appear to them that have the care and
charge about it, that some are not in a present aptitude for it. There is
command for the preaching of the Word in a way to edification, 1 Cor. 143, 12.
yet the particular way of application suitable to men's capacities, so as to
give milk to babes and children, and strong meat to those of growth, that have
their senses exercised, to discern between good and evil, is not done by any
virtue of any specific particular institution, but the Ministers prudence:
Which prudence was exercised by Paul, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Heb. 5.12. by Christ
himself, Joh. 16 12. There is no Ordinance for admission to, or exclusion from
private Fasts, or punctual direction, who are to be called, and received, or
who past by; yet our Savior Christ from the high nature of the duty, concludes
that it is not for novices in the faith. And as it is a point of prudence, not
to put a piece of new cloth in an old garment, (unwrought cloth some
understand) there will be a double inconvenience, the weakness of the one will
not bear the strength of the other, and so the rent that was before will be
made greater, and the whole garment become uncomely and unsuitable: nor yet to
put new wine (which is windy, and working) into old bottles, the weakness of
such a vessel being not able to bear it: so neither had it been a point of
prudence in our Savior Christ, to have put such an austere discipline upon the
necks of his newly entered disciples.

Matthew. 7.6. vindicated.
If any shall object that Text, Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto
dogs, neither cast ye pearls before swine, as I know it is produced as an
Ordinance for the withholding of this Sacrament from those that are ignorant,
and scandalous; I shall desire the Reader, for answer, to take it into
consideration, whether it be not more agreeable to the Text, to make it an
exhortation to an holy prudential circumspection in the dispensation of holy
things in general, (whether in a private, or a public way) then to make it a
distinct peculiar Ordinance about any one piece or part of worship. Making it a
peculiar Ordinance, we shall run our selves upon inextricable difficulties: Our
Savior laying it down in an indefinite way, All whatsoever that is holy, must
there be understood; and pearls, and holy things are the same, one being
exegetical of the other; holy things excelling other things, as far as pearls
excel acorns. And by dogs and swine, both which were unclean in the Law, we
must understand all that Scripture comprehends under those names; they are both
put for one, 2 Pet. 1.21. and so the result of all is, that no person in
visible uncleanness must taste of any thing that is holy. From which it
follows, that as Christ thought it not fit at that present to gratify a
Heathen with a miracle, when he said, It is not meet to take the childrens
bread, and cast it unto dogs, Matthew. 15.26. So it will at no time be meet, or
lawful to preach the Gospel to any heathen, or impenitent and unclean
Christian, they being no other then dogs or swine, and the Gospel the most
precious of holy pearls; but understanding it as an exhortation to Christian
prudence, and observing the reason added, lest they trample them under feet,
and turn again and rent you, these absurdities and snares will be avoided; and
the result of all will be only this, that the holy things of God, and rich
Gospel-pearles, are not to be communicated, where there is no possible
expectation of doing good: But all the issue of it will evidently be danger to
him that does impart them, and all scorn and contempt of the holy things
themselve; which was the Apostles way of dealing, when the Jews were filled
with envy, contradicting and blaspheming, Act. 13. and is frequently given in
counsel by the Wise man, Rebuke not a scornor, lest he hate thee: He that
rebukes a sconer, gets to himself a blot, Prove. 9.7. And the words being
thus understood, though the Sacrament be not solely intended, yet it is not
wholly excluded, being of the number of those holy things, about which there
should be all Christian prudence.

That Text also, 1 Cor. 5.11. is produced by some, 1 Cor. 5.11. vindicated.
as holding out an Ordinance for suspension from the Lords Supper, But now I
have written unto you, not to keep company. If any man that is called a
brother, be a fornicator, or covetous or an idolater, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one no not to eat. But it is more
then strange, that when the Apostle speaks not at all of the Lords Supper in
that Chapter, that he should in those words (in such a sort delivered) make an
Ordinance about it. And it is clear in the Text, that the Apostle gives
direction about the common course of our life, to shun all voluntary and free
converse, out of choice for that end which he specifies, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. And if
any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed. I will not stand to dispute any consequence
that may be drawn from civil commerce to that which is religious, seeing (as I
have said) consequences will not bear any institution, or new setting up of
Ordinances; and here I know there can be none at all, seeing this which the
Apostle forbids, or rather from which he disswades, is in our own choice, where
we may forbear; and that at the Lords Table is of necessity, where we must
obey; we are not to forbear our duty, though another that should be kept back
does obtrude himself. If those, Numb. 9. which were defiled by a dead body, had
come in their uncleanness unto the Passover, as those of Issachar and Zebulun
did, 2 Chr. 7.30. others for their sakes should not have kept absent. Neither
of these Texts therefore hold forth an Ordinance, but both of them Christian
prudence: one of them respecting things civil, the other that which is sacred
and religious. Thus I suppose that argument is taken off which is drawn from a
supposition, that admission to the Sacrament is an act of jurisdiction, in
which I have been large, seeing I well know that many are of a different
judgment. If any can produce reasons of more strength on the other hand, I
shall be ready to yield. In the mean space these with me are cogent, and force
me to conclude, That this in question is an act prudentiall, not juridicall.

Inconveniences objected against the sole power of the Minister.
As for the Objections that are brought from the inconveninces following from a
Ministers sole and single power in this action;

1. That before mentioned, that to put the Minister into any







5. It is objected, it is like this way to go ill oftentimes with

It is further said, that this is to assume a power without any

To this I answer, None that would take this power from the Minister, can own
this objection: It is of equal force against any other hand. Let them show
where any other is set up for it, and we will presently yield it. Those only
that are for promiscuous administration, can with any pretended color in this
way object it: and to these I suppose enough has been spoken, that it is a
necessary result from that power that is given for administration of this
Ordinance: All Ordinances must be so dispensed, that they may profit; where
profit cannot follow, there is to be no dispensation.

Allegations for the power of the people taken into consideration.
As to the claim of those of the Congregational way before mentioned the former
failing, this falls with it: They both agree that it is an act of jurisdiction,
in which one party will have all to vote, the other only the Eldership. But
when it appears that it is an act of prudence, and not of juridick censure,
either of both are at loss for their interest. If these have power by their
vote to let in, and keep from the Sacraments, it is either as dispensers of
these Mysteries, or by virtue of a juridick power of rule and government vested
in them. That it is not as dispensers, themselves will acknowledge, for they
cannot in a joint way thus administer: neither can it be by virtue of any
juridick power of rule and government. In case it were granted, if all are in
place of rule, where then are those that are ruled, and under government? If
every member be an eye, where is the foot? The Apostle salutes the Saints, and
those that rule over them, Heb. 13.24. Here are no Saints but what are Rulers:
Obey them that are over you in the Lord, says the Apostle: these must obey one
another. If these thus govern, and this be an act of their government, then no
man must be admitted to the Supper, but together with it he must be vested in
Church Power, and rule; None must be a member, unless he be a Commander:
Christ's Army must have all leaders, no followers; all Commanders, no common
Soldiers: by this means either worthy Communicants must be shut out, or men
unfit for rule promoted, seeing every godly man that has the spirit of
sanctity, has not presently a spirit of rule. Hence will follow, that
confusion by the experience of many found, and complained of by Mr. Blackwood,
Mr. Firmin and others, not to be suspected of partiality; And when they argue
from their power in excommunication, to their power in barring from this
Ordinance, as the antecedent is to be denied, so the consequent is false. All
the faithful are not to decree excommunication: The meeting together
mentioned, 1 Cor. 5.4. was not of members, but officers, there being more
Congregations then one in Corinth, as is justly presumed, and in some Churches
is undenyably proved; and therefore their members could not meet about any act
of government, but officers only. So also the consequence is false, and though
excommunication were in their power, yet the power of administration of
Sacraments, and men's admission may be in an other hand, as a prudential act.
And so every part of the argument is found faulty. It is true that
excommunication being a juridical suspension from all Church Communion, and
Participation in Church Priviledges, comprizes in it suspension from the Lords
Table, as he that is cast out of the house, is no more ordered for his diet in
the house, but kept from it. Yet there may be a non-administration by the
Minister where there is not any such Church-censure. A Christian in his
minority (suppose of the age of ten, or twelve years) is not upon the account
of his minority to be excommunicated, yet he is not of that age, as to be
admitted to the Lords Supper. And whereas it is said, that it is their duty to
avoid such in their converse, that are thus denied; I answer, that were it
granted to be a Church-censure formally executed, Mr. Rutherford has
sufficiently answered, that their duty to avoid them under censure, is no
argument that they are to have an hand in the censure: But being denied to be
any formal censure of the Church, there needs no further answer, and they are
to avoid them no further then the manifestation of their condition, according
to Scripture-grounds, gives them occasion: So they must avoid children, youth
and all others that are not competently instructed in Gospel-wayes, and
(according to the principles of many of them) all those that are not highly
versed in Christian Mysteries. And as for crimes that carry the name of
scandal, the Minister is in a public way to debar none, but upon known
manifest evidences openly seen; of which any may be competent witnesses. And in
case they suffer wrong by the Ministers imprudence or otherwise, they are not
to suffer farther by other men's avoiding their society, and communion. The
community of the faithful therefore having no power of juridick censure, they
have no color of claim to it under any such a notion. And being no formal
censure, Elderships that have that power, are not formally qua rulers vested in
it. It therefore remains, that it is an act of prudence in the dispenser, and
no act of jurisdiction in them that have right of censure, or inflicting of
penalty.

Some cautions are here needful for a right understanding and to avoid mistakes
in that which has been delivered. Cautions to be observed in these proceedings.


1. This which has been spoken, must not any way be understood to be
prejudicial to Church government, or the power of Church censure. For though
Governors are not to be consulted before these seals be dispensed, yet
government still stands in due power notwithstanding; of this we have all cause
to be tender, seeing whilst some dispute in what hand to place it, others take
their advantage quite to abolish it: But that Scripture speaks of a Government
distinct from that which is in the hands of civil powers, is a truth that
carries such evidence, that it can with no color of truth be opposed. As the
Romans divided that state into Senatum populumque Romanum, implying that some
were in power of Governing, and others were to yield subjection; the Spirit of
God himself makes like division of the state of Israel into Elders and people,
Ruth. 4.9. So the Apostle to the Hebr. in like sort distinguishes Christians:
Salute the Saints and those that rule over you, Hebr. 13.24. Some were without
any power for rule, and these are styled Saints without any further addition;
others are in power for Government, and these have their just title given them.
The same title that is given to Cyrenius in Syria, to Pilate in Judea, Luke
2.2. Luke 3.1. is given by the Apostle to these here mentioned. A military or
political word (says one) which is spoken of a public person who is possessed
of power either in Common Wealth, or Army. And if those other texts of the
Apostle be consulted, Hebr. 13.17. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Timothy 5.19. 2 Cor. 2.6. and
5.12, 13. 1 These. 5.12. (to mention no more) so much will easily be found in
them, that speaks a government within the Church it self, not going out of its
own limits. Whether some texts ordinarily produced hold out so large an
enumeration, as is by some bottomed upon them, may happily be disputed; but
that there should not so much as any government at all be spoken to cannot be
imagined: which thing in reason is also plain, 1. The Church is a society, a
visible Kingdom, an incorporation, a body, and when all of these have their
laws, governors, censures, punishments, it cannot be thought that this
society should herein so far differ, and be so far inferior to all other
societies, as to be wholly destitute: when all others enjoy government,
governors, for their strength. defense and more complete being, the Church
alone shall be like that City which the Wise man speaks of, broken down, and
without walls, Prove. 25.28. 2. The Church consists of men, as do other
societies subject to failings, yea, to enormities, and exorbitances in
judgment and practice. There has no age past in which the Church has not had
her schisms, errors, and scandals. No society or body politic is so like to
run upon miscarriages, seeing the laws to which Christ ties, are so averse to
our natures, when we can bear others; we are apt to say, we will break these
bonds, and cast them away from us. Satan envies no other society, or bond of
men, as he does the society, or bond of Christians. His kingdom will consist
together with all other states and kingdoms; they may rule, and he rule
likewise; only this of Christ's Kingdom, is wholly averse to Satan's; and
militates against it, for the ruin of it. 3. The Church from the beginning
has exercised this power within it self, when all other powers were adverse,
and contrary to it. How long was it before the Church had a Christian
Magistrate, and lay under the persecution of heathen states? in all which time
a discipline was yet kept up. If the Church had no such power, how could it
then exercise it? 4. The Churches that have been remiss in their improvement
of this power, have had their check from Christ himself in glory. He manifests
his displeasure from heaven against the Church of Pergamos, that they had those
that held the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans; and
against the Church of Thyatira, because they suffered Jesabel to teach and
seduce his servants, Rev. 2.14, 15, 20. The censure that lies upon the Kings of
Judah upon neglect of reformation in their time, argues that they were in
power for it. So the censure of these Churches upon like account argues their
power in like manner. Even those that plead most for freedom of conscience,
and liberty in religion, with all impunity from the civil power, yet confess
from these and like texts, a power within the Church it self for censure of
delinquencies. To all this some are ready to subscribe (as being not able to
gainsay the clear Scripture evidence of a power Ecclesiastical) and confess,
that it was so in those times, but now they contend that the case is
otherwise. Providence has ordered a change of things, and all is swallowed up
in the hand of him that is chief in power, since the time that the Church has
enjoyed Kings for her nursing fathers, and Queens for her nursing mothers, not
barely accusing them of error that dissent in opinion, but charging them to
resemble those sons of Belial, that upon the Israelites institution of
Kingship, were ungratefully asking this question, How shall this man save us? 1 Samuel 10.27. Making good their assertion of a change of this nature by this
similitude, As in the first Church among the Jews whilst they were in a
wandering condition, as their need was greater, so Gods personal providence, and
guidance of them was more express, and apparent, and therefore whilst they
were in this Theocraty, their government was not to be managed by any settled
universal authority, besides that of God himself, or any one who took not in
all weighty things immediate direction from him, until such time as being
thoroughly settled in peace, and security from their enemies he might make his
recesse, and permit and appoint to them a King of their own Nation; So in the
first founding of the Christian Church during the time of their persecution, as
their weakness required, were in a Theocraty too, guided by the express
direction of our Savior himself given to the Apostles during the time of those
forty days that he was conversant with them upon earth; but now after the
time that God has perfected the time of the Churches deliverance, and free
establishment in peace, and rest from all about her, and the Prophecy is
fulfilled by appointing Kings her nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing
mothers, and having sons to be set as Princes in all Lands, so that now under
Constantine the uproomes, and wandering Tabernacles, (as formerly under Solomon)
are converted into stately temples, for men now to think of their running into
their Wilderness, and persecuted condition, by entertaining those temporary
forms which unto that condition were most fit, does import both ingratitude and
murmur against God, and imprudence toward themselves. Thus far this
similitude. But those of this opinion I doubt would take ill that free dealing
toward themselves, which they use toward others, and that upon their casting
off all Ecclesiastical government, under the notion of temporary forms, we
should apply that speech of the Lord himself to Samuel, concerning the people
of Israel upon their resolution to make a change in government, 1 Samuel 8.7.
They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign
over them. And to make the dissimilitude in this simile further apparent, it
should I suppose be taken into consideration, that when God was pleased first
to permit, and then appoint a King over Israel, that the former fabric of
Government written in the Law was not taken down, but the whole Levitical order
still stood, as to all purposes prescribed of God; the change was no more, nor
further but in him that ruled in chief. Instead of one raised by an immediate
hand of God, as their exigence required, they now had one after the manner of
other Nations, of constant standing. And God forbid that we should murmur, that
the Church has her sons for Princes, and that those that rule over us, serve
the Lord Jesus with us. But we think that these servants of Christ thus raised
in honor, should see that what Christ has set up should be aright managed,
and that they should have that inspection, as the Kings of Judah had, to
rectify what they find out of order, but not to pull down any thing that Jesus
Christ had raised up, no more then the praiseworthy Kings of Judah, did that
which Moses had prescribed; especially seeing the Lord Christ, even in the
space of those forty days before mentioned, asserting his pleni-potentiary
power that he had received from his Father, and giving power to his Church,
declares it to be of that lasting tenure, to continue to the end of the world,
Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. And because these words which import this continuance,
are variously interpreted, and some will understand them with limit to the end
of the Apostles age, seeing the age of a man is often set out by the word
seculum, the sports at Rome which were seen once in man's age, were called ludi
seculares, and so we have this text against us. But against this interpretation
let the Reader observe, 1. The frequent use of the phrase, (...), to the end of
the world by this Evangelist, chap. 13.39. The harvest is the end of the world,
ver. 40. So shall it be in the end of this world, ver. 49. So shall it be in
the end of the world; and, Matt. 24.3. Tell as when shall these things be, what
shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? none of all which
can be understood of the end of one, but of all ages. 2. Let the context there
be considered; Christ there promises his presence in the work of discipling all
Nations, but that was not the work of one age only, many ages are past over,
and yet many Nations are not discipled. His presence is promised in the Word
and Sacraments, which must have their continuance till Christ's second coming, 1
Cor. 11.26. The Apostles words, Heb. 9.26. may well serve for a comment on
these words of our Savior; the alone place (as Gomarus notes) where this
phrase is used, excepting the texts out of Matthew mentioned: But now once in
the end of the world he has appeared, to put away sin by the Sacrifice of
himself. There are two ages of the world, one determining upon Christ's
suffering, resurrection, and ascension; the other commencing at that time, and
concluding at the end of all time; and therefore the space betwixt Christ's
first and second coming is ordinarily called the last days. Christ dyed at
the consummation of the first, and the promise of his presence is made till the
consummation of the second; and the power given and received, is no otherwise
temporary.

Ruling Elders not hereby prejudiced, Various opinions concerning them.
concerning whom there is in the Church so hot dispute. Some own no such power,
but make it to be a new device not heard of before this last age. Others plead
a divine right for it, and produce Scriptures that appear to speak very fair
that way, though they meet with very shrewd objections. A third not insisting
upon any such formal institution, being jealous that the texts held forth will
scarce bear it out, yet concluding that the whole body of the faithful have
their interest in government (Church Government being neither Monarchical, nor
purely Aristocratical, but mixed with a Democraty) they bring in ruling Elders,
not as officers set up by any immediate institution, but as representers of the
people. So that as Knights appear in Parliament, not in their own names (as the
Peers of the realm heretofore have done) but in the name of the respective
Counties, and Burgesses in the name of their respective Corporations; so ruling
Elders chosen by the vote of the people, have no other power, but what they
exercise in the name and right of those that set them up. Pastors have their
power primitively vested in their own persons by immediate appointment of
Christ Jesus. These have power by way of delegation from them that authorize
and appoint them; others yet are not at all displeased with this power, but
upon neither of the former grounds, but as a prudential course for the more
easy and orderly regulating of the affairs of the Church, in case either the
chief Magistrate shall set them up, or the Church it self by his appointment,
allowance or connivance: Asserting a liberty in the chief Magistrate, or Church
for this purpose, That as in the Jewish Sanedrim, there were of the people
appointed to assist the Priests, both in civil, and sacred affairs, so when
nothing to the contrary appears in New Testament-times it may be still so
provided. As the Church might set up some to determine Controversies, and
prevent lawsuits, 1 Cor. 6.4. and might appoint a brother to be joined with
Apostles, to receive and disburse the Churches Alms, 2 Cor. 8.9, 10. And the
Church of Antioch might delegate some to be present at the debate, and
determination of the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem in a case then
controverted, Act. 15.2. so it is not unlawful with prudent limits to appoint
some that may be assistant to carry on Church Government. I shall not determine
on what bottom it is safest to fix them; I only say, that I do not see how
the Church can well want them. And though Mr. Mede (whom some adore as their
oracle for antiquity, Apparet ex his quae diximus in munere adsessorum, qui
nonnullis in locis in usu sunt (quos distinctionis causa temporarios aut laicos
praesbyteros appellare possumus) nihil esse quod possit reprehendi. Non deesse
in pia antiquitate exempla, quae si non plane conveniant, certe ad hunc morem
accedunt. Quae urbs, si non prima (...), certe praecipuos ejus defensores
edid^t.
and all deservedly magnify) calls it a new device, yet Grotius of no less
esteem, speaks with more favor, Imper. Summar. potestat. circa Sacra. Cap. 11.
After a large discourse about them, He says, that it appears by that which we
have said, that in the office of Assessors, which are in use in some places
(whom for distinction sake we may call temporary, or lay Elders) there is
nothing that may be blamed. Affirming further, that there is not wanting in
Sacred Antiquity examples which come very near to this custom, though not
wholly up to it. Neither does he make Geneva, with some others, the first
Authors, but only the chief defenders of this order, instancing in the benefit
that may hence arise both respective to the civil Magistrate, and Church
Pastors. The second of these with me is very rational, and being fixed upon that
bottom, though those exceptions hold that are usually taken against those
texts, on which their Divine authority is usually built; yet the order may still
stand, and those negative arguments which are brought against them, from the
Apostles inscription of his Epistle to the Philippians directed to Bishops, and
Deacons without mention of ruling Elders, as also from the distinct
qualifications required in Bishops and Deacons with their wives and families,
when as to these Elders there is all silence, may be more easily answered in
case it appear that these had not any constant standing in this work. I only
here say that on what bottom soever they stand, this which I have said can
nothing prejudice them.

3. Neither must this exempt admission to, or exclusion from Not to be wholly
exempted from all cogn^zance of Church Power.
though those in juridick place be not aforehand consulted or taken into
association in it. For though it be left solely to Pastors to discern those to
whom they may distribute these Elements, as it is to divide the Word, and give
every one his portion, yet upon mal-administration they may be called to
question. If pro imperio they shall keep back those that are duly qualified, or
admit such that evidently according to Church-determination should be denied;
they are liable to censure, as they are for corruption, or imprudence in
doctrine. And therefore it was well provided, Canon 27. That he that shall
repel any from the Sacrament, upon complaint, or being required by the Ordinary
shall signify the cause to him, and therein obey his direction. Presupposing
Church power to be vested in him (who for the most part was a mere lay person,
which might cause ruling Elders to stand more right in the eyes of some
persons) this was well determined. Should Pastors be set up for this work,
without any appeal or control, it migbt then indeed be spoken to as a
grievance.

A Ministers prudence to take in assistants.
and to take in to himself, if they may be had, assistants in this work;
especially to judge of men as to their conversations, and to be witnesses of
their promises and engagements in case admonition be needful for amendment and
reformation. More eyes see more then one, and reason it self suggests the
convenience of all helps to be taken in to lighten the burden. Paul tells
Timothy of the profession that he had made before many witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12.
as a Motive to be constant. An engagement made before witnesses, carries
authority with it, and possesses with shame upon violation of it. Thus the
Pastor also shall in a great part avoid that charge of partiality, that
notwithstanding all circumspection he is like to suffer. If any object that
this is to set up officers pro arbitrio, which will make way for the
introduction of any upon like grounds of supposed prudence; I answer, this were
somewhat if he should make over his power from himself by delegation, being
himself in office; But discharging his duty in his own person, he may
doubtless take in all useful helps. Paul may make use of Tertius to write
Epistles to Churches, and yet not make him an Apostle; Aaron and Hur may stay
up Moses his hands, and yet not usurp Moses his place.

Where an Eldership is erected to embrace them as helpers.
5. Where an Eldership is erected, then gladly to embrace them as helpers in the
work. Happily they may think their power weakened, and their right denied in
case they join not in it. If the Pastor be of another judgment, it is not yet
his prudence to raise stirs about it. If others come in as assistant to carry
on what he might otherwise do alone, he has small cause of grievance; it
favors too much of arrogance, and of the spirit of such as love pre-eminence
to affect to be alone, though it is ordinarily most seen in resolving, and
attempting to overrule all where a man confesses himself to be no more then in
association with others. And for those that refuse to come where an Eldership
sits, it argues too sullen an humor. Were I an inhabitant in London or like
place, I should take my self to be bound to pass through all the Elderships
there, rather then hold out of Communion.

6. In making scrutiny into the knowledge of them that offer To proceed with
all gentleness in trial of men's knowledge.
especially toward such as have been of a more mean education; many times such
know that which they can scarce express, and strength of affection is often
seen in plain hearts without any great light. Let these be helped in their
words, and let speech be to them in words fitted to their capacity. Let not a
question be put of any thing save that which is needful to be known; when it
appears that the creation is known, and particularly man's estate by creation in
the image of God, and his fall by sin, and redemption through Christ; so that
the party can distinguish the Persons in the Trinity, to give an account which
of them is the Savior of the world, that each person is God, the second God,
and man in assuming our nature; and withal able to give an account of the
death of Christ in satisfaction for sin, our way of interest by believing, the
necessity of repentance and a new life, as qualifications of those that shall
be saved: knowing the outward signs in the Sacrament, and in some competent
measure their signification and use; Such may be exhorted with tenderness to
grow in knowledge, but not to be kept back as ignorant ones.

7. Neither is a Minister upon whisper of any scandal, Not to refuse but upon
known crimes. Nos a Communione quemquam prohibere non possumus nisi aut sponte
confessum aut in aliquo judicio Ecclesiatico vel seculari nominatum atque
convictum
to set Suarez: But upon evidence of knowledge of a way in flagitious practices
known to him, and scarce doubted by any. That of Austin is famous, We can
forbid none Communion, unless he voluntarily make confession, and be called
and convicted in some Court, either Ecclesiastical or Civil. I know this is
produced by some, to prove that a single Minister may not in any case withhold
the Sacrament from any person. But this is a great mistake, it only proves,
that upon any particular charge it cannot be done without due proof, and proof
cannot be made without power of judicature, either Civil or Ecclesiastical.
Aquinas quotes this of Austin, Sum. 13. quaest. 80. art. 6. and yet he never
doubted of the sole power of the Pastor in it. It plainly thence appears, that
there were both Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts, then appointed to take
cognizance of crimes, which some would make to be inconsistent; And that
Ministers did take occasion upon convictions there, to deny Communion. It does
no more prove that a Minister has no such power, otherwise in an
Ecclesiastical Consistory, then it proves that he has no power without
strength of a secular Judicatory. It indeed proves that which it is brought to
overthrow, which is the Ministers single power: The Minister makes equal
advantage in either Court in his prudentiall proceedings in administration of
the Sacrament.

When a Minister cannot do what he would, he must do what he is able.
without evident hazard of the utter disturbance of the peace of his place, he
is scarce to run the hazard; when he cannot do the good that he would, he must
do the good that he can; he is to do so much the more in public warning of the
sin, and the danger, as he can do the less in authoritative denial, and
withholding his hand from them. If it might appear to me that God has vested
an Eldership, and no other in that trust, I think it were scarce safe to put a
man's self without them upon administration, last it should be like to that of
Saul, when he forced himself to offer a burnt-offering, because Samuel came not
in the appointed time: But no such thing appearing in Scripture, nor any
sufficient reason evincing it, I take it to be in the Ministers hands so to
dispense it, as the Church may receive most of edification by it. And when he
is so overruled that he cannot act as he would, he must act as he can. A
Steward set over the house, and a Commander or Leader in any Army is sometimes
put upon such necessities. Suarez is as zealous as any other against the
delivery of the Sacrament to those that are unworthy of it, yet bounds it with
this caution, If the Minister may do it without inconvenience; And putting the
objection, That not to give the Sacrament to an unworthy person is a negative
precept, that binds ad semper, to all times, and therefore never to be done. He
answers that this Precept is not simply Negative, but is to be reduced to an
Affirmative, which is prudently and faithfully to dispense this Sacrament,
which being formally taken is always to be observed, as often as this
Sacrament is administered, and so it comes to pass that if it may be, it is to
be denied to those that are unworthy, not that it is always to be denied upon
any inconvenience whatsoever.

Nor let any charge me as being too indulgent to such men, seeing none that I
know of any party is of another mind. They that stand for Elderships, will have
this done by the Minister, when the Eldership overrules it. And those of the
Congregrational way, when the Congregation in the majority, votes for it. And
may not the Minister do the same thing when he sees that he is put upon like or
greater necessity in it? The Churches edification in the first place should be
considered, but the peace of the Church by no means neglected; always
provided, that unworthy ends of self-advantage, pusillanimity, base compliances
(which may be as soon seen in the majority of a multitude, as in one single
person) do not overruled it, and may be our temptation in dispensation of the
Word, as well as the Sacrament, and with all care, courage, study, prayer, to
be avoided; That the Apostles severe charge, 1 Timothy 5.21. may be
conscienciously heeded, Doing nothing by partiality.

SECT. XVII. A Corollary drawn from former doctrines.
FRom these two observations above mentioned, That God is the author,
Sacraments are to be received from that hand that God has assigned.
and The Covenant people of God the subject of the Sacraments, this follows by
way of Corollary, that The people of God are therefore to receive them from
that hand, that God is pleased to appoint to administer and dispense them to
them. If God please to vouchsafe a gift, he is worthy to appoint the hand for
conveyance. This might have been the employment of Angels in glory, whom he
makes ministering Spirits, and to whose charge he commits his servants; but he
has chosen another way communicating it by man to the sons of men; honoring
men so far as to entrust them with these Mysteries, whereby he, 1. makes
trial of their faithfulness, whom he thus entrusts in so noble an employment,
as the dispensation of his Covenant, and seal, his Word and Sacraments. 2. He
makes known his power, setting up weak man in his cause to oppose, and get the
upper hand over Satan, and the world; choosing the weak things of this world to
confound the mighty. 3. He provides for his own glory, which would have been
endangered, in case Angels had been employed in this Ambassy; when an Angel was
sent to John, he was ready to forget himself, in his ecstasy to worship the
Angel, Revel. 19.10.22.9. In case the Treasure were in heavenly vessels, the
glory would be of the vessel, and not of God; we should have conceived so much
glory there, that we should looked qo higher. 4. He condescends to our
infirmity, that are not able to bear divine apparitions. This man has known by
experience, Judge. 13.22. Luke 2.9. and God himself has considered, Deuteronomy.
18.16, 17.5. He thereby makes trial of our humility, and obedience, whether we
will submit to such which he sets up, though no other motive but his
appointment appears in it: yet this is not handed over to us promiscuously by
all, or any of the sons of men, but those that he has chosen from among men in
things appertaining to God, Heb. 5.1. The Apostle lets us know that all are not
Apostles, all are not Prophets, all are not teachers, all are not workers of
miracles, 1 Cor. 12.29. so we may conclude all are not stewards, every
household servant is not set over the household to give meat in due season. The
dispensation of Sacraments is a part of the Ministerial function. Arguments
evincing it.
This is a work in Gospel times proper to the Ministers of Christ, as by
several Arguments may be made to appear. 1. They that were sent out to convert
and instruct, were in commission alone to baptize, Matthew. 28.19. But the
Ministers of Christ are sent out to convert and instruct; they only are
spiritual Fathers, Teachers, etc. Therefore this is their business, as before
this commission it was by divine warranty practiced by John Baptist, and
afterward according to the commission through the Acts of the Apostles. 2. the
Supper of the Lord is a setting forth of the death of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.26. and
therefore alone their business in a public way who are to preach Christ
crucified, 1. Cor. 1.23. 3. They are the stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1
Cor. 4.1. These are of his Mysteries, the outward elements as they hold out,
and seal Gospel-promises unto us. 4. They are set over the household of God, to
give them their meat in due season, having in charge to feed the Flock of God,
which is among them, 1 Pet. 5.2. 5. Sacraments are a visible Word, which never
can profit, unless they be opened, and the Mystery be interpreted. 6. They are
seals of the Gospel Covenant, and instituted appendants to it, and therefore
to be dispensed by Gospel Ministers, that are in commission to preach the
Gospel. And so Mr. Tombs his quibble is against him. Though (says he) the
title of the Minister of the Gospel be used in the New Testament, yet the title
of the Ministers of the Sacrament is a made title, Praecurs. page 82.
Sacraments are comprised in the Gospel, and Ministers of the Gospel comprizes
Ministers of the Sacraments. 7. All ages of the Church give in their vote with
it, no Church regularly giving this power to any other; Whether Ministerial
dispensation be of the essence of Sacraments?
Yet I would have this understood with this caution, that I do not so make it
of the essence of Sacraments in general, that no Sacrament can have any being,
but in the hand of a public Minister, seeing, for ought we can read, neither
Circumcision, nor the Paschal Lamb were committed to the hands of men in
Ministerial function. Circumcision was given in charge to the parent, and
whether his own hand, or any others should be employed in it, it is not
mentioned. They might (for ought we read) make use of those that were most
dextrous in it. And for the Paschal Lamb, Rivet among the Calvinists, and
Gerard among the Lutherans deny, that it was to be brought to the Prist to
offer; and though both were Sacraments, (as may be objected) instituted before
the Priesthood was settled, and while the first born were authorized for
public Ministerial acts, yet we do not then find it charged on the first born,
not yet afterward vested in the Priesthood; The negavit judged probable.
neither do I yet judge it to be so of the integrality of the Sacraments of the
New Testament, that it should be no manner of Sacrament, if it be not carried
on by the hand of a Minister, The matter and form being first instituted, the
Sacrament, is after put into a Ministers hand to dispense it. And I see not a
flat nullity of a Sacrament, Gospel order transgressed, when Sacraments are
othewise dispensed.
but a foul breach of Gospel Order, when that way is neglected. As David felt
to his grief, and was brought to confess a foul mis-prision, in the order of
Gods worship, when the Ark was carried on a Cart, and not on the Levites
shoulders, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. so it is when the Sacraments are delivered by any
other hand then a Ministers; yet the Ark (though carried as it ought not)
wheresoever it was, it was yet the Ark of God; so these ordinances (though
administered as they ought not) are yet still Sacraments, they are still divine
instituted ordinances, where the man is such that has his interest, by a free
Covenant grant; and the Ordinance is the seal appointed for ratification of
this Covenant, though conveyed by an unmeet hand, it is (I suppose) no mere
nullity, though a transgression. That of Mr. Hooker, Ecclesiastical Policy,
lib. 5. Sect. 62. is worth our observation: If any thing be herein amiss, the
harm which grows by violation of holy ordinances, must altogether rest where
the bond of such ordinances holds. And having showed how it is otherwise in
jurisdiction, he adds, Factum alterius alii nocere non debet. Baptism on the
other hand being a favor which it pleases God to bestow, a benefit of the
soul for us to receive it, and a Grace which they that deliver, are but as mere
vessels, either appointed by others, or offered on their own accord to this
service; of which two if they be, the one it is but their own honor, their own
offense to be the other, can it possibly stand with equity and right that the
faultiness of their presumption in giving Baptism, should be able to
prejudice us, who by taking Baptism have no way offended? We justly abominate
the opinion of Papists on the one hand, that make the intention of the Minister
to be of the essence of the Sacrament, so that if that be wanting, there is no
Sacrament, as also the opinion of Donatists of old, and Anabaptists of later
times on the other hand, that make the quality of the Minister likewise
essential; so that where he is defective in holiness and fidelity, there the
Sacrament must of necessity be wanting in its power; and efficacy. And these
opinions we reject as upon other accounts, so upon this that it brings
Christians into inextricable straits, how shall they reach the Ministers
intention, at the time that he is about this business; None knows (but he
that searches the heart) this thoughts at that time, and so no other knows
whether any more then common water has been applied, or commpn bread received.
How shall they know the Ministers goodness? how shall they know his graces?
Hypocrisy is spunne with a thread so fine, that another eye cannot discern.
And in case the Ministers goodness were but seeming goodness, then that which
we received were but seeming Sacraments. This opinion of the very essence of
Sacraments, depending on the lawfulness of the call of Ministers, puts them to
little less trouble. If a man will know whether he were ever baptized, he must
be put to it, to make enquiry whether his Baptist were lawfully ordained, being
happily dead before he is able to put this to the question. And this being the
Sacrament of his initiation, he may well question whether he stand actually and
orderly enrighted in any Church? privilege, or be in any orderly way any
Churchmember, in case this fail? Many things being done, are of force, and
stand firm, though he that did them deserves no praise. Though they do not
nullify a Sacrament, yet they break a Gospel rule, Factum valet, faciendum none
est, is an old maxim. And the more near men come to the place of the
Ministerial function, the more unquestionable is the validity of such
administratrions, when any assumes other parts of the Ministerial function, to
officiate in public in that way that the peoples esteem of him, is as of a
Minister called to this work; those that otherwise seem much to scruple, yet
then conclude, that as a Gospel promise is a promise, though from his mouth
whom God has not sent to preach the Gospel, so a Gospel Sacrament from his
hand, is a Sacrament. The call and the work, are not so inviolably joined, but
that the work is done, though unduly, by him that is not called to it; yet
though the validity of the work be asserted, the disorder must be opposed.
Entering upon Aarons work, and never called of God, as Aaron was; with Vzziah
officiating in that work, that appertains not to him; leaving scruples in the
thoughts of those to whom in this disorder they have administered these
ordinances. This the Church has never suffered, save only tha Papists and
Lutherans dispense with Baptism in case of necessity (putting so much weight
upon it, and placing such efficacy in it) which the Church of England also
suffered after the reformation till King James his days, and then (as appears
in the conference at Hampton Court) it was reformed. Dr. Abbot in his Lectures
read, while it stood in power, appeared publicly against it, and as I remember
(for the book is not in my hands) affirmed, that zealous Ministers then
generally did distaste, and decry it. The Midwife was usually employed in the
work as nearest at hand, to cast water upon the infant ready to dye in her
arms, though in no capacity of that function by reason of her sex; and though
the sex might have born it, she was never called to it. But they must first
make that good, that all perish without Baptism, or that the act of Baptism
assures us of salvation, before they can justify this practice, (Protestant
Writers with irrefragable arguments opposing it) produce as a dispensation from
God for the breach of an order by him set up; otherwise we shall conclude that
from the time of the said conference, it has justly been put into the hands of
the lawful Minister; and notwithstanding Mr. Tombs his quibble, it was upon
just grounds concluded by the late Assembly in their confession of faith,
Chapter 27. Sect. 4.

SECT. XVIII. A further Corollary from the former doctrine.
All that are interested in Sacraments must come up to the terms of the
Covenant.
IT further follows, that all those that interest themselves in Sacraments,
expecting benefit by Baptism, and comfort at the Lords Table; must come up to
the terms of the Covenant. They receive them as signs and badges of a people
in Covenant with God; They receive them as seals of the Covenant, God puts to
his seal, to be a God in Covenant: In their acception they engage as by seal to
be his people in Covenant. The obligation now is mutual, in case man fail on
his part, God is disobliged: If any tie be upon him, it is to inflict the just
merit of breach of Govenant upon them. I have spoken to the necessity that lies
upon the Ministers of Christ, to bring their people up to the terms and
Propositions of it, Treatise of the Covenant, chap. 20, 21. Here I speak to it
only as the interest in the Sacraments ties to it: And this obligation has
all force and strength in it. When God entered Covenant with man in his
integrity, upon condition of perfect and complete obedience, and gave him (as
we have heard) Sacraments for the ratification and confirmation of it; when man
failing in obedience, and falling short of the duty of the Covenant, those
Sacraments were of no avail; notwithstanding the tree of life man dyed, and
notwithstanding the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, man became brutish
in his own knowledge. It fares no better with those that are under a Covenant
of grace, and live and persist in breach of Covenant; we see the heavy curse
that God pronounces against them, Jer. 11.3, 4. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, Cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this Covenant, which I
commanded your Fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the Land of
Egypt, from the iron Furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to
all which I Command; so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God. And to
this Jeremy adds his Amen or So be it, O Lord; which assent of his, though it
may be referred to the Prophets duty in obedience of Gods Command, when he had
said to him, ver. 2, 3. Speak to the men of Judah, and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and say unto them, Thus says the Lord, Cursed be every man that
obeys not, etc. The Prophet in these words says, What thou have enjoined me I
will do it; and so Junius and Tremelius understand it; or to the Prpphets
earnest desire to have the promise fulfilled, which the Lord utters in the
close of his speech, ver. 5. That I may perform the oath which I have sworn
unto your fathers, to give them a Land flowing with milk and honey, as it is
this day. To which the Prophet answers, So, Lord, let it be, that this people
being careful to keep Covenant with thee, may still enjoy that land which thou
did by oath bind thy self to settle them in, as the last larger Annotations
understand it, or to Jeremies answer in the name of the people binding
themselves to obedience, as Diodati understands it; yet doubtless it also
comprizeth the Prophets acknowledgement of the equity that the curse should
fall on those that obey not the words of the Covenant. The Amen is of that
latitude, that it comprizeth the whole that goes before of the Prophets duty,
his desire, the peoples obligation, and the equity of the curse that lies upon
disobedience. As the Sacraments in Paradise could be no protection to man in
sin, so the Sacraments under the present Covenant (whether in the old
dispensation of it in the days of the Fathers, or new dispensation of it in
Gospel Times) can be no protection of those that lie in unbelief and
impenitence. Let not an unbeliever, let not an impenitent person think to find
shelter here, as the Jews did think to find in the Temple, and say, They are
delivered to do these abominations. Privilege of Sacraments can help
Christians no more, then birth-priviledge could the Jews, who are checked by
John Baptist for making it a plea to this purpose, and called to bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance, and amendment of life, Matthew. 3. I do not say that
unless you are assured, that you do believe to justification, and repent in
sincerity and unfeignednesse, that you must not come to the Lords Table. I have
declared my self to the contrary, but I say you must make it your business to
believe; your work to repent in truth and sincerity, or else you shall never
find here acceptance. The Covenant of works was for man's preservation in life,
and Adam could have help toward immortality in the tree of life no longer then
he made it his business to keep up to that which the Covenant required. The
Covenant of grace is for man's restitution to life, none under this Covenant can
find any help toward life in any Sacraments annexed to it, otherwise then in
keeping up faith and repentance, which are the terms and conditions of it.
Which way do thou expect life in the Sacrament, either of thy initiation, or
confirmation, either in Baptism, or the Lords Supper? is it in the Sacrament
it self? or is it in Christ that thou should seek and look after in the
Sacrament? If thou look for it from Sacraments, thou Idolizest them and
deceivest thy own soul. Bread and Wine never were, nor ever can be saviors:
Our Fathers ate Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead, Joh. 6. We may eat
bread at the Lords Table, and eternally dye. All Israel in the wilderness did
eat of Manna, and drank of the Rock which the Apostle calls Spiritual meat,
Spiritual drink, being Sacramentally such, yet with many of them God was not
well pleased, but they were overthrown in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.5. If thou
say thou look for life in Christ, I desire to know where thou find
that men in unbelief have life in Christ. The Apostle says, I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me; and presently adds, The life that I live in the flesh,
I live by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. And the same we may say of
repentance, Christ with his own mouth denounces death and destruction to the
impenitent, I tell you, Nay, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish,
Luke 13. Where he gives life he gives repentaace to life, Act. 11.18. I have
said that the Sacrament may be improved with the help of the Word toward
conversion; But if there be no such change already wrought in thy soul, nor any
such thing in thy endeavor, then this great Orinance is sadly profaned; thou
pretendest to Christ, when indeed thou treadest under foot the blood of Christ;
seemingly would have thy interest in his blood, and do become guilty of his
blood. Here Christ's death is set out, his sufferings for sin, called to
remembrance. Art not thou now affected with delight in his death when thou art
affected with delight in thy sin? when thou see a man murdered and sportest
with the murderers, with those whom thou know to have had the alone hand in
the murder, how then do not thou be come an accessory? This is the case of
the man that comes to the Sacrament, and will keep his sin. He looks not upon
Christ Sacramentally broke to the breaking of his heart, but he looks upon him
to his hearts rejoicing. Look upon all that has been said of the danger of
unworthy receiving, by all that have written practically upon this subject; all
is thy danger that art in sin, and resolvest not to relinquish: thou art
admitted into the Church by Baptism, and upon that account art of that number,
and reckonest thy self among those that are called Christians, and here perhaps
thou have hopes, highly prizest this privilege; as sometimes the Jews did
circumcision in order to the favor of God, and assurance of eternal life: And
doubtless rightly understood it is to be prized, otherwise God would not have
given it, it is an honorarium, or token of love to his people. Nor would the
Apostle Peter have said that Baptism saves, 1 Pet. 3.21. But our building of
hopes upon Scripture-words without Scripture-Comment does undo us. When the
Jews took themselves to be secure against all the judgments that the Prophets
could denounce by reason of sin, upon the privilege of circumcision; Jeremy
undervalues not circumcision at all, but helps them to a right understanding of
it; will have them to have it full and complete, reckoning up many Nations by
name, he says, They are uncircumcised, they were wholly destitute of it: and
mentioning the house of Israel, says, that they are uncircumcised in heart,
Jer. 9.26. They want the best and choicest part of it, and so are in the same
condition with uncircumcised ones; and the Apostle after him beating down the
vain confidence of the Jews in their outward title called Jews, and
circumcision, which was a badge of their relation to God as a people in
Covenant, tells them, that he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, that was not
enough to give a full and true denomination; but he is a Jew that is one
inwardly, who is for God in soul, as well as in name, and circumcision is that
of the heart, Romans 2.28. and he beats down the carnal opinion of the Jews in
circumcision, by a definition given of the circumcised, We are of the
circumcision, that worship God in Spirit and in truth, Phil. 3.3. And baptism
of the flesh can neither be, nor do more, then circumcision in the flesh: The
Apostle therefore telling us that Baptism saves, is as willing to undeceive
us, as the Prophet was to undeceive the Jews, and tells us that he does not
mean the outward putting away of the filth of the flesh (the application of
water is but the outside of Baptism) but the answer of a good conscience
toward God; when conscience answers to that which this washing signifies, and
to which it engages, then Baptism saves, not of it self, but seals Salvation
through the Resurrection of Christ; when conscience fails in its duty, Baptism
fails in its efficacy, then it brings not Salvation, but is an aggravation of
condemnation, as after may appear. Thou art admitted to the Supper of the Lord,
upon that account, that through knowledge gained, and profession made, thou art
in a capacity for improvement of it for eternity; But if thou stay here, and
thy remembrance of Christ broken for sin, do not work thee to brokennesse of
heart under sin; can drink of this Cup, and gulf in wickedness, here is no
pardon sealed, but condemnation heightened. I know on the other hand, to
discourage men from endeavor, some say, that there is no acting for life, but
from life; what can be gained by sin? and all actions done in unregeneration,
are no other but sin. I marvel then, what that Counsel of our Savior means,
Joh. 6.27. To labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, The context
acquaints us with the unregeneration of those, to whom this Counsel is given;
As also, what that complaint of our Savior means, Ye will not come unto me,
that ye may have life. These works in unregenerate men are acts of obedience,
and not (as is objected) sins, only by accidental pollution they are sinful;
such subtleties are above the Logic that we read in Scriptures, which gives
duties in charge, in reference to their respective ends, without consideration
of the state of the subject under command, whether in nature, or grace. Actions
we know work to habits, and in case that rule hold, that. Habitus infusi
infunduntur more acquisitorum, which Dr. Wilkin says, is a golden rule in
Divinity, Treatise of the gift of prayer, page 8. this is above controversy. I
yield to that of Austin, that as a wheel is not made round by turning, but
turns because it is round; so a man is not made good by doing good, but is
good through grace, and then does good; as the tree is first good, and then
brings forth good fruit. But it is not Gods way to infuse grace into the soul
unfitted for it, no more then it is to infuse life into the body unorganized. A
new being is put of God into the soul, when reason appears to it, of closing
with it. The Word, Prayer, Sacraments, may all have a hand in it. And all are
in vain to the soul, Word, Prayer, and Sacraments, with all other Ordinances,
and endeavors, unless they lead the soul to it; make it thy business to come
up to the Covenant, or else it is without fruit, that thou come to the
Sacrament.

CHAP. VIII.
SECT. I. Of the necessity of Sacraments.
THe next Observation that the words offer, is, Sacraments are not arbitrary
but necessary.
That Sacraments are not arbitrary, but necessary; the Vovenant People of God,
not only may, but must partake of them. As God appointed, so Abraham received
this sign of circumcision: And as he received it, so all in confederation with
him received it likewise, Genesis 17.23. And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all
that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every
male among the men of Abraham's house, and circumcised the flesh of their
foreskin, in the self-same day, as God had said unto him. And the stated time
for circumcision of those children who were born of parents in Covenant, being
the eighth day, the text tells us, That Abraham circumcised his son Isaac,
being eight days old, as God Commanded him, Genesis 21.4. And when Moses had a
son born in his exile, and had neglected this duty; The Lord met him in his way
from Midian to Egypt, and sought to kill him, Exrd. 4.24. he appeared in some
formidable way of death to him, in that way (as many do conjecture) that he
appeared to Balaam on his way, Numb. 22.23. Not that God really intended his
death whom he now employed in that great work to deliver his people out of
Egypt, but he appeared in this posture, to let him know what his sin deserved,
and by these terrors to bring him and his wife to take the course after
mentioned, for prevention of it. And though there have been some that have gone
about to assign other causes of Gods anger against hith, and this apparition in
such terror, yet no other in the text appearing, and God departing from him,
upon the child's circumcision; the neglect of that Command was undoubtedly the
cause of it. Whatsoever reason moved Moses to this neglect, whether the fear of
displeasing his father in law, or his wife, (which Rivet judges to be most
probable) certain it is from the Lords displeasure against him, that it was his
sin. This was after given in charge by Moses to the people of God, Levit. 12.3.
speaking of the birth of a man-child, he says, The eighth day the flesh of his
foreskin shall be circumcised. This the Israelites (except the intermission of
it in the wilderness) exactly followed; when the eighth day happened on the
Sabbath, that work was yet observed, as Christ notes, Joh. 7.23. On the Sabbath
day they received circumcision, that the Law of Moses might not be broken; John
Baptist therefore on the eighth day was circumcised, Luke 1.59. and Christ
himself on that day was circumcised, Luke 2.21. as also Paul, Philip. 3.5. That
of the Passover was appointed 400. years at the least, after circumcision. It
had its first institution in Egypt, Exodus 12.3, 4. etc. to be observed as a
feast to the Lord, throughout their generations, to be kept as an Ordinance for
ever, ver. 14. It was again commanded by Moses, and inserted into the body of
the Law, Levit. 23.4. Numb. 28.16. This was carefully observed by the
Israelites in their generations, though at some times when Idolatry prevailed,
sinfully neglected. We read of many famous Passeovers observed; viz. In
Joshua's time, in Hezekiah's, in Josiah's days, also by Ezra upon the return
of Gods people out of the captivity of Babylon, Ezra 6.19. It is observed of
the Lord Christ, that he kept four Passeovers after the time that he publicly
appeared as the Messiah. The last was the evening before his death, concerning
which he said, With a desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you
before I dye, Luke 22.15. With extreme earnest affection he was carried toward
it, and then he put a period to it, and did institute his Supper in the place
and room of it. That heavy menace, so frequently threatened in the Law, of
being cut off from among their people, is given out against the neglect of both
of these Sacraments, Gen 17.14. The uncircumcised manchild whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he
has broken my Covenant, Number. 9.13. The man that is clean, and is not in a
journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover; even the same soul shall be cut
off from his people, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his
appointed season, that man shall bear his sin; which commination however we do
interpret it, whether of the more immediate hand of God, as dying childlesse:
The case of Jeconiah, Jer. 22.30. or being cut off by untimely death: The case
of Er and Onan, Genesis 38.1.9. and of Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10.2. or perishing
everlastingly: The case of all presumtuous and inpenitent siners, 1 Cor. 6.9.
or whether the execution be committed to man, and that either the temporal
Magistrate, which was the case of Achan, Josh. 7. and of Shelomiths son, Levit.
24.14. or by Ecclesiastical censure, which was the case of the incestuous
Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.13. As there be that appear for each of these, which way
soever it is understood, it sufficiently proves a necessity of these
Ordinances. For the Sacraments of the New Testament when John baptized, and the
Pharisees did refuse to submit to his Baptism, the text says, They rejected
the Counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. and the Commission given to
the Apostles, to disciple all Nations, baptizing them, Matthew. 28.19. implies a
necessity of all discipled ones, to submit to Baptism, Mar. 16.16. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved. Faith is of absolute necessity in all
that hear the tender of the Gospel, and therefore it follows, He that
believes not shall be damned; and Baptism is the ordinary way set up of God,
that leads to it. Peter counsels his converts, when he had them in an hopeful
way, Repent and be Baptized, Act. 2.28. And Ananias counsels Paul, Arise, why
tarriest thou? and be baptized, Act. 22.16. For the Lord Supper we find it
under a precept, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Luke 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me, 1
Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup, implies as a preparation for it; so also a necessity, that
we eat and drink of it; so that every Sacrament has its injunction upon it.

First, The institution of it is a sufficient proof of the necessity. God did
never institute it to have it neglected; There is strength in that argument
from the gift to the use, Arguments evincing the necessity of Sacraments.
from the fruition of any thing from the hand of God (as the servant the talent
from his Master) to the improvement of it. These are instituted of God for his
people, and therefore for the use of his people. That which the Apostle speaks
respective to Gospel ordinances in general, may be applied to any one in
particular; We beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain, 2
Cor. 6.1.

Secondly, Frequent explicit commands are added (as we have seen in the
Scripture proofs) respective to either of the Sacraments; and though no other
reason could be rendered, yet the Sovereignty of heaven must be obeyed. When the
young Prophet that came from Judah, 1 Kings 13. did eat bread upon his return,
expressly contrary to the command of God, we know the judgment that followed,
when the like command is broke in refusal to eat, there is the like danger; God
has power in positives, as well as negatives, in commanding of eating, as he
has in forbidding.

Thirdly, As it is a duty, so also a privilege; we obey a command when we
receive a Sacrament, and also take a gift. And the sleighting of Gods favors,
equals the evil of disobedience to his commands. What sin suffers more then
theirs, that upon call, refuse to come to the wedding supper? The gift is
annexed to the duty. Take eat, this is my body; they that do not eat, have not
the promise.

Fourthly, Our necessity calls us to it, we have proved the Supper to be an
heartbreaking ordinance, and there is none that deny it to be a soul
strengthening ordinance. Hunger will make haste to run to meat, guilt to
pardon, and pain to ease, and sorrow to comfort; were we as sensible of our
hunger, or guilt, we should make equal haste to Christ in each ordinance, in
this ordinance. Those that are agreed about the necessity of Sacraments, are
yet at difference about the degree, or kind of their necessity. That
distinction of necessity by precept, or command of God, and necessity as a
means whereby salvation is gained, is well known Adversarii fatentur Sacramenta
esse necessaria quia praecepta, et etiam necessaira ut media utilia: non tamen
agnoscunt ullum Sacramentum necessarium, simpliciter ut medium.
Bellarmine says, we yield to them the former, that there is the necessity of
a divine command upon them, And they also yield to us that no other Sacraments
of theirs are any otherwise necessary, except Baptism and repentance. And we
further yield that repentance is of necessity in the most absolute sense; being
understood of the change of the heart or conversion to God. But not under any
notion of a Sacrament. As to their Sacramental repentance, standing in
confession in the ears of a Priest, taking penance, and receiving absolution
from him, we do not so much as acknowledge any command of God concerning them;
All the dispute then is about Baptism, In which also we cannot grant, that
there is a command given of God concerning it, but we must yield that it is
necessary as a means whereby God in his ordinary way, carries us on by his
grace to salvation; only we deny such an absolute necessity of it, as that no
salvation can be obtained without it. They yet yield that desire of Baptism
does supply the want of it, and we yield that those of years, that neither have
it nor desire it, cannot be excluded from contempt of it. This growing out of
error, as in Socinians, The kind or degree of necessity in Sacraments.
and others, we say it is dangerous, but do not presently conclude it damnable.
But the want of it, where there can be no desire of it, as in infants, they
make damnable; in which we wholly are dissenters, and cannot yield a necessity
of that height in it. We have our reasons.

First, Salvation was not tied to Sacraments in the Old Testament; not to
circumcision, in room of which we have baptism, and is by the Apostle called
by the name of Baptism, Col. 2.11. This is clear by the delay of it, according
to Gods command, to the eighth day. If those perished that died in the mean
space, which was the case of David's child, their parents obedience of Gods
command brought them to perdition. And salvation being not tied to Sacraments,
but attainable without them, in the days of the Old Testament, there is no
cause to believe, that in the New Testament, there should be restraint. The
promulgation of the Gospel did not streighten grace, or make the way less
passeable to life and glory.

Secondly, They that are in Covenant with God, are upon that account in
capacity of Salvation. This is plain; what advantage is gained by Covenant, if
salvation be denied? But such are in Covenant, many such that never were
baptized. This is as clear. I will be thy God and the God of thy seed; as soon
as Abraham had a child, he had a child in Covenant, which howsoever Jesuits,
and after them Anabaptists would understand of the spiritual seed, yet God (as
we see through the Old Testament) ownes them as his in a greater latitude.
Those to whom he gave the land of Canaan, are his seed there mentioned: But he
gave not the Land of Canaan to the spiritual seed only: Therefore they only
are not the seed there mentioned. The New Testament holds it out, in as great
latitude, as I have abundantly showed.

Thirdly, As Abraham the Father of the faithful came into a state of
justification, and salvation, so others may attain to it in like sort; This is
evident of it self: But Abraham was in a state of justification, without
application of any Sacrament in his state of uncircumcision, and not of
Circumcision, as the Apostle argues, by computing the time, when it was said of
him, that he believed the Lord, and it was accounted unto him for
righteousness, Romans 4.9, 10.

Fourthly, If Baptism be of this absolute necessity, that regeneration is
affixt to it, and none can be saved without it, then it is in man's power to
save; and destroy, as is said of Nebuchadnezzar, whom he would he slew, and
whom he would he kept alive, Dan. 5.19. which was the highest pitch of
prerogative in regard of the outward man; so it may be said of man respective
to eternity of bliss, or misery; according to them the meanest midwife may
Baptize them ready to give up the Ghost, and save them, neglect them, and damn
them. The Infant set out in type, Ezekiel. 16. And Moses in the flags, lay sadly
at man's mercy for this fading life; but thousands of infants, are alike at
mercy, according to this tenent, for eternity.

Joh. 3.5. vindicated.
The great objection which is made on the contrary, and that only which is
worthy of consideration, is drawn from Christ's words in conference with
Nicodemus, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. The water there, is meant of Baptism, that
laver of regeneration, without this there is no entrance into heaven. When Paul
said, Except these stay in the ship, ye cannot be saved, Acts 27.31. all will
presently understand that their abode in the ship was of absolute necessity to
safety; and so also baptism according to Christ's words for eternity.

Answ. Though it be not easy to determine, what is the right meaning, (and
genuine interpretation of those words, yet it is of no great difficulty to
vindicate them, from them that would fasten this sense upon them, and gather
this consequence from them; And before I come to a full answer, I shall premise
two things. 1. That it is a wonder that Nicodemus coming to our Savior in the
night, and as yet knowing nothing in the Mystery of Christ, should hear that
from him, that others in the open light, and far more knowing in
Christianity, could never hear from his mouth. 2. Bellarmine himself (as
Amesius does observe) confesses (and if I do not much mistake, Suarez
somewhere) that at that time of Christ's conference with Nicodemus, there was no
such absolute necessity of Baptism. He puts the question when baptism began
to be necessary, and determines it in four propositions. Baptismus Ch^^sti non
fuit necessarius necessitate medii aut praecepti ante Christi mortem. Baptismus
Christi coepit esse necessarius necessitate medii and praecepti a die
pentecostes.
The third is, That it was not necessary before the death of Christ, neither
necessitate praecepti, or medii. The fourth is, that it was not necessary,
necessitate me dii, and praecepti, before the day of Pentecost. And let any
judge whether it be probable, instructing that novice in the faith, Christ
would in the first place inform him, not what in present, but what afterward
would be of necessity, especially seeing that after that time by him set down,
when the absolute necessity should commence, we hear of no such necessity of
it. For more full satisfaction, I further answer,

First, That text which names not Baptism, and cannot be concluded by an
argument infallibly cogent to speak of Baptism cannot enforce an absolute
necessity of it; This is clear: But this text names not Baptism, neither is
there any argument to conclude infallibly, that it speaks of baptism;
probabilities are mentioned, but no necessary concluding argument is by any
produced.

Secondly, A Scripture-text carrying like color, has been urged for a like
necessity for infants to receive the Lords Supper, John 6.53. But this is
agreed on all parties not to hold: This then how eagerly soever it is pressed,
may fail likewise.

Thirdly, Either water there must be taken for Baptism of water, or else by
way of Exegesis to hold out the same thing that was expressed before by the birth
of the Spirit. If the latter will hold, as there are many parallel instances
given, and multitudes of Divines so interpret it ( Gerrard in his common
places reckons up many more then I have to consult) then this text comes to
nothing in this particular. And that this should be the meaning, Chamier with
fair probabilities argues, seeing in this sense, the words bear an absolute
truth without any limitation. All being of a corrupt birth there is a necessity
of a new birth, and that by the Spirit, there being no more births then that of
the flesh (which is corrupt) and that of the Spirit, that comes to heal
corruption. If the former stand, that water must of necessity hold out Baptism
of water, as Papists and Lutherans generally contend, and many Protestants
yield, then either the words must be taken in an absolute way, without any
limit at all, or else with their just and due limitations; If limits must be
put, then no absolute unlimitted necessity can be concluded; and to understand
it without any limit at all, our adversaries themselves see to be liable to
dangerous absurdities.

Some therefore understand it of the Baptism of water, or some other that
supplies the place and room of it; and it is on all hands granted, that
Baptismus flaminis and sanguinis, the Spirit, or blood in Martyrdom, may
supply the room of it for salvation. And this Chamier says, is the limit that
Arboreus puts. Others understand it of Baptism of water, if it can be had, and
it be not contemned and despised, and this Chamier says is the limit that
Lombard, Bonaventure, Gorran, Carthusian, and Villagadus put to it. Others
understand it of that regeneration, that is ordinarily by baptism of water,
though by other means it may be wrought. And this limit Alexander of Hales
puts to it, as Amesius observes, either of actual Baptism, or else of the
desire of it, and this Suarez says is the opinion of all Divines, and charges
it for an heresy to hold, that none of years can be saved unless actually
baptized, notwithstanding their earnest desire of it; and in his time, he
says, one a Michael Baius a Divine of Lovain held it, But as (he says) Pius
5. and Gregorius 13. in their letters published did condemn it. And this text
being subject to so many limitations, our adversaries being judges; I hope I
may without any just exception add one, that it be understood of men of years,
such as Nicodemus was, to whom it was spoken; seeing so many helps are provided
for men of years in the want of Baptism, it is altogether unreasonable to
leave Infants in such exigents, as to be irremedilesly under damnation for
eternity, when it is not in their power to make provision of it, and so are
helped by Lombard, and those of that party: Any man may be their Compurgitor
that they are not guilty of contempt of it. Besides this Text, there are many
high speeches alleged out of some of the Ancient for the necessity of
Baptism, and heavy doom of those that pass out of this world in the want of
it. But these are not only under the dislike of Protestants, but of those that
these lay claim to be of their own party. Bernard, Epist. 77. is large against
them; and Vossius has a full quotation out of Petrus Blessensis, who was
Bernards contemporary. Sufficit Spiritus and aqua: Sufficit Spiritus and
sanguis, si aquam non exclusit contemptus Religionis, sed articulus
necessitatis: Sufficient solus Spiritus, quia testimonium ipsius pondus habet.
The Spirit and water suffices; The Spirit and blood suffices, if instant
necessity, and not contempt of Religion depriveth of Water. The Spirit alone
may suffice, for his testimony has weight in it. And whereas Austin of all
other is most frequently quoted for this rigid sentence, as being in name most
eminent, my author sets Austine against Austin, having in his 5th. Book against
Donatists these words: Etiam atque etiam considerans in venio, non tantum
passionem pro nomine Christi, id quod ex Baptismo decrat, posse supplere, sed
etiam fidem conversionemque cordis, si forte ad celebrandum mysterium baptismi,
in angustiis temporum sufficere non potest. Neque enim latro ille pro nomine
Christi crucifixus est, sed pro meritis facinorum suorum; nec quia credidit
passus est, sed dum patitur credit: quantum it aque valeat etiam sine visibili
Sacramento baptismi quod ait Apostolus. Romans 10.10 Cord creditur ad justitiam,
ore autem fit confessio ad salutem, in illo latrone declaratum est: sed tunc
impletur invisibiliter cum mysterium baptismi, non contemptus Religionis, sed
articulus necessitatis excludit.
Again, and again, considering I find, that not only suffering for the Name of
Christ, may supply what is wanting in Baptism, but also faith, and conversion
of the heart, if peradventure streights of time will not permit the celebration
of the Sacrament of Baptism. But to hold the Reader no longer in this
controversy; in avoiding the Popish necessity of Sacraments, for a more
distinct understanding of this necessity of Sacraments, I shall lay down some
rules.

SECT. II. Rules for a right understanding of the necessity of Sacraments.
Rules for a right understanding of the necessity of Sacraments.

1. Sacraments are standing Ordinances.


FIrst, that Sacraments both of the Old, and New Testament, are standing
Ordinances, to be observed of the people of God, not barely in the generation
in which they were set up, but in all successive generations; so that there is
an abiding and lasting necessity in them. This is in that punctual way set
down in Scriptures respective to each Sacrament, as though the Spirit of God
would let us know, that he did foresee a generation ready to arise, to throw
them off, and live above them, or else to vilify them, as unnecessary,
indifferent and arbitrary. For circumcision, see Genesis 17.12, 13. He that is
eight days old, shall be circumcised among you, every man-child in your
generations: he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger
which is not of thy seed, he that is born in thy house, and he that is bought
with thy money must needs be circumcised, and my Covenant shall be in your
flesh for an everlasting Covenant. God lays there a necessity upon it, a
lasting necessity in all succeeding generations of that people to be observed;
and when Moses several generations afterward did as we have heard omit it;
upon what reason we have nothing but conjecture. We see, Exodus 4.24. how much
God was displeased at it. And for the Passover, Exodus 12.13. we find a like
lasting injunction, This day shall be unto you for a memorial, and you shall
keep it a feast unto the Lord, thorowout your generations: you shall keep it a
feast by an Ordinance for ever: repeated again, ver. 17. It was an Ordinance
that no Jew in any generation might antiquate, or put a period unto. It must
last as long as they remained a distinct generation unto God, even till Christ
(in whose hands are times and seasons, in whom there is neither Jew nor Greek)
should be the end of it. As to New Testament-Sacraments the Scripture is as
clear; when Christ gave commission for discipling Nations, and baptizing them,
for their encouragement in the work, he promises his presence unto the end of
the world: The work is to continue as long as Christ's presence in the work
continues: But Christ's presence according to promise, is to continue with them
in discipling of Nations, and baptizing them, being discipled, unto the end of
the world. I am not ignorant of the Critical observation that is made of the
phrase, (...), saeculi, by reason of the various acceptance of it in
Scriptures, endeavoring to have it to be understood of the end of that age, in
which those lived to whom Christ spoke. But neither the parallel use of the
word by Matthew, nor the context will bear that evasion. For the parallel use
of the phrase by Matthew four places may be instanced in, three in one Chapter,
Matthew. 13.39. The harvest is the end of the world, verse. 40. As therefore the
tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this
world, verse. 49. So shall it be at the end of the world, the Angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, Matthew. 24.3. Tell us when
shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of the coming, and of the end
of the world? In all places the phrase is the same, and the words can be
understood in none of them with that limitation: And that the context will not
bear it, enough may be gathered from that which I have said, Treatise of the
Covenant, page 117. For a more clear discovery of the words, we know that there
is a double period of ages, or generations in Scripture: One at Christ's first,
coming, when an end was put to Circumcision, and the Passover; of this the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 9.26. But now once in the end of the world has he
appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: at the end of that world
Christ dyed. The other is at his second coming, and this is the end of the
world here mentioned; and upon this account Dr. Reynolds in this Sermons upon
Hos. 14. interprets that of Christ concerning the sin against the Holy Ghost,
that it shall never be forgiven in this life, nor in the life to come, Matthew.
12.32. of the age in which Christ lived, and now near to an end, and the age
that should follow from his death till his second coming; neither under the
Old, nor New Testament, or Covenant, can that sin find remission. Till Christ's
second return, a Ministry, and Baptism must still remain. For the Lords
Supper, Scripture-testimony is as clear, 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till he come. If we
can believe a coming of Christ for a temporal Reign, before the time of his,
coming to the general Judgment, I shall believe that may be called the
consummation, end or finishing of this generation; and then a period may be put
to these and other Ordinances. But howsoever that will answer, or fail men's
expectations, certain it is, that it is the mind of Christ that they shall
stand, till the time that he does come; and then his mind will be further
known. The practice of the Church has hitherto answered these testimonies. All
ages of the Church (as we know) held up Circumcision till Christ's time, and in
Christ's time it was in use, as Christ testifies, Joh. 7.22. and he submits to
it in his own person, Luke 2. and so we may say of the Passover
notwithstanding some disuse, the godly ever knew it to be in force, or else, as
piety broke forth, they had not still reassumed it. And Christ dying (as we
have heard) at the end of that world, the day that he was to dye, he held a
passover. In New Testament-times not only through the Apostles times, but to
this time, Baptism and the Lords Supper have continued. Reasons may also
enforce this as to Sacraments in general, so to Baptism and the Lords Supper
in particular. 1. The Covenant is to be kept for ever, there is no dispensation
at any time for the breach of it; The seals then which by Divine institution
are appointed as appendants to it, must be continued. As reason it self may
speak enough for the validity of this consequence, so the Text of Scripture
likewise confirms it, Genesis 17.7, 13. compared, I will establish my Covenant
between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations for an
everlasting Covenant; to be a God unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee. He
that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be
circumcised; and my Covenant shall be in your flesh, for an everlasting
Covenant. 2. We have as much need as ever, this generation as any other
generation, to have our weaknesses supported, our faith strengthened; there is
not any benefit ever gained by a Sacrament, but as primitive times did, so we
may reap spiritual advantage by it. For reasons for the perpetuity of Baptism,
Mr. Baxter, page 341, 342. of his Treatise of Infants Church Membership and
Baptism, has furnished the Reader with plenty; of ten that he urges, I judge
nine at least to be unquestionable; to which I shall add only one, and that
is such a one, that with weakness enough has been brought by some for
warranty of the disuse of it. If the gift of the Spirit be lasting, and
continuing in the Church, then the use of Baptism is lasting and continuing
likewise: But the gift of the Spirit is lasting and continuing: Ergo. The
assumption, that the Spirit is a lasting gift, I suppose none will question.
The major Proposition is grounded on the Apostles words, Act. 10.47. Can any
man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we? When others do reason from the having of the Spirit,
to the needlenesse of Baptism, the Apostle disputes in the direct opposite
manner, where the Spirit is, there Baptism is not to be denied. For the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we may likewise evince the constant standing
necessity of it: 1. The death of Christ is to be showed forth constantly, and
every way preached: This is a showing forth of the death of Christ, a means of
declaring of him crucified, 1 Cor. 11.26. 2. The memorial of Christ is to be
preserved, and endeared; This is for his memorial, done in remembrance of him,
Matthew 26. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. If the deliverance from Egypt must be kept as a
memorial for ever in that Ordinance of the Passover, then much more the
remembrance of Christ in his Supper. 3. Every way of Communion with Christ is
to be preserved, and upheld; This is a way of Communion with Christ, 1 Cor.
10.16. 4. Union with the Members of Christ is to be studied; This is the way of
our union with the Members of Christ, and therefore this is to be continued. I
shall not enlarge much for refutation of Objections of those that in our times
are contrarily minded, seeing I have read little of any thing that they have to
say; a noise is abroad of such (with whom I have had small converse) that cry
down rebaptisme, by the denial of Baptism; as Lucian made it his business to
confute Polytheisme, by bringing in of Atheism; made himself merry with the
Pagans rabble of gods, by believing no God; Opposition of error ordinarily
leads men into opposite errors; but a better way may be found for the overthrow
of a double Baptism, then by the nullifying of all baptism. One God asserted
by the Apostle will overthrow Atheism and Polytheisme, and one Baptism
asserted by him in the same place will overthrow Anabaptisme. But these are not
the first founders of this opinion: Austin speaking of the Manichees, Here Is.
46. says, Baptismum in aqua nihil cuiquam perhibent salutis adferre, nec
quenquam eorum, baptizandum putant.
That they hold, that Baptism with water not at all useful for salvation,
neither do they think it meet to baptize any that they deceive: and speaking of
other Heretics, Here Is. 49. Seleuciani, and Hermiani, he says, Baptismum in
aqua non accipiunt.
They do not hold any baptism with water. And Philastrius (who as Bellarmine
witnesses de Scriptor. Ecclesiasticis, page 93. wrote before Austin of
Heresies, and is quoted by Austin) says, Seleucus and Hermius haeretici animas
hominum de igne and Spiritu esse existimantes, isti baptismo non utuntur,
propter verbum hoc quod dixit Johannes Baptista: ipse vos baptizabit in Spiritu
and igne.
Seleucus, and Hermius the heretics hold, that the soul consists of fire, and
the Spirit. These use not Baptism, by reason of John Baptists words, He shall
baptize you with the Spirit, and fire. Socinus in this last age has revived
this opinion, and says, Baptismum aquae habere praeceptum Christi, aut saltem
non perpetuum and universale.
That Baptism with water has no command from Christ, or at least no
perpetual, and universal command. The Reader if he please may see the
Scriptures by him wrested, and Reasons by him brought, Refert Vossius.
vindicated, and answered by Vossius de necessitate Baptismi, page 381. to page
388.

There appears a greater degree of necessity of the initiatory leading
Sacrament, Initiatory Sacraments are of greater necessity then those that
follow.
which serves for our first admission (whether in the days of the Old, or New
Testament) into the Church of God, then of the other that succeeds for our
further strength and growth. Both of them are necessary, neither of them are
arbitrary; but in case we may enter comparison, the greater weight lies on the
former, as may several ways appear unto us:

Arguments evincing this necessity.
First, There was a leading Sacrament for initiation many years in the Church,
before any was ordained to follow after it. Circumcision was given in charge
400 years before the Passover; that of Circumcision was not long after
Abraham's call, and the promise of the land of Canaan being before Isaac's
birth, which was only 25 years distant from his first removal out of Haran for
Canaan, as appears, Genesis 12.4. and 21.5. compared. The Passover was given in
charge upon Isreal's departure out of Egypt, Exodus 12. one year before the Law
was given, which was 430 years after the promise to Abraham, Gal. 3.17. All
this time the seed of Abraham entered into the Church by Circumcision, and
enjoyed no other Sacrament properly so called.

Secondly, Gods displeasure never showed it self so high, upon the neglect of
the Passover, as upon the neglect of Circumcision, though the penalty
threatened is the same in both, Genesis 17.14. Numb. 9.13. God never appeared, that
we read, for the death of any, upon that account, as he did for the death of
Moses, upon the neglect of Circumcision. Reverend Mr. Cotton makes the like
danger to be in the neglect of Infant Baptism, as we may see in the Preface to
his Book on that subject.

Thirdly, To be utterly out of the Church, must needs be of greater danger,
then to want some one Ordinance in the Church. Extra Ecclesiam nulla Salus.
Out of the Church there is no salvation, is an old Rule, which Acts 2.47.
Ephesians. 2.12. Jer. 10.25. abundantly confirm, that is, without it, and all right
of relation to it, and to be without right, and to live in the neglect and
despisal of it, (being convinced of the necessity of it) are alike dangerous.

Fourthly, No such brand can lie on the want of the one, as the other; none
equal to that of uncircumcision, can be fastened upon the want of any other
privilege: But lest excusing a tanto, I should be though to excuse a toto, in
comparing the danger, I should be though to deny any danger in the want of this
later, I shall cease.

Thirdly, As the Passover in Israel, both in the wilderness, The Lords Supper
may occasionally be delayed.
and For the disuse of the Passover by the children of Israel in the
Wilderness more happily may be said, then for the time when they were settled
in Canaan, seeing Circumcision at that time was also discontinued, whether by
special command from God, or upon inevitable necessity by reason of their often
removals, for which the knife of Circumcision would have disabled, or their
sinful neglect, I will not determine; and yet more is said for ommission of it
in that time, then perhaps can fairly be defended. A Reverend Divine says, He
wonders why omission of the Passover in the wildernesses is alleged; for
after the first celebration thereof, all future celebrations were by express
and plain command to be only in the Land of Canaan; quoting Exodus 13.4, 5.
with an etc. Deuteronomy. 16. from ver. 1. usque ad 8. and confirming it at large with
the authority of Rivet, inserting his words. But with due reverence to men of
their eminencey, I may suggest also my wondrings, how it can be said, that by
express and plain command all future celebrations of the Pass, after the
first, were only to be in the Land of Canaan, seeing, Numb. 9.1. a famous
Passover was observed in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the
second year after they were come out of the Land of Egypt. If it be said, that
this Passover in the Wilderness was by especial command from God, and
otherwise should not have been observed till they came into the Land of Canaan,
as Ainsworth on Numb. 9.1. in favor of this opinion does indeed say, The cause
why God commanded them to keep the Passover in the Wilderness was, (says he)
for that by the first institution they were bound to keep it when they came
into the Land of Canaan, and therefore without special warranty could not have
kept it in the desert. I answer, That Circumcision when it was first taken up
again in the Wilderness, was by especial command from God, Josh. 5.2. and in
all probability the Passover that then was observed with it, ver. 10. was by
like command; which does not argue, but that by virtue of the primitive
institution they might have kept it; neither is there any Text urged evincing
any such limit to the Land of Canaan: for the place quoted, Deuteronomy. 16.2, 5, 6.
verses, only looks that way, Deuteronomy. 16.2, 5, 6. vindicated.
and the words are these, Thou shall therefore sacrifice the Passover unto the
Lord thy God, of the flock and the herd in the place in which the Lord shall
choose to place his Name there; thou may not sacrifice the Passover within
any of thy gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee; But at the place which
the Lord thy God shall choose to place his Name in, there thou shall sacrifice
the Passover at even, at the going down of the Sun, at the season that thou
came forth out ^f Egypt: and there the place prohibited is not all places out
of Canaan, but their own gates, though in Canaan. And the place prescribed is
not Canaan, but the place wheresoever God should fix his Tabernacle; upon the
same account no sacrifice could have been with warranty offered in the
Wilderness, but only in Canaan, there is the like reason, and like Law for
both, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 7. But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose
out of all your Tribes to put his Name there, even unto his habitation shall ye
seek, and thither thou shall come, and thither ye shall bring your
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave-offerings of
your hand, and your vows, and your free will offerings, and the firstlings of
your herds and of your flocks, and there ye shall eat before the Lord your God.
Yet we find sacrifice offered in the Wilderness, and there they did eat before
the Lord, as is plain, Levit. 10.1. ver. 16, to the end. As for Exodus 12.25.
and 13.45. where the command for celebration of the Passover is given in
charge to be observed, when they came into the Land of Canaan, They being to
have Canaan by the gift of God for their habitation, mention is made of that
place, where it was in all their generations to be observed (and no notice
taken of any such halt, that they were to make in the way, which their sin did
afterward occasion): But it is no prohibition of it in the way thither, or
warranty for omission, when the time was thus protracted for their arrival
there; having the Tabernacle with them, they had their liberty for observation
of it: which is clear to me, from Deuteronomy. 12.10, 11. When ye go over Jordan and
dwell in the Land, which the Lord your God gives you to inherit, and when he
gives you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety,
then there shall be a place, which the Lord your God shall choose, to cause his
Name to dwell there, thither shall ye bring all that I command you. But before
they passed Jordan, while Moses was with them, as you have heard, they had
their offerings, which is further plain, Numb. 16.17, 18, 46.47. and so might
have had their Passover likewise. As the Passover was discontinued in the
Wilderness; so it was also oftentimes in the Land of Canaan, we read of no
more Passeovers then one, that was kept by Joshuah. Josiah in the eighth year
of his Reign, began to seek after the God of his Fathers; and in the twelfth
year he began to purge Judah, and Jerusalem from the high places, and the
groves, and the carved Images, and the molten Images, 2 Chronicles. 34.3, 4. But it
was in the eighteenth year of his Reign that he could reach to keep a
Passover, Chap. 35.19. Hezekiah, as appears, hasted to keep a Passover, yet
durst not be overhasty, he could not keep it on the day which originally in
the Law was appointed. But upon advice put it off to the second month, because
the Priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, 2 Chro. 30.3. Ezra kept
a Passover upon the return out of the Captivity, Ezra 6.19. and the reason is
given, verse. 20, 21. For the Priests and Levites were purified together, all of
them were pure, and killed the Passover for all the children of the captivity,
and for their brethren the Priests, and for themselves; and the children of
Israel, which were come again out of Captivity, and all such as had separated
themselves unto them, from the filthiness of the Heathen of the Land to seek
the Lord God of Israel, did eat. Had not the Priests and Levites been thus
purified, and the people thus separated, the Passover it appears had been
longer delayed. As these saw necessitating occasion for omission of this
Ordinance, which yet is not charged as their sin; so may also the Ministers of
Christ see like occasion for delay of administration of the Lords Supper. And
there is advantage on their part, seeing there was a prescript time in the Law
for the observation of the one, but no limited time in the Gospel for the
administration of the other. Sometimes a Minister by providence is cast upon
such a people, that scarce three are able to discern what they have in hand,
when they are about this duty, and therefore he sees no more reason to call
them to it, then Christ saw to call his disciples newly chosen unto private
fastings, or the Apostle to give meat to babes; edification is their great
business, their whole business; they may stay the time that they may
administer it to edification; sometimes it evidently appears that the rent is
in a way to be made so great by their administration, through the observance of
some working error upon the judgment in others, that are so principled, that
none but high Saints are for this Ordinance, that they see danger in proceeding
in it. And though I do not doubt, but that it is often forborne out of sinful
neglect, and by truly conscientious Ministers, sometimes out of overmuch
indulgence of their brethrens weakness, and their own over-rigid principles:
yet as I do believe that all conscientious Pastors, who for some space of time
forbear, do judge that there is cause for such forbearance, so I do believe
that upon some occasions pro hic and nunc, it may justly be forborne. And
whatsoever exception is taken against Arguments drawn from Analogy, as not
concluding, of which I need to say no more then I have already spoken, yet I
shall conclude, that this which is drawn from the Passover (which is rather
from example, then analogy) is cogent. If that of the London-Divines in their
Divine Right of Church Government, page 20, 21. (quoted and approved by
Reverend Mr. Jeanes, page 21. of his Treatise) be of weight, That whatsoever
actions were done by Saints recorded in Scripture, upon such grounds as are of
moral, perpetual, and common concernment to one person as well as to another,
to one Church as well as to another, these actions are obligatory to all, and a
rule to after-generations, then this Argument; grounded on the example of such
actions, is not to be charged as not concluding; yea, though we had no such
Example to lead us, (as perhaps they had none, to be a precedent to them) yet
those reasons which led them, or those that are equivalent, may lead us
likewise.

Fourthly, 4. Rule. There is no prescript for the time, or frequency of the
observation of the Lords Supper.
There is no definitive time in the Gospel for observation, nor any precise
determinate prescript for the frequency of the Lords Supper. But when and how
often Christian prudence must order, yet being an holy exercise, the day which
we are to keep holy calls for it, being the Lords Supper, what time so meet as
the Lords day? The whole community of the faithful being interested in it, it
is to be observed at the time of their public meetings, which occasionally may
be at other times, but must be at that time. And in case breaking of bread,
Act. 20.7. be meant of the Lords Supper, (as most affirm, and I will not
oppose) it is out of question. But yet I cannot think that every holy duty is
always to be the work of every holy meeting, so the word should never be
preached, nor prayer publicly made without a Sacrament; I believe there is
somewhat extraordinary in a Sacrament, comparative to other duties, as there is
in a Fast. And though the Law for the Passover, and day of Atonement, tie not
us to annual observations only of Sacraments, and Fasts, as it tied the Jews;
yet me thinks it speaks somewhat more then ordinary in them, and that Fasts and
Sacraments are not to be done in that frequency, as daily addresses to God in
prayer, and our hearing from God in his Word. And though I subscribe to Mr.
Pemble and others, that the Apostles words, [As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup] implies that it should be often. A Christian should not seldom
in his life partake of this Ordinance, yet I suppose it does allow, if not
imply longer intermission then is to be in other duties. The primitive times,
perhaps in some places at least, made this Ordinance over-common, celebrating
it (as is said) every day, in other places every Lords day. Mr. Pemble who
religiously pleads for the frequent celebration of it, says, It is true, that
as in other, so in this Divine institution, Satan has done much by his
malicious policy to corrupt men's hearts in the observation of it. When the
Sacrament was administered often, he brought it into contempt by the commonnesse
of it: Now that it is administered seldom, through ignorance it is thought
unnecessary. How truly his observation is verified, we see in two extremes into
which different parties are run at this present time: One part breaking bread
almost at all their meetings, and make no more of it then common bread, looking
after no Minister set apart for that work, not so much as of their own making,
any one whom they will call a gifted disciple (and such with them is every dipped
disciple) is set up for it; They act it while some walk, some talk in their
presence, with less reverence then befits grave persons at common meals. I
fear there was never more rudeness in Corinth, then may be seen here in
Sacramental observations. On the other hand, the Sacrament is almost forgotten,
and looked upon as a Ceremony antiquated, and obsolete; Christian prudence
should interpose, and discern a mean between both. To quicken and put us on
against this last, of which the most had need, instead of a Book of Canons,
Directions for our guidance about it.
or compulsory Laws. Let us, 1. Affect our souls with an ardent love of
Christ, and then we shall not be so slack in celebration of this memorial of
him: We will keep up the memory of an endeared friend, this way Christ has
commended to endear his memory to us. If love be such as it ought, we shall not
desire that it be seldom, if it may be possibly often. Peter had it three
times in charge from Christ, to feed his Lambs, to feed his sheep; how often he
must preach Christ he is not told, that is left to his love; If thou love me,
feed my sheep. Love would not let him be slothful. 2. Let us take into
consideration our own necessities, of which here we may have supplies, first
our want of humiliation, and heartbreaking, how slight and overly is all our
feeling, and sense of sin? if let alone are we not in danger to grow past
feeling? which was the case of the Heathen, when they had arrived at the
greatest height of wickedness, Ephesians. 4.19. Here is an hammer for that
purpose, when once the Law has discovered, by the light that is given, that we
have sinned. No way to this for the aggravation of it. Here we see Gods
detestation of sin, that would not spare it in his only Son, as he spared not
the Angels that sinned, but having no Mediator to bear it for them, they bore
the punishment of it in their own persons; so he spared not his own Son, when
he had taken upon him our sin. Here we see the desert of sin in all those
torments which Christ bore for us. If we would know sin, and be sensible of
wrath, study the Sacrament, the dead soul may be here awakened. Secondly, our
spiritual weaknesses and wants, which I shall set out in Mr. Pembles words, Let
them look inward, and see how great need they have of many and often
confirmations of their faith, renovations of their repentance, of stirring up
the graces of God in their souls, to add an edge, an eagerness to all
spiritual affections after holiness, to get unto themselves the most powerful
provocations unto obedience. Every one that has grace knows how frequently
the power thereof is impaired by temptations, weakened by wordly distractions,
even of our lawful employment, and over-mastered by the force of sinful lusts,
so that they must needs discover a great deal of ignorance in their spiritual
estate, that feel not in their own souls a pronenesse to astonishment, as well
in their souls, as in their bodies, at least they bewray intolerable
carelessness, that finding the emptiness and leanness of their souls, yet
neglect to repair often to this holy Table, whereon is set forth the bread of
life, whereof when they have eaten, their spirit may come again, 1 Samuel 31.12
their hearts may be strengthened, their souls may be replenished, as with
marrow and fatness. These considerations may quicken our appetites after this
spiritual food. And such a meal extraordinary, with the help of our ordinary
refreshments, in hearing, prayer, and meditation, may carry us on more then 40
days, toward our heavenly Mansion. That we hasten not too fast on the other
hand, Let us take into consideration our inabilities for a suitable
preparation, and fitness for address to this Ordinance; we have fasted so
long in course, that we have scarce known what humiliation of our souls in
fasting is; yea; some would be every day at ^t, as we can rise in our spirits
to the extraordinary weight of it, and fit our souls with suitable
preparations for it. These that I have named are the best gages, that I know,
to regulate us in it, that in over-eager haste in duties extraordinary, we do
not run our selves out of breath; nor in overmuch sloth, give our selves over
to faintness, and leanness.

SECT. III. A Corollary from the former Doctrine.
Men called to the Sacrament may not othewise then upon weighty reasons absent
themselves from it.
THen it will follow by way of necessary inference from this consideration of
the necessity of Sacraments; that, When Sacraments are dispensed, Christians
should see weighty reasons, such in which they may have confidence, that they
will bear them out at the day of Judgment, for their omission of them. This
duty is in the number of affirmative precepts, which always bind, A man is
never from under the obligation of that Precept, Do this in remembrance of me;
though it does not bind to all times, A man is not to be ever in the doing of
it, and he is never to be found in the neglect of it; Loco and tempore debitis,
in due time, and place they must be done. A journey would have dispensed with a
man for absence from the Passover, so it will (when necessity of a man's
calling makes it necessary) from the Lords Supper; so also will sicknesses,
imprisonments, or like providence. But when the servant comes, and calls, and
says, All things are made ready, then take thou heed how thou make excuses.
They that were called to the wedding Feast might have pleaded, that other
businesses lay upon them, that they could not always attend weddings: But when
the King sends, and says, All is ready, come, there is no time for other
occasions td be looked after. It were an endless work, to find out the reasons
that men frame for absenting themselves. Excuses for absence from the Lords
Table removed.
Some see that it is a duty above them, neither their knowledge, nor their life
does answer to that which is required in a Communicant; and so despair of
coming up to it, and therefore keep off, lest they should (as they fear)
increase their judgment: In case these speak out of a serious consideration of
the work, with a sad reflection on themselves, upon a diligent scrutiny into
their hearts, and ways; and so take a day over for it, and in the mean time
dig for knowledge, as for hid treasures, and do strengthen their resolutions
to withstand all temptations to sin, they are by all means to be encouraged,
and helped; every Christian of strength should commiserate these weak souls.
But in case they clearly see all to be so, as we have said, and resolve to let
all alone, as a man that sees himself near to a bankrupt, regards not whether
end goes forward. This is then a sad and saddening reason; It lies upon these
to take their state and condition into further consideration, that by the good
hand of God it may be better with them. To provoke these to further care of
their eternal state, I shall put to them these questions:

First, What is it that thou do respective to other duties, The excuse of
unfitness examined.
the duty of Prayer? do thou pray ever, or never? resolving to keep back from
the Sacrament, do thou resolve wholly to forbear to call on the Name of the
Lord? If thou resolvest in this way, and perishest, thou have upon thee the
brand of the wicked, Psalm. 14.4. They call not on the Name of the Lord; and the
sentence of the wrath of God, Jer. 10.25. If thou can pray with hopes to be
heard, thou may then have hopes to receive the Sacrament, to be accepted;
and if so qualified, as to be out of hopes in the one, then thou art altogether
void of hopes in both. Paul speaks much of the danger of an unworthy
Communicant, which should awaken all that intend to receive. And multitude of
Scripture-Texts speak the same of men that pray in such a condition: What can
be worse then for the Lord to say, when they pray, he will not hear, he will
hide his eyes? Isa. 1.15. to reproach their praying, by the name of howling?
Hos. 7.14. to account it an abomination? Prove. 28.9.

Secondly, If it be above thy hopes to sit down with acceptance at the Lords
Table, Is it not then as much above thy hopes to sit down in heavenly places
with Christ Jesus? If thy state of ignorance, unbelief, and wickedness keep
thee from participation with visible Church Members in this Ordinance in the
way, how will thou be fit to join with the Church Triumphant in glory? Thou
must be made meet for heaven, Col. 1.12. if thou come to heaven: and thou art
meet to partake of this Supper, when thou art meet for heaven; unfit for this,
unfit for salvation.

Thirdly, If the danger be great to come unworthily, is it any less not to
come at all? It is hard to determine of the sins of despising, and profaning
the worship of the Lord, whether is greater, or lesser; Judge whether are in
better case, those mentioned, Matthew. 22.7. or him that is mentioned, ver. 12,
13. and then thou will see that there remains nothing, but to endeavor to be
such a one that may come, otherwise thou perishest in coming, and perishest in
absenting.

Others profess their willingness, and readiness to come, in case they could
have things to their minds when they come: But things being as they are, they
are compelled to forbear. Now these keep off out of several principles, which
in case they be well laid, they may justify their practice; but in case they
are found erroneous, their way must needs be faulty. These are in two extremes.

Want of a wonted Leiturgy may not excuse.
Some would come in case the ancient Liturgy were held, and the Book of Common
Prayer anciently in use in England might be observed; in the mean time till
that be, they do forbear* To this I say, It is wonder how so much stresse is
laid on this as to invite to the worship of God in case they may enjoy it, and
to persuade a total neglect, if they want it. Give me leave to desire of these
(there being so many that harp upon this string) a few things for satisfaction,
that so we may either prevail with them, to hold Communion with us, or else
that we may forbear with them.

First, Is not this an honor far above all, that is due to any labor, or
composure of man, to turn the scale in this manner, whether an instituted
worship of God must stand or fall? An humane work it is, this cannot be denied;
we are to receive nothing as Divinely inspired, upon pain of adding to the Word
of God, but that which is contained in the words of the Scripture. For this, so
to steer my course, that when my liberty of use of it is granted, I will
worship; and when denied, I will forbear; This I say is too high an honor, a
work of man is thus made of the very essence and being of an Ordinancie of God.
Hezekiah indeed put that honor upon the Altar at Jerusalem, that he would
admit no sacrifice elsewhere, (as Rabshakeh could observe to his reproach, Isa.
37.7.) But he had a Word of God for it, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. To give the like honor
to this book without a word from God, is to idolize it; These opinions of it,
were that which outed it.

Secondly, Is it for the excellency of the work it self, that thou thus prizest
it? or from the Sanction, that from higher powers has been put upon it, the
Law that did establish it? It must needs be one of these, that moves thee to
put such an honor upon it. That no such incomparable transcendent excelleny,
to cause so high a price to be put upon it, can be found in the work it self,
may seem several ways to appear, if we consider, 1. The time of composure,
immediately upon the first dawning of the Gospel light, and beginning of the
knowledge of God in the midst of us. 2. The persons for whose use it was
composed, such that for the generality had scarce stepped one foot out of Popish
blindness. 3. The end at which the compilers aimed, to frame such a piece that
might draw on a people wholly held in Mass Idolatry, to be content to accept
somewhat in their own tongue, where prayers are directed to God in Christ, and
not (as before they had been trained) to Saints, and Angels; So that they made
not that use of their own gifts for such a work, as by the light received from
God they might have framed, but such a one that they judged most meet for the
Churches present infant condition, and so contented themselves, in a great
part, with that which they found in the Breviaries, and Portuises of Rome. In
so much that B. Davenant one of the gravest and most learned of Prelates,
says, Deter. 37. Quidam exipsis Pontificibus Romany, formulam illam sacrorum
officiorum qua not utimur, probare voluerit, modo nos ab ejus autoritate hac in
rependere voluissemus.
that some of the Bishops of Rome have offered to approve our form of prayers,
provided that we would accept it by their authority. This is sufficient, if no
more should be said, to make it appear that it did never come up to that
excellency, that one might reach, that were composed in greater light, and for
their use that were of further growth. But letting it pass without exception,
and yielding (as must be granted) that thousands are in heaven that received
the Sacraments no otherwise then according to the directory in it, yet
doubtless, as must also be granted, that many more thousands are in heaven,
that never knew it, Christ and his Apostles never used it. It was not in use in
the primitive times; How many Liturgies may be read, as we may see if we go no
further then Cassander? and this of ours is none of them. None of the reformed
Churches in the world except England has made use of it. Had it been of such a
glory that men would deny themselves the benefit of the Sacrament, rather then
want it, all should at the greatest cost have procured it. As our forefathers
in England sent over into Germany for Bibles, at least New Testaments with
hazard of their lives, so should they out of Germany have sent for ourt Liturgy
Whereas some ignorantly say, that that was the Protestant Religion,
Protestanisme lives and dies with it; This is damnably injurious to all
Protestants in all the world, but our selves; The want of this Liturgy strikes
them out of our Communion; It on the other hand as much gratifies the Church of
Rome, whose emissaries whisper this into ignorant ears; they use to charge us,
that Henry the eighth brought in our Religion, but according to these we are
not so old, Edward the sixth must be the father of it. It is not then from the
excellency of the work that men can warrantably refuse this ordinance of God,
upon the want of it the Sacrament may stand in its glory without it. But it is
from the sanction that is put upon it, the law that has established it, to
which the people of England, though not others, must be subject. This many
learned in the laws much questioned; while it was most in use with us upon
grounds not easily answered; the act that imposed it under so strict penalties,
referres to the book authorized by Parliament in the fifth, and sixth years of
Edward the sixth, with two only alterations; now the alterations from time
have been many more, and therefore the book is not the same. And whereas we
should have recourse to the standard, the original draught among
Parliament-records, that for many years has not been found. 2. When we have
suffered so great a change, as we see in our laws, divine providence so
ordering, and yet keep silence, and in submission to divine will, conform to
that which is in present; How is it that this should be as the laws of the
Medes and Persians, which changes not? When it is taken from us, we must not
leave an ordinance of God, to keep hold of it.

Others would receive it, in case they might keep up their wonted gesture when
they come to it. Variation from a gesture or posture may not excuse.
But seeing that that in many places is not born, therefore they keep from it.
Answ. When some heretofore did forbear the Sacrament upon the account of
kneeling, being so prejudiced against it (as no Scripture-posture) that they
durst not use it, what clamours and invectives were raised against them, that
they left (as was wont to be objected) a necessary duty for that which was
arbitrary and indifferent, and upon so small an account made a breach of that
unity, which ought to be among the people of God? Was it not an usual language
in reproach of these, to say that they would receive it lying along; if it were
possible standing on their heads, rather then want it? and when these made it
their complaint, that they were accounted schismatique Puritans, and worse then
Idolaters, for not kneeling at the Sacrament, Abridg. page 39. Bradsh. arg. 11.
He that took most pains, and wrote most largely in defense of kneeling,
answers, As for the imputations of Puritanes and Schismatiques, so far forth as
the same be cast upon you for refusing to kneel, it is because you refuse and
oppose the Church in a matter indifferent. For to strive against a National
Church, and break the peace of it unjustly (as to break it about such mutable
gestures in Gods worship, as are truly indifferent both in nature and use, is
to break them unjustly) was ever held for a Schismatical course. Paybody of
kneeling, part 3. page 226. That which was then so blameworthy, that men upon
it were scarce judged fit to live in the Nation, is it now so innocent, and
praiseworthy? will this be a good plea at the day of judgment, to speak to
God in this language? Thou have commanded the celebration of thy Supper,
enjoining us to take, eat, and to drink of it. Thou did annex a promise of
the body and blood of Christ for the pardon of sin; now there is a gesture
which I would take in, which thou command not; in case I may not have my
will in the one, why should thou have thy will in the other? Let thy great
promise go, rather then I will take and eat it, in any other posture then that
which I have used. When so many and great troubles were in the Church about
this gesture, which are not yet forgotten, many pious men yielded to it, though
they saw inconvenience in it (seeing they durst not make a schism in the
Church, or be at the loss of a Sacrament) but were far from believing any
necessity of it, or in it. The party that urged it had never more to say then
the command of authority, to put an obediential, not an inherent necessity upon
it, (as Dr. Sanderson distinguishes) and the indifferency of it in its own
nature to warrant it; If a gesture (which some have judged sinful, and all have
confessed to be unnecessary) now be waved, none should be so much offended.

Others yet would break through all of this, A call by Church Officers for an
account of knowledge and profession of faith is no warranty for absence.
to come to this ordinance, neither want of Liturgy, nor change of gesture
should keep them back. But there is a further bar in their way, that which
Peter requires of every man, to be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks them, a reason of the hope that is in them, 1 Pet. 3.15. is now
called for, in case they will communicate. Here is their grievance, and
therefore they will absent themselves, and here is a double exception. 1. The
thing it self. 2. The manner of proceeding. As to the thing it self; It is
objected, that the Apostle says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of his bread, and drink of this Cup, etc. Every man then is to be left to his
own private examination, and not to subject himself to the examination of
another. For answer to this grievance, I say,

First, In case that this examination, or account taken, did shoulder out that
of self examination, the objection were then to purpose; if these can be proved
opposite, and not subordinate, one of them must then be waved.

Secondly, Let us then agree in this, that self examination is necessary: and
that it is to be done in order to the worthy receiving the Lords Supper; and
all that would communicate, to be ready to engage themselves for this
self-examinrtion, and then I shall only demand these questions.

First, Whether they will examine themselves, or engage for examination, that
cannot examine? Whether they will make a search, that have not eyes to see?
Whether they will prove themselves, whether they be in the faith, that know not
faith? Whether they will examine their humiliation under sin, and return from
sin, that know not sin? If a Minister of Christ should call upon his people to
examine, before they eat of this bread, or drink of this cup, he must upon that
account take care that they be so far knowing as to do it. If he must
administer it for edification, he should see (so far as he is able to
discern) whether they be in a capacity to be edified by it. If this knowledge be
wanting, then by their own confession they are unmeet, in case they be of
knowledge, it is easily signified, and made known, especially fundamental
necessary principles being alone demanded.

Secondly, Among other graces, wilt not thou in this self-examination look for
that grace of humility? that of hungring after Christ Jesus evidenced in the
love of his Ordinances? If thou art wholly wanting in the grace of humility,
thou stand unfit for this Table, God resists the proud, The soul that is
lift up is not right. If once this be obtained, then thou will, as to thy
guidance in heaven-way, not be too high to obey those that are over thee in the
Lord. Those speeches that we have heard of scorn and comparisons entered, never
came from an humble heart. If thou want an hungring fervent affection after
Christ Jesus, thou then art not meet for this Table, as being without a
spiritual appetite; If thou have attained to it, no such bars will be
pleaded, or spoken of to hold thee from it. Hunger will break stone-walls,
iron-bars: This is a hard weapon that will break through all obstacles.

For the manner, some say, The association of Elders in the work, no warranty
for absence.
If this were done by the Minister alone, they could easily bear, but others
associated they do not like. Ruling Lay Elders they suppose are not of Gods
institution. To this I say,

First, What do they say to all the Reformed Churches almost in the World, that
have that way of Discipline; if thou were a member of the Church there,
would thou upon this account separate and leave Church Communion?

Secondly, What say thou of our Government in this Church, when Bishops were
in power; who acted then in Government but Chancellors, and Officials, who were
for the most part lay-persons? If such could rule over a whole County, perhaps
three or four Counties; three or four may then with the Minister have
inspection into one Parish. The 26 Canon required Ministers to keep back
notorious offenders from the Sacrament; and Canon 27. provided that he should
give his reason upon complaint to the Ordinary, and obey his direction. This
Ordinary was for the most part a Lay-person, and he was set over both the
Ministers and Communicants of many Congregations.

Thirdly, In case any judge that according to Gospel Order, no others should
join with the Minister, but that he should act alone in admission; what
prejudice is this to the Sacrament, when he that is confessedly called to the
work, acts alone in the administration of it? And in case a Minister see it
expedient to crave assistance in so weighty a business, especially where he is
cast upon a large Congregation, for his further information, and advice; where
then is the evil? When Ministers this way go alone, then it is auricular
confession, shrift, and whatsoever profaneness can devise; then partiality is
objected, that out of spleen they put men from this Ordinance; when to avoid
these even by consent help is chosen, that on the other hand it is such a
grievance, The mixture of such that are supposed unworthy, no warrantly for
absence.
that it is thought a sufficient reason of men's absence.

These that we have hitherto seen are extremes on the one hand. There are those
of an opposite party, that have their Objections likewise, and would come, as
they say, to this Table, in case they could meet with suitable guests there,
and those only that become such a Feast; such that are holy, and no other; but
looking for others there whom God never called, they resolve upon that account
to keep absent. I answer, 1. Let these take heed lest they take too much upon
them, in passing sentence upon all that come to join in this duty, and think
better upon it, whether that, or somewhat else, ought not to be there their
business? 2. Whether they go not higher then the Word of God will bear them
out in the principles that they lay for the qualification of such a one that is
admittible to this Supper? and take heed that their great ambition be not to
find out a Church in that purity and glory, that Christ has altogether denied
to be enjoyed on earth. 3. Where it is that they can have hopes to go to join,
where all give evidences of regeneration, and no other are received? These
betake themselves all their days to the Society of Seekers. As those under the
famine of the Word threatened by the Prophet, shall wander from Sea to Sea, and
from the North, even to the East, and shall run to and fro, seeking the Word of
the Lord: So may these, seeking a Church of their own fancying, but shall find
none. But for more full satisfaction, let these take these following Arguments
into consideration.

Arguments evincing the lawfulness of communicating in mixed Congregations.
First, There is never an approved example in all the Scripture, of any one man
that did separate, or withdraw himself from an Ordinance, which God has
enjoined upon the account of the impurity or defilement, either of him that did
administer, or of those that were to join in it. It is true that it is said, 1 Samuel 2.17. as the aggravation of the sin of Hophni and Phinehas the sons of
Eli, that men then (and as appears for their sakes) abhorred the offering of
the Lord, and therefore in all probability absented themselves from it; but
Elkanah and Hannah did not so, as appears, Chap. 1.3, 7. and Mr. Hildersam.
Lect. 29 on John, page 129. observes from Chap. 2.24. that it was their sin
that made any such separation.

Secondly, There are many approved Examples of the people of God to the
contrary; how much do we read in the Prophets of the peoples wickedness, and
corruptions in the State Civil, and Ecclesiastical? yet which of them for that
cause did make separation? We see what company did resort to the house of God
in Jeremy's time. Jer. 7.9, 10. and yet we see Jeremy ready, when he had
liberty, to resort to it, Jer. 36.5. Much was out of frame, and little in due
order in Christ's time; yet as he acknowledged, that even then salvation was of
the Jews, Joh. 4.22. they had then saving Ordinances among them, so he held
Communion with them, as he religiously observed other Feasts, so some have
observed (as we have heard) that he kept four Passeovers, after he appeared in
public, for the work of man's Redemption.

Thirdly, One man's sin must not keep another from a necessary enjoined duty; if
one man will make himself by his profane addresses guilty of Christ's death,
another must not therefore forbear to show forth his death. This is such a
duty, and the sin of another will by no means excuse neglect of it: this were
to sin, because another sins; to despise an Ordinance, because another
prophanes it: when one came without a wedding garment, no invited guest for his
sake did keep from the wedding.

Fourthly, No one Communicant is bound to examine what all are, that are his
fellow-Communicants; there is neither express command for it, nor yet reason
to evince it; each man is bound to see himself arrayed, as he ought, and not to
find fault in others addresses, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat;
though he be to admonish as his brothers visible sin gives him occasion.

Fifthly, The penalty of him that comes unworthily, reaches his own self, that
comes in his unworthiness, and extends no further. Legal uncleanness defiled
the man, that was personally unclean, and not his neighbor: so it is here, He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself,
etc.

Sixthly, If one man's sin this way do defile another, the sin of one
Communicant does defile all other Communicants; then it must be either from the
nature of sin, thus to defile all in so near Communion, or from the nature of
the Ordinance thus to be defiled to all, when one in defilement comes to it; or
from some positive precept forbidding all to come, when any that is unclean is
there. I doubt not but this is a sufficient enumeration. But, 1. It is not of
the nature of sin, thus to defile all, in such communion, then it would every
where thus defile, wheresoever any have society, or do accompany together. Then
the chief Priests had done well, to keep out of the Judgment-Hall, that they
might be clean, to keep the Passover, John 18.28. and the Pharisees to wash,
when they came from Market. 2. It is not of the nature of the Ordinance to be
thus defiled to all. It is not so in other Ordinances: Cain's offering defiled
not Abels, nor did Hophni and Phinehas in their offerings defile Elkanah and
Hannah when they offered. 3. Nor yet is there any positive precept, forbidding
a cleansed soul, upon the account of the uncleanness of another, to come to
this Table.

Seventhly, If one man's presence in this way defile another, then it is either
his simple presence, such a ones being there in his infection, or else a
willing and witting presence with such a one. If simple presence do defile,
then there is no man that can be secure. The closest hypocrite that creeps in
unawares would be the undoing of all; when Christ said, Ye are clean, but not
all, Joh 13.10. according to this opinion it had been a contradiction, the
uncleanness of one had been the defilement of all. Neither is it willing, or
witting presence, that can in this way defile, then it must be in every single
man's power to determine him to be such, and exclude him thence, or else of
necessity exclude himself. When the Eldership has judged and received
according to the general way of Reformed Churches, or the plurality of votes of
believers, as it is with men of the Congregational way, he must make an
after-search, a further scrutiny; he that one judges fit, that most judge fit,
some will judge unworthy, and upon that account must shut themselves out of
Communion. Men of such principles must everlastingly avoid all
Church Fellowship, or act against their principles; and we need not to speak
it, it is too plainly visible what manner of persons men of such high pretenses
have in their Congregations. There are multitudes of Arguments heaped to
nourish this scruple, but I shall not further trouble the Reader; there is
nothing, I think, can be said, but that which here has been spoke, will afford
a sufficient answer.

CHAP. IX. The being of Sacraments depends upon their use.
Another Position yet follows from the words, The being of Sacraments depends
upon their use, they are no Sacraments to those that do not partake of them.

This is grounded upon this act of Abraham appointed of God, and accordingly
done by him, The being of Sacraments consists in their use.
He received the sign of Circumcision. All that he did was in obedience of the
Divine Commandment, Genesis 17.11. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your
foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me and you. It was
not the foreskin, but the foreskin cut off, that was the token of the Covenant.
So also in that of the Passover, Israel had a command from God, to take every
man a lamb, and to eat the flesh roast with fire, and unleavened bread, and with
bitter herbs ye shall eat it, Exodus 12.3, 8. It is not barely the Lamb, but
eaten in the way that God prescribed, that made the Sacrament. In Baptism, the
command is, Baptize them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. It is not water that makes up Baptism, but water applied to the
subject, or the subject to the water. In the Lords Supper there is bread and
wine in their significancy held out, not for bare sight, but a Command is
added; Take, eat, drink ye all of this; bread and wine makes not up the
Sacrament, without breaking, giving, taking, and eating. In those Sacraments
extraordinary. The Sea was no Sacrament, but Isreal's passage through it. The
Cloud was no Sacrament, but Isreal's guidance by it, or the cloud guiding
Israel, and Israel following after it. Neither was the Manna a Sacrament, or
the rock considered in themselves; but the Manna eaten, the water of the rock
drunk by the Israelites. Even the fictious Sacraments of the Church of Rome
consist in their use: Their Order is no Sacrament, where there is none
Ordained; and Marriage is no Sacrament, where none are married. Their Chrisme
in confirmation, oil in extreme unction not applied, are of no use, or
efficacy. This is plain in Reason. Arguments to ^vince it.


First, The being of Sacraments depends on their institution; Take away their
institution, and they have no being at all. But the institution leads us not
barely to an element, but prescribes the use; not only to a sign, but the
application of it; not only to water, but to be baptized with water; not only
to bread and wine, but the eating of bread, drinking of wine, and the beholding
of both.

Secondly, the being of Sacraments depends upon the relation of the sign to the
thing signified, with the analogy and proportion that is held between them.
This is plain; Take away such relation, and the element is a common element,
and not a Sacrament; set aside, the consideration of the blood, and Spirit of
Christ, and water is an element for common use, to take away the filth of the
flesh, but for removal neither of the guilt, nor filth of sin. Take away the
consideration of the body and blood of Christ, and bread may strengthen nature,
but not nourish the soul. But the relation is not barely in the signs, or
elements, but in their applications to the subject; water bears no relation to
the cleansing of sin, but washing with water; and bread and wine, no relation
to the setting forth of the Lords death, remembrance of him, or life by him,
but the breaking, eating, and drinking.

Thirdly, That which being removed nulls a Sacrament, that is necessary to the
being of Sacraments. This is plain; Nothing can destroy being, but the want of
that which is necessary to being: But the removal, or taking away of the use
nulls and destroys the bring of Sacraments. Let not the foreskin be cut off,
nor the Lamb roasted, and eaten; the water not be applied to the person, nor
bread and wine eaten and drunken, there is no Sacrament; therefore the use of
Sacraments gives being to them.

Fourthly, All benefit of, and in the thing signified, consists in the
application, therefore the Sacraments for their being, use, and benefit,
consist in their application likewise. The consequence is grounded upon the
analogy that is between the sign and the thing signified. The antecedent is
clear, the blood of Christ, the sufferings of Christ not brought home to the
soul, and interest obtained by application, does not benefit, or profit.

Fifthly, That which enters the definition of a Sacrament, is of the being of
it. This none can deny: But the use or office of a Sacrament enters the
definition of it: Ergo. The Apostle defines it to be a sign and seal, which
plainly speaks not the nature, but the use of Sacramental elements.

Here is no Conroversie in this thing among parties, save with the Church of
Rome; neither is there any with them, save in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. They confess that the being of Baptism does so consist in the use,
that without it, it is no Sacrament. Only the Lords Supper (for
Transubstantiations sake) though never used, is still a Sacrament, when they
reserve it in a box, carry it about for pomp, hold it up for worship, it is
still a Sacrament. The body of Christ is still there, and if a mouse falls upon
it, the mouse receives a Sacrament, knawes upon Christ's flesh. But when worms
breed in it (as they may by their own confession) they are hard put to it. They
cannot breed upon accidents, the shape, the color of bread cannot give being
to worms. And to say that the substance which remains there, which is the flesh
of Christ, breeds them, is no low blasphemy. The generation of one is the
corruption of another, and God will not suffer his holy One to see corruption.
I remember an answer to this great difficulty, (when I first read Philosophy)
out of Conimbricenses Physics; That learned Society did determine, that God by
miracle did create matter, and laid it by the consecrate host, and that did
putrify, and not the consecrated bread, and so Worms were generated. They sure
believe that it is an easy thing to put God upon miracles. Against this
permanency of this Sacrament out of the use of it, we say,

First, If the use of this be instituted, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper
equally transient with Baptism.
as well as the use of Baptism, and given in command; then this Sacrament
consists in the use, as well as Baptism. This cannot be denied, for the
institution, and Comman of Christ must equally lead us in both. But in the
Lords Supper, as well as in Baptism, the use is within the institution, and
given in Command by Christ; Therefore this Sacrament of the Lords Supper
consists in the use, as well as that of Baptism. Whereas Bellarmine replies to
this, that Christ commanded the bread to be eaten, but not presently after
consecration; therefore to delay eating is not against the institution. To this
we answer, 1. Neither did he command water, as soon as set apart for Baptism,
to be applied to the party to be baptized; yet till it be applied, the party is
not baptized, water is no Sacrament; and so the bread and wine in that interim
still applied, still wants the nature of a Sacrament. 2. He did command it then
to be eaten, by Bellarmin's confession, though not instantly to be eaten; and
he gave the like command of the cup, as of the bread, yea, with more exactness
a note of universality added, Drink ye all of it; yet their Laity have a
Sacrament, and never drink of it. 3. That which the Apostles did, that Christ
enjoined (as Amesius well replies;) they understood Christ's intimation, as well
as the most nimble-headed Jesuits, but they did not reserve it, but did eat it.

Secondly, If there be no footsteps in all the holy Scriptures, of any other
way of dealing with the elements of the Lords Supper, then the eating and
drinking of them; then, according to the institution, they must be eaten, and
drunken: But there is no footstep there, of any other dealing with the
Sacrament, then eating and drinking; Therefore according to the institution it
is not to be reserved, but to be eaten and drunk. Indeed Chamier quotes Croquet
replying, that some of the Ancient have said, that Judas took one part of the
Sacrament, and reserved the other for scorn; but this may be well reckoned
among others of like nature in their Legends. And I would advise all those that
believe it, if they be ambitious to be disciples of Judas, to follow it.

Thirdly, The promise in this Sacrament is not to be divided from the precept,
by any that will expect a blessing. But where the promise is, This is my body,
this is my blood in the New Testament; in the institution, There is a precept,
Take, eat, Drink ye all of this; therefore they must eat, and drink, that will
have benefit in the promise. It would little I suppose please the Reader to
hear Bellarmine, Suarez, and other Jesuits to exempt this Sacrament from the
common nature of Sacraments, and to make it permanent, when the other (as they
speak) are transeunt. Thomas Aquinas, Part 3. Quaest. 73. art. 1. resp. ad. 3.
makes this difference between the Eucharist and other Sacraments, This
Sacrament is perfected (says he) in the consecration of the matter, other
Sacraments are perfected in the application of the matter to the person to be
sanctified. Suarez, disp. 42. Sect. 4. quotes it with approbation; and Scotus
in quanto Did. 8. quaest. 1. as he is quoted by Amesius, All the Sacraments
except the Eucharist consist in their use; so that in them the Sacrament, and
the receiving of the Sacrament is the same. He that pleases may read Bellar.
Arguments, lib. 4. de Eucharistia, Cap. 2, 3, 4. Suarez in the place named with
Whitakers, Amesius, Vorstius in 3. Tom. Bellar. These. 9. page 406. Chamier
against them both, with others of that party, de Eucharistia, lib. 7. cap. 4,
etc. I shall desire to take up the Reader with that which I judge more
necessary; Gerard in his Common places, Cap. 4. de Sacramentis, makes it his
business to find out the Genus in the definition of a Sacrament, in which the
general form of Sacraments, he says, is to be included; and concludes, 1. In
the negative, that it is not to be defined a sign, and in the affirmative, that
it is an action. Though this perhaps might rather have been taken into
consideration when we spoke of Sacramental signs, and laid open that part of
the definition, yet being slipped there, it may not inconveniently be spoken to
in this place. In this determination of his, he supposes, he meets with a
double error; One, of the Papists, but now examined, that the Eucharist is a
permanent thing, and not transient; which it cannot be, in case it be an
action. And the other both of Papists, and the followers of Calvin, (as he
calls them) both of which affirm, that it is a sign, and that must supply the
place of the genus in the definition; and though he professes willingly to
yield, that Sacraments may be called signs, in respect of their office, and
end; yet he will not have it put into the definition, forgetting it seems (for
he does not once take notice of it) that the Apostle in the Text so defines it.
His Reasons to conclude, that Sacraments are not to be defined, as signs are:
Aliud est res ipsa, aliud ejus officium ac finis, aliud appellatio ejus ex
officio, aliud definitio ex essentia. Definitio est (...). Ergo genus in
definitione peti debet ex rei definitae essentia; jam vero esse signum non
pertinet ad quidditatem, sed ad ejus finem and usum.
A thing it self is one, and the end, and office is another. The appellation of
it by the office is one, and the definition by the essence is another: Now to
be signs, and seals, is the end and office of Sacraments. To which I answer;
That Sacrament denotes the office and use for which such and such an element,
according to Divine appointment, serves. If we should go about to define bread
or water (which are appointed to be signs) to be signs and seals, we should
run upon a great error. For it is neither of the essence of bread, nor wine to
be a sign. But defining a Sacrament in that way, we hold forth the very essence
of it.

2. He says 2. Definitio debet constare ex prioribus and notioribus;
Sacramenta esse signa and sigilla ex prioribus and notioribus, quia ipsorum
cognitio pendet ex actionibus and ceremioniis, hae enim cum fine, qui est
signare, conjunctae, dicuntur signa and sigilla
The definition ought to consist of that which is before, and better known then
the thing defined; But signs and seals are not before, and better known then
Sacraments. The minor which every one will be ready to deny, he proves, Because
the knowledge of them depends on actions and Ceremonies, as though the Elements
alone were signs without consideration of the actions which in the institution
are enjoined. His third reason is, because 3. Proprium genus debet esse
propinquum; signum autem est genus Sacramenti remotum, tum quia a fine petita
est haec denominatio, tum quia mediantibus actionibus certo verbo and externo
elemento constantibus signant.
to be a sign is not the immediate, but the remote genus of a Sacrament, which
he proves in that it is no sign oterwise then by reason of actions
accompanying. Where we meet with the same mistake as before. If it be by the
help of actions that they are signs, it is then by help of themselves,
Elements with their actions and not otherwise are signs. 4. He says, 4. Pars
rei non est genus rei ut totius; signa in oculos incurrentia sunt pars
Sacramentorum, una terrena scilicet, cui adjuncta res coelestis invisibilis
Sacra mentum proprie dictum constituit.
One part of a thing is not the genus of it, as whole: But signs are but part
of a Sacrament, There being two parts, one terrene, and the other heavenly; and
therefore it is not the genus. To which I reply, 1. The action which he puts
into the definition is but one part sure, and the earthly part, whether it be
the action of the dispenser, or receiver, that he understands by action. 2. It
seems that he would have a definition of an outward Element, and Christ put
into one notion together. 3. We define that which lies upon our hand by divine
institution, which is the office of such, and such Elements with the actions
about them, leading to the thing signified. Lastly, He says 5. Genus non debet
esse ambiguum; at qui vox signi est ambigua, etc.
that the genus in a definition must not be ambiguous: But this is ambiguous,
for men speak of signs ambiguously. But this is nothing to those that speak
distinctly of signs, when they put them into a definition, and make it to
appear what signs they mean; So that the Apostles defini-nition making
Sacraments signs, is yet uncontrollable. And defense being made that they are
rightly defined to be signs, all that is said to prove that action is to be
the genus, may easily be answered.

1. The author by an induction proves, that actions are enjoined in all
Sacraments, which we easily yield, and as easily prove that those are
significant actions, and so make up the sign, and that they are Sacramental,
not qua actions, for then as often as we eat bread, or drink wine, we should be
at a Sacrament; and as often as a woman puts water upon her child's face, she
should be about baptism.

2. Sacraments (says he) are actions; Circumcision is an action, so the
Paschal Lamb, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. The first is the cutting off the
foreskin; the second is the rosting, and eating of a Lamb; the third is dipping
or sprinkling with water, and the fourth eating and drinking bread and wine.
Answ. 1. And all these are significant actions in and about an outward element,
and so we are where we were. 2. These instances are no proofs that Sacraments
are actions, but that action is required to the making up of a Sacrament. It is
not simply action, but an action with restraint to such an Element, in, and
about such a subject; Circumcision in any other part could have been no
Sacrament, nor yet eating of any other creature in the time of the law then a
Lamb of the flock, or of the herd; nor yet any other eating and drinking of
bread and wine, then in the manner prescribed. And so we may say of dipping,
pouring, or sprinkling 3. He does not tell us, whether it be the dispensers
action, or the receivers, that makes a Sacrament. In Circumcision, and Baptism
he speaks nothing of any action in the receiver. In the Passover and Lords
Supper he says nothing of any action of the dispenser. And it is for the
receivers sake that the Sacrament is appointed, and Isaacs Circumcision, and
every infants Baptism (if not Abraham's Circumcision, and Baptism of men of
years) may rather be defined by passion then action. And passion may as well
challenge the seat of Sacraments, as action, where he places it. He concludes,
that ancient and modern Writers, yea, Calvin's followers call them by the name
of rites, and Ceremonies, which we know to consist in action. Here is a
manifest mistake, rites and Ceremonies are not always actions, neither humane,
nor divine Ceremonies. The high Priests Ephod, with the rest of those holy
garments prescribed, were Ceremonies, and so was the surplice while in use in
England, and yet these were in the predicament of Habitus and not of Actio. It
is true that the putting them on was an action, but that was not the Ceremony,
but the wearing of them in the work of worship, and the putting it on was no
act of him that wore it, but his that waited upon him. And kneeling at the
Sacrament was esteemed a Ceremony with us, yet no action, but a gesture, or
posture of the body, and in the predicament of Situs, Dr. Burges indeed in his
rejoinder defines a Ceremony to be an action, page 29. But presently he
explaines himself, and says, I call it an action, because nothing is or can be
a Ceremony in respect of existence, or being, but only in respect of acting or
usage thereof, as a ceremony: so that he takes action abusive, for any manner
of usage whatsoever; upon the publishing of the book, I spoke with the author
of this thing, and he acknowledged action strictly taken, was too narrow to be
the Genus of a Ceremony, and that it was helped by the word usage. So Dr.
Sanderson, that renouned Logician, speaking of the execution, done by Phinehas
in the division of his text, calls his standing up an action, but presently
adds. Though I call it an action; yet it is a gesture properly, and not an
action, so that when rites, and Ceremonies may be postures, or habits, it
cannot be said that they consist in action; so that it is clear, that
Sacraments consist in their use, and though actions be seen in every Sacrament,
either done by the dispenser, or receiver, or both; yet those actions being
upon, and about some visible element, and the Elements themselves, with the
actions being all significant; Sacraments are yet rightly defined to be signs,
and not actions.

Then it must necessarily follow by way of Corollary, that there is no
holiness remaining in the elements, There is no continued holiness in
Sacramental elements.
no relative holiness abiding upon them, further then according to the
institution they are applied and received. The water in the vessel that
contains it is no further (as I may say) consecrate then as it is applied to
the person baptized. The river of Jordan, nor yet the waters near Aenon, in
Salem, had no more holiness then other waters in Jury. The relics of bread
and wine in the Lords Supper, have no more of holiness, when they are taken
from thence then they had when they were brought thither. Tippling off of the
wine in the place where it was immediately before received as a Sacrament (of
which I have heard) is undecent, and unsuitable to the work that they have been
upon, yet it is no other then common wine that then is taken. Care should be
taken not to defile the person who remains consecrate to God, and in
participation of these elements makes profession of it, no such fear of
profaning the elements themselves. But for a great part these are well
contented to be profane, provided that the elements may be esteemed, and
honored as holy. This high opinion of holiness in the consecrated wine robbed
the people of it. Many of the Laity have beards that may lick some drops of it
up, and the number increasing it must pass through so many hands, or be put to
so many mouths, that some may be spilt; and those fears here so wrought, that
they may not meddle at all with it. And how great disputes there have been,
what shall be done with it, if a weak stomach vomit it up while the species of
it does remain unchanged; they that are verst in Popish Casuists well know. And
all this from that monster of Transubstantiation. But when a right use of the
Sacraments is understood, all these superstitious conceits will vanish, and
come to nothing; when a sealed indenture has done its office, we no longer
look much after the wax, and parchment.

Secondly, Their touch or abode upon any thing or utensil does not make it holy.
If their Sacramental nature remain no longer then their use, so that
themselves are no further holy, then their touch, or former abodes cannot make
any place, or utensil holy; it cannot leave any such remaining holiness (as
some conceit) behind. So it would follow that in case the words of consecration
be pronounced over all the bread in the greatest pantry, or to be sold in the
market place (which men of that opinion say may be done) then not only every
bit of that bread is turned into Christ, but all the binges or panniers that
receive the bread in them must have an holiness remaining, and abiding upon
them, and so in like case all the Wine in the cellar, yea, all the earth of the
Land of Canaan would remain holy by reason of the Manna falling upon it, which
was spiritual meat, therefore a profaning of it, to tread with the foot upon
it, much more for beasts to dung and graze it. As much is said to prove that
the rock was Christ, as there is to prove that the cup is Christ's blood. If
that had such a sanctifying power, then all the ground on which the water ran,
yea, every beast that drank of it, was made holy. The thought of this might
have silenced that talk of bowing to the place of Gods special residence, by
which they meant the place where the Sacrament has been celebrated, which of a
Table they made an Altar, which then according to our Savior Christ, must make
holy the body and blood of Christ, offered upon it, and the body and blood of
Christ must not make it holy, Ye fools, and blind, whether is greater, the
gift or the altar that sanctifies the gift? Matthew. 23.19. But with us the gift
did put the sanctification upon the Altar, that from the time that the gift had
been upon it, men must upon sight still worship ad, versus, coram, amazing
those that were offended at it, with their distinction of inhesive and
abstractive holiness.

CHAP. X.
SECT. I. Sacraments are seals.
HEre follows a second use and office of Sacraments; which being added to the
former, makes up the whole for which they serve. As they are signs, so they
are seals; from whence a double Observation follows.

Sacraments are seals.

All that the Sacraments work on the souls of receivers is by way of sign and
seal.

First, Sacraments are seals.

Sacraments are seals.
Before this can be proved, by reason of the ambiguity of the word, it is to be
distinguished; Seal is sometimes taken properly, and that is yet twofold: 1. A
seal sealing, or making an impression, and so the instrument used for that
purpose is called a seal, or signet; so, Genesis 38.18. Judah delivered to Tamar
his signet, Several acceptations of the word.
or seal; so, Dan. 6.17. 2. A seal sealed, or receiving an impression; so the
Letters that we send have their seals upon them, when we yet keep our signet,
or sealing seal, to make thousands of impressions: so in the vision, Revel.
5.1. there is a book with seven seals. Sometimes the word is used
Metaphorically. And that is also twofold; 1. By way of allusion to the signet,
or instrument sealing; and so those things that are of great esteem, and highly
prized, are called by the name of seals, or signets, Jerem. 22.24. As I live,
says the Lord, Though Coniah the son of Jehojakim the King of Judah were the
signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence. So, Hag. 2.23. 2. By
way of allusion to the use and office of a signet, or seal, as making
impression on things sealed, that is, as doing the office of such seals: Here
it is taken metaphorically, not in a proper sense, but in allusion to the use
of seals, not the signet it self. Several uses of a seal.
Now the use of seals is various.

First, For secrecy, For Secrecy.
to keep things close, so that while the seal is upon them none may look into
them. To that end we use to put seals on our Letters, that they may not be
read by any but those whom they concern; so the chief Priests sealed the stone,
of Christ's Sepulcher, Matthew. 27.66. To this use of a seal the Prophet alludes,
Isai. 8.16. Bind up the testimony, seal the Law among the disciples; and John
also in that vision, Revel. 5.1. I saw in the right hand of him that sat on
the Throne a book written within, and on the back side sealed with seven seals.

Secondly, For warranty For Warranty.
and authority in the discharge of any business. Haman had Ahasuerus his seal
for the slaughter of the Jews, Esth. 3.12. And Jezabel had the seal of Ahab to
bring Naboth into question, 1 King. 21.8. and to this use of a seal the Lord
Christ alludes, where he vouches the authority of the Son of man to give life
to the world, Him has God the Father sealed, Joh. 6.27.

Thirdly, For distinction, For Distinction.
or separation, to mark out things that are to be known, and distinguished from
others. Commodities allowed to pass, have the public Officers stamp; and the
Merchant puts his mark on the wares that he buys, as the Grazier on his
beasts, the Shepherd on his flock, to distinguish them from those that belong
to others. To this the Apostle alludes, 2 Timothy 2.19. Having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his.

Fourthly, For security, For Security.
to keep things inviolable, and free from harm. To that end Daniels prison-door
was sealed, Dan. 6.17. To this use of seals Solomon alludes, Cant. 4.12. A
garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
Water was precious in those parts, therefore they shut up their Wells, and
sealed them, that none might draw out water from them. The like allusion we see
in that vision, Revel. 7.2, 3. And I saw another Angel ascending from the East,
having the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four
Angels, to whom it was given, to hurt the earth, and the Sea, saying, Hurt not
the earth, neither the Sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of
our God in the foreheads.

Fifthly, For ratification, For ratification.
and confirmation; for further, and more firm assurance. In the grants and
conveyances of men the seal is to make the title unquestionable, Jer. 32.10. I
subscribed the evidence, and sealed it. The Corinthians conversion to Christ,
did evidence the Apostles Call to work of an Apostle; and therefore he says,
The seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.2. We find a seal,
and earnest given, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. 2 Cor. 1.22. to be one and the same; and
the use of earnests we know is for confirmation, to ratify a Covenant, or
bargain: what the Apostle says of an oath for confirmation, that among men it
for end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. the same we may say of a seal, that puts an
end to differences, and contentions. And what an oath is to a promise, a seal
is likewise; and Gods oath added to his promise, is of the same use as his
seal, that by two immutable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we
should have strong consolations, Heb, 6.18. yea, Abraham the leading man in
Covenant had from God both oath and seal added for confirmation of his promise;
The Apostle makes observation of his oath out of Scripture-history, Heb. 6.13,
14. When God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he
swear by himself, saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I
will multiply thee. And here he makes like observation of his seal, God having
entered Covenant with Abraham, and his seed, adds this for ratification, Genes.
17.10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed
after thee, Every manchild among you shall be circumcised; which the Apostle
here interprets to be both a sign, and a seal. He received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness, etc. And in this respect Sacraments
are called seals, to ratify and confirm all that the Covenant does hold out,
and promise. That which does the office of a seal, or earnest between man and
man, that is fitly called a seal between God and his people: But Sacraments do
the same Offices between God and his people, as seals and earnests do between
man and man; seals and earnests ratify man's Covenant, Sacraments ratify and
confirm the Covenant of God; and therefore Sacraments are fitly called seals.

But exceptions are here taken by those that do deny that Sacraments have any
such office as to be for seals.

Objections against of Sacraments.
First, This is the alone place where any Sacrament is called in Scripture by
the name of seal; This Sacrament is only once, and no other Sacrament any
where ever so called: And therefore it will not hence follow that Sacraments
are seals. Sol.


Answ. 1. This will conclude them to be no signs, as well as it will conclude
that they are no seals; Circumcision is here called a sign, and no other
Sacrament is in any Scripture-Text called a sign; yet all confess that they
are all signs. They may therefore notwithstanding this objection be seals as
well as signs. 2. The calling of it a seal, does not make it one, but only
declare it to be such: Before ever the Apostle had given it these names, it was
both a sign and seal, as well as after: other Sacraments are likewise seals,
where there are like Sacramental expressions, notwithstanding they have no such
name in Scripture. And as the Apostle infers from the institution of
Circumcision, and Abraham's acceptance of it, that Circumcision was a seal, so
may we infer in like manner, that other Sacraments are signs and seals. Compare
that which the Apostle here deduceth from Genesis 17. concerning Abraham's
Circumcision, with that which may be deduced from Acts 8.34, 35. concerning the
Eunuchs Baptism; Abraham believed, and was justified upon believing, and then
received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, which
he had being uncircumcised. And the Eunuch did believe on Philips preaching,
and afterward received Baptism. May we not well then say, He received the
sign of Baptism, a seal of the righteousness that he had being yet
unbaptized? so we may say of Paul's Baptism, and the Jaylours, upon their
miraculous conversion to the faith they received the sign of Baptism for the
same reason.

Secondly, It is demanded, whether the Covenant of grace, and promises of
salvation be complete, valid, and firm in themselves, without these things
annexed to them? or whether they be merely void, and null in Law, as Kings, and
men's Deeds, and Charters, without a seal to confirm them? If incomplete,
infirm, and invalid, this is extremely derogatory to the Covenant, and
therefore they are not properly seals.

Answ. 1. no servants? Sacraments are seals by way of metaphor, because they do
the office that seals do among men, and if they do not per omnia quadrare, as
no metaphors do, yet in case they agree in the main for which that serves from
whence the metaphor is borrowed, it is sufficient. Ministers are fitly called
Ambassadors; being sent of God to treat from him with a people, as Ambassadors
are sent of Princes, notwithstanding that those to whom Ambassadors come, may
treat, or not treat at pleasure; may give in Propositions, as well as receive
them; when they to whom Gods Ministers are sent, must give audience, must take
the Propositions delivered, and not stand to Capitulate. If Sacraments ratify
to us the promises of the Covenant; That is enough to denominate them seals,
though wit could devise twenty differences. And yet I read some differences
assigned, which I confess) I do not understand to be any differences at all.
2. I know not that it is absolutely true in Law, that men's grants are void
altogether, without a seal; I have heard of Leases: parol, and Wills
nuncupative, which I am sure have no seal. And seals sometimes by the injury
of time are utterly broke, and lost; and in this case I suppose the Covenant
may yet stand. 3. What is objected against this office of Sacraments, as
seals, may also be objected against the oath of God made to Abraham for
confirmation of his Word. That will admit the dilemma; Either his Word of
Promise was true, and firm without it, or else (which I am loath to speak)
subject to change. The application is easy. The same thing was revealed to
Pharaoh in a dream for seven years plenty, and seven years famine, by a double
sign; If there was truth in one, we may argue the second needs not; if untrue,
neither have cause to be heeded, or regarded. If we will undertake such kind of
reasonings, we should make no end. 4. The Covenant is complete, full, firm, and
valid, in case we should never more then once hear it, or never have any seal
put to it, nor any oath for confirmation; yet our unbelief, and distrust is
such, that we need ingeminations, inculcations, oaths, seals, and all from God
to uphold us.

It is yet demanded, whether these seals are inseparably annexed to the
Covenant, and promises of grace in the Old, or New Testament, as parts, or
parcels of them, as seals are annexed To the Charter? If yea, then show us to
what Covenants, and Promises, and in, and by what Texts they are thus
inseparably annexed, and how any can be saved or made partakers of the benefit
of the Covenant, and promises of grace, who do not actually receive these
seals of grace? when as your selves with all Orthodox Divines must grant, that
many who were never baptized, and infinite who never received the Lords Supper,
are and may be saved, and are made partakers of the Covenant, and promises of
grace, without receiving, or enjoying these seals of grace. If no, then how
can these be termed seals of the Covenant, and promises of grace, which are
not inseparably affixed to them, as seals are to Charters since many receive
the Covenant, and promises of grace, without these seals; and other receive
these seals, without the Covenant, or promises, the benefit whereof they never
enjoy.

Answ. They are inseparably joined respectu praecepti, respectu medii, The
Covenant may have its effect without them, The Covenant is entire in it self
without them. They are not inseparable quoad esse, yet they have their
necessity (though not simple, and absolute) quoad operari, for the Covenant to
have its due work on our hearts. God saw them necessary, helpful, and useful,
and therefore gave them in charge, as many Scriptures witness, and we of
necessity must submit to them, in order to obtain the end to which they serve;
and for which they are designed, and appointed.

SECT. II. Rules for a right understanding of Sacramental Seals.
FIrst, These are outward, visible seals; Explicatory Propositions touching
the sealing of Sacraments.
and privileges of visible Churches, and Church Membership, committed to the
Stewards of God in his house to dispense, and apply to their people. And so
different from that other seal of God frequently mentioned, the seal of the
Spirit which is internal, invisible, proper only to the elect, regenerate,
reserved in the hand of God, according to prerogative to give. That these are
external, and visible, needs no more then our eyes; and that they are the
privilege of visible Churches, and Church Members, sufficient has been spoken.
And therefore they both agree in the general nature of a seal, both are for
ratification, and confirmation of the truth of Gods promises, yet in a
different way, and different latitude; They have the former, that never reached
the latter; and the former is serviceable to attain to the latter.

Secondly, They are seals not to confirm any truth of God in it self, or to
work in us any assent to general Scripture-Propositions, But as general truths
are brought home by particular application, so they seal men's particular
interest in the Covenant. He that has the Son has life; He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life. These are
Scripture-Propositions, and he that is to seek here has no cure in the
Sacraments; They can give no direct remedy. These signs and seals take this for
granted, and cannot make proof of it. But when this is assented to in the
general, He that has the Son, has life; and he that feeds upon him, shall
live for ever; Here souls are confirmed in their particular interests, that
the Son is theirs, and that they feed upon him for life eternal.

Thirdly, we must distinguish the outward sign in the Sacrament together with
that which is done about them, or any of them, and the Communicants act in the
bare beholding of them, from our act of receiving of them. In the former sense
they are no more then signs. The Lords Supper thus considered is no more then
a remembrance, memorial, or representation of Christ's death and passion. In the
latter it is a seal, pledge or earnest. And therefore to say that Christ
ordained it to be a remembrance, memorial, and representation of his death is a
truth. But to say that therefore he did not ordain it to be a seal, is a
manifest error. If Christ had taken bread, and broken it; taken the cup, and
poured out wine, and had said, This is my body, this is my blood, here had been
a sign, a memorial, a representation, and no more: But when he says, Take,
eat, this is my body; This is my blood in the New Testament, drink ye all of
this; it is, as Circumcision was, both a sign and seal: As a sign, remembrance
or representation; the beholding is sufficient, as the Israelites did the
brazen Serpent, and as Papists look on their Images, for which if they had an
institution, as they have a prohibition, they might be defended; and if we were
to do no more, it would be no more then a sign, memorial, and representation;
But being to receive it, It is a seal, and pledge of that which it represents,
and brings to our minds.

Fourthly, They are not absolute seals, but conditional; They do not make it
good to all, that Christ is theirs; but upon Gods terms, which is expressed by
St. Peter to be the answer of a good conscience toward God; Of this I spoke
largely, Treatise of the Covenant, page 34, 35, etc. which by Mr. Baxter in his
Apology has been examined, Sect. 60, to Sect. 82. which here must briefly be
taken into consideration.

A digression for vindication of chap. 7. of the Treatise of the Covenant, from
Mr. Baxters exceptions, touching conditional sealing in Sacraments.
HAving in my Treatise of the Covenant, showed at large that the Covenant of
grace is conditional, In my seventh Chapter I inferred, that the seals of the
Covenant are as the Covenant it self conditional; making it good with six
several arguments, as I had before asserted it in my answer of Mr. T. chap. 15.
p. 100. This reverend Mr. Baxter is pleased to take notice of in his Apology;
and to put the question in opposition to me in these words, Sect. 60. Whether
the Sacraments seal the conditional promise absolutely; or the conclusion
conditionally; when only one of the premises is of Divine revelation: and
whether this conclusion be de fide, I am justified, and shall be saved? Which
terms I leave to the intelligent Reader to consider. He is not pleased to take
notice of any one of my arguments whether it is because he judges them unworthy
of his answer, or for any other reason, I cannot tell. I produce likewise the
testimony of many of our Divines, speaking the same thing, and he takes as
little notice of any of their authorities. As I then spoke what reason enforced
me to believe, so I have the same reason still, to believe what I have spoke;
and when all is examined, which may be found in that apology, from p. 115, to
p. 144. I think more is spoken for me then against me. He is pleased, page 139.
to say, The difference is so small, that were it not for some scattered
by-passages, I would scarce have replied to you. I therefore shall return no
other rejoinder, but only to observe such passages as may best serve to clear
the truth in question; He goes about to take away the subject of the question,
and says, I never heard of, nor knew a conditional sealing in the world; which
to me is very strange. Besides what I have spoken of it, he has doubtless
read Mr. Marshalls answer to Mr. T. (and, page 224. of his Treatise of
Infant Baptism, he makes us know that he has read it,) and he expressly calls
it, a conditional seal of the receivers interest in the Covenant. He confesses
the possibility, but asserts the vanity of such sealing. As if a man (says he)
Sect. 77. page 140. should set the wax and material Seal to a deed of gift,
with this addition, I hereby seal to this, or own it as my deed; if such a man
be now living in France, or if such a ship be safe arrived, or if such a man
shall do such a thing, otherwise this shall be no seal. Here I think an
impossibility is found out; Is an actual Seal made no Seal upon any condition
in the World? Has he never heard of that Maxim, Quicquid est, quando est,
necesse est esse: or that other, Quod factum est, infectum reddi nequit? And we
are wont to say, that this is not within an omnipotence to make a thing that
is, whilst it is, not to be: unless Mr. Baxter means that such wax with
impression made, is formally no seal, before the time that in law it has its
efficacy, as he seems to say, Sect. 72. where he has these words, To say, I
conditionally seal, is to say, It shall be no seal, till the performance of the
condition. So a bond sealed and delivered in presence of witnesses, is unsealed
till it be forfeited; which is a manifest absurdity. And I speak not of a
conditional seal as opposed to actual, I should call such a seal not
conditional, but potential; I speak to conditional sealing, as it is in the
question, that is, when a man ties himself by seal to such or such a thing, not
absolutely, but upon condition; and such sealings I think are common in the
world. A Master seals to his Apprentice, and binds himself at the end of his
term, to apparel him, to make him free of his mystery, etc. but all this upon
terms and condition of true and faithful service. If Philemon in his way had
sealed to Onesimus, his seal had not tied him to make good such engagements. I
have always thought, As is the obligation, so is the seal; and if there be no
such conditional obligations, we have been long abused with such forms: The
condition of this obligation is such, etc. But if any list to say, that
Sacraments absolutely seal upon conditions as it seems Mr. Baxter chooses to
speak, and some of his friends have said is more proper, (though I do not see
it, yet) I will not contend about it. He tells me that he confesses, that
neither promise nor seal bind absolutely, till the condition be performed, page
140. and this is the whole that I desire; I am there taken up for saying, [That
the conditional promise is not any absolute undoubted truth, but upon supposal
of the condition put.] If the Reader compare the context either in the
precedent or subsequent words, he may easily see [truth] there should have been
[tye]; and I think he could scarce have missed the sight of it, had my sentence
been fully quoted. The close of my speech in these words [so both promise and
seal absolutely bind] is left out; yet the words as they stand, though they
carry no congruity, might have received a fair Interpretation: It was no
absolute truth that the Jaylour should be saved, but upon condition of his
believing. I shall not trouble the Reader with that, which to him would be
tedious, and from which he can receive slender benefit; I shall only take
notice of some passages which Mr. Baxter is pleased to put into his Index,
seeing many will perhaps look there, that will go no further. The Minor being
sealed, the Conclusion is not eo nomine sealed, as Mr. Bl. affirms, and
refers to Sect. 65. p. 123. but his charge is, p. 124. It is new Logic to my
understanding, that the Minor being sealed, the Conclusion eo many is sealed:
The Minor of many an argument may be true, and the Conclusion false. And
therefore when the case so falls out, that both Minor, and Conclusion are true
or sealed, it is not eo nomine, because the Minor is true, that the Conclusion
is so, (or is sealed eo nomine, because the Minor is so) but because both Major
and Minor are so, and not then neither, but upon supposition the syllogism be
sound. It should first have been made to appear that I vent such Logic, and
then I might more fairly have been charged with new Logic. I spoke not of
syllogismes in general, but of the syllogism I had in hand, and such a one
where the Major is taken for granted, as I say it is in that syllogism. The
Major in that syllogism is laid down in these words; If God give me Christ, he
will give me justification, and salvation by Christ; which is clearly laid down
by the Apostle Romans 8, 32. The Minor is expressed in these words (as supposed
to be the words of God in the tender of the Sacrament) Here I give thee Christ,
upon which the Conclusion follows: Therefore I give thee justification, and
salvation. The Major in this, I said, page 41. is supposed, not sealed; The
Minor is there sealed, giving in my reason, which is not opposed; and the Minor
being sealed, I say, the Conclusion is eo nomine sealed. This is confessed,
upon supposition, that the Syllogism is found to be sound; and the Syllogism is
not yet under any charge, and therefore what I say, by his own confession is
true. There is further put into the Index Mr. Bl 's doctrine untrue, that [if
the conclusion be not sealed, then no proposition is sealed] referring to Sect.
68. page 126. My words quarrelled at are these, page 42. [If the Proposition
serves directly to prove the conclusion, then that which directly confirms any
Proposition in a rightly framed syllogism confirms the conclusion. If the
conclusion is not sealed, then no Proposition is sealed, or else the syllogism
is ill framed.] The answer returned me is this, This is too new doctrine to be
received, without one word of proof: Does he that seals the Major of this
following syllogism seal the conclusion? All that truly receive Christ, are
the sons of God, and shall be saved: Judas did truly receive Christ; Therefore
Judas was the son of God, and shall be saved. I think both premises must be
true, before the conclusion will thence be proved true: And it is not sealed by
God, when it is false. I confess I stand amazed at this picking of quarrels,
and high strains of wit, to find out matter for animadversions; If the Minor
Proposition here expressed, directly serve to prove the conclusion, then Judas
is saved: for if it serve directly to that purpose, it is neither in matter,
nor form defective. If any should wickedly say R. B. shall not be saved, and to
make it good; shall affirm, that he is a pure Pagan, wholly ignorant of Jesus
Christ; will any say, that this directly proves it, when the proof contains
such an abominable falsehood? And such is the proof here, that Judas is the son
of God, and shall be saved; change Judas into Peter, and then you speak my
thoughts. He is pleased further to put into his Index, Whether it be virtually
written in Scripture that Mr. Bl. is justified? I confess I did not without
trembling of spirit read, nor without tears think upon this, thus put to the
question; together with that which follows, Whether it be de fide that Mr. Bl.
is justified? Who would not believe, that I had directly asserted it, or made
some unsavory vaunts about it? I must therefore give the Reader an account,
that Mr. Baxter himself, Appen. page 66. had framed this syllogism in order to
the finding out of the way of Sacraments sealing; He that believes, and is
justified shall be saved: But I believe: Therefore I am justified, and shall be
saved; affirming that this conclusion [I shall be saved] is no where written,
to which I answered, Treat. of the Covenant, page 42. It is written vertually,
though not expressly: making it clear by an other instance: it is no where
written, that I shall rise in judgment; yet it is on faith, that I shall
arise, seeing it is written that all men shall arise; and when I have concluded
faith in my heart, as well as reason in my soul, knowing my self to be a
believer, as I know my self to be a man; I may as well conclude, that I shall
arise to life, as that I shall arise to judgment. After some exceptions taken
by him at the word [vertually] to prove if he could, that my syllogism is
tautologicall, he adds, Yet I confess, that some conclusions may be said to be
Interpretative vel secundum locutionem moralem in Scripture, when but one of
the premises is there; but that is when the other is presupposed as being
certain. And do not I presuppose the Minor here to be certain, in saying, When
I have concluded faith in my heart, as well as reason in my soul, I speak not
to it, but upon this supposition, that it is concluded; And therefore the
conclusion may be Interpretative in Scripture according to Mr. Baxter, though
not virtualiter, and that shall serve my turn: And I think there is as much of
tautology in the one as in the other. For my conclusion in that instance of
arising again, it is said that, It is by faith and natural knowledge mixed,
that I shall rise again; and I am further told, Though in strict sense it be
thus mixed: In our ordinary discourse we must denominate it from one of the
premises, and usually from the more notable, always from the more debile.
Scripture says, that all men shall rise; reason says, that you are a man.
Though the conclusion here partake of both; yet it is most fitly said to be de
fide, both because Scripture intended each particular man in the universal, and
because it is supposed as known to all that they are men: and therefore the
other part is it that resolves the doubt, and is the more notable, and more
debile part. To which I only say, that of two premises the debilior should be
the more notable, or that a Proposition which is laid down terminis
terminantibus of God himself should be more weak, then that which reason
concludes, I am to learn. I am further told, that it is an undoubted truth with
me, that conclusio sequitur debiliorem partem; That it follows deteriorem
partem, I long since learnt, so that if one of the premises be false, the
conclusion cannot be true; but that it must have its denomination a debiliori,
in the sense here spoken to, I never yet heard, nor could I have once thought,
that upon the account of the weakness of that Proposition of faith, [All men
should rise] it should be yielded to be of faith, that I should rise, and not
otherwise. And here I am put to it to answer, whether I have a fuller evidence,
that I am a sincere believer, then I have, that all sincere believers are
justified? And am told, It seems by your following words, that you have or
suppose others to have. I wonder what words of mine those are that speak such
madness. Can I be more sure that I see the Sun, than I am that there is a Sun
to be seen? I am yet told, If you have as evidently concluded, that faith is in
your heart (saving faith) as that reason is in your soul, and know your self to
be a believer, as evidently as you know your self to be a man, then your
conclusion may be denominated to be de fide, as a part debiliori. But what if
any man have concluded, though not with that evidence, and full strength of
light, how it is hindered, but that still it may be a conclusion de fide, I
confess I am to seek in this new learning, to enquire into premises, whether
is debilior, whether fortior, and so to give the conclusion denomination a
debiliori; what if I cannot tell in which of them most strength lies, (as it
seems Mr. Baxter himself is sometimes to seek) then I shall be at a stand,
whether the conclusion is to be denominated of faith, or of sense, or reason; I
take it to be de fide when I have warrant from the Word of God for it, and it
leads me to believe it.

Mr. Baxter had said in his Appendix. Otherwise (that is, as I understand him,
if this proposition, I shall be saved, be sealed in the Sacrament) every man
rightly receiving the seals, shall be justified and saved. To this I have
answered, I see no danger in yielding this conclusion; Every man rightly
receiving, and improving the seals must be saved, and justified. He that
rightly receives the seals, receives Christ in the seals, and receiving
Christ, receives salvation. In his reply, he first explains himself, and then
retorts upon me. He says, by rightly I meant having right to it, and that
only in foro Ecclesiae, and not recte, and confesses he should plainlier have
expressed his meaning. Let him then bear with others if their words do not
always speak their meaning so plainly as he would desire. I think my meaning
was never so in the clouds, as his is here. He then retorts upon me, in these
words, Whether you here contradict not your doctrine of Baptismal faith, where
you suppose justifying faith to be the thing promised by us in Baptism, and
therefore not prerequisite in it, I leave you to judge, and resolve, as by your
explication. I have busied my head not a little, to find out where any color
of contradiction lies. If it be in this that I yield, that every man that
rightly receives the Sacrament shall be saved, and yet affirm, that men that
are not in a state of salvation have right to Sacraments, then it is a
contradiction to say, that any man may have true right to any thing that does
not rightly use it, which indeed is a contradiction much like to some others,
with which I am charged, and might with as good reason have found a place in an
Index.

Having yielded to Mr. Baxter, That Papists have great advantage given them by
those, that mistaking the nature of justifying faith, think it consists in a
belief of the pardon of my own sins. Yet to make it good, that the conclusion
that my sins are pardoned, or I shall be saved, may be de fide, when the soul
has a right proceeded in the premises; I say, As it is an error to hold, that
to believe my sins are forgiven, is of the nature, or essence of faith, as
though none did believe, but those that had attained such assurance, (true
faith has assurance in pursuit only, sometimes, and not always in
possession) so on the other hand, it is a mistake to say, that it is no work of
faith. The Apostle calls it the full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22. and
describes faith to be the substance of things hoped for; faith realizeth
salvation, which we have in hope to the soul. A description of faith (says Dr.
Amesius out of a Schoolman) by one of the most eminent acts that it produces;
therefore I take that to be a good answer that is here charged with error that
when it is written, he that believes is justified, it is equivalent, as though
it were such, or such a man is justified, in case with assured grounds, and
infallible demonstrations, he can make it good to his own self that he
believes. Upon this he comes in, not with a few animadversions, the two first
are to conclude from my own mouth that assurance is not faith, in that I say it
is not of the nature and essence of faith, and has it sometimes only in
pursuit, and not in possession. In which he seems to take for granted that I
had affirmed that assurance is faith, when I can produce witnesses that almost
30. years ago I have opposed it, and I still persist in the denial of it. 3. He
says, I know none that deny assurance to be a work of faith, which Mr. Bl.
says here is a mistake, to say love and obedience are works of faith, but not
faith it self. A work I mean as my words import, attainable by faith, and if
faith by Scripture-promises, is able to conclude it, then the conclusion with
me is de fide when it is concluded. 4. He says, I must have better proof
before I can believe that it is assurance of our own sincerity, or actual
justification, which the Apostle calls the full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22.
And I think he is the first man amongst orthodox Divines, that has doubted
that assurance of acceptance, is meant in that place. Faith is that grace (say
the last Annotations) whereby we either do, or may approach unto God, with full
assurance of acceptance. Is not that boldness in our addresses mentioned, ver.
19. an evident symptom of it? And is not sincerity fet forth in those words
[having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed
with pure water] as the basis, or bottom of it, not of our acceptance, but of
our assurance? I must hear somewhat more, before I can question it. There
follows. 5. And as hardly can I discern assurance of our sincerity in the
description of faith, Heb. 11.1. unless you mean that hope is part of faith,
and assurance the same with hope, both which need more proof. Hope may be
without assurance, and when it is joined with it, yet is not the same thing;
only such assurance is a singular help to the exercise of hope. And can you
not discern a double encomium of faith in those words? The first with respect
to things past and present, as well as things to come, where it is said to be
The evidence of things not seen. Faith makes that evident, which otherwise
would not be known. The other respective to things to come, and that not evil,
but only good; not things feared, but hoped; expressed in these words, Faith
is the substance of things hoped for; both of them rather expressing what faith
does, then what faith is; and I know not why that speech of hope should be
brought in here, when it is only said, that the good things hoped for, are
that which faith realizes to the soul. It is said further. 6. It is true that
faith may be said (as you speak) to realize salvation to the soul; that is,
when the soul doubts, whether there be indeed such a glory and salvation to
be expected, and enjoyed by believers as Christ has promised ere faith
apprehends it as real, or certain, and so resolves the doubt. And is this all
that faith can possibly do, and for which this high praise is here given unto
it? Against this I say; First, This was expressed in the former branch, the
evidence of things not seen; faith believes a heaven, as well as a creation.
Secondly; a faith short of justifying may do this, an historical faith assents
to the highest dogmatical truths. Thirdly, will you have the full assurance of
hope, Heb. 6.11. to be no other, then to get assurance that there is a heaven,
though we shall never come to heaven? which would be a contradiction; for hope
has possession in expectation. Fourthly, does not our hope enter into that
within the vail, whither our forerunner is gone before us? Heb. 6.19. and are
we not saved by hope? Romans 8.24. Faith then being said to be the substance of
things hoped for, it does not barely tell us that there is a heaven, (that is
too lank and lean a commendation of it) but the office of it is to realize the
possession of it to us. It follows, But when the doubt is, whether I be a true
believer, says resolves it not. Faith has its hand in the resolving of this
doubt, in believing from the Scriptures, what are the Symptoms, or cognizances
of true believing, and gathering them up by reflex upon it self. It follows,
And when the doubt is, whether this certain glory, and salvation shall be mine,
faith only cooperateth to the resolve of it, by affording us one of the
propositions, but not both, and not wholly the conclusion. If faith affords us
one of the propositions, and finds the other in the Scriptures, that is to me
sufficient. It follows. 7. I am of Dr. Amesius his mind, that it is one of
faiths most eminent acts, by which it is there described. But undoubtedly you
were not so in your sixth animadversion, when you left it so low, as we have
heard, and made it no more then the faith of wicked men may reach. There is
added, But so think not they that tell us, that is none of the instrumental
justifying act which is there described. But doubtless they may very well
think so. This here mentioned is a more eminent work of faith, then that of
justifying, as a child on a Giants head is further removed from the earth, and
nearer the clouds then the Giant himself; Faith that gives assurance,
presupposes the justifying act already done by it self, and adds more to it,
when a man believes savingly there is Certitudo objecti, he that believes shall
be saved, but this here mentioned is, Certitudo subjecti, when the good hoped
for is assured to the soul. If there be any other promise made of God for good,
this work of faith I confess takes it in, and I do not believe that the
Apostle does limit this work of faith to the hope of salvation, but I am sure
he does not exclude it; that being the chiefest thing in our hope, that is
undoubtedly chiefly intended, and might well by me be mentioned. It follows.
8. This which you took to be a good answer, is that great mistake which has so
hardened the Papists against us; and were it not for this point, I should not
have desired much to have said any thing to you of the rest, about conditional
sealing, as being confident, that we mean the same thing in the main. If that
be that great mistake, I am still in the mistake, and you are the first man
that ever went about to rectify it; but you herein fail, that you show not
wherein the mistake lies. Those Divines that deny faith to be assurance (that
were as much as to define a man by such excellencies that are to be found in
few men, and so to exclude the common pitch of men from the species of mankind)
do not yet deny but that faith may attain to assurance. It follows. 9. You
forsake them that use to give this answer, when you confine it to those only
that with assured grounds and infallible demonstrations can make it good to
themselves that they believe, i. e. savingly. I think that they as well as I,
confine it to those that you here mention. It follows, I doubt that answer
then will hold but to very few if you mean by assured grounds etc. such as they
are actually assured, are good and demonstrative. I believe that strait is the
gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find
it. There are not many, we may fear, that do savingly believe, and many of
those are not yet assured that they do believe; and to this Mr. Baxter has
spoke abundantly sufficient in his Saints rest. It follows. 10. Demonstrations
may be infallible, and yet not known to be such to the person: but I suppose
that by the word demonstration, you intend that the party discerns it to be an
infallible demonstration: which sure intimates a very high kind of certainty.
You may well know that I intend so, when you see that I say so, and I do not
make that to be assurance, cui potest subesse falsum; If it prove in the event
otherwise, it was not assurance. It follows. 11. Yet even in that case I deny
that the general Premise in the Major is equivalent to the conclusion, I am
justified, and shall be saved, though I should acknowledge that the conclusion
may be said to be de fide, in that the Major has the predominant interest in
the conclusion; if so be that the man have better evidence of his sincerity
then of the truth of the promise. Neither do I say that that Proposition, He
that believes, and repents shall be saved, is of it self equivalent with that
conclusion, without the assumpion with Scripture-warrant, and help of the
Spirit, that I believe and repent; and I know not what to make of such strange
supposals of a better evidence of a man's own sincerity in any man, then of the
truth of the promise which Mr. Baxter presently affirms to be a contradiction.
There is no man comes up to sincerity, but he that is assured by faith, that
the promise is true; Though he may be sometimes staggered, yet he rises out of
it, and holds fast to the truth of the promise; and when the soul has evidence
of both, and is assured of both, I say, the conclusion is de fide; see Mr. Ball
of faith, page 80.

Mr. Baxter says, Appen. page 71. When the Papists allege, that it is no
where written [that such, or such a man is justified] we answer them, that it
being written [that he that believes, is justified] this is equivalent. A
gross mistake, (says he) as if the Major Proposition alone were equivalent to
the conclusion, or as if the conclusion must, or can be merely credenda, a
proper object of faith, when but one of the premises is matter of faith, and
the other of sense and knowledge. In my Treatise of the Covenant, I opposed
against him Dr. Goades speech in a conference, expressing himself in these
words, I will maintain the contrary against you, ( viz. Fisher the Jesuit)
that a conclusion may be de fide, although both Propositions be not de fide,
but one of them otherwise, and infallibly true by the light of reason, or
experience, giving instance in such a syllogism. Mr. Baxters answers, Sect. 75.
Dr. Goad says but the same that I say, only I distinguish, etc. And I am well
content then to say what both of them say, and leave it to the Reader to take
the benefit of his large and elaborate discourse on this occcasion.

He is pleased to put into his Index, the difference between Mr. Bl. and me
contracted, and a plain cogent argument added to prove, that the conclusion
forementioned is not sealed, which is the work of Sect. 76. page 139. In which
much by him is granted, and much affirmed; to which I assent. His cogent
argument that the conclusion [I shall be saved] is not sealed, is thus framed,
Conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem, vel deteriorem; At propositio non
obsignata, est pars debilior, vel deterior; Ergo conclusio sequitur
propositionem non obsignatam. I shall give it in English, that if possible all
may understand us. The Conclusion follows the weaker or worser part: But the
Proposition unsealed is the weaker, or worser part: Therefore the conclusion
follows the Proposition unsealed. And after many words he says, For my part,
I know not what objection can be made against either part of the forecited
argument (the Major being a common Canon or Rule that holds in all figures, and
the Minor being yeeled by your self) else I would answer to it. To this I might
have many things to say. First, That Mr. Baxter knowed, that I did not allow of
any such Syllogism as this, which he thus frames in order to find out the
sealing of the Sacraments, and therefore what is here sealed or not sealed,
with me is little to the purpose.

Secondly, I marvel that he makes debilior, and deterior, weaker, and worser,
here to be both one, when before he made a scripture Proposition to be
debilior, the weaker, and a Proposition of reason fortior, the stronger; when I
should be loath to make, or conceive (as necessarily he does) a
Scripture-Proposition to be deterior, the worser.

Thirdly, As to the Syllogism, I shall call for proof of both his premises; For
the Major, in his sense (if I understand it) I either deny, or much question
it, and therefore distinguish of that which is said to be worser, or weaker;
which may be, either respective to the truth of the premises; and then I yield,
that the conclusion ever follows the worser. If either Proposition be false,
the Conclusion is not true; But this so far as I understand is not his meaning:
Or they may be taken respective to the nature of them, and then I know not that
the denomination of the Conclusion must follow upon account, either of strength
or weakness in either of the premises. For the Minor Proposition, That an
unsealed Proposion is the weaker, or worser part, I shall desire to know the
quantity of it, if it be universal, then it is false; Every unsealed
Proposition is not weaker, or worser then that which is sealed. And whereas Mr.
Baxter says; I have yielded it; I know not, that ever I was put upon it: but
how I shall speak my whole sense of it. I yield that a seal adds to the
strength as does an oath, and therefore an unsealed Proposition is weaker, then
that which is sealed caeteris paribus, all things being otherwise alike in
both, yet there may be those differences in Propositions, that a Proposition
may be of that strength in it self that it needs no seal, and be every way
equal for truth, and evidence to those that are sealed, and thousands of such
might be named, that without any seal are of equal strength to those to which a
seal is added. That there are lands, or tenements in the County of Salop is a
Proposition without a seal, that R. B. has lands or tenements in that County
is a Proposition under seal, yet the latter has no more strength or evidence
of truth then the former. He that has hands lineally descending upon him from
his Ancestors has a true right to inherit, is a Proposition without a seal: R.
B. has such, an inheritance is a Proposition under seal; and I desire to know
whether here be not as much truth and evidence in the Major as the Minor. Let
us look into that Syllogism which I put, to find out that which the Sacrament
seals, and that in the person of God himself pronounced. To whom I give Christ,
I give all things: But I give to thee Christ: Ergo. The first is without seal,
the second in the Sacrament is under seal; yet there is as much evidence of
truth in the first, as in the second. Mr. Baxters Minor Proposition must have
its due limit (as before) or else it is to be denied.

The last thing in his Index as to this controversy is, The safety or danger
to teach men to believe that they are justified and shall be saved.
The danger of teaching men, that they are bound to believe that they are
justified, and shall be saved; which referres to Sect. 81. page 142. Where I am
in the first place handsomely taken up, for saying I recede not from any that
heretofore I have published on this subject, as standing not with ingenuity,
when himself in the next Paragraphe runs on the same error, if an error;
resolving to maintain what he had asserted: I am afterward told, It has been
too common a doctrine amongst the most renowned Divines, that it is not only
de fide that I A. B. am justified, but every man's duty also; yea, part of the
Creed, and so a fundamental for to believe that our sins are remitted, (for so
expound the Article of remission of sins) yea, they earnestly press men to
believe the pardon in particular, and tell them they have but the faith of
Devils else. By which dangerous doctrine (it is said) 1. Most men are persuaded
to believe a falsehood, for most are not forgiven. 2. The careless world is
driven on faster to presumption, to which they are so prone of themselves. 3.
Painful Ministers are hindered, and their labors frustrated, whose business
is first to break men's false hopes, and peace, which they find so hard a work,
that they need no resistance, etc. I believe that, as Mr. Baxter says; this
may be dangerously done; and I believe, that it has not been urged by some
without great danger; yet I also believe, that it may safely, and comfortably
in due order be done, and that Ministers of Christ orderly and in a
Gospel-method ought to do it. For the Creed, I am so far from this error here
mentioned, that I go not so far in this thing as Mr. Baxter himself, as I
have observed in this Apology. I do not think that the Creed it self calls for
so much as faith of adherence, to rest or rely upon Christ for remission of
sins; I suppose Creeds and Confessions of faith are only for declaration of
the doctrine that we hold, to difference us from those that in those
particulars are erroneous in judgment, and do not at all intermeddle with our
will or affections. Though I know the will must consent, and by the affections
embrace and receive Christ, or else there is no salvation to which the Gospel
calls us.

The danger mentioned I fear too often (as I said before) is sadly incurred,
that brand of false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.22, 23. is heavy, Because with lies ye
have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked
way, by promising him life: Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine
divinations; for I will diliver my people out of your hands, and ye shall know
that I am the Lord. This practice is in full opposition to God, (who every
where threatens death to wicked persons) which as many observe well all the
error of those that suffered the charge of false Prophets among the Jews; we
read not that they delivered any positive untruths, but only made undue
applications. And therefore false Prophets among them, are distinguished from
false teachers, which were to arise in Christian Churches, 2 Pet. 2.1 The
latter, and not the former bringing in damnable heresies, and yet the former
were of like danger in their misapplication, both of promises, and
threatenings, and more especially of promises; to urge all to believe, that in
statu quo, they shall be saved, is indeed to teach them to presume, seeing
salvation is not every man's portion, and the portion of no man that lies in
sin: It was a doctrine that the Apostle often preached, that such should not
inherit the Kingdom of heaven, Gal. 5.21. and he lets the Ephesians know that
all those are but vain deceiving words that teach otherwise, Ephesians. 5.6. Yet I
suppose that it is a Christians privilege, that he may believe that his sins
are forgiven, and that he shall he saved; and being his privilege, it is also
his duty. Christ requires some to believe it, Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven, Matthew: 9.2. And the Apostle takes it for granted, that some were
assured; Ye have suffered joyful the spoiling of your goods, knowing that in
heaven ye have a better and far more enduring substance, Heb. 10.32. Why does
Peter call upon Christians, to give diligence to make their calling and
Election sure? 2 Pet. 1.10. Or why did John write to those that believe on the
Name of the Son of God, that they might know that they have eternal life, 1 John 5.13. in case they may not be assured, and accordingly by faith be full
persuaded and satisfied in it? We may not think that assurance is held out in
Scriptures as Chimaera, or as a Chemists Philosophers Stone, to be talked of,
but never compassed. And I suppose sano sensu, and with due qualifications it
may be asserted, That every visible Churchmember is bound to believe his own
salvation, and the pardon of his own sins in particular. I well remember that I
had once conference with Mr. Ball in Mr. Ash's house on this thing, (upon
occasion of that old argument insisted upon by Arminians; That which all are
bound to believe is true: But all are bound to believe that Christ dyed for
them) and he determined that all are bound to believe that Christ dyed for them
in particular, and that all the fruits of his death shall be theirs, not
immediately, but Mediante fide and resipiscentia; Men are bound to faith and
repentance, and uppn their faith and repentance are bound to get this
assurance, which it seems is also Mr. Baxters thoughts by that which he adds in
the fifth place for aggravation of this danger, when wicked men that have but
the faith of Devils, are immediately required to believe the pardon of their
own particular sins, and this made to be de fide, God is dishonored with the
charge of such untruths, as if falsehoods were de fide, and God commanded men
to believe them. It seems then that he grants that men may be mediately
required to believe the pardon of their own sins in particular, and there can
never be too much spoken against an urging of it in an immediate way; It is
after we have done the will of God that we shall receive the promise, Heb.
10.36. and we must not believe that without doing his will we shall ever
receive it. Promise-preachers that are not duty-preachers, that hold out
bliss, and never speak of the terms or means to attain it, are no other then
deceivers. To speak largely of the Fathers bowels to receive, and not a word of
the Prodigals duty to come in, or the multitude of sins that were forgiven that
sinner in the City (supposed to be Mary Magdalen) and conceal her tears of
repentance; to be large in one, and silent in the other, is the way to heal
with slight words. Whereas as Mr. Baxter says, The ungodly that I deal with
are so confident that their sin is forgiven, and God will not damn them for it,
that all that I can say, is too little to shake their confidence, which is the
nurse of their sin. When he makes this his business, he does the work of the
Prophets, of John Baptist, and of Christ Jesus; and I wish that all the
laborers in the Lords work may join with him in that way, and that the Lord
may give success. Yet I still believe that all this is to be done in order to
a well settled, and firmly grounded confidence: when he tells those that come to
Christ, and hear his words, and do them not: clayming salvation by him, and not
obeying him, that they build their hopes on a sandy foundation, and foolishly
deceive themselves; I believe that he tells those that hear, and accordingly
yield obedience, that their hopes of salvation have a firm bottom as a house
built upon a rock. But I know not why all of this should here in this place be
brought in; in the close of all that has past (as he says) concerning
himself, unless it be, to bear men in hand, that my doctrine of conditional
sealing in the Sacraments, (which he yet confesses differs little from his own)
may be charged with this danger, when I suppose it is the alone way of
prevention of it. If I should make the words of the institution an absolute
tender, and the seal wholly unconditional, I know not how to avoid it; and I
may very well fear, that he cannot be without some such meaning. First, In that
he puts into his Index (as we have heard) The danger of teaching men that they
are bound to believe that they are justified, and shall be saved, amidst those
things, in which none but I are concerned; and Secondly, Where he first begins
with me he utters like language, page 3. I doubt not (says he) but the
difference between you and me, is only about the methodizing of our notions,
and not de substantia rei, and yet presently adds, but I doubt lest your
doctrine being received by common heads, according to the true importancy of
the expression may do more against their salvation then is well thgouht on, and
that not by accidence, but from its own nature, supposing the impression of the
soul to be but answerable to the objective doctrinal seal: How unhappy am I in
methodizing of wholesome truths, which are the same in substance with a man's of
such eminence? If that alone should have such a sad influence upon men's
understanding, though age grows upon me, and many other weaknesses; yet were I
sensible of the truth of this charge, I would travel on foot to the remotest
ground in England to learn from any hand a more happy way, and I have therefore
been more large, that the Reader may see the whole of my thoughts in this where
I may seem to be under so heavy a censure, that he may help me in prayer, that
in all that I do I may edify, and not destroy.

SECT. II. Corollaries from the former doctrine.
LEt us here see the goodness of God, the singular tender care of Christ, thus
to condescend to our weakness, Christ's tender care evidenced in his
condescension to our weakness.
as to vouchsafe these visible, sensible pledges, and confirmations of our
faith in the promises. All that can be thought upon to ratify, and make good
whatsoever, from any hand we have in expectation, Christ has been pleased in
his condescension to vouchsafe unto us. In such a case we desire, 1. A promise,
that he from whom we expect it, would engage himself by his word for it. This
Christ has done in the Gospel-promises, we have his promise frequently
repeated, still inculcated, Genesis 32.12. And thou said, I will surely do thee
good, and make thy seed as the sand of the Sea, which cannot be numbered for
multitude, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, Joh. 11.25. I am
the resurrection, and the life; he that believes in me, though he were dead,
yet he shall live. 2. When we have a word, we yet desire an oath, that the
person by that sacred tie, may be obliged not to recede, or go back from that
which he has spoke; This God has vouchsafed. when God made promise to
Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself, that by two
immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set
before us. 3. When we have both word, and oath, yet we desire his hand, that it
may be subscribed, that we may have somewhat to produce and show for that which
we expect; This God has vouchsafed, Joh. 20.31. These are written that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye
might have life through his Name, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written
afore-time, were written for our learning, that we through patience, and
comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. 4. Yet we desire earnest, a pledge
in hand, to make good what is in Covenant, and promise past, and by oath under
hand confirmed; This God is pleased to vouchsafe, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Now he which establishes us with you in Christ,
and has anointed us, is God, who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of
the Spirit in our hearts. 5. We yet desire a seal, As Jeremy had the evidences
of his purchase, Jer. 32.10. This God has also vouchsafed, and this is of two
sorts. 1. Inward by his own immediate hand, the stamp of his Spirit, the
impresse of his grace. This is the character, or mark that we are his, these
God sets apart for himself, Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.30. 1 Cor. 2.21, 22. 2.
Outward put into the hands of his Ministers, and these are Sacraments, these
outward visible assurances. The former needs no conditions but it self, all
sanctified are saved, and sanctification is the seal, there are all
Gospel-conditions. The latter requires all the gracious qualifications of a
people in Covenants. All that are thus qualified, according to the Gospel, have
here full confirmation, and assurance of interest in all promises; so willing
is God every way to condescend to our weakness, to answer what infirmity can
expect, or feebleness crave. We might think that Gideon was exceeding bold
with God, to ask a double sign for the strengthening of his faith in the
promise of God, to save Israel by his hand; yet we see God is pleased to
gratify him, Judge 6.39, 40. yet God deals more abundantly with us, not only
in a double, but a multiplied confirmation, to make good every truth which he
has been pleased to manifest. And as he teaches us by similitudes drawn from
earthly things, as we see in the Prophets, and parables from our Saviors
mouth, so also to speak to our eyes, in these signs and seals ratifying, and
confirming heavenly things unto us. Those great mercies which no thought can
reach are set out in so obvious a way, that every eye does behold and see. That
water which we employ for our common use, and among other necessary services
cleanses all filth that cleaves to us, serves to set out that great mystery of
the blood and Spirit of Christ, taking away both guilt and filth of sin. The
bread which we have at our table, the wine which we drink for our food and
repast, that sets out both the atonement, and divine nourishment, which our
souls find in the flesh and blood of Christ crucified and dying for us. There
is abundant weakness and tottering in our faith, that needs in this manner to
be strengthened. Abundance of sweet mercies in our God that will vouchsafe this
to strengthen and support us.

Secondly, If Christ thus condescends to our weakness, Christ's compassion
toward us should move us to compassionate our selves.
in making provision of these helps, let us learn to have compassion of our
selves, and not neglect, or despise so great favors. If Christ had judged us
to have been of strength, he had never tendered us this crutch; and when he sees
that we need it, and therefore has provided it, let us see that we do not
reject, or despise it. Is it not to imitate Ahaz in his obstinacy, who when he
could not believe the promise that God would deliver him, and his people from
the combined power of Israel, and Syria, that were then before Jerusalem, and
having a sign tendered him of God, either in the depth beneath or the height
above, for his assurance in the thing, he answers, he will not desire a sign,
Isa. 7.11, 12. he will rather dwell in his unbelief, and perish. As that sign
was to that promise, so all Sacraments are to Gods great promise. He that casts
away Sacraments indulges unbelief, and we may well fear, that he shall dwell in
it to destruction.

CHAP. XI.
SECT. I. The whole of the work of Sacraments is by way of sign and seal.
THe next observation follows.

The whole office and use of Sacraments.
All that the Sacraments work on the souls of receivers, is by way of sign and
seal. They have no immediate effects for the working of any inward graces or
privileges, but as our understanding is exercised by them, as Indicative
signs, and our faith, as ratifications and seals of the promises.

The text that we have under our hand is abundantly full to his purpose; Scarce
any text holds out a truth (I may say) more clear and full, then this text
does; that which is here delivered if we take in the context with it, The
Context opened.
to which the copulative [And] leads. The Apostle having in the former Chapter
delivered the doctrine of justification by faith, goes on here to make it good
by the Example of Abraham, and his argument rendered in syllogistical form
appears to be this: As Abraham the father of the faithful was justified, so
must all the faithful. This is taken for granted, as needing no proof: But
Abraham the father of the faithful was justified, not by works, but by faith.
The Assumption consists of two parts, and the Apostle proves both. 1. The
negative that he was not justified by works, this he proves by two arguments.
1. If he were justified by works, then he has whereof to glory, ver. 2. But he
has not whereof to glory before God; Ergo he was not justified by works. 2. If
he were justified by works, the reward were reckoned not of grace, but of debt,
ver. 4. But the reward is not of debt, but of grace: Ergo. Which he further
confirms by the testimony of David; describing the blessedness of man to whom
the Lord imputes righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord will not impute sin, ver. 7, 8. As David describes blessedness,
that way man is blessed; But David describes it to be by imputation of
righteousness, and not by works: Ergo. The affirmative that Abraham was
justified by faith, he proves by a full testimony of Scripture, Genesis 15.6. He
believed in the Lord, and he counted it to for him for righteousness. Now it
might be objected, that this justification of Abraham, and blessedness that
David speaks of, was nothing to the Gentiles uncircumcised, but to the Jews in
the state of Circumcision, and so Circumcision may yet have an hand in
justitification. This the Apostle denies, ver. 10. and proves the contrary by
the time of Abraham's justification, which was in uncircumcision, not in
Circumcision. If Abraham were justified in uncircumcision, then Circumcision,
has no hand in justification; But Abraham was justified in uncircumcision.
Ergo: But then the greatest question is, to what end or purpose he was
circumcised, having already that righteousness which does justify, what needs
more? Circumcision then might have been let alone. The Apostle answers that he
was circumcised on a twofold account, for a double reason. The first is in
reference to his own estate in faith, which equally concerns all in his state
of believing. He received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the faith which
he had being yet uncircumcised. The second in reference to the whole Church,
that he might be the Father of all that believe, in Circumcision or in
uncircumcision; so that we have both the Apostles authority and his
argumentative discourse for confirmation of our point, That the work and
efficacy of Sacraments is by way of sign and seal. We shall find Peter giving
his vote with Paul in this thing (where he enters a dispute about Baptism, as
Paul here does about Circumcision, as you may find, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.) having
mentioned Gods long suffering toward disobedient ones, in the days of Noah,
while the Ark was a preparing, he says; Few, that is, eight souls were saved
by water. That element which (as an executioner of divine vengeance) destroyed
the world of the ungodly, as an instrument in the hand of God, preserved Noah
and his family. It destroyed the world by overwhelming of them, as after it did
Pharaoh and his host. It saved Noah and his household by keeping the Ark above
trees, rocks, mountains, buildings, or whatsoever might have been their ruin.
Then he parallells Baptism with it; The like figure whereunto even Baptism
does also now save us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward. God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ;
which according to Interpreters, implies no more then a resemblance, or, as
Calvin speaks, a correspondence, though, Heb. 9.24. the Apostle uses the same
word otherwise. The Ark then saved a few, when the rest were destroyed;
Baptism now saves a few by the resurrection of Christ. It will always be
(says Calvin on the words) as it was in Noah's days, when mankind runs on
their own ruin, God wonderfully saves some from the common destruction. But
here an objection lies, that Noah's Ark, and New Testament Baptism are nothing,
parallel, few entered that, but now numerous, or rather innumerable multitudes
are baptized. The Apostle answers, that the parallel lies not between the
outward Baptism, that is, the outward act, as man administers it, which he
calls putting away the filth of the flesh, which we know is the work of
Baptism, but the answer of a good conscience, or the restipulation of a good
conscience. I desire now to know how the Apostle can be salved from a
contradiction. He says, Baptism saves, and yet says, the outward putting
away the filth of the flesh does not save, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God. Now this putting away the filth of the flesh, done in the Name of
Christ, or in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is Baptism; so is
not the answer of a good conscience, that is no Baptism. The Apostle then
should rather have said, that the answer of a good conscience saves, and not
Baptism. But he says, Baptism saves. I see no other way of reconciliation,
or to make sense of his words, then to understand him that Baptism saves, as
it has its work on the conscience, as it works upon our understanding, and our
faith as a sign and seal, and is no immediate conveyance of happiness, not any
other way of conveyance, then as it has its work on the conscience of the
receivers.

Reasons. First, The Word and Sacraments work after one and the same manner on
the soul for salvation, respective to any mediate, or immediate way of
conveyance of any graces or privileges. This is evident, in regard of that
relation that the Sacraments have to the Word, as appendants to it. But the
force of the Word on the soul to salvation is not inherent, not by any
immediate conveyance of inward graces or privileges, but as it has its work
on the understanding, and faith of him that receives it; they that understand
not are as the highway-ground that gains nothing. It is the power of God for
salvation to them that believe, Romans 1.16. It profits not where it is not
mixtwith faith, Heb. 4.2. It is effectual only in those that believe, 1 These.
2.13. The bare work done in hearing saves none, and so also it is with
Sacraments.

Secondly, Signs and pledges added to promises, are efficacious no other ways
then as they work upon the understanding and faith of those that receive them
as signs, This may be made good in particular instances, in a large induction
of signs of all sorts. The double sign vouchsafed of God to Gideon for his
confirmation in the deliverance of Israel, Judge. 6. did not work at all toward
such a deliverance further then as it had its work upon the understanding and
faith of Gideon, to whom it was given. The Scarlet thread in Rahabs window had
no power for her safety, further then it was a sign between her and Joshua,
minding Joshua of his engagement to her. The rainbowe is of no power to save
the world from an universal deluge of water, further then it minds and assures
us of Gods promise. The same we may say of all signs and pledges both humane
and divine: But Sacraments are signs, and pledges added to promises, as we see
here in the text: Sacraments then have no others efficacy then, as they work on
the understanding and faith of the receivers.

Thirdly, There is nothing that is material, sensible, corporeal, that has any
immediate influence, or operation upon any object that is spiritual. This is
plain. There must be proportion between the agent, and the patient, the
instrument working, and the object wrought upon: But the Sacramental signs
that we receive as seals are material, corporeal, sensible; and therefore have
no such immediate influence upon the soul for the work of grace, or conveyance
of it.

Fourthly, If this Scripture hold out the work of Sacraments, only by way of
sign and seal, and no other Scripture holds out any other work to be wrought by
them in the soul, then this is the whole of their work. This is clear,
Scripture must somewhere hold out the whole, that Sacraments effect: But this
is the whole that the Apostle in this Scripture gives to them, where he gives
an account of the fruit of Abraham's Circumcision, neither is there any other
Scripture in which any more is attributed to the working of Sacraments. The
assumption is of two parts, The first none can question, that the Apostle
ascribes no more here to Sacraments then as has been said. For the second,
that no other Scripture ascribes any thing further to them, shall God willing
be made good, when we come to examine those Scriptures which are brought in by
way of objection for a further work.

If any would see authorities quoted of men of eminent name, that have appeared
in defense of this position, I shall refer him to reverend Mr. Gatakers
learned dispute held with reverend Dr. Ward, where he may see multitudes voting
for it. And when Dr. Ward Quod quosdam theologos ait hic haerere, and baptismi
effectum hunc ad electos restringere. Imo non qu^dam dunxtaxat, sed multo,
maxima nostrorum pars, non tam hic haerent, quam ex adverso se diserte
opponunt; quod ex testimoniis sup^a adductis luculentissime demonstratum est.
says, that some Divines do stick at his tenent, and do restrain the effect of
Baptism infallibly taking away the guilt of original sin only to the effect,
Mr. Gataker replies, not alone some, but the greater part of our Divines do not
so much stick, or hesitate here, as professedly oppose, which is evidently
demonstrated in the testimonies (says he) before cited, page 134. And my
reverend friend Mr. Bedford, unhappily engaged in this controversy, to carry
the Sacraments higher then Scripture has raised them, misled with the over
esteem of some that have gone that way, tells us of her discouragement, by
reason of the multitude of those of an opposite opinion, that held otherwise
then he did about the Sacraments. And Mr. Baxter rightly does observe, that at
the first broaching of this doctrine among us, it was so much disrelished, not
by Dr. Taylour only, but by most Divines, and godly people, as far as I
could learn, that it did succeed, and spread as little, as almost any error
that ever I knew spring up in the Church. Plain Scripture proof of Infants,
etc. page 294. so inconsiderable was the party that stood for it. And Vorstius
speaking in the name of Protestant Divines in general, says, Id potissimum
quaeritur, an Sacramenta sint signa tantum and sigilla foederis gratiae; sive
externa symbola, and signacula, foederi gratiae appensa, and divinitus ad hoc
institura, ut gratiam Dei salutarem in foedere promissam nobis significent;
atque ita fidem nostram suo modo confirment, and simul public testaram
reddant: quae quidem communis est Evangelicorum sententia; an vero preaterea
sint causae efficientes hujus salutaris and justificantis gratiae, sive an sint
effectiva gratiae ejusdem organa, nempe ad hoc divinitus institura, ut gratiam
istam realiter instar vasorum in se contineant, and omnibus illa percipientibus
candem vi sua imprimant, and reipsa conferant, quae Bellarmini, and
Pontificiorum omnium opinio est.
It is disputed whether Sacraments are only signs and seals of the Covenant
of grace, or outward signs annexed the Covenant and appointed for this of God,
that they should signify saving grace of God promised in the Covenant, and
signifying seal, and after their manner confirm our faith, and give public
testimony of it, which (says he) is the common opinion of Protestants, or
whether they be further efficient causes of this saving and justifying grace,
or whether they be effective instruments of this grace appointed of God for
this thing, that they should indeed contain it in them, and convey it, which
is the opinion of all Papists. Vorstius, Anti. Bellar. ad Contro. 1 Genesis And
our men further judge that opinion of the opus operatum, or of the outward
Sacramental action (as though without the faith, and pious motion of those that
use it, it could justify any) to be evidently false and pernicious: And they
teach, that all Sacraments by the ordination of God himself have only a power
to signify and seal, and not to confer the grace of the Gospel it self. And
whereas several passages in the Liturgy of this Church did seem to favor the
opposite opinion, affixing adoption, membership of Christ, and inheritance of
the Kingdom of heaven, and regeneration to Baptism: we know how great offense
it gave to many eminently Learned and pious, putting them upon omission of
those passages: And also what Interpretation, as with a grain of salt, others
put upon them, that they were only Sacramentally such. And doubtless these
either hit upon the meaning of the Church (which was held to these phrases, in
imitation of many hyperbolical speeches in the Fathers) or else the Church had
mist the meaning of Scriptures; so loath were the sons of the Church to be
quarrelling with their mother, and yet more loath with her to run into errors.

The Observation it self, if heeded, has a caution or limit in it; Affirming
that Sacraments work no otherwise then as signs and seals; and that they
confer no inward graces or privileges further then they work upon the
understanding, and faith of those that receive them: it implies, that they do
confer what an outward symbol, or sign is apt to, and of powder to convey;
and that outward privileges in Sacraments, are either conferred, of infallibly
evidenced. This is clear, the Apostle having so far undervalued Circumcision in
the flesh, as to make it Parallel with uncircumcision, so that a circumcised
Jew, and an uncircumcised Gentile differed nothing as to their Spiritual state
and condition; inferres by way of objection, What advantage then has the Jew,
and what profit is there of circumcision? And answers, not that outward
circumcision is altogether unprofitable, but that it has much profit, and
instances in one eminent one, To them are committed the Oracles of God. This is
the inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33.4. as Moses speaks; and
carrying with it this great privilege, it conveyes with it all other inferior
Church Priviledges; right to the Passover upon this account was theirs, Exodus
12.48. and not otherwise: So it is with Baptism, men are taken into the Church
at this door, according to the Commission given to the Apostles, Disciple all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc. Whatsoever they were,
and whomsoever they professedly served before, they are this way taken in as
the consecrate servants of the whole Trinity, and added to the Church, Act
2.47. When they had by the Covenant a precedent title, in Baptism they have a
solemn inauguration, By one Spirit we are all Baptized into one body, 1 Cor.
12.13. It is the Spirits work to shape the heart of unbelieving Corinthians, to
enter into one visible Church-body, as that work of Gods power, whereby he did
persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. And therefore when
Durandus docet characterem esse ens rationis, id est, respectum advenientem ex
deputatione ad certum officium, qualis est relatio in Doctoribus, Praetoribus,
etc. Quae sententia vix distinguitur ab haeresi hujus temporis.
Durand denied, that the Character which the Church of Rome speaks of, was any
quality in the soul, but merely a relation coming as by way of deputation to
an office or duty, exemplifying it by the relation that is seen in Doctors,
Praetors, etc, Bellar. lib. 2. de Sacramen. effectu, cap. 14. says, That this
opinion can scarcely be distinguished from the Heresy of this time. Haeretici
non negant neque negare possunt quin sit aliqua relatio rationis in Ministris,
quae non est in aliis, qui non sunt deputati ad ministrandum.
And further says, That Heretics do not deny, nor can deny, but that there
is some relation in Ministers, which is not in others, who are not deputed to
the Ministry. We do confess indeed that there is that relation in Christians
to Christ by the work done in the Sacrament of Baptism, which is not in
Heathens. And though we deny Orders to be any Sacrament, yet we confess there
is that relation in Ministers to Christ by virtue of their Ordination, that is
not in those that are not called to the work of the Ministry. There are those
indeed that do deny it; But those that Bellarmine had to deal with, and that he
charges for Heretics, as Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr,
Chemnitius willingly yield it. And in case this were all the character that
they talk of to be imprinted in Baptism; yea, in Ordination, we should never
contend about it. And as these privileges are conferred as to actual interest
in the initiatory Sacacraments, both of Baptism, and Circumcision; so the same
privileges in the following Sacraments are infallibly evidenced, as appears in
that text, 1 Cor. 10.17. The Apostle there making it his business to take off
Christians from their resort to the Idols temples, to eat there of that which
had been offered in sacrifice, which they judged to be within the verge of
their liberty; An Idol being nothing in the world, tells them, that as joining
with Jews in their sacrifice offered on the Altar, did declare them to be one
body with the Jews; and eating of the Sacramental bread, did make them one
body Christian; so also going to the Heathens sacrifices, did evidence them to
be one body Heathen. The Apostle, as we see, Romans 1.5. thought no understanding
man would question it, we must therefore readily yield it; which holds true of
the Passover, seeing only the circumcised who were in says Jews, were to be
admitted do it, Exodus 12.48. And this I suppose is that which Reverend Gataker
means, opposing that tenent, that the Sacraments confer grace by the work
done, where there is no bar put, and having quoted testimonies of Bishop
Abbot, Calvin, and Whitaker, sharply enough declaring themselves against it,
adds, That for the axiom it self I will not contend about it, if that effect
of the Sacraments be understood, for which they were instituted of God, and the
Word be taken in a more large sense for all that whatsoever it be that may be
any impediment, that the Sacraments cannot have their effect. Though perhaps in
these words of his he had some other intentions. It were an endless labor to
lanch out into the controversy, and to gather up the various opinions of those
of a contrary judgment, and their different thoughts to make good their
tenants, whether of those that deny Sacraments to be Seals, as generally the
Papists, whom Anabaptists in this follow at the heels, as in most other things
both about the Covenant, and Sacraments; Or Lutherans, who yielding them to be
seals, as well as signs, yet affirim that these are less principal offices,
and uses of Sacraments: the chief end is to be instruments of conveyance of
grace to the soul; Or dissenting brethren among Protestants, some of them
falling in with Popish Schoolmen, and wholly closing with their tenent, that
Sacraments confer grace where no bar is put to hinder their working; or
others that hold it with limit only to Baptism, and that to elect children,
not daring to put reprobates into a state of regeneration, or remission of sin,
nor yet to assert that the elect are always thus regenerate in Baptism; But
that it holds so in ordinary: Or of some (that I have met with in discourse)
that suppose that Baptism has his work in those elect infants, where God
foresees that death will prevent their regeneration by the Word: or others that
say, that God works by Baptism to regeneration, and forgiveness of sin; but
according to pleasure, they dare not assign to whom. Some of these I judge to
be more evidently opposite to the Scripture then others; yet I confess, I see
not foundation in the Word for any of them. These that are thus agreed, that
the Sacraments as instruments confer grace, without respect had to the
receivers faith, yet are at odds among themselves, what manner of instruments
they are. He that pleases may read in Suarez, disput. 9. quaest. 62. art. 4.
Sect. 2. six several opinions about it; some will have them to be no efficient,
but material causes only, as a dish conveying a medicine, is no cause of
health, but a material instrument only of conveyance. Others hold that they
confer grace per modum impetrationis, because the Minister and the Church
obtaines of God by prayer grace by them. Others say, that they are conditions
without which God gives not grace Others yet say, that the Sacraments are
causes of grace, because when they are applied, they move God to confer it.
As we say they work by way of sign on our understanding, so they say they work
by way of sign with God, moving him to remember his promise. Others say, they
confer grace, because God in a more special manner appears in them as a
principal agent, or efficient; which my Author complains is very obscure. But
he that will consult the Author of this opinion, which is Henricus a Gandavo
Quod. quart. quaest. 37. may find much against any power in the Sacraments to
confer, or to speak in his language, to create grace in the soul; creation
being solely the prerogative of God, and above the power of any creature to be
assistent in it; yet lest he should run upon an heresy against the
determination of the Catholic Church, in making them no more then signs and
seals, he is put upon it to come off thus blewly, that Suarez with all his high
wit cannot find out his meaning. Suarez himself concludes, that they are
Physical instruments in the conveyance of grace, and that they are causes of
grace; because by a true Physical action they concur to the sanctification of
men. Having with much ado endeavored to prove a possibility of their working
of grace in a Physical way, he concludes, that this is their way of working,
and that not barely in working some disposition toward grace, not reaching
grace it self, nor yet in working an union only of grace with the soul; But in
the most proper and rigorous sense, Sacraments Physically work grace; the very
Physical action by which Grace is wrought, and drawn out of the obediential
power of the soul, truly, really, and Physically depending on the Sacraments,
which he judges to be most agreeable to the dignity of the Sacraments; the
phrases of Scripture, and Councels, and Fathers about them. But it might pity
the Reader to see how miserably he comes off with this assertion of his, only
telling us, that the Scripture says, we are cleansed, sanctified, or
regenerate of water, or the laver of regeneration, and washing of water in the
Word of life, without the least light given us, to let us understand that these
phrases must be taken in his Physical sense meaning: adding some sentences of
Fathers, who ordinarily give that in their writings to the sign, which is
proper to the thing signified, finding yet opposite sentences in them, that
much troubles him, in which in an orthodox, way, they explain themselves
sufficiently against his position. In case in this position of his of the
Physical working of Sacraments, he had only understood, that they work
according to the nature of the office, and place assigned unto them, there
might have been just cause to have subscribed to his judgment. It is of the
nature of a sign to hold forth to us the thing signified, of a relative
symbol, to engage to the filling up of such a relation. It is of the nature of
a seal to confirm every grant past in Covenant: but to give a Physical power
to those elementary substances to create Grace in, or confer grace upon the
soul, is a monstrous tenent. A little Philosophy will accquaint us with the
natural properties of water, and as applied in washing experience will soon
discover it. The Psalmist also shows the efficacy which nature gives to bread,
and wine, Psalm 104. But for either water, bread, or wine to pardon sin, infuse
habits, or new qualities into the soul; or add to the strength of those that
are already wrought, is an unheard of secret. Others yet say that they are
hyperphysical, or supernatural instruments in the conveyance of grace, which
might easily enough be understood, in case it could be believed. A power they
mean put into them, or exercised by them, above that which in their natural
workings they have any possible activity to reach, as in the water of the Poole
of Bethesda, upon the moving of the Angel to heal him that first stepped into
it, and in the water of Jordan to cleanse Naaman of his Leprosy by seven times
dipping in it. Had it had, that natural power of cure Abana and Pharpar rivers
of Damascus, would never have been esteemed equal with it. But that these
elements should be standing instruments of the work of miracles of this nature,
we had need of full and clear texts of Scripture to make good to us. I shall
as soon believe a transubstantiation in the bread from hoc est corpus meum, as
such a transmutation, or renovation of the soul, or any such privileges of
glory: as Scripture makes the peculiar inheritance of those in whom this change
is wrought, upon the bare application of these Elements. Most say they are
moral instruments in what they do; but then there is so much work to
understand what a moral instrument means, that I dare neither without further
expression of my self affirm or deny it. Some make them such instruments by
which God works according to pleasure, sometimes working that which they
signify, and sometimes working not at all by them, as sometimes he works by
the Word: but sometimes it remains a dead letter. Others make it an instrument
of conveyance, as a staff of an Abbotship, a pall df a Bishopric, a Book of a
Canons place, and this doubtless is according to the meaning of Scriptures; as
men vouchsafing gifts appoint at pleasure Ceremonies, and Solemnities
evidencing such donations, so God has appointed these elements as signs of
that nature. Having a precedent right, the initiating Sacrament is a means of
solemn inauguration, and the following Sacrament an evidence of continued
possession. Baptism takes into the body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and Bread and Wine
evidence that we are of the body, 1 Cor. 10.17. And as a twig, and turfe vests
a man in his purchase of lands, a rod vests a customary tenant in his
Coppyhold, a Crown vests a King in his Kingdom; so these elements (having this
office assigned them of God) vest a man in Covenant in visible
Church Membership, and give him actual interest in all visible
Church Priviledges. But yet this difference, The Staff, the Pall, the Book,
the Twig, and Turfe, the Rod, the Crown, lead no further then to that which
they immediately confer, which is the present dignities, and possessing
whereof they are solemnities, and these dignities are also terminated in
themselves, and lead men into no expectation of any higher honor. But
Sacraments vesting us in Church Priviledges, and these privileges leading us
to higher and greater things as they vest us in present in these, so by way of
sign and seal, they lead, and raise us unto all that Church Priviledges serve,
and are appointed to advance us unto. So that God works as a Moral agent, in
appointing according to pleasure these elements as solemnities of his grant,
and they work according to the nature of the office assigned them, that is, by
way of sign and seal, for the help of our understandings, the refreshing of our
memories, and strength of our faith in promises of greater things.

SECT. II. Propositions tending to clear the doctrine.
IN order to the discovery of some further light concerning the operation of
Sacraments, and for detection of erroneous opinions about them, I shall lay
down several Positions. Explicatory Propositions. 1. Man's first original is in
sin.


First, This must be held as an uncontroverted truth between parties in this
dispute, that Man's first original is in sin, his first estate (not by Creation,
but by birth, not as he came out of the hands of God, but as he comes into the
world) is in full opposition against heaven, The imagination of man's heart, is
evil from his youth, Genesis 8.21. The word (as Ainsworth, and Rivet on the place,
with Mr. Hildersam on Psalm. 51.5. observe) signifies infancy, the same title
which is given to Moses when he was newborn, Exodus 2.6. Compare with this
Psalm. 58.3. The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as
they be born, speaking lies. The sin of all begins then, the sin of bad men
still remains, no change is wrought in them, nor amendment seen, but a
progress in evil, Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
my mother conceive me; The cavils of old Anabaptists to take off the force of
this text are vain, That by iniquity here is not meant sin, but sorrow, which
for sin came upon women in childbearing, and that by sin in the later part of
the verse is meant the height of lust in David's parents. Let any man look into
the context, and see whether it will bear any such gloss. David is there upon
a serious humiliation of his soul for sin, and aggravating it in the
circumstances of it, and how his mothers sharp throws in travel, or either of
his parents height of lust, can add any thing at all to aggravate his guilt, or
increase his sorrow, none can understand, he presently prays that this may be
cleansed, and taken away, which can be understood of neither of those
particulars which are in the objection. This pollution by birth sin abundantly
appears in reason.

Arguments evincing it.
1. By the necessity of regeneration, or new birth in all those that enter into
the Kingdom of heaven. As the Apostle says of Covenants, If the first had been
faultlesse, there had been no need of a second, Heb. 8.7. so we may say of
births; there is a necessity of a second, therefore there was a fault in the
first; take away this birth-sin, or original pollution, and then you destroy
regeneration. If all be as it should be in our former birth, then there needs
not any other.

2. By the Lord Christ's Incarnation, in order to the work of Redemption; taking
man's nature, he began as man begins in sin, even with infancy; he dyed in our
nature for all, of all sorts, conditions, and ages: infants partake of the
fruit of his death, and were upon that account admitted, as his by
Circumcision, and are in Baptism, and are therefore under the defilement of
sin.

3. By the stroke or judgment unto which infants are subject, being liable to
sickness, taken away by death, subject to miseries of all kinds; sin goes
before as the cause, where these follow as effects, Romans 5.12. As by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin: so death passed upon all men; for
that all have sinned, or in whom all have sinned.

4. The readiness and pronenesse of little ones to run upon sin is an evidence
of it. The thorns, briars, and weeds, that the earth casts out, when precious
flowers, and choice plants are more hardly nourished, is an argument that the
earth is under a curse, and is not now, as once it was. The sins that even in
childhood appear, and together with age grow forwards, when graces are
difficultly planted, and that which is good very hardly produced, is as great
an evidence of a man's innate degeneration. This even Heathens could see, though
they knew not whence it was. Homines natura sua esse malos and induci non posse
ut justitiam colant.
Plato observed that men by nature are wicked, and that they cannot be brought
to learn righteousness; and Hominem a natura noverca in lucem edi corpore
nudo, fragili atque infirmo, animo ad molestias anxio, ad timores humili, in
quo divinus ignis sit obrutus. Referunt Theol. Lydenses, Disp. 15. These. 6.
Tully lamented, that man is brought into the world by his stepdame nature,
with a body naked, frail, and weak, a mind anxious in troubles, low under
fears, weak for labor, prone to lust, in whom every Divine spark is
overywhelmed. If any man demand how it comes to pass that we are thus, we must
look as far as Adam, to see the inlet of it, By one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, Romans 5.19. His was peccatum originans, giving the rise to all
evils in us, thence issued peccatum originatum our original condition as before
decribed. Sin seizing upon the Angels, made them unclean, and they have through
that defilement the denomination of unclean spirits; sin seizing upon man has
rendered him unclane; It defiled not only the person of man, but the nature of
man; had man stood, all mankind had stood; man falling, all mankind became
filthy, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Job. 14.4. Adam
begat a son in his own likeness, Genesis 5.3. like himself, when he had lost the
image of God; what sin made man, that an infant is, so far as of capacity to
be, not to act sin; he that can do nothing, cannot do evil, but in them there
are those principles, that show themselves in action so far as there is power
to act. A young Serpent does sting none, poisons none, but there is in them a
poisonous and destroying na ure, which grows, as nature grows.

5. By the duty incumbent upon Christians to put off the old man, Ephesians. 4.22.
which is not so called in opposition to that which is young, (as though man
grew up to it by degrees, many years being gone over his head before he had
gotten that name) but in opposition to that which is new, as we see, ver. 23.
The old has the precedence of the new, and is before it as the old garments
are worn, and put off before the new put on; why must all of necessity be new
if the old would serve the turn?

Secondly, This sin which is man's hereditary estate, This Original state of man
is not only a want of Prim^tive integrity, but is attended with universal
defilement.
has in it not only a want of that Priwitive purity, which God stamped upon
man, according to his own likeness, but also an universal defilement and
pollution: Therefore the Apostle setting out this estate under the name of the
old man, gives it this character, corrupt according to deceitful lusts, Ephesians.
4.22. All the pollution in the world is from lust, 2 Pet. 1 4. that is the
sink; and source, from whence all proceeds, and the old man is wholly made up
of these corrupt, filthy, and defiling principles. They promise better when
they draw aside, but that is their work; and therefore as they are corrupt, so
they are branded as deceitful likewise. Upon this account it is, that man is
dead in trespasses and sins, able to rise no higher in nature then that which
is sin; and this renders his conversation to be according to the course of this
world, after the prince of the power of the air; the former is his pattern and
the later is his Sovereign; the one is followed, the other served. And
consequently with guilt or ordination to punishment.
In fulfilling the desires, or wills, of the flesh and mind, Ephesians. 2.23.
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. as wholly enslaved by this
defiling principle. And as this is of the being, so guilt or ordination to
punishment is a necessary adjunct, or consequent of it; Death is in as great a
latitude as sin, Romans 5.12. the proper wages of that work, Romans 6.23. Therefore
all that have a nature thus defiled, are by nature the children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3. Men may descant as they will upon the word, and tell us of another
use of it in profane Authors; but all their wit will not work men from under
this guilt, or gain him any thing more in his birth-state, but wrath for his
portion.

To restore man to his Primitive happiness, his nature must be healed, Nature
must be healed and guilt removed, for restitution of man to his Primitive glory.
and his guilt removed; there must be a change, wrought in his principles, and
a pardon vouchsafed of his sin. If either the stain continue, or the guilt
hold, man will be wretched; till he be again like God, and reconciled to God,
his case is forlorn: This needs no proof, man was without stain or guilt when
God made him upright, his stain must be washed, and guilt removed, or else his
happiness is not repaired. And this was the converted Corinthians glory; they
were under the defilement of Adultery, Idolatry, Fornication, Drunkenness,
etc. and upon this account, under the sad doom of exclusion out of the Kingdom
of heaven; but being washed, sanctified, justified, the doom is reversed.
However you Interpret these several phrases, we have their deliverance from the
stain and guilt of sin in them.

Either of both of these is the work of Christ, and the happy privilege of all
of Gospel-interest. Either of both of these is the work of Christ by his blood
and Spirit.
He takes off the stain in the work of Regeneration, and Sanctification by the
power of his Spirit; as by our fall we were dead in sin, so by this new work on
our hearts, we are dead to sin; we were free from righteousness, now we are
alive to righteousness, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. When we were
dead in sins, he has quickened us together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.5. Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might Sanctify, and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the Word, that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it
should be holy, and without blemish, Ephe. 5.25, 26, 27. As the spot is taken
off by his Spirit in working new principles in us, and working us up to new
obedience: so the guilt is removed by his sufferings; He blots out their
transgressions for his Names sake, He remembers them no more, He hides his face
from them, He casts them into the bottom of the sea, removes them as far as the
East is from the West; He does not one of these, to leave the other undone; He
vouchsafes purifying, and he vouchsafes pacifying grace. He delivers from the
wrath to come, and he makes meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light; He conferres habitual graces, and he honors with relative
privileges.

Fifthly, These may be distinguished, Blood and Spirit may be distinguished,
but must not be divided.
but they must by no means We account it a great presumption in men of years,
to talk of justification, and want sanctification; and we can say to such, If
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. God writes his Law in
the heart, and puts it into the inward parts, where he remembers sin no more,
Jer. 31.33. They are quickened together with Christ, that have their trespasses
forgiven them, Col. 2.13. And it is an unwarrantable conceit to imagine that
relative privileges of adoption, and pardon of sin, are conferred on infants
in Baptism, or otherwise, when their natures remain still the same and
unchanged; who can think that God fits all of age for glory, that he takes into
glory? and yet takes infants into glory, their impurity and birth-defilement
continuing. Seeing that we have instances, as of Gods love of infants, Romans
9.13. of Christ's blessing of them, Matthew. 19.16. so also of the gift of his
Spirit, Jer. 1.5. Luke 1.15. In case the former may be avoided, yet certainly
the later is above exception. The reason given by Christ of that sentence of
his, holding forth an absolute necessity of regeneration, Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; is the pollution of the first birth,
as appears by his own words, ver. 6. inferred immediately upon the repetition
of the former, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and this is of equal
concernment to infants, and men of years; uncleanness of birth, as well as
uncleanness of life, stands as a bar to our entrance into heaven; and no
unclean person must enter there.

Sixthly, The Sacraments, especially those of initiation (whether in the old or
new Covenant) about which concerning this in question there is most dispute,
The Sacraments especially those of initiation have respe^t to both of these.
havo respect to this whole work, both of the change of our nature, and the
removal of our guilt: As the have respect to the one, so also to the other; and
that the whole of their work, and the way how it is wrought may be better
understood, we are to consider that; First, Somewhat is hinted, and employed in
those respective signs of Circumcision and Baptism, and that is our
uncleanness in nature, and guilt contracted upon it. Why should either infant,
or man of years have the foreskin of his flesh in that way by Divine
appointment cut off; but to let us understand the propagation of corruption,
and derivation of it from man to posterity? Why should water be applied, which
is of an abstersive, cleansing faculty, but to let us know that there is
uncleanness to be removed? Cleansing for that which is clean is vain, and
needless. As Sacrifices for atonement did imply wrath, so this cleansing
implies filth, and consequently guilt, filth and guilt being inseparable.

Secondly, Somewhat is signified and taught us in them; somewhat the bare signs
themselves are apt to signify, viz. That the taking off of the stain, and the
removal of our guilt, is to be done by another power. Why is this applied by
another hand, but to let us know that it is above our strength? Somewhat, not
the signs of themselves, but the Word of the Covenant that is annexed teaches,
and that is, That the blood of Christ removes this guilt, and that the Spirit
of Christ takes away this stain. This the signs of themselves could never
show, but the words of the Covenant abundantly do demonstrate, that remission
of guilt, is the work of the blood of Christ, and Regeneration or
Sanctification, the work of the Spirit. That the water in Baptism holds out
the Spirit unto us for Sanctification, and change of our ways, is (that I
know) denied by none, and in the Scripture it is plain, I will circumcise thy
heart, and the heart of thy seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Circumcision is that of the
heart, Romans 2.29. which by the Apostle, Col. 2.11. is interpreted the putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh: Baptism is the same as to the
signification, as we see in the same place, from the Apostle, Col. 2.11, 12,
13. In whom ye are also circumcised with the circumcision made without hands,
in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of
Christ, buried with him in Baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him through
the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from the dead, and you
being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of your flesh has he quickened
together with him, having forgiven all your trespasses. And this death to sin,
and life in grace are both from the Spirit, Romans 8.11, 12, 13. and both of
these Baptism holds out to us, Romans 6.4. We are buried with him by Baptism
into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory
of the Father: even so we also should walk in newness of life. But whether the
blood of Christ be at all signified by this element of water some have
questioned. Sticking so rigidly to that phrase of the Apostle, Tit. 3.5. that
they will not alone have it understood of Baptism, but they will have nothing
else looked after in Baptism, but the work of regeneration: But this
doubtless is a clear mistake. The blood that was shed in circumcision, gave
the circumcised to understand, that the guilt propagated, could not without
blood be remitted. And if any think that this is too dark, and obscure a proof
of a Mystery of this weight, let them compare with it the text under hand, and
the Apostles scope and aim in it, which (as we have heard) is to show, that
Abraham's circumcision was not his justification; seeing he was justified by
faith in his state of uncircumcision, and that he received circumcision as a
sign and seal of it; justification is by blood, Romans 3.25. Circumcision is a
sign, and seal of justification. Righteousness of faith is not Sanctification,
Sanctification is inherent, the righteousness of faith is imputed; but
circumcision is a sign, and seal of the righteousness of faith. And that
Baptism signifies, and seals the same thing we find expressly in Peter's
words, Ast. 2.38. Be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins. Remission of sins is by blood, Heb. 9.22. Without
shedding of blood there is no remission. Baptism is for remission of sins; and
therefore the water in Baptism holds out the blood of Christ. And I doubt not,
but Ananias had respect to this in his speech to Paul, Act. 22.16. Rise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins. Somewhat it is, to which these signs engage,
and that is all, unto which a Christian in duty, as duty, stands engaged,
whether for his change in heart or life, or in order to the pardon of his sin.
Baptism engages to the first work of regeneration, and to the first work of
making all new within: To this circumcision did tie; as it signified it, so it
engaged to it, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and be no
more stiffenecked. If by virtue of their circumcision in the flesh, God did not
require it, why is the want of it charged on Judah as their sin? or how could
it lay them open with other Nations to punishment? Jer. 9.25, 26. Behold, the
days come, says the Lord, that I will punish all them that are circumcised,
with the uncircumcised, Egypt, and Judah and Edom, and the children of Ammon,
and Moab, and all that are in the uttermost corners, that dwell in the
wilderness: for all these Nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of
Israel are uncicumcised in the heart. And that the first work is required, as
well as a further degree and progress, both in circumcision and baptism is
clear: In baptism we are explicitly dedicated (as the Jews were implicitly in
circumcision) to Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and therefore engaged to be
sincerely his in Covenant. But this cannot be, till a change be wrought, and we
be born again from above. To this therefore we are engaged. We are engaged, to
love the Lord with all our heart, with all our strength; but this cannot be,
while our hearts are in an unchanged condition, and therefore the circumcision
of the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. is mentioned in order to this of the love of the
Lord: The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed,
to love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul; what is it
but the first work that is called for in that of the Prophet? Make ye a new
heart, and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 10.31. And in those texts of the Apostle, Awake
thou that sleep and stand up from the dead, Ephesians. 5.14. Be ye transformed
by the renewing of your minds, Romans 12.2. That ye put off concerning the former
conversation, the old man -- And be renewed in the spirit of your minds, Ephesians.
4.22, 23. Howsoever some of these Scriptures may be conceived to be directed to
men in a state of Regeneration, and therefore that they call not for the first
work, but for a further progress in grace, yet all of them cannot be so
Interpreted. And there is not any of them but implies, that where the first
work is not done, it must be done; where the old man is not put off, it must be
put off; and where the new man is not put on, it must be put on; where the
spirit is not renewed, it must be renewed. Neither is it of force against this,
to say, that the first work is out of our power, and that in it we are wholly
passive, and therefore we do not in baptism engage to it, but God rather
engages for it. To which I answer, Though it be out of our power, yet it is
within the command of God, and is matter of our duty. Gods command is no rule
of our strength, neither is it brought down to answer our weakness; so a
carnal man should be under no spiritual command, but it is a rule of our duty;
what we once were, and still ought to be, it commands us for to be. And though
we be passive in the first work, yet we are always concerned to be active, and
as soon as we do receive power, we are to act. Dead Lazarus was commanded to
rise, and having power communicated from God, he did actually rise and come out
of the grave. There is not any promise of God for inherent Grace, nor any work
of Grace, but it comes within our duty, and a command lies on us; as instance
might be given, and consequently there is an obligation and engagement to it.
Gods command and his promises stand not in opposition, but in subordination;
and to say that God is engaged, and not man, is dangerous; then all that are
baptized must be regenerate, or else God fails in his engagement. Somewhat it
is, that these signs seal, and in sealing ratify, and confirm, and that is (as
the text shows) the righteousness of Faith, and consequently all other
privileges whatsoever of like nature, that are annexed to it; Remission,
Justification, Adoption, Glorification. Sacraments, as seals, have not (as I
conceive) at least immediately, and directly reference to graces, or inherent
habits; but privileges. They are (as Mr. Baxter has well observed) seals of
the conditional Covenant, and so they must seal, whatsoever they do seal, on
Gods terms and conditions: they ratify mercies promised, on those terms that
the Covenant does promise; now graces are the conditions, and terms of the
Covenant, and mercies are promised upon those terms: and therefore the
Covenant requires them, but the Sacraments do not ratify and seal them. The
Sacraments as signs show us our wants of, or wants in grace by the help of the
Word, and light received from it: they point us out where supply may be found,
they engage us to this change, to the whole of duty required from the people of
God: and upon answer of our conscience in this work, they seal, and confirm all
promised privileges to us. The nature, efficacy, and operation of Sacraments
would be better understood, if that which is proper to each part, or the
particular office in each relation, were better known. The seal in a Lease, as
from the Lessor, does not ratify the homage, that is to be done by the Lessee,
or the service from him due; but the inheritance, or benefit whatsoever, which
upon condition of such homage, or service is conveyed. Graces are the homage,
and privileges are the benefit, or the inheritance; the privileges then, and
not the graces, are directly in Sacraments sealed to us. It is not sealed up to
us; either in Baptism or the Lords Supper, that we do believe or repent; but
that believing, and repenting, we have forgiveness of sin, and salvation. But
some say, that the Sacraments seal all that the Covenant promises; but the
Covenant promises Grace, and therefore the Sacraments seal, and confirm in
this, that we have grace. Answ. Not to dispute the absolute Covenant in this
place, as many call it; The Covenant to which Sacraments are annexed as seals,
properly promises privileges upon condition of graces, and requires the graces
though God in his elect ever graciously works; what it is respective to grace
that Sacraments do, we have now heard, that is, to show us our want of it, and
point us out the fountain of it, engaging us to it, and upon our making good
our engagements through Grace, they ratify these promised privileges to us.

7. Scriptures of two sorts are brought by those that would advance Sacraments
above that which they work as signs and seals.
Seventhly, The texts of Scripture brought by those that would raise the work of
Sacraments above all that they do, as signs, and seals; and to evince that
they have an absolute work on the soul, without respect had, either to the
understanding, or faith of the receivers, are of two sorts. The first are such,
where no Sacrament at all is mentioned, neither can it by any good argument be
proved, that Sacraments in those texts, are directly intended. Others are such
wherein Baptism indeed is mentioned; but faith is evidently required to the
attainment of the effect there specified; when these two are proved, a full
answer is given to all the Scriptures which by the Adversaries in this behalf
are objected. Scriptures of the first rank are, 1. Such wherein no Sacrament is
mentioned, nor can be proved that any is intended.
Titus 3.5. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the word, 1. Cor.
6.12. Such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Though the thing signified in
Baptism is here evidently spoken to, and some allusion may be conceived to be
here made to Baptism; yet I suppose that it can by no good argument be proved,
that the Sacrament of Baptism in any of these Scriptures is intended. First,
Arguments evincing that Baptism is not intended in the Sacramental work of it.
The Lords Supper may be as fairly evidenced out of Christ words, John 6.53,
54, 55. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you; whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day; for my flesh is meat indeed, and
my blood is drink indeed, as Baptism may be evinced out of any of those texts
alleged: when yet Protestant Writers unanimously conclude, and several
learned Papists yield, that no Sacramental eating is there intended. To clear
this they say, there is a mere Sacramental eating, and drinking the flesh and
blood of Christ, when the outward signs are received, and no more; a mere
spiritual eating and drinking, when Christ is applied by faith without any
Sacramental sign; and an eating, and drinking both Sacramental and Spiritual,
when the Sacrament is received by sincere believers; and the text in John is
understood (as they conclude) of bare spiritual eating, and drinking. The same
we may apply to washing, and conclude, that it is merely spiritual washing,
that in these texts alleged is understood. Secondly, There are the same
phrases, or those that are parallel with them, in Old Testament-Scriptures,
when no Sacrament of this kind was instituted, and therefore could not be
intended, Psalm. 51.7. Purge me with Hyssope, and I shall be clean: wash me, and
I shall be whiter then Snow, Ezekiel. 36.25 Then will I sprinckle clean water
upon you, and you shall be clean from all your filthiness. And it must needs
be that mere Spiritual, and not Sacramental washing, for the reason alleged,
must in these texts be understood. Thirdly, If outward Baptism were there
intended, why should not the word Baptism be there, as in other places used?
when we see it is yet omitted, when other words are in the stead of it
industriously chosen; when common washing is intended, we know that the word
Baptism is frequently used, as Mar. 7.8. Luke 11.38. and so also, when legal
cleansing is spoken to; as, Heb. 9.20. And in case Baptism it self were here
purposely intended, it is marvel that other words should by the Spirit of God
be chose, and this laid aside. Fourthly, This Interpreters of eminent note have
seen. Mr. Gataker, disceptatio de Baptis. Infant. vi and efficacia, page 51.
says, It Dubitari potest non immerito, baptismine Sacramentum, an interna
ablutio, hoc nomine eo loci designetur.
may justly be doubted, whether the Sacrament of Baptism, or inward washing in
that place of Titus 3.5. be understood; and then adds, Atque ego certe, etiamsi
ad baptismi ritum externum respectum aliquem haberi nullus negaverim, de
interna tamen ab lutione, diserte dictum existimo, quae externa illa lotione
corporis designatur, ut ex clausula mox sequente verba illa exponantur, per
lavacrum regenerationis non videtur apostolus significare baptismum, sed ipsam
regenerationem quam lavacro comparat.
Though, I am not he that will deny that some respect is had in those words to
the outward rite of Baptism, yet I believe that they are expressly spoken of
the inward washing, and that the words may be interpreted by the clause
immediately following, the renewing by the Holy Ghost; quoting Piscator for his
opinion, These. theol. vol. 1. loc. 25. Sect. 20. who says, By the laver of
regeneration the Apostle seems not to intend baptism, but regeneration it
self, which he compares to a laver: and also Dr. Slater on Romans 2.25.
affirming, That it is doubtful, whether in Titus 3.5. there be any speech of
the Sacrament, or only of the blood of Christ, and of the Spirit; and in his
words (as the Reader that pleases to consult him may see) he takes in Ephesians.
5.26. likewise Vorstius speaks most fully of all to these Texts, mentioning the
Argument drawn from Ephesians. 5. Titus 3. for the opus operatum in Sacraments, he
says, Our Divines answer, Aliena testimonia citari, viz. quae res quidem in
Sacramentis significatas metaphorice declarant, attamen de Sacramentis proprie
dictis non agunt.
That impertinent testimonies are urged, which hold forth the thing signified
in Sacraments, by way of metaphor, but do not speak of Sacraments properly so
called, Antibel. Tom. 3. Contro. 1. These. 1. and 2. And whereas Calvin is
produced by some, as interpreting Titus 3.5. of outward baptism, his authority
will but little help them. Non dubito quin saltem ad baptismum alludat, imo
facile patior de baptismo locum exponi.
I do not doubt (says he) but that the Apostle does at least allude to
baptism; and further says, I can easily bear, that this place should be
interpreted of baptism; on which words of his, Mr. Gataker, page 123. very
well comments. Quasi aliam potius quorundam expositionem probaturus, ni aliorum
importunitas alio impelleret. Verba sunt enim alii concedentis aliquid, potius
quam animi sui sensum enuntiantis.
As though he would rather (says he) allow another interpretation, if the
importunity of others did not lead him that way. They are words of one
granting, or rather yielding somewhat to another man, then speaking his own
mind, as he further observes. And Mr. Burges, Spiritual Refining, Part 1. page
214. speaking of Baptism, says, it is called the laver of regeneration, Titus
3.5. as some expound it, giving us to understand, that it is no exposition
universally agreed upon, and sufficiently hinting, that it is the more
inconsiderable part that do interpret it this way. Fifthly, Though we should
yield that these places were to be understood of the Sacrament of Baptism, as
Calvin says he could be content to do, yet all this while nothing is gained,
seeing it still rests to be proved, that this is meant any otherwise then by
way of sign and seal, they conclude no abolute work, but only as they have
their influence upon the understanding, and faith of the receivers. And
therefore Calvin, when he was prevailed withal to yield so far, as we have
heard, presently adds, Non quod in externo aquae symbolo inclusa sit salus,
sed quia partam a Christo salutem Baptismus nobis obsignat.
Not that salvation is included in the outward symbol of water, but because
Baptism seals it to us, when Christ has obtained it for us. And Danaeus
speaking to that Argument of Bellarmine, that the Scripture witnesses, that
the words of the Sacrament are active instruments of our justification, and not
seals of the promise, giving instance in these, and the like Scriptures for
this purpose, answers: Instrumenta and signa etiam mere obsignantia and
testantia dicuntur, per tropum and metonymiam id facere quod obsignant, nam and
annulus sponsalium qui solus est signum eorum, dicitur conjun gere and obligare
sponsos, contractus instrumentum quod solum consensus signum obstringere
contrahentes, Doctoratus sigillum and literae creasse and effecisse n.
Docto^em; quaeenim nos juvant efficere ea ipsa dicuntur, propter finem in quem
spectant, in quibus ab eis juvamur. Verum vitanda est verborum hujusmodi, quae
ut causis vel signis vel instrumentis actionem tribuunt homonymia: ne propterea
censcamus ea signa vel instrumenta esse causas ist^us actionis, vel effecti,
vel fructus efficientes; efficient enim aut efficere di cuntur illa effecta,
suo tantum modo, nempe per modum duntaxat signi, quatenus obsignant and
certificant eam actionem vel effectionem, aut per modum instrumenti, quoniam ad
effectionem ad hibentur: multum enim signa, and vera instrumenta inter se
proprie differunt; signa vero nihil plane ad effectio nem conferunt, qualia
sunt Sacramenta, sed affectionem Sp. S. and opus illius in nobis duntaxat
v^rissime and certissime testantur and consignant.
Instruments, and signs merely testifying, and sealing are said by a trope, and
metonymy to do that which they seal; for even a ring used in espousals, which
only is a sign, is said to join and bind the espoused; an instrument of
contract, which is only a token of agreement, is said to bind the contractors;
and the letters and seal of a Doctor to create a Doctor: for those things that
are helpful to us, are said to effect those things, as to such an end, in which
they are helpful. But the homonymy of words of this nature is to be shunned,
which attributes actions to signs, or instruments, as to causes, lest upon
that account, we may think that such signs or instruments are causes of such
actions, or efficients of such fruits, and effects. For they effect or are said
to do such a work alone after their manner, that is, only by way of sign, as
they seal or certify such an act, or work, or by way of instrument, because
they are used in the work. For signs and instruments properly so called do
very much differ; For signs contribute nothing to the work, of which sort are
Sacraments, but only truly and certainly testify, and seal the work of the
Spirit of God wrought. Danaeus Contra Bellarmi. Tom. Contro. 2. Cap. 14. ad
Arg. 2. Abundance more might be added, to clear these Texts, and take them out
of their hands, that urge them for this purpose, though they were meant of the
Sacraments, which is not to be granted. And what we have said of these Texts,
may be affirmed of that also, Deuteronomy. 30.6. I will circumcise thy heart, and the
heart of thy seed: Circumcision which was a Sacrament, is indeed there named,
but the speech is only borrowed by way of metaphor, from the circumcision of
the flesh, and applied to the heart, as is clear, Deuteronomy. 10.16. where that work
is given in command to the Jews, and they were not commanded to circumcise
themselves, but were already in Circumsion.

A second sort of Scriptures are such in which baptism is mentioned, but faith
evidently required to the attainment of the effects of it.
A second sort of Scriptures are such where Baptism is indeed mentioned, and
the Sacrament of Baptism intended, but faith is evidently required for the
attainment of the effect specified. These especially are, Acts 2.38. Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins, Acts 22.16. Rise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on
the Name of the Lord. I shall refer the Reader for a full vindication of
these Scriptures to Mr. Gatakers disceptation, page 9, 10, etc. page 56, 57.
and shall only add, that that phrase, in the Name of the Lord, utterly
destroies all that they would build on these words, seeing it implies faith in
his Name, as, Acts 3.16. may be seen; And howsoever Infants that are in
Covenant upon their parents profession of faith, are baptized into this Name,
yet those of years (as these were, to whom this speech is directed) are in
their own persons, not only to make profession of faith, but in sincerity to
believe, in order to attainment to the pardon of their sins, or any other
spiritual privilege of the Covenant whatsoever. Yea, that which these men
would draw from these Texts stands not with their principles that urge them.
The Sacraments work grace, say they, as instruments; I shall then desire to
know whether positive infidelity be not such a bar that will hinder? If it be
a bar in men of years, then the Sacrament works not without actual faith in
the baptized: It is the privilege of faith to obtain forgiveness of sin, Act.
13.39. Romans 3.25. It is the work then of faith in the baptized to obtain it,
and baptism to them (as Circumcision to Abraham) is only a sign and seal of
it, and does not otherwise effect it. The like I may say of impenitence, that
according to them, it is a bar to the working of Sacraments. Sacraments only
work in penitent persons, repentance then is a qualification in them that
obtain a pardon, and Sacraments by way of seal assure penitent one^ of it.

Eighthly, 8. The most eminent of the adverse opinion produce Scriptures
clearly opposite to their assertions.
The most eminent that ever have appeared for this power in Sacraments to
confer grace on the receivers, either utterly deny, or at least very doubtfully
affirm, that Baptism works in Infants any real change, but only that which is
relative, that it conferres any habits, or any thing more then privileges on
Infants baptized, when yet the Scriptures that they bring for proof of this
baptismal work, almost all speak to such a change, that is real, not relative;
of habits, and not of privileges. When this is made good, it will appear to
any impartial eye, that the Scripture-Texts alleged come far short of proof of
any such baptismal power to confer grace on all baptized Infants. This as it
seems Reverend Dr. Ward suspected, asserting the certainty of salvation of all
baptized Infants, dying in infancy, he says. That Quae est nostrae Ecclesiae
and totius antiquitatis indubitata sententia; and, ut ego reor, ipsius
Scripturae.
it is the undoubted opinion of all antiquity of our Church, and as he thinks
of the Scripture it self. For the former part of this assertion, that the most
eminent, that have appeared on this party, have held, as before, let Reverend
B. Davenant in his Epistle, speak; Asserting by Arguments that which he says
he had often affirmed, that the argument borrowed from Infants, which
Arminians, Papists, and some of our own use to maintain the apostasy of
Saints, or believers, is not only invalid, but altogether impertinent, as to
that controversy. His third Proposition, to make good this, assertion, is,
Pontificii non agnoscunt pro fidei dogmate, habitus fidei aut charitatis,
infundi parvulis in baptismo, neque tanquam de fide docent, effici u^los justos
formaliter, inhaesione habitualis justitiae aut Sanctitatis
That Papists do not receive it for a point of faith, that the habits of faith,
or charity are infused into Infants in Baptism, neither do they deliver it, as
of faith, that are thereby made formally just, by any inherent habitual
righteousness or holiness. To make this good, Bonaventure, Aquinas, Gerson
among the more ancient Schoolmen are brought in, and of the more modern Writers
Soto, affirming, that habits infused into Infants are not so known, as is the
Catholic faith, and that Estius does ingenuously acknowledge, that this
infusion of inherent righteousness is problematically disputed, the Master of
the sentences inclining to the negative. And whereas some later Papists affirm,
that this opinion of infused habits in Infants, is now otherwise ratified then
heretofore by the authority of the Trent Council, he first answers, that that
Council has no such authority as to make that an article of faith, which for
so many hundred years has not been such, and afterward peremptorily denies,
that that Council did ever so determine, concluding, that it is resolved upon
by Papists, that all baptized Infants are some way rendered acceptable to God;
but that this is done by any such infused habits, or by any inherent quality
created of God, is (as he says) as yet doubted among them. His fourth
Proposition is, that Protestants non concedunt fidem justificantem aut
charitatem Deo unientem, aut gratiam regeneratricem, quae reparat omnes animae
fa^^tates in ipso Baptismi momento infundi insantibus.
Protestants do not yield, that justifying faith, or charity, that unites us to
God: or regenerating grace, that repaires all the faculties of the soul, is
infused into Infants in the very moment of Baptism; quoting Calvin, Beza, and
Peter Martyr, speaking fully to it. Nec quenquam scio nostris Theologis qui
regenerationem illam quae sita est in spiritualium qualitatum creatione (quam
nos sanctificationem, Pontificii formalem justificationem in digitant) in ipso
momento Baptismi productam definiant. Cumigitur nec Arminiani nec Pontificii
nec Protestants agnoscant parvulos in ipsa Baptismi susceptione fieri
participes illorum habitualium donorum aut Spiritualium qualitatum quae proprie
dicuntur constituere hominem justum et inhaerenter sanctum, nemo eorum potest
amissionem fidei aut justitiae aut sanctorum Apostasiam argumento ab infantibus
sumpto demonstrare.
Adding, that he does not know, that any of our Divines determine, that that
regeneration which consists in the creation of spiritual qualities (which we
call Sanctification, and Papists, formal Justification) is infused in the
instant of Baptism. And he brings in also Mountague in his appeal vouching it
out of these Belgic and French Confessions, and then concludes, when neither
Arminians, Papists, nor Protestants acknowledge that Infants in their
participation of Baptism, are made partakers of those habitual gifts and
spiritual qualities, which properly make a man just, and inherently holy, none
of them can demonstrate the loss of Faith or righteousness, or Apostasy of
the Saints, by an argument drawn from Infants. His fifth Proposition is, That
Patres nec actualem nec habitualem fidem aut charitatem parvulis in baptismo
donatam agnoscunt: conversionem etiam sive novi cordis creationem, quae proprie
regeneratio dicenda est, non nisi cum ad aetatem rationis capacem pervenerint,
in iis produci docent.
the Fathers do not acknowledge, that either actual or habitual Faith, or
charity is given to Infants in Baptism; and that they teach, that conversion
or creation of a new heart, which is properly regeneration, is not wrought in
them but only when they come to years, and are capable of reason. For this
Austin is quoted, and frequent places out of him are produced; and with him
Hierome, Nazianzen, Justin Martyr, and Bernard, making all up with the
testimony of Whitaker, Patres ne somniasse quidem de habituali Papistarum fide,
quam illi volunt in Baptismo ex opere operato infusam esse parvulis.
that the Fathers did not so much as dream of the habitual faith which Papists
say is infused, by the work done in Baptism, inferring this as the result of
all that in five several propositions he had delivered; that Hinc quivis
perspiciat quam invalida sit haec concludeni ratio, Multi ex infantibus
baptizatis postea pereunt in infidelitate et impoenitentia; Ergo fides,
charitas, reli quaeque Spirituales qualitates in renatis Spiritus virtute
productae aliquando amittuntur.
(from thence any man may see) how invalid this argument is, Many baptized
Infants afterward perish through unbelief, and impenitence; Therefore faith,
charity and other Spiritual qualities, wrought by the Spirit in the regenerate,
are sometimes lost. And having delivered himself thus in the negative, that
Baptism works not these graces or habits in infants; His first proposition, in
the affirmative, tending to show what Baptism does work, is, Omnes infantes
baptizati ab Originalis peccati reatu absolvuntur.
That all baptized infants are acquitted from the guilt of original sin; for
which opinion, many Fathers, and Schoolmen are quoted by him, as they were for
the former. So that I think the first part of my position is fully made good,
that the most eminent that ever have appeared for this power of Sacraments to
confer grace on the receivers, either utterly deny, or else doubtfully hold
that Baptism works any real change in infants, but only that which is
relative, and that it conferres, not habits, but only privileges on Infants
baptized.

For the other part of the position, that the Scriptures which these bring for
proof of this power of Baptism, almost all speak of such a change, that is
real, not relative; of habits, and not of privileges. The proof is easy. What
those Scriptures are which by them are produced in this Controversy, may be
seen in the former position, and that almost all of them speak of a real
change, not barely that which is relative, is evident. The alone Old Testament
text that I can find, is, Deuteronomy. 30.6. with Jer. 9.25. where circumcision of the
heart is mentioned; which texts as they can hardly be interpreted to speak at
all of the Sacrament of Circumcision, in the outward rite, so it is certain,
that a real change is spoken to by Moses in Deuteronomy, and by the Prophet
also complained of to be wanting. Reverend Dr. Ward yields that Spiritual
Circumcision of the heart is there meant; but he says, that by this Spiritual
Circumcision, the remission of original guilt, is understood. To which Cordis
circumcisione peccatorum remissionem denotari ut credam, nihil adhuc quod
suadeat video, quod cogat multo minus. Certe si quis verba illa, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
Circumcidite ergo praeputium cordis vestri] aut ill^d etiam, Jer. 44.
Circumcidimini sive circumcidite vos Jehovae] exposuerit, Remittite vobis
peccata vestra; (...) (pute) (...).
Mr. Gataker replies, that he sees nothing that can persuade, much less force
him to believe any such thing, Adding; that, If any should expound, Deuteronomy.
10.16. Circumcise the forskin of your heart, or, Jer. 44. Circumcise your
selves to the Lord, to be as much as forgive your own sins, it would be thought
strange. Disceptatio, page 147. yea, he makes the contrary plainly to appear.
As for those texts, Titus 3.5. 1 Corinthians 6.11. Ephesians 5.25, 26. they
speak all to the same thing; In every one of them a real, habitual change is
mentioned, Acts 2.38. Remission of sins is indeed mentioned, and very
probably, Acts. 22.16. But in what sense to be understood, I have showed in the
last place; so that I think there is so much yielded, and so little proved by
the eminent advocates in this cause, (that according to Scripture, there is any
such causality in Baptism for the pardon of sin in every Infant that is
presented to that ordinance, and received) that even upon this account it is
justly to be susspected. Besides, that the blood of Christ and his Spirit are
not only distinguished by them, but divided; The virtue of his blood, is
ascribed to those that have no portion in his Spirit, as though that Christ
came, both by water and blood unto some: and by blood only unto others.

SECT. III. Objections against the former doctrine.
Where the blood of Christ on Gods part is offered, and applied for pardon of
the guilt of sin, and no impediment put on his part that receives it, there the
guilt of sin is remitted; But in the Baptism of Infants, the blood of Christ on
Gods part is offered and applied, and no impediment put by him that receives
it; Ergo in the Baptism of Infants the guilt of sin is remitted.

Answ. 1. This Argument will hold with equal strength for proof of that which
these deny; as for that which they would assert, Where the Spirit of Christ is
offered on Gods part, and applied for regeneration, and true sanctification,
and no impediment put by him that does receive it, there regeneration,
sanctification, and all other gracious habits are wrought: But in the Baptism
of Infants the Spirit of Christ is thus offered, and applied, and no impediment
is put: Ergo. The Major in this syllogism can be no more denied, then in the
former. The Spirit of Christ is as efficacious for regeneration, as his blood
for pardon; It were overmuch boldness to put any difference between them. And
for the Assumption, none can deny but the Spirit is as well applied in
Baptism, as blood; either then both must hold, or both must be denied.

2. I utterly deny, that the blood and Spirit of Christ, that either Simon
Magus, it would so have seized upon him, and wrought in him, that Peter would
not have addressed himself to him in that language, which he heard from him,
and so I may say of the blood of Christ, such an application of it to his soul,
would have had that effect, that Peter would have said to him in the words of
the Seraphim to Isaiah, when he had applied the coal from the Altar to his
mouth, Thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is purged; and not as he did,
that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. The blood
of Christ upon the soul of an Infant, or man of years, must needs be as
efficacious as a coal from the Altar on Isaiah's lips. Universal redemption, we
know, is asserted by these Authors, though it be with such limits, as not to
close with Arminians, but to remain their opposite. If now there be not only
impetration of the merit of Christ, but also application in that latitude as
Baptism is administered. I know nothing that can stand in the way of salvation,
of all those that are baptized. He that would see the consent of modern
Writers, of the most eminent note, in the denial of this proposition, let him
consult learned Mr. Gataker, Discep. pap. 6, etc. whereby his industrious pains
(after his manner) many are multiplied; Danaeus leads the way, He is deceived
(says he) that thinks that Christ and his benefits, are applied by the sign of
water, which is only the seal of such application.

3. According to these principles laid by these Authors, no guilt of sin is
taken away by Baptism, either in Infants, or men of years: for either it is
pardoned before Baptism, or else a bar in Baptism is put against the pardon
of it. If they are regenerate before Baptism, then sin is pardoned before they
are baptized. In case they are unregenerate when they are tendered to Baptism,
then there is a bar put to it. Original sin in Infants is mortal, otherwise
they would be saved without Baptism, as well as in it. And sin in the
unregenerate is mortal likewise. There are therefore bars put by both of
these, or at least an impediment found, and consequently no man's sin is thus
remitted upon account of his Baptism.

Every Infant is conceived and born in sin [ordinarily,] which David confesses
of himself, Psalm. 51.5. Of unclean seed, Job. 14.4. A child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
and held under Original guilt. But there is a promise of remission of sin made
to the Infant, when it is initiated by the Sacrament of Baptism: Repent and be
baptized every one of you, for remission of sins --; for the promise is made to
you, and your children, Acts 2.38, 39.

Answ. 1. It was not with good advice, that birth-sin, confessed by David, is
in the Major proposition branched out in that latitude, as to comprize both
uncleanness and wrath; For it makes way for the Assumption to be as large,
namely that in Baptism the Spirit is promised, and applied, to take away filth
as well as blood, to deliver from wrath, otherwise the remedy does not answer
the malady. And so we have more in the conclusion then they would have, though
no more then is in the premises, viz. that in Infant Baptism there is both
remission of sin, and regeneration. The Infant is thus made, both happy and
inherently holy.

Secondly, The fruit of Baptism, a right carried on, (conscience Abraham, Genesis
17. and continued to them who were his offspring, which argued them to be yet
in Covenant. And the Apostle makes use of it, as a motive to press them to
accept of Baptism, the present initiating seal of it. See this text further
spoken to, Treatise of the Covenant, Chap. 37, 43.

Thirdly, It is objected. That which Baptism figures, that

Answ. 1. Baptism also figures out a further work, of regeneration, Romans 6.4.
Col. 2.11, 12.

2. This Proposition universally understood, without any limits,

3. Sacraments do effect what they figure, as seals effect what the Covenant
conveyes, upon Covenant-terms, all is effected Pet. 3.21.

4. The great objection is. If Sacraments have no other work de nudis signis
(as it is called) making Sacraments bare and empty signs, is the ground of
Anabaptisme. And the greatest sticklers against Infant Baptism, have publicly
professed, that if that tenent of the opus operatum (as we may call it) in
Sacraments could be clearly proved, they would no longer oppose that practice.

Answ. 1. If the doctrine de nudis signis were (as is objected) Calvin and
others (to whom in this I subscribe) opposing it, I know none that now assert
it. As soon as Calvin has done with refutation of one, he presently falls upon
refutation of this other, I here oppose; It is hard to say, whether he be more
zealous against the doctrine de nubis signis, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 14. Sect. 13.
or against this other doctrine of Sacramental efficacy, Sect. 14. And Chamier,
lib. 1. de Sacram. in genesis cap. 10. Sect. 11. having mentioned that use of
Sacraments as distinguishing signs, says, Hic tamen nec solus est finis nec
praecipuus Sacramentorum; itaque Anabaptistas aeque cum Bellarmino improbamus,
quos etiam ante illum Calvinus refutavit: quibus Sacramenta nihil sunt quam
signa instituta ad discernendum Christianos a Judaeis and Paganis, ut Romany
olim toga erat signum quo discernebantur a Graecis palliatis.
This is not yet alone or chief end of them; therefore (says he) we oppose
Anabaptists, as well as Bellarmine; and Calvin also before him had refuted
them, in that they make Sacraments nothing more then signs distinguishing
Christians from Jews, and Pagans as a gown sometimes was a sign whereby a
Roman was known from a Greek. I remember when in the Divinity Schools, a
respondent in his verses (according to custom premised) called the signs in
the Sacraments, surda elementa (it may be metri causa) The Dr. of the chair
made a sharp animadversion on it. They that do not raise them so high, as to
make them instruments of conveyance of this nature, yet do not set them so low,
as to be naked and empty signs. They are not naked, though such clothes, that
every one woul put upon them, do not fit them.

2. It is no marvel that Anabaptists are ready to offer to come in to us, upon
these terms, when this doctrine is fully cleared, being well aware, that it
never will nor can be proved, and so they have a good ground given them to hold
on in their opposition. Our great revilers of the place of our public
meetings, calling them by the name of Steeple Houses, or thinking that too
gentle, Jeroboams calve-houses, I doubt not but will promise to forbear that
language if it can be clearly proved, that they are of divine institution, and
that they have that holy sanction put upon them, as once the Temple had at
Jerusalem; but when those that put so high an honor upon them, rise so high in
their elogies, and yet fall so low in their proofs, they put an argument into
their mouths, and (as I may say) an axe or hammer into their hands to demolish
them, making them to think that this is all that can be said for them. Mr.
Fuller in his history of holy war, lib, 3. cap. 20. quoting out of Reinerius
a charge against the Albigenses, that they gave no reverence to holy places,
answers, It is true. And then gives in this for a reason, because most in that
age ran riot in adoring of Churches, as if some inherent holiness was ceiled
to their roof, or plaistered to their walls, yea, such as might more ingratiate
with God the persons and prayers of people there assembled. Let men take heed
that they raise not Sacraments above the honor that Scripture gives them, with
like success as these did places of public holy assemblies; a good cause has
not a greater adversary then a weak argument taken up in the defense of it.
This argument, I confess, had it ground to stand upon, might be of force for
the battery of Anabaptisme, but having no Scripture-bottome, it presently falls
before any adversary, and Anabaptisme gathers strength by the fall of it.

3. As to the argument it self, tending to evince the uselessenesse Paul's
doctrine, Romans 3.1. when he had made it his great business, to set
circumcision on its right bottom, and declared, that it was not efficacious in
the way that they expected, and that it was without use for salvation, unless
it were answered with the Circumcision of the heart, an objection presently is
raised, What profit is there then of Circumcision? so these likewise when
Sacraments are not raised to that height, as the Schoolmen have advanced them,
to be instruments of conveyance of grace by the work done, and as they expect
from them, they presently demand, what profit? And affirm (as to infants at
least) that they are useless.

4. That answer, which Paul gives to his Questionists, that demanded Much every
way: he answers more punctually, instancing in one eminent privilege, that
virtually comprised all the external privileges enjoined by Israel as
Church Members, chiefly that to them were committed the Oracles of God. It was
said before that these privileges in all Sacraments, are either actually
conferred or infallibly evidenced. In Baptism a true title is legally
conferred. Upon account of our baptism we have an orderly and legal right,
and title to all succeeding Church Priviledges, as the Jews had done upon
account of their Circumcision, though there be not always an aptitude for
actual admission to them, or improvement of them. Upon this ground infants
have, 1. Their share and interest in all the prayers made for the Church
collectively, even in all that are preferred to God by his people for Zion and
Jerusalem. This was the duty of every son of Zion, Psalm. 122.6. This was the
faithfulls practice, Psalm. 51.18. and in these, infants as Church Members had
their interest, on this account infants were brought to Christ, Privileges
following upon infant baptism.
That he might put his hands upon them, and pray, Matthew. 19.13. 2. They have
their share in the blessings of the Church; we see with what solemnity it was
to be done, Number. 6.22. etc. The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron
and unto his sons saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel,
saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc. and they shall put
my Name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them. Infants had their
share here, and upon this account, infants were blessed of Christ, Mar. 10.16.
3. Their relation to God by virtue of Covenant Interest, is hereby evidenced
and ratified. How transcendent a privilege this is to have the Lord for our
God; we see, Psalm. 144.15. having reckoned up several mercies, the Psalmist
concludes, Happy is the people that is in such a case, yea, happy is that
people whose God is the Lord This is the privilege of every infant, that upon
Covenant title is baptized; God will not suffer their enemies to pass without
vengeance. As it was an acceptable work to dash the infants of Babylon against
the stones, Psalm. 137.9. being a seed growing up against God; so it is as
displeasing, and provoking to harm these, that, are a seed dedicated unto, and
growing up for God. 4. Baptism teaches them to know as soon as they are of
capacity to learn to whom they belong, what Master they are to serve, and in
what School they are to be trained. 5. A necessity is seen to get the knowledge
of Christ, and timely to walk in his ways. 6. A delight is wrought in them,
toward those in whose communion they are bred, and that own them as theirs,
whereas being debarred in childhood from this society, and denied this badge,
it is the way to bring them to malign them: each one is apt to love those of
his own fraternity, and on the contrary to study the opposition of others. 7.
The aggravation of their sin presently rings in their ears, by reason of the
favor they receive from God, the society into which they are incorporated,
when their, conversation does not in some measure answer their profession. 8.
Parents here see a strong engagement, to bring them up for Christ, whom they
have thus dedicated to him, and put into the fellowship of those who are his
Saints and members. When they have brought forth children unto God, they see
their sin heightened in giving them to Moloch, or any other besides God, and
there is no example of any believing parent in all the Scripture bringing, up a
child for Covenant, but in Covenant with the Lord. These alone, though more
might be added, might stop the mouths of all that insultingly move this
question.

5. That which in present does not, but hereafter may work upon the
understanding, is not vain and useless when it is done. That was not vain
which Christ did to Peter, Joh. 13.17. when he said unto him, What I do, thou
know not now, but thou shall know hereafter.

6. Seals of purchases taken in infants names, are of use to infants; though
during infancy they know not how to make actual improvement themselves of them:
If Baptism has its actual use in behalf of infants, whilst infants, as has
been showed, and remains with them, to be improved by their understanding and
faith, when they come to maturity, it cannot be thought to be vain and useless.

SECT. IV. A Corollary from the former doctrine.
THen it follows by way of necessary Corollary from that which has been said;
Answer to Sacramental engagements^ ncessary to salvation.
that unless the soul answer to Sacramental engagements, Sacraments are not
efficacious for salvation to the receivers. This is a clear result from that
which has been said, and is fully delivered by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.21.
speaking of the Arc of Noah, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by
water: he adds, The like figure whereunto Baptism does now save us by the
resurrection of Christ. The Arc did save those that entered into it; Baptism
does save those that are received into the Church by it. And whereas an
objection is obvious, that Noah's Arc, and New Testament Baptism does much
differ, and that in the very thing in which the similitude is brought; few
entered the Arc, and were saved by it, but myriads of thousands are baptized;
This the Apostle answers, in the Parenthesis there interposed, that the
parallel lies not between the Arc and the outward act of Baptism, as by man
administered, and there called the putting away the filth of the flesh, (so
there is a vast disproportion, the outward act, as administered by man saves
not,) but between the Arc and the inward work, which is The answer of a good
conscience toward God. That of Tertullian (which Beza says, may serve as a
Comment upon these words) is elegant: The soul is established by answering, and
not by washing. And further to clear this text, we must know that the Covenant
has a Proposition in it, to which all in Covenant must give assent. He that
believes, and repents, shall be saved. This assent is presupposed in all those
that make actual improvement of the Sacraments. Faith and Repentance being the
terms of the Covenant. And this Divines in their Treatises of Conscience call
(...). Now in case we have the benefit of salvation by Sacraments, conscience
must answer (and a good conscience, only can answer) But I believe I repent.
This Divines call (...); Then and not otherwise Sacraments save. Dr. Slater on
Romans 2.25. has these words: Here I think the observation is easy, out of the
body of the text, that the work done in Sacraments availes not to
righteousness or salvation except the condition of the Covenant be performed
by those that partake them; first the condition, then the Antithesis shows it,
if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision, that
is all one to thee, as if thou had never been circumcised: yea, a gentile
wanting the Sacrament, having obedience, is nearer heaven then thou that have
the Sacrament and neglectest obedience: and weigh well that the Lord in
promising or sealing binds not himself to performance, but conditionally, that
we perform our restipulation; and whence Sacraments should have their efficacy,
but from the promise and grace of God I see not. Circumcision in the flesh
engaged the receivers to circumcision in the heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16. where these
did concur, there was a man in Covenant, and upright in Covenant: And, Jer.
9.25. wrath is denounced of God against several Nations; and the circumcised,
and the uncircumcised, in the threat are put in equipage together, equally and
alike to suffer. And to take off all scruple or offense that might be taken,
there is a distinction brought of Circumcision in the flesh, and Circumcision
in heart. Judah had Circumcision in the flesh to plead, but remained
uncircumcised in heart, and therefore fares no better then those that were
uncircumcised in flesh, Jer. 4.4. The Prophet commands, Circumcise your selves
to the Lord, and take away the foreskin of your heart, ye men of Judah, and
inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none
can quench it, because of the evil of your doings. On these terms the fury of
the Lord is prevented. Those Israelites that passed out of Egypt, into the
wilderness for Canaan, had the Cloud, and the Sea of the same use as Baptism:
And Manna, and the Rock of the same use as the Lords Supper. The two former are
called by the name of Baptism, and the two latter, Spiritual meat, Spiritual
drink. All were baptized in the one, and all did eat and drink of the other;
yet (says the text) with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were
overthrown in the wilderness. If you would know who suffered thus under Gods
displeasure, the text tells you, Lusters after evil things, v. 6. Idolaters, v.
7. Fornicators, v. 8. Tempters of Christ, v. 9. Murmurers, v. 10. And Heb.
3.17. The Apostle demanding, But with whom was God grieved forty years?
answers, Was it not with them which had sinned, whose carcases fell in the
wilderness? Further demanding to whom swear he, that they should not enter into
his rest, but to them that believed not? These wanting the answer of a good
conscience, fell short of the Sacramental engagements, and also came short of
true happiness. Arguments evincing it. 1.
This might be further evinced with arguments.

1. In this case where the soul answers not to Sacramental engagements,
Sacraments are but as outward shadows, and bare empty signs, and set out by
the Spirit of God in Scripture with all their Rites and Ceremonies, (as other
Ordinances of like nature) in the most low, despicable and undervaluing words
that is possible. Baptism in the letter, is no better with the Apostle then
putting away the filth of the flesh; the cleansing of the hands, the feet, or
face from dirt or filth, is the same with it. The Pharisees washing of hands,
yea, their washing of cups, platters, (as low as it is laid by our Savior) was
as efficacious and as acceptable. Circumcision also when it led not to, but
from Christ, is called by the Apostle by the name of Concision, Phil. 3.2. Any
gash made in the flesh, or rent in the garment, as well pleases. The Apostle
therefore, Romans 2.25. says, Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the
Law, but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision. If you understand the Apostle speaking the sense of the carnal
Jews, with whom he had to deal, then you must understand the keeping of the
Law in its full perfection; for to this Circumcision, looked upon, as a leading
Law-Ceremony, did engage: He that is circumcised is a debtor to the while Law;
if we understand him speaking of it as a seal of the righteousness of faith,
then sincerity is intended. If this be wanting, Circumcision is uncircumcision:
where that of the heart is, there Circumcision in Gods account, is; and where
it is not, there Circumcision is not, Romans 2.28, 29. We are the Circumcision,
says the Apostle, that worship God in Spirit and truth, when the cutting of
the foreskin in those false teachers was no better then Concision, the worship
of God in Spirit in whomsoever it was, was Circumcision.

Israelites, Jer. 34. had covenanted with God to put away their servants, which
contrary to the Law they had kept in bondage, and afterward served themselves
of them; we see what follows upon it, the Lord proclaims liberty to them, to
the sword, to famine and pestilence. When we have once covenanted to put away
our sins, we have less reason to serve our selves of them, or rather again to
serve them, then these Israelites had to serve themselves of their bond men and
bond-women. The highest reproach is this way cast upon Christ. No man leaves
one Master, to betake himself to the service of another, but he prefers in his
judgment the latter before the former, especially when he breaks all Bonds,
Covenants, and Engagements for such an exchange of service. When a penitent
person leaves sin to come over to Christ, Christ has honor. It appears that
he is now in dislike with sin, and better pleased with Christ, But when a man
leaves Christ, and his ways to serve sin, there is a reproach cast upon
Christ; and of this he is very sensible, Jer. 2.5. What iniquity have your
Fathers found in me, that they are gone from me, and walked after vanity, and
became vain? An aspersion of iniquity is cast upon a Master, when he is left,
and the vainest of men is chosen; and this cast upon Christ in the highest way
in a Christians turning to sin, and in this case we see in what manner he
expostulates and complains.

3. In this case where conscience answers not to Sacramental

4. When conscience answers not to Sacramental engagements, He that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself. That very kind of
eating has an obligation in it to suffering, and the equity of such
obligation, by such a communicant is acknowledged. If an idle, unfaithful,
purloyning, runaway apprentice, should bear stripes from his Masters hand, and
should upon it, produce his Indentures to implead his Master for reparations,
these Indentures will give full evidence to the justice of his sufferings, or a
man that enjoyes a lease with several clauses of forfeiture, and by non-payment
of rent, or otherwise makes forfeiture, the producing of his lease for
ratification of his title proves a nullifying and destruction of it: This is
the case of an unbelieving, impenitent, disobedient Christian. All therefore
that willl find comfort in Baptism, and expect it at the Lords Table, must
study to come up to Covenant-engagements, and exercise themselves continually
to have a conscience void of offense, both toward God, and toward man.

SECT. V. A case of Conscience upon occasion of the former Corollary answered.
When it is that Conscience answers to Sacramental engagements.
HEre a great question lies, When it is that conscience thus answers to
Sacramental engagements, so that we may conclude their efficacy for salvation,
and when it is that they come short, and so in our claim of them, we subscribe,
as has been said, to the equity of our own condemnation?

To this I answer, that every soul must make it his great business, all the
days of his life to get abilities, to give satisfaction to this demand, and
all the books that have been written in positive Divinity, and Cases of
Conscience are little enough for directions for it; yet to speak something for
their help, that desire to look into it, in their enquiries into Scriptures,
and the labors of the learned in this particular, they must first distinguish
between keeping of Covenant, failings in Covenant, and forfeiture of it;
between keeping in the way, str^yings out of the way, and a total resolved
leaving of it. He may fail that makes not a total forfeiture. And for discovery
of these which I call failings in Covenant, we must yet distinguish of sins,
some are mere infirmities and unavoidably weaknesses; others are sins above
infirmities, presumptuous acts, or at least acts of inadvertency, or carnal
security. As for those that are mere infirmities, and unavoidable weaknesses,
unto which Noah, Lot, Abraham, David, Job, Nathaniel, to whom God gives largest
testimonies, (when in their walk they were most exact and circumspect) were
subject, I take them not to be so much as failings in Covenant, seeing we never
Covenanted with God to be above infirmities, or never to be any more found in
any weaknesses; These with sincere hearts keep up to their Covenant
engagements. Of such it is testified that they were upright, perfect, without
guile. The promise then made to those that keep Covenant, and that remember to
keep Gods Commandments, to do them, Psalm. 103.18. is theirs. These are no
Spirit-grieving sins. Complaint is made of God, of those that grieve the holy
Spirit of God, Isa. 63.10. Psalm. 95.9. but no complaint is made of these
persons, they are men after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. his delight, Prove.
11.20. The effects which grief has with men, is not seen in Gods dealings with
them. He departs not from them upon this occasion, neither does he upon this
account afflict them. Whereas some say, that God in Justice may damn for the
least sin, and therefore he may much more afflict; I answer, The Covenant of
Grace supposed, this cannot (as I think) stand with Justice, he is otherwise
engaged to the believing and penitent, and no instance can be given of his
punishment of unavoidabie weakness. He brings not his sword upon them to
avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. Though sin wheresoever it is, is opposite
to Gods Spirit, yet God is well pleased in their bearing up, and holding
opposition against it. These walk up to their Covenant-vow made in Baptism,
and come every way fitted for the Lords Table. In application of themselves to
the one, and looking back to the other, they find all manner of encouragements,
and no cause of fears or terrors. Every promise made to the believing,
sincere, upright, perfect, obedient, is theirs. These may sit down at the Lords
Table, with all alacrity; having a work upon their spirits to abide for ever.
When they are taken hence they shall change their place, but not their company
and fellowship. Their humbling of their souls under weaknesses, plainly speaks
their pressing after further strength. Their hatred of sin, speaks their love
of Christ. Their resistance of sin, their care to walk with Christ^. Of these
Christ says, Thou art all fair, my beloved, there is no spot in thee, Cant.
4.7. that is, universally fair: they are those that have respect to all Gods
Commandments. And these, whilst such, and as such, come not within the
compass, either of failing in, or forfeiture of their Covenant.

Others are sins above infirmity and unavoidable weaknesses, and these are
either mere breaches in, or violations of our Covenant with God; or else such
breaches that are also forfeitures: and those I call mere breaches or
violations of this kind, how foul soever, that are short of forfeitures, such
as was David's uncleanness and blood, Solomon's Idolatry, Hezekiahs pride, Jonas
his flight to Tarshish, Jobs passion, Peter's denial of Christ, and whatsoever
other sins that may stand parallel with these, whether of omission, or
commission. These are sins above infirmities, toward presumption at least,
much of will and consent of heart is in them; these are outbreaches from God,
and violations made upon our Covenant entered with him, notwithstanding they be
not with full consent of heart, and afterward broken off by repentance. And
concerning these I shall first lay down several Positions, and then apply all
to our present purpose.

Positions holding forth the danger of notable sins in regenerate persons.
1. Though these sins thus acted do not take away all title to the Kingdom of
heaven, yet they cloud and obscure the evidence and assurance of it. I know not
how this can be made up to the soul, otherwise then by a practical syllogism,
inquiring as before into the answer of the conscience to Covenant-engagements.
He that believes and repents shall be saved, is the bottom on which the whole
edifice of assurance must stand, and how the soul, under so sad a witness,
that conscience in this case is ready to give, can return answer, I believe, I
repent I yield sincere obedience, I cannot understand. Yea, Conscience in this
plight will presently syllogize on the opposite hand. No Whoremonger, Idolater,
Murderer, Drunkard, and has title to the Kingdom of heaven. This is a
Gospel-Proposition, and whatsoever other of like nature that conscience can
assume, and how far this is from yielding matter of assurance, let any judge.
Neither let election here be objected, seeing this is no bottom on which
assurance can be built further than we find clear evidence of the fruits of it.
Those unclean Corinthians reckoned up in that List, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. had no
assurance of salvation from Election, in their unconversion. Nor yet can
regeneration be objected, seeing these are not acts of the regenerate part.
Unregeneration then bearing dominion and exercising present power, evidence is
clouded. When Hezekiah was left to himself in the matter of the King of
Babylon, he was not raised above himself in the beatifical vision. They that
will keep up assurance, must keep off from sins.

them, can yet in their doctrine set open the gates of heaven for to receive
them. Is the visible Church on earth in a more narrow latitude, then the state
of bliss? or may we without danger pervert Christ's speech, and say, Few are
called, but many chosen? If Miriam upon sin was not fit for the Camp for seven
days, Numb. 12.14. much less are these immediately upon the acting of like
enormities fit for glory. If any think that the merit of Christ steps in, and
keeps from hell, yet doubtless the Spirit of Christ has not in present made
them meet or glory. Some say, What if David had died after his adultery, before
his recovery? what then had been his case? He was a child of God, and could a
child of God have perished? And I demand, What if Paul had dyed in his
persecution when he was exceedingly mad against Christianity? He was elected,
and could a chosen vessel of God have been damned? He that can reconcile one of
these, may be able easily to reconcile them both. An Elect person cannot be
damned, and an enemy of Christ cannot be saved. A Child of God cannot dye, and
a Murderer and Adulterer cannot live. We find therefore, that Paul did not dye
in his Persecution; he that chose him to life, chose him also to the
acknowledgment of the truth. David did not dye in his Adultery; He that had
adopted him for glory, wrought him to repentance for remission of sins. The
salvation if both of them was doubtful respective to their estates now
mentioned, in case we look only at the men, being both in a plain road toward
perdition; but the damnation of either of them was impossible, if we look at
the election and purpose of God. Gods Election carries on undoubted and
infallible effects, through doubtful and contingent means. Omnis actus a duobus
dependens, quorum unum est necessarium, alterum veto contingens; licet habet
necessitatem ex part necessarii, habet tamen contingentiam ex part
contingentis.

Ordo praedestinationis certus est, et tamen voluntas effectum suum producit
non nisi contingenter. Praedestinatus potest perire, si consideratur ipsius
potentia: non potest, si consideratur ordo quem habet ad Deum praedestinantem.
Refe^t Davenan. epist. ad Dr. Ward.


Every action (says Gandavensis) depending upon two agents, whereof the one is
necessary, and the other contingent, though it be necessary respective to the
necessary agent, yet it is contingent and doubtful on the part of the
contingent agent. Quodl. 4. q. 18. The order and way of predestination, says
Aquinas, is certain, and yet the will of man produces its effects no otherwise
than in a contingent manner. An elect man may perish, if we consider his own
power he cannot perish if we look unto the order in which he stands in respect
of God that predestinates. See the suffrage of the Divines of great Britain,
art. 5. part. 2. these. 3, 4, 5, 6. Davenants Epist. prop. ult. Burges on
Justification, page 240. The Assemblies confession of faith.

Isai. 57.17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote
him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.
I have seen his ways, and will heal him, I will lead him also, and restore
comforts to him, and to his mourners; These of whom the Prophet here speaks,
were a people of Gods everlasting love, being those whom he heals, and to whom
he restores comforts. They were yet overmuch carried out to covetousness, and
pursuit of creature contentments; Gods wrath was upon them for this miscarriage
of theirs, he was moved here upon to appear in displeasure against them; he
smites them in his wrath, and hides his face in displeasure from them, having
his eye open to their sin, but his face withdrawn from their consolation. Number.
20.13. we may find Moses and Aarons sin, and the Psalmists observation upon it,
Psalm. 106.32, 33. They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went
ill with Moses for their sakes; because they provoked his spirit, so that he
spoke unadvisedly with his lips. Moses suffers from God for his sin, when he
suffered the people to provoke him to sin. This Moses seems never to have done
with, Deuteronomy. 1.37. and 3.26. and 4.21. so that God punishes for sin, and in
anger punishes for it. If love and wrath cannot consist, (as some would have
it) then Moses was none of Gods beloved. 2 Samuel 11. we find David's sin set out
at length, and how it took with God, we find in the end of the chapter. The
thing that David did, displeased the Lord; and that it was no otherwise in
New-Testament-times is clear. As the oneness and samenesse of the Covenant
which we and they were under, does evince it; so also Gods dealings with the
Corinthians upon their profanation of the Lords Supper is a proof of it.

4. Sin thus committed is such an obstruction in the way of bliss Cor. 11.31,
32. The Apostle having there reproved these Corinthians in a tart way for
profanation of the Lords Supper, and dissuaded them from it by the deadly
nature of the crime, they were herein guilty of the body and blood of the Lord,
and the danger they incurred, eating and drinking judgment to themselves; he
farther sets before them present experiments of Gods hand, For this cause many
are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep; In this place he lets them know
how they might avoid this judgment, If we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged. Our examination and sentence might avert the examination and
sentence of heaven. And then acquaints them with Gods end in this visit of his,
to correct as a Father, and not condemn as a Judge: But when we are judged, we
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. The
application here is easy, They are the Elect of God, and of saving Gospel
interest, that are kept from condemnation. A way in sin would have brought
them, as others in the world, into condemnation: If they might have been saved
in sin, when the world was damned for sin, this correction for that end did not
need. To avoid condemnation therefore for sin, God by his judgments lashes
them out of it: By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all
the fruit, to take away his sin. So that the tendency of sin, even in a child
of God, is to bring to condemnation; and the care of God is by afflictions to
take him off from sin, that he might not be condemned. To this end
Church Discipline is also set up of God, 1. Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. For I verily as
absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already as though I were
present, concerning him that has so done this deed, in the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one unto Satan, for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. How far
that sentence of giving up to Satan did reach, I shall not stand to determine,
whether barely to cast him out of the Church, and put him among those over whom
Satan reigned, or as consequent of it, horrors and terrors from Satan by Gods
just permission; when the Church leaves him off from their communion, God casts
him off from his protection and consolation: which (as is said) ordinarily
followed upon this sentence in Primitive times: The end is plain, the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus. If this man's former justification would have brought him on in his sin
without step to salvation, all this had not needed, that his spirit might be
saved. See further, 2 Cor. 7.9. the Apostles severe dealings with these
Corinthians concerning this incestuous member, had cast them down with grief,
and this grief raised the Apostles spirit with joy, not that they had grieved,
but that their grief had so happy an issue. Now I rejoice not, (says he) that
ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance, adding, ver. 10. For
godly sorrow works repentance to salvation not to be repented of. They were
stepping therefore out of the salvation-way, repentance brings them back This
in reason is plain; If new sins thus committed occasion no such obstruction, as
to bring a necessity of repentance, (as some would have it) then the free grace
of God gives a man full liberty to sin, and opens a gap to all ungodliness;
this will then follow, which some have profanely inferred from some
Gospel-principles, Live as I list, and shall be saved. What shall hinder, if no
way in sin either has any tendency to condemnation, or is any obstruction in
the way of salvation? Some I know to avoid this, speak of that holy, filial,
ingenuous disposition in a child of God, that in case he were set free from any
such danger, and let loose to all the devils in hell; he would abhor sin, and
have in detestation all that is evil, but I do not find God giving in his
testimony of any such ingenuity. If all the children of God were thus towardly,
all those rods that he uses were needless; and if justification might be thus
carried on in sin, Christ would not have found reason to have said, Straight is
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, Matthew. 7.14. It was
sufficiently broad in case sin would lead us in at it. Neither would the
Apostle have said, If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly
and the sinner appear? 1 Pet 4.18. The righteous might thus be saved with ease,
and the wicked and sinners salvation would be alike easy.

These in this posture under the present power of lust or temptation, are not
as they ought mindful of their Covenant, The application of these rules
respective to Sacraments.
but are in a high way of violation of it. Their Baptism-Vow is not as it ought
kept up, and their adventure to come to the Lords Table for renewing of their
Covenant, (the strength of lust still remaining) is a further provocation of
the Lord. Upon this account the Corinthians, (as we have heard) smarted. God
will not bear so high a dishonor of so great an Ordinance. It is an high
presumption for a soul, under such present defilements; to dare to approach so
nigh his presence, otherwise then in order to humiliation, and more strict
renewed engagements against such practices. He that comes in this posture might
here see the hatefulness of his present way to the height set out, and the
justice of the heavyest, smartest stroke, that can be laid. As Joab sometimes
abominated a sin that David acted, 1 Chronicles. 21.6. though David was a man in the
general frame of his soul, upright with God, and Joab (as we may fear) far from
it; so some that never had that change on their heart, yet under present
convictions, and resolutions against sin, with the Publican, Luke 18. and
intelligent in the ways of God with that Scribe that was not far from the
Kingdom of heaven, Mark 12.34. may be otherwise accepted at the Lords Table,
then these persons notwitstanding their habitual graces.

To distinguish these which are unavoidable weaknesses, Rules to discern the
nature and quality of sins.
and not of that danger to a man upright in Covenant, from such sins that are
violations and breaches of it, and of that peril as has been said, some Rules
might be delivered.

1. The more there is of light, the less there is of weakness, but to whom
much is given, of him God will require the more. Graciously disposed souls walk
up to that which they know, but cannot attain to that which they see not. That
may be from weakness in one, which is out of will, and perverseness in
another. Sincerity admits of degrees, differenced according to men's several
abilities.

2. The less there is of temptation, the more of sin, and less of weakness;
The bowl may run more evenly toward the mark whilst it meets with no rubs,
but a rub necessitates some unevenness in the running. Temptations of this
kind are of two sorts, some from within, from men's natural constitution and
temper. It is above possibility for some men to be in that measure free from
all appearance and evidence of covetousness, ambition, lightness, passion or
the like, as some others. He is not farthest from weakness, in whom least
appears of sailings; but he that is least vigilant, and makes least resistance.
There are many of choice principles, that yet by reason of the temper of their
natures are men of strong temptations. And the Heathen could see that it is
Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret.
an hard thing to beat back natures inclinations. I have heard of an eminent
man, to whom one that very well knew him said, Thou have grace enough for ten
men, but all is too little for thy self; There was such a crabbed nature for it
to deal with. It is hard for these by the help of much grace to appear in their
walk equal to those that are in grace far their inferiors. As there are
temptations from within, so there are assaults from without in like manner.
Satan has more free scope, and rope-length given him toward some, then
toward others; and at sometimes more toward the same persons, then at other
times; in which Job is an eminent example, Commission after Commission is given
to Satan against him, the later still exceeding the former. The world with more
impetuous violence sets upon some, then others, and at some times with greater
violence then at others. The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet have I
not declined from thy Law, Psalm. 119.51. The bands of the wicked have robbed
me, but I have not forgotten thy Law, Psalm. 119.61. It is a very hard thing in
such a case for a man to stand steady and upright. He that stands on an hill to
take view of a fight, may see many divisions from military rules; but in case
he were to manage the fight, he might perhaps make more faults then he
discovers. A sheep hardly passes without loss of some wool through many briars.

and everlasting concernment. A dispute is sometimes held between a man's
conscience, and his fears, when the danger is so sudden, and thereupon his
fears so high, that the voice of conscience cannot be heard, nor has it
leisure or strength to bring up the argument. But when there is opportunity
offered, and much reason from conscience heard, more regard is then had to
self, and less to God, in case sin be committed. This was Francis Spira's
case, when he was put to it either to subcribe to Popery, or to run the hazard
of all his worldly interests, having so much time to debate, and so much
strength of reason against it, yet yielding after this full debate, he could
never find peace in himself afterward.

4. In omissions; The more opportunity for the duty, the greater the neglect;
the less the opportunity, through the multitudes of occasions, the more it is
toward weakness. It is hard to have many Irons in the fire, and to see so
well to all that none be burnt: several Kings are so far honored in Scripture,
that their hearts were perfect, and yet imperctions are noted in their
government, which must be imputed to that multitude of businesses that lay on
their hands, together with the many obstructions that were in their way for
effecting of it.

SECT. VI. Sins that are Covenant forfeitures.
AS these are failings in Covenant, and such as may be called violations of it,
though God is not pleased to take hold of advantage, to proceed upon it: so
there are forfeitures of Covenant, which do not only blurre our evidence for
heaven, and bring the soul under Gods present wrath and displeasure, but
destroy all title to happiness and glory: or if that phrase will not be born,
they are such as give full evidence that we are without all title to it. To
these we may speak in the Psalmists words, What have thou to do to delare my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth? seeing thou
hate instruction and castest my words behind thee, Psalm. 50.16, 17. As it is
with those that hold by way of Lease from men, they so fail sometimes by
non-payment of rent, waste made, or service neglected, that they may be
impleaded and brought under an arrest: Sometimes they so fail that they run
upon forfeiture of the whole, and all right and title through carelesenesse is
lost. Those already spoken to are justly proceeded against, but these that we
are now upon are to be utterly ejected. They may with the sons of Keturah have
their portions (and the Psalmist says, They have their portion in this life,
Psalm. 17.14,) but they must never inherit with Isaac. Concerning these the
Prophet is resolute, Ezekiel. 18.13. Shall he then live? he shall not live, he
has done all these abominations, he shall surely dye. And if any object
against this, as a legal text, we shall find the Apostle as peremptory, that
they have not any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5.5.
that they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, twice repeated, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. as also, Gal. 5.21. Now these are of sundry kinds. Some in whom there is no
appearance of God, Several sor^s of sinners that make forfeiture of Covenant.
or footsteps of piety and holiness, but such whose transgression speaks
within the heart of all, that there is no fear of God before their eyes: A
profane rabble that scarce make mention of God but when they blaspheme: Others
of a more civil, or more restrained course, that with the young man in the
Gospel, come up to the outside, and letter at least of most Commandments, and
therefore of that generation that is pure in their own eyes, yet not cleansed
from their filthiness. Some are such that understand little, or nothing of God
or ways of godliness, but with the highway ground hear and understand
nothing at all; the Devil stealing away that which was sown in their hearts,
lest they should believe and be saved. Others are men of parts and abilities,
are confident of themselves, with those to whom Paul speaks, Romans 2.19, 20.
That they are guides of the blind, lights to them which are in darkness,
instructers of the foolish, and teachers of babes, which have a form of
knowledge and truth in the law; perhaps of abilities to prophesy in the Name of
Christ with those mentioned by our Savior, that claim the Kingdom of heaven
upon that account, Matthew. 5.22. Some are universalists (as I may say) in sin,
at least, with that profane deboist youth that obeyed not the voice of his
teachers, nor inclined his ear to those that instructed him, they are almost in
all evil in the midst of the Congregation or assembly, Prove. 5.13, 14. Others
are of a more refined stamp, and somewhat reformed way that with Herod have
learned to do many things after those that they hear, but yet have their
reserved Herodias, some right hand that they will not cut off, some right eye
that they will not pluck out; these are in the same condemnation. The Catalogue
or sins shutting out of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. are not reckoned up
copulatively, so that all must concur to cast a man out, but disjunctively;
any one held and continued in will serve for it. Neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. I shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Some have
their beloved, endeered lusts in a more open, outward way, their filthiness of
flesh to the defilement of the outward man in drunkenness, gluttony, adultery,
senseual pleasures. Others their spirit-filthinesse, distrust of God, inward
pride, confidence in the arm of flesh, self-seeking and the like. Some are
carried away in their affections only whether sensitive or rational, fixing
them upon forbidden objects, but in the mean time hold the truth thus
imprisoned in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Others have a taint in their
judgments, not holding the head, from which all the body by joints, and bands
having nourishment ministered, and knit together increases with the increase of
God, Col. 2.19. Though in this age these have many advocates, yet their case is
the same with others, already mentioned. Heresy is a fruit of the flesh as
well as adultery, fornication, drunkenness, lasciviousness Idolatry,
witchcraft, and together with them shuts out of the Kingdom of heaven, Gal.
5.19, 20, 21. If the Apostle would have been in that way indulgent toward it,
as many would have all to be in these days, he had never so whetted in all his
Epistles his pen against it. Some have their positive sins, as before named,
others stand charged chiefly (I think seldom solely) with negatives. They call
not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14.4. She strengthened not the hands of the poor and
needy, Ezekiel. 16.49. She obeyed not the voice, she received not correction, she
trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near to God, Zeph. 3.2. Some have their
sins of a more deep dye, of a Scarlet-colour, sins of a great magnitude, whose
very name might even astonish others, sins are seemingly and appearingly light
or small, such as Papists have accounted venial, and most think it would
overmuch rigor in God to proceed against them in eternal judgments, eying
the matter of fact, and not the thwarting of the divine command. Some have
their hand-sins, sins in action: Others have their thought-sins, their
tongue-sins. Some carry their sins more clearly without check or curb, having
got a conscience peaceably wicked: others have their girdes and gripes, many
times brought into Melancholy dumps about them, with Ahab Sermon-sick; and yet
not able to bear it out against their lusts, but again return to their former
courses. These and many others that stand up in a parallel equipage with these
men in Covenant, professedly Christian, baptized into the Name of Christ, and
having never professedly renounced Christ, are forfeitures of the mercies of
the Covenant. No opinion that they hold, party that they take, name that they
think they have got, supposed interest that they have in Christ, can acquit
them. They may be denominated unsanctified, or unholy men, (having not obtained
that which the Apostle sought in prayer, in behalf of the Thessalonians, that
they might be sanctified throughout, in spirit, soul and body) sanctification
purifies all the unclean, and heales all the diseased parts; And no unclean
person can inherit the Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 5.5. They are truly styled
impenitent ones. Repentance is a return to God, in the same latitude as our
departure by sin was from him; In every sin of all these and of the like kind,
we depart from God: In repentance therefore we are to return from every sin to
God. The Prophet tells us upon what terms our souls may be freed from ruin by
sin, Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin; and unless we repent, we shall all perish,
Luke 13.3, 5. They are justly pronounced to be void of grace, there being that
contrariety between grace and sin; that they cannot rest in the same subject,
or lodge continually in the same heart, without opposiition. Where grace is
prevalent, sin falls; and where sin prevails, grace is excluded; and it is the
grace of God that brings salvation, Tit. 2.11. They are void of the Spirit of
regeneration. As our birth-corruption has in it the spawn of all sin, so
regeneration has the seed of all grace. And Except we be born again, we cannot
see the Kingdom of God, John. 3.3. These are the men which by their claim of
Baptism, The uselessenesse of Sacraments to these persons.
and offer of themselves to the Lords Table, subscribe the equity of their own
condemnation, and justify the sentence of death pronounced against themselves.
They accept the Covenant on those terms on which it is tendered in the Gospel;
and upon these terms they are under the wrath of God, and liable to the
sentence of eternal death. Yet not remedilessely, helplessely, hopelessely, as
it is with those oftentimes, that upon forfeitures of Covenant, fall into the
hands of man; the forfeiture being once made, advantages are taken by many to
the uttermost. The prodigal is an instance of the Fathers readiness to receive
to mercy those that have gone away from him in ways of sin; And the Prophet
tells us, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he
has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not dye. All his transgressions that he
has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live. And though it be a wickedness that reaches
to the highest violation of Covenant, yet this shall not hinder, Jer. 3.1. They
say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's,
shall he return unto her again? Shall not that land be greatly polluted? But
thou have played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, says
the Lord. He that has hitherto come in the highest degree of unworthiness to
the Lords Table, as often as he has come to it, yet casting that off, which was
his unworthiness, and coming up to Gods terms, he is now received and accepted.

SECT. VII. A further Corollary from the former Doctrine.
THen let all take heed that they look for no more from Sacraments, then God
has put into them, We are to look for no more from Sacraments then God has
put into them and promised to do by them.
and has promised to work by them, least looking unto them, and waiting for
them, as the troops of Tema, and companies of Sheba, for the stream of Brooks
which vanish when they wax warm, and are consumed out of their place, they be
confounded, and coming thither be ashamed. And this caveat is no more then
needs, seeing men in all times have been wonderfully apt to delude themselves
upon account of their fruition of outward Church Priviledges; Men's aptness to
delude themselves in Sacramental privileges.
and in particular, Sacrament-priviledges. And to this they are induced by
diverse reasons. 1. Because Sacraments are an honor, which God has vouchsafed
to his people, and denied to others that stand not in that relation, and they
cannot think that it is in vain, that such an honor is conferred upon them. 2.
There are great promises annexed to them, and made to those that make right
improvement of them. The bread is the Communion of the body, and the wine in
the Lords Supper the Communion of the blood of Christ, 1 Cor 10.16. It is the
New Testament in Christ's blood shed for many for the remission of sins, Matthew.
26.28. Baptism saves through the resurrection of Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. As many
as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. Insomuch that
we have been taught that in Baptism we are made children of God, members of
Christ, and inheriters of the Kingdom of heaven; These promises are straight
applied; without any eye had to the terms and Propositions annexed to them, like
unto men that look at dignities in offices, and never regard the burdens. 3.
Interest in Sacraments is not only a privilege, but a duty; not only an
honor, but a work of obedience in them that partake of them. To be baptized
with water, and to eat of the Bread, and drink of the Cup in the Lords Supper,
is a duty, as it was to be circumcised in the flesh of the foreskin, and to eat
the Paschal Lamb at the time appointed, and there is danger in neglect of
these: This gives some ease, and speaks some peace to the conscience, that they
have done the Command of the Lord. 4. They are yet matters of ease, especially
New-Testament-Sacraments; Here is no mortification of the members, no
crucifying of the flesh, no cutting off the right hand, or plucking out the
right eye; and therefore no marvel that men could wish that all Religion were
in them, and hope that salvation may be gained by them. Lastly, Those of these
conceits, have always met with teachers to sooth them up in them, In all Ages
some have over-highly advanced Sacramental privileges.
and carry on their delusion. How high was Circumcision set up in the Apostles
times, as in regard of the necessity of it, Acts 15.1. Certain men which came
down from Judea, taught the brethren and said, Except ye be circumcised after
the manner of Moses ye cannot be saved: So also in regard of the power and
efficacy of it? and therefore the Apostle was put to it to warn men in that way
of the delusion, and to give that undervaluing term of concision to it, Phil.
3.2. After-age produced Schoolmen, and Popish Writers to magnify them,
affixing, and limiting salvation (except in some cases extraordinary) to the
water in Baptism; and how great things they ascribe to the body of Christ
received, if no bar be put, (which they understand of the Sacramental bread)
is very well known. But as some have observed, where poison grows, providence
takes care that there be antidotes found, so none of these ever appeared in the
Church, but some by the good hand of God have stood up in opposition. How
mightily did the Prophet Jeremy oppose himself against that over-high opinion
that the Jews in his time had of Circumcision? Jer. 9.25, 26. As also Paul,
making use of his authority against the Jews in his time, and disputing at
large against it, Romans 2. And the Apostle Peter foreseeing (it seems) that
Baptism would be set up as high among Christians as ever Circumcision was
among the Jews, makes it his business to prevent it. Having affirmed that
Baptism saves, he is careful to let us know that it is not by its own power,
but by the resurrection of Christ, that is, Faith in the Resurrection: and
further explains himself, that it is not the outward act alone, but as answered
with an inward work that has that power, as you have heard. And Popish
Schoolmen making it their work (as we have heard) to advance Sacraments to that
height, Protestant Writers in a sull stream have appeared to set them on their
right bottom, and to make it appear what it is that Scripture attributes to
them, and what in their right use may be expected from them. Calvin's words,
lib. 4. instit. cap. 14. Sect. 14. are high and notable, having opposed the
doctrine of nuda signa, which makes Sacraments to be bare and naked signs: On
the other hand (says he) Rursum admonendi sumus, ut isti vim Sacramentorum
enervant, usumq prorsus evertunt, ita ab adversa part stare alios qui arcanas
nescio quas virtures Sacramentis affingunt, quae nusquam illis a Deo insitae
leguntur. Quo errore periculose falluntur simpliciores et imperiti, dum et Dei
dona quaerere docentur ubi reperiri minime possunt et a Deo sensim
abstrahuntur, ut pro ejus veritate meram amplexentur vanitatem. Magno enim
consensu Sophisticae Scholae tradiderunt, Sacramenta novae legis, hoc est, quae
in usu nunc sunt Ecclesiae, justificare et confer gratiam, modo non ponamus
obicem peccati mortal^s. Quae sententia dici non potest, quam sit exitialis et
pestilens, eoque magis, quod multis ante saeculis magna Ecclesiae jactura in
bona orbis part obtinuit. Plane certe diabolica est, nam dum justitiam cirra
fidem pollicetur, animas in exitium praecipites agit: deinde quia justitiae
causam a Sacramentis ducit, miseras hominum mentes, in terram s^ apt sponte
plus satis inclinatas, hac superstitione illigat ut in spectaculo rei corpore
ae potius quam in Deo ipso acquiescant.
we are to be advertised, that as those weaken the efficacy of Sacraments, and
utterly overthrow their use, so there are others on the other hand that assign
I know not what virtue to them, such that we never read that God ever put into
them: which error (says he) dangerously deceives the simple, and unlearned;
Whilst they are taught to seek the gifts of God where they cannot be found,
they are by degrees drawn from God to embrace mere vanity instead of truth. For
the Schools of Sophisters with great consent have taught that the Sacraments
of the new law, (that is, those that are now in use among Christians) do
Justify, and confer grace, provided that we put no bar of mortal sin. Which
opinion (says he) has been of more deadly danger than can be spoken: and so
much the more, because for many Ages, to the great loss of the Church, it has
prevailed. It is certainly (says he) devilish; for whilst it promises
Justification without Faith, it casts souls headlong to destruction. And upon
that account, because they derive the cause of righteousness or Justification
from the Sacraments; by this superstition they so ensnare the poor souls of
men, (overmuch of their own accord inclined to earth) that they had rather
rest in a corporeal element than in God himself. This is his entrance upon the
dispute. That which he has further upon it, in four whole Sections is very
well worth the reading. The consent of other Writers of his time, and that have
followed after him, as a cloud of witnesses, might be produced: but this (as
the Reader has heard) is already done to my hand. And when some of reverend
esteem, and singularly deserving in the Church of God, have gone overmuch on
this hand, as soon as it was carried abroad in Manuscripts, a learned
Manuscript of Mr. Gatakers met with it, and afterward appearing in print as a
Posthumous work, this, as soon as it came to the Authors cognizance by his zeal
to the truth followed it. And let me here add to that which has been said,
that if nothing else, yet experience might correct this overhigh conceit of the
work of Sacraments. That which we evidently see is not wrought by Sacraments,
we cannot believe they are assigned of God to work. This Proposition has
certainly reason in it; They certainly do that office, which God has assigned
and appointed them. But we evidently see that they do not actually work all
that they figure out, even where (according to these) there is no bar put;
therefore there is no cause to believe that they are designed of God for it.
Here I might instance in their failing in the work of remission of sin in
Infants, seeing when they come to growth we often see them in that way of sin,
that stands not with actual forgiveness. But I know that many that here are
adversaries confess an intercision of Justification, and therefore this is not
against them: and others that admit not that doctrine speak of a double
Justification, one, for the state of Infancy; another of those that are of
growth upon their acceptance of Christ by faith: and therefore though sins be
remitted in Infancy, and afterward, upon their acting of sin, charged, here is
no such intercision of justification, which Arminians hold, and their
adversaries oppose. I shall therefore wave this, and instance in the failing of
Baptism in the work of regeneration, which is as well figured out in Baptism,
as that other of remission of sin. Baptism comes not alone to remove the
guilt; but also to correct the power of original corruption, and so to work in
us a freedom from the power of sin, as well as the pardon of it. And in case
Baptism effects this work, how is it that sin in Infants is so apt to show it
self? that as soon as they act, they are so readily prone to act that which is
evil. When Saul said he had done the Commandment of the Lord, Samuel had a
confutation ready; What means then (says he) this bleating of sheep, and
lowing of oxen in mine ears that I hear? 1 Samuel 15.14. If Gods command had been
done, a sheep had not been left to bleat, or an ox to low in his hearing. Here
is a real confutation as ready; If Infant Baptism cleanses from original sin,
the root being dead, what means such abundance of living, lively branches? How
come all those complaints of the timely growth of sin in Christians children?
Why have not Paedobaptists found a real confutation of their Adversaries in
their issue? being able to show them their young ones, as averse from sin as a
fish is to a life in the air, when the children of their adversaries wanting
that nature-healing medicine, are wholly addicted to it. Neither Israelites nor
Christians were ever able to hold out such an experiment. And if this were our
received doctrine, it would necessarily herein infinitely strengthen
Anabaptisme; when Anabaptists have ever found the greatest opposition from
their pens, that never acknowledged any such power in Sacraments. And in case
it should fall out, that our Adversaries were in the truth, and we in an
error, concerning this power in Sacraments, I cannot possibly see what great
danger can any way follow to us upon it, seeing that if Sacraments confer
grace, this way, so far above our expectation, we among others shall yet have
our shares in it. Our Infants are in no such error with us, and they put no
more bar to the working of Baptism, then the Infants of others. And therefore
all benefits which thus follow upon Baptism, are theirs. And we urge all of
growth to see that their consciences answer to all Covenant, and Sacramental
engagements; which in case it be done, will acquit them from putting any bar to
any such supposed work. As a man that takes a medicine, not understanding the
worth of it, shall have equal benefit with him that most mightily extols it: so
we, whether in Infancy or Age, notwithstanding any such ignorance shall reap
this unexpected benefit by either of both of the Sacraments. Mr. Hooker, (who
delivers himself in that manner touching the efficacy of Sacraments, that a man
cannot tell on what part he stands) lib. 5. Eccles. pol. Sect. 57. says, It
greatly offends, that some when they labor to show the use of the holy
Sacraments, assign unto them no end, but only to teach the mind by other
senses, that which the Word does teach by hearing. Whereupon how easily neglect
and careless regard of so heavenly mysteries may follow, we see in part by
some experience had of those men with whom that opinion is most strong. For
where the Word of God may be heard, which teaches with much more expedition,
and more full explication any thing we have to learn; if all the benefit we
reap by Sacraments be instruction, they which at all times have opportunity of
using the better means to that purpose, will surely hold the worse in less
estimation. To this I may well answer; 1. I know not who those be, that have
given offense that way; They at whom this learned Author is apt to take
exceptions, and most professedly opposes, do not limit the use of Sacraments
within so narrow a compass, as barely to teach the mind, or help the
understanding, that is not, according to them, their whole work. As they are
signs, they have a twofold other use. 1. As marks of distinction, to separate
Gods own from strangers. 2. As bonds of obedience to God, strict obligations to
the mutual exercise of Christian charity, provocations to godliness,
preservations from sin. The Author himself lays down both of these; and I
scarce think that in this, he has ever been excepted against by any. As
seals, they have a further work upon the will, for the strengthening of our
Faith, in assured confidence of the promises, as our Author has likewise
observed. In regard of the weakness that is in us, they are warrants (says
he) for the more security of our belief. 2. I say, they read the Scriptures
with little heed, and it may be feared, as little benefit, that do not
conscienciously make use of all those helps, to which Scriptures lead; and that
they lead to the use of Sacraments is evident. 3. If that the Word and
Sacrament were two distinct teachers without reference one to the other, and it
were left to my choice which to take, I should make use of the better, and
leave the more inferior. If I should be necessitated to take the one, and
leave the other, the Word should be chosen. But seeing that the Sacraments are
an appendant to the Word, given us in charge there, and the whole use of them
by the Word is taught, no man can conscienciously use the one, in neglect of
the other. But let us see whether that which the Author himself delivers be
not as much offensive, as this at which he seems so greatly offended. Having
laid down 3. several uses of Sacraments, he adds, But their chiefest force and
virtue consists not herein so much, as that they are heavenly Ceremonies,
which God has sanctified, and ordained to be administered in his Church, first
as marks, whereby to know when God does impart the vital or saving grace of
Christ unto all that are capable thereof; and secondly as means conditional
which God requires in them unto whom he imparteth grace. For since God is in
himself invisible, cannot by us be discerned working, therefore when it seems
good in the eyes of his heavenly wisdom, that men for some special intent and
purpose should take notice of his glorious presence, he gives them some plain
and sensible token whereby to know what they cannot see. For Moses to see God
and live was impossible, yet Moses by fire, knew where the glory of God
extraordinarily was present. The Angel by whom God endued the waters of the
pool of Bethesda with supernatural virtue to heal, was not seen of any, yet the
time of the Angels presence known by the troubled motions of the waters
themselves. The Apostles by fiery tongues which they saw were admonished, when
the Spirit, which they could not behold, was upon them. In like manner it is
with us: Christ and his holy Spirit, with all their blessed effects, though
entering into the soul of man, we are not able to apprehend or express how, do
notwithstanding give notice of the times when they use to make their access,
because it pleased Almighty God to communicate by sensible means those
blessings which are incomprehensible. Who would not wish that these elegancies
might universally hold, and that as sure as Moses knew that God was
extraordinarily present in the burning bush, and the diseased in Jerusalem knew
that the Angel was present when the waters were moved, and the Apostles that
the Spirit was come down, when they saw the fiery cloven tongues; so in
receiving of the Sacramental signs, we might as assuredly know, that vital,
and saving grace is imparted to us, and that these sensible means do as
assuredly communicate these incomprehensible blessings. But seeing those marks
of distinction between the visible people of God, and those that are strangers
to him, work no otherwise, as to vital and saving grace, than has been spoke,
let us take heed lest these dissimilitudes do not draw us to embrace a cloud
instead of Juno, when it shall appear that they have not so much of elegancy,
but are answered with equal incongruity. If they be such marks as these
instances seem to hold out to us, how are they then conditional means, to
communicate these blessings? Upon what condition I marvel was it that Moses
knew that God was in the bush? Or the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that the Angel
was in the water? Or the Apostles, that the Spirit was come down upon them?
These were undoubtedly to be looked upon as unconditionate communications of the
respective presence of God, his Angel, and his Spirit. And how this stands with
that which presently after we find in our Author, I know not, (unless many
grains be allowed to abate the height of them) that Sacraments are not
Physical, but moral instruments of salvation, duties of service and worship,
which unless we perform as the Author of grace requires, they are
unprofitable. For all receive not the grace of God which receive the Sacraments
of his grace. Moses undoubtedly did enjoy the presence of the Angel, and the
Apostles the presence of the Holy Ghost. Let us then learn to use them, as the
Author of grace requires, and that is as signs and seals, as his chosen
vessel to convey his grace here teaches.

I shall only add in this place. If Sacraments work as signs and seals,
then they must be allowed to have that whole work on all that are Communicants,
which as signs and seals they can possibly effect, either for the bettering
of their understanding, or farther engagements in ways of godliness, and that
by the help of the Word, they may help the understanding even of unregenerate
persons, and make discovery of strong engagements to ways of godliness, can
scarce be questioned. If the Word can teach the unregenerate by hearing, then
the Sacraments being appointed for visible teaching-signes, by the help of the
Word may also teach them by seeing, and unregenerate men making profession of
their relation to God, may here see further engagements and provocations to
godliness. This effect cannot be denied to be possible in Sacraments, as
signs, at least upon some persons in unregeneration; and when they further see
all the glorious privileges of the Covenant, upon the terms propounded of God
to be attainable, may they not be of singular use as seals to put them on, and
stir them up in all conscientious use of means to rise up to the answer of
conscience? And so as the Word as an instrument in Gods hand, by instructions,
motives, exhortations and other provocations is a means for conversion; so may
the Sacraments as appendents to the Word, and by the help of it be herein
serviceable likewise, which is the whole that I do or ever did attribute to
Sacraments, so much as in a possible way, of conversion.

CHAP. XII.
SECT. I. The thing signified and sealed in Sacraments.
THe whole use and office of Sacraments we have seen, Sacraments are suitable
to Covenants.
which is to seal the gift and grant of God in Covenant, as well as to
signify. The thing sealed in them here comes to be spoken to, which is the
righteousness of faith. There being a double Covenant given of God to man, one
in man's integrity, whilst he was in spiritual life, for preservation in life;
the other in man's fallen condition when dead, for restitution to life. There is
a double righteousness answering to this double Covenant: The one inherent in
man, to be wrought by himself, and called our own righteousness; The other
wrought by a Mediator in our stead, and made ours by Faith, and therefore
called the righteousness of faith, and sometimes the righteousness of God,
being wrought by Christ who is God. And answerably to this double Covenant, and
double righteousness, Sacraments of a double kind were instituted. The first
without respect had to any Mediator, confirming Gods engagements, on the terms
of perfect obedience. The other with respect to a Mediator, and Faith in him;
confirming happiness to believers. The Sacraments of the Covenant of grace are
of this latter sort. They are signs and seals, as were the trees of life, and
of the knowledge of good and evil, and seals of righteousness, as they were
also, but of righteousness of another kind. The former were seals of the
righteousness of works; These are seals of the righteousness of faith. Those
were seals to assure a reward to our own righteousness; These are seals to
assure us of another righteousness, made ours by faith. From hence these two
Observations follow; one employed, the other in the words expressed. The first
which is employed in the words, is, The righteousness of Faith is the great
Promise of the Covenant of Grace.

The Apostle tells us of blindness that in part happened to Israel, Romans
11.25. and the blindness was this, that they would not be brought to an
acknowledgment of this righteousness; But in an high zeal made it their
business to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.2, 3. It does not
appear that they wholly denied the concurrence of all grace for the work of
this righteousness in which they confided. The Pharisee, who is brought in to
personate those of this opinion, says, God I thank thee, I am not like other
men; He therefore did acknowledge some kind of discriminating grace; But it was
his own act, through grace, a righteousness inherent, and not through grace
imputed; wrought by himself, and not by another in his stead, in which he
confided. This observation might have been pertinently and properly spoken to,
in this place, being that on which the Sacraments are bottomed; A flaw here
must needs be the undoing of all. The Jew mistaking here was at loss of all
his pains, in sacrifices, Sacraments and all other personal performances. When
he had carried on this with the greatest vigor, and alacrity; he was still too
short, and this held him back that he looked not after any other
righteousness, and so perished without any such righteousness as was able to
justify. I should not therefore have wholly past this by, but that a long
expected and greatly desired Treatise on this subject is sent to the Press,
and will for a good space of time prevent this piece, where the Reader, I doubt
not, will find full satisfaction. I shall therefore wholly pass it by, and
come to the Observation which the words expressly hold out.

The righteousness of faith is sealed in the Sacraments of the Covenant of
grace. This enters we see the definition a Sacra-ment, Propositions holding
forth this righteousness.
and is expressly laid down in the text of the Apostle, and for a right
understanding of this great privilege here sealed some Positions or
explicatory Propositions must be laid,

1. This is called the righteousness of faith (as before was hinted) in
opposition to, and to distinguish it from the righteousness of works required
in the Covenant, entered with man in his integrity; and which the Jews for a
great part conceited they were bound to answer acccording to the letter of the
precepts of the Law, for the attainment of salvation. That of works is called
by the name of our righteousness, Romans 10.3. Phil. 3.18. being to be done by
our selves, in our own persons; as also by the name of the righteousness of
the Law, being required at our hands by the Law, so that salvation gained this
way, is of our selves, of works, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. This other is called the
righteousness of faith in this text, as also, Phil. 3.9. Heb. 11.7. Faith
being the hand that receives it of Gods free gift, by grace; it is called also
the righteousnsse of God, Romans 10.3. Phil. 3.9. Either as being the gift of
God, which that phrase seems to imply, the righteousness which is of God by
faith, or else as being the work of Christ, that is God. So that salvation this
way gained is of grace, and the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. These two are still
opposed one to the other; when one is followed, the other is quit and left,
Romans 10.3. They being ignorant of Gods righteousness and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
righteousness of God: so also, Romans 10.5, 6. Moses describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does these things shall
live by them: but the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise,
etc. Phil. 3.9. Not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, the rigteousnesse which is of God by
faith.

2. This righteousness is synechdochically put for the whole The
righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise, that is, the Covenant
which interests us in the righteousness of faith, speaks this language; so
that Sacraments sealing this righteousness, they seal the whole of this
Covenant.

3. All the blessings and privileges following upon, and following Comes
this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision
also? For we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. This
righteousness, and blessedness, is made one and the same in those words of
the Apostle.

Romans 10.4. speaking of the error of the Jews, in going about to establish
their own righteousness, and their non-submission of themselves unto the
righteousness of God; he says, that Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes, that is, finie consummans (as
Gomarus says) not consumens. The end at which the Law aimed, and not putting
an end and period to it. One Christ assumes to himself; It becomes us, to
fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. The other he disclaimes, Matthew. 5.17.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill. The Law calls us to righteousness, but is not able to
work it in us: Christ has done it for us, and in our stead. He is therefore
called our righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 23.6.
so that wheresoever we prove that Christ is sealed to us, in the Sacrament, or
any other benefit flowing from Christ as Mediator, there is a sufficient proof
of this observation.

the soul, producing any act beyond its self, as the hand is the instrument to
the soul in labor, but as receiving, and taking in a gift from God. This the
Phrase of the Apostle, Phil. 3.9. does clear. The righteousness of God by
faith; otherwise it might be styled the righteousness of works; yea, when the
words are the righteousness of faith, the meaning must still be, the
righteousness of works; as a man when he receives pay for threshing or
digging, receives pay for working. But these are made directly opposite one to
the other, and not confounded one with the other, Romans 10.5, 6. Faith therefore
is considered not as a work or habitual grace in the soul: So considered it is
a branch of our own righteousness; but as an instrument applying Christ, and
interesting us in his righteousness.

These Positions being premised, The Point proved.
the Observation may be easily proved, that the righteousness of faith, or the
righteousness of God by faith, is sealed in the Sacraments of the Covenant of
grace, and may be made good in an induction of particulars. Circumcision, the
leading Sacrament of the old Covenant is expressly here spoken to, and here we
see what is the thing signified in it, and sealed by it. And in case we saw no
more in it, then the most carnal amongst the Jews saw, that it was a note of
distinction between them, and others that had no visible relation to God in
Covenant, yet we know that this distinction was grounded and founded in Christ.
By Scriptures.
The one stood in a visible relation to him, and the other were strangers from
him. And the Apostle, Col. 2.11, 12. is full in the proof of it. Having said,
that we are complete in Christ, enjoying him we want nothing, it might be
objected, that we want the very leading Ordinance which receives a people into
visible Communion with God, which was Circumcision; The Apostle answers, that
in him we are circumcised, with the circumcision made without hands, in putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ. This,
Circumcision did figure, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jer. 9.26. Romans 2.28, 29. And this is the
work of Christ, as we see in the Apostles words, and therefore circumcision led
to him.

For the following Sacrament of the Passover, if we look to the letter of the
institution, together with the explication given, we shall find it a memorial
of a temporal mercy. It is the Lords Passover, Exodus 12.11. that is, a
memorial that the Lord passed over them when he smote the Land of Egypt, v. 13.
But this is no concluding Argument, that it sealed not Christ, or the
righteousness of Christ by faith, as may (God willing) be made to appear when
we shall have occasion to speak of the Cloud, that guided Israel out of Egypt,
the Sea that they passed through, and Manna and the rock whereof they ate and
drank. This deliverance celebrated in the Passover was in and through Christ,
as is gathered from the blood that was to be struck on the two side-posts, and
on the upper door-post of their houses, Exodus 12.7. But most clearly from the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.9. He there says they tempted Christ; but they tempted him,
from whom they had defense, and present deliverance: And therefore the Apostle
expressly calls the Paschal Lamb by the Name of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7. For even
Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. And John Baptist had respect to it
as well as to other Sacrifices of the Law, when pointing out Christ, he said,
Behold, the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29.
This is so clear in the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism and the
Supper of the Lord, that proofs do not need.

By Reasons.
And the Reasons of it are clear.

Without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. We can do all things through Christ
that strengthens, Phil. 4.13. In him we have the Circumcision made without
hands, which is the putting away the body of the sins of the flesh, Col. 2.11.
By Christ we have pardon of sin, God has set him forth a propitiation through
faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Christ then is signified and sealed in the Sacraments.

Baptism saves, 1 Pet. 3.21. But salvation is through Christ, He is the
Author of eternal salvation, Heb. 5.9. Neither is there salvation in any
other: for there is none other Name under heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved.

When you see a seal you must find the use and latitude of it in the Covenant,
so it is in Sacramental seals, God entering Covenant with Abraham to be his
God, and the God of his seed, which was a Covenant for true blessedness,
Matthew. 22.31, 32. Circumcision was instituted for confirmation of it, and put
(as we see in the Text) as a seal to it. When Christ had promised his flesh for
meat, and his blood for drink, being to leave the world, he iustituted signs
for memorial which are seals of it: With this explanation or comment of his own
upon them, This is my body which is given for you, this Cup is the New
Testament in my blood. And that Christ is the great Promise for blessedness in
the Covenant, and that in him all Covenant-promises are made good, needs not to
be proved. Christ therefore is sealed in the Sacraments.

1. This we are so to understand, The doctrine by rules explained.
that as all happiness and true blessedness is comprised under the
righteousness of Faith, (even all that the Apostle looked after and made his
ambition to compass in lieu of all those privileges, which he once had Phil.
3.8, 9.) so every Sacrament, that is a seal of this righteousness of faith,
seals all whatsoever is given of God in Covenant to his people. If there be
thousands of things made over in any grant, one seal is the confirmation of
all; and though the seals be many, (as Amesius observes) yet all that is
passed in Covenant is made good in each. Our Justification, Adoption,
Perseverance, Glorification, and whatsoever else in order to these or any of
these, a people upright in Covenant may expect from the hand of God, is under
seal, in every Sacrament confirmed unto them. So that, whatsoever it is that
the Word promises, that the Sacraments by way of seal ratify and confirm unto
us. Abraham had this righteousness of Faith revealed to him by promise, the
Gospel being preached to him, Gal. 3.8. He had also the Land of Canaan given in
promise as a special gift to his posteriry; This was now confirmed also to him
in his Circumcision. The righteousness of faith was, as the marrow and
substance of the gift, and therefore the Apostle puts it into his definition:
yet the gift of the Land of Canaan, which was only an adjunct annexed (as
Chamier observes) is confirmed with it. Every baptized man has the
righteousness of Faith in Promise, and ratified to him in Baptism, and
whatsoever else is made over in promise by reason of any special calling or
relation which is of God, is confirmed in Baptism likewise. When we are put of
God into any way, we have his promise, Psalm. 91.11. to be kept in that way.
This promise is assured and confirmed in Baptism, Ministers are called of God,
and commissioned for their work, in which we know they have many and large
promises; all of these in their Baptism are confirmed to them.

that he that has the Son has life, and that unto whom God gives his Son,
with him he gives all things; that, eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of
Christ, believers have eternal life: here a particular tender is made of his
body and blood in these visible Elements of water, and of bread and wine. The
water is passively received in Baptism, the bread and wine actually taken,
eaten and drunk in the Lords Supper. In either whole Christ, and the whole of
all the benefits of Christ is tendered and to be received. So that what miracles
extraordinarily were to particular promises, as we read in Scriptures, for the
confirmation of those that beheld them, and for whose sake they were wrought;
that Sacraments ordinarily are, and serve for, as to true bliss and eternal
happiness. This Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Sacram. in genesis cap. 24. charges on his
adversaries, quoting Melancton and Luther for it, and we are content willingly
to own it; and among many others which he charges as errors, he says this is
the chief, and diligently to be refuted: therefore he sets himself professedly
against this use of Sacraments, and will not have them to serve by way of seal
for confirmation of our faith in particular. And this he endeavors with five
several Arguments.

SECT. II. Objections against the former doctrine.
1. IF Sacraments confirm our faith by way of seal or after the

Answ. 1. The assumption here should have been, Nohting is But the former is
left out, lest it should give check to their doctrine of obscurity of
Scriptures; and instead of making the Word easily intelligible, he contents
himself to say, that it is more intelligible than nods or dumb shows, when yet
dumb signs or such nods are better known, and more easily understood, (as we
have experience sufficient) than the Word of God, or any other word whatsoever,
in an unknown language.

2. If this Argument be of force, then nothing else in the Gideons, Ezekiah's
and Ahaz his signs, but the oath also made to Abraham, was superfluous. All
these had the Word of God, and unless the signs given them, and the oath made
to them, were more efficacious then the Word, (which, as he says, nothing is)
according to him they are all superfluous.

3. Comparison is not to be made between the Word, and Bellarmine says Luther
acknowledges: but enquiry is to be made whether the Word together with
Sacraments, annexed to it, be not more efficacious by reason of our weakness
and inclinations to diffidence, than the Word without any such visible
ratification. Nothing can be more firm than the promise of God, seeing God
cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. His Oath is no more valid then his Word, yet God willing
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his
counsel, confirmed it by an oath, That by two immutable things in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation.

The nature of Sacraments cannot any where be better understood, than from his
words that is the author of them; But in the Holy Scriptures they are no where
called seals of Promises, but instruments of Justification: Ergo.

Rome, and most of their Sacramentals must fall, seeing, by Thomas Aquinas his
acknowledgment they are not to be found in Scriptures.



If Sacraments be only seals of the promise of grace, then either they are
superfluous, or else of very slender use and benefit, for we have more
Testimonies far more efficacious. Good works are better signs and testimonies
of righteousness obtained, then washing with water, or taking of the
Eucharist, which may be received Hypocritically.

At the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established.



Amesius observes) but of their own nature, they evidence our fitness for
glory, and as fruits of our faith, as Whitaker speaks. And those which
Bellarmine uses to make the best of works, Alms, Fasting and Prayer, may be
hypocritically performed likewise.



4. If Sacraments seal by way of particular application for support

Ans. 1. We may learn of Bellarmine, that Protestants at least

2. The Apostle was certainly able to have given a satisfying Phil. 3.5. It is
of equal strength against Infant-circumcision as against baptism.

5. If Sacraments be seals of grace which in particular is conferred

Ans. Our Adversary here prevents us, That the Sacrament is a seal or testimony
of grace, not absolutely, but, if he that does receive the Sacrament, do
believe the promise. And this indeed is their Answer, as out of Amesius,
Whitaker, Vorstius, Pareus, Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Rutherford. I have shown; to
which may be added, that full Testimony out of Dr. Slater before mentioned. As
for those that will have the Covenant to be absolute, and the seals to be put
without any respect had to any condition: against the full stream of Protestant
Writers, I shall desire them to help us to any other satisfying answer to this
Argument. I must confess, that in case I be once convinced, that the work of
Sacraments is to ratify Gods promise in an absolute way, as the Rainbowe does,
that God will no more destroy the World by water, without respect had to any
condition at all. And that a seal is put to a blank, in case any unregenerate
person be baptized or admitted to the Lords Table; I must either be helped with
further light, than I can yet see, or else I think I shall never more adventure
upon Baptism, or the Lords Supper. And Bellarmine supposing that this will be
our answer, can bring nothing more to avoid (...) then two speeches of Luther,
and one of Melancton, nothing at all to purpose.

SECT. III. A Corollary from the former Doctrine.
Circumcision no carnal badge.
THen it follows by way of necessary Corollary, that Circumcision is no carnal
badge, but a seal of spiritual mercies given in promise. The righteousness of
faith is no carnal, but a spiritual privilege. Circumcision is a seal of the
righteousness of faith, and therefore it is no carnal badge, but a seal of
spiritual mercies. This might here fitly be enlarged to take off this shift
which Anabaptists have borrowed from Jesuits; But this is already done at
large, Treatise of the Covenant, Chap. 26. And here nothing needs to be added.

SECT. IV. A further Corollary from the Doctrine.
Sacraments in the time of the Law and days of the Gospel are of the same use
and signification.
IT further follows, that Sacraments in the time of the Law, and in the days
of the Gospel were of the same use and signification: the Sacraments of
Israelites and Christians are all one in substance. This is clear. Circumcision
was a seal of the righteousness of faith; and in case, Sacraments in the days
of the Gospel seal not this to Christians, we must then leave the Apostles, and
seek a new way of happiness. Yea, if then there were any Sacrament properly so
called, (as some argue) that Sacrament must necessarily be of the same, and no
other use and signification than these, which followed after in the time of the
Law, and days of the Gospel, seeing those Fathers were under the same promise
of the righteousness of faith, That was Noah's inheritance, Heb. 11.7. This
further appears from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. opened.
1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our
Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea: and were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea. And did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of
the Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. The Apostle here first
gives the very name of our leading Sacrament unto theirs; they were all
baptized unto Moses (says he) in the Cloud and in the Sea. 2dly, he declares
that the thing signified was the same in theirs, as it is in our Sacraments.
They ate the same spiritual meat, and they drank the same spiritual drink, and
so from hence this Argument is obvious. Where there is the same name, and the
same thing, there is the same Ordinance in substance; But here is the same name
and the same thing (as we have seen); and therefore the Ordinances are in
substance the same. The Apostle gives no greater excellency (says Calvin) to
our Sacraments then to theirs, when he says, that the fathers ate the same
spiritual meat with us, interpreting himself, that that meat is Christ.
Bellarmine here finds several difficulties (as he calls them) seemingly making
for us against him, and presses them further then he can find strength to
answer. 1. If the Jews ate the same spiritual meat, and drank the same
spiritual drink as we do in the Lords Supper, then there was the same virtue in
Manna as in the Lords Supper. To this he answers, that they all are of the same
meat one as others among themselves, but not the same with that which we eat.
But, I had rather follow the Apostles own Comment then Bellarmines: and he
interprets this meat to be Christ: and unless we feed not on Christ, we and
they have the same spiritual food. For, as the Apostle tells us, they fed on
him. 2. If it were spiritual meat, spiritual drink, wherewith they were fed, it
had the same efficacy as our Sacraments. Ours have no efficacy above that which
is spiritual. 3. He says, we urge the state of the question which the Apostle
there handles. The Apostle there warns Christians not to rest too much in their
fruition of Sacraments, so as to think themselves safe, because they were
baptized and admitted to the Lords Supper, seeing Sacraments like to these,
little availed the fathers that did not abstain from sin. And lastly, Austin is
produced on our behalf, who, Tractate on Joh. 16. says, That the Sacraments of
the Jews and ours were different in their signs, but the same in the thing
signified. They were different in outward visible appearance, but the same in
their divine virtue. These he makes it his business to answer, lib. 2. de
effectu Sacram. cap. 17. Which answers of his are so fully taken off, by
Amesius, Bellar. enervat. tom. 3. cap. 4. And by Whitaker, praelect. de Sacram.
Quaest. 5. cap. 3. that I need not cause this work to swell any bigger with it.
And this Text, I doubt not, is clear for it.

Col. 2.11, 12. The Apostle makes Circumcision, and Baptism one and the same,
and calls Circumcision by the name of Baptism, Circumcision of the heart
(which is the putting away the body of the sins of the flesh) was signified
(and in the right use of it effected) in circumcision, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer. 4.4.
Romans 2.28. And the same is signified, and in the right use of it effected in
Baptism, as appears in the text quoted, as also, Romans 6.4. We are buried with
him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. Reasons
assigned.
This also appears in reason.

Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant to be a God unto
thee and thy seed after thee. And the Apostle, Heb. 11.16. speaking of the
Fathers, says, God is not ashamed to be called their God. This promise is
interpreted by Christ to include mercies for eternity, Matt. 22.31, 32.
Temporal promises will not evince a resurrection: But these promises, as Christ
lets us know, do evince it. Gospel promises are the greatest: but they enjoyed
Gospel-promises, Gal. 3.8. Heb. 4.2. They were therefore our equals in
promises.

2. Children of the same father, are fed at his table, with the Romans 9.4. To
them pertained the adoption: Ergo.

Matthew. 8.11. I say unto you that many shall come from the East and West, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven. The
same Kingdom in which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were, Gentiles that are called
in Gospel Times are Ergo.

Explicatory Rules.
This we must understand with these rules.

First, These Sacraments, theirs and ours, are not in that manner them. 1. They
differ in their outward signs; appearing to us, in several shapes. That which
was seen in Circumcision, differed much from water in Baptism; and a Lamb,
whether of the herd or flock, differs much from bread and wine. 2. Ours are of
greater ease then theirs. There was pain and smart in Circumcision; which the
new Circumcised Shechemites felt to their cost, Genesis 34.25. which happily might
occasion the neglect of circumcision of Moses his son, through the Mothers
tenderness, as may be gathered from her words, Exodus 4.25. Neither was the
Passover without cost and pains; especially to them that lived at a great
distance from Jerusalem. 3. There is far more light accompanying our
Sacraments then theirs, not in themselves; for as much might be gathered, if
not more, for significancy from their outward signs, then from ours; but by
reason of the clear discovery of the promises, and open, full manifestation of
their use. 4. Ours were without blood, theirs were accompanied with blood, one
of the person receiving, the other in the sign received. 5. Old
Testament-Sacraments had their period, and others follow in their place: Ours
must not cease until all time cease, Baptism must hold to the end of the
world, Matthew. 28.20. And the Lords Supper until Christ come, 1 Cor. 11.26. But
none of these make any substantial difference, nor any more then that which is
circumstantial, or gradual; The outward dress in which they differently
appear, can make no difference in substance. A seal is one and the same,
whether the wax be red, green, or yellow, yea, whether the impression be in
wax, or dough, whether the signet have the Letters of a man's name, or the Arms
that he gives. Men look at the grant to which the seal is put, and not at these
circumstances. Neither matters it whether they be done with trouble or ease,
and where their worth is not known, they are not therefore in themselves of
less value. And though they do not endure always, their efficacy is yet no
less, whilst they last. If we eye circumstances of this nature, ours may be
advanced; But if we eye the substantial work, theirs will be equal. Hereupon so
different speeches are quoted from Austins pen; Some highly advancing our
Sacraments above theirs, and others parallelling theirs with ours, which with
this distinction may be fairly reconciled, and (as we have heard) the author
himself thus reconciles them.

Secondly, Those undervaluing phrases of Old Testament-Sacraments, which are
sometimes found in the Prophets and Apostles, and brought by adversaries to put
them at a great distance behind ours, are either spoken, as they were abused
and misobserved by Jews in unbelief, and impenitence, and not according to
their institution, or lawful use; in which case we might say the same of
Baptism or the Lords Supper. Or else we must understand them, as having an end
by Christ's coming in the flesh put to them, and so in their use dead, if not
deadly to the observers.

Bellarmine makes it one of the particulars, wherein we and they agree, that
the Sacraments of the Jews are types of ours, in the days of the Gospel; Yet
in case the word type be taken in that sense, as it is ordinarily used, we
utterly disclaim it. There are indeed very many, and different acceptations of
this word, as may appear to any that will consult John 21.25. Act. 23.25. Act.
7.43. Romans 6.17. Romans 5.14. with Heb. 9.24. Phil. 3.17. Act. 7.44. 1 Cor. 10.6.
1 Pet. 3.21. And, as it is used in that one place in Peter, where Baptism is
said to be the antitype to the Ark (which according to Interpreters implies
only a similitude, or correspondence) we may well grant that their Sacraments
were types, that is, theirs and ours carry a full resemblance; but taking the
word as it is ordinarily used, for that which shadows out, somewhat that is to
come, by Divine institution, whether person or thing; as Adam, Romans 5.14. is
said to be a type, or figure of him that was to come; and the holy places made
with hands, are types and figures of the true, which doubtless our adversaries
intend, so it is to be denied; and Protestant Writers unanimously deny them to
be any such types, wholly disclaiming that doctrine, that the Sacraments of the
Jews did only shadow out grace, and ours do confer it. And therefore when
the contents affixed to the respective Chapters in our last translation, seem
otherwise singularly exact, so that that great Critic, Ainsworth (who cannot
be suspected to do it out of any humor of imitation) in his translation of the
Pentateuch and the Psalms, very rarely differs from them, it is wonder how that
slip came into the contents affixed to 1 Cor. 10. thus expressed, 1. The
Sacraments of the Jews, 6. are types of ours, 7. and their punishments, 11.
ensamples for us, when it should rather have been 1. The Sacraments of the
Jews are the same with ours, 5. their punishments are ensamples for us. The
four first verses making the Sacraments there mentioned to be of the same use
with ours, and the seven following verses to v. 12. show that their sufferings
for sin, are our examples for admonition, that we run not upon like practices.
See Ravanellus in verbum Typus, Whitaker praelect. de Sacram. quaest. 5. cap.
1. page 109. Pareus in 1 Cor. 10.6.

SECT. V A third Corollary from the doctrine.
THen it follows by way of necessary Corollary, that Christians should see,
All must see that they be rightly principled in the doctrine of this
righteousness.
that they be rightly principled in this doctrine of the righteousness of
faith, as that in which the great mercy of the new Covenant, and all that the
Sacraments seal is comprised. Ignorance of this, being the undoing of the
zealous Jew, A mistake or flaw here must needs be of singular danger. And here
those of the Church of Rome may be supposed to be most of all secure, seeing
there is no imaginable righteousness, but they hedge it in: as may appear in a
brief view of their doctrine. That righteousness which must save, either must
be wrought by our selves, and so styled our righteousness; or else it must be
wrought by an other, and made ours. There is no righteousness of a third sort.
That which is wrought by our selves, is either according to the command of God,
prescribed in the law, or else over, above, and besides the Law, assumed by our
selves, or received by tradition. As Pharisees had an high zeal for both of
these, whereof Paul in his unconversion is an instance, Phil. 3.6. Gal. 1.14.
So it is at least pretended by these persons, though their zeal for their
righteousness of the law, falls far short of that for the tradition of the
Church. And for righteousness, besides their own, wrought by others, they take
in not only the righteousness of Christ; but also the supererogation of the
Saints; which, as they persuade themselves, is satisfactory, not only for the
Saints themselves, but for others. The Church of Rome makes it her care to take
in the whole of all these branches of righteousness, and in all of them they
place their justification. Here we had need of the clew of Scriptures to lead
us. That righteousness which according to the precept of the Law, is to be
wrought by our selves; as to sanctification or qualification of the soul in the
way of salvation; we must vigorously pursue and not disclaim. As Christ when he
was accused by the Pharisees to destroy the law, and to be an enemy to
righteousness; to take off this calumny, he tells his Disciples, Matthew. 5.20.
I say unto you, that except your righteousness, shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. So we may say to these adversaries that charge us to be
enemies of good works, except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
these superstitious ones, ye can by no means enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
The righteousness of a Papist being of the self same stamp with that of the
Pharisees, for tradition the Trent Council makes known their zeal, Council.
Triden. Sess. quart. p. 11. With the same degree of reverence, and esteem we
receive the Traditions of our Fathers, as we do the books of the Old and New
Testament; and how defective both of them were touching the righteousness of
the law, their agreement in the gloss which they put upon the law is a
sufficient witness. The Pharisees gloss on the law we may read in Christ's
refutation, Matthew. 5. and the several precepts, which Christ there delivers,
transcending the Pharisees dictates, Papists will have to be no branches of the
law, but Evangelical Counsels added to it; So that B. Hall quotes a speech of
Serrarius the Jesuit that the Pharisees may not unfitly be compared to
Catholics, adding as his own, that one egg is not liker to an other, then
the Tridentine Fathers to these Jesuits. Supererogating righteousness, and
that which is bottomed on tradition, we must wholly shun. It is enough that we
can bring it up to the rule, in the parts of it, it must not exceed. It is hard
to determine whether a man that casts off all regard of righteousness, or a
man of such righteousness, be more hateful in Gods presence; one utterly
sleights the sovereignty of God, and the other corrects his wisdom; one
refuses to serve at all, the other serves only, according to his own pleasure.
As to the other branch of righteousness wrought by others, The supposed
satisfaction of the Saints must be left, and the Lord Christ's alone chosen.
That speech of Christ in the Prophet Isai. 63.3. spoken of the conquest of his
enemies, I have trod the Wine Press alone, and of the people there were none
with me, holds true, when it is applied (as by many it has been, though not
according to the letter of the text) to his satisfaction, By one offering he
has perfected for ever those that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. yea, the
righteousness of Christ, in the matter of justification must stand alone, in
opposition to all righteousness in the world, whether of others, imaginarily
to be applied, out of any public treasury, by way of indulgence; or wrought
by our selves, either by the strength of natural abilities without grace,
(which the Papists confess to be too weak) or in grace, and these works (how
great an honor soever of late is put upon them) come short of perfection to
justification likewise, as plainly appears by the Apostles argumentation, Romans
3.20. By the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight,
giving this in for his reason, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. The
argument runs thus, Where the Law discovers sin, the works commanded by it
cannot justify; This proposition is the Apostles: But the law discovers sin,
even in those in whom grace here has its most perfect work; This needs not to
be proved: Therefore works commanded in the law, and done by assistance of
grace in the regenerate cannot justify. And that the Apostle disclaims all
righteousness any other way his own, then by free imputation from God in the
work of justification, is clear, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet am
I not hereby justified. Though he had the witness of a good conscience, as his
rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12. Yet this is not his justification, when the Rhemists on
the place, and Bellarmine de justificat. urge this text against assurance of
salvation, Mr. Ball, Treat. of Faith. page 107. says, This text makes strongly
against justification by works, but against certainty of salvation it makes
nothing. And Pareus upon the words says, Hence it is most firmly concluded
that by the works of the law no man is justified. If so great an Apostle cannot
be justified by works, then much less others. His works were certainly done by
the power of grace, and upon new-Covenant-engagements. That of Mr. Baxter,
Aphor. of justif. page 307. must stand as an eternal truth; who after that he
had laid down the Socinians tenent, that they acknowledge not that Christ has
satisfied the Law for us, and consequently is none of our legal righteousness,
but only has set us a copy to write after, and is become our pattern, and
that we are justified by following him, as a captain and guide to heaven and so
all our proper righteousness is in this obedience; And having marked it with
this just brand, [Most cursed doctrine] he adds, So far am I from this, that I
say, The righteousness which we must plead against the laws accusations, is
not one grain of it in our faith or works, but all out of us in Christ's
satisfaction.

As this righteousness which is no otherwise ours, but by imputation (being
neither inherent in us, Faith the alone grace that interests us in this
righteousness.
nor wrought by us) must stand entire, and sole in our justification: so faith
must be acknowledged to be the alone grace which interests us in it, and
attains to our reconciliation to God in Christ, otherwise why is it that not
only the denomination is still from faith only? (as we see in the text, and
always when it is named, it is called the righteousness of faith, and not of
hope, love, obedience, or repentance) But that justification is evermore in
Scripture ascribed to this grace? The Apostle speaking of Christ who is
confessed to be our righteousness, says, Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. In him, God, who otherwise through
wrath stands at the greatest distance, is propitious, and this through Faith;
on which Diodate has these words, All this has been done by virtue of Gods
appointment, who of his mere will, and full power, has from everlasting
appointed Christ to be the only means of expiation and reconciliation,
applyable to man by faith, which is the means, or instrument whereby we receive
the mercy of God. So also, Gal. 2.16. is very full, Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by faith in Christ Jesus. The Apostle
there first in the negative shows, where our justification is not, and in the
next place tells us, in the affirmative where it is; so that all works of all
kinds, are by him excluded, and faith only is acknowledged. Whereas one says,
that Paul does either in express words, or in the sense and scope of his
speech, exclude only the works of the Law, that is, the fulfilling of the
condition of the Law our selves, but never the fulfilling of the
Gospel-conditions, that we may have part in Christ; It is fully against the
Apostle, if by fulfilling the Gospel-condition any thing but faith be
understood. All works are excluded, and faith as in opposition to works is
acknowledged, and we have our part or interest in Christ, in or by fulfilling
of no other Gospel-condition, then that of faith, whereby we receive Christ,
and Christ dwells in us, John 1.12. Ephesians. 3.17. The same Author teaches us to
distinguish betwixt our first possession of Justification (which is upon our
contract with Christ, or mere faith) and the confirmation, continuation and
accomplishment of it, whose condition is also sincere obedience and
perseverance. But being first possessed of justification, we are justified, and
of this Paul still speaks, and there is no intercision of it, nor any other way
in progress of time to be interested in it. Being justified we enter upon are
reconciled state, which is never lost, and held up only by Christ upon the
interest of our faith. Obedience and Perseverance are both of necessity to
obtain the end of our Faith, the salvation of our souls, but not to give us
this interest in Christ. Sin in the elect-regenerate, may work a man (as has
been said) under present wrath, but renders him not a child of wrath; brings
upon him an inaptitude for glory, but makes him not simply liable to
condemnation for eternity. This accomplishment of Justification in the sense
spoken to, is no other then glorification; and these two are distinct links in
Paul's golden chain (as it is called) Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them
also he called; and whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. As Predestination differs from vocation, and
justification; so Justification also from glorification; when our first
possession of Justification is acknowledged to be of mere faith, Paul's
justification is confessed to be of mere faith likewise. The same Author
says, Paul does by the word [faith] especially direct your thoughts to Christ
believed in: for to be justified by Christ, and to be justified by receiving
Christ is with him all one; and I am sure faith alone receives Christ, and no
Evangelical work either of obedience or perseverance; therefore Faith alone
justifies. There is added, And when he does mention faith, as the condition, he
always implies obedience to Christ, therefore [believing] and [obeying the
Gospel] are put for the two summaries of the whole conditions: But Faith as an
instrument receiving Christ is the condition, when the Evangelist complains,
that He came to his own, and his own received him not, Joh. 1.11. he points out
their neglect of the condition required: They were his in Covenant, or else
they had not been called his own; and in not receiving him they failed in the
condition required of them; and in the words following the Evangelist speaks of
those of his own in Covenant, that did make good the condition of it, and that
is no otherwise then by believing; But as many as received him, to them he gave
power to be the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. And this
faith implies only acceptance, though it be an act of the soul that yields
obedience. It is further said, Our full justification, and our everlasting
salvation have the same conditions on our part: But sincere Obedience is
without all doubt a condition of our salvation; Therefore also of our
justification. Here is either a manifest tautology, or an error. For either
full justification, and salvation are both one, and so here is a tautology; or
else, if they differ, it is an error. The same are not conditions of both
strictly taken, only Faith gives title to Christ for Justification; Works
qualify as a condition in order to salvation. And whereas it is further said,
It would be as derogatory to Christ's righteousness if we be saved by works, as
if we be justified by them. Either of both is doubtless derogatory to it, and
therefore still disclaimed in Scriptures, and always expressly denied, except
in that one Text of James, Jam. 2. which speaks to Justification, and must
admit of another interpretation then our Author would put upon it, otherwise
he can neither be reconciled to himself, nor to the whole current of the
Gospel. Works may be causa sine qua non of salvation, or a qualification of
those that are saved, as, Heb. 5.9. He became the Author of eternal salvation
to all them that obey him. But this is not to be saved by works, which the
Apostle denies, Ephesians. 2.9. Not of works, lest any man should boast. And works of
this efficiency, wrought through grace, will raise a man to boastings, as
appears in the Pharisees [God, I thank thee.] But seeing there are several new
questions started, Whether Faith be an instrument in Justification? Whether
works do not justify? Whether the new Covenant have any condition? Whether
Faith be not the alone condition? And how Repentance can be a condition of the
Covenant, and not of Justification? And Mr. Ball is almost on every hand
appealed to, I suppose it will not be ungrateful to the Reader, if in this
place I commend to him the words of that Reverend Author, (though it be in a
larger way, then quotations are ordinarily brought) in which we have not barely
his authority, (which I do not offer to put in the balance with any) but the
Points in question with singular strength, debated and spoken to; Treating of
the Covenant of Grace, page 18. he says, Repentance is called for in this
Covenant, as it sets forth the subject capable of salvation by faith, Luke
13.5. Acts 11.18. 2 Cor. 7.10. Ezekiel. 18.27.
but is it self only an acknowledgment of sin no healing of our wound, or
cause of our acquittance. The feeling of pain and sickness, causes a man to
desire and seek remedy, but it is no remedy it self. Hunger and thirst make a
man desire and seek for food, but a man is not fed by being hungry. By
repentance we know our selves, we feel our sickness, we hunger and thirst
after grace, but the hand which we stretch forth to receive it, is faith alone,
without which repentance is nothing but darkness and despair. Repentance is
the condition of faith, and the qualification of a person capable of salvation,
on our part required. It is a penitent and petitioning Faith, whereby we
receive the Promises of mercy, but we are not justified partly by prayer,
partly by Repentance, and partly by Faith, but that faith which stirs up
godly sorrow for sin, and enforces us to pray for pardon and salvation. Faith
is a necessary and lively instrument of Justification, which is amongst the
number of true causes, not being a cause without which the thing is not done;
but a cause whereby it is done. The cause without which a thing is not done, is
only present in the action, and does nothing therein: but as the eye is an
active instrument for seeing, and the ear for hearing; so is faith also for
justifying. If it be demanded, whose instrument it is? It is the instrument of
the soul, wrought therein by the Holy Ghost, and is the free gift of God. In
the Covenant of works, works were required as the cause of life and happiness:
but in the Covenant of grace, though repentance be necessary, and must
accompany faith, yet not repentance but faith only is the cause of life. The
cause not efficient, as works should have been, if man had stood in the former
Covenant, but isntrumental only: for it is impossible that Christ, the death
and blood of Christ, and our faith, should be together the efficient or
procuring causes of Justification or salvation. Romans 3.21, 22, 28, 30. Gal.
2.16, 17. Romans 4.2, 3.
When the Apostle writes, that man is not justified by works, or through
works, by the Law, or through the Law (opposing Faith and Works in the matter
of Justification, but not in respect of their presence; Faith, I say, and
works, not faith and merits which could never be) without doubt he excludes the
efficiency and force of the Law and works in justifying: But the particles [By]
and [Of] do not in the same sense, take Justification from the Law and Works,
in which they give it to faith. For faith only does behold and receive the
promises of life and mercy; but the Law, and Works, respect the Commandments,
not the Promises of mere grace. When therefore Justification and life is said
to be by Faith, it is manifestly signified, that faith receiving the promise,
Deuteronomy. 7.12. and 10.12. Jer. 7.23. Lev. 19.17, 18. Luke 10.27. Mark 12.30.
does receive righteousness and life freely promised. Obedience to all Gods
Commandments is covenanted, not as the cause of life, but as the qualification
and effect of faith, and as the way to life. Faith that imbraceth life is
obediential, and fruitful in all good works: but in one sort faith is the cause
of obedience and good works, and in another of Justification and life eternal.
These it seeks in the promises of the Covenant: those it works and
produces, as the cause does the effect. Faith was the efficient cause of that
precious oblation in Abel, Heb. 11.4, 7, etc.
of reverence and preparing the Ark in Noah, of obedience in Abraham; but it
was the instrument only of their Justification. For it does not justify as it
produces good works, but as it receives Christ; though it cannot receive
Christ, unless it bring forth good works. A disposition to good works is
necessary to Justification, being the qualification of an active and lively
faith. Good works of all sorts are necessary to our continuance in the state of
Justification, and so to our final absolution, if God give opportunity: but
they are not the cause of, but only a precedent qualification or condition to
final forgiveness and eternal bliss. If then when we speak of the conditions
of the Covenant of grace, by condition we understand whatsoever is required on
our part, as precedent, concomitant, or subsequent to Justification,
repentance, faith and obedience are all conditions: but if by condition we
understand what is required on our part, as the cause of the good promised,
though only instrumental, faith or belief in the promises of free mercy is the
only condition. Faith and works are opposed in the matter of Justification and
salvation in the Covenant; not that they cannot stand together in the same
subject, for they be inseparably united, but because they cannot concur or meet
together in one and the same Court to the Justification or absolution of man.
For in the Court of Justice according to the first Covenant, either being just,
he is acquitted; or unjust, he is condemned: But in the Court of mercy, if thou
receive the promise of pardon, which is done by a lively faith, thou art
acquitted and set free, and accepted as just and righteous: but if thou believe
not, thou art sent over to the Court of Justice. Thus far Mr. Ball. In which
words of his the blood of Christ, faith in his blood, repentance and works have
all of them their due place assigned them. The blood of Christ as the alone
efficient procuring cause, Faith as the instrument giving interest, and making
application: Repentance as a necessary qualification of the justified person in
order to glory. In this (which is the good old Protestant doctrine) God loses
nothing of his grace, but all is free in the work. Christ loses nothing of his
merit, it stands alone as the procuring cause. Faith receives all from Christ,
but takes nothing off from the free grace of God, or Christ's merits. God loses
nothing of his Sovereignty, and man is not at all dispensed with in his duty.
God is advanced in his goodness and Sovereignty: man is kept humble, thankful,
and in subjection, no place being left for his pride, or gap open for
licentiousness.

A Digression concerning the Instrumentality of Faith in Justification.
HEre I cannot pass by that which Mr. Baxter has animadverted on some
passages of mine, in the Treatise of the Covenant, concerning the
Instrumentality of Faith. After I had spoke to our Justification by Faith, in
opposition to Justification by works, in several Propositions, (of which he is
not pleased to take any notice) I infer, page 80. [These things considered I am
truly sorry, that Faith should be denied to have the office or place of an
instrument, in our Justification: nay, scarce allowed to be called an
instrument of our receiving Christ, that justifies us. Mr. Baxter not
acquainting his Reader at all, with the premises, immediately falls upon this
inference: making himself somewhat merry, with my professing my self to be
truly sorry for this thing; telling me I was as sorry, that men called, and so
called, faith the instrument of justification, as you are that I deny it,
acquainting his Reader with his Reasons, which he would have to be compared
with mine, which he passes over in silence. 1. No Scripture does (says he)
either in the letter, or sense, call faith an instrument of Justification. This
the Reader must take on his word, and it should further be considered, whether
he do not in the same page contradict himself, where he says, It is only the
unfitness, or impropriety of the phrase that he mentions, and not the sense.
2. Says he, I knew I had much Scripture, and reason against it; but I find no
reason from him, but that which some know that I have urged Terminis
Terminantibus, before his Aphorisms ever came to light; and had I not been
able to have given my self satisfaction, I had been in that opinion (if not
before him, yet) before I had any light from him, to lead me to it. That horned
Argument of his, that if faith justify as instrument, it is either as an
instrument in the hand of God, or in the hand of man, with his reasons against
both, I have made use of argumentandi causa, before any work of his saw the
light. 3. The instrumentality of faith makes not man the efficient cause of his
own Justification.
I thought it (says he) of dangerous consequence to say, that man is the
efficient cause of justifying, and pardoning himself, and so does forgive his
own sins. And I think every honest man should be of that mind, and I shall wait
the time when proof shall be made, that Justification by faith, in opposition
to works, makes man (...), The efficient, and that Justification by works gives
it to God only. If this be once made good, I shall be more sorry than ever for
holding such self-exalting and man-advancing doctrine as Justification by
faith, and that ever I opposed that self-denying, man-depressing doctrine of
Justification by works, and shall hence forth conclude, Where is boasting then?
It is excluded: by what Law? of faith? Nay, but by the Law of works. There is
added, Yet all this had never caused me to open my mouth against it, but for
the next, viz. I found that many learned Divines did not only assert this
instrumentality, but laid so great a stresse upon it, as if the main difference
betwixt us and the Papists lay here. For in the doctrine of Justification it
is, say they, that they fundamentally err, and we principally differ, and that
in these four Points. Four great errors laid to the charge of Reformers.
1. About the formal cause of our righteousness, which, say these Divines, is
the formal righteousness of Jesus Christ, as suffering and perfectly obeying
for us; or, as others add, in the habitual righteousness of his humane
nature; and others, the natural righteousness of the Divine nature. 2. About
the way and manner of our participation therein, which as to Gods act, they say
is imputation, (which is true) and that in this sense that legaliter we are
esteemed to have fulfilled the Law in Christ. 3. About the nature of that faith
which justifies; which, most of our foreign Reformers say, is an assurance, or
full persuasion of the pardon of my sin by Christ's blood. 4. About the formal
reason of faiths interest in Justification, which, say they, is as the
instrument thereof. Adding his own censure, I doubt not but all these four are
great errors. Of how dangerous consequence soever it is, that man should be
made the efficient of justifying, and pardoning himself, yet it had passed
without control, if worse than this had not been vented, by the learned of the
reformed Religion; It is yet well, that when the ignorance of all his professed
Antagonists is of that eminence, that yet so many learned are on their party.
Those learned errors should be taken into further consideration, and some that
are learned, have entered the lists with Mr. Baxter in them. The second of these
great errors he tells us is true, and how a great error can be true, I cannot
tell, unless his meaning be, that it is truly an error, which is as high an
equivocal speech as any that is fastened upon the Scriptures. And when this
second is true; I cannot see, (and I think few of his Readers will see) how the
first to which it relates can be false. If it be true, that by Gods imputation
of this righteousness of Christ, we are legaliter esteemed to have fulfilled
the Law in Christ, then that is true also, that they say, that Christ is our
righteousness, or that the righteousness of Christ of mere grace is made
ours. And how much good will is here shown to the reforming part is too
manifest, in making one Party amongst them to hold, The natural righteousness
of Christ's Divine nature is not our Justification.
that the natural righteousness of the Divine nature is our Justification, as
Bellarmine did before him, and is answered by Davenant, de just. habit. p. 313.
That in this all the Churches of the Protestants have exploded Hosiander; It
being his singular opinion; and another says, This opinion was almost like
Jonas his gourd that did presently wither. As for the third, the charge is upon
our foreign Reformers only; and not upon all that have idly busied their
learned heads in this bad cause; They only say, that says is a full
persuasion of the pardon of my sins by Christ's blood. I shall request from him
therefore a Latin Treatise; for their better information in this thing, and
not to trouble Controversies in English, with that, in which his English
Antagonists stand right, himself being witness. Neither is it all foreign
Divine that go that way; Gomarus putting it to the question says, That there
be some of those that have opposed Papists on either part, All foreign
Reformers make no faith a full persuasion.
and himself determines with them that side in this with our English Reformers,
Tom. 2. page 371. So that in these three our English Reformers at least stand
fully acquitted. That which follows, I doubt not will be the trouble of many
of his Readers. That which troubled me (says he) was this, to think how many
thousand might be confirmed in Popery by this course, and what a blow it gave
to the reformed Religion. For who can imagine but that young Popish students
will be confirmed in the rest of their religion, when they find that we err in
these, and will judge by these of the rest of our doctrine; especially when
they find us making this the main part of the Protestant cause, what wonder if
they judge our cause naught? It is a greater wonder, that old Popish students
have not discovered this to their novices, but have left this work to Mr.
Baxter, to give them light in this in which Reformers so err, and unreformed
Papists stand right, so that it must be his work, not Bellarmines, Stapletons,
Suarez or any others to unreform.

But lest this should be a stumbling block to offense, that so eminent a man
(that is like, if himself may be heard, to draw away so many) speaks out such
Language; let us oppose against him on the other hand, Albertus Pighius, whom
those of his party (as Peter Martyr says, loc. com. page 541. made their
Achilles, and thought, that he alone by his subtle wit, had pierced into the
inward Mysteries of truth. So that I hope I am not too low in my comparison.
Pighius a learned Papist joins with Protestants in the doctrine of
Justification, and many others.
This great wit of the Popish party reading Mr. Calvin, to confute him in the
point of justification, was confuted by him, and wrote with us against his own
party, as is not only affirmed by men of our party, (as Davenant de just.
habit. cap. 29. page 382. Albertus Pighius, (says he) in his controversies
largely explains and confirms our opinion. 1. He excludes inherent
righteousness from any efficacy in justification. 2. He manifestly approves
the imputation of Christ's righteousness. Lastly, He gives his reason, why the
righteousness of Christ is imputed to us for justification. And then adds,
Many more things are found in the same author, who, though in other
controversies, he maintains a fierce war with Protestants, yet being overcome
with the clear light of truth in this of Justification, he fell off from the
Papists and came over to our party. And Capel in his preface to Mr. Pembles
tract of justification, Pighius (says he) though of a peevish spirit enough,
yet reading Calvin, to confute Calvin, in the very doctrine of justification,
was confuted himself, and wrote with us) but also acknowledged by our
adversaries. Albertus Pighius is checked by Bellarmine (says Dr. Prideaux lect.
5. Page 165.) for that in reading our authors, himself at last became a
Lutheran, in this article. And that Pighius may not stand alone on our parts
among Romanists; Davenant in the place quoted produces many others. 1. The
whole covent of Canons at Cullen in their book which they entitled
Antididagma, Who acknowledge the imputed righteousness of Christ to be the
chief cause of our justification, Titu. de justific. 2. The Romish party in the
Conference of Ratisbone, Who (says he) gave their vote the same way, page 47.
3. Isidore Clacius, orat. 40. in Luc. 4. Naclantus Episcopus Clodiensis, cap.
1. ad Ephesians. page 59, 72. The two first of these authorities are quoted by Dr.
Prideaux likewise, Adding, that Cassander, Stapulensis, Peraldus, Ferus, Arius
Montanus, did tread in the same path: and therefore, miserably suffer by the
Index Expurgatorius, Cardinal Contarenus is likewise frequently quoted by
Amesius as on our party. And Dr. Prideaux, says, that almost four years
before the Council of Trent he had so asserted the orthodox doctrine of
Justification, that (being, as is thought, taken away by poison) he did not
long survive. And for the whole space between Gregory and the reformation, our
author pronounces it, that authors generally for the most part were more sound
in their commentaries, then in their disputations, and in their meditations,
soliloquies, and conflict of temptations; then in their polemicks. Bringing in
Chemnitius instancing in Bonaventure and others. So that in case they have one
of eminence amongst us, we have one of theirs as eminent: and in case he should
prove too light, we have many more into the bargain to make up weight.

There follows, Now to the thing it self: Your Arguments for faiths
instrumentality to Justification I will consider, when I can find them. And his
Reader will consider no more of his jeeres, when he can look into his books,
and his eyes miffe of them. Some of those of whom he has made boast, as his
converts in this controversy, have professed themselves satisfied with that
which I have written, though Mr. Baxter cannot find it. I am told that I begin
and say more for faiths Instrumentality in receiving Christ, than for the
instrumentality of it in Justification. And the truth is, I know not how to
distinguish them. If it be an instrument to receive Christ, that does justify;
it is with me an instrument in Justification. If mine eye be an instrument by
which I receive in light, for sight; then mine eye is the organ, or instrument
of sight. If I prove the one, I think I cannot be denied the other. The
Instrumentality of faith for receiving Christ, is thus reasoned against. If
Faith be the instrument of receiving Christ then it is either the act, or the
habit of Faith, that is the Instrument. I am well aware that if I shall affirm
either of these, that then either some text of Scripture will be called for
specifying such habit or act of faith in justification, or a needless stir
will be made about these Logical notions. The safest way then is to say with
Scripture, that faith is the grace that receives Christ, and that interests us
in propitiation in his blood, and the grace by which upon that account we are
justified, without limitation of it to either the act or habit. Neither can any
answer, (as I suppose) be thus given, but such as will coincidere; If I say the
habit justifies, it is as it puts forth it self into act; Whether the act of
faith, or the habit does justify?
If I say the act justifies, it must be as it comes from the habit, and so both
habit and act justify. Neither does a man's justification cease when the habit
of Faith in sleep cease acting, seeing justification denotes a state which is
remaining, and abiding. It is further said, Receiving strictly taken is ever
passive. A reason then may be seen, why Divines have called faith a passive
instrument in justification; and Mr. Baxter may see a fair answer to the high,
and indeed scornful censure, that he gives to the most learned, (as himself
styles them) in his preface to this apology. The most learned (says he) in the
upshot fly to this that credere, is not agere, but pati, and is but Actio
Grammatica, or the name of action, but Physically or Hyperphysically a
suffering: Is not here a curious doctrine of faith, and Justification? If
Aristotle had been a Christian, he could not have comprehended it. But I
confess I see no reason to make receiving, Neither receiving not believing are
in the Authors thoughts merely passive.
and consequently believing, to be at least merely passive. There is always an
act of the will, in rational agents in receiving, properly so called, and often
of the hand. The receivers of custom are agents for the States, and in their
receipt are active. Receiving in a civil, ethical, less proper sense (as is
further said) is but the act of accepting what is offered. But is not this
accepting properly receiving? or is not receiving properly so called, at least
necessarily joined with it, in such civil ethical reception? When I give a
beggar an alms, does not he in as strict a sense receive it, as I do give it?
and this is either his act of acceptance, or that which accompanies it. If I
put water into a vessel, the vessel rather contains it, then receives it. If I
give a child a lash, he rather suffers then receives ^t. So that receiving
strictly taken, is as well active as passive, and rather active then passive.
There is added, When it is only a relation, or a jus ad rem that is offered,
consent or acceptance, is an act so necessary ordinarily to the possession, or
proper passive reception, that it is therefore called receiving it self; and it
is therefore (as I think) called so, because it is so, and that it has its
concurrence, and way of efficacy for possession, I think few except Mr. Baxter
will deny. It follows, Yet still I say, if any will please to call it an
instrument, in this sense, I will not quarrel with him for the impropriety of a
phrase, especially if some men had the same ingenuity that others have, that
say it is but Instrumentum Metaphoricum. There is not I hope so much ingenuity
desired, as to smother or blind their reason. If it be a metaphorical
instrument, there must be some real analogy between it and an instrument
properly so called, in doing that which is done by an instrument, and when an
instrument is (as is affirmed) an efficient; An instrument without any
efficiency at all, is a strange kind of Metaphor; It had been better to have
held to the old dialect of Equivocal. There follows. But to say (says he)
that the act of Faith is the instrument of Ethical, active reception, (which is
that which I argued against) is to say receiving Christ is the instrument of it
self. It will sure rather follow that Faith is the instrument of the soul in
receiving Christ.

We say faith receives, as we say the hand takes, Faith is the instrument of
the soul; and not of it self in receiving Christ. That faith is the eye and
hand of the soul, are Scripture Metaphors.
or the sword kills; but we mean the man receives by the hand, and the hand
kills by the sword, and so we mean the soul receives Christ by faith. I
explained my self in giving instance in men's usual language concerning faith,
which is rejected with no little disdain, affirming that these speeches. Faith
is the eye of the soul, the hand of the soul, are Metaphors of mere humane
use; forgetting (it seems) that ever the Scripture said, that Moses by faith
endured, as seeing him that is invisible; or that the promise of the Spirit is
received by faith. If I had added that faith is the foot of the soul, they had
all been Metaphors of Divine use: I urge Scripture texts. We receive remission
of sins by faith, and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified, is
received by faith, Act. 26.18. To which is replied. If [by] signify an
instrumental cause, it is either always, or sometimes. You would not sure have
your Reader believe that it is always: if but sometimes, why do you take it
for granted that so it signifies here? This I might well retort, If it signify
and an instumental cause sometimes, why is it not made appear, that it does not
so signify here? But I confess that [by] has not always such signification.
Bartimeus sat by the high-way-side begging, in which place [by] is no
instrument, but when the particle [by] has reference to that which has
immediate reference to a principal cause; and sometimes is put to the principal
cause it self: I suppose nothing else but an instrument can be intended: when
Christ is said to be set forth a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans
3.25. and that we are justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. I know not how the
blood of Christ can be a principal cause and faith not denote an instrument. I
said, why else is this righteousness sometimes called the righteousness of
faith, sometimes the righteousness of God by faith, but that it is a
righteousness which faith receives? To this is replied, It is properer to say
Credens recipit credendo, the believer by believing receives it, then to say,
faith, especially the act, receives it. Here is an egregious subtilety; It is
more proper to say, I receieve a gift by my hand, then to say, my hand receives
it, of the same stamp with another; where it is said that Scripture says, That
we are justified by faith, yet denied, that Scripture says, that faith
justifies. But be it so, that is properer; does not Scripture speak as
improperly? Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard. It had been as much
properer to have said, No man has seen with his eye, or heard with his ear. I
quote Ephesians. 3.17. Christ dwells in us by faith; and, Gal. 3.14. We receive the
promise of the Spirit through faith. There I say [Scripture speaks of faith as
the souls instrument, to receive Christ Jesus, and to receive the Spirit from
Christ Jesus:] and I am answered. You odly change the question: we are speaking
of faiths instrumentality in receiving a right to Christ, or Christ in
relation, and you go about to prove the reception of his Spirit, or graces
really, or himself objectively, and so we have a large discourse of Christ's
dwelling in us. But is it not to the purpose, to show that the phrase [by
faith] notes instrumentality which these texts make good; and does not Christ
dwell in us to more purposes then one? Is it not to all purposes, that by faith
we receive him? And then our receiving right to him is not here excluded. I
said [the instrumentality of it in the work of justification is denied, because
the nature of an instrument as considered in Physical operations, does not
exactly belong to it; which if it must be always rigidly followed, will often
put us to a stand in the assignation of causes of any kind in moral actions.]
To this is replied, I said 1. The action of the principal cause, and of the
instrument is but one action, is not this true of moral operation as well as
Physical? To this I answer, I think here some demurre might be put, and scarce
believe that it will be fully made good; that the action of the principal
agent, and the instruments which are (...) are always exactly one, though the
act of the instrument may be in such cases Interpretatively called the act of
the principal agent; as David is said to have slain Vriah with the sword of the
Ammonites. Saul I am sure was of an other mind, when intending the death of
David, he said, Let not my hand be upon him, but the hand of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 18.17. But in case it be granted, what has he gained? He adds, 2. I say,
the instrument must have influx to the producing of the effect of the principal
cause by a proper causality, that is in suo gene^e. Demanding, Is not this true
of moral operations as well as Physical? Then yielding that it is true, Moral
causes may be said to have a less proper causation then Physical, etc. And
this less proper causation; I doubt not, but may be found in faith, and as
proper a causation as an instrument of this nature will bear. I say, [The
material and formal causes in justification are scarce agreed upon, and no
marvel then, in case men mind to contend about it, that some question is raised
about the instrument,] etc. To this there is much spoke; telling me what he
would have me to have concluded, comparing me to plunderers in time of fight;
which would but weary the Reader to see repeated: whereas after other words I
add, [I do not doubt but it will easily appear, that those Divines that with a
concurrent judgment, (without almost a dissenting voice, have made faith an
instrument in this work) speaking most aptly, and most agreeably to the nature
of an instrument] He is pleased to reply, But, Sir, what is the cause of this
sudden change? Through their great condescension, I have received
animadversions from many of the most learned judicious Divines that I know in
England. And of all these there is but one man that does own the doctrine of
faiths instrumentality; but they disclaim it all, some with distaste, others
with a modest excuse of them that use it, and the gentle Interpretation of a
metaphorical instrument, and that remote; for so they would have me Interpret
our Divines. I told you this when I saw you, and you asked me whether Mr. C.
were against it? To which I answer, not so much as diverse others, that write
to me, but judge you by his own words, which are these, [Object. But though
faith be not the instrument of our justification, may it not be called the
instrument of receiving Christ? Answ. I think they mean so and no more who call
faith the instrument of our justification, etc. I shall not be unwilling to
yield to you, that to speak exactly, faith may better be called a condition of
our justification] so far Mr. C. To this I answer, 1. Why have we not the
authority of Divines that are open to all men's eyes, rather then of those that
lie dormant in his hands? and there are sure more in the press, then in his
private study in Manuscripts. No one is produced, and I scarce think can be
produced. 2. I would he would publish to the world the labors of these
eminently learned persons; that we, as well as he, might see their weak
opposition of plain Scripture, which somewhere is his free censure. 3. There
are those (if intelligence do not deceive me) that he has said, he has
brought to his judgment in this thing, that yet have professed themselves
satisfied with that which I have said, and are they of both our minds? 4. For
Mr. C. upon the coming forth of this Apology he wrote to me, among other things
in these words. Mr. C. vindicated.
Mr. Baxter, page 19. cites some words of mine about faiths instrumentality,
but it had been fair to have signified what I say further about it, especially
in my second writing, when I perceived what advantage he did take of that which
I had said before; only to avoid contending about words, which I do not like:
so far Mr. C. I said in my Treatise, [the work about which faith is employed,
is not an absolute, but a relative work; a work of God toward man, not without
the actual concurrence of man: such in which neither God, nor man are sole
efficients; nor any act of God, or man, can be sole instruments, but there must
be a mutual concurrence of both.] To this is replied, A dangerous doctrine in
my judgment, to be so nakedly affirmed; no doubt but justification is a
relative change, and it is past controversy, that it is not without the actual
concurrence of man, for he must perform the condition on which God will
justify him: But that God is not the sole efficient, nor any act of God the
sole instrument, I durst not have affirmed without proof; Neither durst I have
charged any man's speech with danger of that nature without disproof, unless I
should think it enough to make it so, because in my judgment it appears so;
and that which is here granted as without controversy, is with me a proof
sufficient. If it be not done without the actual concurrence of man, and is
done by such concurrence of which we have as many proofs, as there is mention
of justification by faith, there must be some kind of efficiency in this
concurrence; There is somewhat of efficiency in man's concurrence by faith in
Justif^cation.
that man should be justified by faith, and faith have no hand at all in it, I
cannot reach. I bring for proof the absurdity that will follow upon denial in
these words; [This must needs be granted, unless we will bring in Dr. Crispes
passive recipiency of Christ; Christ's abode in man, without man, in spite of
man, and suppose him to be justified in unbelief.] To this is replied. This is
very naked asserting; why did you not show some reason of this ill
consequence?] It Is past any reach to see the least: If I were too short, it is
now done to my hands, where a mutual concurrence of God and man in the work is
confessed; tell me how it can be denied, unless Christ come into man without
man, and in spite of him; for if man act in it, he must needs be an agent. It
follows, Why do you still confound Christ's real abode in us by his Spirit with
the relation we have upon justification? when even now you affirmed it was a
relative work (as you call it) I pray by the next show us more clearly, how
these absurdities follow that doctrine. And does not a relative work of this
nature necessarily presuppose this abode by the Spirit? and is not a relative
change a necessary consequent of it? If strangers to Christ be justified by
Christ, The relative change in Justification necessarily presupposes a real.
I am to learn in the doctrine of justification, that desire of his I think is
already satisfied. I further say, faith is disabled from this office in
justification, by this argument: If faith be an instrument [It is the
instrument of God or man, etc. to which in my Treatise I answered, it is the
instrument of man; though man do not justify himself, yet he concurres as a
ready willing agent with God in it.] To which is replied, If this be not a
palpable contradiction, saying, and unsaying, my Logic is less then I thought
it had been. If it be [mans instrument] of justification, and yet [man do not
justify himself] then either man is not man, or an Instrument is not an
instrument, or justifying is not justifying. It seems he would have us by the
way know that his thoughts of his own Logic are not low; The Author acquit
from the charge of a palpable contradiction.
but if other men's Logic cannot solve this contradiction; yet me thinks his
might, who says receiving strictly taken is ever passive, and a man may be
passive in justification, and not justify himself. But perhaps with me it is
of more difficulty that have affirmed, That reception has still somewhat at
least of action in it; but this reception here in question, has no more of
action then serves to possess it self of a free gift; which ever adds honor
to the giver, not to the receiver: I distinguish therefore of instruments of
mere reception, and instruments of further operation; Instruments of mere
reception and further operation distinguished.
that which is objected holds of instruments wholly operative, not of those
that are merely receptive. A man receives a gift with his hand, as the lame man
was ready to do, when he expected something from Peter and John, Act. 3.5. and
he earnes his living with his hand, as Paul did, when in some exigents his
hands ministered to his necessities, Act. 20.34. In the former man's hand
concurres to his enriching, but he enriches not himself, as in the later. The
denomination is from the fountain, whence all flows, not from the hand that
accepts, or the cistern that does receive. There is added. In my judgment this
doctrine should not be made part of our Religion, nor much stresse laid on it,
if it were true, because it is so obscure. It seems then that not I, but our
Religion, is the author of this so high a contradiction; so that I cannot
defend Religion, but I am put upon it to assert such contradictions; and who
lays greatest stresse upon that which is not obscure and dark, I leave to the
Reader of Mr. Baxters Aphorisms and Apology to determine. It follows, That
man concurres as a ready agent, who doubts? but does that prove him, or his
faith the efficient cause of his own pardon and justification? Do I, or does
our Religion make man or faith the efficient cause of his own pardon, and
justification? Quote some words of mine or some Article of faith in any of the
Protestant Confessions that affirms it: were some others in my stead they
would highly rhetoricate, and tell the world what would be said when they are
dead. But this is my comfort, when I am dead, Religion will stand up for its
own defense: that the concurrence of a ready agent has somewhat of efficiency
in it, I think none can deny; and that such concurrence that I have mentioned
can rise to be the efficient I think, Faith is the instrument both of God and
man in the work of justification.
very few will affirm. And to bring my self into that which he before hand
charges to be so absurd, I said, [And because it is the instrument of man in a
work of this nature, it is also the instrument of God. As some have observed a
communication of titles between Christ and his Church (the Church being called
by his name): so there is a communication of actions in these relative works.
Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. We believe, and not Christ:
and yet [faith] there is Christ's instrument, whereby he takes up his abode. God
purifies the hearts of the Gentiles by faith, Act. 15.17. They believed and not
God: yet faith is Gods instrument in the work of their purification. So on the
other side the Spirit is Gods work: yet we by the Spirit do mortify the deeds
of the flesh, Romans 8.13.] Here Mr. Baxter first takes in hand the thing that I
assert, and when he has done falls upon the proof which is first to quarrel
with the conclusion, and then to take the premises into consideration, 1. It is
said, If this be indeed true, God and man are not coordinate causes in
Justification.
that it is man's instrument of justification, and Gods both, then both God and
man are causae principales partiales by coordination, making up one principal
cause; This he thinks I will not affirm, and this indeed I do deny upon the
reasons before laid down, it is man's instrument for concurrence in it, but not
of principal efficiency to produce it: In case I had affirmed, he gives in his
reason of denial of it in a Similitude of an absolute donor, in which I grant
the conclusion, and therefore shall not trouble the Reader with it. As to the
proof that I bring, he first excepts against that which I say, others have
observed, and say: This communication of titles, 1. is very rare. 2. uncertain
whether ever, and goes about to take off that text, 1. Cor. 12.12. But this
being Heterogeneous to the work in hand, I shall let his exceptions alone, only
pointing him out one another text; with which if he please, he may take like
pains, Jer. 23.6. Jer. 33.16. Compared. After much ado to find out my meaning
he resolves: But it is like you intended to have said, that there is a common
or mutual attribution of each others actions, or one is entitled to the
actions of the other: and so mean only a communication of the name quoad modum
producendi, and not of the actions themselves. And who but he, that would seek
a knot in a Bul-rush could have thought of any other? but as the titles of one,
are observed by some to be attributed to another; so the actions proper to one,
are attributed to the other? Then a Dilemma is brought against me, either this
is in an improper figurative way of speech, or it is proper and grounded in the
nature of the thing, and either of both is excepted against; I say the action
of one is said interpretative to be the action of the other, because he makes
use of it to do his own work, or bring about his own purpose. To the instance
that I gave, [that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith] he says there is not
a word to prove that there is a relative indwelling. But Mr. Br. very well
knows that I did not oppose relative in this place to real, as intending to
hold forth any effect wrought by Christ's indwelling: but the opposition is so
absolute, as I expressed my self. I do not say that justification is directly
spoke to in that place, yet there is a proof I think sufficient that Christ
makes use of our act to effect his own work, which is as much as I intended
elsewhere. Mr. Br. is so free as to yield that faith is an instrument to
receive Christ, How Christ is said to dwell in us by faith.
but here he stickles hard to deny it, but let us take notice of his
concessions: Christ (says he) is said to dwell in us by faith. 1. Formaliter,
Faith being the principal part of that grace which dwells in us. And so we
might say he dwells by Love, Hope, Meekness, Patience, which I think no
Scripture or Orthodox Writer says. 2. Conditionaliter; Faith being a condition
of our right to the Spirit abode. But it is so a condition as it is withal an
isntrumental condition. It is not barely said, if you believe, I will give you
my Spirit; which might imply barely a condition, as it is said, turn at my
reproof, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you: but it is said, we receive the
promise of the Spirit by faith. 3. Efficienter. As the act of faith does
directly cause the increase, and so the abode of the habit. And is it may we
think a principal, or is it an instrumental efficient? If an instrumental, I
have what I desire, and I am sure he will not say it is a principal efficient.
Mr. Baxter is, I am sure, as zealous as I can be to assert a conditionate
Covenant: and if an adversary be as streight-laced to him, and me, in that, as
he is to me in this; he will hardly prove a condition, either in the Covenant
of works or grace. I will as soon find the word instrument in Scripture applied
to justification, as he shall find the word condition applied to either
Covenant. And he can name I think no word implying a condition that is always
put for a condition: and the context wheresoever we are said to be justified by
faith, or that Christ is a propitiation through faith, is in all indifferent
Readers eyes as clear for an instrument in justification: as those which he,
and I, can bring (which yet are clear enough) for a conditionate Covenant. And
that doctrine has far more adversaries then this, though there is little
cause that any man should be an adversary in either.

He says, the same answer serves to Act. 15.9. and then the same reply may
serve. There follows, To what you say from Romans 8.13. I reply,

1. An adjutor, or concause is ill called an instrument, must the Spirit needs
be our instrument, because it is by the Spirit? as if by, signified only an
instrument. Mr. Baxters head was doubtless on somewhat else, either when he
read these passage of mine, or when he framed his answer. I never had it in my
thoughts that justification is expressly spoken to in any of these texts, nor
was it my business to find out any instrument in them, though I doubt not but
that faith is spoken to instrument in two of them, and as a condition,
non-instrumental in none of them; neither did I dream of making the Spirit an
instrument. All that I intended was to prove, The acts of God are entitled to
man, and the acts of man to God in Scripture.
that the acts of man were entitled to God, and so the acts of God to man, not
considering (as the business in hand let not to it) about what these acts are
exercised: if they prove that, It is to me sufficient, whether it be in
Justification, Sanctification, Mortification, or any other work. There is
added. 2. All this is nothing to the business of justification; nothing
directly, immediately, but much by way of Analogy. It is enough to prove, That,
to be the instrument of man, and the instrument of God are not (...). And if he
desire a proof more punctually applied to justification, let him consult, Rom
3.30. It is one God that shall justify the circumcision by faith, and the
uncircumcision through faith; and, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God
would justify the Heathen through faith. Faith for justification is usually
ascribed to man, being properly his act, and therefore that text of the
Prophet, Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his faith, is by the Apostle more
then once applied to justification: And in the text now quoted, this act of
faith is ascribed to God, for that work. I explained my self [man neither
justifies, nor sanctifies himself, yet by faith he is raised to close with God
in both] etc. To this is answered, If man justify not himself, and yet faith
be his instrument of justifying, then farewell old Logic. Mr. Baxter is the
first great Logitian, that I ever heard talk so much of his Logic in the last
Section but one we had it, and now we have it in the same thing again; there I
showed that old Logic may stand, and yet his consequence not yielded. 2. It is
said, If man sanctify not himself under God, as to the progress, and acts of
sanctification, then farewell old Theology. And if man may be said to sanctify
himself further then has been said, or so as to be a principal efficient
(which will follow from Mr. Baxters reasonings) then welcome the newest
Divinity. It will not be denied, that a sanctified man differs from one that is
unsanctified, and then in case it may be allowed to say, I sanctify my self:
he may say; I make my self to differ: which I never heard that any in direct
terms would say against the Apostle, but Grevenchovius, as I find him cited by
Dr. Featly, and yet it seems it is my great error, that I will not say so, I
lift man up in that height in justification, as to pardon his own sin, in
holding that it is of faith, that it may be of grace, not of works lest any
should boast; And I raise him not high enough in sanctification, If I say no
more then that by faith he receives power from God by the Spirit for it: that
text, 1 Pet. 1.22. would far better have served my purpose, if I had first
hit upon it; The Spirit of God and not man, is to have the denomination in
sanctification.
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit.
They that have done any thing in purifying their hearts through the Spirit,
will rather entitle the Spirit of God, then themselves to it, and will judge
that he, rather then they should be denominated a sanctifier. And for other
texts that are hinted, and one mentioned, 2 Cor. 7.1. To argue from the Command
to the power, is that old Theology, that I am ready to bid farewell to. As God
requires it, so he does often undertake it, and declares that it is his work to
do it, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Deuteronomy. 30.6. I think few will say, that they make their
own hearts new. There is added. 3. To close with God in pardoning me,
signifies not, that I pardon my self, or that I or any act of mine is an
efficient cause of pardon. This is for me, therefore I am contented it should
be said over again, and my faith is the instrument wherewith I close with God;
In case it be the instrument wherewith I receive Christ, (as Mr. Baxter has
sometimes yielded.) There follows. 4. When you say that [faith as an
instrument receives righteousness to justification] you speak exactly the
conceptions of most Divines that I have met with, or read that go your way, and
therefore these words deserve a little further consideration, and after some
enquiry into their meaning, There is added, but these things must be more
accurately considered I think. Here it is confessed, that I tread in the beaten
road, and that I do appear in the common cause, and comparing what is here said
with that which in his conclusion he delivers: The Author is confessed to appear
in the common cause in behalf of Protestants.
It appears that the Divines of this corner of the world for 1300. years past
have all taken this way, which is all that go under the name Protestant,
whether Calvinist, or Lutheran, as they are wont to be distinguished: I shall
therefore expect, that some of those that by grace have obtained to be, as of
the first three among David's worthies, will step in with their Auxiliary helps,
in case the cause be prejudiced by my weakness: He asigns me to the party of
those that he calls Reformers, page 16. on what party himself stands, it is
easy then to determine. Having said that these things are to be more
accurately considered, he expresses himself without any one title of Scripture
in eight particulars, I shall as briefly as I can take notice of the sum of
them. Mr Faxters eight heads taken into consideration.


1. It must be known, that the righteousness given to us, is not the
righteousness whereby Christ's person was righteous, (for accidents perish
being removed from the subject) but it is a righteousness merited by Christ's
satisfaction, and obedience for us. Here we have a negation with its reasons,
and an opposite affirmation, without any reason at all. The negation is, That
the righteousness given us is not the righteousness whereby Christ's person
was righteous. The reason is, Accidents perish being removed from the subject,
and therefore the righteousness given us is not the righteousness whereby
Christ's person was righteous; impliying that the reformed party take
righteousness for justification out of Christ (and leave him belike without
any righteousness) and put it into themselves; and so as Christ was before, so
now they are inherently righteous. He well knows that they hold, that it is
still in Christ, and of grace reckoned to be ours; and therefore that of
accidents perishing needed not an opinion which he vehemently opposes in his
Preface to his Confession. If Christ only (says he) were righteous, Christ
only would be reputed, and judged righteous, and Christ only would be happy.
The Judge of the world will not justify the unrighteous, merely because
another is righteous; nor can the holy Ghost take complacency in an unholy
sinner, because another is holy. And yet himself holds, That the Judge of the
world, will not only take an infant born under the defilement of sin into
Covenant as holy; but also justify him (though in his opinion incapable of any
real change by the Spirit) barely upon the account of the parents state in
grace through regeneration. We cannot be righteous through Christ's
righteousness, notwithstanding we know, that in the Gospel of grace, it is
reckoned ours, and by faith have our interest. Yet an infant is righteous by
the parents rigteousnesse: Notwithstanding we read not of any such imputation,
or any such way, of interest by faith or otherwise: I must crave leave to hold
to the former which he leaves, though not with his, but Scripture comment upon
it. God does not justify us, merely because another is righteous; but because
Christ is made of God to us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and is Jehovah our
righteousness Jer. 23.6. And to leave the latter which he holds: I believe
neither regeneration nor justification to be from Parent to child ex Traduce.
In which sense that holds, Nemo nascitur, sed fit Christianus. I choose rather
with Walaeus to subscribe to the opinion of Calvin, lib. 4. instit. cap. 16.
Sect. 20. That Infants are baptized into future Repentance and faith: which he
says is the opinion of most other Authors. I believe Mr. Baxter chiefly took
up this opinion of justification of infants, tanquam Apendices parentum, for
Amiraldus his sake, who had it from Camero, Amiraldus qui nihil Cameronis
imitatur preter naevos idem dicit.
and was his follower (as aged and reverend Molinaeus says) in nothing but his
blemishes. And I would not have so good a friend and eminent ornament to the
Church to make either of them, in these his precedents.

The affirmation is, that it is a righteousness merited by Christ's
satisfaction and obedience. Here is a Proposition delivered with very little
accuratenesse:

1. The righteousness given is here distinguished from his obedience; when
certainly this obedience is that which is given to us. By the obedience of one
many shall be made righteous, Romans 5.29.

2. Christ's satisfaction and obedience are here distinguished; when his
satisfaction was his obedience, Joh. 10.18. Phil. 2.

3. His satisfaction is distinguished from this righteousness, when I think it
is plain, that it self is righteousness; Christ's own as a Redeemer; Ours as
redeemed ones; when Christ had taken upon him our sins, he had not stood
righteous in Gods sight, without a discharge, and this discharge is our
acquittal and deliverance.

Queries put concerning this righteousness.
4. We hear not whence this righteousness thus merited, is; where it resides,
and how made ours. Is it a righteousness by a new Creation? as the light was
once made to shine out of darkness; was it put immediately into Christ, or
given immediately to us? which seems to be Mr. Baxters thoughts to avoid
perishing of accidents. Is it one gift indefinitely at once for all, or to all?
or is it given particularly, numerically, individually? Is it made ours without
us, or by us? If it be made ours, whether is it by our acceptance through
faith, or ability merited for us to work it? and so Christ merited that we
might merit.

2. It must needs be known (says he) that the faith which is the justifying
condition, is terminated on Christ himself, as the object, and not on his
righteousness which he gives us in remission; remission, or rigteousnesse may
be the end of the sinner in receiving Christ; but righteousness or remission
is not the object received by that act which is made the condition of
justification; or at least but a secondary more remote object, etc. In this
whole piece we have an affirmation, a negation, a concession and illustration.
Our Faith being terminated on Christ, it is terminated on righteousness.
For the affirmation, that faith is terminated on Christ, we grant; but that it
is not therefore terminated on the righteousness which he gives in remission,
(for remission I think was intended) we are to learn: And when it is granted,
that remission is the end, (which is ill confounded with righteousness, one
being the cause, the other the effect) it must be granted, that a righteous
Christ is the object, and that Christ is received upon account of his
righteousness; were not this an accurate way of distinguishing, to say, that a
man ready to perish with cold, goes to the fire, and not to heat, for warmth;
The heart ready to perish with thirst; goes to the water, and not to moisture;
If the soul ready to perish in unrighteousness, goes to Christ for
righteousness, his faith cannot be terminated on Christ, but it must be
terminated on righteousness, as the eye cannot be fixed on the sun, but it
must be fixed on light. We are helped with a similitude. As a woman does not
marry a man's riches, but the man; Though it may be her end in marrying the man,
to be enriched by him; nor is her receiving his riches the condition of her
first Legal right to them, but her taking the man for her husband. If Christ
and righteousness were separable, as a man and riches are, this simile might
be to some purpose, so that a man might be married, and poverty continued; but
Christ cannot be received and a state of unrighteousness remain. It is said,
Receiving the persons into relation, from whom we expect the benefit, goes
before the receiving the benefit by them, which is usually the remote end, and
not the object of that first reception, which is the condition. Which may be
true where person and benefit are separable; but I cannot receive a woman in
marriage, and a wife after. As an eternal increated righteousness is essential
to Christ, as God; and the quality of righteousness, connatural as man; so a
righteousness to constitute others righteous is essential to Christ qua
Mediator; without such a righteousness, he is no high Priest for us, and
therefore his righteousness, as Mediator was before very harshly called an
accident. It follows, Our Divines therefore of the Assembly do perfectly
define justifying faith, to be receiving and resting on Christ alone for
salvation, as he is offere d in t Gospel. And is he offered in the Gospel
without a righteousness? being offered in the Gospel as Mediator, and
righteousness essentially necessary in a Mediator, resting on Christ, we rest
on righteousness.

3. In my judgment (says he) it is a mere fancy and delusion to speak of the
receiving a righteousness, that we may be justified constitutive thereby in
such a sense, at if the righteousness were first to be made ours, in order of
nature before our justification, and then justification follow, because we are
righteous, and so these were two things; for to receive righteousness, and to
receive justification is one thing. Gods justifying us, and pardoning our sin,
and his constituting us righteous, and his giving us righteousness is all one
thing, under several notions. If it be granted, that justification is verbum
forense, To receive a righteousness for justification is no fancy or delusion.
borrowed from proceeding in Courts of justice, and holds out our acquittal, or
discharge from sentence, and not making us formally just, then it is no fancy,
or delusion, to say that we receive a righteousness to be justified, but
dangerous (as I think) to deny it; if righteousness and justification be one
thing, then that is a tautology, Deuteronomy. 25.1. ye shall justify the righteous,
and condemn the wicked. Though it is impossible that God should condemn a just,
and justify a wicked person, as a man may; yet righteousness and
justification, as wickedness and condemnation differ both in God and man's
proceedings And righteosnesse is not justification, as wickedness is not
condemnation, sure Davenant was high in this fancy and delusion when he thus
entitled his 28. Chap. de justitia habituali. Imputatam Christi obedientiam,
esse causam formalem justificationis nostrae probatur.

4. Christ's satisfaction or redemption (says he) solvendo pretium and merit
cannot be properly received by us: for they are not in themselves given to us
(but as tropically they may be said to be given to us, because the fruit of
them is given us) It was not to us, but to God, that Christ gave satisfaction,
and the price of our redemption. And yet justifying faith does as necessarily
respect Christ's satisfaction and merit, as it does our justification thereby
procured. It is therefore the acknowledging of this redemption, satisfaction or
merit, and the receiving of Christ as one that has redeemed us by satisfaction
and merit, and not the receiving that satisfaction or redemption our selves,
etc. If Christ gave satisfaction to God, How Christ's satisfaction to God for
us, is received by us.
he yet gave it for us, and God accounts it ours: In him we have redemption
through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. If we have it in him, some way we come by it.
And how we come by it, if we do not receive it, I cannot imagine. As the Son
gives himself for our ransom to the Father; So the Father gives the Son to
us. I marvel what comment will be put upon the words of the institution of the
Lords Supper, Take eat this is my body which is broken for you; as it is broken
for us; so it is given to us and so of the Cup, This is my blood in the New
Testament shed for you, and for many for the remission of sins. Christ and
satisfaction wrought by Christ, Christ and redemption wrought by Christ are
both received, seeing Christ is made unto us redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. and faith
is our way of receipt.

5. If faith shall be said (says he) to be the instrument of justification eo
nomine because it is the receiving of that righteousness whereby we are
justified, then it will follow, that faith must also be called the instrument
of our enjoying Christ eo nomine because it receives him and the instrument of
our adoption eo nomine because it receives adoption, and so the same act of
faith which entitles us to justification, does not entitle us to any other
blessing; nor that act that entitles us to Christ, does entitle us to
justification (unless there be several justifying acts) but every particular
mercy has a particular act as the instrument of receiving it, which is no
Scripture doctrine. Mr. Baxter being given to understand by a friend, that this
is scarce intelligible, he has expressed himself with more cleernesse, in a
postscript in this syllogism. If the apprehension of Christ's righteousness,
and no other act should strictly be the justifying act of faith, and that eo
nomine because it is the object of that apprehension, which is the matter of
our justification, then it would follow, 1. That the apprehension of nothing
else is the justifying act. 2. And that we have right to every other particular
mercy eo nomine because we apprehend that mercy, and so our right to every
particular benefit of Christ were received by a distinct act of faith: But the
consequent is false: Therefore so is the antecedent. The consequent is here
twofold, the first I yield, but deny the second. The apprehension of nothing
else is the justifying act, but that there needs distinct acts of faith to
receive other mercies, does not follow upon this principle, which Mr. Baxter so
far as I understand him in the following words has proved, when it lay on his
hand to disprove. Having mentioned several Sciptures, 1 John 5.12. Joh. 3.16.
Joh. 1.12. he adds as a result from all, So that one entire faith is the
condition of our right, Interest in Christ, gives interest in all other
privileges.
to all particular benefits. And he must remember that it is the first
according to the tenor of the promise that gives right to all: He that spared
not his own Son, but gave him for us, how will he not with him give us all
things? Romans 8.32. When the Prophet was to confirm Ahaz in the truth of a
promise, then to be made good; he holds out to him the promise of the Messiah,
and only that promise; which would not have carried strength, but that
interest in the first, gives interest in all. All the promises of God in
Christ, being Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.19.

6. It must be remembered (says he) that the thing that faith receives
naturally and properly, is not Christ himself, or his righteousness; but the
species of what is represented as its object; And that faiths reception of
Christ himself, and his righteousness, or of right to him, is but receptio
metaphorica, vel actio ad receptionem propriam necessaria: and that the true
reception which is pati, non agere, does follow faith. And therefore Christ
himself is received, only Receptione fide ethica, activa, metaphorica: species
Christi praedicati recipitur receptione naturali, intelligendo: Jus ad Christum
recipitur receptione naturali passiva, propria. Mr. Baxters friend let him know
that he understood not his former, I would I had acquaintance with him to help
me in this; for if he had not understood him here, he would likely have said as
much as before; unless perhaps his modesty would not suffer him to be so much
on the excepting hand. That which I think I do understand, I know not how to
make to agree: who would not here think, but it were the natural property, or
act of faith to receive the species of Christ? yet, Sect. 10. page 2. he says,
that every other grace that has Christ for his object, is thus far an
instrument of receiving him (that is, the species of him, as he expresses
himself) as well as faith, but none so properly as knowledge, which also he
here (as we see) repeates, species Christi praedicati recipitur receptione
naturali, intelligendo. So that faith less properly, and not so naturally
receives him. Knowledge in this has the preeminence; who would not think from
these words, that it were proper and peculiar to believers thus to receive
Christ? yet in the place quoted, page 22. it is said, that he thus dwells in
every wic^ed man that thus thinks of him. It seems then that Judas in his
thoughts to betray Christ, did as much to this receiving of him, if not more,
then others in believing of him. It is there said, that doubtless he does not
dwell in that deep and special manner as in his chosen; yet if it be most
properly by knowledge that he thus dwells, then they that know most have the
most deep indwelling, and that is more in devils then in some (if not any)
chosen ones. The reception of Christ himself, his righteousness, or of right
to Christ, is here confessed to be an act of says, and who but Mr. Baxter would
look for a more true reception? yet the true reception which is pati, non
agere, does follow faith; and though the believer receive the actual
efficacious gift; yet it is not his faith that receives it, as we have in the
close of the Paragraph; In his English, he says, that faiths reception of
Christ himself, or of right to Christ is but receptio metaphorica, and opposed
to true reception, which is pati, non agere: In his Latin he says, Jus ad
Christum recipitur receptione naturali, passiva, propria; faith with him is an
acceptance of a freely given Christ, and life in him; yet a believer receives
the efficacious giving, but his faith does not receive it: I would mind Mr.
Baxter of that rule of his own, Vbi lex non distinguit, etc. and where he meets
with these distinctions in the Word of God I know not, and he goes not about to
make known. Scripture speaks of receiving Christ, and not the species of Christ
only.
Scripture tells us of receiving Christ by faith, and not of the species only,
which an unsanctified knowledge without faith may reach. The Species of Christ
can neither justify us, nor purify us, nor yet give victory over the world,
nor make resistance against Satan; yet all this through faith Christ does: and
therefore faith does not receive the bare species; if we could be content with
Gospel-simplicity, truth might stand, and these distinction be laid aside.

7. The great thing therefore that I would desire to be observed is this; that
though faith were an instrument of the aforesaid objective, or of the ethical,
metaphorical reception of Christ, (which yet is not properly, being ipsa
receptio) yet it is not therefore the insturmental cause of the passive, proper
reception of right to Christ, or righteousness. Whether we have not that again
here denied, which before was asserted, let the Reader judge. However Reasons
are given of it:

Faith is an instrument of the proper reception of Christ.
1. In the negative: Of this (says he) it is only the condition and not the
proper instrument, with an objection prevented in a parenthesis; I shall show
hereafter that it is impossible to be both. I shall wait therefore till this be
shown, for I despair I confess ever to see such impossibility; I know an
instrument, qua instrument differs from a condition, qua a condition, but that
one and the same thing is in an utter incapacity to be both an instrument and
an instrumental condition, I do not believe. I may give a man a piece of money
with a proviso, that he take it in a sawcer, or a pair of tongues, this now is
the condition, yet the tongues or sawcers are his instruments to receive it.

Faith does more then morally qualify the subject to be a fit patient to be
justified.
2. We have a positive reason: It does morally qualify the subject to be a fit
patient to be justified, as Mr. Benjamin. Woodbridge says truly in his
excellent Sermon of Justification. I have not this Sermon, though I know that
he has often applauded it; but how excellent soever, I had rather have had a
quotation out of John's Gospel, or Paul's, Peter's, or John's Epistles. And if he
affirm that which is here quoted out of him, (as I do not question) I hope to
dye in a different opinion from him. This subject that is only morally
qualified to be a fit patient to be justified, is not yet in possession of
Christ, of life by Christ; Mr. Baxter is morally qualified for the degree of
Doctor, and yet he is no Doctor; was morally qualified to be called by the
State for consultation about Religion; when as yet he was not called, and might
have dyed, and never have been called; but faith puts into an actual possession
of Christ, and Justification by him. By him all that believer are justified
from all things. I should rather take Humiliation, Conviction, Compunction,
soul-emptinesse, to be such moral qualification as is here mentioned; and this
I have learnt from our Savior, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest. Such are morally qualified for
the justified man's rest and peace; And more fully in the Parable, Luke 18. the
Publ cane that came not with a list of virtues as the Pharisee did, but was so
clogged with sin, that he stood afar off from the mercy-seat, durst not lift up
his eyes to heaven, seeing a large list of sins, and not of virtues, or
praiseworthy carriages, goes away justified rather then the Pharisee. Here is
a subject morally qualified to be a fit patient to be justified, not yet
actually justified, (which also was their case, Acts 2.37. with the Jaylours,
Act. 16.30.) which I think neither Mr. Baxter nor Mr. Woodbridge can find
affirmed of any actually in the faith, who according to Scripture are actually
justified, and not barely qualified to be fit patients in due time to receive
it. There follows, I would have Pareus here put against this which is quoted
out of Mr. Woodbridge; speaking by way of objection against the Orthodox
doctrine of Justification, he says, Faith justifies, that is, Fides
justificat, i. e. disponit ad justitiam. Respondeo: Glossa contorta Scripturae
ignota et repugnans. Justificare enim dicitur fides accipiendo donum justitiae
absque operibus, non disponendo ad justitiam. Nec justificatio fit per motum,
sicut calefact^o, sed per imputationem. Quod si sicret per motum, admodum
imp^oprie fidei tribueretur. Neque enim motus ad rem est res ipsa, nec
dispositio generat, sed est via ad generationem. Non igitur per motum
dispositionis fides justificat --.
it disposes or fits for Justification; and answers, A wrested gloss; unknown
to Scripture, and contrary to it: For faith is said to justify by receiving
the gift of righteousness, without works, and not by disposing for
righteousness. Neither is Justification by motion, as is warmth, but by
imputations. And if it were by motion, it were most improperly ascribed to
faith. Neither is motion to a thing, the thing it self: nor does a disposition
obtain any thing, but is the way to obtain it: Therefore faith does not
justify by any motion of disposition, Pareus in Rom 3. Dub. 8. The reason of
this is, That this is only donation, or the will of the donour signified, that
can efficiently convey a right to his own benefits; the receiver is not the
giver, and therefore not the conveyer of right. I wonder what this is a reason
of; if it be intended for a reason of that which goes immediately befote, that
faith does morally qualify in the way mentioned, it is above me to see any
reason in it. It is further said, Every instrument is an efficient cause, and
therefore must effect; and it is only giving that effects this right. But it
effects no such right without receiving, where it is given upon that proviso,
that it be thus and thus received. After much ado, and to what purpose, let
others judge. The conclusion is: The great thing therefore that I affirm is
this, that if you will needs call faith the instrument of apprehending Christ,
or righteousness, yet does it not justify proxime and formaliter as such, but
as the condition of the gift performed. And the great thing that I would
affirm, is, That the instrumental apprehending Christ, or righteousness, is
this condition of the gift; It is given upon condition that we make use of our
faith to apprehend it; and so the sum is, That faith does not justify
formaliter and proxime, as apprehending Christ, or righteousness, because it
does justify proxime and formaliter as thus apprehending. Faith as a condition
certainly does somewhat, and this it is that it does according to the Scripture.

The eighth and last of his accurate heads follows. In which he says, he
opens his meaning together, about this point, though as he says with some
repetitions. I cannot then without repetitions give any further answer, which
to the Reader would be too troublesome, yet somewhat is observable that I find
not before. Faith (says he) must first be faith, i. e. apprehensio Christi, in
order of nature before it can be the condition of right. Actual existence not
necessary to the being of a condition in a Covenant.
If faith must have an actual being before it can be the condition of right,
then perfect obedience (according to the old rule, as Mr. Baxter calls it) must
first be perfect obedience in actual being, before it can be a condition of the
Covenant of works, and so it will follow that, that Covenant has no condition,
seeing there is no such actual obedience. A condition may be a condition,
though not made good, though never made good. The delivery in of an hundred
foreskins of the Philistines was David's condition for Marriage of Saul's
daughter before any Philistine was slain, and had stood as a condition though
had never been given in. If he mean, that faith must be faith, before the
condition be made good, this is false: for the actual being of it is the making
of it good; and so it is as much as if I said, I must wink in order of nature
before I shut my eyes. He further distinguishes of apprehensio Christi, and
conditio praestita, when apprehensio Christi is conditio praestita; as though I
should distinguish between Abraham's sacrificing of his son, and his obedience
of Gods command in sacrificing him, when all know that his sacrificing him was
his obedience. To say that there is such a thing as faith in the general notion
before Christ does constitute a condition, were somewhat; but to say that we
believe, or apprehend Christ before we perform the condition, is to say we must
perform the condition before we perform it.

Having led the Reader through all this accuratenesse, I must further consider
his animadversions. I said, [The Spirit will do nothing without our faith, and
our faith can do nothing without the Spirit; man cannot justify himself by
believing without God, and God will not justify an unbelieving man; faith then
is the act of man; man believes, yet the instrument of God that justifies only
believers.] To which I have a multiplication either of answers and scorns in
place of answers. 1. It is said. The Spirits working in sanctification is
nothing to our question of justification. It is yet somewhat for illustration,
for which alone it was brought, though nothing for proof for which it was never
intended. 2. It is said. The Spirit works our first faith without faiths
coworking, and that is more then nothing. What need he to have told me this,
when I had told it him before? as the Reader may see in words which he omits; I
speak there of the Spirits work in the soul where faith is implanted. 3. The
Spirit moves faith to action before faith moves it self. Here is an exception
to fill up the number. If I move my pen to write, before it move, then I write
something without my pen. 4. It is said. It is not so easily proved as said,
That the Spirit never exciteth any good act in the soul, nor yet restrains
from any evil without the coworking of faith. But why is not this disproved
with ease? I would know for my learning, what act of the Spirit upon a
believing soul is mentioned in Scripture, which is not ascribed also to faith.
The Spirit mortifies the deeds of the flesh, so does faith, Acts 15.9. Devils
are cast out by the Spirit of God, so they are cast out by faith, Mar. 9 The
Spirit is our strength in the inward man, Ephesians. 3.16. and faith is our
strength, 1 Pet. 5.9. Romans 4.20. All things are possible to the Spirit of God;
And all things are possible to him that believes, Mar. 9.23. The Spirits method
laid down in the Word is not to work in us respective to salvation (after the
grace of faith is implanted) without us; what is ascribed to the one as the
efficient, is ordinary ascribed to the other as the instrument. But these
answers he confesses are besides the point; This simile might therefore have
escaped this quarrel; in the two next he will sure then be so punctual, that
all Readers shall say, Rem acu tetigisti. 5. It is added. When you have laid
down one proposition, Man cannot justify himself by believing without God, how
fairly do you lay down this as the disjunct proposition? And God will not
justify an unbelieving man, who would have thought, but you would rather have
said, Nor will God justify man unless his faith be the instrument of it? and
do you not seem to imply that man without God, does justify himself, when you
say man cannot justify himself by believing without God? No, nor with him
neither, for none can forgive sins but God only, even to another; but who can
forgive himself? I think all is laid down so fairly, that were I to lay it down
again, I should not lay it down in Mr. Baxters words. Nor will God justify a
man unless faith be the instrument, he would then soon have challenged it as a
petitio principii, seeing it is that which is in question; I might have said
that God will not justify a man except he disclaim his own righteousness, and
accept of Christ's righteousness to justification; but that which I did say is
the same with any friend, or fair adversary, and so it is a disjunct
proposition fairly laid down, and I imply that which I speak; and if any will
have it further expressed, God will not justify man without the concurrence of
his faith. There follows; In deed I have thought what a sad case the Pope is
in, that is the only man on earth that has no visible pardoner of his sin: he
can forgive others; but who shall forgive him? It seems by this jest that Mr.
Baxter is willing to put off that he is not so good a proficient in Popish
mysteries, as by Mr Crandon he stands charged; otherwise he could not but know
that the Pope has his pardoner as well as others. The Pope has his visible
pardoner as well as receivers.
He gives power for the pardon of sin, as the supposed head of the Church, by
application of the supererogated merits of the Saints, together with the merits
of Christ, out of the treasure of the Church, of which he has the keys. Now he
sins as a man, and receives pardon as a Churchmember, and to that purpose
has his confessor, A man as visible as other men. And speaking of his sad
condition on this supposition, he seems to lay far more stresse on the
pardons of Rome then they themselves; as though he stood in some eminent danger
of hell upon the want of such a pardon, when he might know that according to
their principles, all his danger is, an abode some longer time in Purgatory,
which is their trimming place in the way to heaven. For if the pardon find him
in a mortal sin (which alone is deserving of hell) it is altogether
inefficacious; mortal sin puts a bar to the working of it. It is the
temporal punishment which this pardon remits, and not the eternal; and in case
it were true that this could not be done to the Pope, there being none above
him, his successor with a wet finger can do it for him. As to that which was
forgotten, it had been to his honor if it had never been remembered. I forgot
(says he) that every believer forgiveth himself, for I did not believe it.
Such sarcasmes befit not grave Writers, especially when all Reformers (to speak
in his own language) must bear a share in the contumely; when they had it in
their thoughts, in this way to imitate the Apostle in giving all to grace, and
taking all from man, that one would rise out of themselves to make this sport
with it. It follows, 6. How nakedly is it again affirmed without the least
proof, that our faith is Gods instrument in justifying? does God effect our
Justification by the instrumental efficient causation of our faith? If this
were my fault, yet Mr. Baxter of all men is most unfit to give it in charge;
other men must have a proof for every word, but he himself may heap up
distinctions, propositions, conclusions, without any color of proof at all:
where is his proof of that which in the last Section, number 6. must be
remembered? and of that great thing, number. 7. he would desire should be observed?
I suppose he will have ten to remember, and observe, before one to believe it.
Others can see proof, and send their Reader hither for proof, though he cannot
find it. My work was to show, that though it be man's act, yet God may make use
of it as instrumentally serviceable in this work; and whether this has been
nakedly said, or proved, let the dis-interested Reader give his sentence; if
that which I have said will not satisfy, let Mr. Burges be consulted in his
late Treatise of Justifica. Part 2. I conclude, [That which is here spoken by
way of exception against faith as an instrument, holds of efficients and
instruments sole and absolute in their work and causality; but where there is a
concurrence of agents, and one makes use of the act of another to produce the
effect that in such causality is wrought, it will not hold.] To this is
answered, He that will or can make him a Religion of words or syllables, that
either signify nothing, or are never like to be understood by the learner, let
him make this an article of his faith, what you mean by absolute, I cannot
certainly ariolate. Bona verba bono viro desunt. Seeing I find the man in this
mood, I say no more; but seeing he knows not how to ariolate, what I mean by
this, or that, I have no mind to help him in this art of soothsaying, and shall
let the words stand for their use, that bring a mind to understand, rather then
to exercise their wit to carp at what they read.

Of the sole sufficiency of the grant of the new Covenant, as an instrument in
justification.
I shall now leave to the Readers consideration, whether Mr. Baxters exceptions
against the instrumentality of faith in justification, be of that validity, as
to overthrow it, and whether his doctrine of this subject be of that
clearness, as to accuse the doctrine of his adversaries (which are all
Reformers; Foreign, and English) of such notable obscurity. I must now look
into that which he has said; for the sole-sufficiency of the grant of the new
Covenant of the Gospel to stand in stead of faith for an instrument in this
work. And if I meet with no more satisfaction in this, then in the former; I
must crave leave to say, that I have very little in either. I said in my
Treatise of the Covenant. [The promise or grant of the new Covenant in the
Gospel, is instead of faith made the instrument in the work of justification]
adding, [This is indeed Gods, and not man's: It is the Covenant of God, the
promise of God, the Gospel of God: but of it self unable to raise up man to
justification.] To which Mr. Baxter replies. I say there is none but Gods, for
non datur instrumentum, quod non est causae principalis instrumentum. And I say
still that God acts not in this work, without the concurrence of him that is
justified, which Mr. Baxter grants; And this concurrence of man having its
instrument, In justification of man, God acts not without man.
God thereby does carry on his work; otherwise the Apostle had not only said,
that God is a justifier, of those that believe in Jesus, Romans 3.26. but also
that he justifies the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumsion through
faith. And this act of man is interpretative, the instrument of God, but more
directly and properly the instrument of man; where I say it is of it self
unable to raise up man to justification; he gives in his answer. In which we
have: First, his concession, what of it self it is not able to do. Secondly,
his assertion, what of it self it can do. Thirdly, his explication under what
notion it does it. His concession is, That it is not of it self able to do all
other works antecedent to justification, Mr. Baxters concession.
as to humble, to give faith, regenerate, etc. But he does not tell us from
whence it has any supply for those antedaneous works, or whether it be
employed in those works at all. His assertion is, that as to the act of
justification, His assertion.
or conveying right to Christ, pardon, and righteousness, it is able of it
self. But it is worth our enquiry, to whom this new Covenant grant does convey
right to Christ, pardon, and righteousness, whether to the unhumbled,
unbelieving, unregenerate, or to the humble, believing, and regenerate soul?
The former are not in a present capacity of him, and the latter are already in
possession; if he can find me an humble, believing, regenerate man void of all
right to Christ, pardon, and righteousness, I will confess that the grant of
the new Covenant is of it self able to do what Mr. Baxter says. I looked that
he should have proved, that the grant of the new Covenant in the Gospel does
this constitutive as he uses to speak, That it should work an unjustified man
up to a justified state; but it seems he will have it to do it only
declarative, to make it appear that he is already justified, which honors is
very low, and that about which I intend not to raise disputes; If I mistake
him, and that he will say, that he means more then a naked declaration. I would
he would explain himself and speak out what more it is that he inteds; for if
he intend more, I know not how to help him out of an high contradiction, seeing
he talks of conveyance right to them that all know are possessed beforehand
of right. The same Gospel-grant which works those antecedaneous acts of which
he speaks, does together convey right to all those in whom such a work is
found. It is able to do it of it self (as he explaines himself) ac signum
voluntatis divinae, but where is it revealed from God, that either the
unhumbled, unbelieving, unregenerate, shall have right to Christ, pardon,
justification, or that the humble, believing, regenerate want it? Faith with
Mr. Baxter is an acceptance of a freely given Christ, and life in him, how does
a man in faith stand in need of a new conveyance of right to him? There
follows; If you should mean that [that of it self] i. e. without the
concomitance of faith as a condition is not able; I answer, that is not fitly
called disablity; or if you will so call it, the reason of that disability is
not, because there is a necessity of faiths isntrumental coefficiency, but of
its presence, as the performed condition: It being the will of the donor that
his grant should not efficere actualites till the condition were performed.
This assertion, That there is no efficiency in faith, but a naked presence to
stand by, and as it were to look on in the work of justification, calls for
some proof: seeing he well knows that among all Reformers his adversaries,
this will pass for so high a Paradox. How is Christ a propitiation through
faith? and how are we still said to be justified by faith? If no more then a
bare presence is required, the presence of other graces is equally required; as
love, meekness, temperance, chastity, they have still been confessed necessary
in justification, quoad presentiam, though not quoad efficientiam: yet Mr.
Baxter can I think, no where show, that Christ's is set forth a propitiation
through any one of these graces: or that we are justified by love, meekness,
temperance, etc. I shall as soon believe that the presence of the eye is barely
required for sight, without further efficiency, as I shall believe that the
bare presence of faith is required, and no more for justification: and where he
will will prove that it is the will of the Donor, that his grant should not
efficere actualiter till the condition be performed, (intending as he
expresses himself, that after the condition is performed a new grant must
pass actualy to effect this right) I cannot tell, when the condition is to
accept Christ which is present possession. They cannot take Christ for
justification, but by virtue of this grant: and when they have thus taken him,
and are possessed of him, must they have a new grant for right to him? If I give
a beggar a gift, upon condition that he will come, and take it: when he has
taken it, and is possessed of it, has he need of any further grant of right to
it? I said, [It is often tendered, and justication not always wrought, and so
disabled from the office of an instrument by Keckerman, in his Comment on his
first Canon concerning an instrument; As soon as the instrument serves not the
principal agent, so soon it loses the nature of an instrument,] mentioning
instances that he gives, and adding, neither is the Gospel an instrument of
justification where it justifies not. Mr. Baxter being gotten into a vein that
he has not yet a mind to leave, replies; I am too shallow to reach the reason
of these words; I know you had not leisure to write them in vain, and merely to
fill paper. 1. I may fear there was a worse end in the reply, then barely to
fill paper: In contentions of this nature it is easy for great wits, voluble
tongues, and nimble pens, to be more then vain. And here is scarce fair
declaring to cut off my words before any full period, and so render them to the
Reader; That my meaning cannot be seen, till he have gone over three or four
Sections interlaced with needless triflings. 2. If Mr. Baxter know (as he
says) that I will not own such an argumentation as he there frames, without so
much as color of sense in it, which were vain to repeat, what was his end, but
merely to fill up paper, or somewhat worse, in framing of it? A Reader of half
Mr. Baxters wit, if he look on my words as they lie in my Treatise, and not as
mangled by his divisions, may easily see another way of argumentation, and such
that carries sense; and I leave to the Reader, whether or no it carries
strength. And for his satisfaction, Tht Authors argument against the
sole-sufficiency of Covenant grace, as instrument in justification.
I thus put it into form. That which often fails of obtaining the end, for
which it is employed, and never can attain to it, without the concurrence of
some other with it, is no sole instrument in any work: But the Gospel or
Covenant-grant often fails of attaining that end of justification, when it is
to that end published, and employed, and never can obtain it without the
concurrence of somewhat further to be joined with it: Ergo it is no sole
instrument in the work. Mr. Br. signifies that it may still be the same thing,
and have the same aptitude to produce the effect, even when it is not applied.
I answer, then Mr. Kendall has well told him it is an instrument
aptitudinaliter, and is no instrument in actual being, but when the end is
obtained, and then it is no sole instrument, being not sole in producing the
effect. Mr. Baxter takes it for granted, that it always has its effect when
it is employed, and I took it for granted, that it is often employed, and the
effect not, produced; but I did not then think, that Mr. Baxter had meant, an
application to convey right, where right is already in possession. I added,
[When the Minister is a Minister of condemnation, and the savor of death to
death, there the Gospel becomes an instrument of condemnation and death, and so
comes short of justification.] To this is replied, 1. So it is, if there be no
Minister where it is known any way. 2. I speak of Gods grant, or promise in the
Gospel: you speak of his commination. 3. If the threat be the proper instrument
of condemnation a pari, the promise, or gift is the proper instrument of
justification. I grant his first, and he threapes kindness with me in the two
last; he will have me to speak of the threat only, when I speak as well as he
of Gods grant or promise: Gospel promises are a savor of death to many.
This is a savor of death unto death unto many. It is as great an evil to
slight a Promise, as to disobey a Command, or neglect a threatening: his third
therefore migt well have been spared: but that I intend not to trifle away
time, I could easily show him if I had spoke of threat, a great disparity. I
added, which should not have come in thus dismembered) [The efficacy that is in
the Gospel for justification it receives by their faith to whom it is tendered.]
To this is replied, Darkly, but dangerously spoken, and reasons given. For it
is possible you may mean, that it receives it by faith, as by a condition, sine
qua homo non est subjuctum proxime capax, and so I grant the sense. There is no
possiblity, that I should mean so, having sufficiently (as he after observes)
declared my self to the contrary, if I understand his sine qua non frequently
found in his writings; which men eminently learned profess they do not. It
follows, Dangerously; for the words would seem to any impartial Reader to
import more, viz. That the Gospel receives its efficacy from faith, or by faith
as the instrument which conveyeth that efficacy to the Gospel. It is my meaning
that the word is inefficacious without faith, and that faith renders it
efficacious, not by infusion of any new power into it, but raising up the soul
with strength to answer it, which is not barely said, but proved: But my bare
speech must first be censured, and then my proof in a disjunct way at pleasure
(as we shall see) dealt with. A reason is rendered, why for the truths sake, and
my own, these words have never been seen. For if faith give the Gospel its
efficacy, 1. It cannot be as a concause instrumental, coordinate, but as a
superior more principal cause to the subordinate. By Mr. Baxters leave I do
believe that concauses instrumental may receive efficacy one from another. The
thread has efficacy from a needle, and is a concause instrumental to sow up a
rent, or to make a seam or hem. The line gives efficacy to the anglers hook to
take a fish. I believe he has seen a knife touched with a Loadstone, fetch up
a needle from the bottom of a vessel of water. Here the hand is the principal
agent, or the man using his hand: The knife is the instrument, yet such an
instrument as receives efficacy from the spirits of the Loadstone, as a
concause instrumental. The Gospel works no more without faith, then a knife in
this thing can work without a Loadstone. It follows, 2. If it were the former
that is meant, yet it were intolerable; For which reasons are given; but how
these hang together, I know not. His former (now spoken to) was brought in as
the first in order to disprove what I had said, taking my words in the second
sense which he gives of them; and this which is in order the second, is to show
by three reasons, that in case they be taken in the first sense, which he
himself professedly grants, yet it were intolerable; seeing therefore that I
take it not in that sense, (and if I did, he grants the sense) there is no
cause that I should trouble my self with his Reasons. I added, in way of proof,
[ Heb. 4.2. Unto us was the Gospel preached, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12, 13.] To which
is replied, But where is your conclusion, or any show of advantage to your
cause? I must speak nothing, it seems, but syllogismes in form; and he that
cannot here make up a syllogism, and find out a formal conclusion, is a very
Infant in Logic. In the first Text, the Apostle (as he says) speaks of the
Words profiting in the real change of the soul, and our question is of the
relative. Heb. 4.2. Vindicated.
And what show of proof is there, that it is so understood of a real change, as
wholly to exclude that which is relative? It is meant of that, whatsoever,
which tends to the souls profit; It is spoken of profit in order to eternal
rest; If Justification be for our profit, or tend at all to our everlasting
rest, then justification is not here excluded. It follows, The Scripture
means, The Word had not further work on the heart as it has in them that mix
it with faith; will you interpret it thus, The Word did not justify? If I take
this to be the meaning, I must interpret it, That the Word did not justify
them; for it does justify where it is mixed with faith, though I should not
exclude other offices done by the Word. It follows, 2. It Is true that the Word
did not justify them, but that is consequential only of the former
unprofitablenesse. I might as well say, that the Word's not sanctifying is
consequential; as he may say, the Word's not justifying is only thus
consequential. I see no show of reason, that the Text should be meant
immediately of sanctification, and consequentially only of Justification; and
if it be consequentially only proved, that the Word did not justify Them,
here is a real, and more then a show of advantage to my cause. I hope he is
not the man that will dispute against proofs by consequence, when the
consequence by himself is granted. It follows; Once prove that man is but as
much efficient in justifying himself, as he is in the obedience and change of
his mind or actions, and then you do something. When I go about the proof of
it, I think I shall have Mr. Baxter my sole and single adversary in it, he is
not pleased to give us in any difference. And he ownes that which is usually
quoted out of Austin, He that made thee without thee, will not save thee
without thee; and has not justification as great an influx into salvation, as
sanctification? I desire him only to reflect upon that which he has said in
the Preface of his confession, (a book newly come to my hands) Antecedently to
believing all have an equal conditional gift of pardon, and none have an
absolute, nor an actual right; The Gospel finds us equal, and makes no
inequality, till we make it our selves; But the secret unsearchable workings of
Divine grace do begin the difference, and make it in us, before it be made by
us. Who ever went higher in speaking of man's work in his sanctification? and
higher it is, then ever I spoke of a man's pardoning himself. It is said, It is
weak arguing, to say the Word profits not, because it was not mixed with
faith, therefore faith conveyes to it its efficacy of sanctifying, yea, of
justifying, you cannot but know the sequel would be denied. Others would think,
that there is strength in such arguing, that it receives efficacy from faith,
upon that account, that it profits where faith is, and is unprofitable where
faith is not; especially when they find efficacy ascribed to faith both in
justification and sanctification. It follows, In progressive sanctification,
and obedience, and exercise of graces, the Word and faith are concauses, and
one will not effect without the other. And are not the Word and faith concauses
in Justification, as in progressive sanctification? tell us whether you will
exclude? I dare exclude neither faith nor Gospel, as instrumental workers. But
it follows not, as is said, that therefore faith gives efficacy to the Word in
this, for concauses have not influence on each other, but on the effect. I
scarce think that maxim to be of universal truth; but be it a truth, I say no
more, then here is asserted for me; Justification is the effect, and the Word
and faith are concauses. It yet follows, The want of faith may hinder the Word
from that further work on the soul, which presupposes faith, and that is all
that the Text says. If any sense can be made of this arguing, so far as I
understand it, then Justification presupposes not faith, which is not Mr.
Baxters judgment. It follows, May not the absence of faith hinder, unless
when present it does effect? And would the Apostle (think we) have spoke of
effectual faith, or the efficacy of faith? yea, would Dr. Preston have wrote a
Tract of effectual faith, if it had been idle in the soul, and without all
efficacy? And to restrain the efficacy of it to sanctification, excluding
Justification, never came, that I know, into the thoughts of any Orthodox
Writer, that has treated of Justification; neither would the Penmen of
Scriptures have expressed themselves in that way; as to say we are justified by
faith, had faith been there, and only had sat idle. The various applications
of that Text, Hab. 2.4. [The just shall live by his faith] may teach us, not to
pen up faith in such narrow bounds, as to restrain the work of it to efficacy
in one kind only. The Apostle to the Hebrews plainly applies it to support by
faith in sufferings, Heb. 10.38. and Gal. 3.11. to justification by faith; and
shall we say, that in the one, it is working; and in the other, it does
nothing? If we do, we shall have Paul our adversary, who says that Christ is
set forth a propitiation by faith: what follows, has been already spoken to.
The second Text, says he, I know not how you mean to make use of, unless you
argue thus, The Word works effectually only in believers, therefore faith
conveyeth efficacy to the Word. I think I need not tell you, (says he) that I
deny the sequel; not to speak of the antecedent, nor yet to tell you that this
speaks not of working the relative change of justification: He had a good mind
to speak to the antecedent, but if he can for disproof of that, make any
efficacious working of the Word appear in Infidels, such as Scripture uses to
honor with such titles, I shall oppose him, to maintain the Justification of
Infidels. The sequel in the word [convey] is his own; and to that which
follows, I have already sufficiently spoken.

I inferred from the former words, that [the Gospel in it self considered, is
wanting in that honor assigned to an instrument, to have influx to the
producing of the effect of the principal cause, by a proper causality. If none
dare say, that faith has such an influx, they may much less say, that the
Word has such.] This in very big terms is denied, and the opposite boldly
asserted. The Gospel, says he, in it self considered without the coordinate,
or subordinate, or superior causality of faith, has this honor so fully,
clearly, beyond all doubt, that no man that is a preacher of this Gospel should
question it. When I stand thus highly charged, to deny that which no Preacher
of the Gospel should question, by reason of the clear evidence of it, every man
may justly expect full, clear, and evident Scriptures, and reasons, beyond all
doubt, for my conviction; but I hear of neither; but instead of it, first, a
piece of a Concession; Secondly, a Simile. The Concession is, That the Gospel,
without the concomitance of faith does not actually justify, else faith were
no condition, or causa sine qua non. That faith should barely wait, effecting
nothing, and gain no further honor then here is assigned, will appear a
strange assertion. If it had its efficacy where it was in being in miraculous
cures, so that it was said, Thy faith has made thee whole; I think it is much
rather efficacious in justification, there being so much spoken of
justification by faith. I desire Mr. Baxter to consider the words of his
learned dying friend Mr. Gataker, in his letter to him. And surely faith as a
medium, seems to have a more peculiar office in the transaction of that main
business of Justification, then either repentance, or any other grace, as the
love, or fear of God, and the like. Which to me, seems the more apparent,
because I find it so often said in the Word, that men are justified by faith, but
no where by repentance: Albeit, that also be as a condition thereunto required
as also that form of speech, (...), fides, or fiducia in sanguine, seems to
intimate and imply, that this grace has a more special reference then any
other, to the satisfaction made to Gods Justice for our sins by Christ's
sufferings, which alone we can plead for our discharge of them at Gods
Tribunal: Much more follows worthy of Mr. Baxters consideration, in laying so
high a charge as he has done on our Reformers in this particular. There
follows a Simile as full of obscurity, as the earth is of darkness, and it
were aesie so far as it is intelligible, to make it appear, how much it
halteth; but that I will not trouble the Reader with such impertinencies, and I
look for proofs, rather then Similes; and here is no proof at all.

I further infer in my Treatise, [Mr. Pemble therefore affirming the Word to be
an instrument of Gods Spirit, presently adds, Now instruments are either
cooperative, or passive, and the Word must be one of these two. Cooperative, he
says, it is not; and gives his reason; It is therefore, says he, a passive
instrument working only per modum objecti, as it contains a declaration of
the Divine will, and it proposes to the understanding and will the things to
be known, believed, and practiced.] Here many exceptions are taken.

Whether the Word be a passive instrument, or cooperative with the Spirit.
First, That Mr. Pemble speaks of the Word as the instrument of sanctification;
we speak of it, as conveying right to Christ, and as justifying.

Secondly, That Mr. Pembles reason of the passive instrumentality of the Word
is but this, that it cannot be declared, what operative force there should be
in the bare declaration of Gods will.

Thirdly, That himself will undertake to declare that an operation there is by
the agency of this declaration, though not punctually how it operates.

Fourthly, That this passive instrumentality of the Word in sanctifying, does
very ill agree with the language of Scripture, which makes the Word to be
mighty, powerful, pulling down strongholds, etc.

Fifthly, That Mr. Pemble herein is single and singular.

To speak to these in order. To the first I say. Though Mr. Pemble gives an
instance of the Words work in sanctification, yet there is no reason to
believe, that he limits his whole discourse to it, indefinitely affirming that
it is a passive instrument, and giving instance in one, there is no imaginable
reason that he can exclude the other. For his second; He lets his Reader know,
that he took an hasty view of Mr. Pemble, when he said, that this was all his
reason, he may see the thing fully argued by him, mihi, page 97, 98, 99, etc in
quarto, which is too long to transcribe. The work which is done upon the soul
is wrought by the Spirit, as the principal agent, whether it be to
regeneration, progressive sanctification, or in order to justification; every
previous work in tendency toward these, is from the Spirit likewise, as
illumination, conviction; the beginning and whole progress is by the Spirit.
The Word is no more then an instrument, and all that the Word does, is by power
from the Spirit, and therefore said to be mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.5. Now
the Spirit must work by way of power, either on the Word, or the soul as its
object; It must infuse power and strength into the one as the principal agent
in the work, Mr. Pemble denies, that it works thus by an infusion of power into
the Word, and affirms that the infusion of strength is into the soul, and not
into the Word, which the Apostle confirms, Ephesians. 3.16. As for his third,
which he says, he will undertake to declare, he brings nothing but bare
authorities; He faith, he has read many that say one thing, and some that say
another, but himself is of Scotus his mind, and we have not one syllable to
induce any other to be of the same judgment. His fourth, Mr. Pemble answers,
and says, That, all those phrases there reckoned up are to be understood by a
metonymy, which though they properly belong to the invisible power of the Holy
Ghost, giving effect unto his own Word, yet are figuratively attributed unto
the Word it self, which he uses as his visible instrument, explaining himself
by several similitudes. For his last, If Mr. Pemble be thus sole and singular,
he was much mistaken; Having fully spoke his judgment in this thing, he adds,
page 99. And this is the sentence of the Orthodox Church touching the nature
and distinction of these two callings, Inward by the work of the Spirit,
outward by the voice of the Word. The Arminians are of another opinion, whose
judgment (says he) about this matter is thus, etc. At large laying down their
doctrine. And it were easy to multiply those testimonies that take all efficacy
or energy from the Word, to give it to the Spirit, usually quoting 1 Cor. 3.6,
7. 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. He tells me, I doubt whether you believe him or
your self thoroughly; for if you did, I think you would preach but coldly. I am
persuaded you look your preaching should operate actively. And does he think
Mr. Pemble did believe his own doctrine, or was he a cold Preacher? he delivers
his doctrine with confidence, and backs it with reasons; and the works that
he has left behind, argue that he spoke with some heat, and fervor; and I
wish that I could gain more heat both in prayer and preaching, and I do look
that my preaching should operate actively; but whether of it self, or through
the power of the Spirit, there lies the question. He concludes, If it were
proved that there were an hundred passive instruments, it would never be proved
that faith is one (as an instrument does signify an efficient cause) of Gods
work of justifying us, neither really, nor reputatively, is it such. To which I
say I read in Divines of a justification active, and that is the work of God,
and a justification passive, of which man is the subject; as I read of a double
miraculous faith, one active, to work a cure; the other passive, to be cured.
Paul saw that the Cripple at Lystra had faith to be healed, Acts 14.9. Yet I
suppose that this is called a passive faith; not that it acted not at all,
(which is contradicted by Christ, in saying, Thy faith has made thee whole)
but that it served for a passive work on the diseased; so I think this faith
which tends to our justification, is not merely passive, though it serves for
such a work as receives that denomination. When I receive a gift that enriches,
I act; Yet he that gives, only does enrich, and I that receive, am enriched;
so it is in justification, we do not justify, but are justified, and yet act
in receiving Christ for justification, as sick ones in Christ's time, did not
heal, but were healed, yet their faith acted for cure and ours for
justification. I confess I did somewhat needlessely run upon this discourse
of passive instruments, upon occasion of Mr. Pembles words, and Mr. Baxters
denial that there was any such thing as a passive instrument, never intending
to make faith merely passive; which was never my opinion, neither am I
altogether without scruple in that which Mr. Pemble delivers; yet I would have
those that are confidently opposite, to weigh the streng^ (...) his reasons,
and find out (if they can) a more moderate middle^ (...) to ascribe somewhat
more to the Word, without injury do^ (...) the working of Gods Spirit. I am
afraid to utter any thing that may be prejudicial to either, and of two
extremes detracting from the Spirit, I take to be the greater; which I leave
to the learned after a more full enquiry, further to determine. I am loath to
trouble the Reader with that which upon occasion of some passages in Mr.
Baxters Aphorisms, I mentioned, that [if Burgersdicius his gladius and culter
be active instruments, and Keckermans incus, etc. yet it follows not that
there is no passive instrument;] but only to rectify Mr. Baxters complaint,
that these words do import an intimation (as he expresses it) that I said all
these were active instruments. And as the words stand in my Book, it is hard to
say what they import. It should have been expressed, and Keckermans incus, etc.
and his scamnum, and mensa accubitus, and terra ambulationis [no instruments]
which words, I know not by what means were left out; yet the Reader may see,
that they were intended, seeing they are opposed to the other, which are made
active instruments. But so much is spoken of passive instruments by others,
that I may well spare my pains; neither is it any way necessary for me to
speak to them, seeing (though I doubt not, but there are thousands of such kind
of instruments) I put not faith into that number, as I know many godly learned
do: But it is easy to bear a dissent in a word of art, when the thing in
question is agreed upon. As to the rest which follows in this tract against me
in this thing, there is very little, but what has been spoken to; and this
paper already growing more big then is meet, for an interposition in this kind,
in a positive Treatise (though not impertinent to the subject in hand) I am
loath to cause it to swell further with impertinencies; only I must take
notice of two passages, one where I am charged with ignorance, the other with
compliance with Rome in the height of their doctrine of merit. In the first
there are several particulars. 1. A charge of misunderstanding Mr. Br. when it
was hoped, that I had understood better. I suspect (says he) by your words
when you say, [the Word is produced and held forth of God,] and by your
discourse all along, that you understand not what I mean by the Covenants
justifying; yet I had hoped you had understood the thing it self. So (...) it
is taken for granted, that he cannot be mistaken, when (...) truth is known,
Mr. Baxters writings, and truth are one and (...) same. 2. My error is
detected, and I am sent where I may understand my self better. You seem to
think that the Covenant justifies by some real operation on the soul, as the
Papists say, and our Divines say, it sanctifies, or as it does justify in foro
Conscientiae, by giving assurance, and comfort; but Sir, (says he) I opened my
thoughts fully in Aphoris. page 173, 174, etc. I scarce bestowed so many words
on any one particular point. But I marvel that it should be expected, that my
new learning should be bottomed on his doctrine there delivered, seeing himself
there speaks with so much vacillancy, Mr. Baxters former vacillancy and
hesitation in this doctrine.
page 176. I dare not be too confident in so dark a point, but it seems to me
that this justifying, transient act, is the enacting or promulgation of the new
Covenant wherein justification is conferred upon every believer; and in the
close of all, when he has spoke his full mind, he adds, page 180. This is the
present apprehension I have of the nature of remission, and justification;
adding, Si quid novisti rectigus, etc. But now he peremptorily says, I speak
not of the effect of Gods Word as preached to men's heart, but as it is (lex
promulgata, and foedus, and testamentum) and so does convey right, or
constitute the duenesse of the benefit, 1 John 5.11, 12. I would learn of my
Catechrist that is now thus raised out of douhtings, in this manner, to take
the chair.

1. Whether this enacting or promulgation of the new Covenant, (which is the
transient act, in which justification is conferred on every believer) find men
in the faith upon the promulgation of it? If so, then actual faith ptecedes any
knowledge of the Covenant; if not, whether he presupposes, that men upon the
Laws promulgation, will believe of themselves without any further work? or
whether God makes use of any other instrument for the work of faith? If these
be answered in the negative, that men will not believe of themselves upon such
promulgation, nor there is any other like instrument for this work, then I
think it must follow, that God makes use of this Covenant thus enacted to work
men to believe, and so I am further confirmed in my former supposed mistake,
that the Covenant works by a real operation on the soul in order to
justification; Namely, By working men out of unbelief into faith. I had thought
that when Paul, and Appollos are Ministers by whom men believe; that they had
by the means of this encted, or promulgated Covenant, brought men to this
posture. And though justification be a relative change, and not a real, as is
truly affirmed, yet that a real change had been wrought in the soul for this
work. Whereas he says, He speaks not of the effect of Gods Word, as preached
to men's hearts, but, etc. I think he ought to speak so of it, when he speaks of
it as an instrument of justification. In his sense, I suppose it can be no
instrument of justification; an instrument must serve to work the thing of
which it is an instrument: but in this case, justification is beforehand
wrought; and therefore, according to the proverb, it cannot do that which is
done before it comes: for the truth of this, let Mr. Baxter speak; The
accepting Christ in this Covenant, is true justifying faith, if an unregenerate
man have this indeed, then he is justfied, page 66. A believing man has this
indeed, and so is indeed justified, and the grant of the Covenant, is an
instrument for justification of a justified person; I am demanded, Do you not
often read in Divines of justificatio juris, vel legis, as distinct from
justificatio judicis, vel per sententiam? And I demand, whether of these
justifications do proceed? If justificatio juris go not before justificatio
Judicis, then the Judge justifies him whom the Law justifies not; In case it
follow after, then it is only a manifestation, or declaration of it, of which
we may have further occasion to speak hereafter. And this considered, it
appears to me that Mr. Baxter speaks of the Covenant only as eyed of God, and
not applied to us, and then indeed it is no instrument of God, whereby he
justifies, but his rule according to which he justifies. Pardon of sin is a
relative change, yet Ministers appointed of Jesus Christ for the pardon of sin,
are instrumental in working a real change from unbelief to faith in order to
this work, and so are instruments of pardon dispositive, as Mason de Ministerio
Anglicano speaks, as well as declarative.

I added in my Treatise, [Forgivenesse of sin is preached in the Gospel, Act.
13.38. but it is to those that believe, that are justified; faith through the
Spirit gives efficacy, and power of working to it:] And here comes in my second
charge mentioned. I should tremble says Mr. Br. to say so, what Romanist by
the doctrine of merit gives more to man in the work of justification? I answer,
Paul a Roman extols faith as high as I have done in Scripture already quoted
in the work of justification, The Author acquit from compliance with Romanists.
and, according to Mr. Baxter, far more, seeing through the whole Chapter of
Heb. 11. he speaks as he says, not only of justifying faith, but as
justifying, yet he is no Romanist. 2. Mr. Br. well knows the Romanists
distinction, of a first, and second justification, which first justification
Protestants only allow, according to Scripture to be called justification; and
that there is according to them, no ingrediency of any other grace but faith;
and no merit in faith, but all of grace; for which he may see Mr. Crandons
first parallel, Part 2. page 215. It follows, If our faith give efficacy and
power to the Gospel to justify us, then we justify our selves, when the
Gospel justifies us, then the Gospel is our instrument of justification; and
can this be, unless it be also said, that we made the Gospel? then God and we
are concauses in the Gospels act of donation. But how this can follow, I think
few but himself can see: It will only follow that the Gospel cannot justify
us without us, that which Austin has de verbis Apostoli, Ser. 15. will follow,
He that made thee without thee, does not justify thee without thee. It will
follow, that somewhat is to be done by us, without concurrence of which the
Gospel for justification is inefficacious; Qui ergo fecit te sine te, non
justificat te sine te.
and how the second can follow, that the Gospel is our instrument of
justification, I desire to know: If Naamans dipping himself seven times in
Jordan, rendered it by Divine appointment efficacious for cure of his Leprosy,
will it follow, that Jordan was his instrument, whereby he cured himself? If
the Angels moving on the water, Joh. 5. gave efficacy for cure to him that
first entered, will it then follow, that it was either the Angels, or his
instrument that first entered, and not rather the instrument of God only? And
to his question moved, Can this be, unless we made the Gospel? If we should
grant that it is our instrument, will this follow? Can no man use an instrument
unless he first made it? Peter it seems was no fisher, but rather a Cutler,
and made the sword wherewith he cut off Malchus ear, or else he could not have
used it as his instrument. Neither follows it, that God and we are concauses;
It would only follow, that there is a willing concurrence in us to accept of
that which God of grace does give. That of Austin will follow, which
immediately is added in the place quoted, Ergo fecit nescientem, justificat
volentem, tamen ipse justificat, ne sit justitia tua.
He therefore that made thee unwilling, does not justify thee unwilling; yet
he does justify thee, lest it should be thine own righteousness. It will then
follow, that in self-denial, renouncing all self-righteousnesse, we humbly
accept what God of grace does give. After these supposed absurdities, we have a
list of subtle questions; Is it the same power and efficacy for justification
which the Gospel receives from God, and which it receives from faith; or, are
they diverse? If diverse show us what they are, and which part of its efficacy
and power the Gospel receives from faith, and which from God. If they are the
same, then God must convey justifying efficacy and power into faith first, and
by faith into the Gospel: which who imagines? or why should I be so vain as to
stand to confute it? That faith gives efficacy to the Gospel for sanctification
Mr. Baxter will not deny, as appears in his words that follow, and his own
exposition of Heb. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. before mentioned, here let him then
first answer his own question respective to Sanctification, and by the help of
him, and light borrowed from his illuminate notions, I shall aim somewhat at
it, to answer his, respective to Justification: If it be the same power and
efficacy for sanctification that the Gospel receives from God, and from faith,
then God must convey efficacy and power into faith first, and by faith into the
Gospel for sanctification; and till I have his answer, why should I be so vain
as to confute his? There follows, Oh that you had condescended to your Readers
weakness, as to have deigned to show him, Quomodo patitur Evangelium
recipiendo? and Quid recipit, ut fiat potens and efficax? and Quomodo haec
potentia and efficacia fuit in fide? utrum eminenter, an formaliter? Aut utrum
fides id communicavit, quod nunquam habuit? and quomodo agit fides in hoc
influxu causativo in Evangelium? For answer, I desire Mr. Baxter to take into
consideration that Text of the Apostle, Romans 8.3. What the Law could not do, in
that it was weakened through the flesh, etc. And whether he understand it
respective to sanctification, (which is not agreed upon among Interpreters) to
give his Reader satisfaction, Quomodo patitur Lex in hac debilitatione, and,
Quid patitur, ut fi at impotens et inefficax? and, Quomodo haec impotentia and
inefficacia fuit in carne? utrum eminenter, an formaliter? and Quomodo agit
Caro in hoc influxu debilitativo in legem? And I doubt not, but I may as easily
answer his Queries, in order to the vindication of my assertion, as he may mine
in vindication of that which the Apostle delivers. Answering the last, all is
indeed answered. Caro agit injiciendo obices, and remoras, Quo minus Lex
operatur in cord hominis; Spiritus agit per fidem, ut causa removens
impedimentum, E medio tollens obices, and remoras istas Incitando and potenter
inclinando animam in amplexum promissionis divinae. I desire also his full
Comment on the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made us able Ministers of
the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life: with a satisfying answer to all like
Quaeries that thence may be made. I suppose he will grant that they are able
Ministers of the New Testament, no otherwise, then in preaching the Gospel; and
when the bare Scripture (as Tremelius reads it) is of power only to kill, we
may demand how the Gospel suffers in receiving any such quickening power from
the Spirit? And indeed the Gospel suffers not, but the soul in receiving power,
to answer the Gospels call, whether to Justification, o^ sanctification: And
that the Spirit makes use of faith in this quickening power, I think will not
be denied, seeing the Apostle tells us, The life that I live in the flesh is by
faith in the Son of God. Faith therefore has its hand in the Spirits
quickening work: and he adds, Sure you do not take the foregoing words for
proof; adding, What though only believers are justified by the Covenant, does
it follow, that faith gives efficacy and power to the Covenant to justify?
then either there are no conditions, or causae sine quibus non, or else they
are all efficients, and give efficacy and power to other efficients: I confess
those words taken by themselves, in that sense, as he may fancy, and the words
in themselves may bear, will not come up to a full proof; Justification may be
restrained only to believers, and yet faith have no hand in it; but seeing
other Scriptures give an efficiency to faith in this work, some of them
speaking of it, as Gods instrument, Romans 3.30. most of them as man's, we may
well then know, that Scripture holds it not out as any such naked condition; To
others the Gospel-grant lies dead, to these through faith it is effectual;
There is added, Your terms of [faiths giving power through the Spirit] tell me,
that sure you still look at the wrong act of the Gospel; not at its moral act
of conveyance, or donation, but at its real operation on man's heart. I do look
at the act of the Gospel, as its real operation on man's heart, and yet I look
at the right act of it; The Gospel is an instrument to justify by the
intervening act of faith, according to Protestants, and by the intervening work
of sanctification according to Papists, and according to both there is a real
work on the soul necessary to put into a posture for Justification. All know
that Divines distinguish between redemption wrought by Christ, and the
application of it. Redemption is the proper work of the Son, but Application
they ascribe to the Spirit; Hinc Pater and Filius mittere dicuntur Spiritum ad
applicationem istam perficiendam.
The Father and the Son are said (says Amesius) to send the Spirit, to perfect
this application, Medull. Theol. Cap. 24. Sect. 5. And whereas I am told that
neither Scripture, nor Divines use to say that the Gospel remitteth sin, or
justifies by the Spirit; nor does the Spirit otherwise do it then by inditing
the Gospel, etc. Though I own not this phrase that is here put upon me, and I
might expect so much privilege, as to be Master of my own words; yet I would
have it taken into further consideration, whether Divines use his language or
mine, or whether they judge not that t^ ^e the right act of the Gospel for
pardon of sin, which I mention. The Leyden Divines having spoke of the
application of the righteousness of Christ, Disp. 33. Sect. 21. have these
words, Sect 24. Haec applicatio in nobis and fit a Spiritu sancto, 1 Cor. 6.11.
dono scilicet fidei. Ipse enim eam per Ministerium Evangelii (Quod Ministerium
Spiritus dicitur, 2 Cor. 3.8.) ingenerat, ac verbo suo ac Sacramentis confirmat
and auget, Phil. 1.29. Gal. 5.5. Unde and Spiritus fidei dicitur, 2 Cor. 4.13.
qua Deum ut gratiosum, Christum ut redemptorem, ejusque justitiam, and ex ea
vitam aeternam apprehendimus, Joan. 1.12. Romans 9.30.
This application in us is made by the holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.11. viz. by the
gift of faith; For he works it by the Ministry of the Gospel (which is called
the Ministry of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8.) and increases it by his Word and
Sacraments, Phil. 1.29. Gal. 5 5. From whence it is called the Spirit of faith,
2 Cor. 4.13. whereby we apprehend God as gracious, Christ as Redeemer, and his
righteousness, and from it everlasting life, Joh. 1.12. Romans 9.30. And Sect.
25. This application on our part is made by faith, Romans 5.1. Acts 26.18. A
part nostra, fide, Romans 5.2. Actor. 26.18. and ex fide, and per fidem, To.
3.30. Justistficamur and justificat nos Deus.
By faith, and through faith, Romans 3.30. We are justified, and God justified
us: with much more to that purpose. And Ravanellus in verbum justificatio,
speaking of the instrument of justification says, it is either outward or
inward Causa instrumentalis externa verbum Dei and S^cramenta ut patet ex Romans
4.11. [ubi circumcisio appellatur s gillum justitiae fidei] nam verbum Dei and
Sacramenta sunt organa, per quae Deus nos vocat, and per quae operatur,
conservat, ac auget in nobis fidem, obsignatque in cordibus nostris gratiam
justificationis; atque adeo Ministri Ecclesiae and alii qui docent nos viam
salutis, Dan. 12.3.
The outward instrumental cause, he says, is the Word of God and the
Sacraments, as appears from, Romans 4.11. [where circumcision is called the seal
of the righteousness of faith] for, says he, the Word of God, and Sacraments,
are instruments by which God does call, and by which he works, preserves, and
increases faith in us, and seals in our heart the grace of justification, and
so also the Ministers of the Church, and others, which teach us the way of
salvation, Dan. 12.3. Gomarus, Matthew 5.4. page 46. denying any affections or
work of man preceding faith, to be the procuring cause of justification, and
affirming that faith it self is no such cause, but an instrument only; gives
this reason, Nullae hominum affectiones, ac praeparationes, nullaque opera
fidem antecedentia, justificationis causae, nedum proreantes esse possunt; imo
nec fides ipsa causa illius est procreans (cum ealaus soli gratiae Dei, ac
merito Christi and efficaciae Spiritus sancti comperat, Romans 3.24. and 28.
Ephesians. 2 8.) sed tantum instrumentalis.
That honor belongs only to the grace of God, and merit of Christ, and
efficacy of the holy Ghost; so far are these Divines from excluding the Spirit
from having any hand in this work: such a Gospel instrume^^ality as that it
should do nothing at all on the souls of men, I have not before read or heard
of. As it tenders conditions, so it is employed to work the conditions that it
tenders: It makes known the mind of God, that men believing have right to
Christ, and in him to justification, and it works faith for justification,
only believers saved by it, and it is the power of God, and not nude signum
voluntatis divinae, to salvation. And as the Simile brought by Mr. Baxter of a
Fathers bequeathing by his testament an hundred pound a piece to each of his
sons; To one on condition he will ask it of his elder Brother, and thank him
for it; to a second, and third upon conditions at pleasure, with this demand
upon it, Do any of these conditions give power to the testament? No, yet the
testament does not efficaciter agere, till they are performed, why is that?
(says he) because all such instruments work morally; only by expressing ut
signa the will of the agent; and therefore they work both when and how he will,
and it is his will that they shall not work till such a time, and but upon such
terms, etc. He might easily see how little this serves to our present purpose.
1. That which he speaks of, is a bare testament, and no more; but the Gospel
(as elsewhere I have showed) is a Covenant truly so called, and not barely a
testament. 2. Those Legacies are such gifts that each son would be apt to
embrace, being ready to put a sufficiently high estimate upon them; But this
Gospel-gift, if nothing further be done, will for ever lie contemned, and
neglected. 3. The will is a mere instrument of donation, leaving the Legatee to
himself; to accept or refuse. The Gospel is the instrument of Gods power by the
Spirit, to change the heart, and work upon the will for acceptance. 4. These
testament-legacies presuppose the condition not yet performed, and so the
Legatee without all right upon Testament-termes; But Mr. Baxters
Gospel-donation, supposes the conditions already done, and the soul upon that
account in full possession, before this Gospel-donation comes; It conveyes
right to a believer, and if he be a believer, as has been abundantly showed,
he is in present possessed of Christ his righteousness, and justification by
him. And whether or no, I have acquit my self from the double charge, brought
against me, I shall leave to the Readers consideration.

1. If there be an instrumental efficiency ascribed to faith in Scripture in a
work, in which there is as much of God, and as little of man seen as in the
work of justification, then there is no reason but that faith also has an
instrumental efficacy in the work of justification. This is clear; The reason
given why faith should have no instrumental efficacy, is, because this takes
from God, who alone is the efficient, and ascribes to man, who is justified,
and does not justify himself: But an instrumental efficiency is ascribed in
Scripture to faith, in a work on which there is as much of God, and as little
of man, as in the work of justification. This is clear, in miraculous cures
wrought upon diseased persons: The work upon them was Gods, not man's; They were
cured, and did not cure themselves, yet an isntrumental efficiency is ascribed
to their faith. If those words spoke to the two blind men, Matthew. 9.29.
According to your faith, be it unto you, nor that of Paul, concerning the
creeple at Lystra, That he had faith to be healed, Act. 14.9. nor yet that of
Christ to the Canaanitish woman, Matthew. 15.28. O woman, great is thy faith, be
it unto thee as thou will, will not hold it out, which yet seem to speak very
much this way; (other graces were qualifications, yet none but this is taken
notice of) yet that to the woman with the bloody issue is full, Matthew. 9.22.
Mark. 5.34. Thy faith has made thee whole, not only made whole by faith
(which is an exception against faiths justifying) but faith made her whole,
Quemadmodum fidei ascribit Christus quod mulier soluta est a morbo corporis,
ita certum est fide nos consequi remissionem peccatorum and adoptionem filiorum
Dei juxta doctrinam Evangelii.
words speaking as much of instrumental efficacy as may be. The conclusion then
follows, That faith has its instrumental efficiency in justification
likewise. Pareus his notes upon the words are worthy observation. As Christ
ascribes it to faith, that the woman is healed of the disease of her body: so
it is certain, that by faith we obtain remission of sins, and adoption of
children of God according to the doctrine of the Gospel.

2. If there be an instrumental efficiency ascribed to faith in Scripture
respective to salvation: then there is an instrumental efficacy ascribed to
faith, respective to justification. This is plain; nothing can instrumentally
work to salvation, that takes not in justification. But an instrumental
efficacy is ascribed to faith, respective to salvation, Luke 7.59. He said to
the woman, Thy faith has saved thee. In the context there is a full proof of
the Major. The great privilege which she of grace received there is the
forgiveness of her many sins, and this is acribed to her faith. The Minor is
fully proved; Her great love is mentioned as a consequent of this grace
received; But it is ascribed to her faith, as that which had its alone
efficacy, Thy faith has saved thee. As we are saved by faith, or through
faith, Ephesians. 2.8. so faith saves. The conclusion then follows, that faith
has its instrumental efficacy in justification.

3. That which puts a man into possession of that from which justification
necessarily and inevitably follows, that is either a principal efficient, or
an instrument in justification. This cannot be denied: He that puts me into a
place, to which a plentiful livelihood is necessarily annexed, is either the
efficient or an instrument of my livelihood: But faith puts into possession of
Christ, from whom justification necessarily follows. This proposition consists
of two parts. 1. That faith puts into possession of Christ. 2. That
justification necessarily follows this possession. But I shall stand upon the
proof of neither, seeing as in themselves they are plain, so they are confessed
by Mr. Baxter. Faith then is either the efficient or instrument in our
justication. Not the efficient, all know, and therefore an instrument.

4. That which is ascribed in Scripture both to God and man, in a work, in
which there is a concurrence of God and man, in such expressions, which usually
hold forth the efficiency of an instrument, and cannot fairly be interpreted
otherwise, is not unfitly called an instrument both of God and man in such a
work. This I know not how fairly can be denied; and any man will but abuse his
reason that calls for a proof of it: But faith in Scripture is ascribed both to
God and man in the work of justification, in which there is a mutual
concurrence of God and man, and in words that usually hold out the working of
an instrument, and cannot fairly be interpreted otherwise: Therefore faith is
not unfitly called the instrument of God, and man in justification. The Minor
consists of four parts. 1. That faith in justification is ascribed both to God
and man, and this consists also of two parts. 1. That faith is ascribed to God
in justification; and this we have already proved from, Romans 3.30. Gal. 3.8. as
it is also ascribed to him in sanctification, Act. 17.9. 2. That it is ascribed
to man in justification which is held out to us wheresoever we are said to be
justified by faith, seeing faith is the act of man: and the Prophet tells us,
The just shall live by his faith, which the Apostle applies to justification,
Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11. The second part in this Proposition is, That there is a
mutual concurrence of God and man in this work, as God gives a discharge, so
man accepts: Which by Mr. Br. himself is acknowledged, according to that before
quoted out of Austin. The third part is, That th^^ is ascribed to God and man
in expressions that usually hold forth the efficiency of an instrument, which
the phrases [by] and [through] do manifest. The fourth is, That it cannot be
fairly interpreted otherwise, or of any other thing but an instrument. And this
is also clear, Either it must hold out a meritorious cause, a mere condition,
or else an instrument. A meritorious cause none will say, a mere condition, or
bare causa sine qua non, it cannot be, for two reasons. 1. Such phrases are
uncouth, to say, That a thing is done by that which is merely a condition sine
qua non of it. 2. There are many other such conditions, to which this is never
thus applied, as the Apostle says, To which of the Angels said he at any time,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a
Father, and he shall be to me a Son? Heb. 1.5. To which of the Angels said he
at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool?
Heh. 1.13. so we may say, To which of the graces, (when all are reckoned up by
number) was it ever said, that we are justified, by it? Tthe conclusion then
follows as before, that faith is an instrument of God and man in justification.

5. Out of this we may more briefly thus argue: If the holy Ghost single out
faith from among all other graces; which are yet conditions or causae sine
quibus non, and ascribes alone to it that which in the ordinary acceptance
holds out an instrumental efficiency, then it is not a bare condition, or causa
sine qua non, but an instrumental efficient: But the holy Ghost singles out
faith from among all other graces which are conditions and causae sine quibus
non, and ascribes to it and no other, that which in the ordinary acceptance
implies an i^strumental efficiency; The conclusion then follows, that faith is
an instrumental efficient in justification.

Lastly, To bring if it may be a compromizing argument, If faith works at
least, that which is proportionable to an instrument properly and rigidly so
called in the work of justification, then it is not unfitly called by the name
of an instrument. This is plain; that which does work, that every way answers
to the work of an instrument, that may fitly be called by that name; But faith
works at least, that which is proportionable to the work of an instrument. This
is confessed by Mr. Br. who is ready to yield that it should be called,
Instrumentum Metaphoricum, and a Metaphor is a figure whereby a word is carried
out of its most proper signification, unto an other that carries resemblance
and proportion with it. In case then it does not that whch is proportionable to
an instrument properly so called, it is no instrumentum Metaphporicum, but
Catachresticon. And indeed Mr. Baxters gloss renders it such a Catachresis, as
may make all Rhetorique ashamed of it. A Metaphorical Instrument that shall
have no resemblance of an instrument in it; But if any will say that an
instrument is external, sensible, whether it be for operation or reception;
but faith is internal, invisible; and therefore no instrument rigidly and
properly so called, though there be no cogent reason to yield it, (for as is
the agent, so well may be the instrument), yet I shall not be so stiff to
contend about it; yield that it does the work to put into Christ from whom
Justification necessarily follows, and I will no longer contend about the
Word, but let it be an instrument in exact property of speech or in a Metaphor
as men shall please.

As to that of the sole sufficiency of the Word, without faith, as an
instrument in Justification; I might take up an argument from Mr. Baxters, and
thus reason: That which cannot bring a man to the works that are antecedent to
justification, cannot justify: This is clear; That which cannot work the
prerequisites, cannot work the thing it self: But the Word alone (according to
Mr. Baxter) cannot bring a man to these antecedent works, Sect. 14. Chap. 29.
Ergo. But I shall content my self at present with this only. That which the
Word says, is done by faith, it cannot do without it; This is clear: But the
Word says, and frequently says, we are justified by faith: Ergo the Word
cannot justify without faith. Here some distinction must be used, if any
evasion be endeavored; But then it must be confessed, that it is an other kind
of justification that is spoke to by Mr. Baxter then is laid down in Scripture:
For Scripture-justification is still by faith: that is the Holy Ghosts constant
language. And to come to a right understanding (if it may be) of parties;
somewhat must be yielded, and somewhat asserted, and maintained. That which
must be yielded is, That God in his Word declares upon what terms a man may
attain unto justification; and to this the Word, as signum voluntatis divinae
(being a manifestation of Gods pleasure concerning the justification of a
sinner) is sufficient; So far I shall willingly grant. That which is to be
asserted is, 1. That this manifestation of Gods pleasure, or signum voluntatis
divinae before mentioned, is the first ground work on which the whole work of
justification is bottomed, and goes before those graces but now mentioned,
which Mr. Baxter makes antecedent to justification. This is plain. The terms
on which God will justify must be understood, before men can be brought to
accept and come up to them. 2. This manifestation of Gods will thus made
known, and by the power of the Spirit applied to the soul, in an unjustified
condition, works to humiliation, regeneration, faith, and by faith to
justification. 3. This manifestation of Gods pleasure being applied to a man
already humbled, regenerate and in faith, finds him as we have heard before in
a justified posture. Though Faith in nature goes before justification, as the
cause before the effect; yet they are in that manner simul tempore; that none
can conceive a believing man in an unjustified condition: that so there should
any intervall or time pass, for conveyance of right by Gospel-grant to
justification. 4. This Gospel-grant or manifestation of Gods mind being thus
tendered as before,; to a regenerate believing soul, serves for ratification and
confirmation of his justified condition, to make good to such a believing son
or daughter, that their sins are forgiven. To apply these assertions to our
present purpose. This manifestation of Gods pleasure, Gospel-grant, or signum
voluntatis divinae, or whatsoever else we call it, in the first consideration
justifies not; Going before that which is antecedent to Justification (as we
see it does) it cannot justify. In the second consideration it works indeed to
justification; But if we yield this to Mr. Baxter, he will not accept of it;
for he says, he does not thus speak of it; and in this consideration it
justifies not without faith, but works faith in order to Justification. By this
man is preached forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are
justified. In the third consideration it justifies not, seeing it finds the
work done to its hands, and only serves for the work of assurance as in the
last place is asserted. So that, all that can be said of this Gospel-grant,
donation, or conveyance of right (so often by Mr. Baxter mentioned in this
work) is, 1. To make known Gods mind, on what terms justification may be
attained. 2 By the power of the Spirit through faith to work it, and finally to
assure, ratify, and confirm it. I shall the refore close this dispute (if I may
be allowed so to style it) in the words of Chemnitius in his Common place, de
justificat, mihi page 797. octavo. Having spoken to the causes of justification
he says, It is altogether necessary that there be application made of these
causes to the person to be justified. Omnino vero necesse est fieri
applicationem harum causarum ad personam justificandam. Nam quotquot receperunt
eum, his fecit potestatem filios Dei fieri, Joan. 1.12. and 3.33. Et Modus seu
medium applicationis seu apprehensionis docendi gratia vocatur causa
instrumentalis. Duplex autem est causa instrumentalis. 1. Docens, Patefaciens,
Offerens et Exhibens beneficia justificationis per quam Deus nobis communicate
illa bona et haec est vox Evangelii et usus sacramentorum, vel sicut veteres
loquntur, verbum vocale et visibile.
For as many as received him, to them he gave power to be made the Sons of God,
John. 1.12. and, 3. v. 33. And this manner or medium of application or
apprehension, speaking to men's capacity, is called a cause instrumental. And
this isntrumental cause is twofold. 1. Teaching, Opening, Offering, and
Exibiting the benefits of justification, by which God does communicate unto us
those gifts; And this is the Word of the Gospel, and use of Sacraments, or as
the Ancients speak the Word vocal and visible. 2. Receiving or apprehending, 2.
Recipiens seu apprehendens, qua nobis applicamus illa bona quae in Evangelio
offeruntur, ita ut eorum participes reddamur. Est igitur quasi manus Dei
traders, et hominis manus suscipiens id quod traditur. Supra autem testimonia
et annotata et explicata sunt solam fidem, non ulias alias vel qualitates, vel
opera in nobis esse medium applicationis.
whereby we apply those gifts to our selves, which are offered in the Gospel,
that we may be made partakers of them. There is therefore the hand of God, as
it were delivering; and the hand of man receiving that which is delivered. And
testimonies are both observed, and above explained, that only faith sand no
other qualities or works in us) is the medium of application.

SECT. VI. A fourth Corollary from the former Doctrine.
AS Christians must see that they be aright principled in this Gospel-doctrine
of the righteousness of faith, Christians must get assurance that they do act
according to these principles.
so also they must get assurance that they act according to these principles,
which I might urge respective to all that, which is required of a man of
Gospel-righteousnesse. But having already spoke to that purpose in pressing the
necessity of the answer of conscience unto Sacramental engagements; I shall
here only urge it, respectively to that grace which immediately interests us
in this righteousness, which is the grace of faith, as we see in the Text;
which is confessed to be the grace that receives Christ, even by those that deny
the instrumentality of it in our Justification. If this righteousness which is
our Justification be the righteousness of Faith, then those that are void of
faith must needs be wanting in this righteousness, and Christ being the end of
the Law for righteousness to those that believe, those that persist in
unbelief never attain to this end. And howsoever zealous they may otherwise
appear, yet they come short of righteousness for life and salvation. Giving
assent to all Gospel Truths, (perhaps upon the principles of their education)
they may not only have the repute, but also enjoy all outward privileges of
believers; yet wanting that work upon their will, or if you please in their
affections to receive Christ and close with him, they yet have not Christ nor
life in him, and therefore upon this account, there is all reason to hearken to
that of the Apostle, Especially to see to their faith.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves: Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be Reprobates? In which words we see the Apostles exhortation, and his reason
annexed. The exhortation calls us to self-examination, to a self-tryal, an
inquisitive, experimental trial; The question to be put, or thing to be proved,
or brought to upon trial, is our faith, not barely the doctrine of faith (as
some would have it) whereby we may conclude that we are of such a Church, in
which Christ is visibly resident in Ordinances, but the grace of faith, whereby
he makes his abode in our souls. The reason annexed is put by way of
interrogation, or question, Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ
is in you, except ye be reprobates? which does not imply, that all are
Reprobates, that know not in present, that Christ is in them; but this is all
that is employed or can be gathered, that Jesus Christ is in all that are not
reprobates; where reprobate is not yet opposed to the Elect, as though all such
were everlastingly cast-awayes in whom Christ is not in present: But as the
word is used, Jer. 6.30. reprobate silver, that is, unfit for use or service,
so it is here taken: such in present are not in a saving, but in a lost
condition; and therefore it much concerns us to put this upon the trial.

Motives to persuade to get assurance of this grace. 1. Necessity of Faith.
For Motives to put men upon this work, consider,

First, the necessity of this grace, and that upon a several account; 1.
Without Faith (as you have heard) we are without this righteousness. None in
unbelief can say of Christ, Jehovah our righteousness. All the good that
Christ does, unbelief loses; so much good that Christ can do thee, of so much
unbelief strips thee. The Apostle tells us of unsearchable riches in Christ,
Ephesians. 3.8. Such that none can sum up, nor he that is highest in skill in
Arithmetique calculate. Christ is the Fathers Storehouse, Magazine, or rich
Exchequer; The Father has not a gift for any of his, but he lays it up in
Christ, and a faith receives it from Christ. Noah by faith was heir of this
righteousness, Heb. 11.7. The rest of the world wanting this grace went
without this inheritance. The rest of Canaan was lost by unbelief, Heb. 3.18.
The rest of heaven will be thus lost in like manner, God has chosen the poor
of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom, which he has prepared
for those that love him, Jam. 2.5. The rich of this world destitute of this
Faith, make forfeiture of this Kingdom. Is Christ a gift? Faith receives him,
and unbelief is wanting. Is Christ food? Faith feeds upon him, and unbelief is
hunger-starved. Is Christ raiment? Faith puts him on, and unbelief is naked. Is
Christ a Medicine? Faith applies him, and unbelief languisheth. Is Christ a
laver? Faith drencheth and douzeth it self in him, and unbelief is filthy, and
defiled. Is Christ a pardon? Faith sues it out, and unbelief lies under guilt.
Is Christ satisfaction? Faith makes the plea, and attains a discharge, and
unbelief remains indebted. 2. Without Faith, the soul is under the wrath of God
and his ireful displeasure. This is a necessary result from the former. The man
of unbelief wants that which might be interposed as an atonement, and might
stand as a skreen or shield for his guard. And it is also fully laid down in
Christ's words, Joh. 3.36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life:
but the wrath of God abides on him. What Zophar says of the wicked man, Job
20.29. This is his portion from God, and the heritage appointed him of God,
that Christ says of unbelievers: so long as they remain in unbelief, so long
wrath abides on them. All by nature are the children of wrath, having no other
inheritance; and the man of unbelief never gets from under wrath to attain any
other portion. This is an aggregate of all miseries, when all is reckoned up
that can be named, to make miserable, wrath comprizeth it all to the uttermost,
to infiniteness. As is the man, so is his strength, say Zeba, and Zalmunna,
Judge. 8.21. As is God, so is his wrath; with this motive the Psalmist presses
to faith, Psalm. 2.12. Thy sin has merit enough to damn, and thou have not any
interest in Christ to save or deliver. He that is void of Faith, and yet under
no such fears, it is not because there is no cause of fears, but that such a
soul is not awakened, to see his fearful deplored and desperate condition. If
the rich glutton had seen Hell gaping for him, and the Devil ready to hale and
drag him, he could not then have had any list to his every-dayes Gorgeous
apparel, nor yet any appetite to his delicate fare. That is the condition of
secure sensual ones, till Hellfire flame about them, they think they are sure
of heaven. 3. Without faith there is no benefit to be had, or good to be found
in any Ordinances. No Ordinance is useful but either as it is improved by Faith
already seated in the soul, or as it is serviceable to the plantation of it. No
duty of any kind works to acceptance from an unbelievers hand. Abel's sacrifice
was accepted, when Cain's could not gain acceptance, Genesis 4.4, 5. The Apostle
shows us the reason of this difference, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered a more
excellent sacrifice then Cain. The Parable of the sower tells us, how few
profitable hearers of the Word there can be found; and the Apostle gives the
reason, Heb. 4.2. The Word is not mixed with faith in those that hear it. It is
effectual alone in believers, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. and no more have audience in
prayer, then those that profit in hearing: and there is one and the same reason
of both, Jam. 1.6, 7. And that man is doubtless under an heavy Judgment, that
never gets good when he hears from God, nor obtains his request when he seeks
to God. At the Lords Table they eat bread, but feed not on Christ; they take
the Cup, but have no interest in the blood of the new Covenant. 4. Without
faith nothing is done that God accepts. The man and the work both displease,
Heb. 11.6. There must be a concurrence of all requisites to render a work good,
and acceptable: But in an unbelievers work (the matter of the work excepted)
all requisites are wanting. The rise is from a fountain that is unclean, and
the unbelieving soul cannot go so high as to make the glory of God the end. And
the rule is above him in the work to look after. 5. Without Faith the whole of
man, head, breast, and bowels, are all open to Satan. Faith is a Christians
shield, Ephesians. 6.16. and a shield is the defense not of one part, but the guard
of the whole. A man without faith, is a Soldier without arms, and destitute
of all power to make any manner of resistance. Satan leads such an one at
pleasure. There is nothing of Christ, nothing of grace, nothing of the Spirit,
to stand up in opposition. Some devils are not resisted without strength of
faith, Mark 9.29. No devil without faith can be vanquished or overcome.

The benefits that faith bring: as, 1. Whole of Christ theirs.
1. Christ is his, and all that is Christ's, who does believe. Christ with all
his unsearchable riches is made over to believers; This is the greatest of
gifts that God has in his hand for to bestow; and imparting this gift, with it
he gives all things. These are sons of God, Joh. 1.12. and being sons, they are
heirs, joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. heirs of the righteousness of
faith, Heb. 11.7. heirs of a Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Heaven and all on this side
heaven, that stands in any reference to it, is theirs, Whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come: all are theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1
Cor. 3.22. 2. These stand secure against every enemy. First, 2. They stand
secure against every enemy. 1. Against Satan. In his accusatious.
they are secure against Satan man's capital and most potent adversary. They
stand secure against his accusations, having an advocate in heaven that makes
appearance to answer every charge against. them It is of the beleiving elect
(not only chosen from eternity, but in time taken out from the rest of the
world) that the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? Christ's death, resurrection, and intercession in glory is
his answer to every plea. All that the unbeliever wants, in those several
relations that we spoke to in Christ, that the man of faith enjoyes, nothing
can be conceived in sin, but there is in Christ to answer. Secondly, In his
temptations. 2. Against the world.
The believer stands secure against Satan's temptations: upon resistance Satan
flees, Jam. 4.7. and they make strong resistance, 1 Pet. 5.9. These are secure
against the world: Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even onr faith, 1 John 5.4. Greater is
he that is in them, then he that is in the world. They are kept by the power of
God, through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. The everlasting arms are
underneath them. Faith interests it self in God, and all that is of God, 3. It
interests in God and all that is Gods. His power.
for safety and preservation; The office or work which is ascribed to God
respective to man's preservation, is ascribed to faith; The Lord Is a shield or
Buckler for defense, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, my fortress, my
deliverer, my Buckler, Prove. 2.7. He is a Buckler to them that walk uprightly,
Psalm 3.3. Thou Lord art a shield for me; with endless more places; Yea, God
is so a shield that there is no other, Psalm 47.9. The shields of the earth
belong unto God: yet faith is a shield, Ephesians 6.16. What God can do for
safety, faith cand do: not by any strength of its own, so faith were advanced
into the place of God, but only as interesting us in God, and in all which is
of God. Faith interests it self in the power of God, and takes in omnipotence
for help, so did Abraham by faith, Romans 4.21. No difficulty in the thing could
cause his faith to stagger. So did Jehoshaphat, in that danger in which he
stood, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. so Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. so the three children when they
were in danger of the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.17. Faith interests it self in the
faithfulness of God, and realizeth every promise to the soul: and therefore it
is said by the Apostle to be the evidence of things not seen, His faithfulness.
Heb. 11.1. what no eye can see any other way then in a promise, that faith
looks upon as present; so Sarah in the promise which she received, Heb. 11.11.
so David, 2 Samuel 7.28. So that he prays, In thy faithfulness hear me, and in
thy righteousness, Psalm. 143.1. Gods truth is the believers Shield and
Buckler, Psalm. 92.4. Faith interests it self in the mercies of God, His mercy.
in the multitude of his bowels and compassions; so the Psalmist in those
depths, in which he was plunged, Psalm. 130.1.33.4. and under that guilt that he
had drawn upon his soul, Psalm. 51.1. and so the Church in that low condition
into which she was cast, Lament. 3.22. Faith interests it self in the Wisdom of
God, His wisdom.
when all light is so clouded and all channels so stopped, that no visible means
on earth can be found, faith knows that what we see not, God sees. As Christ
could convey himself out of the midst of his enemies, so he can free his from
their enemies; As he could enter when the docres were shut, so he knows how to
open all obstructions. So Jehoshaphats faith was acted, We kn^w not what to do,
but our eyes are upon thee, 2. Chr. 20.12. So Mordecai's faith likewise, Esth.
4.14. Enlargement and deliverance shall arise to the Jews from another place;
So Peter, The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, 2. Pet.
2.9. Faith interests it self in the help of the Angels of God; His Angels.
when the Prophets servants eyes were opened, he saw Mountains, full of horses
and Chariots, 2. King. 6.17. a whole host of Angels for defense in straits; and
those Jacob saw when his Brother Esau marched against him, Genesis 32.1, 2. The
believing man knows what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the
Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. This
promise is made to every confiding soul, Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways; They shall bear thee up
in their hands lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.

This assurance is possible.
difficult it is, or else such a narrow search and diligent scrutiny needed
not; and possible it is, otherwise it booted not. Copper may be like unto Gold,
and tin unto Silver; yet that gold or silver which is right, may be known
from all that is counterfeit. The good ground well-look'd into may be
differenced from the best of those grounds which are bad. A temporary faith may
be like that which is true, yet it is not the same with it, and may be
distinguished from it. There is somewhat in the faith of the elect, that is not
to be found in the faith of any other in the world. Otherwise hypocrites must
everlastingly feed themselves with vain hopes, and the true believer lie under
unnecessary fears; so no Minister of Christ could be able to divide the Word
aright to any of his people. The hypocrite would apply the believers comforts,
and the believer would lie under the hypocrites terrors.

Fourthly, Upon trial thy faith may be found temptation-proof. Upon trial faith
may be found approved.
There is many times most hopes of those that are aptest to call it into
question. As there are many who scarce ever questioned, but that they do
believe, yet when they come to the test, are nothing, TEKEL may be written upon
them, Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting, Dan. 5.27. What
the Wiseman says of riches is true being applied to faith Prove. 13.7. Some
boast themselves of the strength of their faith, that they thank God they have
ever believed, when as their faith is a mere fancy. These boasters are but a
crack, like a banquerupts vapor. Others complain of their unbelief, yet ready
to renounce all for Christ, their complaint is not out of want of faith no more
then the covetous worldlings is out of want of wealth, but because they cannot
give themselves satisfaction in believing.

Fifthly, In case upon a due search and trial thou find but a Howsoever the
case is not forlorn and remediless.
a mere resemblance of justifying faith, and not the faith that does justify,
yet it is not so remedilessely gone, but that it may be helped; not so
deplored, but that a cure may be had. The most barren ground may be made
fruitful, and the heart that is most obdurate may be made fleshy. God out of
the number of unbelieving ones, and out of the number of mere pretenders to the
faith, chooses to himself those that are truly faithful. When the evidences of
a man's lands are faulty, and the fault past help, men are willing to shuffle
all over and rub out as well as they can, but go with many sick thoughts about
it, but if there may be any way found they will not be wanting in their
endeavors, neither will they spare any cost to settle and establish it. Deal
so with thy faith, bring thy evidences to Council and what is amiss, let be
amended.

SECT. VII. Helps for the discovery of the truth of our Faith.
FOr our help in this discovery, we must consider,

First, The soil, where faith grows. Every ground will not bear all grain, and
every heart is not capable of true faith.

Secondly, The proper, and true kind and nature of it. Every plant that does
grow up like it, is not it.

Thirdly, The means that is to be used for preservation of it. It will not live
and grow without nourishment.

Fourthly, The fruit that it bears, or effect that it produces. True faith is
not idle, dead or barren. Some of these, or all of these will lay open thy
faith to thee.

The humbled soul the proper soil for faith.
1. The soil where it grows, is the humble, or rather the humbled soul. The
heart rent, torn, broken, and nothing in its own eyes is the proper seat of it.
You may as soon find a fair rich garden, or a fruitful corn-field upon an hard
rock, or in ground where no plough has touched, as you can find faith in an
heart not cast down, but lift up in it self. This we may see in the opposition
put by the Prophet, Hab. 2.4. His soul which is lifted up is not upright in
him, but the just shall live by his faith. The heart is sometimes said to be
lift up for God, high in resolutions and actings in his obedience, 2 Chronicles.
17.6. This is not done, but by the strength of faith. The unbelieving soul in
the ways of heaven is low, and dastardly; but the lift-up heart in this place
of the Prophet, is an heart high in it self, never yet brought down to the
sight of its own defiled and deplored condition; and this is put in opposition
to the believing heart. This soul little heeds a threat, as little regards a
promise, sees no necessity of reliance upon Christ, and has no strength for
obedience. The opposite to this is the believing soul, and that is the humbled
soul, brought down in sense and sight of its own condition. Humiliation, as the
word bears, is a bringing down, laying low, and rendering base and contemptible,
and this is the most proper acceptance, and in Scripture variously used; 1. As
the act of God upon man, or any society of men, as, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3. 1 Samuel 2.7. 2
Cor. 12.21. 2. The act of man upon man, one man upon another; and this, either
to make sinfully vile, filthily low; so the defiling of a woman is called
humbling her, Levit. 21.14. Ezekiel. 22.10, 11. or to make outwardly low and mean;
so Nebuchadnezzar took an oath of Zedekiah, and brought him under homage, to
make the Kingdom base, Ezekiel. 17.14. 3. As the act of man upon himself, and
this also either to make sinfully vile, as the sons of Eli made themselves
vile, 1 Samuel 3.13. or outwardly vile, and so the Lord Christ for our sakes
humbled himself, Phil. 2.8. And as the word is used to make low, or render
vile, so also to esteem, repute and account as low, and vile: Sin brings a man
lower then the dunghill, then the dungeon, and man has made himself so by sin.
When we see our selves in this low estate, and are brought to a sense and
acknowledgment of it, then we are humble, then we humble our selves; and the
soul that is brought into this frame, is the soil in which faith takes, and
kindly grows. Such a soul sees nothing but want, and therefore is glad of
supplies: sees nothing but danger, and therefore is glad of support, and
deliverance. As the lift-up heart will not come to Christ, that it may have
life, being under no sense of death, so these cannot be kept from Christ. The
soul which is naturally high and lofty, is not in Gods ordinary way wrought
into this frame without some sensible work upon it, being so foul, and yet in
its own eyes clean; so wretched, and yet in its own thoughts happy; it must be
brought to conviction in order to conversion; it must by the Law be brought to
see sin, before it will be washed from it, or will seek a pardon of it. There
must be John Baptists to make way for Christ, some soul-shakings, before the
sweet and still voice of Gospel-comforts. Something indeed may be said, as to
those, that with Timothy have been trained up from childhood, in the knowledge
of Scriptures, and with John Baptist sanctified in the womb, for the abatement
of this soul-humbling, and shaking work, as to the degree of it, though not to
the total exclusion. They were not capable to make observation of the pollution
of sin, till they were in their measure by the Spirit cleansed, nor to know the
danger of sin, till they were justified and acquitted; yet even in those, there
is so much of the relics of sin, and remainders of corruption, that upon
discovery of their inconformity in such a measure to the will of God, they
cannot want some workings of Spirit. But as to those that live all their days,
and never apprehend any thought of fear by reason of sin, nor ever called the
state of their soul into question, but have always carried it in the same
plight; Among all the questions that they have put in their lives, about their
health, their estates, the nature of their grounds, or how to carry on their
Trades (besides those multiplied ones of mere vanity and inconsiderable
concernment) they never had it in their thoughts to move a question of any
concernment to their souls. The young man's question, the Jaylours question,
Peter's hearers question, never came into their heads. I have seen little
evidence of good in these; and I see little ground to believe any thing of
faith in their souls. You may speak of some of these, as of men of good
dispositions, of a fair nature, and harmless life and course; these may grow
up in nature moralized and regulated, when yet faith is far from them: they may
grow up high in profession, but growing in the blade, or leaf only, and not in
the root, they may justly be suspected. Every tree that bears a fair leaf, does
not bear good fruit; and every apple of a fair color is not to be desired for
food. Such fruit as this, may take where faith will not grow. The Prophets
words then should be heeded, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not amongst
thorns: this way must be taken for soul-humbling, that men may be brought to
believing.

The nature of faith wherein it consists. A necessary prerequisite in faith.
2. The next way of discovery is, to take notice of the proper and true kind,
the genuine nature of this grace. And here I hope, the Christian Reader may
reap a double advantage; First to understand what faith is, and the requisites
in it. Secondly, helps for proof of themselves, whether they be in the faith.
And here we may observe; First, a necessary prerequisite of faith. Secondly,
the essential parts of it. The prerequisite to it is knowledge, which some
indeed make a part of faith; but faith, I suppose, rather presupposes it, then
is made up of it. The essential parts, are either in the understanding, or in
the will, or affections; for faith is an act of the soul, and the whole soul is
employed in it. First, then of that which I make a prerequisite. Knowledge, is
in that way required to the making up of faith, that is often put for faith,
as, Isai. 53.11. And when God works to faith, he is said to open the eyes, or
to work to knowledge or light, Heb. 10.32. Act. 26.18. We come to faith by
hearing, we must therefore hear, and know, before we can believe. Knowledge is
the first act or work of the soul that conducerh toward faith in the heart;
Now knowledge is threefold. First, of sense, we know what we see; Thomas knew
Christ, that is the person of Christ, when he had seen his wounds, and put his
finger into them. This knowledge is not necessarily required in faith, Christ
there says, Blessed is he that sees not, and believes, John 20.23. And the
Apostle says that faith is the evidence of things not seen. Secondly, of
reason; we know those things which our reason is able to reach; This knowledge
runs through all sciences, in which we attain knowledge by discourse; and the
clearer head, the better Artist, and the more of knowledge. This we do not
require to the being of faith, though faith be not always against, yet it is
often above all our reasonings; yea, our reasonings, and hammering out
conclusions are oftentimes against faith. The word of faith beats down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and brings into captivity every thought, 2. Cor. 10.5. Our Notionalists
are indeed men of sublimated understandings, in case they can always reach
unto that which according to the Gospel they are to believe. Thirdly, of
authority, we judge our selves to know a thing which men worthy of credit do
make known: and if we receive the witness of men, says the Apostle, the
witness of God is greater, 1. John 5.9. The testimony of man gives a moral
certainty; and such that we will not question. The multiplication of witnesses
renders our knowledge grounded on such authority, more firm; and therefore the
proverb, in a well qualified sense, is at least near to truth; Vox populi, vox
Dei. The voice of the peop^^ unanimously witnessing, is as the voice of God. We
do no m^re doubt that there was a massacre of Protestants in Ireland, about the
year 41. then we do, that there was one resolved upon at Shushan in the reign
of Ahashuerus, Esth. 3. The testimony of God is always of infallible truth, as
to the substance, so to every circumstance of it: many passages about that
massacre we may justly question: so we must not any thing which divine verity
has made known. This knowledge we require in faith, and know it to be
necessary to the being of faith; we must know that God has revealed in his
Word, a Trinity of Persons, or else we shall believe no such thing, as three
distinct subsistences in God, that the holy Ghost is God, that Christ is God,
and man in one person, or else we shall believe no such doctrine. We must know
the creation, from the Scriptures, or else we shall not believe a creation, but
run into that opinion, that all things have ever been, as they are. We must
know the offices of Christ, or else we shall not believe that any such office
was undertaken by him. The same we may say of every doctrine of faith; perhaps
without Scripture, we might have known somewhat confusedly of some of them: as
that there is a God, and that the world had a beginning: but we should have
known nothing at all of many of them; and nothing distinctly of any of them.
These we must know, and from the Scriptures of God know, or else we cannot
believe; we may as easily see, where nothing is to be seen, as believe where
that is not known which is to be believed. Ignorant persons therefore, that
know not the right hand from the left in religion, and are to seek in the very
first principles of the Oracles of God, in the very beginnings of the doctrine
of Christ; that either come not to hear, that they may learn, or that learn
nothing at all by hearing; ever learning and never coming to the knowledge of
the truth, are in an incapacity of faith. Men weak in knowledge can hardly make
proof of their faith, they do not well know the nature, or lively workings of
it, and so want the comfort, but not the thing. Men without knowledge, are
without faith, and have not gone the first step toward it.

The essential parts of faith.
The essential parts of it, are (as we have said) in the understanding, will
and affections. In the understanding, there is an assent to that which is
revealed, upon the authority of him that does reveal it. 1. In the
understanding. An assent.
When we believe any thing upon that account, that we suppose we see a reason
of it, as that the middle region of the air is coldest, or that the Sun is in
many degrees bigger then the Earth, that ^e may call an opinion. That which by
reason we can certainly conclude, we may call knowledge; but that which we
believe upon the credit of him that speaks it, that is faith or belief. This is
so of the being of faith, that without it there is no faith, neither humane nor
divine; The Nobleman of Israel, 2 Kings 7.1. Zachary the father of John
Baptist, Luk 1.18. Martha, John 11.39, 40. were all of them herein faulty. This
Truth of God, was above their reason, and therefore they suspended their faith
in it. We believe not what man says, when we do not assent to the truth of
that which he speaks: and we believe not what God speaks further then we assent
to the truth of his Word. Thus far the devils go, having sufficient experience
of the Truth of God; and thus far and further we must go, if we be in the
faith. Now this assent has these two properties; first, It is Firm; secondly,
Unlimited, absolute, 1. Firm.
and full. First, firm. Not always free from assaults and doubtings; Satan and
our own hearts will muster up objections, but such that yields not, but
withstands, and overcomes doubtings, holds firm to truth when all means are
used to wrest from it. Herein Eve failed, God had said, The day that ye eat ye
shall surely die; Satan brought such objections, that upon his word she
believed, that she should procure good to her self, 2. Absolute and unlimited.
and not incur evil by eating, and so yielded to unbelief, upon Satan's
reasonings. As our assent must be firm, so also absolute and unlimitted to the
whole of all that God speaks, such was the faith of Paul, Acts 24.14. Believing
all things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets: and Christ blames
the two Disciples that their faith was not such, Luk, 24.25. How little honor
do we give to man, when sometimes we give credit and belief to that which he
says, because we see reason and probability of truth in his words, and at
other times call all to question that he speaks? such is the honor that many
give to God, when they pick and choose in believing, as they do in obeying.
Promises must be believed in the way of Gods tender of them, with limit to the
conditions annexed to them; Threatenings must be believed upon those grounds
that they are menaced; commands must be believed, that is Gods sovereignty in
them, the justice and equity of them and a necessity of our yielding to them.
As it must be an assent to the whole Word of God: So it must be an assent to
it, in that sense as God propounds it. The Word in that sense that it gives of
it self, is the Word of God, and not otherwise; when we put our sense upon it,
we make it our word not Gods. Where we must not condemn all for unbelief, that
are any ways subject to mistakes, or that through weakness of judgment, do
not apprehend every thing as it is. Willing and wilful wrestings of the Word
are here spoke against: when carnal reasonings, out of singularity,
vainglory, carnal contentment, hope of gain, and admiration of men are set up
against the Truth of God; if we should go no further in our scrutiny, how many
would be found unsound in the faith? Have we not those that are so far from any
close adherence to truth tendered, that every wind tosseth them to and fro, and
drives them up and down? that hold no longer in an opinion, then a mimick
gallant keeps in a fashion, and change their faith as these do their dress?
Have we not those that believe, where they list; and that is, where it may
serve for their advantage, or repute, but where they list not, they can deny
all faith to any truth that God speaks, and deny it they will, where they see it
tends to their danger? No swearer, no drunkard, no adulterer, no extorting
oppressor, etc. can believe the truth of God in his Word; but he must with it
believe his own condemnation.

2. In the will with the affections.
But faith is a work of the whole soul, and implies the will with the
affections, as well as the understanding. Faith is expressed in Scripture, by our
coming to Christ, Joh. 6.35. And that is a work of the will, and not of the
mind: of the judgment, and not of the affections. It is called a receiving of
Christ, Joh. 1.12. this is also done by the will and affections. Consideration,
and deliberation are works of the understanding; but choice and embracing, are
works of the will; when the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.29. says, Is not this the
Messiah? There was matter of consideration, and deliberation; there was work
for the understanding to be employed in; whether he were to be acknowledged
indeed the Messiah. But now to leave all, and follow Christ, to forsake all,
and cleave to him: This is matter of choice, and work for the will and
affections, whose work it is to take, or refuse. Therefore as faith is set out
in Scripture by words implying knowledge, and assent; so likewise by words
implying affiance, trust, rolling, casting a man's self on the Lord. Faith then
takes Christ, and cleaves to him; in all of those relations in which a
Christian stands to Christ, takes Christ and looks for no other delight or
comfort; takes Christ and will not endure any other Lord, or commander; takes
Christ and looks for no other helper; takes Christ and looks for no other
Savior; takes Christ as a Savior, and trusts in him; takes Christ as an
husband, and delights in him; takes Christ as a Lord, and obeyes him. Thus
according to the several offices that Christ does, there are several actings of
faith for to answer. The great work of Christ was, to give his soul an offering
for sin, to shed his blood to take away our guilt, there faith answers, and it
is not alone said, that they that believe are justified from all things from
which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, which might imply no
more then a qualification of the person to be justified; but it is further said
that Christ is set forth a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25.
which plainly denotes the instrument whereby we have our interest. When there
are many acts of faith, that which respects his blood, alone does justify.
Christ is set up as a King, and has all things put in subjection under him.
Here faith yields up all to him, and consents as to be saved, so to be ruled by
him. Christ in his Kingly power protects as well as commands; as he holds out a
Scepter, so he is a shield. Faith flies unto him for shelter, and so receives
and quenches all Satan's darts. Christ is given as an head to his body the
Chuch, not only for command, but for quickening and enlivening power, to supply
with vital energies every part and member. Here faith answers, and takes in
from Christ the Spirit by the promises for life and power; and so the life,
that we live in the flesh, is by faith in Christ Jesus. So that faith I suppose
may be fitly defined to be, A firm assent of mind to the whole truth of God, in
the way that he does reveal it, with an acceptance of all that good which God
confers by Christ in the way that he does tender it. I know this grace is
diversely held out, and is so comprehensive, that the full nature of it is not
easily laid open; A common definition of it is, that it is, A resting upon
Christ alone for salvation; purposely given, to correct their mistake, that
have made assurance, or a full persuasion that what Christ has done, I shall
enjoy in particular, to be of the nature and essence of faith. But though this
may vertually comprize all that is required in this grace, yet it is no full
and explicit definition of it; for unless the understanding give its assent
that salvation is alone by Christ, the will cannot rest upon him for it. This
assent in that definition is presupposed: But it is convenient that it should
be expert. Other things besides salvation are received by faith from Christ,
but salvation is the most eminent and principal, and all other as by
consequent depend upon it. This that I have delivered, is more explicitly
full; not only virtually, but expressly holds out all that faith compriseth.
And as all of those are here as we have heard convinced of unbelief, that know
not those necessary truths that God has made known, and upon that account can
give no assent, together with those that believe, even in necessary and
fundamental doctrines, otherwise then God has revealed, that pick and choose
in doctrines of faith, assenting or denying assent at pleasure; So also all
those that give other things the pre-eminence above Christ, or at least take
them in in coordination with him. When Christ is offered in the Gospel to the
soul, and men are urged by his Ministers to receive him, for life and
happiness, the things of the world are still ready to make tender of
themselves: The lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, the pride of life;
that is, profits, pleasures, honors; When these are hugged, prosecuted, and
followed, Christ is refused and slighted. A covetous man will make sail of
Christ for a piece of silver; he will lay out more strength of affection to
compass earth, in the way of a calling, then to compass Christ in Ordinances.
The man of pleasures will sell Christ for his cups, for his sports, for his
wantonness; the like we may say of the man of honors. He that for the cause
of Christ can forsake and abjure all, is the only man in whom Christ by faith
makes his residence.

The necessary nourishment of faith.
Thus we have seen the two first ways for the trial of faith: the third
follows, which is, The means appointed for the nourishment and strength of it.
It cannot live unless in the use of means it be kept up. Declensions are apt
to appear in soul as well as in body. He observes little about his spiritual
estate, that does not see his faith oftentimes apt to languish as well as his
health. And though we be kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation;
yet it is in the use of means, and not otherwise. He therefore that lives in
faith, is careful in the use of means to keep faith alive. The means appointed
of God for this end are especially, the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. The Word
1. The Word.
is food as well as seed; as it plants, so it waters; as it begins, so it
perfects the work of grace. When Paul left the Ephesians, whom he had begotten
to the faith through the Gospel; he leaves them this Legacy, Act. 20.32. We are
born again of the immortal seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1.23. and as new born
babes, we must desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby. 1
Pet. 2.2. No man ever knew a child live without the breast, or other suitable
means for nourishment; Nor men of strength without answerable sustenance; no
more can a man in grace live without the Word of grace. Our imaginations and
carnal reasonings will be stirring and working, and faith has not a more
deadly enemy. The Word which is the sword of the Spirit, must beat those down,
and hold them under, 2 Cor. 10.5. The word of promise underproppes our faith,
and must be frequently heard, diligently heeded, or else it cannot be upheld.
Those therefore that prize the Word, as a child the dug, esteeming it with Job,
as their ordinary food, Job. 23.12. and to this end, to keep life in their
souls, faith in their hearts; here is a sign both of life and growth: but when
it is with men, as with Israel in the wilderness, their soul loatheth this
heavenly Manna, as light bread; having their appetite far better pleased with
other things, their ear being of the temper of Jeremies hearers, The Word of
the Lord is a reproach to them, they have no delight in it, Jer. 6.10. these
never had faith in the power and life. And all they that lose in their love to
the Word, lose also in their faith. Many here might be convinced to be wanting
in this righteousness upon their want of faith to intrest themselves in it. 1.
Those that take themselves to be above any necessity of hearing, having learnt
as they think so much, that they may now well lay aside their teachers. God
vouchsafing of grace those gifts for the perfecting of the Saints, having
gained (as they think) perfection, they matter no more intermedling with them.
If these could show us any Scripture-Saint, that ever reached to this height,
or ever set upon any such resolution; or if they could give such experience to
all that know them, that they might know that they want nothing of the highest
top of perfection, then they said something. But when the highest of Saints
that we read of in the Word, highly prized the Word, and the more high they
were, the more high prize they put upon it, and these that upon this pretense
reject it, proclaim to the world many wants in their souls; even in that
which lies at the very bottom of faith, and is of greatest necessity to the
being of it, their knowledge being but in part, in most of these very lovv;
and little or nothing, where most should be known; we may well conclude
that all this talk of perfection is vain. Take two persons, the one of them
talking and boasting of wealth, and the other laboring hard in tillage or
trade to gain wealth, and if you can tell whether of these, the talker, or the
labourer, is like to increase in substance, then you have determined the
question, whether these unruly talkers that boast of faith, or those that
diligently attend on Ordinances for gaining of it, are more richly stored with
it. 2. Those that neglect to hear, or hear only at their idle leisure, judging
a business that may be done, but see little necessity of doing of it, would
pretend not to despise it, yet put a very slight esteem upon it. Does the
child judge so of the dug? Or do these judge so of their ordinary and necessary
food? A life of nature is kept up in the use of means as long as it can be
patcht up; if Physic be neglected, so is not food. The Word is food and
physic for the life of grace, and this is let alone. 3. Those that carelessly,
negligently, superciliously, and disdainfully hear, as though their business
were not to feed, but judge; not to learn or be minded of any thing, but only
to censure. According as the way of their fancy works, so the Word takes. Some
are pleased only with Kickshawes, like such dishes on a table, that have show
without substance, words that are quaint and strained, not to help, but to
exceed their understandings. Others with choice notions only; how wholesome
soever, it is not worth heeding, if not curious. Others take up all according
to the person that delivers it; with children they are pleased with every thing
from one hand, with nothing from another. Lastly, Those that let go all truths
as soon as they are heard; There is no more heard of the Sermon when once it is
done. They that go to a feast will talk of the dishes, and they that go to a
Fair or Market will talk of the Commodities; but when they go to the
Congregation, there is not a syllable heard of the Word after they return. When
meat goes out of the stomach as it comes in, it neither strengthens nor
nourishes; and the Word slipped as soon as it is heard, can be no more effectual.

Sacraments 2. Sacraments.
are visible signs and seals. That of Baptism enters us into the Church
visible, and seals all the promises made to members, on Gods terms and
propositions. And the Supper of the Lord is for confirmation of those that are
visibly Church Members on the same terms likewise.

Baptism is past in the act; but still present in the use. As a Soldier by
oath taken, and colors given was tied to his General: so we are hereby tied
unto God, and God is tied unto us; and hereby we know our duty, and Gods
promise. As a lease binds to duty and assures a benefit, so it is with the
Sacrament of Baptism. The Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.21. compares it to the Ark of
Noah, he was there tossed up and down in the deep, considering his present state,
he might well have feared shiprack; but the Ark being of Gods apointment, and
he put into it by Gods command, he might well confide in him for safety. If we
look to the temptations and assaults, wherewith our souls are on all hands
battered, we have just cause of fears; but when we call to mind that we entered
the Church (as Noah the Ark) by Baptism, and make it our business that
conscience may answer unto what Baptism requires, what objection soever our
heart makes, Baptism may raise our souls in confident assurance. The Lords
Supper is to the eye, as the promises are to the ear. Whilst we are in the
body, spiritual things under corporal signs are ordained for our help and
strength. Our Savior tells us, his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is
drink indeed, John 6.55. And here under the signs of that which is our ordinary
meat and drink, the flesh and blood of Christ is tendered, and as our food is
offered unto us. Where these Sacraments have their due esteem, and men baptized
in infancy, do not pass by the thoughts of it in their growth, but well
consider their engagements and bonds that lie upon them to press them to duty,
and the engagements of God for support of their faith, they then make use of
this ordinance, to uphold faith and keep life in it, in their souls; when they
frequent the Lords Table, and conscienciously communicate, for the ends for
which it was instituted, to be laid low in themselves, to see sin aggravated
and pardon tendered, there is like hopes: But when all thoughts of Baptism is
laid aside, and the Lords Supper either neglected or profaned; these may well
look, that as a child through want of food, so their faith upon the same
account may languish.

Prayer 3. Prayer.
is the daughter of faith, and also the nurse or foster-mother. Faith breathes
out it self in prayer, and prayer obtains a more ample measure of faith to
pray. Lord, I believe, help my unbelief, was the prayer of the father of the
Lunatic, Mark 9.24. and Lord increase our faith, was the prayer of the
Apostles, Luke 17.5. When we have done all to stand, prayer in the Spirit,
Ephesians 6.18. must second. This Communion with God keeps up faith in God: They
that make it their work to pray always, ever holding it up in the season of
it, joining with the Congregation in public, in the family in a way more
private, and after Christ's counsel in their closet, sending forth holy
ejaculations in their beds, their walks, and on all occasions; These take care
of their faith. But in case that may be truly said of them, which was falsely
laid to the charge of Job, that they restrain prayer before God, Job 15.4.
their faith may justly be suspected. I may speak concerning this grace in the
words of the Apostle, these have not, because they ask not: these starve their
faith, and let it dye through want of nourishment and support. We hear of
Camelions that live in the air, and Salamanders in the fire; A Wonder was not
long since noysed out of Germany, of a Maid that lived only on the smell of
flowers; An impostor lately went from place to place that fed on stones: these
that would pass for believers are some such Monsters. Thus we have looked into
faith according to the three first rules, the last follows, which is, the
fruit that it bears, or the effects that it produces; The fruits which faith
bears, and the effects which it produces.
These might be reduced into two heads. First, such as all faith, if true,
produces. Secondly, such as only a strong and grown faith obtains. But
calling men to the trial whether they be in the faith; and not whether they be
high, and transcendent in believing; I shall wave the latter, and speak only
to the former. These fruits which every faith (which is such in truth)
produces, are either in the understanding, or affections.

For that which it produces in the understanding, 1. In the Understanding.
take this rule. Faith puts that high prize on Christ, and privileges through
Christ, that all earthly things are comparatively of the meanest value, and
most low esteem. This we might make good in diverse instances. 1. In Moses. If
we read the beginning Chapters of Exodus, we may there see the sad afflicted
estate of the people of God in that time, together with the honor to which
Moses by a wonder of providence was advanced. In this honor of his, and low
ebb of theirs, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of
Israel, Act. 7.23. He could not drink wine in bowls, and anoint himself with
the chiefest ointments, and not grieve for the afflictions of Joseph: and see
the the Comment that the Apostle makes upon it, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. By faith
Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: Esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches then the treasures in Egypt. David in the Wilderness of Judea
was persecuted by Saul; all his honors at Court were lost; yea, all livelihood
and way of subsistence gone; yet penning a Psalm in the midst of those
exigents, none of these are named on that day that he speaks of the fruition of
Christ in Ordinances, as, Psalm. 63. may be seen. Paul, Phil. 3.5, 6. lays open
the rich privileges that according to the flesh could be looked after, and
such that sometimes he himself did admire, but these things that were gain to
him, he counted less for Christ; yea, he professes himself to account them
but dung, when they stood in competition with Christ. Compare the greatest of
things that can be in thy desire, and dung together, and these will certainly
stand in a great disproportion; yet such is the disproportion between Christ
and the greatest privileges upon earth in a believers thoughts. When the world
has a low and despicable opinion of Christ, and men of the world are ready to
say, He has no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him: All that is spoke of him in
Gospel Ordinances, with them is dull and flat; as was said of Sion, This is
Sion which no man looks after; So it may be said of the King of Sion. Men of
faith are of another opinion; He is to them the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant.
5.10. and stands in their thoughts above all comparison. As the apple tree
among the trees of the Wood, so is my beloved among the sons, says the Spouse,
Cant. 2.3. If men would now look into their hearts, whether Christ and the
great things of Christ, or the world and the great things of the world have
this esteem, they might thence draw a strong conjecture whether they be in the
Faith, or whether their hearts are void of it; which estimate of their
Judgments may appear in their care and pains to compass, as also in their
trouble upon the loss that accrues unto them. If their care to compass the
world be great, so that they rise up early, and eat the bread of carfulness,
the world having all command of their affections to scrue them up to it self,
and put them on to improve their diligence to the utmost, and in the mean time
Ordinances are in low esteem, and every way that Christ is compassed of mean
regard, businesses jusling out prayers, and the week-daye^ employment in
servile labors taking up the Sabbath-dayes duties, when worldly affairs are
followed with eagerness, and holy undertakings are done with earthly thoughts,
wearisomly, as against the hair, here is a cause of suspicion. Troubles in and
about losses may be as great a discovery, as cares to compass; If they were in
Lots Wives case to run away from all, and for Christ to leave it to fire,
plunder, confiscation, would not they then with a wishly eye look after them,
and have sad parting thoughts about them, instead of joyfully suffering the
spoil of them? And upon apprehensions that things go ill upon any emergent
occasions at once, to the hazard of outward things, and the endangering of
Ordinances, in case they are sensible of the former, and are as men senseless
of the latter, having more wishes that taxes were taken off, then that the
Gospel should flourish; here is a true Gadarene that would part with Christ
rather then his swine. The world, and not Christ in Ordinances, is the Pearl
for which they will make sale of all.

As to the fruit, or effect that Faith produces in the affections, 2. In the
Affections.
take these rules: 1. Faith is against all whatsoever that is against Christ.
As it sets Christ in the highest room, so it opposes all that opposes him,
and will not suffer the most desired lust that divides from him. As the
covetous man's lust carries him to his gold, the wantons lust to his Dalilah,
the drunkards to his cups, and breaks through all opposition in their way of
fruition of them; so a believers Faith carries him to his Christ, and will not
abide any temptation or lust in his way of interest in him, Acts 15.9. We may
see that Jews and Gentiles are either of both of unclean hearts, and that it
is only God that cleanses and purifieth; as he makes the heart soft, so he
makes it clean; and says is the instrument wherewith it is thus cleansed. Lust
defiles, 1 Pet. 2.4. and says purifies. It is Lust that divides from Christ;
They that are Christ's, crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24.
and that upon account of eternal fruition of him. She that is married cares
how she may please her husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. she is not to go in any manner of
atti^e or dress to please her self, but in that which may please him. That
which he dislikes, she must cast off. The believer is betrothed to Christ, his
care then is to walk in all well-pleasing, and to cast off all that does
displease him. If men can do that for Christ, which the Galatians were ready to
do for Paul, even to pluck out their eyes for his sake, rather then lose him,
then all is well; but if they look into their thoughts, and see that there is
any thing dear unto them which is abhorrent to Christ, any thing which they
love, that he loatheth, whether it be inward filthiness, as pride, vainglory,
earthly-mindednesse, etc. or outward uncleanness, as drunkenness, whoredoms,
etc. this evidences a total want of grace in their souls. A believing
drunkard, a believing adulterer, a believing extorting oppressor, as to assent
to the doctrine of faith and profession of it, may well stand together; and
reading the Scriptures, and looking among Christian professors, we may find
too many such believers; but as to the grace of faith, they stand in full
opposition to it; and in this sense we may justly say, there is not a believing
drunkard, or covetous worldling upon the earth. As our Savior said concerning
those devils that had held their haunt in the young man from infancy, that his
disciples could not cast them out because of their unbelief; so I may say of
all that cast not out these lusts. It was weakness in the disciples faith that
disabled them, that they could not cast devils out of others: It is want of
faith that disableth these that they cannot cast them out of themselves. 2.
Faith makes that resolute choice of Christ, that it suffers all manner of
afflictions rather than to be driven and divided from him. After ye were
illuminated, (says the Apostle to the believing Hebrews) ye suffered a great
fight of afflictions, Heb. 10.32. To save the labor of turning over large
Volumes of Martyrologies, read over that little book of Martyrs, as some have
called, Heb. 11. especially, ver. 35, 36, 37, 38. Faith kindles that flame that
many waters cannot quench. Christ upon earth was a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs, yet he had those disciples that never left him, till he
came to the Cross, and then sollicitously enquired after him. Where Christ
dwells by faith, there the Spirit strengthens for sufferings, Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
If men now look into their hearts, and see themselves willing to follow Christ
in fair weather, and to own his cause whilst it costs them nothing, but in
worldly respects rather gain by the bargain; but when trouble arises, they are
gone; These may look into the Parable of the sower, whether this be not an
evidence of a rocky and stony heart. A strong wind is the trial of the root of
the tree, of the foundation of the house; an hot scorching fire of the truth of
the metal. It is true, that self ends sometimes put a man upon sufferings; But
it is always true, that self ends only put a man upon profession, when he
will not stand out in sufferings. They whose Religion is the States Religion,
the Times Religion, will not lose an hair by any profession they make; Self and
not Faith carries on that profession. 3. As faith carries the soul up to Christ
to be one with him, so also it carries it on in every affection and office of
love to his brethren. In Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love, Gal. 5.6. It is not to be
of this opinion, or of that, which men call their faith; nor of this Nation,
nor of that, which too often prescribes all that men in their way of faith
believe; But to be possessed of that faith which works by love, which commends us
unto God. A man may be of this or that faith according to pleasure, and yet his
faith utterly destitute of that grace. Faith carries a man not any further at
all toward Christ then his love carries him on toward his brethren. An idle
faith is a dead faith, and a dead faith never reaches righteousness to
Justification and life. James never disputed against Paul's assertion of
Justification by faith only: Writing after him (as is generally confessed) he
did not write to contradict any doctrine, or correct any errors delivered by
him. When Paul concludes Justification by faith, James concludes that it is by
a working faith; Where it works not, it does not then justify; and where it
works to acceptance, it works by love.

CHAP. XIII.
SECT. I. Of the number of Sacraments.
AS a result from all that has been said of the nature and use of Sacraments,
we may conclude the definite and distinct number of them. So many Ordinances
that we can find in Old or New Testament-Scriptures, that are signs and seals
of this nature, as here has been set out from the Apostles words, so many
Sacraments there are truly so called, equally worthy of that honor of
Sacraments with this of Circumcision, being every way of the same nature and
use, they are deservedly to have the same esteem. But falling short of such,
they are to have esteem as they are, and their dignity may challenge, but not
to be put into this number. The way to find out the number of Sacraments.
And I know no other way then this to find out the set and definite number of
them. Those trifling arguments made use of by some, that the matter of New
Testament-Sacraments, viz. Water and Blood, came out of the side of Christ, and
that blood and water, as John affirms, bear witness on earth, are not worthy
to be mentioned, save only that they are used by some of eminent name. And
upon diligent search we shall find only two stated, standing Ordinances in Old
Testament-Scriptures, and only two in New Testament-Scriptures, that are to be
thus received. We have not indeed any distinct Text in either of both
Testaments, expressly testifying that there are two, and two only Sacraments,
as we find it ordinarily in Catechismes. Neither is there any distinct Text in
the Law or Prophets, that as we would that men should do to us, so we should do
to them. Yet our Savior, Matthew. 7.12. tells us, that that rule is both in the
Law and in the Prophets, being a clear result from that which the Law and the
Prophets have delivered. The like may we say concerning the number of
Sacraments. It is as clear a result from that which is delivered to us both
from Old and New Testament-Scriptures; so that the conclusion is twofold, drawn
by way of deduction of this nature.

1. Two only standing Ordinances in the Old Testament of the nature of
Sacraments. Two only Sacraments in the New Testament.
There were in Old Testament-times only two standing Ordinances of the nature
of Sacraments, viz. Circumcision and the Passover.

2. There are in New Testament-times only two Sacraments, viz. Baptism and
the Lords Supper.

We shall begin with Old Testament-times; and here our way of discovery is;
First, To find out all those Signs, or Ordinances that are set up in
competition as Sacraments. Secondly, To enquire into the nature and use of
them. Thirdly, To find out how nigh they come to the nature of Sacraments, and
what agreement they have with them. Fourthly, where it is that they are
defective, and fall short of Sacraments truly so called.

SECT. II. Rainbowe no Sacrament.
THe first that offers it self is the Rainbowe, of which we might speak; First,
as it is in nature, for discovery of the physical being of it. Secondly, as a
sign appointed of God. But the first consideration of it is not my business,
but the work of Philosophers; who out of Aristotle have defined it to be, A
Bow of many colors seated in an hollow and duskish cloud, The definition of a
Rainbow.
appearing upon the reflection of the Sun in opposition against it. He that
pleases may read further in Magirus physiol. peripat. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Keckerman Syst. Phys. lib. 6. ad finem. Zanch. de oper. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 3.
Valesius de Sacra Philosoph. cap. 9. So that the efficient cause is the Sun.
The subject in which it appears is a cloud standing in Diametrical opposition.
The thing it self is the reflex of the Sun. The form and shape is a bow of
variety of colors. Whereupon it is generally concluded, that there were bows
of this nature before the flood, the Sun being then in equal vigor to produce
it, and clouds in which the reflex might be apparent. And the cause being then
as well as now in act, the effect must needs be likewise. But it was from that
time, and not before, that it was appointed as a sign; and under that
consideration we find it mentioned and largely spoke to, Genesis 9.8. Genesis 9.8,
etc. opened.
and following verses, God spoke unto Noah and to his sons with him, saying,
And I, behold, I establish my Covenant with you, and with your seed after you;
And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle,
and of every beast of the earth with you: from all that go out of the Ark, to
every beast of the earth. And I will establish my Covenant with you, neither
shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood, neither shall
there be any more a flood to destroy the earth. And God said, This is the token
of the Covenant which I make between me and you, and every living creature that
is with you, for perpetual generations: I do set my bow in the cloud, and it
shall be for a token of a Covenant between me and the earth. And it shall come
to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in
the cloud: And I will remember my Covenant which is between me and you, and
every living creature of all flesh, and the waters shall no more become a flood
to destroy all flesh; and the bow shall be in the cloud. And I will look upon
it, that I may remember the everlasting Covenant between God and every living
creature of all flesh that is upon the earth. And God said unto Noah, This is
the token of the Covenant, which I have established between me, and all flesh
that is upon the earth. In which words we may observe, 1. A Covenant entered. 2.
The sign whereby it is ratified and confirmed. In the Covenant it self we see,
1. The parties in Covenant, God on one part; Noah, his sons, their seed,
every Living Creature on the other part. 2. The Rainbowe has respect to a
Covenant improperly so called.
The nature of this Covenant, absolute, and not conditional, as Pareus
observes, and therefore it is a Covenant improperly so called, as appears upon
a double account. First, In that it is absolute; when a Covenant properly so
called, has its conditions, as elsewhere I have largely showed. Secondly, In
that beasts and birds, that are here parties in Covenant, are subjects capable
of receiving mercies, but not of entering into Covenant, no more then the
stones of the field are of capacity to enter league with man, as, Job 5.23. or
to be witnesses in any cause, as, Josh. 24.17. therefore as a bare command is
called a Covenant, Jer. 34.13. as a bare seal is also so called, Genesis 17.10. so
promises elsewhere called a Covenant likewise, all of them in an improper sense.
In the Covenant we see the mercy promised, ver. 11. not to cut off all flesh
any more by a flood. In the sign for ratification and confirmation we may see,
1. The Author. 2. The sign it self, the appearance of a bow. 3. The place of
situation, the Cloud. 4. The way of signification, and that is by institution,
as appears in that God sets it for that very end. Some make the Rainbowe a
natural sign of that which the text says is signified by it, which according
to them is not that which is generally understood, that God will destroy the
world no more by water, but only that no such deluge shall at that time come
when the Rainbowe appears; seeing it is a sign that the Sun has got victory
over any such clouds, that might have tendency to such a deluge: So Cajetan, as
he is quoted by Rivet exercit. in Genesis who yet (as Rivet observes) contradicts
himself, in that he says any deluge of such kind must needs be supernatural.
It might then come upon the earth, from the hand of God, at the instant time
that the bow appears, any such natural cause notwithstanding. It is then, The
Rainbow an instituted sign.
no natural, but an instituted sign, to give assurance of the fulfilling of
this promise. Upon sight of this bow, we may call to mind, that it is of free
grace, that all flesh does not perish, and that the waters that are so useful
to us, do not presently destroy us: and to assure our selves, that through
grace we shall be kept from perishing. Pareus says that the Jews upon the
appearance of the rainbowe, used to go out and make such express
acknowledgments. But open professions of that nature, are in danger to turn to
ostentation, and mere formality, which yet must not hold us from our duty in
humility, confidence and praise to make observation of it. Correspondencyes
observed by some in the Rainbow with the promise.
Some find fit correspondencies in the Rainbowe to signify, and seal this
mercy. First, Because of the place, which is in the clouds of heaven. whence
came the rain that drowned the world before. Secondly, Because the bow is
bended upward toward God, not toward the Creature below, as when it is taken
in hand, to shoot at a mark; nor is there in the bow any arrow, which is said
to be made ready upon the string, when hurt is intended, Psalm. 11.2. Thirdly,
because the Rainbowe appears commonly with rain; and so where men might begin
to fear the judgment, there they may take comfort against it in that it is a
sign of his Covenant for safety. Fourthly, because the Rainbowe appears not,
but when there is a clearness and brightness in some part of the sky, but at
the general flood it was all black with rain. Fifthly, That the Rainbowe
consisting of diverse colors, by the watery color is represented the
overwhelming rain past, and not to return; and by the fiery color is
prefigured the destruction of the World by the element of fire, as is foretold,
2 Pet. 3.10. Sixthly, Because the Rainbowe where it touches upon any shrubs,
leaves a very sweet and fragant smell behind; (as some Naturalists observe) it
holds out the pleasant acceptance of God as a sweet smelling savor in his
nostrils. But seeing that these are not taught us in the Word, but found out by
men, and Zanchy says of them, that they are piae, but parum firmae, I shall
pass them by. And to wind up all that we have to say of this thing, How far
the Rainbowe is Sacramental.
we see; First, How far there is an agreement between the Rainbowe, and the
Sacrament. The Rainbowe we see, 1. Is a sign. 2. A sign not natural, but by
institution. 3. The institution is of God. 4. It is to signify and seal a
promise made of God. How far it falls short of a Sacrament.
Thus far it is of Sacramental use, yet it falls short of a Sacrament
properly so called in several particulars. 1. Sacraments are signs and seals
of a Covenant properly so called; but here is no Covenant, but such as is
Synechdochically, and improperly such as we have heard. 2. Sacraments are
engaging signs, with restipulation; these are absolute, nothing at all being
called for from man, much less from other creatures. 3. The Covenant people of
God are the adequate subject of Sacraments; but here the whole world of
mankind, and all flesh is entitled. 4. This is only to be seen as it is set of
God in the Cloud; but Sacraments are to be received, upon tender from God, and
not only beheld. 5. Sacraments are seals of the righteousness of faith
appointed for ratification of spiritual and saving mercies; but this is only
a ratification of a temporal deliverance. As to this last dissimilitude perhaps
some exceptions might be taken. As the Rainbowe was immediately a sign and
seal of a temporal mercy, so it was with the Passover in like manner. The
freedom of Israel in Egypt, when the first born were destroyed, seems to have
no more spirituality in it, then our security from a deluge. And in case we
make that of Egypt a type of a further deliverance in Christ, so we may make
this deliverance a figure of like mercy, and so Zanchy indeed makes it. And the
last Annotations hint such a thing, Though this Rainbowe (say they) be a sign
of a temporal Covenant in the general extent of it to all creatures, yet the
Godly may look upon it with reference to Christ, in whom all promises of what
sort soever, are Yea and Amen, and who is represented sitting in his throne,
compassed with a Rainbowe in light like unto an Emerald, Rev. 4.3. And in case
this sign had been peculiar to the Church, as was that deliverance in Egypt,
and given of God, only to his people in Covenant; and in New
Testament-Scriptures so applied, as that of the Passover is, it had been
unquestionable: but being common to the world, all creatures in the world
having like interest in it, and there being no touch of it in New
Testament-Scriptures, it cannot be so conceived. Only we may safely yield thus
much, that as the godly may see a son-like title to every common mercy in
Christ, and not barely as they are to others, a commmon providence and
largess: so they may see the Rainbowe shadowing out a like mercy; but in case
this would conclude it to be a Sacrament, every creature enjoyed by a Child of
God, would have the nature of a Sacrament likewise.

SECT. III. Sacrifices not Sacraments.
THe next Old Testament-ordinances that offer themselves, as of the nature of
Sacraments, are sacrifices. These being of several kinds are usually ranked
under four heads, The Burnt-offering, The Sin-offering, The Trespasse-offering,
and the peace offering. Some of which also admit of several subdivisions. Other
distributions of them are also made by some under other notions, which would be
besides my purpose particularly to mention. There is much agreeable to the
nature of Sacraments in them. 1. They had their institution from God, as we may
see in the Levitical Law, and so had all sacrifices that from the beginning the
people of God did offer. By Faith Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice then
Cain, Heb. 11.4. And nothing can be done in faith without warranty of a Divine
prescript. 2. These were given in command of God, to his people in Covenant,
Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints which have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice.
3. Christ was held out in these Sacrifices, and consequently, the
righteousness of faith signified, as the whole body of the Epistle to the
Hebrews shows. Some therefore will have them to be Sacraments properly so
called, and are angry at that Divinity, as they call it, magisterially imposed
by some, that the Jews had but two Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passover;
and oppose against it, the Cloud, the Sea which Israel passed through, and
Manna, and the Rock, which were to them in stead of the Lords Supper; and also
the Sacrifices under and before the Law, appointed to the people of God. And
doubtless they had much of Sacramentality in them, being external rites
appointed of God for his people in Covenant, Leading them unto Christ and
remission of sins by his blood, and the Church (as it appears) for a long
time had no other; yet doubtless there are differences to be assigned between
them. 1. Sacrifices were received of God from the hands of his people, being
given to God by man, they were accepted of him. If the Lord were pleased to
kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering, and a meat offering at
our hands, Judge. 13.23. But Sacraments (as we have heard) are given of God to
be received of his people; Abraham offered Sacrifice to God, but he received
Circumcision from God; And the Passover was to be eaten by those of the
family, Exodus 12.4, 10. And though perhaps it may be proved, that the people
had liberty to eat of some of their Sacrifices, yet that was not the proper
end, and reason of them, as it was of the Passover. The people brought them to
offer rather then to eat of them. 2. These Sacrifices led men unto Christ for
atonement, by him to attain it; Sacraments are to seal up an atonement made,
and already actually perfected, upon Gods terms to be applied to us in
particular. And so their difference from Sacraments properly so called is
evident.

SECT. IV. The Cloud, the Sea, Manna, and the Rock were Sacraments
extraordinary.
THe next that offer themselves to our consideration, are those providence of
God over his people, as they passed out of Egypt, and whilst they were in the
Wilderness; and these are four, The Cloud, the Sea, Manna, and the Rock. For
the cloud we have the history of it, Exodus 13.21, 22. And the Lord went before
them by day in a pillar of a Cloud, to lead them the way, Exodus 13:21, 22.
opened.
and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light, to go by day and night.
He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by
night, from before the people. As also, Exodus 14.19, 20. And the Angel from
God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them: and
the pillar of the Cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them. And
it came between the Camp of the Egyptians and the Camp of Israel, and it was a
Cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these. So that the
one came not near the other all the night. Which is further enlarged in other
texts of Scripture, Numb. 9.15, etc. Numb. 14.14. Deuteronomy. 1.33. with observations
upon it, Neh. 9.19. Psalm. 98.14. concerning which many questions are
multiplied, of which some are not so needful to be answered. 1. For the number,
Whether there were two clouds or only one?
whether there was one only Cloud or two? The text quoted, Exodus 13.21. seems
to imply that there were two Clouds; one dark, and the other bright, but the
other text, Exodus 14.20. as also, Numb. 9.21. rather makes it to be only one,
dark on the one part, and bright on the other, which seems more probable. The
first being fitly understood of the various appearances of one and the same
Cloud, The Cloud not ordinary but supernatural.
and not a variety of Clouds. 2. For the nature of it, or matter whereof it did
consist, which doubtless was Supernatural, and extraordinary. Had it been of
the common nature of Clouds, which is a thick moist exhalation drawn up by the
heat of the Sun, it could not have been of so many years durance, neither could
it have subsisted at all elsewhere, then in the middle region of the air. The
reflex from the earth would soon have dissolved it. 3. For the Motion of it, It
is plain that it followed not the motion of the heavens, The motion of it
guided by an Angel.
so it could not at any time have stood still; neither was it carried at all
uncertainty with the blasts of winds as ordinary Clouds are, but the motion was
ordered according to the good pleasure of God, by the Ministry of an Angel,
The form of it was in appearance as a pillar.
Exodus 14.9. 4. For the Form of it, it was in appearance as a pillar. The
smoke which in a calm season ascends out of Chimneys, sets out the shape of it,
being called pillars of smoke, Cant. 3.6. of no greater breadth then the
tabernacle, as appears, Numb. 9.15. Had it been of any greater breadth, it had
hindered the Israelites prospect; and had it not been of eminent height, it
could not have been visible for the guidance of Israel in that distance in
which many of them were often from it. The Use is that which is most
considerable and that was twofold. The use of it. 1. As Isreal's guide.
1. As Isreal's guide, as, Numb. 9. is fully held forth. When the Cloud stood
still, they were to keep in their quarters, and when that moved they were to
march, and to march that way that it led. This was the constant use of it, as
the Psalmist, Psalm. 98.14. observes, and also the Levites on their day of
Isreal's humiliation, Neh. 9.19.2. As Isreal's guard, 2. As Isreal's guard.
Exodus 14.19, 20. It used to be in the van, now it was placed in the rear. It
had formerly gone before them as a guide, but now it stood behind them as a
guard; so that Egypt eagerly set upon the pursuit of them could not come near
them. Of this the Psalmist takes notice, Psalm. 150.39. He spread a Cloud for a
covering, and a fire to give them light by night; so that here God was a Sun
and shield.

The second observable providence is, Isreal's passage through the Sea, which we
find, Exodus 14.21, 22. Exodus 14.21, 22. opened.
And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the Lord caused the sea to
go back by a strong East Wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and
the waters were divided. And the children of Israel went into the midest of the
sea upon the dry ground, Several things observable in Isreal's passage through
the Sea.
and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
With frequent Scripture-observations upon it, Josh. 4.23. Psalm. 78.13. Psalm.
114.3. Heb. 11.29. In Moses words we see; First, The Author of this great work,
and this is twofold; 1. Principal, the Lord. 2. Secondary, Moses stretching out
his hand upon the sign given. Secondly, The instrument, a strong East wind
employed of God to force the waters against their natural current. In which we
see, 1. The continuance a whole night. 2. The effect that it wrought, to divide
the waters, and to make the land dry; God will keep up his agents until his
work be done. 3. Isreal's passage, They went into the midst of the sea upon the
dry ground. 4. Their security, The waters were a wall unto them on the right
hand, and on the left. Some have thought, that there were several divisions of
the sea into parts, according to the several tribes of Israel, but this is
without ground; all that we can collect is, that the whole of Israel, and of
those that joined themselves to them had a safe passage made them; they all
went out, both old and young, sons and daughters, Exodus 10.9. and all these had
a passage cut to their hand.

The third remarkable providence is Manna, The narrative of it we may see,
Exodus 16.14, 15. Exodus 16.14, 15. opened.
And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the
wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar-frost on the
ground. And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is
Manna; for they wist not what it was. And Moses said unto them, This is the
bread that the Lord has given you to eat, and mentioned in several other
Scriptures, Number. 11 7. Psalm. 78.24. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Nehem. 9.20. Joh. 6.31, 49, 58.
Several remarkable occurrences might be observed about it, which is not needful
to stand upon. From whence Manna has its name.
It had the name from the Israelites question upon the sight of it, not knowing
it they said Manhu, which is, what is this? It was given to Israel upon their
complaint against Moses and Aaron, that they had brought them forth out of the
land of Egypt to kill them with hunger, Exodus 16.3, 4. And it continued with
them till they came into the Land of Caanan, The time that it did continue with
Israel.
and had eaten of the old Corn of the Land, Josh. 5.12. Whether it were of the
same kind, with that which at this day in several Countries is found, is much
disputed; but whether it were the same, or in nature differing from it, it was
certainly miraculously provided to their hands, It was miraculously provided.
otherwise it would have been found in that wilderness, both before and after
those forty years of Isreal's travels through it. It was called by the name of
Angels food, Psalm. 78.23. Not that the Angles feed upon it, but by reason of
the excellency of it, as the tongue of him that excells is called the tongue of
Angels, 1 Cor. 13.1. Though that which some talk of the rarity of it, A fable
concerning it rejected.
and would gather out of the Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. 16.20, 21. that it was
fitted to every man's taste, and as any did fancy, so it was. If any did desire
to eat of an Egg, that was turned into an Egg, or to eat of an Hen, or Lamb,
that was forthwith turned into such a dish, (and so was a figure of
transubstantiation) may well be reckoned amongst the Legend-tales. Then the
Israelites would never have complained that their soul loathed that light
bread, Number. 21.5. Nor had they had cause to have said, as they did, Number. 11.4,
5, 6. Who shall give us flesh to eat? We remember the fish which we did eat in
Egypt freely: the Cucumbers, and the Melons, and the Leekes, and the Onions,
and the Garlic; but now our soul is dried away; there is nothing at all,
besides this Manna before our eyes. They might (according to this fancy) have
found flesh, fish, cucumbers, melons, leekes, onions, garlic, and all things
else in the Manna it self, unless any will turn it into an Allegory, that that
which answers to all is found in Christ whom Manna did typifie.

Number. 20.9. opened.
The last of these providence is the Rock. The history we may see, Exodus 17.
Number. 20.9. and observations made upon it by the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.15. Psalm.
105.41. Psalm. 114.7, 8. and the like by the Levites, Nehem. 9.25. As the Manna
was given upon Isreal's want of bread, so this upon their complaint of want of
water. Go on before the people, (says the Lord) and take with thee of the
Elders of Israel, and thy rod wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine
hand and go. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb, How
the rock is said to follow Israel.
and thou shall smite the Rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the
people may drink. How it is said to follow the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10.4. is the
great difficulty; Rocks being above all other things immovable: The Jewish
fable that it was carried those forty years on Chariots in the wilderness is
not worthy to be named, in order to our inquiry into it. This must be taken for
granted, that the Rock it self is not here intended as a sign, but the water
flowing out of the rock; As the cup is not the blood of Christ in the New
Testament, but the fruit of the vine that is in it, and this of following the
Israelites being referred to the water which flowed out of the rock. That
resolution which is generally received, is most probable, that many running
streams, were framed to draw the water along, according to their several
stations, and removals, to which River will have that song, Number. 21.17, 18. to
allude, Spring up O well, sing ye to it; The Princes dug the well, Nobles of
the people dug it by the direction of the Lawgiver with their staves. But
if we refer it to Christ, the thing signified as Diodate on the words says,
it is very properly spoken; for not only his benefits are perpetual, but he
himself who is the spring of them, is ever separated from his, but resideth
always in and with them by his Spirit. If now we look upon these respective
signs with our Saviors, and St. Paul's Comment upon them, we shall not find for
the time that they were in use, any thing that serves to make up the proper
nature of Sacraments that was wanting in them. All that is essential in
Sacraments was found in these providence during the time that they served the
Israelites.
And the Apostles hope at which, it appears, he aims when he speaks of these,
1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. plainly does evince it. The Corinthians taking themselves to
be high in the favor of God, by reason of their privilege of Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord, the Apostle lets them know that the Jews had that
which answers to our Baptism; figuring out salvation by Christ to them, as
Baptism to us: They were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea.
As the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt was a figure of their redemption by
Christ; and their pilgrimage through the wilderness, an image of the Elects
life in the world; and the Land of Caanan, a shadow of that Kingdom of heaven:
so their passage through the Red Sea, and their being under the Cloud, were a
sacred figure, correspondent to Baptism; And Manna, and the water coming out
of the rock, a sign which had its relation to the Lords Supper. And our Savior
applies that type of Manna to himself, as we see, Joh. 6. throughout. When the
Jews said, v. 31. Our Fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, quoting the
Psalmists words; He gave them bread to eat: Christ answers, Verily, verily I
say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father gives
you the true bread from heaven. For the bread of God is he which comes down
from heaven, and gives life unto the world. And upon their request, Lord,
evermore give us of this bread, v. 34. he answers, v. 35. I am the bread of
life, he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me
shall never thirst. So also, v. 49, 50, and 51. Your fathers did eat Manna in
the wilderness and are dead; This is the bread that comes down from heaven,
that a man may eat thereof and not dye. I am the living bread which came down
from heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the
bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. Here is an outward visible sign given of God, and received of his
Vovenant People, sealing Christ, or righteousness by Christ unto them. The
whole therefore that is of the essence of a Sacrament is found in them. Only
these were found with Israel, but for a time, namely, the time of the
pilgrimage in the wilderness, when Circumcision, and the Passover, Baptism
and the Lords Supper are Ordinances, stated and constant; therefore the
observation is, that in Old-Testament-times there were only two standing
Ordinances, of the nature of Sacraments.

Here some questions might be put necessary to be answered.

They were baptized into Moses, says the text, and being baptized into Moses,
how could it be the same with Christian Baptism? We are baptized into Christ,
and not into Moses.

Ans. Into Moses, is here no more, then the Ministry of Moses, or by the hand
of Moses, who was a Mediator in type, between God and that people. And though
some would overthrow our argument drawn from Baptism into the Name of the Son,
and holy Ghost, as into the Name of the Father, to prove that the Son, and the
holy Ghost are God, as is the Father, seeing we are baptized (as they object)
into Moses; yet Moses is not God; It will not yet serve their turn, seeing the
Name of the Son, and of the holy Ghost are made equal in Baptism, to the Name
of the Father, and so is not the name of Moses. We are Baptized into the Name
of Christ, and called by his Name; so the Israelites never were into the name
of Moses no more then the Corinthians into the name of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.13. That
is Christ's peculiar with the Father, and the holy Ghost, not communicated to
any creature.

2. It is objected, that these outward elements were given not Israelites, but
also to their beasts; for the water of the rock, the text says, They drank of
it and their cattle, Number 20.11. And as for Manna, Bellarmine contends that
there can be no question, but the Domestic creatures, as Dogs, and Hens did
eat of it; that not by casualty, or wickedness, (as he confesses they may of
the Eucharist, and so a Dog or a Swine eats Christ) but ordinarily or commonly.

Answ. We must distinguish between the Natural and Mystical

2. The whole of those elements were not Sacramental, but Israelites ate and
drank of it.

3. It is objected, that the Israelites saw no such thing as Baptism

Answ. 1. What Israel did see is one thing, and what these

2. That they saw not Christ in these Sacraments; nor yet they had the nature,
and were of the use of Sacraments.

SECT. V. The five supposititious Sacraments of Rome Examined.
IN the next place we are to make it appear that there are in
New-Testament-times, only two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. In
this we may be more clear, seeing none is set up in competition with any fair
color. And here the five suppositious Sacraments of the Church of Rome offer
themselves; which are either such which (according to them) belong to all in
general, or those that are restrained to some in peculiar. Of the former sort
there are three, Confirmation, Penance, and Extreme Unction. Of the latter
two, Orders, and Marriage.

SECT. VI. Confirmation no Sacrament.
THe first of these is Confirmation. For discovery of which we must leave the
fountain of Scriptures, to rake in the dunghill of Popish Writers. In case
therefore we should dwell too long in it, the Reader would be in danger to
nauseate it; yet perhaps it may not be ungrateful to look into it, to see the
mercy of our deliverance from it. Though they put it after Baptism in order,
Confirmation preferred before Baptism.
yet with them it goes before it in honor. In Baptism we are made the
servants of Christ: in Confirmation they become his Champions or Soldiers;
Confirmation therefore perfects what Baptism begins: and before confirmation,
baptized ones are only one half Christians; The lowest Priest may therefore
ordinarily baptize, and any other upon emergent necessity: but the Bishop only
may confirm. Concerning this the Council of Trent has determined: If any shall
say, that confirmation of baptized ones, is an idle Ceremony, and not rather a
true and proper Sacrament, or that heretofore it was nothing but a certain
Catechism in which young persons of growth, gave a reason of their faith
before the Church, let him be accursed. And now it is time for all that have
sworn to that Council to see that they defend it. I shall briefly out of
Bellarmine lay down the whole of it. The matter of it he lays down in four
propositions. 1. Chrisme or Unction is the matter of Confirmation. 2. The
matter of Confirmation The matter of confirmation.
is not simple oil, but oil mixed with balsame. 3. Chrisme which is the matter
of confirmation is first to be consecrated and blessed. 4. The ointment of
Chrisme ought to be made in the form of a cross in the forehead of the
baptized person, that it may be the true and immediate matter of this
Sacrament. The form The form.
of this Sacrament is this, I sign thee with the sign of the cross, and
confirm thee with the Chrisme of salvation in the Name of, etc. The fruit The
fruit.
of it is, 1. To confer grace, to strengthen the soul against Satan's
assaults. 2. To confer an indelible character whereby men are received into
the Army of Christ, as in Baptism they are received into his family; so that
it may not be reiterated any more then Baptism. The Minister The Minister.
of this Sacrament is only the Bishop, and no other; He that administers other
Sacraments, has nothing to do with this Sacrament. The Ceremonies The
Ceremonies.
are twofold. 1. At consecration. 2. At administration. At consecration At
Consecration.
there are four Ceremonies. The Oil and Balsame are blessed with prayer, with
the sign of the Cross. The Bishop breaths certain times on the ointment, he
salutes it with these words. All hail holy Chrisme. At the administration At
the administration.
there are eight Ceremonies. There must be a Godfather present, prayers must be
used over them, the Bishop gives a pax to the party now confirmed, he gives him
a blow upon the face, the forehead must be bound with a fillet, some say seven
days, others only three. The head must not be washed, nor the forehead for
seven days space. It must be administered at the feast of Pentecost. Lastly, it
must be done with fasting. When all this is considered we may well think that
Austin was much deceived, when he said that the Sacraments of the New Testament
are few and easy. Bellarmine in order to prove this to be a Sacrament, lays
down three requisites in a Sacrament. 1. A promise of grace. 2. An outward
sensible sign as an organ or instrument to convey the promise. 3. A command of
God for administration. But all of these we say are wanting in this Supposed
Sacrament, and therefore according to himself it is no Sacrament. The promise
of grace he thinks he finds in the fourteenth, fiftenth, and sixteenth Chapters
of St. John's Gospel: Joh. 14.15.16. chap.. Luke 24. Act. 1. vindicated.
where the Holy Ghost is promised to the Apostles, to make them valiant and
undaunted in the profession of the faith. And, Luke 24. where they are
commanded to tarry at Jerusalem until they be endued with power from on high.
And, Act. 1. where they are promised to receive power after that the Holy Ghost
is come upon them. Here if our Author may be heard, is enough. A divine
promise, and that in Scripture, made to men baptized, for a larger measure of
grace, for strength, for confession of faith. But our acute disputant should
show us where this promise is made to his Chrisme made up of oil and Balsame.
and thus crossed and blessed. 2. He should remember that he himself tells us,
that the Apostles had this promise made good unto them without this or any sign
at all. 3. He might have found many of these promises in Old Testament times,
which yet made up no such Sacrament in those days. Act. 8.17. vindicated.
The outward sensible sign he finds, Act. 8. where it is said, They put their
hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. But, 1. Papists use no
imposition of hands in this supposed Sacrament. 2. In other Sacraments, both we
and they make the outward sign and matter, to be one and the same; why is it
then that imposition of hands is the sign, and other things the matter? 3. The
gifts there mentioned are not saving, but miraculous, proper to those times,
and not found in ours. 4. Those were conferred before Baptism as well as
after, Act. 10.44. Who can forbid water that these should be baptized, seeing
they have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? The command from God
Bellarmine will prove from the Apostles use of this sign; If God had not
enjoined imposition of hands, The Apostles imposition of hands no proof of
Confirmation.
they would not so ordinarily (says he) have laid on their hands in conferring
of gifts. Answ. 1. we look for a command for that which our adversaries do use,
viz. their Chrisme, Balsame, Cross, and not for imposition of hands, which
they use not. 2. John did baptize, yet our Author will not allow that for a
proof that he had a command to baptize. 3. The penmen of the Holy Ghost wrote
Scripture, yet that is no proof with him, that they had a command to write 4.
Alex. Hal. part. 4 quaest. 9. affirms that Christ the Lord did neither
institute nor dispense this Sacrament as it is a Sacrament. 5. Thomas Aquinas
is more modest likewise, as we heard before when we spoke to the Author of
Sacraments, confessing that their Chrisme is not found in Scriptures, and he
excuses it as not belonging to the being but solemnity of Sacraments, therein
confessing that all that belongs to the being of Sacraments ought to be written
in Scriptures. But though his answer is more modest, yet it is less advised;
that which all his fellows make the matter of this Sacrament, he denies to
belong to the being of it.

The ancient use of that which afterward did degenerate into this soppery, The
ancient use of confirmation degenerated into this practice.
Bellarmine out of Chemnitius lays down in six Propositions. 1. When a child
baptized in infancy comes to discretion, he is to be instructed in the
principles of Religion, and then to be brought before the Church, and put in
mind of his Baptism, how and why he was baptized. 2. He is to utter a
profession of his own faith according as he has learned. 3. He is to be
examined in the principal heads of Christian Religion. 4. He is to be
admonished that hereby he now differs from Heathens, Heretics, and all of
profane opinions. 5. There is to be added an exhortation concerning the vow of
Baptism, and the necessity of perseverance in the doctrine. 6. This is to be
concluded with prayer. And if laying on of hands be used, it may be well done,
says Chemnitius, without any superstition. But when care in Catechizing, and
examination is wanting, it is no better (says he) then an idle Ceremony, and
with addition of the forementioned Ceremonies a mere foppery.

SECT. VII. Penance no Sacrament.
THe next that they would obtrude upon us as a Sacrament is Penance; Satan not
enduring the grace of Repentance, has made it his business to rob us of the
Word, and to bring in that of Penance in the stead of it, leaving little that
is of God in it, and making it up with the device of man. It is not my work in
this place to speak to Repentance, as it is held forth in the Gospel to us, and
to be practiced of Christians, whether as it is inward, the change of the mind
and will from evil to good, from Satan to God; or outward, in answerable works
of obedience. We confess a necessity of it in this sense, in the highest
degree, a necessity as well medii, as praecepti, being not only enjoined by
command from God, but of that necessity that salvation cannot be obtained
without it, Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; but the
Sacramentality of it, which they assert, we wholly deny. Our souls having all
made shipwreck in our first parents, and upon that account made liable to
wrath, the first plank for safety they say is Baptism; in which all sin,
Original, or Actual, before contracted is actually pardoned; and that Sacrament
is (as they say) of no further use, for the pardon of any sins following after
it. The second plank for safety after shipwreck with them is Penance, which is
a following Sacrament for remission of sins, not so easy as the former; but
attended with more trouble, The parts of penance. 1. Contrition.
consisting of three parts, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. The first
of these aright understood, we willingly acknowledge to be a Christian duty,
and a necessary requisite to the grace of Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow
works Repentance to Salvation not to be repented of. Upon sense of sin, we
are brought to turn from sin. 2. Confession.
Confession we likewise acknowledge, knowing with Job, that it is an evil to
hide our sins as Adam, Job 31.33. and that the Apostle tells us, If we confess
our sins, God is just and faithful to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from
all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.10. But that which they would bring in, which is
a whisper of all in a Priests ear, in order to take from him some bodily
Penance, and accordingly receive his absolution, we deny, and well know that
it were a vain labor to search into the Scriptures, or antiquity for it.
Satisfaction we so far receive, that offenders to public scandal, must make
that public acknowledgement, that the Church may with freedom receive them
into communion. 3. Satisfaction.
But for satisfaction to God, we must let it alone for ever, unless we will
shoulder Christ out of that function, and take it upon our own persons; he will
never suffer that we should be sharers with him in it, and so we should be for
ever on the work (as the damned in hell are) and never able to go through with
it. This is, as though a man were fined of his Prince, as much as the servant
in the Parable was indebted to his Lord, ten thousand talents, and should
attempt to pay it with a few pence of a counterfeit coin of his own stamp,
making good a lesser crime with high treason. And whilst these add all this of
their own, they leave out the very whole of that, which according to Scripture
is essential to repentance, which is a thorough change, and amendment of our
ways. And how they got it into their heads to thrust it among Sacraments, a
man might think of it, even to amazement. And they themselves are so confounded
about it, that they know not how to find any thing of a Sacrament in it.
Bellarmine says, Papists agree not what that is in penance that makes up a
Sacrament.
that they affirm with great consent; that Penance is a Sacrament but
confesses, that there is difference among them, to assign what in Penance is
the Sacrament; here then sure is a glorious agreement. And it were easy to
multiply arguments against it. 1. There is no outward visible sign appointed of
God in this Penance of theirs, with any promise annexed, Arguments evincing
penance to be no Sacrament.
which even adversaries confess is of necessity to the being of Sacraments.
Bellarmine (who makes every thing to be visible that is any way sensible)
says, That both confession, and absolution, is a visible sign in Penance; so
that the words of the Pennance-taker, and Pennance-doer concur together to
make a visible sign, and this sign in that way visible, as he can make it, he
only affirms, but never proves to have any Divine institution. And his
brethren, Scotus, Major, Gabriel, Dionys. Cistersiensis, deny that confession
is any part of Penance, as Amesius observes; and Soto denies, that absolution
is any part of it. 2. Repentance was in use in the Church, and of equal
efficacy as now, when yet by their own confession it was no Sacrament, viz. in
the time of the Law, in the time of John Baptist, and of our Savior Christ;
and therefore now it is no more a Sacrament then it was then. 3. Baptism is of
the same use, and serves for the same purpose, as that which they imagine to
find in their Penance, and engages to Gospel-Repentance for remission of sins.
And this is an undoubted confessed Sacrament, and there needs not therefore any
fiction of a second. And the Reader may find this so at large disputed in
Chamier, Vorstius, Amesius, that I shall cease to add any more concerning it.

SECT. VIII. Extreme unction no Sacrament
THe third which they obtrude, is Extreme Unction: A rite which they administer
upon men's departure out of this life, as a viaticum to carry them hence. And
Bellarmine undertaking to make it good by reason, says, It is meet that men
should have support by divine providence in their departure out of the Church,
as they have in their entrance into it. As they are saluted with a Sacrament,
so he would have one for their farewell likewise. It is then wonder that the
Jews had not one to answer Circumcision, as they have now found out one to
answer Baptism. Providence it seems was then vvanting in that which the
Jesuit thinks meet should then have been provided. The matter The matter.
of this Sacrament is, oil olive blessed by the Bishop. The form The form.
is in these words, By this holy ointment and his most tender mercy God forgive
thee whatsoever thou have offended by sight, etc. The effect The effects.
of it is, first, the healing of the body if it be found good for the soul;
though they never apply it, till this be desperate. Secondly, the taking away
of the remainders of sin; but what sin, they cannot determine. The Minister The
Minister.
of it is a Priest, consequently a Bishop, if he please. For the subject
capable of it, six qualifications are required: Qualifications of the person
capable of extreme unction.
1. He must be a Christian. 2. A weak one. 3. One dangerously sick and weak. 4.
One of years, with the use of reason. 5. One not excommunicated. 6. One that
has taken confession and absolution, if he be found guilty of sin. Ceremonies
Ceremonies.
used in this Sacrament are two: 1. The Letany and certain other prayers must
be repeated. 2. Seven parts of his body must be anointed, viz. eyes, ears,
nose, mouth, hands, by reason of the five senses, and the reins where is the
seat of concupiscence, and the feet upon account of the loco-motive faculty.
But whether all of this be essential, they are loath to determine. They have
two only Texts which they offer to produce to establish this Sacrament. The
first is, Mark 6.13. And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many
that were sick, and healed them. Mar. 6.13. vindicated.
This Bellarmine denies to hold out any Sacrament, and see also Jansenius upon
the words, likewise Ruardus, Soto, as Bellarmine tells us. Bellarmine is
induced to this opinion, as he says, because Luther, Calvin, and Chemnitius
hold, that the ointment, Jam. 5. and Mark 6. are both the same. And he will
make an hard adventure toward the loss of a Sacrament, rather then he will
join so far with such heretics in opinion. And this Text also together with
that of James 5.13. is rejected by Cajetan, as he is quoted by Chamier and
Amesius. It does not appear (says he) either from the words, or from the
effect that these words speak of the Sacramental anointing of extreme unction,
but rather of that ointment which the Lord Jesus instituted in the Gospel to be
applied by his disciples to the sick; For the Text does not say, Is any sick to
death? but absolutely is any sick? And the effect is the raising up of the
sick: And it speaks of forgiveness of sins no otherwise then conditionally,
when extreme unction is not given but even at the point of death. And as the
form of it speaks, it tends directly to the pardon of sin. Besides, James
commands that many Elders be sent for to one sick person, and many for prayer,
Jam. 5.14, 15. vindicated.
which is not done in extreme Unction. So that when there are but two texts
pretended for this Sacrament, one Cardinal has robbed them of one, and another
of both. Against the Sacramentality of this oil we have these arguments. 1.
Sacraments are for all the vovenant people of God in general, without respect
had to this or that condition, and this is for the sick only. 2. Sacraments
are signs and seals of spiritual grace, this is a sign only of recovery from
sickness, being appointed for the sick to raise them up. And whereas it is
objected that pardon of sin is here mentioned; it is plain that it is only
mentioned in order to the cure of the bodily infirmity, and to be obtained by
prayer, not wrought by the oil. The pardon of such sin that may have brought
upon the patient any such sickness, as, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. When the Land is under
famine or pestilence, there the Lord says, If my people that are called by my
Name, do humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways, then I will hear in heaven, and pardon their sin, and heal the
land. The pardon of the Lands sin is there in order to the removal of the
Lands judgment. The pardon of the sin of the sick patient, is here for his
healing likewise. Much more might be spoke against our adversaries use of it.
They limit it to Oil olive, when Scripture speaks of Oil in general. They must
have the Bishops blessing upon it, when Scripture has no such thing; And in
Scripture he that administers a Sacrament, is sufficient for the blessing of
it. No one word of their form is found in the Scripture. They never intend
recovery when that yet is the whole of Scripture-intention. For a right
understanding of this text in James, about which most of the controversy lies,
Jam. 5.14, 15. opened.
it is not so easy to determine. It stands much upon matter of fact, and we are
at too great a distance, for any clear discovery. It is ordinarily understood
of a Miraculous power, as that other text, Mark 6.13. must be understood. And
the miraculous gift ceasing, the rite (say Divines) would soon appear
ridiculous; and that it does cease, we need no more for proof then our own
experience; and in case it had constantly held, it would have been looked upon
as ordinary, and not miraculous. But I ingenuously confess, I see more
difficulties attending this interpretation, then I know well how to salve. 1. I
see not in any age of the Church, any rule given to all that were sick, to look
after a miraculous way of healing; but that they made use of it as providence
extraordinarily did offer the opportunity. 2. Had they had direction from God
to seek for a miraculous cure, it should still have answered their expectation,
when yet that is denied on all hands. And whereas it is said, that they that
had this power, had also with it a spirit of discerning to whom to apply it;
why should then the command be given to all promiscuously to enquire after it?
3. Miraculous gifts were for healing of deaf, dumb, blind, as well as sick
persons; (as Bellarmine not impertinently observes) why then are only the sick
here mentioned? 4. It seems to imply that all Elders of the Church had this
gift of healing, which is contrary to that text, 1 Cor. 12.29, 30. Others
understand it of a medicinal power in the oil, but all Elders were not
Physicians, and one oil would not cure all diseases. Some speak of it as an
hieroglyphick or outward Symbol which was in use amongst the Jews, to hold
out any thing that is spiritual; but it is very doubtful, whether the Apostle
would permit, much less can I think that he would prescribe the use of these
to Christians. I most readily therefore subscribe to that of Amesius, which I
confess gave me great content when I found it in him, that so I might not be
said to be alone in the opinion Oleum potest Synechdochice poni pro medicamento
salut.
This oil (says he) may be taken Synechdochically for any healing medicine
whatsoever; And answering Bellarmines objection, why direction is here given
only to the sick, and not to the blind, etc. he says, Consilium datur tantum
de aegrotis, quia non de miraculoso usu olei in genere, sed de aegrotorum
directione tractatur.
that it is given only to them, because the Apostle speaks not of the
miraculous use of oil only, but the way to deal with sick persons. So that
miracles where the gift was, are not excluded, but all means, whether ordinary
or extraordinary, according to the Apostles prescript, are to be applied. The
Elders are to be sent for (says he) especially for prayer and consolation; but
so that the use of means upon that pretense be not neglected, so that it is
little other, than that which Christ gave in charge concerning the damsel that
he had raised to life, that something should be given her to eat, Mark. 5.43.
Some, as is said, have made an essay to revive this custom in these times, and
in their visit of the sick, will follow the Apostle in the letter, they will
pray, and praying will anoint with oil likewise. I would that these would give
some distinct account of their proceedings. 1. Whereas there are in the world
so many sorts of oil, even beyond number, whether any that is called oil will
serve the turn? Trayn-oyl (which yet in most places is readiest) would sure be
thought too gross to be employed in it. 2. To what part of the Patient they do
apply it; and in what quantity? In our colder clinates, and especially in
colder seasons, in stead of helping perhaps this liquid stuff may soon wrong
weak persons. 3. What effect they expect from it; whether corporeal, or
spiritual, or a mixture of both? 4. Whether they use it as an instrument, to
work that which they expect upon application of it, or only a symbol for
assurance that God will work? If they make use of it as an instrument, it must
either be for conferring of spiritual grace which (as we have heard) is
denied to Sacramental signs, or else for the obtaining of bodily health; then
they must see that it be (...), otherwise they are in danger not only to use
it in vain, but for harm. If they make use of it as a symbol or sign to assure
that God will work, then let them first produce a promise: there the effect is
attributed not to the oil, but to the prayer of faith; and secondly, let them
acquaint us how to discern those unto whom we may with success apply it,
otherwise we shall not only lose our oil and our labor, but expose it unto
scorn likewise. And it cannot be expected that all should be thus healed.

SECT. IX. Orders are no Sacrament.
THe fourth which they would obtrude upon as is Orders, or the solemn way of
the call of Ministers to their functions. This, or rather these; they will have
to be a Sacrament properly so called. And these Orders are divided into seven,
The number of orders and their divisions and offices.
and one of the seven is subdivided inco two so that this one Sacrament if it
hit right, has gained seven more, and so they have fourteen Sacraments. The
first of these is, the office of Priesthood, which they subdivide into two;
Bishops, and Presbyters, which as they say, differ in order, and not in degree
only, as a Bishop, and an Archbishop; and therefore must have distinct
Ordinations. The next is of Deacons, to assist the Priest in all things which
are done in the Sacrament. The third is, Subdeacons, to bring the Chalice and
Patin, the Cruse with water, and Towell, to the Altar. The fourth is
Door-keepers, to receive the Keys. The fifth Readers, to read Scriptures in
unknown languages. The fixth Exorcists, to cast out unclean spirits. The last
Acolythes, to carry Torches or Tapers when the Gospel is read, or the sacrifice
to be offered. Bellarmine tells us that the Ordination of Presbyters is a
Sacrament by the consent of all, and he himself determines, that the Ordination
of Bishops is a Sacrament, and according to him there is no other
Scripture-Ordination, seeing all the Scriptures that speak of it, speak (as he
says) of the Ordination of Bishops; Most of these doubted among themselves
whether they be Sacraments.
though he multiplies Authors denying their Ordination to be any Sacrament.
Ordination of Deacons, he says, is very probable, and to be believed that it
is a Sacrament, though it be no Article of faith to believe it; which he
proves, because it cannot be evidently deduced out of the Written Word, or
tradition: Neither is there (says he) any determination of the Church for it.
For Subdeacons, he says there is not that certainty as of Deacons, yet (he
says) it is very probable that it is a Sacrament, though he has such an
argument against it, as that none but himself will be ever able to answer.
Imposition of hands, he says, (and proves out of the fourth Council of
Cartharge, Canon 5.) is not used in it, and yet his whole nineth Chapter is
spent to prove, that imposition of hands is essential in this Sacrament. It is
a Sacrament, save only that it wants the essentials of a Sacrament, as do
indeed all their five supposititious ones. The four last which with them are
the lesser Orders, have not, (as he says) that probability that they are
Sacraments, as that of subdeaconship: yet the opinion that affirms their
Sacramentality, The matter of these Sacraments not agreed upon.
is far more probable then that which denies it. Their learned Council are not
yet agreed, what is the matter of this, or these Sacraments, whether it be the
imposition of hands, or the holding out of such an instrument, as belongs to
their function, as a Chalice to the Priest, etc. The words uttered to each
respectively, The form.
when such an instrument is delivered, are the form. The effect The effect.
of these is, 1. A Spiritual and perpetual power for discharge of their
function, of which the indelible character is a token. 2. Saving grace for a
right discharge of their function. The Minister The Minister.
of these is a Bishop, and the Ceremonies, Anointing, and Shaving. That the
Ordination of Ministers for their function is Gospel Ordinance, we willingly
grant, and that no man should take upon him this honor, to deal for men in
things appertaining to God unless he be called, as Aaron; Tymothy was this way
called to the work, 1 Timothy 4.14. and he has a directory given him for the call
of others, 1 Timothy 5.22. Titus is left in Crete for this purpose, Tit. 1.5. and
Paul and Barnabas, in every City where they come, act in it. Yet it is far
short of the honor of a Sacrament properly so called. Reasons evincing it to
be no Sacrament.
The outward rite of imposition of hands was used, not so much for
significancy, as decency, being an usage in religious acts, of solemnity before
the Law, under the Law, and continued in Gospel Times, as standing with the
simplicity of it; yet we dare not with Bellarmine, make it essential to
Ordination, finding no institution of it for a sign, much less any saving
grace annexed to it by way of promise; so that here, both an outward instituted
sign, and inward grace are wanting. ^^ither is it such in which all the people
of God are interested. One peculiar order only can claim to it. In the time
of the law, this was in use, and yet by their own confession, it was then no
Sacrament. And it is very strange, that not only power given for
administration of Sacraments, should be a Sacrament, but authority to open the
door for these that come for the Sacrament; as for other Ordinances, should be
a Sacrament likewise. The greatest thing that adversaries talk of is, that
Calvin in Instit. lib. 4. Calvin vindicated.
cap. 14. sect. 20. says, that he can willingly suffer Ordination to be called
a Sacrament; but they are unwilling to take notice that he denies to number, or
reckon it among Ordinary Sacraments, and therefore it is plain, that he takes
the word in a more large acceptance then ordinary: which is further clear in
that in his Comment on Jam. 5.14. he makes the oil which Christ's Disciples
used, Mark 6.13. for the time that the use of it continued to be a Sacrament,
when yet he restrains the whole effect or fruit of it to the health of the body
only, which falls far short of his famously known definition of a Sacrament;
so that Ordination neither according to Scripture nor Calvin is to be accounted
a Sacrament.

SECT. X. Marriage no Sacrament.
THe last Sacrament which they would obtrude upon us is Marriage, which they
have determined to be a Sacrament, as well as the rest that serve to make up
the number, whilst the solemnizing of it holds; and the parties are upon the
work. The words, or signs expressing consent (according to Bellarmine) is both
matter Matter.
and form Form.
of this Sacrament: But when the work is over, then the married couple, in
their persons are the matter; and the words or signs are the form. The married
persons expressing their consent in any manner whatsoever, are themselves the
Minister Minister.
of this Sacrament. Canus seeing how great a dishonor it is to Sacraments, to
make that which is acted in the most profane and clandestine manner, a
Sacrament, resolves that the words of the persons, thus expressing consent, are
the form of the contract of Marriage, and that upon that account marriage is
valid; but it is no Sacrament, according to him, unless it be done by a lawful
Minister; but this Bellarmine opposes as a singular and new opinion. A
Sacrament then, according to him, is, wheresoever a marriage is, and marriage
is, where consent of Parties is expressed; though in the lewdest way, by
persons under Parents power, and not at their own dispose, by divine
appointment. We willingly yield it to be an Ordinance, Reasons evincing it to
be no Sacrament.
established by God, but very short of the nature or honor of a Sacrament, for
diverse reasons: 1. It was the same, as it Adam to Christ's coming in the flesh
it was no Sacrament, by our adversaries confession. 2. It is an Ordinance
Durand Ephesians. 5.32. where the Apostle having illustrated that love, which is
due from the husband to the wife, by that similitude of the love of Christ to
the Church, concludes, This is a great Mystery: and having spoke, both of the
union betwixt Christ and the Church, and between man and his wife; to prevent
all mistakes, he adds, but I speak of Christ and his Church; so that first we
have not the word Sacrament there, but the word Mystery, which by Bellarmines
own confession is not elsewhere in Scripture to be understood of any Sacrament:
and Cajetan on the words (as Amesius observes) warnes the prudent Reader to
observe, that we have not from Paul in this place, that Marriage is any
Sacrament. So that neither word nor thing is found in Scripture, that Marriage
is a Sacrament. Every one of these might have born a large discourse, as is
well known to all that are verst in these controversies. But so many having
spoken so fully to them, though I was unwilling (intending a Treatise of the
Sacraments,) wholly to omit them, yet was resolved, that the Reader might not
be overburthened, to be as brief as possible in them.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT TO REVEREND and LEARNED Master BAXTER, IN WHICH, These following
QVESTIONS are friendly debated.

Whether faith in Christ, qua Lord, be the justifying act?

Whether man's Evangelicall, personal righteousness, be here perfect?

Whether the Moral Law is a perfect rule of righteousness?

Whether Unbelief, and Impenitence in professed Christians, are violations of
the Covenant of Grace?

Whether Faith and Repentance be Gods conditions, or man's, in the proper
conditional Covenant?

Whether the Covenant of Grace require perfection, and accept sincerity?

With an enquiry into the judgment of Antiquity about several things in
reference to Justification.

Sicut meritum Christi non potest apprehendi ad justitiam and salutem, nisi per
organon fidei, divinitus ad hoc ordinatum: ita si fides alibi, quam in suo
proprio and principali objecto, quaerat Justificationem, non invenit nec
accipitillam.

Chemnit. exam: council: Trident: de fid: Justif: page 159. LONDON, Printed by
S. G. for Abel Roper, at the Sign of the Sun, against Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. 1655.

THE INTRODVCTION.
REverend, Beloved, and much Honored, I have received your Apology, according
to your appointment, from your Stationer, for which I return you hearty thanks,
as for the gift it self, so for the pains that you have taken to rectify me,
where, in your judgment, I have publicly stepped aside. An error in Divine
things, if it stand alone, without addition of further aggravations, is not
light. Truth being of such divine excellency, that no pensil can draw out; all
deviation from it into opposite error must needs answer, in black deformity,
and darkness: But when it is not simple error, but joined with endeavor to
engage others, it is far above it self in fowlness. To reduce a brother
therefore, not only erring, but thus erring, must needs be an high, acceptable
office of love. But in this, I need to do no more, than to say over to you,
what you have said to me, in your first and second page, which you style your
Prologue. In this (if we both speak our hearts and thoughts) we are one. And I
wish that in all other things, there were a like unity in judgment, and the
time I hope (with some confidence) is near at hand, that all mists and clouds
will be so dispelled, that we shall arrive at perfect union. And as for
infinite other reasons, so for this, glory is infinitely desirable. In order
to a right understanding between us, I must acquaint you, that your first
words, after your Christian salute, have their mistake, though not much
material; whether upon mistake of my words, when I last saw you in Shrewsbury;
or failing in memory, I cannot determine. I told you not, that I had then sent
to the Press a treatise of the Covenant^, but wished you, indeed, not to be
offended, in case I should in such a treatise, publish somewhat in the way that
you mention. In which I do not barely oppose my memory to yours; but also the
witness of the Reverend Brother, whom you know was then present: together with
the computation of time, which speaks it to me to be above contradiction. It
was May 3. that we spoke together; as I well know by the errand, that I had at
that time into those parts: and my book saw not the light, till toward the end
of November following; and yet made speedy haste, after it went out of my
hands. I was glad of the opportunity, as of a brief discourse of some things,
(as the little scantling of time would bear,) so also to understand your mind,
in the thing already mentioned, before any further proceeding, that there might
be no unbrotherly difference, which at that time you expressed with all
possible candor, for my encouragement in that way. Yet, you now complain, that
I have given the first onset, and so put you upon a necessity of this way of
dealing against me; which you mention in your Preface Apologetical, and in this
Prologue, and more at large in the Preface of your Confession: preferring in
your judgment a more private Collation, and enquiry into things, before this
public way of appearing in the Press. And indeed, I had it in my thoughts to
have written to you, before I had any settled resolution at all, any more to
have appeared in public; and had done some little that way, as soon as your
Aphorisms came to light, (which was more than three years and an half, before
my treatise of the Covenant was published, as may be seen, comparing the dates
of either) but after-thoughts took me off: And indeed I see no cause of
Repentance; considering the issue of things between you and others. After so
much pains of writing on both sides, I do not hear that any of those eminently
learned men, which you say from most parts of the land have taken this way, to
impart their animadversions, have at all prevailed to change your mind. Neither
do I hear, that any of your replies have wrought any change in them for
satisfaction. And in the mean space, those elaborate writings on both sides,
are buried in your Study and theirs; and no other, but your selves, have any
benefit at all; Only we have their complaints (such is humane frailty) that
their names suffer in your public writings. As to the Charge against me for
making the first onset, I had not appeared at all, had I not upon other
occasions (which may be seen in my Preface) been put upon it, to come out in
open view. And how far I stand guilty of that in which I stand charged, I
desire the indifferent Reader impartially to consider. In that of Sacramental
Seals, you had given me at least some occasion. When I had delivered my self in
private to you, and also made my judgment public, that they seal
conditionally; you are pleased peremptorily to determine the contrary. Herein
being not alone unhandsomely censured by your Quaerist, (with whom you there
deal) but terminis terminantibus by you also gainsaid. I indeed make mention of
your name, yet so, as almost wholly agreeing with you in the thing in question,
and differing in some notions and expressions only. In which, I made it my work
to beat out the right meaning, for a true understanding; and in language, I
hope, altogether without offense; And therefore that piece was scarce worthy
the name of a difference. In one or two more problematicall things, I likewise
mention your name, taking notice of your opinion; perhaps with some dissent, as
we are constrained to deal with all, since the penmen of the Holy Ghost
completed that Canon. But for the points that are worthy the name of
controversall, (whether already inserted into the forgoing treatise, or
following in this Postscript) the Reader may see, that your name is not so
much as once mentioned, unless it be with approbation. I was loath indeed to
appear your professed adversary, and more loath, to honor those Tenants of
which I had no other esteem, with the mention of your name. Had you held like
course with me, how inobservant would the differences have been that are
between us? Not many that read your Aphorisms, read my treatise, and so on the
contrary: and all Readers would not have observed the author of arguments, when
the Man industriously is concealed. The offense of Br. against Bl. and Bl.
against Br. would, howsoever have been avoided. I had indeed many debates with
my self, whether or no I should not have totally waved all, that in opposition
to that which I intended to publish, you had delivered. My inclination to
peace, and that great respect I had to you, led me strongly that way. On the
other hand, being resolved upon a tract, in that method, and way, that found
you in full oppposition; Conscience of duty (to appear against all, where I was
convinced that truth was opposed) put me upon it to deal with your arguments,
yet with resolution to let alone your name. So, that I think, the indifferent
Reader will judge you, rather than I, (respective to these bickerings in this
Apology of yours, where, in this public way, you deal with me) to be the
beginner. You are pleased to tell the Reader in the Preface to your Confession,
that you have used more care to avoid offensive words to me, than any other;
which cannot but much engage me. But truly Sir, to speak of things, as they
are, I am apprehensive of not a little gall, in the ink that thou spent upon
me, and take my self to be much more bedabled through your writings, than the
cause required. And indeed it is seldom the cause that I defend, that hears so
much (which yet must fall before arguments, and not words,) as my weakness, as
you endeavor to hold it forth to your Reader. Were it alone my thoughts,
exceptions might soon be put in; but being all Readers thoughts, (as I think)
as well as mine, there is no likelihood that I am much deceived. I may
overvalue my self, but others will not be so hasty to put that over-high
esteem upon me. Let your Index speak, which appears in the vann; Many eyes will
fasten there, that perhaps will look no further; And what honorable language
Mr. Bl. upon all occasion hears, will soon be discerned. But I hope I have
learned better than to make returns; If I can, I fain would avoid it. But to
leave the Porch, and to get more near into the House. You see my thoughts in
three particulars already laid down, in the preceding treatise. I was there
resolved to wave nothing that fairly came into my way; nor to take in any thing
that was impertinent to the work in hand. The first, I must confess, is most in
my thoughts, viz. The interest that faith, which is short of justifying, gives
to Baptism. In which you are pleased to charge me with a doctrine of a very
dangerous nature; Though in all that you have said, I hear not a word of any
dangerous consectary that follows upon it. And truly, Sir, if I should have a
thought of changing my opinion, I know not how to look to the end of the danger
that will follow. Dangers that attend the restraint of right to Baptism to the-
Regenerate.
I must first necessarily engage my self, in an everlasting Schism; being not
able to find out a Church in the world of any interest, in which I shall dare
in this account to hold Communion. I shall see in many members (unless I offer
violence to my judgment) too clear symptoms of non-regeneration; and unbelief,
as to that faith which justifies: And though this will not bear a separation
(as is clear in all the examples that we find to the contrary in the
Scriptures, and the Epistles wrote from heaven to the Churches in Asia) yet
this consideration of their non-baptism, will necessarily enforce it.
Church-communio^ is not to be held with any that are no Church Members; But all
in non-regneration (according to this tenent) are no Church Members, upon
account of their non-baptism, or their null-baptism. And if I meet with men
that are able to give a good account, (and as to men satisfying) of their
regeneration; yet if there ever were a time, since their baptism, that they
were unregenerate, that concludes the nullity of their former baptism. And
being Baptized upon the account of their Fathers faith, That failing and
falling short of that which justifies (as often it does) Their baptism fails;
and I must upon my new taken up principle, renounce Communion, till they have
made all good by a new baptism. And if I shall betake my self to the
Antipaedobaptists (for so many of them as I do know, where I now live, or have
lived, or hear of by report) I must upon all occasions among them plead for
Anabaptism; So slender signs of regeneration, but all on the contrary, being
too evidently manifested for the most part by them. The great reason that ever
I could gather from the principles of Antipaedobaptism, why God should so blast
that way, wheresoever it appears (as you, after Bullinger, Bucer and many
others, have abundantly shown) is, the Schism in which they unavoidably engage
themselves. The whole face of Christianity through the world, had their baptism
in infancy; and this proving no more than the sprinkling of a little common
water, and mere mock-baptism, they are eo nomine, put upon a separation, and
necessitated to disband themselves, and deny society to the whole Church on
earth. The like will (as appears to me) here follow upon this principle, That
only the faith that justifies, gives title in a man of years, either to his own
(if unbaptized) or to his Child's baptism, upon the grounds before mentioned.
And If I be here helped out (as indeed I utterly despair) by any distinction of
Forum Dei, or Forum Ecclesiae, Vnivocall, or Aequivocall; what thoughts then
shall I entertain of the Holy Scriptures? As you say of an opinion that you
oppose, Confess. page 5. when you do but open the Bible, you can seldom meet
with a leaf that is not against them; And I think your Hyperbole is very
tolerable; The same, I think, I may assert of this opinion which here I oppose,
if you except the book of Genesis, and that needs not wholly to be excepted, as
Genesis 6.1. does witness. After the Church was gathered into a visible body in
Abrabam, the leaves are very rare, through the Old and New Testament, in which
a man may not find, testimonies, or instances, of a people in Covenant Relation
to God, and received by Circumcision, or Baptism, into a Church State, in an
unregenerate condition. Let Mr Ball be consulted in his Friendly trial, page
192. What high titles, implying a Covenant Relation, are given to men of most
vile qualifications? To which many more might be added. They are called (says
he) by God himself, His People, His Children, A chosen People, An holy Nation,
The peculiar People of God, The Daughter of Zion, The Daughter of his People,
His pleasant Plant, A right Noble Vine. To which may be added, Children of the
Kingdom, Children of the Covenant, Heirs of the promise, Saints, Believers,
Disciples, Together with many compe^l^tions, I am God, even thy God, etc. And
all of this (as this Reverend Author shows) of a People that were a stiffnecked
People, Foolish and Unwise; That did rebel against the Lord, That did not
understand, were a most Sinful Nation, As Sodom and Gomorrah, passing Sodom
and Gomorrah in iniquity. Here is enough to speak a Covenant, and upon that
account, interest in Circumcision and Baptism. Yea these were called, The
People of the Lord, and the People of his holiness. And to come off with such
distinctions, that they were aequi^ocally, not univocally, nomically and not
really such; That they had these names, as a Corpse, or Picture has the name of
a man, is that boldness with Scripture on which I dare not adventure;
Especially finding those great advantages and privileges in Scripture annexed
unto them. May not the worst of Antinomians, whom you follow with just
indignation, give like answers, and find like starting holds? when they deny
any necessity of good works, and we bring Scripture Texts in the fullest and
plainest way against them, May not they reply, that all this is respective to
our carriage toward men, and not, as to any notice that God takes of them,
either as to displeasure or acceptance? That they are not necessary in foro
Dei, but in foro humano only. As Trask in a journey that he made into
Staffordshire, there delivered, That a Christian was to live amongst men, as
though he were under the obligation of the Law of God, (or words to that
purpose) but must not account himself obliged. And I once heard one that had
got into a Pulpit, pretending to advance Christ, (but in such a way, as I hope
I shall hear no more) mentioning Sanctification, he said, There was such a
thing indeed respective to man, but God regards it not; And objecting the
Apostle's words 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be a willing mind, it is accepted,
according to that which a man has, and not according to that which a man has
not, This he said was not any acceptance of God, but of the Saints. I must
confess the gloss with me, is alike in the one, as in the other; and either of
both, such, as the Text will not bear. Not that I charge all that hold that
tenent, as so highly guilty. They see not (as is plain, in that they deny) the
connection between them, as the Ubiquitaries deny that any thing that they hold
is destructive to the humane nature of Christ; but with me, the consequences
before mentioned, are palpable. And if on the other hand, when God says Hear O
my people, and I will testify against thee, I am God even thy God, Psalm. 50.7.
I entered covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. I shall
believe that God speaks as he thinks; and that this covenant relation is real,
and not barely equivocal, or nominal; I cannot see any danger that follows
upon it. To leave this to your further thoughts, and the Readers more serious
judgment, I come to that which is behind, which I think I may reduce to these
three heads.

1. Those things, wherein you and I really differ in judgment. The Contents of
this Postscript.


2. Those things, in which there is an agreement between us.

3. Those things, which we on either side problematically dispute, and enquire
into.

In the first, I believe your business is to beat down error, and find out
truth; In the second, your end might be judged to be only to discover my
weakness, (being satisfied with my Tenent, but unsatisfied it seems with my
reasons) but you profess other, and better intentions; In the third, I believe
that amidst what seems doubtful, you would fain find out that on which you
might fix as certain. In all of these I would willingly be brief upon a several
account. 1. There is none of them in which this Treatise does directly engage
me, and that, at this time is my work; And I think I had never appeared at all
in any of these, had not this work led me to it. 2. I would not be thought to
have a mind to differences, when indeed my endeavor is to take my mind off
them. 3. I doubt I shall put the Reader to too much cost and pains. The Book it
self is of that bulk (though I hope of a necessary subject) that he may be
tired, before he comes at the Postscript.

SECT. I. Faith in Christ, qua Lord, is not the Justifying Act.
THe first of those points which you have made choice of, is, That the
acceptance of Christ, as a Lord, and not only as a Priest, does justify, In
opposition to some passages of mine Chap. 12. page 79. of my Treatise of the
Covenant. In all of which, as I do not name you, so I think there is never a
sentence that is positively yours; so that, had not you thus owned it, few
would have observed it. I there say what you repeat, [That, it is true, that
faith accepts Christ as a Lord, as well as a Savior; but it is the acceptance
of him, as a Savior, not as a Lord, that justifies: Christ rules his people as
a King, teaches them as a Prophet, but makes atonement for them only as a
Priest, by giving himself in sacrifice, his blood for remission of sins: These
must be distinguished, but not divided: Faith has an eye at all, The blood of
Christ, The command, The doctrine of Christ; But as it fastens on his blood, so
it justifies. He is set out a propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans
3.24. not through faith in his command. It is the blood of Christ that
cleanses all sin; and not the Soverainty of Christ. These confusions of the
distinct parts of Christ's Mediatorship, and the special offices of faith, may
not be suffered. Scripture assigns each it is particular place and work;
Sovereignty does not cleanse us, nor does blood command us: Faith in his blood,
not faith yielding to his sovereignty, does justify us. Mr. Brs. reply
analized.
]

In your reply to this passage of mine, you

1. Acquit me of any further error, then what is found in my method, affirming,
that I agree with you in substantia rei.

2. You lay down six several distinctions.

3. You lay down nine propositions. All of which, both distinctions and
propositions, I believe you intended for illustration of the point in debate,
but your Readers (and those neither of the younger nor duller sort) complain
of your obscuring of it.

4. You fall upon your charge of me, and here you charge, 1. My expressions,
with confounding that, which was my business, as well as I could, to
distinguish. 2. You charge my implications, or employed sense (which it seems
you far better know then I) with triple injustice. 1. Against the truth and
word of God. 2. Against the souls of men, 1. In such nice mincing and cutting
the conditions of their salvation, to their great perplexity, if they receive
my doctrine. That which all complain of, in your expressions, you are pleased
to blame me withal in my implications. Upon the coming out of your Apology,
I was wrote unto by an eminently-learned hand in these words. I wish that it
may not divert you from better employment, and namely your Treatise about the
Sacraments, to which if you adjoyn as an appendix, something by way of reply to
Mr. Br. not so as to trouble your self and others, (as Mr. Br. does too much)
with Logical niceties, but to clear and confirm the main matter, I think it
will be most convenient. 2. I am charged, as not affording one word of
Scripture or reason; when yet in those few words recited, I think the reader
may see as many as in all your distinctions and propositions. Lastly and
leastly (as you term it) my charge is of evident injustice to my friend, (For
it is, as is said, no hard matter to know who I mean) in charging him with
confounding the distinct parts of Christ's mediatorship. I am expressly spoke to,
and charged without injustice for confounding Christ's actions, with man's faith;
How truly let the Reader judge; And am yet guilty of injustice, in charging my
employed friend, in my employed sense, with such a crime.

5. You excuse your self, for your not much troubling me with arguments; Giving
your reason, that you have done it, over, and over, to others. Where I would
have the Reader to observe, that you have other Adversaries, besides me, in
this point, and those of the most learned, who (as else where you say) have
vouchsafed that condescension as to give in animadversions. 2. That we hear
none of these learned men's reasons. A few words of mine let fall by the bie,
are fallen upon, and elaborate learned Treatises of others lie dormant,
industriously written on this subject.

6. You come in with your ten arguments; which it seems you take to be a
number below trouble. It would trouble you, If I should say, your employed sense
is, That they are such, to which I may without trouble give in an answer.

7. You amplify your tenth argument, with a large discourse, and all of this
before you can reach my words. I should trouble the Reader in his purse and
patience, if I should follow you in all these particulars, and indeed I was
scarce ever brought so near to a nonplus. To speak to all, Time will not
suffer; and to take to some, and leave others, will expose me to censure. Your
distinctions should be looked into, and if they had been either proved or
explained, you had done your Reader a Favor. Your first distinction is between
Constitutive Justification, His distinctions considered.
or remission by the Gospel-grant or Covenant; and Justification by the
sentence of the Judge. I hope you do not make these two distinct
Justifications, that so it should be a distribution of a Genus into its
species, So I think few Readers will own it. But if you mean by the former, a
Justification wrought, and in it self perfect and complete, as your word
constitutive would seem to imply; And by Justification by the sentence of the
Judge, Justification manifested and declared, then I freely yield. That is
Justification in it self, perfect and full, that renders a man blessed; And
this your constitutive Justification, which you call remission by the
Gospel-grant does, Psalm. 32.1. Commented upon by the Apostle, Romans 4.7, 8.
Whether the Elect shall have any other justification, or this manifested, and
more fully held out, let Christ himself determine. At the day when God by him
shall judge the world, he will pronounce this sentence, Come ye blessed of my
Father, Matthew. 25.34. This Justification then by the sentence of the Judge is a
manifestation of this blessedness, which is in remission and non-imputation of
sin. Your next distinction is between, Constitutive Justification as begun, and
as continued or consummate. And here I doubt not but you may distinguish,
provided that you donot divide and make one condition to be required for the
first, (as you use to do) viz. Faith only, and another (which is works) the
condition of the second; When David through faith was put into a justified
state, and after fell into sin, there was a necessity of his return in the
order established of God. You may say, if you please, that works must now
acquit him from this second guilt: but this I shall hardly embrace. He sought
in his fallen condition, to have sin by free grace remitted, and to be purged
with that, which Hysopin Ceremonial purifications did typifie, Psalm. 51.7. A
justified state is carried on in a way of obedientiall affiance; But faith in
Christ's blood, first and last does only justify. The Apostle speaks of the
falls of the Children of God, when he says, If any man sin, 1 John 2.1. and
tells us the way to be acquitted, not any new, but the old and first way: We have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sin; And I know no other way of propitiation, then through
faiths in his blood. I know what you say, Pref. to your Confess. page 8. if I
number right, They are very different questions, How we are constituted just,
or put into a justified state at our conversion; and How we are sentenced just,
or justified at Gods Judgment seat. You may if you please make them two
questions, but were I to be Catechized by you, I should give you the same
answer. And I believe Paul was of the same mind, when he desired to be found,
(as I think, in judgment) not having his own righteousness, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. I
think he could find no other, which would be as a Screen, or cover, to hide
sin, or keep off the wrath of God. He knew nothing by himself; He could not
therefore be charged as unbelieving or impenitent; Yet he was not thereby
justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. Be it faith as a work or other work of obedience, they
are all within the command of the Law; and I dare not rest there for
Justification. And the Apostle acquaints us with no other way then faith for
interest in this righteousness. You farther say in in the place quoted: They
that will needs (to the great disgrace of their understandings) deny that there
is any such thing as Justification at Judgment, mu^t either say that there is
no Judgment, or that all are Condemned; or that judging does not contain
Justification and Condemnation, as its distinct species; but some men shall
then be judged, who shall neither be Justified nor Condemned. All men have not
their understandings elevated to one pitch, I know no Justification to be
expected then, specifically distinct from that which did precede. I would for
the bettering of my understanding learn, whether this Justification at the day
of Judgment be not a Justification of men already justified, yea of men already
in possession of their Crown, (except of those who then are found alive) though
not complete, in regard of the absence of the body; I have fought a good fight,
(says the Apostle) I have finished my course, henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. At the end of his combat he receives
his Crown. This must needs be, unless we will be of the Mortalists Judgment,
to deny any separate existence of the Soul; Or of theirs that assert the
Souls-sleeping: both of them against the Apostle, who says, To be absent from
the body, is to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. And upon that account,
had a desire to depart, and be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. which present advantage
seemed to him to over-weigh, or at least to balance all the good that the
Church migh reap by his labor surviving. Your third distinction is between the
Physical operation of Christ and his benefits, on the intellect of the
Believer, per modum objecti apprehensi, as an intelligible species; and the
moral conveiance of right to Christ, and his benefit, which is by an act of
law, or Covenant-donation. If you call the first a Justification, then very bad
men, in the Church on earth, and the worst of Devils in hell, may be justified:
They may have such operations upon their understanding. You seem else where to
distinguish between the acceptance of him by faith, and this moral conveyance
of right. Your fourth distinction is between those two question, What
justifies ex part Christi, and what justifies or is required to our
Justification ex part peccatoris. Which as it is laid, is without exception.
Your fifth is, between the true efficient causes of our Justification, and the
mere condition, sine qua non, et cum qua: Which I can scarce tell whether to
approve or disapprove; with your comment upon it, I have spoken to it. Your
last distinction is between Christ's meriting man's Justification, and this
actual justifying him by constitution or sentence, which, as the fourth, is
above exception.

Your propositions offer themselves in the next place to consideration.

1. You say, Christ did merit our Justification, or a power to Justify, not as
a King, but by satisfying the justice of God in the form of a servant. This I
embrace with thanks, and do believe that it will draw more with it.

2. You say, Christ does justify constistutive, as King and Lord, viz. ut
Dominus Redemptor, i. e Quoad valorem rei, he conferreth it, Ut dominus gratis
benefaciens; But Quoad modum conditionalem conferendi, Ut Rector et Benefactor.
For it is Christ's enacting the New Law, or Covenant, by which he does legally
pardon, or confer remission, and constitute us righteous, supposing the
condition performed on our part. And this is not an act of Christ as a Priest
or Sacrificer, but jointly, Ut Benefactor et Rector. Hereto me are termini
novi, and Theologia nova. But let the terms alone of Dominus, Redemptor,
Rector, Benefactor, That which you ascribe to Christ in this place, (so far as
I understand) Scripture still gives to the Father. Christ gave himself for us,
indeed, according to his Fathers command; but the Father gives him to us, and
he that gave his Son, appoints the terms on which Justification and Salvation
is to be obtained by him, God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, John 3.16.

So that this New Law (if you will call it so) is of the Fathers appointment,
John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one who sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life. And in this sense, if we
will follow Scripture, The Father justifies, Romans 8.33, 34. It is God that
Justifies, whche is that condemns? Christ's work, is to work us into a
posture, to obtain it. The Father judicially acts in it.

3. You say, Christ does justify by sentence as he is Judge, and King; and not
as Priest. Answ. If he justify by sentence, Then he condemns by sentence,
when yet he says, J 1.47. He judges, (that is) condemns none. The truth is, as
the Psalmist speaks, God is Judge himself, Psalm. 50.6. and the Apostle tells
us, he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness,
by the man whom he has ordained, Act. 17.31. This unquestionably Christ does
as King; but in this Kingly power, he is no other then the Fathers Agent, who
has set him on his holy Hill of Zion, Psalm. 2.6. He is therefore at the
Fathers right hand, as prime in power for that work. Those that are next to
him, that is chief, are so seated, and Zebedees Children looked for it, in
Christ's temporal Kingdom. When this is done, Christ's mediatory power will be
finished, and he shall give up his Kingdom to the Father.

4. You say, Sententiall Justification, is the most full, complete and eminent
Justification, That in Law being, quoad sententiam, but vertuall Justification.
Answ. To this I have spoken upon the first distinction.

5. You say, Faith justifies not, by receiving Christ as an object; which is to
make a real impression and mutation on the intellect; according to the nature
of the species, I say to justify is not to make such a real change, etc.
Answ. To this I have spoke under that head of the instrumentality of faith. The
works ancedent to this of Justification, as Humiliation, Regeneration, faith,
imply a real change. Such a change is wrought in the Justified Soul, though
the act of Justification do not work it.

6. You say, Faith can have no physical causation or efficiency in
Justification, seeing that the work to be done by us, is not, nosmetipsos
Justificare either in whole or in part, etc.

7. You say, The legal formal interest, or conducibility of faith toward
Justification, cannot therefore be any other then that of a condition in the
proper Law sense, etc.

I have spoken to both of these in the place last mentioned.

8. You say, Scripture does not say (that you can find) that faith justifies,
but that we are justified by faith, and therefore (you say) you use the latter
phrase, rather then the former. Ans. This sure comes to fill up, or make a
number, To say that we are justified by faith, and not that faith justifies, is
a distinction without a difference: We have warmth by Clothes, but Clothes do
not warm u^. Faith has no less efficiency in Justification, then in
miraculous cures, and yet in them faith made whole.

9. You say, Though ex part Christi, our several changes proceed from his
several benefits, and parts of his office exercised for us; Yet ex part
nostri, i.e. fidei, it is one entire apprehension or receiving of Christ, as he
is offered in the Gospel, which is the condition of our interest in Christ, and
his several ben fits; and the effect is not parcelled, or diversified, or
distinguished from the several distinct respects that faith has to its
object, etc. Answ. It is well that this is confessed, on the part of Christ.
And I think you cannot show, why Christ should undergo this variety of
functions in his Mediatorship, and make them known to us likewise; That we
should be taught in our Catechism (which is so honored with your approbation)
That Christ executes the office of a Prophet, in revealing to us by his word
and Spirit, the will of God for our Salvation; That he executes the office of
a Priest, in his once offering up of himself a Sacrifice to satisfy divine
Justice, and reconcile us to God, and in making continual intercession for us;
That he executes the office of a King in subduing us to himself, in ruling and
defending us, if our faith is not to observe, which way these various
privileges accrue unto us; Why does the Scripture so distinctly speak of them,
if we may not distinctly consider them? Must our intellect go without our faith
in this thing? I think it may be proved, that the Saints faith, has thus
distinctly acted. In danger of enemies they go to God in Christ, in
consideration of his sovereignty, As Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. O Lord God of
our Fathers, art not thou God in heaven, and rulest not thou over all the
Kingdoms of the heathen, and in thy hands is there not power and might, So
that none is able to withstand thee? etc. Under a cloud of ignorance to go to
him as a teacher, We see the censure that the Psalmist passes upon himself, So
foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee, and presently
addresses himself to God, Thou shall Guide me with thy counsel, and bring me
unto glory, Psalm. 73.22, 24. Under the burden of sin, to look to be cleansed
and purged; To what else did the sacrifices tend? and why else did David make
his address? Wash me thoroughly from my sin; Deliver me from
blood-guiltinesse. Here I must lay down certain propositions, in a more full
way to explicate my self.

Propositions tending to explain the Authors meaning
1. That these several functions of Christ must be distinguished, but may not
be divided; He that is one is all, Christ a Priest does rule, Christ a King
does merit and teach, Christ a Prophet does both merit and rule: But as a
Priest he does not rule, as a King he does not merit; he is still one, in all
of these functions, but acts under a distinct notion.

2. There is a necessity of the actual improvement of his Kingly and
Prophetic office, to bring men into a Justified state; and to bring Justified
ones to the end of their Justification. There must be light to lead men to
Christ, power to subdue men unto him, as well as a price paid to reconcile
them. When the price of our redemtion is paid by Christ, and not published, it
is like the hid treasure, by which no man has advantage: Yea, were it made
known, and by faith applied and brought home, our enemies yet are so potent and
numerous that they would still prevail against us. Being redeemed by a price
out of the hands of the Fathers Justice, we must be rescued by a power out of
the hands of Satan; When his right determines, (as it is with many unjust
possessors) he will yet keep his hold.

3. Our faith has respect to whole Christ, to every part and piece of his
Mediatorship. It yields to his sovereignty, is guided by his counsel, and
rests in his atonement. So that the faith which Justifies looks at his Kingly
office, at his Prophetic office, as well as at his Priestly office, but not as
it justifies. Qua teaching, it looks upon him as a Prophet, and learns; Qua
ruling, it looks upon him as a King, and submits to him; Qua sacrificing, and
making atonement, it looks upon him as a Priest, and rests there for acquitall
and discharge. Where the Gospel distinguishes, our faith is distinctly to act
and look.

As to the charge laid against me, I shall say little. I had rather speak for
truth then for my self. You tell me, that my expressions confound Christ and
his actions, with man's faith in our Justification, or these two questions [by
what we are Justified ex part Christi] and [by what we are Justified ex part
nostri.] For answer, I only leave it to the Readers eyes, whether I do not
mention, [our faith] as distinct from [the blood of Christ] in the words by you
recited; And it is faith by which we are Justified ex part nostri. The employed
sense which you accuse, I shall further consider in some express reasons.

Now for your arguments, we have ten in number, and not above two of them
conclude the proposition in question.

Your first concludes, That Christ is not received as Christ, Mr. Brs.
Arguments examined.
if not as Lord-Redeemer, which is a new phrase, which I remember not, that I
have read before I read this Apology. For Answer, I say Christ is to be
received as the Lord our Redeemer, and as our Master or Teacher, but faith in
Justification, eyes Redemption, not Dominion.

Your second concludes from the authority of the Assembly, That Justifying
faith is the receiving of Christ, as he is offered in the Gopel; But he is
offered in the Gospel as Savior and Lord. All which is that which never was
denied.

Your third concludes, That to save from the power of sin, is as true a part of
a Saviors office, as to save from the guilt, which is not at all to the
question. Saving from the power of Sin, Sanctifies, and not Justifies.

Your fourth, Of faiths receiving Christ, as he Justifies us, affirming, that
he Justifies us, as King, and Judge, and Benefactor, is the same, for ought I
can discern, with your tenth, and there is to be considered.

Your fifth is, If receiving Christ as Satisfier and Meritor, be the only faith
that gives right to Justification; then on the same grounds we must say, It is
the only faith that gives right to further Sanctification and to Glorification.
If you put this argument into form, the word [meritor] will be found
aequivocall, and the Syllogism to consist of four terms. We look at Christ for
Justification, as satisfying Justice, and meriting pardon and remission, not as
meriting Sanctification.

Sixthly you say, Rejecting Christ as a King, is the condemning sin, therefore
receiving him as King, is the Justifying faith. This is like the old argument,
Evil works merit condemnation, Ergo good works merit salvation. An ill meaning
damnes, Prove. 21.27. Our good meaning therefore saves. I further answer,
Rejecting Christ as a King, is a sin against the Moral Law, which damnes: Yet
somewhat more then subjection to the Moral Law is required, that a sinner may
be saved. You give in your reason of your consequent, Because unbelief, say
you, condemns, (at least partly) as it is the privation of the Justifying
Faith; explaining your self, that you speak of that condemnation, or peremptory
sentence, which is proper to the New Law. To this I answer, Unbelief, if we
speak properly, does not at all condemn, further then as it is a breach of a
Moral Commandment. The privation, of which you speak, only holds the sentence
of the Law in force and power against us: which me thinks should be your
judgment as well as mine, seeing you are wont to compare the New Law (as you
call it) to an Act of Oblivion, And an Act of Oblivion saves many, but
condemns none: If a Traitor, or Murderer be exempted in any such Act of
Oblivion, it is their crime that condemns them, only the Act provides no
remedy for them. It harms them not, only it does not help them. If one of
those which were stung by the fiery serpent, Numb. 21. had refused to have
looked on the braz^n serpent, The sting had been his death, and such obstinate
refusal had kept him from the means of cure.

Your seventh is, Kissing the Son, and submitting to him, as King, is made the
condition of escaping his wrath. Answ. If you had said A condition, you had
spoken fairlier [The condition] implies the sole condition. The yielding up of
our selves to him in all his functions, as the Lords Christ, verse. 2. is there
understood, which is of necessity in all that will escape his wrath.

Eighthly, you say, Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. The condition of case and of rest
(from guilt as well as power of sin) is our coming to Christ as a teacher and
example of meekness and lowliness, and our learning of him, a taking on us
his yoke and burden. Answ. This text shows the duty of men to be, not alone
to seek rest and ease from Christ, but to learn of Christ, and follow him: But
neither their learning nor their imitation, but faith in his blood, is their
freedom, or Justification.

Ninthly, you say, That faith which is the condition of salvation, is the
condition of Justification or remission: But it is the receiving of Christ as
King, as well as a satisfier, that is the condition of our salvation; Therefore,
etc. Answ. Here the Conclusion is safely granted. You know that we yield, that
the faith that accepts Christ as a King, Justifies: But that is not the
Justifying act. The hand has more officers then one; It works as well as
receives; and so has faith. And that there is more req^ired as a condition to
Salvation then to Justification, (speaking of it in Scripture phrase) you yield
sufficiently, where you distinguish of Justification begun, the condition
whereof is faith only, and Justification consummate, there you bring in
Repentance and Obedience; That which you call Justification begun, is
Justification properly so called. Faith only is serviceable to reconcile us
unto God; but there is more required for reparation of our qualifications, to
hold us up in communion with God. Of this I have spoke, Chap. 1.2, 13, 14. of
my treatise of the Covenant.

Your tenth and last reason is, If accepting Christ a Lord Redeemer be the
fides quae Justificat, i. e. quae est conditio Justificationis, then it is
merely, strictly, and properly the Justifying act of faith, as the accepting of
Christ's righteousness is: But the Antecedent (you say) is granted by all
Divines that you have to do with: Therefore, etc. Answ. If they grant your
Antecedent simply, as in this phrase you deliver it, I much marvel. This
seems to imply that Christ acted qua Lord, in paying the price of our
Redemption: and that this work of his, is to be referred to his exaltation, and
not to his state of humiliation: And I am sure the Scripture speaks otherwise.
That which I yield is, That the faith which accepts Christ who is our Lord and
Redeemer, is the faith which Justifies, and the condition of our Justification;
But as it looks upon Redemption a sacrificing act of Priesthood, The
distinctias fides quae and fides qua, asserted.
done by him who is indeed a Lord and King, sit only Justifies. But this
distinction of Fides quae Justificat, and Fides qua Justificat, is (as you are
pleased to say) the general cheat, so that your Antecedent it seems is
granted you, by all those Divines with whom you deal, under this limit; And as
it seems, you have met with a pack of impostors, and that of the most learned
in the Land, that out of their great condescension, have written for your
satisfaction. This word, you think, sounds harshly from Mr. Crandon, as indeed
it does, and is no small blemish to his great pains, you may then judge how it
will take from your self, in the ears of others: And I much marvel that this
distinction, that every where else would pass, and be confessed to be of
necessity, to avoid confusion in those distinct capacities, in which men
usually act, should here not alone be questioned, but thus branded. Does not
every man that undergoes various relatitions variously act according to them?
And do not men that make address, address themselves in like variety? He that
is at once, a Husband, a Parent, a Master, a Schoolmaster, a Physician, acts
variously according to all of these capacities. Some come to him as a father,
some as a Master, some as a Teacher, all of them come unto him, as a Physician;
But only they that come to him, as a Physician, are cured by him. Believers
through faith go to Christ, that bears all the relations mentioned; But as they
seek satisfaction in his bloodshedding, which is an act of his Priesthood,
they are justified. Learned Amesius may worthily be ranked in the first place
amongst those that you thus honor. As soon as he enters upon the dispute of
justifying faith, in answer to Bellarmines first question, What that faith is
that is required to justification? he says in the name of Protestants, Hoc
ipsum vel imperite, vel sophistice, in quaestionem vocatur. Nam, 1. Multa ad
justificationem requiruntur quae non justificant. 2. Non tam quaeritur quae,
aut quid fides quae justificat, quam quae sit ratio qua proprie dicitur
justificare.
This is either unskilfully or sophistically put to the question, giving in his
reasons. 1. Says he, There are many things required to justification, which do
not justify. 2. It is not so much inquired into, what that faith is, which
does justify; as in what notion it is that it is said to justify? And giving
answer to farther words of Bellarmine, he says in the same page, that
Observandum est, nos non restringere fidem illam quae justificat, sed tantum
qua justificat, ad promissionem misericordiae. Arguments evincing that faith in
the blood of Christ only justifies.
Protestants do not restrain the faith [which] justifies, but faith [as] it
justifies, to the promise of mercy. Much more may be seen in this Author in his
next Chapter, Sect. 1. Sect. 8. which I leave to the Reader to consult at
pleasure. And together with it, that which may be seen largely in Chemnitius,
enquiring into the proper object of justifying faith, in his Examen Council:
Trident: mihi page 159. under this head, Quid vere and proprie sit fides
justificans, and quo sensu scriptura velit intelligi, quando pronunciat impium
fide justificari.

I shall here take the boldness to give in my arguments to make good, that
faith in Christ, qua Lord, does not justify.

1. That which the types under the Law, appointed for atonement and expiation,
lead us unto in Christ, our faith must eye for atonement, expiation, and
reconciliation; This cannot be denied; These Levitical types lead us doubtless
to a right object, being Schoolmasters to lead us unto Christ, and shaddows
whereof he is the substance; As also to that office in him (who is the object
of faith) that serves for this work: But these types lead us unto Christ in his
Priestly office, for the most part as Sacrificing, sometimes as interceding,
John 1.29. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 1.18. A great part of the Epistle to the Hebrews
is a proof of it.

2. That which the Sacraments under the Gospel, setting forth Christ for pardon
of sin, lead us unto, That our faith must eye, for Reconciliation, Pardon, and
Justification; This is clear, Christ in his own instituted ordinances, will not
misguide us: But these lead us to Christ suffering, dying for the pardon of
sin, Mat. 26.28. This is my blood in the new Testament shed for you, and for
many for the remission of sins. Here is a confirmation of both these arguments
in one; The types of the Law, and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, lead both
of them to his blood, for this reason of atonement and forgiveness. There was
an old Testament enjoined of God, in which the people in convenant were
sprinkled with blood, Exodus 24.1, etc. commented upon by the Apostle, Heb.
9.20, etc. That blood, and this cup, lead to Christ's blood for forgiveness, and
in them the death of Christ is remembered. A broken, bleeding, dying Christ, in
the Lords Supper is received.

3. As the Spirit of God guides faith, so it must go to Christ for propitiation
and atonement; This needs no proof; The Holy Ghost is the best leader: But the
Holy Ghost guides our faith to go to the blood of Christ for atonement, whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, To. 3.25.
It is blood is our propitiatory or mercy seat: We are justified by his blood,
Romans 5.9. And faith is our way of interest, and thither the Spirit of God, by
the Apostle, leads our faith, as we see in the words mentioned. I am checked
indeed by you, because I say, through faith in his blood, not faith in his
command: quo jure nescio, say you. My reason, or warranty is; because I durst
not add to the Apostles directory; when he leads us one way, I dare look no
other. If he had intended to have led us to Christ as a propitiation, without
further direction, under what notion our faith should have looked upon him; It
had been enough to have said, that he is our propitiation: but distinctly
pointing out [his blood] and [faith in his blood] I think I have warrant
sufficient to lead souls hither, and only hither: especially seeing I find him
still in the same language, Romans 5.8, 9. God commends his love toward us, in
that, while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, much more then, being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath, through him. In whom we
have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians.
1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.
For as much as ye know that we were redeemed -- with the precious blood of
Christ, as a Lamb without blemish. You demand, Will you exclude his obedience,
resurrection, intercession? To which I only say, I marvail at the question; If
I exclude these, I shall exclude his blood; His shedding of blood was in
obedience, John 10.18. Phil. 2.8. His resurrection was his freedom from the
bonds of death, and an evidence of our discharge by blood: His intercession is
founded on his blood; He intercedes, not as we, by bare petition, but merit: He
presents his blood as our high Priest in the holy of holies. You tell me
further, that the thing I had to prove, was not the exclusion of [faith in his
commands] but of [faith in Christ as Lord and teacher.] I can no more
distinguish [Lord] and [command] then I can [blood] and [sacrifice] it being
the office of a Lord to rule, as of blood to make atonement. You yet tell me,
It was fittest for Paul to say [by faith in his blood] because he intends to
connote both what we are justified by, ex part Christi, and what we are
justified by, ex part nostri, but the former principally. To this I say, If
this were fittest for Paul, then it is unfit for any to come in with
animadversions, and tell us of any other thing, either ex part Christi, or ex
part nostri, for justification. I pray you rest here, and we are well agreed.
Here is Christ's Priestly office on his part alone, and I am resolved to look no
further.

4. Our faith must look upon Christ so as to obtain righteousness by him, by
virtue of which we may appear before God as righteous: But it is by his
obedience as a Servant, that we obtain righteousness, and stand before the Lord
as righteous, Romans 15.19. By the obedience of one, many are made righteous.

5. That way that Christ took to bring us to God, our faith must eye and
follow: But Christ by death, the sacrifice of himself, brings us to God, 1 Pet.
3.18. Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God.

6. As Christ frees us from the curse, so he justifies us, and in that notion
our faith must look unto him for justification. This is plain; Justification
being no other but our acquittall from the curse, which is the sentence of the
Law of Moses, Acts 13.38. But Christ frees us from the curse, in suffering as a
sacrifice, not ruling as a Lord, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangs on a tree.

I said in my Treatise of the Covenants, [there are several acts of justifying
says, Heb. 11. but those are not acts of justification. It is not Abraham's
obedience, Moses self-denial, Gideons or Sampsons valor, that was their
justification, but his blood that did enable them in those duties by his
Spirit; Paul went in these duties as high as they; and I doubt not, but he
overtopt them; yet he was not thereby justified.] Here are many exceptions
taken. 1. At the phrase [an act of justification] with much ado made to know my
meaning, when I had thought all had well enough understood it: You would fancy
that I mean that justification it self acts, speaking of it, not as an object,
but an efficient; but I must acquaint you, that it implies, that justification
acts, when I speak of the acts of justification, as it does, that harvest
works, when I speak of harvest-work. I mean acts tending to justify, or
exercised in, or about justification. 2. It is demanded, Who knows whether you
mean that none of those acts, Heb. 11. are acts of justification? The proper
importance of your words, say you, is for the former: but that, (say you) is a
dangerous untruth, giving in v. 13. as an exception against it. Answ. I
intended the generality of those acts there ascribed to faith, in that
indefinite speech of mine, which you cannot make necessarily to be universal.
You have justly made exception of one, verse. 13. which in my ministerial way,
preaching on those words, I have interpreted, as you say, our Divines do. It
see^s by you, that I have our Divines in the rest siding with me. 3. You tell
me, you should not (in my judgment) have called [Abrahams obedience, Moses
self-denial, Gideons valour] acts of justifying faith. Are these acts of
faith? If you mean, (say you) that these acts are fruits of faith, it is true,
or if you mean that an act of faith did excite the soul, etc. Answ. And should
the Apostle have then said that they were done by faith? Is not this his error,
as the former is mine? I pray you what was that [work of faith] that the
Apostle mentions, 1 These. 1.3? Faith wrought and acted somewhat. 4. You demand,
what mean you to say, obedience and valor was not their justification? Answ.
If no act of faith, sano sensu, by an ordinary Metonymy, may be said to be
justification, make then a comment upon the Apostles words, Romans 4.3. where to
overthrow justification by works, and to establish justification by faith, he
says, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness: which
is as much as, it was his justification. That which is a prevalent plea in any
Court to obtain justification, is not unfitly called justification. Faith in
Christ's blood is such a plea, and therefore not unfitly called our
justification. Your fifth and sixth need not to have been put into two; Then
how come you to say next, (say you) that it is Christ's blood? The blood of
Christ is the meritorious cause of our justification, etc. But I thought the
contest in your dispute had been, which is the justifying act of faith, and
which not? And therefore when you denied those in Heb. 11. to be acts of
justification, (which I am forced to interpret [justifying acts] I expected to
find the true act asserted; but in stead of that, I find the opposite number,
is [The blood of Christ.] Is this indeed the controversy? Whether it be
[accepting Christ as Lord] or [the blood of Christ] that justifies? Never was
such a question debated by me, in the way here intimated. I am wholly for you,
if this be the doubt. H^re you meet with the greatest advantage, that I think
in my Treatise you any where find; when I say, [these acts were not their
justification] and put in opposition, [but his blood who did enable them to
duties by his Spirit,] it should have been faith in his blood who did enable
them to these duties; but each one may see, and some have said, (that before we
read this objection of yours,) that it is plain that I meant it. S^venthly you
tell me, It would prove an hard task to make good that there are several acts
of justifying faith by which we are not justified, without flying to great
impropriety of speech. Answ. I believe you think, that justifying faith
includes in it, all those kinds of faith that Scripture mentions, as Faith
Dogmatical, or Historical, and (in all that had the gift of miracles,)
Faith-miraculous. They had not one faith, whereby they had their interest in
Christ, and another whereby they gave assent to Divine truths, and a third
whereby they wrought miracles: And to say that we are justified by such assent,
or they, by such miracles, I think were a speech more then improper. You say
further, That by justifying faith, I must mean the act, habit, or renewed
faculty. And I wonder you could have it in your thoughts, that I should mean
the last. Then you would willingly engage me in a dispute, whether that the
acts and habits of man's soul, are of so distinct a nature, that where the acts
are specifically distinct by the great distance and variety of objects, yet the
habit producing all these is one and the same. To which I say no more for
answer, but that I shall take it for granted, till I see (as yet I do not)
convincing reason against it. Eighthly you tell me, that 1 Cor. 4.4. is nothing
to our business. Paul was not his own justifier. Though he knew not matter of
condemnation (sensu Evangelio) for no doubt he knew himself to be a sinner) yet
that did not Justify him; because it is God only that is his Judge. Answ. I
believe that you give a right comment on the Apostles words, as to the first
branch. He was one whose heart, as John speaks, condemned him not; but your
reason why he was not thereby justified is very strange: Because, say you, that
it is God only that is his Judge. And thus then the Apostle argues; God only
is Judge to justify: But my innocence, or integrity is not God: Therefore it
does not justify. It seems that Abraham's works with you are God, for you tell
us presently that he was justified by them. The Apostle indeed adds, in the
following words, He that judges me is the Lord; But those words have not
reference to these now in hand, as is plain in the context, but to that which
he had spoken to verse. 3. With me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man's Judgment, yea I judge not mine own self, to which
these words come in direct opposition, But he that judges me is the Lord. And
thus then the Apostle here argues, He that must stand to the Judgment of the
Lord, may account it a very small thing to be judged of men: But I must stand
to the Judgment of the Lord: Ergo. I think the Reader may find a better
interpretation of this text from Mr. Ball, quoted by me in this treatise, which
might be seconded by the authority of several others, and such (as he says)
renders the text strong against Justification by works. When you have expounded
the words as you have done, they serve to shut out all works, in which Paul
ever appeared, from Justification. There follows such an inference that you
would hardly bear with from another. Can you hence prove (say you) that
accepting Christ as a Lord is not the condition of Justification then you may
prove the same of the accepting of him as a Savior.

It seems every word in a whole treatise must immediately of it self, formally
prove the main thing that is in question. It proves that works parallel to
Abraham's offering Isaac, or leaving of his Country, are none such whereby men
are justified. It fully proves that which the next words seems to disprove.

I brought in by way of objection that text of [ James, and endeavored to give
some answer to it: James 2 24. vindicated.
James indeed says, that Abraham was Justified by works, when he had offered
Isaac his Son on the Altar, Jam. 2.21. But either there we must understand a
working faith, with Pisator, Paraeus, and Penible, and confess that Paul and
James handle two distinct questions, The one, whether faith alone Justifies
without works? which he concludes in the affirmative; The other, what faith
Justifies? Whether a working faith only, and not a faith that is dead and idle?
Or else I know not how to make sense of the Apostle, who straight infers from
Abraham's Justification by the offer of his Son, And the Scripture was fulfilled
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. How otherwise do these aceord? He was Justified by works, and
the Scripture was fulfilled which says, he was Justified by faith?] Here are
many exceptions taken, If James must use the term [works] twelve times in
thirteen verses, a thing not usual, as if he had foreseen how men would
question his meaning, and yet for all that we must believe, that by [works]
James does not mean [works] it would prove as hard a thing to understand the
Scripture, as the Papists would persuade us that it is. Answ. First, it seems
the difficulty of interpretation is supposed, when the word is used 12 times so
near together, otherwise I doubt not but your self will confess a necessity of
interpretation of this kind, which yet you would be loath to have branded with
such absurdity. Secondly, If I durst take the liberty that others assume, the
doubt were easily solved, and say, that Paul speaks of a real Justification,
James of an equivocall, which interpretation would far better suit here then
else where. A dead faith is fit to work a dead Justification, and such as
carries as full resemblance to Justification in truth, as a dead corpse does of
a living man. Thirdly, were you to interpret that of David, Psalm. 22.6. I am a
worm and no man, I think you would so interpret it, as to make him a man and no
worm. But to leave Metaphors, Metonymies frequent in Scripture.
and come to the Metonymies of this kind. How frequently are such found in
Scripture? which enforce us to say, that not to be in strict Propriety of
speech, what Scrippture says, is. He has made him to be sin for us, 2 Cor.
5.21. When yet we must say, he was not made sin, an entity cannot be made a non
ens, or mere privation; He was made then an atonement for sin, a sin-offering
as we say, a Metonymy of the Adjunct. These died in faith, having not received
the promises, Heb. 11.13. They had received the promises, Romans 9.4. It is a
contradiction to say, They died in the faith, and had not received the promise.
It is taken there for the land promised; a Metonymy of the Object. When Herod
the King heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him,
Matthew. 2.3. Jerusalem was not troubled; It was alone the Inhabitants that were
troubled, by a Metonymy of the Subject. This is the Will of God, even your
Sanctification, 1 These. 4.4. and this was not, voluntas Dei, but res volita,
not the Will of God, but the thing willed, by a Metonymy of the Cause. A
Thousand more of these might be named, which yet are as well understood, as we
understand each others common Language.

2. Do but read (say you) over all the severses, and put [working faith]
instead of [works] and try what sense you will make? Answ. Here is employed,
that, As [works] are taken in some of these verses, So they must be taken in
all, If there be no Metonymy in all, then there is no Metonymy in any. As one,
so all are to be understood. But if you please to consult Gomarus in his
vindication of those words of Christ, Matthew. 23.27. Com. 1. Page 110.111. One
and the same word is often repeated in the same verse, or near to it, in a
different sense.

Infirma est haec consequentia, nititur enim falsa hypothesi, quasi ejusdem
verbi repetitio semper eundem sensum postularet: cum contra pro
circumstantiarum ratione saepe diverso sensu accipiatur, quem admodum illustria
ex empla demonstrant.


You will find frequent instances where the same word, in the self same place
or verse, must be taken in a different sense; in one properly, and in the other
figuratively. Interpreting those words, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, of the heads
and leaders of the people of Jerusalem; there lies an objection against him,
that in Luke 13.33. the words immediately before are, It cannot be that a
Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem, where the word Jerusalem is taken for
the City it self, and not for the heads and leaders of the people. He answers,
This consequence is weak: For it is built upon a false ground, as though the
repetition of the same word should also enforce the same sense, when contrawise
according to the circumstance of the place, it may be taken in a different
sense, as many illustr ous examples make manifest; Instancing in Joh. 3.17. God
sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, Where world in the first
place signifies the earth, in the second place men on the earth, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Him that knew no sin, he made sin for us, Where in the first place sin is taken
properly, in the latter place by a Metonymy. 2 Chronicles. 35.24. And they brought
him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchers of his
Fathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. In the first place,
Jerusalem is taken for the City, in the second place, for the Inhabitants of
it. And so also, Matthew. 2.1, 3. There came wisemen from the east to Jerusalem.
When Herod the King heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with
him; With further instances which there may be seen, concluding, that therefore
the supposition of the adversaries is false, that the repetition of the same
word must be allwaies in the same sense.

3. No doubt, say you, but Paul and James handle two distinct questions, but
not the two, that you here express. Paul speaks of meritorious works, which
make the reward of debt and not of grace, if you will believe his own
description of them, Romans 4.4. But James speaks of no such works, but of such
as have a consistency with grace, and a necessary subordination to it. I prove
it: The works that James speaks of we must endeavor for and perform, or
perish, Paul excludes not only works of merit, but all works, from
Justification.
(supposing time) but the works that Paul speaks of, no man must endeavor, or
once imagine that he can perform, viz. such as make the reward to be of debt,
and not of grace. To this I answer, 1. That if Paul speaks only of meritorious
works, then according to you, he speaks of no works at all, for there are none
such, no not in Angels, Confess. Chap. 3.. 6: Paul speaks in the place quoted
of works where there is a reward of debt, and yet speaks not as I conceive of
works of merit, seeing, as he mentions none such, so there are none such. He
exclude then works to which a reward is due, vi promissi, rather then meriti,
As Ephesians. 2. he excludes boasting of works done by the help of grace: for there
is a matter of boasting in these, as we see in the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. 2. If
Paul had here spoken of works of merit, and I must believe him, so elsewhere he
speaks of other works, and there both you and I are to believe him likewise. 1.
He speaks and excludes all the works that we have done, Tit. 3.5. Which he
universally opposes to Justification by free grace, v. 7. and it is of faith,
that it may be of grace, Romans 4.16. 2. He speaks of and excludes all those
works, or that righteousness, which is not the righteousness of God by faith,
Phil. 8.8, 9. that is, all the righteousness that is inherent in us, and not in
Christ alone, and made ours by faith: therefore he is called the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. and said to be made of God unto us righteousness, 1
Cor. 1.30. 3. He speaks of, and excludes, all those works which the Law
commands, Romans 3.20. Now there is no work of grace but the Law gives it in
charge, yea the Law commands to take in grace, wheresoever there is a tender of
it, for our assistance, Requiring a duty, it requires all necessary helps to
it. And therefore Chemnitius observes, that when the Apostle excludes the works
of the Law from Justification, his intention is to exclude the highest and
noblest, not only done by Pharisees or unregenerate persons, but Abraham,
David, or the most eminent convents. 4. He speaks of and excludes all those
works, that any man in the highest pitch of grace can attain unto, in the place
quoted, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self, yet I am not thereby Justified.
He knew no matter of condemnation say you, sensu Evangelico, he then kept up to
that which God in the Gospel Covenant calls for: And yet he is not thereby
justified. Though God will not condemn a man of that integrity, through grace,
yet this does not justify. This place, (says Cartwright on the words) is the
death of your Justification by works. For if Paul knew nothing by himself (in
that wherein the Corinthians might suppose him most guilty) and was not so much
as in that point Justified before God, who is he that dares to Justify himself
before God in any work? And Fulk on the words. Paul does acknowledge that he is
not Justified by his faithful service, and labor in the Gospel, therefore no
man can be Justified by his works done of grace, in as great perfection as can
be done of mortal man. If the whole discharge of Paul's ministerial function,
wherein he took heed to himself and to his doctrines, was not such where by he
could be Justified, How then could Abraham be justified in offering Isaac, or
Rahab in her hiding of the spies? If the Apostle therefore do exclude works of
merit, we see what works he also excludes with it. You futher say, Paul speaks
indeed of faith collaterally, but of Christ's merits and free grace, directly
and purposely: So that the chief part of Paul's controversy was, Whether we are
justified freely through Christ's merits, or through our own meritorious works.
But James question is, Whether we are Justified by faith alone, or by faith
with obedience accompanying it, and both, as subordinate to Christ's merits.
Answ. Some will think that you judge faith not worthy to be named but on the
bie. Who can be of your mind that reads the Apostle speaking so often, Paul
treats diversely and industriously of Justification by faith.
and so fully to the office of faith in Justistification, but that his scope is
no less to show what justifies ex part nostri, which it still faith, then
what that is that justifies ex part Dei, which is grace, or ex part Christi,
which is his blood or merit? Paul's question, you say is of the meritorious
cause of our Justification, James his question of the condition on our part. If
you are in the right, Paul certainly was much defective in his Logic. We think
the question in debate is to be put into the Conclusion, and see how he
concludes Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith
without the works of the Law. Inferences are made, and consectaries drawn from
that which is mainly in dispute, and not from that which is collaterally
mentioned, and upon the bie only touched upon: Now he concludes from the
doctrine of Justification by faith, mentioning as we see Justification ex part
nostri, peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. You further
say, Paul speaks of Justification in toto, both in the beginning and progress,
but especially in the beginning, but James speaks only of Justification as
continued, and consummate, and not as begun, For both Abraham's, and every man's
was begun, before works of obedience. I Answer, Then works do not consummate;
for Paul casts off all works from this office, and he speaks, according to you,
of Justification in toto, and if James speaks of it only as consummate, and
finished, why does he instance in Rahab, this being the first that was heard of
her being in faith or grace? The Authors that you follow are wont to say, that
Paul speaks of the first, and James of the second Justification, and it had
been more for your advantage, fully to have followed them, then to have said
that Paul speaks principally of the first, yet speaks of the second likewise.
Yet you may see how hardly those of that opinion have been put to it.
Bellarmine, that knows as well how to stickle for an opinion as another, says,
that Paul speaking of the first Justication, fetches a proof from Abraham,
which is understood of the second Justification: and James speaking of the
second Justification, fetches a proof from Rahab, which is the first
Justification, which as long since I have observed, in the vindication of this
text, agrees like harp and harrow. So that if the Authors that I follow have
missed the meaning of these Apostles, those that follow you, are much less
like to find it. Yet after all this labor, for a Reconciliation of this
seeming difference between these great Apostles, the Reader stands much engaged
for that which you have brought to light from Reverend Mr. Gatakers hand in his
Letter written to you, where we see in what judgment he both lived and died,
taking it up as (he says) when he was a novice, and persisting in it to his
last, wholly differing from you, and agreeing with me. In Paul the question is
(says he,) of sin in general, concerning which, when any man shall be
therewith charged, there is no means whereby he may be justified, that is,
justly assoyled from the otherwise just charge of being a sinner, but by his
faith in Christ's blood: Christ's blood having made satisfaction to Gods Justice
for sin, and his faith in it, giving him a right to it, and interest in it.
This he understands of all sin, through the whole course of a believers life;
first and last, faith is his way of Justification; Whereas in James says he,
the question is concerning some special sin, and the questioned persons guilt
of it, or freedom from it. What special sin he means, he explaines himself,
to wit, Whether a man be a true or counterfeit, believer, a sound and sincere,
or a false and feigned professor? In which case any person that is so
wrongfully charged, may plead not guilty, and offer himself to be tried by his
works, as in some cases Gods Saints have done, even with appeal to God himself.
And what differs this from what I say? only the faith that is not counterfeit,
but evidenced by works, justifies. The truth of his faith is questioned,
whenever the sincerity of his profession is thus charged. This is no more
then that which is ordinarily affirmed, that faith justifies the person, and
works justify faith.

4. You say, The ordinary exposition of the word (faith) Jam. 2.24. vindicated.
If with the named Expositors you understand by [works] a [working faith]
either you grant as much as I affirm in sense, or else you must utterly null
all the Apostles arguing from v. 13. to the end. Answ. It were too tedious to
follow you through this large discourse, and you very well save me the pains,
when you add, I suppose you will say, Faith which Justifies must be working,
but it Justifies not, qu^ operans; And so indeed I do say, and you answer,
true, nor qua fides, i. e. q^a apprehendit objectum, if the [qua] speaks the
formal reason of its interest in Justification. To this I say, If it neither
Justifies qua operans, nor qua apprehendens objectum, I would fain know how, or
under what notion it justifies. Does it justify nihil agendo? I may well say,
Cedo tertium? If you say, as I think you will, it justifies qua conditio: Is it
conditio, nec operans, nec apprehendens? A faith neither working, nor
receiving, is certainly as bad as the faith that James speaks of, that profits
nothing. You demand further, Why cannot faith Justify except it be working? I
answer, Because if it be faith to apprehend or receive, then it is in life: for
if not alive, it cannot receive: If it be alive, then it does work. You say,
The Apostle does not plead for a mere necessity of signification or discovery,
but for a necessity, ut medii ad Justificationem, Even, that Justification
which he calls imputing of righteousness, and that by God. I answer, He
enquires what that faith is, that is medium ad Justificationem, and determines,
that it is not a dead but a working faith, that is this Justifying medium, and
this strengthens and not nuls the Apostles argumentation.

When you have made it your business to overthrow my interpretation, you set
upon my reason, and say, As for your single argument, here I answer, And I may
reply, 1. That one argument to the purpos^, is to be preferred before 31 which
are all besides the q^estion. 2. That you might have found a double argument,
but that you industriously leave out one, to make it single. You say, it is a
weak ground to maintain that James twelve times in thirteen verses, by [works]
means not [works,] and by faith alone (which he still opposes) does not mean
faith alone, and all this because you cannot see the connection of one verse to
the former, or the force of one cited Scripture. And I hope I may without
offense tell you, tht this kind of reasoning, or answering, adds advantage,
neither to your cause, nor reputation. You take it for granted, and would
persuade your Reader, that if I suppose the word is once figurative, (where the
proper acceptance is both destructive to the sense, and repugnant to the whole
tenor of the Gospel, which was my second reason by you omitted) that I must
therefore so interpret it all along. But you have had Scripture instances to
the contrary, and are directed where you may be further furnished. I conclude,
that when James affirms that faith without works is dead, and therefore cannot
justify, ad says, Abraham was justified by works when he offered Isaac, which
Scripture says was a work of faith, of if that do not please, was done by
faith, Heb. 11.17. and further says, that in his justification by works the
Scripture was fulfilled, which says, he was justified by faith; Is it not a
fair interpretation to understand a working faith; which is alone of possible
power to justify, when the Scripture also ascribing this instanced justifying
work of Abrham, to the faith of Abraham, as we see, Heb. 11.17.

In the close of your ten arguments you speak your sense of the danger which is
like to follow upon this tenent; which I have thought most meet to reserve to
this place. What sad effects, say you, it may produce, to teach the world, that
the only justifying act of faith, is, the accepting of justification as
merited by Christ's blood, or the accepting of Christ's righteousness to justify
them, it is not hard for an unprejudiced man to discern. For my part, in all my
experience of the case of the ungodly that I have trial of, I can find no
commoner cause of their general delusion and perdition, then this very
doctrine. Answ. To this I might have many things to say.

1. It is the hard fate, Desperate Conclusions inferred from right principles.
(if I may say so) of Christian Religion to have inferences of this kind drawn
from her principles. And yet the way of Christians has not been, either to
desert the principles from which they are drawn, nor yet to own or defend the
inferences or conclusions that are drawn from them. The Apostle affirming that
the exaltation of Gods glory, in not utterly casting of the Nation of the
Jews, was eminently seen in their disloyalty and covenant breaking with him;
Inference is presently made, that covenant breaking, and disloyalty, cannot
then be blamed. If the truth of God has more abounded through my lie to his
glory: why yet am I also judged as a sinner? That which advances Gods glory
cannot be charged as a sin, Bat covenant breaking with God, (according to the
Apostle) adds to his glory, and therefore it cannot be charged as a sin: If
answer be made, that this exaltation of God in his glory is by accident, and no
thanks to him that breaks covenant, but to the goodness of God that brings good
out of evil: From this, inference is made also, Let us then do evil that good
may come, which Conclusion was slanderously charged upon the Apostle, Romans 3.
verse. 8. The doctrine of Gods free election of some, and passing by of others,
occasioned two d^sperate inferences; 1. That there is then unrighteousness with
God, as deserting, yea hating his creature without cause, Romans 9.14. 2. That
God then without reason finds a fault with his creature, this being his will,
who can resist it? To. 9.19. The wits of some have been indeed busied to put
such a comment upon the Apostles words, that no such inference as these, with
any color, or show of reason, can be drawn: and thereby make it appear that
their comment is utterly dissonant from the Text; for from the Apostles
doctrine, these inferences, in the judgment of blinded reason, and rules held
between creature and creature, seem directly to follow, as evidently appears in
the Apostles answer. To come nearer to the business in hand, the Apostle making
it his work to advance Gods free grace in man's justification, some feared lest
their sin was above the grace of a pardon: To satisfy these, the Apostle tells
them, that where sin abounded, grace does super-abound, Romans 5.20. So that the
greatness of their sin exalts the free grace and favor of God: an inference is
presently ready, Let us then continue in sin, that grace may abound, Romans 6.1.
And here indeed was as fair and full encouragement to sin, as any that you hold
out, in your objection against this doctrine; this very use which you say is
now made by wicked ones, of this Doctrine, generally taught by Protestants, was
made (as is said) in the Apostles times, by the Gnostics and others, who
maintained, that it was enough to believe that Christ died for sin, though a
man lived in all wickedness and ungodliness. How could this so soon spring in
the Church, but that carnal ones found somewhat that would bear some color on
which they might bottom it? as, omne mendacium fundatur in aliqua veritate, as
may be seen verified in the instances mentioned. Let not Christian doctrine then
be blamed upon the account of such desperate deductions, and cursedly wrested
inferences. As soon as reformation began, and this doctrine among others
appeared, it is well known what from the adversaries it suffered. As it was
laid to the Reformers charge, that they made God the author of sin, so that
Gibieuf with his black mouth, makes Calvin worse then the Manichees: so also
that they utterly laid aside all care and regard of good works, or ways of
godliness, and that upon account of their doctrine, that faith alone justifies.
It is well known with what a belly they use to picture Luther, as if his work
had been alone to drink. And Bellarmine taking upon him in the preface to his
fourth Tome, out of the Revelation, to set out what a creature a Lutheran is,
says, that those that are addicted to their belly for the most part fall to
them. And their orator, Turner, in his elogie of Drunkenness, applauds the
Lutherans with a been secistis, in that they have lest the Catholic Church,
to betake themselves to that party. How full their invectives were against
Calvin and Beza, and all of their opinion, as enemies of all godliness, and
friends of profaneness, almost all books of popish writers may witness. Those
things are famous that Bellarmine out of Bolsecke and Colcheus quotes to this
purpose. Granatensis in his dedicatory Epistle before his Dux peccatorum,
having laid this down as a maxim, that Holiness and purity of doctrine is a
certain mark and note of true faith and Religion, and asserted, that there has
been no sect from the beginning of the world, if we run through all ages, to be
compared with Christians, for doctrine of concernment to man's Moral
conversation; he enters comparison, first, with Heathenism, then with Turcisme,
then with Judaisme after Christ's coming, and lastly takes notice of the lives
of Heretics in the primitive times; of the Manichees out of Austin, Of the
Gnostics out of Epiphanius, Of the Carpocratians out of Austin, then he falls
upon his own times, and says, The Heretics of our own times are no more
holy. They that have fetched back the errors of faith of former Heretics from
hell, are also diligent followers of their practices; what holiness of life,
says he, is to be expected from the Lutherans, that with their special faith
have set open a door to all impiety? and the wicked practices of the Calvinists
are better known, says he, then we desire: and thereupon tells us two tales,
first, that some that neighbor upon Geneva, being demanded, why they did not
reject the Catholic, and receive Genevas Gospel, answered, That was not to be
wondered at, for said they, the words and books of Calvinists, stuffed with
lies and fraud, are carried further then the narrative of their wickedness; But
to us (say they) that go every week to their Market, it is well known to be a
kingdom of hellish confusion, and therefore their Gospel does not take with
us. His next is, of a certain Minister of theirs, who a few years before went
into Hungary, and petitioned a Bashaw of the Turks for liberty to preach their
Gospel to the Christians that lived among the Turks under tribute; and to
persuade the said Bashaw to grant his Petition, he began with many reasons to
tell him, that the Religion of the Calvinists was most near to that of Mahomet.
And having ended his request, the said Bashaw answered, I see that you
Calvinists and we are like to be shortly one, Save only that leaving the
drinking of water to us, you willl keep your selves to wine, and be drunk with
it. Charges of this nature, Lutherans and Calvinists were wont still to hear,
but divine providence, through grace, has so ordered, that these Calumnies, as
with a beam of the Sun, have been dispelled. The holy lives of those that
appeared for this doctrine has been an abundant real comfutation. Not to look
beyond the seas where we might be furnished with several instances, let Jewel,
Grindall, Pilkington, Raynolds, Fulk, Whitaker, Perkins, Fox, Greenewood, Dod,
Hilderson, Pemble, Ball, and many others, with their Followers, witness. In so
much, that by degrees, shame has caused them to forbear this Language. And as
for those who of latter times have receded from this doctrine of this supposed
danger (as Mountague and his followers, as may be seen in his Gagg, and Appeal)
whether their lives and zeal for the Gospel did at all outstrip those already
mentioned, whose supposed errors in doctrine they went about to correct, I
leave to all of impartial judgment to witness. How great a trouble is it then
to have this, by a man of your name and reputation, now revived? For that
experience of yours, of which we have already heard, and you further enlarge,
The assertion (that faith in Christ's blood is the only justifying act) acquit
from danger.
in your affirming that you never met with the most rebellious wretch (except
now and then one under terrors) but when they have sinned their worst, they
still think to be saved, because they believe; and what is their believing? why
they believe that Christ died for them, and therefore God will forgive them,
and they trust for pardon and salvation from Christ's death and Gods mercy. To
this I answer: Though I do not in any other thing appear in competition with
you, yet here I may say, my experience has been of a longer standing then
yours, yet I can say, it answers not that which you here mention. When I have
to deal with such that you name, if they look out of themselves at all, it is
usually to Gods mercy. He is, say they, a merciful God, and at what time
soever a sinner repents from the bottom of his heart, he is ready to receive,
and so relying on Gods mercy, they will take their time for their return. Which
is answered also, as is evident in the experience of others. Read Practical
Treatises, and published Sermons, and see whether this plea be not commonly
spoken to: Ordinarily their answer is, that their good doings, their Prayers,
and Repentance, must save them. Few comparatively will have Christ in their
mouths, till he be put into their heads. And if they hit upon faith, as
sometimes they will, they yet know not how to terminate it on Christ's blood.
It is only a good belief, that God will not deal so with them. Such a faith the
Plain man's pathway to heaven, out of much experience of such men's answers,
does notably decipher. It is a rare thing to meet with one that will argue as
you would put it into their mouths, viz. He that has the only justifying act
of faith is justified: But that have I; For I accept of Christ to forgive and
justify me by his blood: Therefore I am justified. But in case any shall thus
reason, you say you are not able to answer, and I shall not presume to be your
teacher. But me thinks you might deign to learn of Mr. Gataker, and tell such a
disputant, that it is not every thing that bears the name of faith, that is an
acceptance of Christ to justification. You may acquaint him, that there is a
true and sincere faith, and that there is a false and counterfeit faith; and
that it is not enough for justification to say, that a man has faith, but
soundly and sincerely to believe. If he say, that his faith is not dissembled,
but sincere, put him upon that which Mr. Gataker says, is Saint James his way
of trial, If he will have faith to justify his person, let works then
justify his faith. There is life in that faith that takes Christ's blood for
justification, and that faith that has life to take, has life also to work.
Where a receiving or taking faith is, there Christ is, and where Christ is, the
soul can do all things through Christ that strengthens. So tha^ if the man be
such as you speak, his faith is cast, at the first sight, and evidenced to be
no better then counterfeit, and is no medium to justification. He may talk that
Christ is his, but it is clear that it is on a cracked title: and his faith
being no better then you say, had he all the Logic in the world, here he must
be non pluss'd. And here I would willingly learn how you will convince such a
man of whom you here speak, upon your own principles. If he shall argue, He
that has the only justifying act of faith is justified: but that have I; for
I take Christ as my Savior, and Sovereign Lord: Ergo. Seeing there are many
that profess to take Christ for a Lord, as well as a Savior, that must never
enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 7.21. If they do not spit at Christ and
defy him, they persuade themselves that they serve him. A service of Jesus
Christ, with their own most favorable and easy comment upon it, they doubt
not will save them. And I know no viler persons in the world, then those that
say, that they love and serve Christ with all their heart, and that their good
works and serving of God must keep them from hell and damnation: As I once
heard a man stark drunk on a Lord's Day profess, that fall back, fall edge, he
would never leave serving God whilst he lived. These, if they may be believed,
have as good an heart to God, as he that is most precise in all the world. And
if they be wanting in that acuteness of Logic that you before mention, they
may be well helped, out of your principles, which they may find anon, thus to
reason. He that falls short of the precepts of the Law, and requisites in the
Gospel, may yet be justified and saved, if he answers to the conditions of the
Gospel Covenant: But thus do I: although I come not is to the precepts of the
Law, not to what is required in the Gospel, yet I answer to the conditions of
it, for according to you, these come short both of the commands of the Law, and
the precepts of the Gospel. Though they do not all that is commanded them
neither in Law nor Gospel, yet they hope they do that which will save them.
They have their faults, they confess, and who, say they, is free? Few days
pass over their heads, but they say, God forgive me. What you say is their
wickedness, they will say is innocent and praise worthy; I never knew a more
vile wretch then one that would say, that he thought in conscience he served
God better on a Sunday, spending six pence in an Alehouse to help a poor woman
with her children to live, then in going to Church, when his own wife and
children stood in a much need, as any Ale-wive's whosoever. Look among Papists,
who look upon works, not only as such that justify, but also merit, and
supererogate, and see how far they exceed those that hold this, which you call
so dangerous a principle. They are Saints here, they say, compared with those
in Italy and Spain; this being the place of their persecution: Yet Doctor Hall
observes in his serious disswasive from Popery, that he never yet could know
that Papist, which made conscience of all Gods ten moral Laws: so that in
leaving our principles to choose theirs, upon a design to advance good works,
you much mistake your way, and go about to work with a wrong engine. And I can
conclude no other, but that these inferences are without reason, and that there
is no Gospel-principle that can be laid down, but men may alike wrest to their
own perdition.

SECT. II. Man's Evangelicall, Personal Righteousness, is not here perfect.
THe next in order which you examine is, concerning the instrumentality of
faith in Justification, which is already spoke to and inserted into the body of
the Treatise: and therefore I pass to your third, to which you speak, Sect. 28.
page 41 entituling it, Of Evangelicall, personal Righteousness: Where you set
down words of mine at large; and then subjoyn; The third opinion which you rise
against, is, that which you take to be mine, as your citing my words does
manifest. Where I do not then cite any words which are yours, nor use your
name, I pray you, let me not hear any such charge. I am loath to cause this
piece to swell with repetition of all my own words. That which I excepted
against, was, The authors concessions vindicated.
[That our personal inherent righteousness is affirmed to be perfect] and a
charge of intolerable ignorance laid upon learned men that speak otherwise.]
Here, I partly employed, and partly expressed several concessions, which you take
hold of, and raise several questions about them. 1. I yield [a righteousness of
this kind inherent in Christians, though I deny such a perfection] as I take to
be asserted in your Treatise. And here you think, I am already caught. For ens
and perfectum, are, say you, as convertible, as ens and bonum, or ens and
verum. And after pains taken out of Scheibler, and Scaliger to correct my
ignorance, you tell me, It is a Metaphysicall, Transcendentall perfection that
you speak of, which has no contrary in being, which consists in the presence
of all things necessary to being, etc. And you warn me still to remember, that
you take it not, de perfectione accidentali but essentiali. And I wish that you
had told your Reader so: I am confident there was not one that did so
understand you in your Aphorism^s. When we dispute, whether such, or such a
thing be perfect, or imperfect, we take it for granted, that there is such a
possible imperfection, of which we dispute. If I dispute the truth of this
proposition, Coelum movetur ab intelligentiis, I do not question whether this
be truly a proposition; but whether in the common acceptance, it be logically
true; whether the predicate be truly affirmed of the subject. Did not you speak
of righteousness, and so of holiness, as it denominateth the subject? not as an
abstract, but a concrete, and so susceptible of magis and minus, (if Qualities
do suscipere magis and minus,) and such as is subject to contrarieties? When
learned divines have spoke in your hearing, (as you imply that they have done,)
of imperfect righteousness, can you think that it was in their heads to take it
in that sense, in which a little learning might acquaint them, that there is no
possible imperfection? 2. I further yielded [ a perfection of the subject, as
opposed to hypocrisy, dissimulation, or doubleness, and a perfection of the
entireness of the object, respecting, not one, or only some, but all
commandments, called a perfection of parts.] This you say, you do not
understand, though I think, few other Readers have been so quick, as to discern
any difficulty. When Divines speak of universal obedience grounding their
words on several Scripture-Texts, do not they ordinarily explain themselves,
1. Of an universality of the Subject? when the whole man is brought into
obedience, according to that of the Apostle, 1 These. 5.23. The very God of
peace sanctify you [wholly] per omnia perfectos, Vatablus reads it, and puts
in the margent, vel totos, according to our reading, wholly: And then adds his
comment, The following words declare what that [wholly] is, Vel totos,
sequentia declarant istud totos: hoc est in spiritu and in anima and in corpore.
viz. in soul, in spirit, and body. This is the perfection of the subject of
which I spoke, and as I thought, sufficiently explained my self. 2. Of an
universality of the Object, when not one, but every command is heeded, as Psalm.
119.6, 128. You tell me, you charitably conjecture, that when I speak of a
perfection of the object, I mean a perfection of our acts, as they respect the
object extensively. And if you please but to make use of your eyes, they will
inform you, that nothing else can be my meaning, and so I shall not stand in
need of your charity in it. And hereupon you fall to distinguish of objects, I
know not why, but that I may know, (which I well knew before) that you can
distinguish. You tell us of objects of absolute necessity, and objects of less
necessity. For answer to which, it is enough for me, that there is such an
entireness in the soul, respective to all known obliging commandments, that
denominates the man in an Evangelical sense, universal and entire in his
obedience.

After a large discourse to show how our righteousness is essentially perfect,
you seem thus to sum up all, page 43. Take up all together then, and you will
so, that, 1. Righteousness is formally a relation, 2. And that not of our
actions or dispositions to the mere precept of the Law, determining of duty as
such (Commonly called the Moral law) but 1. To the law as determining of the
conditition of life or death, 2. To the promise and threatening of that Law
which are joined to the condition. But you should consider, that we are talking
of a Rule, without consideration either of reward or punishment, and you run
out into a discourse of a Covenant. The query is, Whether righteousness be
perfect or imperfect: You fall upon it, as a condition of Justification, which
never was put to question. And you well know, that those learned men whose
ignorance you thus challenge, never had any such thing in their thoughts,
Making the Scripture their study, and Protestants writers their Comment, they
find Justification by the blood of Christ, Romans 5.9 and interest in this blood
alone by faith, Romans 3.25, 28. and works they find again and again excluded. I
wish you to consult the Homilies of the Church of England, especially the
Homilies of the Salvation of Mankind by Christ our Savior, page 14. Having
touched upon diverse passages of Saint Paul, This is added, In the aforesaid
places the Apostle touches especially three things which must go together in
our Justifycation, upon Gods part, his great mercy and grace; upon Christ's
part, Justice, that is, the satisfaction of Gods Justice, or the price of our
Redemtion, by the offering of his body, and shedding of his blood, with the
fulfilling of the Law perfectly and thoroughly; and upon our part, true and
lively faith in the merits of Jesus Christ -- And therefore Saint Paul
declares here nothing upon the behalf of man, concerning his Justification,
but only a true and lively faith. And yet that faith does not shut out
repentance, hope, love, dread, and the fear of God to be joined with says in
every man that is Justified, but it shuts them out from the office of
Justifying, With much more to the same purpose. Your Readers that are not so
much seen in the Language of Bellarmine, and Suarez, as they are in the
Scriptures, or at least, that do not so much heed them, deny all that you take
for granted. In which also you have phrases more uncouth to your Readers, then
any that I have uttered can be to you; to be righteous signifies, say you,
quoad legem novam, non obligatus ad poenam, and cui debetur praemium. This
signification, according to this new law, I think was never found in any of our
old and new Dictionaries. Those that are righteous shall be thus acquit, and
rewarded, we believe, but not upon account of any righteousness inherent in
them, but the righteousness of Christ made theirs by faith: and so their faith
is accounted to them for righteousness. You then add, So that you see that
your first righteousness [non reatus poenae, vel jus ad impunitatem and ad
praemium] as it requires Christ's perfect satisfaction as a medium to it, by
which all the charge of the Law works must be answered; So it requires our
performance of the condition of the Law of grace, as an other medium, by which
Christ and his benefits are made ours. I had thought that our righteousness
had not been non reatus poenae that is not the thing, at best, were it as
perfect as Adams was, but reather non reatus culpae. If a man be charged with
Murder, his righteousness as to this charge, is, his not-killing, and not his
non-obligation to the Gibbet, That follows upon it; non reatus, is not of the
essence of righteousness, nor is reatus of the essence of sin, otherwise then
consecutive. And that Christ's righteousness should be thus called a medium, I
do not see. I think it is the thing it self, and not a medium to it. And that
our righteousness is any medium to Justification as it is inherent, I deny:
and that our inherent righteousness required by the Law of Grace, stands in
any such subordination to the righteousness of Christ, as a necessary means to
make it ours, I see your word for it, but I think (and the reformed Churches
are of the same mind) that I have the whole current of Scripture against it.
You close up this discourse thus; And thus I have done what at present I
thought my duty, that it might be not my fault, that you are in ignorance all
over; But I have said the less, because I have lately more exactly opened the
nature of our righteousness, in answer to the Animadversions of an other
learned brother. But it is worth inquiry whether this learned Brother have
received satisfaction from that more exact pains of yours. Perhaps his
learning may serve to give as exact an answer. And if his greater learning be
not satisfied, with that which is more exact and elaborate, my less learning
may well remain as much unsatisfied with less exactness. And your Reader will
think you were not so well advised, to publish your self, and conceal your most
exact opening of this point of so great concernement. Though you might think,
that any thing might serve me, yet all your exactness will, I believe, be
litte enough in this point to give satisfaction to many Readers.

Whereas you had said in your Aphorisms, page 122. Imperfect righteousness,
is not righteousness, but unrighteousness. Imperfect righteousness is no
contradiction.
It is a contradiction in adjecto, yet there admitting an imperfection in
holiness, I answered, [I never took imperfect righteousness to imply any such
contradiction, more then imperfect holinesse] To this you reply, 1. By a way of
concession, that holiness is taken, first, for the relation of a person or
thing dedicated to God, So it admits not of magis and minus more then
righteousness; 2. That the common use of the word, Holiness, is for the
qualities or actions of a spiritually-renewed man, and this is confessed to
have its transcendent perfection, as well as righteousness. Hitherto we are
agreed; but here, say you, is the difference, Holiness thus taken is a
quality, which though it have the truth of being, yet it is intendend and
remitted or does recipere magis and minus righteousness is a relation which in
suo formali is not intended or remitted. And is not Righteousness a quality in
like manner, which is intended and remitted? when Zachary says, Righteousness
as well as holiness is intended and remitted.
We are delivered out of the hands of all our enemies, to serve in
righteousness and true holiness, Is not the one a qualification by a new work
of the Spirit, as well as the other? When the Angel said, Rev. 22. He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is
holy, let him be holy still: As [unjust] and [filthy] hold out vicious
qualities from the flesh, so [Holy] and [righteous] both signify renewed
qualities by the Spirit. It follows, Nay if you will exactly open it, it will
appear that the righteousness in question is a relation founded in a relation.
Yea more, that the very subjectum proximum hujus relationis nec intenditur, nec
remittitur, and this is that I mean by perfection, besides the aforesaid
transcendentall perfection. And how shall we know what the righteousness in
question is? either it must be gathered out of your own words, or out of their
words, that you censure as guilty of such ignorance, as before; Let us look
upon your own words, These. 2.2. which you there comment upon. In this
fore-explained sense, it is that men in Scripture, (say you) are said to be
personally righteous: And in this sense it is, that the faith and duties of
believers, are said to please God, viz. as they are related to the covenant of
Grace, and not as they are measured by the Covenant of works. Are not [faith]
and [duties] here our personal righteousness? and is not [faith] a branch of
holiness as well as it is of righteousness? And has it not its degrees as
well as righteousness? Surely the Apostles thought so when they prayed, Lord
increase our faith, Luke 17.5. And the Lord Christ had no other thoughts, when
he rebukes his hearers for their little faith, Matthew. 6.30. And commends the
Woman of Canaan for the greatness of her faith, Matthew. 15.28. And as it rises
and falls, so do other duties with it: they are more intense, or remiss, in
like manner. And as for their speeches which you challenge; do you think that
their ignorance was in that measure intolerable, as to believe the
righteousness of what they spoke was a mere nonentity, i.e. had nothing of
the being of righteousness in it? They doubtless looked upon righteousness
as a renewed quality, as you do upon holiness, and the Apostle, both upon
holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. The new man is so put on that we must
be still putting it on. It follows, that seeing these things are exactioris
indigationis, understand that the reason of my assertion lies here: The law as
it is the rule of obedience, does require perfect obedience in degree, and so
here is an imperfection in our actions in the degree, as being short of what
the rule requires, and it being these actions with their habits which we call
our holiness, therefore we must needs say, our holiness is imperfect. And if
our righteousness were to be denominated from this law, commanding perfection,
we must say, not that such righteousness were imperfect, because the holiness
or obedience is imperfect, but it is none at all, because they are imperfect.
It seems you intend here, exactness equal to that in which you appeared to
the learned brother before mentioned; and as you did distinguish before of a
metaphysicall and moral perfection, so you seem here to distinguish of
righteousness and holiness: either as a duty performed by men in the Covenant
of grace according to rule; or else as a condition required by the Covenant of
works, respective to the attainment of life upon terms there required. This
seems to be your meaning in your last words in this Paragraph: Duty simply as
duty, and holiness or supernatural grace as such may be more or less; But
holiness and duty, as the materia requisita, vel subjectum proximum justitiae,
consistit in indivisibili. How duty and holiness can be the subject of it self,
I know not; for so they are, if they be the subjects of righteousness. That
righteousness in which we must exceed the righteousness of Scribes and
Pharisees is our duty, and our holiness as well as of our righteousness; but if
you carry it thence to make it the righteousness of the covenant of works, it
is easily granted, that the imperfection of it, renders it as no righteousness
respective to that end of attainment of life by it. A Pharisee might as well be
justified upon the terms of that covenant, as Noah, Daniel, and Job, Zachary,
and Elizabeth, or any other of those, that were most perfect and eminent in
righteousness. But I think, no Reader could observe either in your own words,
or theirs that you censure, any such meaning.

To assert the imperfection of our righteousness I said, [ Isaiah, I am sure,
says, All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Is. 64.6. no greater charge
of imperfection can lie against the most imperfect holiness, then the Prophet
lays upon our righteousness, Interpreting the Prophets words, as I think the
sense of them is generally given by interpreters ancient and modern. But seeing
you go off to speak of righteousness of another kind, I will not contend. I
there added, [Neither do I understand how holiness should be imperfect, taken
materially, and righteousness perfect, taken formally in reference to a rule.]
After such courteous censure that you please to give, you fall to examine what
that is, that I understand not. In which you take one piece of my sentence
apart, and say, [How holiness should be imperfect, taken materially,] sure you
understand that. It is therefore, say you, no doubt, the other branch that you
mean, How righteousness is perfect taken formally in reference to a rule. If
the Reader please to consult my words, he may see that I put them not divisim,
but conjunctim, giving in my reason, why to me it is non-intelligible, telling
you that [we may for ought I know, as well make holiness formal, and refer it
to a rule, and righteousness material, in an absolute consideration, without
reference to any rule at all.] This you disjoyn from the rest, and fall upon my
words apart; for what reason, is best known to your self; And I leave it to the
Reader to judge, whether that I may not call holiness perfect, and
righteousness imperfect, as well as you may call righteousness perfect, and
holiness imperfect; and whether there is not a materiality, and formality, (not
in the one, or the other)) but in the one, as well as the other: and this was
that which I spoke to. And any man that understands no more then I, will ( I
think) take this to be a material exception against that which in your
Aphorisms was delivered. You say, if you, or any man resolve to use holiness
in the same sense as righteousness, if I once know your minds, I will not
contradict you, for I find no pleasure in contending about Words, but for my
self, I must use them in the common sense, if I will be understood.
Righteousness and holiness in what sense commonly used.
But you might have done well to let us know that, that is the common sense of
the word righteousness, (taken for personal inherent righteousness) which you
here use; till I see that made good, I shall judge it to be your own peculiar
acceptance of it. I would know what interpreter of Zachary's words, Luke 1.75.
of Paul's words, Ephesians. 4.24. of John's words, Revel. 22.11. do put such a
difference as you make between righteousness, and holiness, as to make one a
renewed quality of the Spirit, the other no such thing, but a relation in esse
formali, to what you must explain your self; I have read so much difference
indeed made, as to put holiness for duties of the first Table, in immediate
reference to God; righteousness for duties of the second Table, in immediate
concernment to man: but thus taken, they are both equally new qualities from
the Spirit, and have their intension and remission, one, as well as the other.
And I have read a rule given, that where they are put together (as in the
Scriptures quoted) they are to be distinguished as before, but where the one is
put apart, it is to be understood as comprehensive of both. It were easy to
show, that writers of most eminent name promiscuously use these terms of
righteousness and holiness. But for your interpretation, for ought I know, you
are alone in it, speaking as you do, and entituling your discourse of personal
inherent righteousness. I added, Moral perfection, or imperfection is in
reference to a rule.
[And in such consideration, ( viz. without any reference to any rule at all) I
do not know how there can be perfection, or imperfection, (either in holiness,
or righteousness: Is is as it they come up to,) or fall short of the rule, that
they have the denomination of perfection, or imperfection.] To this you say, At
the first view the sentence seemed so strange to me, that I thought it meetest
to say nothing, because it is scarce capable of any apt answer, but what will
seem sharp, or unmannerly: Now you have found out a way to speak, both mildly
and mannerly, you think, (it seems) that your words will be more heeded, then
at other times. You further say, That which I say you may consider, is
something, or nothing: if something, and yet not capable of perfection, or
imperfection, it is such a something, as the world never heard of till now. I
had thought, on the contrary, that there is many a thing in the world, (and I
believe shall think, when you have spoke all that you can against it) capable
neither of moral perfection, or imperfection, and of such perfection we speak,
when we speak of inherent personal righteousness, and therefore incapable
either of perfection, or imperfection, because there is no rule by which they
are measured. The Schoolmen, you know, speak of actions preventing reason,
which they say are actions of men, but deny them properly to be actions humane,
as you may see in Thom. 1, 2. quaest. 1. art. 1, 2. as to move the foot, rub
the beard, when a man's thoughts are intent on somewhat else. These, they use to
say have neither rectitude, nor irrectitude in them, are neither good, nor
evil, and therefore neither perfect, nor imperfect. But if all actions of men
must be also humane, and such that reason orders, according to rule, or at
least ought to order, and are therefore either right or oblique, as some in
opposition to Schoolmen do determine; yet doubtless it is not so in the actions
of brute creatures: These have neither moral perfection, nor imperfection,
seeing they act by no rule, save that of natures instinct. And if all rule were
taken from man, his actions would be parallel. Where there is no Law, there is
no transgression, and consequently no conformity, nor inconformity, no
rectitude, nor irrectitude, and so neither perfection, nor imperfection. You
add, But upon second thoughts, I find that your words, de justitia may be
born, for it is nothing that you speak of. This I think is such an answer, that
few will see either mildness, or manners in it. I speak of man's personal
righteousness, and so do you: This you affirm to be perfect, and charge learned
Divines, as before, for charging it with imperfection. And if it be nothing,
you might well have kept silence, for [nothing] suffers nothing by their
language. That which follows, must at least be repeated: But that holiness
taken for sprituall habits and acts, can have neither perfection or
imperfection; or that, that they are capable of no perfection, or imperfection,
in any other sense, but as related; nor yet in relations to God, or the person
dedicating, save only in relation to the Rule; all these for the first reason,
shall have no answer but a recital. I might say of much that is here repeated,
Tu male dum repetis, incipit esse tuus. And I think that which you now repeat,
is not such that you may say, magna front recit-asse, est refutasse. To this
supercilious reply, I only say; that this is the first time that ever I heard
of holiness of separation, dedication, or relation, applied to acts, or habits
of this nature. And what else, but the reference to the rule, can denominate
them imperfect, I would you had spoke out. They are sinful only, according as
they transgress the rule, and righteous as they hold to it, and by consequence,
I think that they are either perfect, or imperfect, on like account.

I added in my Treatise; [ Paul's Gospel frame, whether you will call it
righteousness, or holiness, is set out I am sure, Romans 7. full of imperfection,
yet all this as in reference to the rule, as it answered, or fell short in
conformity to it, v. 22. I delight in the Law of God after the inner man.] Here
you begin to q^arrel with the phrase, and say, Is not [righteousness] or
[holiness] as Scripturall, as Logical, as plain a term, and as fit for
disputants as [Gospel frame?] I answer, yes doubtless, when they are used
Scripturally, or Logically: but when your Reader is confounded with the use of
these terms, making one imperfect, and the other incapable of any imperfection;
making one to stand in conformity to a rule, the other without any such
conformity at all; taking one Metaphysically, and not telling us how you take
the other: sometimes telling us that you take holiness for the qualities, and
actions of a spiriturally renewed man, elsewhere, that it signifies no more
then a dedication to God, either by separation only, or, by qualifying the
subject; first, with an aptitude to it is divine employment, and then
separating, or devoting it, I was put upon it, to seek a third word, to hold
out that which I mean by righteousness, and holiness; and learned men mean,
when they speak of imperfect righteousness, which also is the same with your
qualities, or actions of a spiritually renewed man. You further say, Till I
further know whether by [Gospel-frame] you mean, Habits, Acts, Relations, (and
what Relations) or what else, I shall pass it, as incapable of a better reply.
Adding further, Did not I acknowledge expressly as much imperfection, as you
here affirm, of Paul's frame; why then do you intimate by your arguing, as if I
did not? Answ. If you did expressly make such acknowledgement, surely you knew
what you meant, when you did expressly acknowledge it, and how is it then that
you are so to seek in my meaning? you tell me further, There is a twofold rule,
or action of the Law; which our habits, and actions do respect, as you say, you
have often said. The first is the precept determining the duty simply; this, all
our habits, and actions, come short of, and therefore no man has righteousness
consisting in this conformity, The second is the promise, or that act going
along with the promise, whereby God determines of the condition. To this I
say, If I had spoken of [action of Law,] confounded [rule] and [action]
together, I should have heard of it. And if you have often said, that there is
such a twofold rule, I think no other man, but your self, has said it, and I
neither hear of Scripture, nor reason for it. We are speaking of agenda, and
not credenda; and that here should be any rule de agendis, but the precept
determining of duty, or that the promise, There is a righteousness, in an
imperfect conformity to the Law.
or any act that goes along with the promise (which what it means, I cannot
imagine) should be any rule of our actions, I never heard, but from your mouth.
And for your inference, That all our Actions and Habits, coming short of the
precept, determining of duty, no man therefore has a righteousness consisting
in this conformity, I should think, all but your self, would take to be a Non
sequitur. There is a righteousness in conformity to the precept, which yet falls
short of a full and perfect conformity. Look I pray you upon Zachary, and
Elizabeth; that have this praise in the Gospel, that they were both righteous
before God, and by what rule this righteousness had its denomination, let the
Text be consulted. If walking in all the ordinances, and commandments of God
blameless, give men the denomination of righteousness, then there is a
righteousness in conformity to the precept? But walking in all the
commandments, and ordinances of God, denominates men righteous; Ergo, doing
righteousness denominates righteous; He that does righteousness, is righteous,
1 John 4.7. And what should be the rule of doing, but the precept, I cannot
imagine: If we break the precept when we sin, the precept is our rule; but we
break the precept when we sin, 1 John 5.4. Abel has often that Testimony to be
righteous, and that because his works were righteous, 1 John 3.12. And so Lot,
in like manner, 2 Pet. 2.8. there is a righteousness then in conformity to the
Law of works, though not to the covenant of works. Zachary says, We are
redeemed to serve without fear, in holiness and righteousness before God, B.
concedimus renatos diligere deum and proximum; sed imperfecte diligere, and per
consequens imperfecte legem implere.
Luke 1.74, 75. And this righteousness, is not without its rule, and has no
other rule then that which Zacharies righteousness had, in the sixth verse of
the same Chapter. There is an imperfect fulfilling of the Law; and so an
imperfect righteousness in conformity to it. (b) We grant (says Davenant) that
the regenerate love God, and their neighbor, but they love imperfectly, and by
consequence they fulfill the Law imperfectly, de Justit. actuali, p. 551. And if
you acknowledge an imperfection in Paul's frame, (as you say, you do,) you then
acknowledge an imperfect fulfilling of the Law, and an imperfect conformity to
the Law. It is in reference to the Law, that he had his imperfections, and
gradual inconformity. He delights, he says, in the Law, in the inward man, but
sees an opposite power, drawing him aside, and he quotes the precept, and not
the promise annexed, Thou shall not covet, to which in such imperfection he
conformed.

I added in my Treatise, [Whereas a charge of ignorance is laid even upon
learned Teachers, that commonly understand the word [Righteousness] and
[Righteous] as it refers to the old Rule, I profess my self to have little of
their learning, but I am wholly theirs in this ignorance. I know no other Rule,
but the old Rule, the Rule of the Moral Law, that is with me a Rule, a perfect
Rule, and the only Rule.] Here you first complain of want of candor in me in
not repeating all that you spoke, and if is but this once, that I know, that I
am thus charged: And the sense, I think, is full in those words that I do set
down. Secondly, you go about to clear your self from some aspersions,
concerning harsh speeches used by you against learned Divines: in which, you
say, you speak not to me, but to others, standing thus charged by them, and not
by me. In which I am well content that you should stand as right in your
Readers eyes as you can desire, and shall forbear to rake further into that
ulcer. Thirdly, you take me to task, and are content to put my name at length,
As for Mr. Blake's profession, that he has little of their learning, but is
wholly theirs in this ignorance, I did still think otherwise of him, and durst
not to have described him: But yet my acquaintance with him is not so great, as
that I should pretend to know him, better then he knows himself, and I dare not
judge, but he speaks as he thinks. Good Sir, say it over again, that it may be
known from an hand of your eminence; that I say, my learning is little; and
that I speak it, not more modestly, then truly, neither do you know, how much I
suffer, that it is no more. Yet, least the cause in which I appear should
suffer with me, or rather in me, let me assume so much boldness, as to tell
you, that I yet think, that, that little which through grace I have obtained,
may serve to satisfy those arguments, which this piece of yours holds forth
against me. I have been often confounded with your multitude, but never
perceived my self shattered by your strength; not that my learning is equal
with yours, ( I know my self better, then to enter such comparisons) but your
cause is unequal to mine. Your advantage is not so great against me in the
greatness of your abilities, as mine against you in the goodness of the
cause. It would often go ill with a good cause if the most able Advocates
should not sometimes be worsted, in the presence of impartial Judges. Should
you and I make exchange, So that I were to appear in the cause that you
maintain, and you in that which I defend, a weaker then you, would easily do
that, which I think you have not yet done. But your willingness is observable
to take a hint from my mouth, to strip me of all the learning of these learned
men, charged with intolerable ignorance; and leave their ignorance only with
me, as the whole you are willing to allow me. Yet in the next place you engage
me to you in your endeavors to help me out of my ignorance in this. Let me be
hold to show him, (say you) part of that, which he says he is wholly ignorant
of: That our personal inherent Righteousness is not denominated from the old
Law, or Covenant, as if we were called righteous (besides our imputed
Righteousness) only because our Sanctification, and good works have some
imperfect agreement to the Law of works. But I were ignorant indeed, if you
could surprise me with your confounding of these terms, [Law] and [Covenant.]
Those two I take much to differ. In your Aphorisms, (where you think you speak
most full, and here complain, that I omitted somewhat of that which you there
said) you have the word [Law] and the word [Rule:] But I hear not of the word
[Covenant] at all. But here, Law, and Covenant, are confounded, as though every
Law were a Covenant, and every Covenant a Law. And I were yet more in
ignorance, if I should let your Syllogisms pass, as you have laid them down.
The first of your seven is, If no man be called Righteous by the Law of works,
but he that perfectly obeys, (so as never to sin) then no imperfect obeyer is
called Righteous (nisi aequivoce) by that Lawy: But the Antecedent is true;
Therefore so is the consequent. Here I would desire that you would explain your
self, in what sense any Law can call any particular man Righteous? The Law
lays down general Rules, and makes not particular application to this, or
that person. If you mean that no man has the denomination of a righteous, or
just person, upon his observation of the precepts of the Law, you must except
Zachary, and Elizabeth, and all other which in Scripture have the title of
just, or righteous. I pray you consult Calvin on Luke 1.6. Neque enim est haec
definitio negligenda, justos esse, qui vitam suam formant ad legis praecepta.
Dominus, quia illis peccata non imputavit, sanctam illorum vitam licet
imperfectam justitiae titulo dignatus est.
Neither is this definition, says he, to be neglected, that they are just that
frame their lives according to the precepts of the Law; and afterward adds,
Because the Lord does not impute unto them sin, he honors their holy life,
though imperfect, with the title of righteousness. See also Rivet, on Genesis 6.9.
Exercit. 5.2. Perfectio vero inchoata per omnes parts in nobis etsi non
absoluta per gradus, est sincera and (...) secundum totam legem obedientia,
sive sincerum ac serium studium obediendi Deo secundum omnia ejus praeceta.
Perfection begun in us, in all parts, though not complete in degree, is a
sincere and undissembled obedience according to the whole Law, or a sincere and
serious endeavor of obeying God according to all his Commandments. God in the
Covenant of Grace, looks upon and accepts a sincere endeavor of ordering our
conversation according to the precepts of works. All the rest of the arguments,
carry it to a denial of justification by the Law, (which is far from me to go
about to assert) but touch not upon denomination of [righteous] or
[righteousness] upon a sincere endeavor of conformity to the Law. Who knows
not but that the Law curses upon the least trangression, were there not a
redress in the Gospel? yet men of Gospel Grace, to whom sin is not imputed, are
denominated righteous upon their sincere, though weak endeavor of conformity to
the Law. Potest homo in se justus denominari ab illa qualitate justitiae quae
est quantumvis imperfecta modo vera: at non potest constitui justificatus coram
Deo nisi ab illa justitia quae omnes perfectionis numeros comprehendit.
A man may, says Davenant, be denominated just A man may be denominated just
from that rule that will not denominate him justified.
in himself, from such quality of righteousness, which is true, though it be
imperfect, but he cannot be constituted, justified before God, but from that
righteousness, which comprizeth all kind of perfection in it. Davenant, de
Just, habit. page 342. Mortui sumus legi, diversa ratione. Nam legi ceremoniali
ratione necessaria observationis, justificationis and condemnationis: morali
vero non ratione justitiae seu observationis, sed justificationis and
condemnationis.
We are dead to the Law, says, Gomarus, upon a several account. To the
Ceremonial Law, as to necessary observation, justification, and condemnation.
To the Moral Law, not as to righteousness, and observance, but as to
justification. Gomarus in Galat. 2.19. So that the whole of these seven
Syllogisms, may be put to the other thirty one, concerning unbaptized persons,
believing in Christ Jesus. There is not one of the Conclusions that touch me. I
say not that the Law judges righteous, or that men by the Law are judged
righteous, but that God in the Covenant of Grace, calls weak conformity to the
Law, [righteousness] and men of such conformity [righteous.] Davenants
distinction of denomination of a just man, and a justified man, is a sufficient
answer to all these arguments.

SEC. III. The Moral Law is a perfect rule of righteousness.
IN the next place, you take me up for saying, [I know no other Rule but the
old Rule, the Rule of the Moral Law, that is with me a Rule, a perfect Rule,
and the only Rule:] And make it your business to Catechize me better: And
thereupon you say, distinguendum est. And so we have a multitude of
distinctions, (too many to write out) with this Elogy] upon them: I think the
solidity and great necessity of all these distinctions is beyond dispute. But I
confess, I cannot be induced to be of your mind. Mr. Brs. distinctions
discussed.
I think the solidity of some of them may well be disputed; and the necessity
of most of them (as to our business) wholly denied. I am to seek, how the
preceptive part of the Law of nature, delivered to Moses, and the preceptive
part of the Law of nature, now used by Christ, as his own Law, (which is one of
your distinctions) do differ. Whether Christ and Moses, in holding out a Law of
nature, stand at any such distance, may at least be disputed, though perhaps,
when others see it not, you may be able to conclude it. I as yet neither know,
any detraction from, or addition to, the preceptive part of the Law of nature
by Christ. I think there was neither any abolition, addition, or diminution
respective to the Law thus considered, made by our Savior. I do not yet see
reason so much as to recede from that opinion, that this Law, as delivered by
Moses, is binding to Christians. If you be able to conclude the negative, yet I
know, that as it has been, so it may be still disputed. And when we are
speaking of the rule of Righteousness or obedience, which is the line and
thread according to which our actions should be squared, (under which you
justly comprehend the prohibition as proeceptum de non agendis) I see no
necessity of talking either of a rule of reward, or punishment, or a rule of
the condition of the reward, or punishment; which is another of your
distinctions. These three last Rules, if they be true Rules, may here, as to
this business, be very well overruled. They are not at all essential to a
Law, as coming neither within the direction for duty, nor obligation to duty,
but only serve ad been esse, to quicken our obedience, and to withold from
transgression. As to the [Promise] God might have commanded us to work, and
never have told us of any pay, and, The [Punishment] is upon supposall of
failing in duty. And if you thus bring them in, as accessory parts of the Law,
yet I see no imaginable reason to speak of them as Rules, unless it be such as
God has proposed to himself, in his way of distributive Justice. They can be
no Rule to us, determining only, (as your self observe) what shall be done to
us, not what shall be done by us. The first branch then of your fourfold
distinction of a Rule is here alone of useful consideration, that is, the Rule
of Obedience, or what shall be due from us. We have nothing to say here either
of the Rule of Reward, or Punishment, nor of the Rule of the condition of the
Reward, or Punishment, which are your other branches. And that only, I here
intended; and I had thought, all I would have known that I only intended it.
This you say, you suppose is my meaning, as well you might: but withal you
say, It is strange to your ears; and give your reasons. 1. That is but part of
that very Law of nature. Does not the Law of nature (say you) as well as the
Positive Law determine de debito poenae, as well as de debito officii? But sure
debitum officii, and not debitum poenae, is our Rule. 2. You say, If you took
it for the whole of nature, is that the only Rule? And here comes in, it seems,
that which is strange to your ears; that I should make the Moral Law, as
determining de debito officii, our only Rule, perfect and complete: Which
assertion being so unanimously received, might well have delivered you from all
wonder at the strangeness of it, With whom they join that oppose the
perfection of the Moral Law.
how erroneous soever you had judged it. Undertaking the negative part, and
impleading it of imperfection, you have indeed Arminians, Socinians, and
Papists, on your part. But Protestants (for ought I know) unanimously your
adversaries. Papists have their Traditions added as well to the Law, as to the
Gospel, which is an accusation of the written Law, as imperfect: They have also
their Evangelicall Counsels, which though they are not commanded, yet (as
Bellarmine speaks) are commended, as raising Christians to an higher
perfection, then ever the Law required. Socinians (with whom many Arminians
join) affirm, that Christ has instituted new precepts of Obedience in the
Gospel; and added them to the Commands of the Law, such as transcend and exceed
all that were delivered in Old Testament-times. Gerrard having disputed for the
perfection of the Law against Papists, cap. 14. De Evangelio, says, The Popish
opinion of New Laws promulgated by Christ, the Photinians (which is an other
name of Socinians) greedily embrace; making a fair way for Mahometism, seeing
that in the Alcoran it is in like manner said, That Moses gave a Law, less
perfect, Christ more perfect, and Mahomet most perfect of all. Out of the
Cracovian Catechism in the same Chapter, Gerrard quotes this passage, Christ
came not only to fulfill the Law for us, but added new precepts to it. These
new precepts, (the same Author says) they make twofold: Some of which do
appertain to manners, Some to ceremonies, or outward rites in worship. He names
three that appertain to manners: To deny a man's self; take up his Cross; and
follow Christ: Which three precepts my Author in way of opposition says,
belong to the first Commandment. Peltius in his Harmony of Arminians and
Socinians, Chap. 4, 4, 6. shows their combination against the Orthodox party,
as in many other things, so in this proposition now controverted. He there
quotes from Socinians these positions: That Christ in the New Testament did not
only abrogate the Ceremonial and Judicial Law, but did much increase and add
unto the Moral Law: That he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it;
which fulfilling, (says he) is nothing else but a perfecting of it, and
addition of what was wanting: That we ought not only to observe those things
that are given to us of God, and not abrogated by Chrijst, but those precepts
in like manner that are added by Christ. Much more from many Socinians, and
Arminians, may be seen in that Author to that purpose. Dr. Hammond in his
Practical Catechism, speaking of Christ's Sermon in the Mount, agrees indeed
with the Papists against the Protestants, That Christ does not here expound
Moses, and vindicate the Law from false glosses, but that he adds to the Law,
and names many additions to the 6. and 7. Commandment, and other
Commandments, but dissents from Papists that make these Evangelicall Counsels,
and makes them precepts; not precepts of Moses, but of Christ, added by him to
the Law: but this with much Modesty, as though he would not be peremptory in
his opinion. So that Authorities vouchsafed for the perfection of the Moral
Law as a Rule.
Mr. Burges, page 166. handling controversies about the Law, says, I shall now
handle the perfection of it, and labor to show that Christ has instituted no
new duty, which was not commanded before by the Law of Moses. And this
question, (says he) will be profitable, partly against the Arminians, partly
the Papists, and lastly, the Socinians. He further says, page 169. That Christ
did not add new duties which were not commanded in the Law, because the Law is
perfect, and they were bound not to add to it, or detract from it, Therefore we
are not to conceive a more excellent way of duty, then that prescribed.
Further, if we speak of holy and spiritual duties, there cannot be a more
excellent way of holiness, this being an Idaea, and representation of the
glorious nature of God. Dr. Ames in his Sciagraphia, handling the Decalogue,
makes this his first doctrine, Lex ista Dei quae in Decalogo continetur est
perfectissima regula ad vitam hominis dirigendam.
The Law of God contained in the Decalogue is a most perfect Rule of the guide
for the life of man. He gives four reasons, with an use of information, Vt
legem istam Dei eo loco habeamus quo debemus i. e. ut non aliter de eadem
cogitemus quam ut de vitae nostrae unica forma and tanquam de illa norma quae
nullum habet defectum sed perfecta est in sese and perfectionem omnem a nobis
requirit.
That we esteem this Law as it ought to be esteemed, and that, as the only Rule
of our lives, and such a Rule that has no defect, but is perfect in it self,
and requires all perfection in it. Davenant de Justit. actual. cap. 40. page
463. says, Ipsa le^ Christi est exactissima and pefectissima regula
Sanctitatis et justitae
The Law of God it self is a most exact and perfect Rule of Holiness and
Righteousness: And in the proof of it says, Passim in Scripturis confirmatur
quae perfectionem legis divinae mirifice extollunt.
This is every where confirmed in Scripture, which wonderfully extols the
perfection of the divine Law. Downham in the preface of his Tables of the
Commandments says, that, The Law of God is perfect, requiring perfect
obedience both inward and outward, not only in respect of the parts but of the
degrees. The Leyden Professors say, Tam perfecta est haec lex ut nihil ei in
praeceptis moralibus aut a Christo aut ab Apostolis ipsius additum fuerit quoad
exactiorem bonorum operum normam sub novo Testamento sit adducta.
The Law is so perfect, that nothing in Moral precepts, either by Christ or his
Apostles, as any more exact rule of good works has been added under the New
Testament. Disp. 18.. 39. Vrsinus in his definition of the Moral Law inserts
this, Obligans omnes creaturas rationalies ad perfectam obedientiam internam
and externam.
binding all reasonable creatures to perfect obedience both inward and outward,
Page 681. Chemnitius entitles his third Chapter de Lege, De perfecta obedientia
quam Lex requirit.
Of the perfect obedience which the law requires, and presently lays down
these words, Variis autem corruptelis omnibus temporibus, and olim, and nunc
depravata est doctrina de perfecta obedientia, quam Lex Dei requirit.
This doctrine of the perfect obedience which the Law requires, in all ages
past has been, and is now depraved. Bucan in his Common places, Page 188. thus
defines the Moral Law; Est praeceptio divina continens pie justeque coram Deo
vivendi regulam, requirens ab omni homine perfectam and perpetuam obedientiam.
A divine injunction containing a rule to live piously and justly before God,
requiring of all men perfect and perpetual obedience toward God. I shall
conclude with the Confession presented to both houses of Parliament, by the
Assembly of Divines, Chap. 19. 2. The Law after his (i. e. Adams) fall,
continued to be a perfect Rule of Righteousness, and as such was delivered by
God on mount Sinai in ten Commandments; To these, more might be addded, but
these are sufficient to take you out of that wonder that I should assert the
perfection of it.

But I shall not rest barely upon the authority of these testimonies, but offer
to your consideration these following reasons. Arguments evincing the pefection
of the Moral Law.


1. If the Law be not a fully perfect and complete Rule of our lives, then
there is some sin against God which is not condemned in the Law, this is clear;
Deviation from any rule given of God is a sin; Deviation from that supposed
additionall rule is a sin: But there is no sin which the Law does not condemn;
Sin is a Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3, 4. He that sins, transgresses the
Law.

2. If the Law alone discovers and makes sin known, then it is a perfect, full,
and complete Rule; this is plain: Omne rectum index est obliqui. But the Law
alone discovers sin, Romans 3.20. This office is ascribed there to the Law, and
is no other but the Moral Law. Had not the light of that Rule guided him in
this work, he had never made any such discovery. And it is the moral Law
written in the decalogue that he means, as appears in the quotation; I had not
known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.

3. That which alone works wrath is the alone Rule and guide of our lives. This
is clear, in what sense soever it is, that we take working of wrath: whether we
understand it of working of wrath in man against God, as some do; Man's heart
being apt to rise against him that will exercise Sovereignty over him. Or of
the wrath of God kindled against man upon transgression of the Law. But it is
the Law that works wrath: it is ascribed to it, and it alone, Romans 4.15.

4. That which being removed will take away all possibility of sinning, that is
alone, the Rule of our obedience: This is plain; were there any Rule, the
transgression of it would be still our sin. But the Law being removed, all
possibility of sin is taken away: Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression, Romans 4 15.

5. If the Law only adds strength to sin, viz. for condemnation, then the Law
is the alone Rule of obedience: This is plain; Any other Rule whatsoever adds
like strength to sin, and upon transgression will condemn. But the Law only
adds strength to sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. The strength of sin is the Law.

6. Either the epithet [morall] is not justly given to the Law, or else it is
a perfect Rule of manners, that is, of obedience: This is plain; for moral
denotes, as Amesius observes, that use of it. But this epithet given to the
Law, and appropriated to it, was never (as I think) upon any such account
challenged. Ergo.

7. Either this new Rule does transcend the old Rule of the Moral Law,
requiring a more exact degree of perfection (as Papists speak of their
Evangelicall counsels, and Socinians of their additionall Gospel precepts) or
else it falls short and admits of obedience in a degree more low. If it require
obedience more high, then even the doers of the Law, in the greatest highth and
possible supposed perfection; though equal to the Angels, are sinners: The Law
might be fulfilled, and yet disobedience charged. If it fall short of the old
Rule (which it seems is your opinion, seeing you confess an imperfection is
our personal righteousness, as it refers to the old Rule; and assert a
perfection, as it relates to the new Rule) then the new Rule allows that which
the old Rule condemns, and so you bring in a discrepency between them, and
find an allowance for transgression. So that I think, I have sufficient
authority, divine and humane, with reasons that are cogent, to conclude that
which I have asserted, That the old Rule, the Rule of the Moral Law, is a
perfect Rule, and the only Rule.

You come in here with six several exceptions taken against the Exceptions
taken against the perfection of the Law.
perfection of this Law, or singularity of it, as rule.

1. You demand, What say you for matter of duty to the positive 1. Exception.
precepts for the Gospel? of Baptism; the Lords day; the Officers and a
government of the Church, etc? Is the Law of nature the only rule for these?
And foreseeing what I would answer, as well you might, you add, If you say,
they are reducible to the second commandment, I demand, 1. What is the second
commandment, for the affirmative part, but a general precept to worship God,
according to his positive institution? 2. Do ye take the precept de genere to
be equivalent to the precepts de speciebus? etc. To this I think I may answer
out of your own mouth. Aphor. page 149. The neglect of Sacraments is a breach
of the second commandment. In case we break the commandments in the neglect of
them, then the commandment requires the observation of them. For which you may
consult also, Mr. Burges Vindiciae legis page 149. Balls Catechism, Amesius
his Sciographia, Dod on the Commandments, Downhams Tables, Zanchy, each of them
on this Commandment; and Cawdry and Palmer on the Sabbath, Part. 2. Page 176.
For further clearing of this point, we must consider of the preceptive part of
the Moral Law, which alone in this place, is our business to enquire after, 1.
As it is epitomized in the Decalogue, those ten words, as Moses calls them,
Exodus 34.28. or else, us commented upon, or more amply delivered in the whole
Book of the Law, Prophets, and Scriptures of the New Testament. 2. We must
distinguish of the manner how the Law prescribes, or commands any thing as
duty, which is either expressly, or Synecdochically, either directly, or else
interpretatively, virtually, and reductively; I very well know, that the Law is
not in all particulars so explicitly, and expressly delivered, but that, 1. The
use and best improvement of Reason is required to know, what pro hic and nunc
is called for at our hands for duty. The Law lays down rules in affirmative
precepts, in an indefinite way, which we must bring home by particular
application, discerning by general Scripture Rules, with the help of reason
(which sometimes is not so easy to be done) when it speaks to us in a way of
concernment, as to present practical observation. 2. That hints of providence
are to be observed, to know what in present is duty, as to the affirmative part
of the commandments of God. If that man, that fell among thieves, between
Jerusalem and Jericho, had sat by the way, on the green grass, without an
appearance of harm, or present need of help, the Samaritane that passed that
way, had not offended, in case he had taken no more notice, then the Priest and
Levite did: But discerning him in that case as he then was, the sixth
commandment called for that, which he then did, as a present office of love to
his neighbor, according to the interpretation of this commandment given by our
Savior, Mark. 3.4. When the Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal the
man with the withered hand on the Sabbath day, He demands of them, Is it lawful
to do good on the Sabbath day, or to do evil, To save life, or to destroy? It
was not their mind, that Christ should kill the man, only they would not have
had him then to have cured him: but not to cure, when it is in our power,
according to Christ's interpretation, is to kill. If diligent observation be
not then made, the commandment may be soon transgressed. 3. Skill in Sciences,
and professions, is to be improved by men of skill, that the commandment may be
kept. The Samaritane powered Wine and Oil into the Samaritans wounds, knowing
that to be of use, to supple and refresh them: Had he known any other thing
more sovereign, which might have been had, at hand, he was to have used it. As
skill in Medicines is to be used for preservation of men's lives, so also skill
in the Laws, by those that are versed in them, for the help of their neighbor,
in exigents concerning his estate and livelihood. 4. We must listen to Gods
mouth, to learn when he shall be pleased at any time, further to manifest his
mind, for the clearing of our way in any of his precepts. There was a command,
concerning the place of public, and solemn worship, Deuteronomy. 12.5. Unto the
place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his
name there, even to his habitation shall ye seek, and thither shall thou come.
Now they must depend on the mouth of God, to observe what place in any of the
Tribes he would choose for his habitation. When God commands, that all
instituted worship shall be according to his prescript; this is a perfect Rule
implicit, and virtual, tying us to heed the Lord at any time, more
particularly discovering his will, and clearing this duty to us. Was not the
Law of worship, perfect to Abraham, unless it explicitly told him that he must
sacrifice his Son? And if you take your self to be so acute, as to set up a new
Rule, as you are pleased to style it, then you antiquate and abolish the old
Rule, and singularly gratify the Antinomian party. Two Rules will no more
stand together then two Covenants: In that you say a new Rule, you make the
first old: Now that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away,
Heb. 8.13. You add moreover, does not the Scripture call Christ our Lawgiver,
and say, The Law shall go out of Zion, etc. Is. 2.3. And was not I pray you the
old Law, (as you are pleased to call it) his? Saint Paul I am sure quotes that
which belongs to the preceptive part of the Moral Law, and calls it the Law of
Christ, Gal. 6.2. His Laws were delivered in the wilderness, whom the people of
Israel there tempted and provoked; This is plain, for they sinned against their
Lawgiver, and from his hands they suffered. And who they tempted in the
wilderness, see from the Apostles hand, 1 Cor. 10.9. And as to your Scripture,
the words quoted are exegetically set down in those that follow them. The Law
shall go out of Zion, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem: Which is no
more, but that the name of the Lord, which was then known in Judah, shall be
great from the rising of the sun, to the going down thereof. You further
demand, And is he not the anointed King of the Church, and therefore has
legislative power? For answer, I desire to know what King the Church had when
the old Law was, before Christ came in the flesh? the Kingdom was one and the
same, and the King one and the same then, and now, as I take it. Many shall
come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with Abrah. Isaac and Jacob,
in the kingdom of heaven. The Gentiles coming in at the Gospel-call, are under
the same King, and in the same Kingdom. And if all this were granted you for
which you here plead, it is no more then a change in some positive,
circumstantial Rites, and what is this to our question, That our
righteousness, which is imperfect according to the old Rule, can be perfect
according to the new? when old and new in that which is naturally Moral, is
ever one and the same. When the Law required heart-service, and love with the
whole heart, upon spiritual ends and motives, upon which account all fell short
in their obedience, and performance, shall we say that Christ did dispense with
any of this? so the Rule being lower, our obedience now may answer. Others that
make Moses and Christ two distinct Lawgivers and agents for God, in holding
out distinct precepts, give the pre-eminence to Christ, and account his Law to
be of more eminent perfection. You on the contrary seem to make the Laws of
Christ to stoop far beneath those of Moses.

2. Exception.
2. For Justification of your accusation of the Moral Law of imperfection, you
say, I think the Moral Law, taken either for the Law given to Adam, or written
in tables of stone, is not a sufficient Rule for us now, for believing in Jesus
Christ, no nor the same Law of nature as still in force under Christ. For a
general command (say you) of believing all that God reveals, is not the only
Rule of our faith, but the particular revelation and precept are part, etc. To
this I say,

1. As before, I think I may answer out of your own mouth, where you say,
Neglect of Sacraments is a breach of the second Commandment, and unbelief is a
breach of the first. If we break the Commandment in unbelief, then the
Commandment binds us to believe.

2. Much of that which I have spoke by way of answer to your former, may be
applied to this likewise.

3. I have already spoke to this, that faith is a duty of the Moral Law, Treat
of the Covenant, Chap. 3. page 18, 19. To which I refer the Reader.

4. If Adam had no command for faith, then he was not in any capacity to
believe, and by his fall lost not power of believing: And consequently it will
not stand with the Justice of God to exact it at our hands, having never had
power for the performance of it.

5. I say, there was power in Adam, for that faith that justified, but not to
act for justification. Adam had that habit, and the Law calls for it, from all
that are under the Command of it: But the Gospel discovers the object by which
a sinner through faith is Justified.

3. The same answer may serve to your third objection, 3. Exception.
which indeed is the same with the former, only a great deal of flourishing is
bestowed, in discourse of the understanding and will, paralleling them with the
Prefaces, grounds and occasions of Laws. And at last bringing all to the
Articles of the Creed, to which enough already is spoken.

4. You say, But what if all this had been left out, 4. Exception.
and you had proved the Moral Law the only Rule of duty? does it follow
therefore that it is the only Rule? Answ. I take righteousness to be matter of
duty, and then the only R^le of duty, is the only Rule of righteousness. You
say further, Sure it is not the only Rule of rewarding. And I say, Rewarding is
none of our work, but Gods, and I look for a Rule of that work which is ours,
and that we are to make our business, I confess an imperfection in it to give
life, but assert a perfection as the Rule of our lives, It justifies no man,
but it orders and regulates every justified man.

5. You say, The same I may say of the Rule of Punishment. 5 Exception.
To which I give the same answer: It is not our work, bu Gods, either to reward
or punish. And here you speak of a part of the penalty of the new Law: And I
know no penalty properly distinct from the penalty of the old. You were wont to
compare it to an Act of Oblivion, and Acts of Oblivion are not wont to have
their penalties. You instance in that of the Parable, None of them that were
bidden shall taste of the supper; when the sin for which they there suffer is a
breach of a Moral Command.

6. You say, The principal thing that I intend is, 6. Exception.
that the Moral Law is not the only Rule, what shall be the condition of Life
or Death, and therefore not the only Rule according to which we mu^t now be
denominated, and hereafter sentenced, Just or Unjust. To this I have already
given a sufficient answer, and if I had not, you answer fully for me, Aphor. p.
144 These. 28. Where you say, The precepts of the Covenant, as mere precepts,
must be distinguished from the same precepts considered as conditions: upon
performance of which we must live, or die for nonperformance. And I speak of
them as mere precepts, and so they are our Rule of righteousness, and not as
they are conditions either of the Covenant of works or grace: And a man may be
denominated righteous by the Laws Rule, when he cannot stand before the
sentence of it as a Covenant, of which we have heard sufficient. After a long
discourse against all possibility of Justification by the Law of works (as
though I were therein your adversary, or that the Antinomian fancy were above
all answer, that a man cannot make the Law his Rule, but he makes it withal
his Justification) you go about to prevent an objection and say, If you should
say, this is the Covenant and not the Law, you then tell me that you will
reply, 1. Then the Law is not the only Rule. To which I say, When my work is to
make it good, that the Law is our only Rule, I marvel that you will so much
as imagine that I will say that which makes it not the only Rule. But perhaps,
you think I do not see, how it cannot follow, as indeed I do not, neither can I
see any color for it. 2. You reply, It is the same thing in several respects,
that we call a Law and a Covenant (except you mean it of our Covenant-act to
God, of which we speak not) who knows not that praemiare and punire are Acts
of a Law? And that an Act of Obliviom or general pardon on certain terms is a
Law, and that the promise is the principal part of the Law of Grace. To which
I say, that praemiare and punire are not essential in a Law. Some have power
of command, so that their words in just things is to be a Law, where most deny
any power of punishment; as an Husband over the Wife. Some Parents have
Authority to command Children, (Children remaining under the obligation of the
fifth Commandment as long as the relation of a Child continues) when they have
neither power to reward or punish. Jacob took himself to be in power to command
Joseph (among the rest of his Sons, as appears in the charge that he gives
concerning his burial, Genesis 47.29, 30. and Chap. 49.29. So compared) and yet
he was not in power either to reward or punish him. And though they be acts of
a law where he that gives the Law is in power; Yet they are no parts of a Rule,
nor any directiory of life to him to whom they are proposed. I know that an Act
of Oblivion or general pardon may be called a Law, as many other things are,
catachrestice and abusive but that it should be a Law properly so called, I
know not. The Romans defined a Law, whilst that a Democratie was in force
among them, to be, Generale jussum populi aut plebis rogante magistratu.
Afterward, when the State was changed, and the Legislative power was in other
hands, they defined it to be, Jussum Regis aut Imperatoris. And Tullye's
definition of a Law is, that it is, Ratio summa insita in natura, quae recta
suadet, prohibetque contraria. Here jussio, suasio, and prohibitio are
expressed, which are not found in Acts of Oblivion. That every man, who is
within the verge of such an Act, may be said to be acquit by Law, I willingly
grant; seeing that Act takes off the form of the Law force condemning him: But
that it is a Law, strictly so taken, I know not. You conclude, that you have
now given some of your reasons, why you presumed to call that [Ignorance.] And
I must presume to acquaint you, that till I hear more of your reasons, I shall
remain in this, as Ignorant as ever.

SECT. IV. Imperfect conformity to the Law, is Righteousness inherent; as an
Image, less like the Pattern, is an Image.
I Said in my Treatise, [The perfection of this Holiness and Righteousness in
man's integrity, stood in the perfect conformity to this Law; and the reparation
of this in our regenerate estate (in which the Apostle places the Image of
God) must have reference, as to God as a pattern, so to his Law as a Rule.]
Here I pass by some words of yours of a Transcendentall p^rfection, not well
understanding them, much less understanding that they serve at all to our
purpose, and come to your second, There is a partial reparation of inherent
righteousness in regeneration.
where you answer, That there is a partial reparation of our Holiness in
Regeneration, but no reparation of our personal, inherent Righteousness at
all. Is Righteousness by the Law of works? I take this to be dangerous
doctrine. Answ. You entitled this controversy, page 41. Sect. 28. [Of
Evangelical personal Righteousness] And now you understand it, of personal,
inherent, Legal Righteousness. Are Legal and Evangelical the same, or, are not
you the same? When the Apostle joins Righteousness, and true holiness together,
as that in which the Image of God did consist, and is to be repaired in the
Regenerate, Is there a partial reparation of the one, and no reparation at all
of the other? In your former reply, you say, I hope you observe, that we speak
not of that called Moral Righteousness, consisting in an habit of giving every
man his own, but of justitia forensis: where you seem to make that a full
definition of such Righteousness; when I had thought that Moral righteousness
had given God, as well as man, his own: And if we speak not of this
righteousness, when we speak of a Rule of righteousness, I cannot but observe,
that it has been a wild discourse, and little to purpose, ever since either of
us entered upon it, either we speak of this, or else (I think) we might as well
have kept silence. I know no inherent Righteousness, that is not Moral
Righteousness. You demand, Is Righteousness by the Law of works? I take this
for dangerous doctrine. Answ. You put it as though I int^nded, that the Law
raises a man to that Righteousness for which it calls in order to
justification, and life, according to the tenor of the Covenant of works, which
were dangerous doctrine indeed, rendering Christ's death to be in vain, as we may
see from the Apostle, Gal. 2.21. And of the more danger it is; the more I
suffer. I say, that the Righteousness of which I speak, (and which, all, I
think, understand, when they speak (as you do of a believing man's personal,
inherent Righteousness) is from the Spirit of God, working with power in the
hearts of his chosen, but yet according to the Rule of the Law of God, and led
by no other Rule. And here I think there is no danger.

I illustrated this with a comparison [As an Image carrying an imperfect
resemblance of its Sampler, is an Image: so conformity, imperfectly answering
the Rule, is conformity likewise.] Here 1. You come in with yoor Dilemma
against me. Either that Image say you, is like the Sampler in some parts, and
unlike in others, or else it is like in no part, but near to like. If the
latter, then it is but near to a true Image of that thing, and not one indeed.
If the former, then it is nothing to our case. Answ. You may do well to tell
us, what near to like means, in the mean time, I must tell you, that you bring
no perfect enumeration. It is like in all parts, though not with a full
resemblance, complete in degree. 2. You tell me that Scheibler says, that
similitude does lie in puncto as it were, and ex part sui admits not of magis
and minus, and therefore stricte and philosophice loquendo, says he, that is
only simile, which is perfectly so, but vulgariter loquendo, that is called
simile, which is properly but mi^us dissimile. And then you add by way of
concession, Similitude consists not in puncto, but admits of magis and minus.
that Scripture speaks vulgariter often, and not stricte and Philosophice, as
speaking to vulgar wits, to whom it must speak, as they can understand. Give me
leave then that pretend to know no more then a vulgar wit, to speak the
language of Scripture, which I think was your own language in the last Section,
where you said, that There is a partial reparation of our holiness in our
regeneration, and this, the Apostle tells us is the reparation of the Image of
God, Ephesians. 4.24. And as I take it, the language of Scheibler also in his
Topics, where I had thought he had spoken stricte or logice at least, and
there he says, Paria a similibus omnino differunt, and how they differ I know
not, if there be not magis and minus in simili, as there is not in Pari. As you
confess it to be true in Scripture-sense; so I take it, with Scheiblers leave,
to be true in the exactest philosophical sense. Similitude is founded in
quality, as parity in quantity; And that qualities are intended and remitted, I
shall believe, till I have learned new Logic. Davenant in Colos. 3.10. says,
This is to be held, that Christ is otherwise the Image of the Father then we.
He is the Image of equality, enjoying the same nature with the Father, whose
Image he is. Every regenerate man is the Image of imitation, imperfectly
resembling some similitude of the divine nature in certain gifts of grace. You
conclude, If all this were otherwise, it is little to your purpose, for in this
conformity of ours, there is something of quantitative resemblance as well as
qualitative, and so it has a kind of quantity and parity in it as well as
similitude to the rule. Answ. What there is of quantity, and how much, you do
not tell, and if there be not only a similitude, but also a parity between God
and man, so that when God is judged of man, he should be tried by his peers, I
shall say nothing, but rest amazed.

SECT. V. Our actions are denominated good or evil, from the Law only.
TO your next Section, in which you complain of unfair dealing at my hands, I
have spoken sufficiently: your close only is observable. No doubt, say you, but
that sincere obedience consists in a faithful endeavor to obey the whole
preceptive part of Gods Law, both natural, and positive; but no man can by it
be denominated righteous (nisi aequivoce) but he that perfectly obeys in
degree. Your concession I accept, but wonder at your assertion. Is not doing
required in, and by the Law, and did John equivocate when he said, He that does
righteousness is Righteous, 1 John 3.7. And do you equivocate also when you put
it in your title page of this piece against me? Is that an equivocal honor
that is given to Zachary, and Elizabeth, to Abel, Lot, Joseph, Simeon, and
diverse others in Scriptures? The men of Sodom were denominated wicked upon
their breach of Gods Law, being sinners exceedingly: And Lot is denominated
Righteous upon his observation of it. I said in my Treatise, [A perfection of
sufficiency to attain ths end, I willingly grant, God condescending through
rich grace to crown our weak obedience; In this sense our imperfection has its
perfectness: otherwise I must say, that our inherent Righteousness is an
imperfect Righteousness, is an imperfect conformity to the Rule of
Righteousness.] Here you are displeased, with the ambiguity, as you say, of the
word [otherwise] and tell me of a natural perfection, or imperfection, of which
actions are capable, without relation to the Rule, which you confess is nothing
to this business. And then you add, Many a School Divine has written (and
Gibieuf at large) that our actions are specified a fine, and denominated good,
or evil, and so perfect, or imperfect, a fine, more especially a fine then a
lege. But this requires more sbutilty and acurateness for the discission, then
you, or I, in these loose disputes do show our selves guilty of. Answ. If there
be no more subtlety and acurateness in these many Schoolmen and Gibieuf, then
that which you please to quote out of them, and particularly out of him; there
is no despair, but either you, or I, might soon render our selves guilty of as
much subtlety and acurateness as they: And indeed, [guilty,] is the most proper
term, I think, that can be given to discourses of this nature. Actions, (say
they, as you quote them) are denominated good, or evil, and so perfect, or
imperfect a fine, rather then a lege, Though the Law that commands an action,
and the end at which the action aims, or ought to aim, stand in a Diametrical
opposition, and the end is wholly without the cognizance of the Law. Did not
those Jews in the time of the captivity, transgress the Law of God, when they
fasted and mourned, and did not fast and mourn at all unto God? Zach. 7.5. And
did not the Pharisees break the Law, when they did their alms to be seen of
men, and prayed in Synagogues, and Streets, upon that account also, that men
should observe them? The Law, had it been heeded, would have led them hgther,
as we may see in our Savious words, Mat. 22.37. According to this doctrine, a
good meaning, or intention, will salve the worst action. Saul had then
performed the Commandment of the Lord, as he said to Samuel, when he spared the
best of the Sheep and Oxen, for sacrifice to the Lord God; that had been a
pious end, if no command had prohibited it. But to give Gibieuf his due, I have
examined his dispute, De fine, and there cannot find that he makes any such
comparison, or puts such opposition, nor that he so much as mentions the Law,
when he speaks so much De fine, as you mention. I referred to Dr. Davenant De
Justit. habit. 349. disputing against Justification by inherent Righteousness,
upon the account of the imperfection of it. To this is replyyd, Do not you
observe, that I affirm, that which you call inherent Righteousness to he
imperfect, as well as Bp. Davenant. Answ. Why is it then that you laid so high
a charge of ignorance on learned Divines calling it imperfect? when you well
know, that they had not any such notion of a Metaphysical entity in their
heads, but maintained what they spoke, (as indeed Reverend Davenant does) with
that which you call a simple objection, that as we are called holy, by an
imperfect holiness, so we are called Righteous, by an imperfect Righteousness.
They never refer their Righteousness to the Law as a Covenant. You can find no
way to charge them and acquit him. As to this, They are as learned as he, and
he as ignorant as they. You add, Yea I say more, that in reference to the Law
of works, our works are no true Righteousness at all: Answ. If you mean by the
Law of works, not a Rule, but a Covenant, I say, with you, That they are no
such righteousness as will obtain the grace, or avoid the penalty of it: yet
this reference to this Covenant, cannot make imperfect righteousness
simpliciter no righteousness, though secundum quid, or versus hoc, it is such.
If I am bound in strict justice, to pay the sum of a thousand pound, and bring
an hundred instead of it, this is money, though it is no full pay, or total
discharge. You say further, He that says, they are no Righteousness, says as
little for them, as he that says they are an imperfect Righteousness. Answ.
The question is not, who speaks more or less against this righteousness, but
who speaks most truth. And Righteousness being, as Rollock on Ephesians. 4.24.
observes, A virtue in man, whereby he wills and does those things, which agree
with the Law of God, and as Gomarus on Mat. 3.15. defines it, An obedience due
to God, and still joined with holiness, it cannot be nothing, and yet it can
be no better then imperfect. You say, You suppose that I know that Bp. Davenant
does not only say as much as you for the interest of works in justification,
but also speaks in the very same notions as you do, referring me, where I may
find it in Davenant. Answ. 1. The interest of works in justification, is not to
our present question, of the perfection, or imperfection of righteousness: and
therefore whether he be, therein for you, or against you, it is not to this
question much material. Yet seeing you speak so confidently here to me, and
more fully else where, that you have this Reverend Author in that point firm on
your part, insomuch that having q^oted a Century of witnesses that are (as you
say) for you, you add, If the reader would know which of these speak most my
own thoughts; I answer, most of them, if not all, in a great part, but Davenant
most fully, Confess. page 457. It will be worth our pains to make some further
enquiry: And at the fi st sight, the thing doubtless will appear to all your
Readers, that have read as Davenant, as wonderfully strange. If he speak your
thoughts so fully, how comes it to pass, that you have so many adversaries as
you complain of? when he, for ought I know, amongst Protestant writers, has
none at all; If you speak both the same thing, your Adversaries doubtless
would be his; And his work being so much more large then yours; he would have
found so many more Adversaries then you. His work was published before yours;
and if you intended to publish no other doctrine, How could you know, that
yours was like to blast your reputation with most Divines, (as in your Printed
Letter, you tell, Mr. Tombs Page 409) When his work has much advanced and not
blasted his reputation at all? In this Apology you tell me, Page 16. of four
great errors of the Protestant party in the doctrine of J^stification;
a^quitting English R^form rs in one of them only, And all (except that one)
Davenant is as guilly as any.

The first is, That the formal cause of our Righteousness is the formal
Righteousnesss of Jesus Christ, as suffering and perfectly obeying for us. And
if this be an error, no man is more chargeable then he with it. He makes this
the title of his 28. Chap. de Justit. habit. Imputatam Christi obedientiam esse
causam formalem Justificationis nostrae probatur
The imputed Righteousness of Christ, is proved to be the formal cause of our
Justification. Making it good in that Chapter, by 11. Arguments, and answering
contrary objections. Having confirmed it with Arguments, he proceeds in the
next Chapter to back it with Authorities: And quoting Justin Martyr in the
first place, he thus comments upon him. Hic aptrte doc et Justinus Martyr non
modo mortem and satisfactionem imputati ad poenam delendam; sed ipsam
conversationem ejus, seu obedientiam activam imputari nobis ad peccatum
obliterandum.
Here Justin Martyr does evidently teach, that no^ only the death and
satisfaction of Christ, is imputed to us, to take away our punishment, but also
his conversation and active obedience is imputed to us, to take away sin, Page
374. The like we may find Page 378. upon occasion of quotation out of Cyrillus
Alexandrinus. The next error charged upon Protestants by you is, about the way
and manner of our participation of this Righteousness, which the Divines say,
is by imputation. And so Davenant says, as we have already heard, asserting
against Bellarmine the greatest necessity (as he speaks) of it, Page 32.
Quoting against him Scriptures for it, explaining Protestants meaning in it.
Nos vero hac imputatione justificationem sitam putamus, non eo nomine solum
quod Christus nos regit justitia sua, sed multo magis quia donat nos justitia
sua. Neque dicimus Deum nos pro justis habere solummodo quia tectos conspicit
justitia Redemptoris nostri sed quia ex sua ordinatione omnes credentes, atque
in unam personam cum Christo coalescentes, justitiae ejus and obedidientiae
vere participes factos.
We think (says he) that Justification is placed in this imputation; not only
because Christ's covers us with his Righteousness; but much rather, because he
freely conferrs his righteousness upon us. Neither do we say, that God
accounts us as just; only because he sees us Clothed with the Righteousness
of our Redeemer; but because he sees by his own ordination, all believers
united into Christ as one person; made truly partakers of his obedience. But
perhaps, you are most offended with that, which you put in the close of your
Charge of this error upon Reformers, That we are hereby (namely, by imputation
of this Righteousness) esteemed legaliter, to have fulfilled the Law in
Christ: Which in your account, is so high an error, that with you it is one of
the pillars of Antinomianisme. And q^oting these words from a Reverend Brother,
whom sometimes at least you have had in high esteem, That as in Christ's
suffering we were looked upon by God, as suffering in him; So by Christ's obeying
of the Law, we are beheld as fulfilling the Law in him; You appea^e to you^
Reader whether it be true, or tolerable. Yo^ seem to think, that the naming it,
is enough to work a deep dislike, if not detestation of it. And if Davenant
here be not as blameworthy as he, I am much mistaken. See his third Argument
for confirmation of his Thesis before mentioned, Page 364. Deus ex intuitu
obedien (...) per Christum praestitae usque ad mortem crucis, nos liberavit a
poena debita legis transgressoribus, imputando nobis hanc alterius
satisfactionem, perinde ac si nostra fuisset: Ergo ex intuitu obedientiae per
Christum praestitae usque ad impletionem legis, nos donabit illis beneficiis
quae promittuntur legis observatoribus; imputando nimirum, nobis hanc alterius
justitiam, quasi etiam nostra esset.
God in beholding the obedience performed by Christ, even to the death of the
Cross, delivers us from the punishment due to the transgressors of the Law;
imputing this satisfaction of another to us, even as though it had been ours.
Therefore in beholding the obedience of Christ yielded even to the fulfilling
of the Law, he confers these benefits upon us which are promised to the
observers of the Law, that is, by imputing to us this righteousness of
another, as though it were ours. And much more to this purpose; And afterward,
further explaining himself, he says: Quemadmodum iutuitu imputatae
satisfactionis, Deus nos liberat ab ira and poena, quasi nos illam
satisfactionem in propriis personis exhibuissemus; Sic intuitu legis a Christo
pro nobis impletae acceptat nos ad vitam and proemium gloriae, quasi nos nostra
personali justitia legem implevissemus.
As, upon sight of this imputed satisfaction, God does deliver us from wrath
and punishment, as though we had made satisfaction in our own persons; So, upon
sight of the Law fulfilled by Christ for us, he accepts us unto life and glory,
as though with our own personal Righteousness we had fulfilled the Law. The
third error which is charged upon Protestants is, that, from which English
Reformers are acquitted.

The fourth is, About the formal reason of faiths interest in Justification:
Which Protestant Reformers say, (as you observe from them) is, as the
instrument. This indeed Davenant does not put to the question, and purposely
handle, that I know, as he does the former. Yet we find him fully asserting it.
Answering Bellarmines objection, that Instrumentalem semper agnoscit, non autem
formalem: nisi quatenus sub nomine fidei includit objectum fide comprehensum.
Quasi diceret, Christi obedientiam fide apprehensam esse causam formalem
Justificationis nostrae.
Luther made faith the formal cause of Justification, he says, that Luther
always acknowledged it the isntrumental, but not the formal, unless under
the name of faith he include the object apprehended by faith, as though he
should say, that the obedience of Christ apprehended by faith is the formal
cause of our Justification. Where we plainly see Davenants mind.

1. That that which apprehends and applies the righteousness of Christ for
justification, is the isntrumental cause in it. 2. That faith apprehends and
applies, this righteousness of Christ for justification; and consequently, with
him, Faith is the instrument. So also Determinat. 37. page 165. Huic fiduciae
in Christum mediatorem tribuimus instrumentalem vim justificandi, potius quam
illi actui hominis peccatoris, Quia constat eo modo justificari homines, quo
gloria divina maxim illustretur, and honor salutis nostrae ad solum Deum
referatur. Atqui ab aliis virtutibus aut operibus statuunt hominem justifioari,
in justificationis negotio gloriam salutis humanae non integram Deo relinquunt,
sed merito suo aliqua ex part adscribunt. --
We attribute, says he, this isntrumental power of justification to this
trust in Christ the Mediator, rather then to any other act of sinning man;
because it is manifest, that men are justified that way, by which the glory of
God may be most illustrated, and the honor of our salvation given to God
alone. But they that affirm that man is justified by other virtues or works, do
not leave the whole glory of man's savation, in justification, alone to God,
but ascribe some part unto themselves.

You are highly displeased with all those, that will have no other condition of
our justification, at the day of judgment, then affiance in Christ's
righteousness. If you allow faith to begin it, yet you will have works, at any
hand, to perfect it. Here he is as full as anywhere against you. Quoting two
passages out of Hilary, Chap. 29. p. 377. Of which we may make use anon, he
thus expresses himself. Solent Jesuitae justificationem fidei ascribere, sed
non solo. Hunc errorem taxat Hilarious, quando dicit, Sola fides justificat.
Initium etiam justificationis fidei tribuunt, sed non consummationem: Atille
long aliter, justum fides consummat.
Jesuits are wont to ascribe justification to faith, but not to faith alone:
Hilary taxes this error, when he says, Faith alone justifies: They attribute,
says he, the beginning of justification to faith, but not the consummation:
But Hilary far otherwise; Faith consummates the just.

We have heard your sense of the danger of that opinion, That faith in Christ,
as giving himself in Satisfaction for us, is alone the justifying act: And we
shall hear how confident you are, that all antiquity is against it, as against
the instrumentality of faith in justification, and the interest of works as
consummate in judgment. If you please to read Davenants 37. Determinat. You
shall see him as fully against you, as Chemnitius, Amesius, Prideaux, Bernard,
Anselmus, or any other, that you can look upon, as your greatest adversaries.
My third argument to assert this position (laid down Sect. 2. of this
Postscript) he there makes his first, which I saw not till I was come hither,
else I might have made other use of it. And see how he expresses himself, page
164. Jam quod spectat ad pro prium illud and speciale objectum in quod fides
respicit eo ipso articulo quo accipit justificationem a Deo, certum est in
historica narratione creationis aut gubernationis non posse animam ream
invenire hanc peccatorum remissionem. Vnde Aquinas, In ipsa justificatione
peccatoris, non est necesse ut cogitentur caeteri articuli, sed solum cogitetur
Deus peccata remittens. Deinde in mandatis and comminationibus legis multo
minus invenitur hoc speciale objectum: Nam talis consideratio ex se nihil
gignit quam terrores etc. Restant igitur dulces promissiones Evangelicae de
favore and gratuita peccati remissione per and propter. Mediatorem, in quas dum
fides respicit, peccator fiduciam concipit, in hunc oblatum sibi Mediatorem
recumbit, divinae misericordiae se justificandum subjicit, atque inde
justificationis beneficium protinus consequitur.
Now, as to that special, and proper object, at which faith looks, in that
very instant, in which it receives justification from God, it is certain, that
the guilty soul can not find remission of sins in the historical narrative of
creation, or providence. Whence Aquinas, In the justification of a sinner, it
is not necessary that other articles be thought upon, but that God be thought
upon pardoning sin. And in the commands and threats of the Law this special
object is much less found; For this consideration begets nothing else, but
terrors, etc. Therefore the sweet Evangelicall promises of the favor and free
pardon of sin, by, and for the mediator, only remain, upon which whilst
faith looks, the sinner conceives hope, relies upon this mediator, offered to
him, yields himself to divine mercy for justification, and thereby attains the
benefit of justification. And this he backs with three Arguments.

You tell me, Apol. p. 24. It must needs be known, that the faith which is the
justifying condition is terminated on Christ himself as the object, and not on
his Righteousness which he gives in remission. Giving in your reasons; To which
in their due place I have spoke: And you may see Davenant as full against you
here, as any where, ca. 23. de Justit. habit. p. 317. Accipere autem dicimur
hoc donum manu fidei, quae applicat nobis Christi justitiam, non ut nostra fiat
per modum infusionis aut inhaesionis, sed per modum imputationis.

Atque demiror Papist as non posse intelligere quomodo per fidem Christi
justitia nobis applicetur, qui putant se intelligere quo modo per indulgentias
Pontificias Christi and sanctorum merita sive vivis sive mortuis assigentur.


We are said to receive this gift by the hand of faith, which applies to us
[the righteousness of Christ;] not that it should be made ours way of infusion,
or inhesion; but by way of imputation. And I wonder, (says he) that Papists
cannot understand how [the righteousness of Christ] is applied to us by faith,
who think that they understand, how by the Popes indulgencies, the merits of
Christ's, and the Saints, are applied to the quick and dead. As also chap. 28.
p. 371. Nihil usitatius quam causae applicanti illud tribuere quod proprie and
immediate pertinet ad rem applicatam. Quia igitur fides apprehendit and
applicat nobis Christi justitiam, id fidei ipsi tribuitur quod reipsa Christo
debetur.
There is nothing more usual, then to ascribe that to the cause applying, which
properly and immediately belongs to the thing applied. Therefore, because faith
apprehends and applies [the righteousness of Christ] to us, that is attributed
to faith, that indeed is due to Christ. Where we plainly see, that according to
him, Faith applies the righteousness of Christ, and that it is an applying
cause, and what cause except isntrumental, I cannot imagine. Much more might
be brought out of this Reverend Author to this purpose. But this is enough to
let us see, that there is not any so fair, and full accord between you. And if
I should be put to name two writers of note, much differing one from the other
in one particular subject, I think I should first mention Bp. Davenant, and Mr.
Richard Br. in the point of justification. Your Reader may well judge, that he
is amongst those that you say, ( Confess. page 459.) you may safely, and boldly
advise, all those that love the everlasting happiness of their souls, that they
take heed of. Where you warn all such, that they take heed of their doctrine,
who make the mere receiving of, that is, affiance in, the righteousness of
Christ, to be the sole condition of their first justification, excluding
Repentance, and the reception of Christ as a Teacher, and King, and Head, and
Husband, from being any condition of it, yea, and will have no other condition
of our justification at judgment; who call that affiance only by the name of
justifying, faith, and all other acts by the name of works. And as to that
which you here assert, that he speaks as much as you, for the interest of works
in justification, you may conceit it, but those that have perused him, will
hardly be induced to assent to it. Why is it then that he admits no other
condition in the Covenant, then faith only? In hoc foedere ad obtinendam
reconciliationem, justificationem, atque aeternam vitam, non alia requiritur
conditio, quam verae and vivae fidei.
In this Covenant, (says he, cap. 30. de Justit. act. page 396) there is no
other condition, then that of true faith, required to obtain Reconciliation,
Justification, and life eternal. And having quoted, Romans 3.16. Romans 4.5. Gal.
3.8. he adds, Justification therefore, and right to life eternal is suspended
upon condition of faith alone: But good works are also required of justified
men, not to constitute a state of justification, or demerit life eternal; but
to yield obedience, and testify thankfulness toward God, who justified us
freely, and has marked out that way for their walk, whom he has designed for
the kingdom of glory. How is it Justificatio igitur, and jus ad aeternam vitam
ex condition solius fidei suspenditur. Sed ab hominibus jam justificatis opera
etiam bona exiguntur, non ad constituendum statum justificationis, aut
promerendam vitam aeternam: sed ad exhibendam obedientiam, and testificandum
gratitudinem erga Deum, qui nos gratuito justificavit, atque ad ambulandum in
illa via quam ad regnum gloriae designatis ipse delineavit.
then, Haec gratia (sc. inhaerens) ut saepe dictum est, est appendix five
consequens gratuitae justificationis.
that again and again (as he says) himself has said, that it is but an
Appendix or consequence of Justification, page 317? If he thus interest works
in Justification, how he will be reconciled to himself, where in the passage
before quoted he says, that They that affirm that man is Justified by other
virtues, or works, do not leave the whole glory of Man's salvation, in
Justification, alone to God; but ascribe some part to themselves? And in all
that you quote out of him, Page 319, etc. to Page 326. how little is there that
looks this way? You think you have just cause to charge contradictions upon the
Reverend Author of the first, and second part of Justification; Because, having
delivered that very doctrine which here is held forth out of Davenant,
concerning the imputation of Christ's active obedience (in which they scarce
differ in terms) yet afterward adds, Though holy works do not justify, yet
by them a man is continued in a state and condition of Justification: So that,
did not the Covenant of grace interpose, gross and wicked ways would cut off
our Justification, and put us in a state of condemnation. If you can reconcile
Davenant to Davenant, which I doubt not may be done, this Author may then be as
easily reconciled to himself. Passages of this kind only, you quote out of
Davenant, which are as much opposite to himself, as to the Author now mentioned.

SECT. VI. Unbelief and Impenitence in professed Christians are violations of
the Covenant of Grace.
THe next you enter upon is, a Query, How far unbelief and impenitence in
professed Christians are violations of the new Covenant: Opposing your self
against that Position of mine, Chap. 33. Page 245. [The men in impenitency and
unbelief, that lie in sin, and live in the neglect of the Sacrifice of the
blood of Christ, live in a continual breach of Covenant] Here you confess
that I cite no words of yours, and therefore you are uncertain whether it is
intended against you. To which I say, that it is intended against all that deny
what in the Position is asserted; which you seem to do, Aphor. These. 34. Page
163 Where you say, That the Covenant of grace is not properly said be violated,
or its conditions broken, except they be finally broken. But before I enter
upon the thing it self, Men in final unbelief and impenitency in Covenant with
God.
a give me leave to assume thus much out of your own mouth; That men in final
unbelief and impenitency are in Covenant with God; This is clear; They that
break Covenant, and render themselves properly guilty of the violation of if,
are in Covenant. The breach of promise presupposes making of a promise, and
b^each of Covenant presupposes entrance into Covenant, Jer. 34.18. The Lord
threatens those that trasgressed his Covenant, and had not performed the words
of Covenant: And those that thus transgressed Covenant, did likewise, as we
see there, enter into Covenant: But these as you affirm, break Covenant, and
render themselves properly guilty of violation of the conditions of it:
Therefore it follows, that they are in Covenant. And, as the Covenant is, that
they transgress; such the Covenant is, that they enter; They do not enter one
Covenant, and transgress another; They transgress a real, and not
equivocall, halfe-erring Covenant: It is therefore a real, and not an
equivocall, halfe-erring Covenant that they enter. And as this clearly follows
from hence; so that from you prosition that immediately goes before it, [That
Christ's passive obedience and merit was only to satisfy for the violation of
the Covenant of works, but no at all for the violation of the Covenant of
grace] it clearly follows, Universal Redemption overthown.
That there is no universal Redemption by Christ's Death or satisfaction. If
Christ died not for satisfaction of their sin, that stand guilty of the breach
of the Covenant of grace, then he died not for the sins of all: This is clear.
But, according to you, he died not to make satisfaction for their sin, that
thus stand guilty; Therefore he died not for the sins of all. Yea it will
follow, that he dyed for the lesser part only, of those that make profession of
his name: Seeing the greater part die in impenitency, and unbelief. Yea, it
will follow, that he dyed for the Elect only; For Faith and repentance are
proper to the Elect: All others die in impenitency and unbelief. I do not here
go about to dispute the thing, but only observe, that all that Amyraldus has
gone about to set up, concerning universal Redemption, with such high applause
of yours, is by this position utterly overthrown. For the assertion which in
the place mentioned I have laid down, that [impenitence and unbelief in
professed Christians is a breach of Covenant] I need say no more, then that
which I have spoke, there having been nothing replied to that which I have
said. My argument in the place quoted, Arguments evincing that impenitence and
unbelief in professed Christians are violation of Covenant.
in brief was this; [They that engage in Covenant to believe in Christ, and
forsake their sin, break Covenant by a life in unbelief, and sin: But all
professed Christians engaged by Covenant to believe in Christ, and to forsake
their sin: Therefore all professed Christians, by unbelief and sin break
Covenant] I only here add, If unbelief and impenitence be not breaches or
violations of Covenant properly so called, then final unbelief and impenitence
is no breach or violation of Covenant properly so called. This is clear. Final
perseverance in unbelief and impenitence is no more, then a continuance of the
same posture or state of Soul Godward, in which they before stood, in
impenitence and unbelief; As Perseverance in Faith and Repentance, is the
continuance of Faith and Repentance. Explicatory distinctions examined.
If then final unbelief and impenitence be a breach of the Covenant of grace,
then all unbelief and impenitence, denominating a man, an unbelieving and
impenitent person, is a breach of Covenant likewise. For the clearing of your
meaning, which is all that you do in this question, you distinguish, first of
the Word [Covenant:] Secondly, of the word, [Violation.] You say, The word
[Covenant] is sometimes taken for Gods Law made to his creature, containing
precepts, promises, and threatenings: Sometimes for man's promise to G^d.
[Violation,] You say, is taken, either rigidly for one that in judgment is
esteemed a non-performer of the condition, or laxly, for one that in judgment
is found a true performer of the condition, but did neglect, or refuse the
performance for a time. You apply both these distinctions: Taking the word
Covenant in the latter sense, you say that you have affirmed, that man breaks
many a Covenant with God: yea even the Baptismal vow it self, is so broken,
till men do truly repent, and believe. To which I reply, That it is no other
then the Baptismall vow, or Covenant, that we are to enquire into. Baptism is,
as Circumcision was, a seal of the Covenant: In Baptism then we engage to the
terms of the Covenant, and till we repent and believe, by your own confession,
we break this Covenant. But taking the word [Covenant] say you, in the former
sense, i. e. for Gods precepts, promises and threatenings, and [Violation] in
the latter sense, for one that in Judgment (that is at the day of Judgment) is
esteemed a non performer of the conditions, so, you say, None violate the
Covenant but final Unbelievers and impenitent, that is, (as you explain it)
No other are the proper subject of its peremptory curse or threatening. But Good
Sir, reflect upon this explanation of yours, and in a more serious way, yet
consider of it. To help your self out; you refer man's violation of Covenant,
not to his own promise or engagement, in which he stands in duty tied, but to
Gods engagements, containing his promises and threatenings, and to violate Gods
promise or threatening, (which you here implye to be done by Covenant-breakers)
scarce carries sense with it. We may incur his threatening, or miss of his
promise; but we do not violate either his promise or threatening. Violation of
Gods precept is disobedience, of which Pharaoh, a man never in Covenant, was
guilty, but no violation or breach of Covenant, where there is no voluntary
engagement. Our engagement is necessity to make it up into a Covenant, and our
violation of our engagements, to make it a breach of Covenant. Was ever any
charged with breach of Covenant, in breaking not his own, but the condition of
the other Conanting party? Jsrael was under a Law to let their Hebrew. Servants
go free, the seventh year, Exodus 21.2. In Zedekiah's time, they served
themselves of them beyond that term. Here was the transgression of a Law, but
no breach of any particular Covenant. But when they entered Covenant with God to
do that which Law required, and ratified it by cutting a Calfe in twain,
passing through the parts of it; and again, served themselves of them; here was
a breach of Covenant.

So that the violation that you speak of (if you may call it a violation) is no
Covenant-violation. Every man that breaks a Covenant, breaks his own; and not
another part, in the Covenant.

And whereas you will have that to be a violation of Covenant, laxly, and not
rigidly taken, Impenitent persons in the most strict and proper sense are
Covenant-breakers.
when one does negl^ct or refuse the performance for the time, but in judgment
(that is in the day of Judgment) is found a true performer of the conditions;
to me it is very strange, upon a several account. First, I suppose you mean
his own conditions to which he stands engaged, which for a time he thus
neglect^, and not Gods; And you so spoil all that before you spoke of
Covenant-violations, respective to promises and threatenings. Secondly, Such a
one, in the strictest sense, is a man guilty of breach of Covenant during such
time of his neglect or refusal. Was not that younger Son of his Father,
mentioned Luke 15. properly and in the most rigid sense, a prodigal, when he
wast^d his substance with ritotous living, notwithstanding that he was after
reclaimed to a more frugall course? And was not she also that was a sinner in
the City, Luke 7. truly a sinner, or only in a laxe sense, because she
afterward repented? Was not the penitent Thief, as truly, and in as rigid a
sense, a Thief, when he stole, as he that stole and repented not? And so he
that lives in breach of promise with God, is as truly a breaker of Covenant,
notwithstanding following Repentance, as those that live and die impenitent. I
know therefore, no other way of explanation of your self to your Readers
satisfaction, but to say, that the Covenant of grace is not finally violated
unless the conditions be finally broke. Who ever doubted, but when a sinner
repents, the doom which is passed against him for sin, is reverst? And that
Paul a persecutor, not in a laxe, but in rigid sense, afterward building the
faith that he destroyed, shall not appear in Judgment as a persecutor. And so
he that is, as truly and in no laxe sense, a Covenant-breaker, being by grace
brought in to keep Covenant in the day of Judgment shall be reputed and
esteemed a man faithful in Covenant.

SECT. VII. Faith and Repentance are man's conditions, and not Gods, in the
proper conditional Covenant.
THE next in order in which I am spoken unto, is, that which Sect. 55. Page
108. you fall upon, Entituling it, [Whether Faith, and Repentance be Gods
works?] Where having repeated words of mine out of Chap. 15. Page 101. of the
Treatise of the Covenant, somewhat largely, but very brokenly, you are pleased
to say, Mr. Bls. business here is to refute the answer that I gave to that
objection. The objection was thus put by one, that excepted against your
Aphorisms. [How make you Faith and Repentance, to be the conditions of the
Covenant on our part, seeing the bestowing of them is part of the condition on
Gods part? Can they be Gods conditions and ours too?] To which I answered
(which in part you transcribe) [In case these two cannot stand together, that
they should be conditions, both Gods and ours, we may answer by way of
retortion: And am I sure we have the better end of the staff, that they are
our conditions; they are conditions on our part, therefore they cannot be Gods:
That they are ours is made known of God, as by the beam of the Sun in his
word. And I shall not stand to distinguish of an absolute and conditional
Covenant, and so making the whole in the absolute Covenant to be Gods, and in
the conditional, this part to be ours (which I know not whether exactly
understood the Scripture will bear) but in plain terms, deny them to be the
Gods conditions, and affirm them to be ours] In all which I can confidently
speak that I never had it in my thoughts to oppose you; yea, I assuredly
expected, that how many adversaries soever I should find, yet I should have had
you here, on my party. Grounds on which the Author was confident that Mr. Br.
herein was on his party.
My confidence herein was upon these grounds. 1. In that you have showed your
self so well pleased with that which I had spoke in my answer to Mr. Tombs, for
explanation of that text of Jeremiah after quoted; as may be seen Page 224. of
your Treatise of Infant Baptism: and I am sure there is nothing here to cross
any thing that I had spoken there; Showing your self then so far my friend, I
could not imagine, that persisting in the same, I should have had you to be my
Adversary. 2. In that you had plainly enough (to my understanding) declared
your self against any such thing as absolute promises, Aphor. Page 8, 9. in
these words: Those promises of taking the hard heart out of us, and giving us
hearts of flesh, etc. are generally taken to be absolute promises; and after
some more words, you infer, Therefore these absolute promises are but mere
gracious predictions, what God will do for his Elect, the comfort whereof can
be received by no man, till the benefit be received, and they be to him
fulfilled: Therefore as all mere predictions, so also these promises, do fall
under the will of purpose, and not of precept. And Commenting on those (...)
words of the Prophet, as applied by the Apostle, Heb. 8. you s^y, Appen. Page
42. Whether the Apostle mention it as an absolute promise is a great doubt; and
having yielded so far as to say, I think you may call it an absolute promise,
you caution this freedom of calling it so, very largely, Page 43. And then you
make all up in these words, So that I conclude, that it is most properly, but a
prophe^ie what God will do, de eventu^; as it has reference to the parties on
whom it shall be fulfilled; and so is the revealing part of Gods purposing
will, and belongs not at all to his preceptive or legislative will, by which
he does govern, and will judge the world. And that Gods Covenant and promises
properly so called belong to his preceptive and legislative will, whereby he
governes the world, and not to his purposing will, (according to you) is
manifest. 3. You have appeared at large and with much zeal for the
conditionality of the Covenant on man's part, and that it is not made alone with
Christ, but Christians; with conditions impos^d on them, but not on him. And
how this can be, when those are Gods conditions and not m ns, I cannot see. If
Faith and Repentance be Gods conditions and not man's. Where is there any
conditions on man's part remaining? 4. Summing up your answer to your Querists
6. and 7. question, you say, Now I hope you can hence answer to both your own
demands. To the seventh, You see there is a Covenant absolute, and a Covenant
conditional; but the last is the proper Gospel Covenant. To the sixth, You see
that in the absolute Covenant or proph^c^e, he promises Faith and Repentance
(in promimising his Spirit and a new heart) to the Elect, who are, we know not
who. And in the conditional proper Covenant, he requires the same Faith and
Repentance of us, if we will be saved: So that they are Gods part which he has
discovered that he will perform in one Covenant, and they are made our
conditions in another. And you very well know, that I speak of the
conditional, proper Covenant, or else why do I contend for conditions in it?
and in this Covenant of which we speak, you say, they are required of us, and
are our conditions. And for the other Covenant, where you say that they are
Gods part, which he has discovered that he will perform, see how full I come
up to you, Chap. 9. Page 64. of my Treatise, where I say, [I suppose they may
be more fitly called, the declaration or indication of Gods work in the
conditions to which he ingageth, and of the necessary concurrence of the power
of his grace, in that which he requireth]. So that, had you had no more mind to
have been upon contradiction of me, then I of you, we had here shaken hands
together, and not lift up o^r hands one against the other. You say, Section 38.
page 37. that you are uncertain whether my 33. Chapt. be against you, because I
recite no words of yours, though it be indeed full against your opinion. Here,
I think, I recite no words of yours, neither did I, as I thought, oppose any
opinion of yours; Yet you say, my business is to confute your answer. You say,
A brief reply may satisfy this confutation, And I say, [No r ply] would have
been more fit for [no confutation.] You acquaint me how you explained your
self, plainly showing that the thing called [God's condition] was not precisely
the same with that called [ours.] Ours was, Believing and repenting, God is,
The bestowing of these, as the question expressed. Answ. I think you should
have made the difference far more wide. O^r conditions in this conditional
proper Covenant, are faith and repentance, to these we are called (as you say,)
if we will be justified and saved. God's conditions in this conditional proper
Covenant, are those to which he engages himself, viz. rewards, in case of
Covenant-keeping, and punishments, in case of Covenant Breaking; One he
promises, the other he threats: and these we expect, or fear, according as we
answer in Covenant-keeping, or fail, through breach of it Herein I explained my
self, Chap. 5. page 21. and this sure was your mind, when you wrote your
Aphorisms, where you say, Faith and Repentance are Gods part, that he will
perform in one Covenant, and made our conditions in another. The bestowing of
them, then, is no condition of God in that Covenant where they are conditions
required from us. You say in a Parenthesis (if I understand you) that our
action of believing is called Gods condition by the Querist, though improperly,
yet in a language very common in Mr. Bl's Treatise. I desire instances to make
this appear, that it is thus common in my Treatise. You say, Thus much being
premised, I reply more particularly, 1. I will yet say, that God has such an
absolute promise as well as a conditional, till you give me be^ter reasons of
your denial, or your questioning whether Scripture will bear it. Answ. It
seems you perceive that I do not plainly deny it; Arguments offered against an
absolute Covenant.
I have reasons so far preponderating at least, that I dare not assert it; I
shall adventure upon one that makes toward a denial. Mere gracious
predictions, or prophecies de eventu, what God will do, are no absolute
promises, how generally soever so taken. This I think is plain. There is a
difference betwixt a mere prediction and a promise, or a prophecy de eventu,
what God will do, and a promise. But these that are generlly taken to be
absolute promises, are, (according to you) mere gracious perdictions what God
will do, Aphor. page 9. Prophecies de eventu, what God will do, Append. page
44. Ergo. I shall adventure to second it with another. Promises properly so
called, have some determinate object, to whom they are made, and who may
receive consolation from them. This appears, Heb. 6.17, 18. But in these
absolute promises generally so called, there is no determinate object to whom
they are made, or that possibly can receive consolation from them. This is
plain. They are made (as you say) to the Elect and being made to them, they are
made, (as you further say) to, we know not who, and so none can receive
consolation from them. No man can aforehand say, (as you observe,) that he
shall have a new and soft heart, because God has promised it: For he cannot
know that it is promised to him; Therefore these are no promises properly so
called. You add, I shall yet say, that the giving of our faith and Repentance
is the matter of that absolute promise. Answ. That it is the matter of that,
which you have called [Gods prediction, or prophecy de eventu, what shall fall
out,] and now do call an [absolute promise,] I do easily grant: And so,
according to your self, it is not the matter of the conditional proper
Covenant of which we speak, which is enough for me against you in the thing in
question. You further say, my argument to the contrary, has little in it to
compel you to a change. Answ. My argument, it seems found you changed: I
cannot see you the same here, as, at least I thought, I saw you in your
Aphorisms. Your Major, (say you) is, Whose acts they are, his conditions they
are. In your reply, you seem to grant it, understood negatively, but
affirmatively, (you say) the proposition holds not universally, but put not in
your exception. But afterward you put in an ^xc^ption, as understood
negatively; Nor negatively does it hold, (say you,) speaking de action qua est
quid donandum. Answ. I think it holds nothing less then if there be quid
agendum, as well is quid dandum, in case the action be matter of duty. You say
further, to your Minor, I could better answer, if I could find it. Expecting,
(say you,) that it should have been this, But our faith and Repentance are not
Gods acts; And observing that I say, That this rises not to make them formally
Gods acts, and not ours, leaving out all that, to which the Relative [This]
refers, you know best for what reason. Your Reader may suspect, That it is to
persuade, that I deny, (which seems your great design here) that God has any
hand in it. I was censured before for giving too much to the Spirit of God, in
the work of Sanctification; when I would have the denomination to be given to
him, and not to man in that work: And here I am brought in, as ascribing
nothing to Gods Spirit, because I seem to say, that Faith and Repentance are
man's acts and not Gods: Where you further except against me, as over cautelous
in speaking the two propositions copulatively. It is enough, you say, to prove
them Gods conditions, and ours, if they be Gods actions and ours; Which will
be, I think, a disproof (if it be once made good) of that which in your answer
to your Querists, you have said; where you say, That they are Gods part that he
has discovered that he will perform in one Covenant, and they are made our
conditions in another. They are not then Gods conditions and ours in the same
Covenant: I am well enough content, that you make them God's conditions, and
not ours, in the improper unconditionate Covenant, so that you will grant, that
they are our conditions and not Gods, in the proper conditionate Covenant, of
which we now speak. When I say that this rises not to make them formally Gods
acts, and not ours, You say the word [formally] may do much to help me out; And
I say it is well that I have some help that way, for I fear your great design
here is to hedge me in; or else you had not opposed me, where my business is
not to oppose, but to defend you, And here you come in with an objection to
purpose. It is hard to know whether your [formally] respect a natural, or moral
form; Where we have Logic niceties enough: But to let these pass: I think no man
but your self, would have mentioned nature, or morality here. My meaning is
only, that, formali modo loquendi, they have their denomination from man, and
not from God. You further observe, that I say, They are our acts, etc. God
believes not, etc. Yielding that to believe is our act; you object, that to
move us effectually to believe, as a superior cause, is not our work, but Gods.
Answ. Sure you do not think, that ever I thought, that the work of a superior
cause above man, is the work of man: And you may plainly see, that I speak as
much, in words that you leave out, for God's more superior causality in this
work, as you do. You say, Let it be so, to believe, is our work, and our
condition; It follows not, that it is not Gods. But me thinks this necessarily
follows. I never heard, that in any bargain, the condition of the one party,
was the condition of the other. And your Reader will think, that you have here
much forgot your self, having in this very page said, The condition is his that
performs it, not his that imposes it; And I am sure that God imposes, and
we perform the conditions of Faith and Repentance, therefore they are not his
conditions but ours. You say, There are sufficient reasons why God is said not
to believe, though he cause us to believe. If you please to produce these
reasons, I shall he artily thank you. I have said plainly enough, that God
causes us to believe, and den^'d that he is properly said to believe. Your
reasons then must needs be acceptable. You tell me of Praedeterminants and
their Adversaries, Jesuits, Arminians: All of which acknowledge God to be the
cause of u^^acts: And I acknowledge the same, and so far there is a ^aire and
^^i^ndly accord. B^t you say, I adventure a step farher, and say, that faith
and repentance are man's work, and not Gods. To which y^u reply, 1. What mean
you then to yield afterward, that God works all our works in us? Those which
he works are sure his work. Answ. What need you to ask that question, when I
there explain mine own meaning? Your ^r^u^ent a conjugatis, [What God works,
is his work] must have its due limits, or else you will run into many
absurdities. God works our motion from place to place, and yet he himself does
not move. The text it self by me quoted, gives an answer. Having asserted that
God works them, the denomin^tion is still given to man: God work^ all our works
in u^: when he has wrought them they are yet said to be ours. I freely
subscribe to that of E^^ius upon the words, Deus omne bonum, ac totum, ab
initio bonae voluntatis, usque ad consummationem boni operis, in nobis
effic^citer operatur, ordine, sc. causalitatis. You ^dde, I never met with any
Orthodox Divine, but would yield that Faith is a work of Gods Spirit, and the
Spirits work is doubtle^s Gods work: Farther telling me, If you go the Common
way of he Praedeterminants, you must acknowledge that God is the Physical
Efficient, Praede^ermining, Principal, Immediate cause of every act of every
creature, and therefore doubtless, of our Faith; and that both immediatione
virtutis and suppositi; So that it is more properly his act then ours. Here you
furnish me with an answer. Though in the highest way of Praedeterminants, I
should ascribe all in every act to God, yet they are not Gods works or acts in
a rigid proper sense, but by a Metonymie of the cause. He works them, because
he work us for the acting of them, and so I explained my self, We are his
workmanship, fitted and prepared for good works. Christ was the principal
efficient when he raised Lazarus; yet it was Lazarus and not Christ that did
rise. Concerning acts of this nature, that we are upon, I believe, that Quod
voluntas agit, libere agit, interim ex natura non est libera ad bonum, sed per
gratiam liberata: libera in radice, non in termino. Homo denuo natus vult and
perficit quod est bonum; Deus autem operatur and velle and perficere ordine sc.
causalitatis. You profess your self of Bp. Davenants mind, who says, As for
the predetermination of men's wills, it is a controversy between the Dominicans
and Jesuits, with whose Metaphysicall speculations, our Protestant Divines love
not to torture their brains, or at least should not. Declaring your self, that
you take it to be a point beyond the knowledge of any man, which way God works
on the will in these respects: I much marvel then that you will so much
trouble your Reader about it. You tell us, that if you must incline to any way,
it would be rather to Durandus, for stronger reasons then you find in Ludovicus
a Dola, who yet (you say) has more then you have seen well answered. And yet
perhaps a Dola, in case he had seen your arguments, would have judged his as
strong as yours, Notwithstanding your great abilities to give answer to them,
when all others that you have seen, have been wanting. So far as I have
looked into the Author, I see him a man of much modesty, and one in whom
reason is not wanting, though I will not undertake to declare either with, or
against him. When I say [Our dexterity for holy duties is from the frame into
which grace puts us, and so still the work is ours, though power for action is
vouchsafed of God] You reply, Both velle and perficere are the gift of God, and
not only, posse velle, and perficere. To which I say I had thought, that Power
for action, had included that wnich you say, and not denied it, namely a
powerful inclination of the will to the work. Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3. The will is still man's, when grace has
wrought him up to it. I had thought there had been no such danger in Paul's
words, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.
You conclude, that I have not confuted your answer, namely to your Quaerists
question, when indeed I never intended it, and if I would now go about it, I
need not, finding it (as I think) done to my hand. You give in your reason, 1.
That I have not disproved the absolute promise of the first special Grace.
Answ. You say no more of this, in your reply to your Querist, that I can find,
but Whether the Apostle mention it as an absolute promise, is a great doubt,
and that you think we may call it an absolute promise; when you had said
before, that they are mere gracious predictions. 2. These supposed promises, as
you say in your answer, are not within the proper conditional Covenant, and
therefore I had nothing to do with it. 2. You further say, that I have not
disproved God to be the Author of our faith, so as that it is his work. Answ. I
do not find that in all your answer, and you most unfairely make the title of
this Section, to be [Whether Faith and Repentance are Gods works] My businsse
was against your Querist, affirming them to be Gods conditions not ours. 3. You
say, If I had; yet Believing, which is our work is not the same with giving
faith, or moving us to believe, which is Gods work. Answ. This I confess; You
did not affirm it before, that, I know, and I yield it now. The former is
ours, viz. to believe, the latter, Gods, viz. to give Faith, or move us to
believe. A mighty proof sure that your answer is not confuted if it had been
intended, because I have gainsayed, what your answer never asserted. For that
which I intended not against you, but as I thought, for you, That Faith and
Repentance are our conditions, and not Gods, I thus further argue.

Arguments evincing, that Faith and Repentance are our conditions and not Gods,
in the proper conditional Covenant.
Those conditions that are not mentioned in the proper conditional Covenant, as
from God, but req^ired of God from us, are not Gods conditions, but ours, in
that Covenant. This is clear; Being there expressly required of us, and not so
much as mentioned, as from God; they cannot be his engagement, but ours to
perform. But Faith and Repentance are not mentioned as from God, in the proper
conditional Covenant, but required of God from us. This proposition is your
own in your answer, as we have heard before, page 45, 46. Therefore Faith and
Repentance are not God's conditions in the proper conditional Covenant, but
ours.

2. The conditions of a Covenant are his that performs, and not his that
imposes. This Proposition is your own in this Section, and clear in reason.
But we perform, and God imposes Faith and Repentance. This is of two parts;
First, that they are performed by us, This you confess, where you yield that
they are our acts. For the second, that they are imposed on us, none can deny,
See 1 John 3.23. Act. 17.30. They are therefore our conditions, and not God's,
in this Covenant.

3. Covenant-conditions are theirs, that are charged with falsehood in case of
failing in them, and nonperformance of them. This is plain in all Covenants:
To make conditions, and to fail in them, is to be false to them. But in case of
failing in Faith and Repentance, man is charged and not God. God fails not but
man deals falsely. Therefore they are man's conditions, and not Gods.

4. Covenant-conditions are theirs, who upon failing in them, and not
performance of them, suffer as Covenant-breakers. This is clear. Israel
covenanted to dismiss their Hebrew servants, and dismissed them not: And Israel
suffered for it, Jer. 34. But upon failing in Faith and Repentance, God suffers
not, so much as in his name. He is not charged with men's unbelief and
impenitence: Men themselves suffer. Therefore Faith and Repentance are man's
conditions, not God's. So that though I have not refuted your answer, which
never was in my eye, yet I have answered your Querist's demand, and made it
good, that Faith and Repentance are man's conditions, and not God's, in the
Gospel Covenant.

SECT. VIII. The Covenant of Grace requires and accepts sincerity.
I Have passed through those debates, in which our judgments stand at
difference; for in the last you will differ, though I had thought there had
been a full accord between us. Now I must come to that in which we do agree,
which page 144. Sect. 82. you entitle, [Whether the Covenant of Grace require
perfection, and accept sincerity?] In which I take to the negative, conceiving
that it requires the same that it accepts. And in your Aphorisms, if I
understand any thing, you have clearly delivered your self with me, page 157,
158. in these words: As when the old Covenant said, Thou shall obey perfectly,
the Moral Law did partly (I think you mean perfectly) tell them wherein they
should obey: So when the new Covenant says, Thou shall obey sincerely, the
Moral Law does perfectly tell us wherein, or what we must endeavor to do, etc.
Whereupon Mr. Crandon is, herein against you, with as great vehemence as in any
other of your doctrines. Neither do I perceive, by any thing that you have
said, that your mind is changed: And I had much rather answer Mr. Crandon in
defense of truth, which he, in you, here opposes, then to spend time in my own
quarrel. Though my Tenent give you not distaste, yet it seems, my arguments do
not please. But if truth stand, it matters less though I fall. You answer all
my arguments in order, as though you judged me to be in the fowlest error; when
I am yet persuaded, that if not only some, but all of my arguments fail, which
you make your business to impugn, the Position it self, (which with you is
truth, as well as with me) will fall with it. After a short Apology, and
conjecture made, who that Divine may be, whom with much reverence I mention,
supposing him the first that manifested himself in the contrary way, that the
Gospel requires perfection, and accepts sincerity, You tell me, that you
conceive this difference is occasioned by the ambiguity of the word [Covenant
of Grace:] and tell me, that in your judgment, I ought to have removed it, by
distinguishing, before I had argued against their opinion. And so you fall upon
my work for me, and give in abundance of acceptations of the word [Covenant of
Grace.] And if I may take the boldness to be as free with you, as you with me,
I think you might have done well to have made it appear, where, and by whom,
this word is taken in all of these different senses, and significations. If
your Reader knew all this, before your Book fell into his hand, you have
nothing benefited him, you have only told him what he knew before: If he he
knew it not, he has now alone your word for it. And I know not where else, any
Reader may find a great part of it, but from your hand. I profess my self to be
much more amazed then edified in Reading all that you have spoke of it. When
you have reckoned up very many senses of the word, you say, Now if the question
be, whether in any of these senses, the Covenant does command perfect
obedience? you answer, An explication of the Authors meaning.
All the doubt is of the three latter, one of which is, Promises, Prophecies,
and Types, before Christ's coming. And to speak mine own meaning, (and I had
thought, no man had doubted of it) I take Covenant of grace in this dispute,
for the whole transaction that passes, in a Covenant-way betwixt God and his
people, in order to Salvation, as comprizing all that God requires, promises,
or threats, and all that to which man engages himself, and which he expects.
But when I speak of that which the Covenant, thus taken, promises; I mean that
which it promises in the promissory part of it: when I speak of what it
threatens, I mean in the Minatory part of it: and when I speak of what it
requires, I mean in the preceptive part of it. Now this preceptive part must
needs have some rule, at which men in Covenant must look, as distinguished from
threats or promises, and containing Agenda, things to be done, and not
Credenda, Speranda, or Timenda, things to be Believed, Hoped, or Feared. The
rule, or Standard here, in these things, which man in Covenant is called to do,
is the Moral Law: God quits not man of his Subjection: He is a subject in this,
as he was in the former Covenant. The Covenant of works called to the keeping
of it in the highest, fullest, and most complete perfection. The Covenant of
Grace calls us to eye it, and with sincere endeavor to conform to it. When God
spoke to Abraham (the leading man in Covenant respective to all
after-Covenanters, whether Jews, or Gentiles,) he says, I am the Almighty
God, or God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1. In
which words, we have first the parties in Covenant, and the engagement of
either party. Gods engagement is to be to Abraham, Almighty, and All-sufficient
for protection, for provision, so that, he need not look elsewhere to compass
good, or keep off evil. Abraham's Engagement is, to walk before God, and to be
perfect, or, as it is in the Margent reading, upright, sincere: which walking
says Ainsworth, comprehends both true faith, Heb. 11.5, 6. and careful
obedience to God's Commandments. That faith is called for in this perfection,
see 2 Chronicles. 16.8, 9. To rely alone upon God in one verse, is to be perfect in
the other. That this perfection of service, of obedience, is no other then
sincerity, all interpreters that I have seen, acknowledge. See Peter Martyr,
Vaetablus, Paraeus, Calvin on the place. God Covenants for obedience, (says
Calvin) from his servant; and the integrity, which is here mentioned, is
opposed to hypocrisy. Rivet closes with Calvin, and in many words expresses
himself, that this perfection means nothing else, but integrity, or sincerity,
otherwise (says he) they that walk, and are yet in the way, do not attain to a
perfection properly so called. So that according to him, the Covenant requires
the same, that through grace the Saints here attain, and that is a perfection
not property so called. Dr. Preston on the words is very large to this purpose.
As for that which you produce as an opinion of an acquaintance, and friend of
mine of extraordinary learning and judgment (leaving me to guess whom you
mean, as indeed I do, but with possibility of mistake) That the Moral Law is
the matter of the new Covenant; I cannot well understand, at least as you
express it. How far the word [matter] may reach, I know not. I believe, that it
is their Rule in the New Covenant, but otherwise held out, then it was in the
Covenant of works, as I have before expressed my self. As a Law, it loses
nothing of it is ancient strictness, for it is ever unchangeably the same; the
rule of our duty, and not of our strength; only the terms of the Covenant of
Grace, are not for exact observation, but sincere endeavor. So that the least
failing is a sin against the Law, but not a breach of Covenant; which for ought
I discern is the sense that you give. As for that which in the second place you
urge from him, whom you style, Learned, Judicious, and much Honored Brother,
and my friend and acquaintance; making these two, but one Law quo ad formam, I
command thee fallen man, perfect obedience; and oblige thee to punishment for
every sin: yet not remedilesly, but so, as that if thou Believe and Repent,
this obligation shall be dissolved, and thou saved, else not. I should rather
take them disjunctim then conjunctim, but I know not whether there be any
considerable difference. I so far subscribe, that all that perish by the
sentence of the Law, to whom the Covenant was ever tendered, are by neglect of
Covenant, left in a remediless condition. The Law damns the unbeliever and
impenitent: unbelief holds him, that he is not by the Covenant of Grace
delivered from the Law's sentence. When you come to bring all home, by
application to me, with your censure for laying an heavy charge upon them that
I oppose, and apologizing on their part; I do not well know how to understand
your words, that so I might see my own error. You say, It is most likely, that
those Divines that affirm, that the Covenant of Grace does require perfect
obedience, and accepts sincere, do take that Covenant in this last and largest
sense, and as containing the Moral Law, as part of the matter. Before you spoke
of the Moral Law, as the matter of the Covenant, and now you speak of it, as
part of the matter, And so understood, (you say) No doubt it is true, if I
understand it of perfection for the future. And then doubtless it is an error,
for I understand perfection for the present; And what the Law of God, or
Covenant does require, it does in present, as I think, require: And what gave
you occasion to suspect otherwise, I cannot imagine. When you have taken upon
you their defense, or at least their excuse, that hold against you, you come to
answer my arguments, that hold with you.

I said, [This opinion, Arguments that the Covenant of grace requires only
sincerity vindicated.
That the Covenant requires perfection, establishes the former opinion opposed
by Protestants, and but now refuted, as to the obedience, and the degree of it
called for in-covenant.] You answer, If you interpret the Papists as meaning
that the Law requires true perfection, but accepts of sincere, then if it be
spoken of the Law of works, or nature, it is false, and not the same with
theirs whom you oppose. Answ. I marvail that you will put the case [if I do]
when I tell you expressly that I do not. I limit the parallel to the obedience,
and degree called for in Covenant, which these Reverend Divines make to be the
same, as those that I had spoken to, but differ respective to acceptance: and
so their mistake, if it be one, is infinitely below the Popish error in the
Council of Trent held forth, which I did oppose. You further say, If you take
them, as no doubt you do, as meaning it of the Law of Christ, as the Trent
Council express themselves; then no doubt but they take the Law of Christ, in
the same extended sense, as was before expressed: and then they differ from us
but in the forementioned notion. Answ. I do not understand your distinction
between the Law of nature, and the Law of Christ, as I have before largely told
you, and given in my reasons. You speak somewhat in that which follows, that
the Papists do not indeed take the Covenant or Law it self to command true
perfection, but that which they call perfection, which is no other then the
grace of Sanctification, as I expressed out of some of the chief of the
writers: But it is true perfection that those mean whom I now write against.
And so you conclude, that you see not the least ground for my first charge. But
you might observe what I further say in words more at large, then is here fit
to he repeated, purposely to prevent this objection, that they look upon this,
which we say is no more then Sanctification, as full Perfection; and such that
answers to the Law in the sense in which it was given. Our character of grace
inherent is their interpretation of the Law: and so they raise up men in a
conceit that they answer the Law, when they live in a continual breach of it.

2. I said, [If this opinion stand, then God accepts of Covenant-breakers, of
those that deal falsely in it, whereas Scripture charge it upon the wicked,
upon those of whom God complains, as rebellious, Deuteronomy. 29.25. Jos. 7.15. Jer.
11.10. and 22.8, 9.] etc. You answer, This charge proceeds merely from the
confounding of the duty as such, and the condition as such; And you proceed ex
non concessis, to charge me with this confusion; taking it for granted in the
words that follow, that a Covenant, which is also a Law, as well as a Covenant,
may by the preceptive part, constitute much more duty then shall be made the
condition of the promises. In which I conceive there is a double mistake. 1.
That a Covenant properly so called (of which we speak can be a Law in the
proper acceptance. For a covenant is of 2. parties, either of both concurring
to the constitution of it, and if it be a Law, both parties are as well
Lawgivers, as Covenant-makers. A Superior may impose a condition as by a Law,
but that is but one part of a Covenant. 2. That there is any duty in a
Covenant, that is not also of the Condition of it. I am sure in the Covenant of
Grace there is nothing duty, which is not a condition. Faith and Repentance are
conditions, and if you can tell me of any thing else which is matter of duty,
taking Repentance in its due latitude, viz. to cease to do evil, and learn to
do well, it will be a piece of a new Catechism with me; These you grant are
conditions, and this the [all] of a Christians duty. Whereas you say, If you
will speak so largely as to say, All who break the preceptive part of the
Covenant, are Covenant-breakers, then no doubt God accepts of many such, and
none but such -- for Whether we say, (say you) that the New Law commands
perfect obedience, or not, yet except you take it exceeding restrainedly, it
must be acknowledged, that the precept is of larger extent then the condition,
having appointed some duties which it has not made sine qua non to salvation.
Answ. I think God accepts of none that break the preceptive part of the
Covenant, in the sense, as the preceptive part of it qua Covenant, is to b^
understood; and as interpreters usually give as the meaning of it. God accepts
(that I know) none (to speak de adultis) but those that walk before him, and
are sincere. He neither accepts of profaneness, nor men of hypocritical
dissimulation. I know sincerity has its latitude, as perfection strictly taken
has not: An upright heart in temptations has many a great shock; but if you
can say, that the duty of the Covenant is so laid aside, that the heart is not
right in the sight of God, as Peter of Simon Magus, (which must be said if the
precept of sincerity and uprighthnesse be broke) then I do not know that there
is any acceptance. Simon Magus must be in another frame, before the thoughts of
his heart be forgiven him. And this I am confident is the thoughts of my
learned friend whom you mention, if I do not (as I think I do not) mistake the
man: And I have my reason for this confident opinion. And as I wonder at your
distinction betwixt the duty and condition of a Covenant, so I no less marvail
at your Simile. You tell me, If I send my Child a mile of an errand, and say, I
charge you, play not by the way, but make have, and do not go in the dirt, etc.
and if you come back by such an hour, I will give you such a reward; if not,
you shall be whipped; He that plays by the way and dirties himself; and yet
comes back by the hour appointed, does break the preceptive part, but not the
condition. Your distinction is between the preceptive part, and the condition
in a Covenant, and here you talk of a precept that is no part of the Covenant;
but if I put all within the Covenant, and say, Come again within an hour, not
playing, or dirtying your self; if he either out stay his hour, or play, or
run in the dirt, he forfeites his reward, and is at mercy for a whipping,
according to Covenant. You speak afterward of a man's breach of some particular
Covenant, which a man may do in a temptation; and yet as to the Covenant of
grace, be sincere.

3. I said, [Then it will follow, that as none can say, They have so answered
the command of the Law that they have never failed; So neither can they with
the Church make appeal to God that they have not dealt fasly in the Covenant,
Psalm. 44 17. Every sin (according to this opinion) being a breach of it, and a
dealing fasly in it.] You reply, This charge is as unjust as the former. I
confess it, and you giving no further reason, I shall sit down with the former
answer.

4. I said, [Then the great promise of mercy from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto Childrens Children to such
as keep his Covenant, and to those that remember his Commands to do them, Psalm.
103.17, 18. only appertains to those that keep the Law, that they sin not at
all against it.] You answer, It follows not: If they sincerely keep the Law,
they fulfill the conditions of the Covenant, though not the precept. And I say,
the precept of the Covenant goes no higher then sincerity: And I had thought
you had fully concurred with me. That Christ (say you) as the Mediator of the
new Covenant should command us not only sincere but perfect obedience to the
moral law; and so has made it a proper part of his Gospel, not only as a
directory and instruction, but also as a command, I am not yet convinced:
Adding, My reason is, because I know not to what end Christ should command us
that obedience which he never does enable any man in this life to perform.
Aphor. 157, 158. How these can be reconciled, I know not. I think none is
enabled through grace to be more then sincere: and then the precept of the
Covenant according to you requires no more. You further say, They keep the
precept in an improper, but usual sense, as keeping is taken for such a less
degree of breaking as on Gospel grounds is accepted. Answ. They keep it, if
they be sincere, in the sense as Christ the Mediator of the Covenant gave it,
and in as proper a sense as they keep the conditions.

5. I said, [Then our Baptism-vow is never to sin against God, and as often as
we renew our Covenant, we do not only humble our selves that we have sinned,
but we afresh bind our selves never more to commit the least infirmity.] To
this you answer, We do not promise in Baptism to do all that the precept of the
Covenant requires, but all that is made the condition of life, and to
endeavor the rest. I desire to know where you find this distinction as applied
to our Baptism-vow. You say page 79. of this Apology, that Baptized ones are to
renounce the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and that this abrenunciation
has been in the Church ever since the Apostles days, q^oting Tertullian,
Cyprian, and all antiquity for it. I would know whether Tertullian, Cyprian, or
any other eminent in ancient times, helped it out with your distinction, that
we engage to renounce them, not as duty, but as a condition to obtain
Salvation. This privative part of duty holding out the terminus a quo, in our
Christian motion, implies a positive work, which also was expressed in our
English Leiturgie, constantly to believe Gods holy word, and obediently keep
his commands; and confirmed by the Apostle to be our duty, To. 6.4. Buried with
him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of li^e. This
we vow, and I desire to know what more in any Gospel-precept is required?

6. I said, [then the distinction between those that enter Covenant, and break
it, as Jer. 31.32, 33. and those that have the Law written in their hearts, and
put into their inward parts to observe it, fall^: all standing equally guilty
of the breach of it; no help of grace being of power to enable to keep
Covenant.] To this you answer: When sincere obedience, The precept, and the
condition, in the Covenant of Grace, are one.
and perfect obedience, are all one, and when the precept, and the condition of
the Covenant are proved to be of equal extent, then there will be ground for
the charging of this consequence. I marvail how the first part of the answer
came into your thoughts. That Text of Jeremiah speaks to sincerity, and not to
perfection. For the second, sincerity is the precept, and since^ity is the
condition: sincerity is one and the same, and therefore precept and condision
are one and the same. That which we are to renounce, and that to which we
engage, is our condition. But that which we renounce, and that to which we
engage is the Gospel, or Covenant-precept: The precept and condition are
therefore the same. Faith and new obedience are the precept, Faith and new
obedience are the condition; The precept and condition are therefore one and
the same. So that your distinction falling, as I doubt not but it does, all my
arguments after the first to the last, eo nomine stand. You go about to evade
them all with this one distinction, which I leave to the judicious Reader to
determine, whether it be not without a difference.

But before I undertake your next, I have to thank you for that which you have
transcribed out of Robert Baronius, page 401. of your Confession. Treating in
an Appendix of the possibility of fulfilling the Law of God, considered
according to Gospel lenity, you tell us what his second assertion is, page 122.
which I desire the Reader to peruse, either in your book, or in the Author
himself: Where he may see, 1. That the Gospel is below the Law, as to the
degree that it requires. As to the one there is a possibility of fulfilling,
(according to him) and not so to the other. 2. That the obligation of the Law
yet remains, so that all failings are transgressions. 3. That it stands as a
Rule for us to affect, and with our best strength to endeavor after. 4. That
the Gospel requires a certain measure of obedience, on pain of eternal
damnation. This doubtless is that which is the condition of it. 5. That this
obedience thus required, is necessarily to be, as high as grace enables to
reach. In which we see in the first place, their distinction opposed, that say,
That the Gospel requires perfection, and accepts sincerity. The Gospel
according to him requires no more then it accepts, and for which grace enables.
And in the next place, your distinction of duty and condition, is by him
utterly overthrown, according to him, all comes within the condition, which is
matter of duty.

My last argument was, [Then it follows, that sincerity is never called for as
a duty, or required as a grace, but only dispensed with, as a failing, and
indulged, as a want. It is not so much a Christian's honor, or Character, as
his blemish; rather his defect, then praise. But we find the contrary in Noah,
Job, etc.] To this you reply, I will not say, it is past the wit of man to find
the ground of this charge, i. e. to see how this should follow; but I dare say,
it is past my wit. If it had been said, The Covenant commands perfection, and
not sincerity, or the Covenant accepts sincerity, but not commands it,
there would have been some reason for this charge. But do you think that
sincerity is no part of perfection, etc? Answ. My wit is so low, that I know
not where the cloud lies. I do not take sincerity to be properly a part of
perfection, but a degree toward it; as Calor ad unum, is a degree toward,
rather then a part of Calor ad octo, So the lower deg^ee of heat would remain,
when a higher is introduced, and not be swallowed up in it. And if the command
looks no lower then perfection in degree, the imperfect degree is not directly
commanded, though (according to these) it is in dulged. It is said Matthew.
12.20. that Christ will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking
Flax. Is that feeble strength, and remiss heat, there looked upon as a duty; or
rather is it not looked upon as a defect, or want? Is it not Christ's
indulgence, rather then the obedience of his command, that is there noted or
pointed out?

My answer to the single argument, (so far as I have read, or heard, against
that which I here delivered) follows. But, seeing that your reply, so far as I
can judge, is rather with me, then against me, as to the Position it self; and
your endeavor, rather to excuse, then defend those of the contrary opinion,
(which very well pleases me, for I wish that more were said for their honor,
so that the truth do not suffer) I am well content to pass it by, having a
greater desire to defend you, where you speak for truth, then my self, where
not truth, but my reputation is impugned: And shall make it my business to look
into that, which Mr. Crandon has against you in it. Concerning the second,
that the Gospel does require but sincere, Mr. Crandons arguments answered.
not perfect obedience, which is both your assertion and mine, he says, What
shall we think of those Texts in the new Testament, which require us to be
perfect? 2 Cor. 13.11 Jam. 1.4. Yea perfect as God is perfect, Matt. 5.48.
reproving weakness and infirmity, and commanding a going on to perfection.
Answ. We are to think of them as Protestant Divines ordinarily do in their
commenting upon them; We deny, says Rivet, that the perfection of which
Scripture speaks, either when it commands us to be perfect, or gives testimony
of perfection, or integrity to some, consists in a freedom from sin, Exercit.
52. in Genes. page 267. The Text quoted out of James, serves well to explain
the rest, Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting, nothing, whence we may argue, 1. That perfection which
Christians may attain, is the perfection that the Apostle calls unto, This is
plain in the Text, he calls for perfection, that we may perfect: But Christians
can reach no further a degree in perfection then sincerity; Therefore the
Apostle calls only to sincerity. 2. That is the Apostles meaning, where he
speaks of perfection, that himself gives in as his meaning; This is clear, he
is the best interpreter of himself. But he expresses himself by perfect there
to mean entire, or lacking nothing. A perfection of entireness, or integrality
then he means, a perfection of parts, and not of degrees. For that Text of
Paul, 2 Cor. 13.11. Finally brethren, farewell, be perfect, etc. let us compare
with it, that which he testifies of some in Corinth. 1 Cor. 2.6. Howbeit we
speak wisdom among them that are perfect, that is, those that have a right and
more full understanding of Gospel mysteries, put in opposition to the weakness
of novices, which perfection is, (according to the Apostle) the way to unity of
judgment. As for the Text, Matthew. 5.48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father
which is in heaven is perfect, If it be streined to the highest, it calls for a
divine, increated perfection, Mr. Crandon then must yield, that there is a
sicut similitudinis, non aequalitatis, in that place. And if the context be
consulted, we shall find, that it is opposed to that half-hypocriticall
righteousness, which was found in Scribes and Pharisees; which all must exceed
that enter into the Kingdom of heaven. In Heb. 6.1. a novice-like imperfection
in knowledge, is reproved; and a further growth toward perfection is called
for.

Mr. Crandon goes on, If perfection were not the duty of a Christian, and
unperfectness, and infirmity his sin, why does the Apostle groan, and grieve
under the remainder of his natural infirmities, and press on to perfection,
Romans 7.14. to the 24. Phil. 3.12, 14? The conclusion here is granted; the one
is a duty, the other is a sin, and because of failing in the one, and the
burden of the other, the Apostle groans. Foreseeing that this would be yielded
him, he adds by way of objection, Or is such unperfectness a sin only in
reference to the rule of the Law, and not the Rule of the Gospel, or that the
Law does, but the Gospel does not call for perfection? Answ. There is not one
rule of the Law, as I have demonstrated at large, and another of the Gospel,
seeing the Gospel establishes the Law; only the Gospel Covenant calls for
those sincere desires, which grace works to conform in its measure to the Rule
of the Law. He adds. This is both contrary to the Scriptures alleged, and
does withal make the Gospel to allow imperfections. But both of these have
been already answered. What he further adds, answers it self, save only his
great pains to pump out your meaning. But I shall leave you to be your own
interpreter, and forbear in this to interpose between you.

Thus I have passed through (Grace assisting) those things, wherein our
judgments differ, as also those in which we agree in one. Some other things
there are, which both of us problematically enquire into; which Sect. 56, 57,
58. You treat of, under this title [ Of the life promised, and death threatened
to Adam, in the first Law.] In which neither you, nor I, (as I think) see any
important difference; and in them I must confess, that you deal with much
candor; though there be some things in them, to which I might speak my
differing thoughts, yet I shall forbear further to be the Readers trouble, and
leave all to enjoy their own judgment.

SECT. IX. The conclusion of the whole, with an enquiry into the judgment of
Antiquity about several things in reference to justification.
AS you have saluted me in a Prologue, so you are pleased in your close, in a
particular address, to take your leave, In which, among other things, you wish
me not to suppose, that you judge of all the rest of my book, as you do of
this that you have replied to. Telling me, tha you value the Wheat, while you
help to weed out the tares. I am glad that I have your approbation in any
thing, and I hope you will not be offended that I mind you, that in this work
of weeding out Tares, you stand in danger to weed out the Wheat also. It is
said by some, that the tares in those parts, carried so near resemblance with
the Wheat, that they could hardly be distinguished. I am sure, that if I had
judged the least nature of a Tare to have been in any of that which you have
gone about to weed out, it never had been sown there; and I did believe, that I
was rather weeding, then sowing Tares, when I was upon the work you examine. I
dare not brand all that seed with the name of Tare^, which is not pure Wheat.
In a Corn field, there are seeds of a middle nature, Not pure Corn, nor yet
such, that like Tares are dangerously prejudicial to overtop, and destroy the
Corn; whether they be Tares, or Wheat, or other seed of a middle nraure, we
must both leave to the judgment of the Mast^r of the harvest. You speak of a
Pardon in the next place for your onfident concluding me in an error, and your
self in the truth; In which I have all reason (if that must pass as a fault,
needing Pardon) to be facile; seeing I need it from you, as well, as you from
me; Though I am not in expectation of like credence as you (your name with
some, being enough to put in balance against all the Arguments that another
hand can produce) yet I believe, that I am as far above scruples. As I have not
heard, that your elaborate replies, to those learned friends, that in private
have given in their animadversions, have given them such satisfaction, as to
change their judgments; so I confess it fares with me; And when either of us
stand this way opinionated, no other course can be taken, then that which you
mention, either to leave the other, and both of us, all others, to judge by the
evidence of arguments on both sides, with what part the truth rests. I have
made it my business in most points of difference, to enlarge my self further
with arguments then before I judged to be needful. I doubt not but they will
undergo different censures. I shall not much matter what on the sudden will
be voyced, but shall rather weigh (if God prolong life) what after a few years
will be more generally thought. Neither shall I in the mean time assume the
boldness to charge you with any error, you have herein forestalled me, in the
preface of your Confession, in your enumeration of those qualifications, which
you expect in any that shall attempt it. 1. That he be a man of a stronger
judgment, and of a more discerning head; and not one of those that Nazianz.
describes, Orat. 1. and (after Page 453.) think themselves wise enough to be
teachers, or contradict others, when they have got two or three words of
Scripture: Nor such as have not wit for an ordinary business, and yet think
thy can master the deepest controversies. He that thinks to do this without a
peircing wit (as well as grace) ordinarily thinks to see without eyes. 2. That
he be one that has longer, and more diligently and seriously exercised himself
in these studies, then I have done. 3. That he be one more free from prejudice
and partiality then I am. 4. That he have more of the illumination of Gods
Spirit, which is the chief. 5. That he have a more sanctified heart, that he
may not be led away by wrong ends, or blinded by his vices. It is not for me
here to enter comparison; There being but one piece, of one of them, in which I
can speak any such priority, I have been longer ( I think) exercised in these
studies, which is all that I have to plead, and I wish it had been with more
serious diligence; It is my way then to keep silence; Though many may think
that you are scarce serious, in judging all of these to be necessary
requisites, in any that shall take upon them such boldness; seeing you seem not
to tie your self up to this Rule, in your dealings with others. You are pleased
sometimes to say, that you should have little modesty, or humility, if you
should not think more highly of the understanding of many Reverend and Learned
Brethren, who dissent from you (in several points debated between you and me)
then of your own: Yet who is it, of all these, that you do not charge with
error? Yea where is there the man, almost in the world, that hears not that
charge from your pen? More then once you charge error, on Reverend Dr. Twisse,
Prolocutor (while he lived) of the late Assembly; in speaking for justification
of of Infidels (as you call it,) and making it an immanent act in God, warning
younger Students to be wary in their Reading of him. In whose behalf Mr. Jessop
has stood up as an advocate, not pleading justification in his name, but not
guilty; In which I shall not interpose. My judgment in the thing is
sufficiently known. You charge the Assembly that set him up in that honor, in
like sort; entering your dissent from their larger Catechism in four passages,
from their confession in six, desiring only indeed, a liberty of expounding,
but in several of them you well know that your exposition was none of their
meaning, which you do not obscurely signify, in the different expression of
your self, in your dissent from them, and from the Synod of Dort. You charge
the pious Ministry of this Nation in general (out of whom that Assembly was
gathered) in the Preface of your Confession, with error in their thoughts about
Church Discipline, and if information do not deceive me, as full an Assembly of
Learned, and pious Ministers, as Conveniently live for such a meeting together,
in any part of the Nation, after a full debate of that which you charge as an
error, determined it against you. Lastly, you charge the whole reforming party
of Divines, with four great errors, as we have seen in your Apology, page 16.
Now for a man to think, that you judge your self above all these, in this
gradation mentioned, in every one of those enumerated qualifications, were
indeed to challenge, both your humility and modesty. Your Readers then must
conclude, that either you were not serious in your List given in; or else you
take liberty to transgress your own Rules, and set upon that work your self,
which you will not allow in others. After quotation of several passages of the
Fathers (with which all must vote) you seem to prefer one of Austin above all,
contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturas nemo Christianus, contra
ecclesiam nemo pacificus; Making that application of this, as you have done of
none of the other, That in the point of faiths instrumentality, and the nature
of the justifying act, taking in afterward the interest of man's obedience in
justication, as it is consummate in judgment, you are constrained upon all
these three grounds to give in your dissent. I can persuade none to abjure
Christianity, renounce reason, and make a schism in the Church (as it seems
you think you must do) to come over to me; and yielding (as clearly enough you
do) that I have this little corner of the world, wheresoever Protestants dwell,
for an hundred and fifty years past on my side, sure you stand amazed, that
none of all these men, in so long a space of time, can either be brought to the
sight of reason, or to a right understanding of Scriptures, or yet to return
to that unity, from which they have in so foul a Schism departed. These points,
on the two first grounds, have been brought already (as well as I can do it) to
the test; In which you see, my reason against yours; and my sense of
Scriptures, against that which you have given; The third only does remain to
be enquired into, and I cannot yet believe that the Church is my adversary. And
here you seem to put me fairly to it. If you will bring (say you) one sound
reason, one word of Scripture, or one approved writer of the Church, (yea or
one Heretic, or any man whatsoever) for many hundred years after Christ (I
think I may say 1300. at least) to prove that Christ, as Lord, or King, is not
the object of the justifying act of faith, or that faith justifies properly as
instrument, I am contented so far to lose the reputation of my reason,
understanding, reading, and memory. You speak this, you say, because I tell
you, there was scarce a dissenting voice among our Divines against me about the
instrumentality of faith, and if (say you) there cannot be brought one man that
consents with them for 1200. or 1400. years after Christ, I pray you tell me,
whom an humble and modest peaceable man should follow? Answ. For reason, or
Scripture, I shall bring no more then I have done, I think you may see both, in
that which I have already written. The Churches testimony only now remains to
be looked after, whether you, or I can lay the fairer claim; and here you
distinguish of it. 1. As it was for the first 1200, 1300, 1400 years after
Christ, for you name all of these Periods. 2. As it has been for 150. years
now past. The Church for one full hundred years at least, it seems by you,
stood Newter, viz. from 1400. to 1500. The Church for this little scantling of
time, viz. for 150. years is not denied by you to vote with me, if the
Protestant party to which you join in communion, may deserve that name. But for
all that space as before, it was (as you pretend) unanimously yours; at well
the Orthodox, as the Heretical party in it. Here, for further discovering of
truth, two things should be enquired into. 1. Whether he, more worthily
deserves the name of an enemy of the Churches peace, that dissents in judgment
from the Church in some particulars, as in ages past it was; or he that
confessedly dissents from the Church whereof he is, and where he lives, and as
that present, it stands? I think, here the determination is easy; Let us
enquire whether of these dissents will work more heart-broyles, quarrels,
contentions, envyings, mutual oppositions, and needless disputes, and let that
be agreed upon (as well it may) to bear the blame. If all must be tied up to
keep peace, and be at one with the Church, as to all particular tenants, in the
revolution of all these ages, they are then tied to know, and their Pastors are
bound to teach, what in all successive ages has been the Churches opinion. But
this were a great burden for Pastors, and far more intolerable to be put upon
the people. If a man may be secure in this, that he goes not against truth, I
think he need not trouble himself as to ages past, in the matter of peace. Had
you produced the vote of Antiquity, as a probable inducement to persuade, that
you had truth according to Scripture, and reason, on your part, it had been
somewhat, such appeals to humane Authority, after Divine Testimony produced, is
ordinary; but to dissent from the Church, in which a man lives, and of which he
is, to avoid the danger of a breach of peace, with the Church that sometimes
was, is such a way of peace, that I never yet knew trodden, or taken: 2. Whether
Antiquity be as clear for you, as the Church in present is for me? The latter
you freely grant, but the former will, I think, hardly be yielded,
notwithstanding what you say, Because a word, or an opinion, that is unsound,
has got possession of a little corner of the world for about 150 years;
therefore I am suspected as a novelist, for forsaking it. Whereas it is to
avoid singularity, and notorious novelty, that I assent not to your way. The
same I say about the interest of man's obedience, in his justification, as
continued, and consummate in judgment. If either Clemens Roman. Polycarp.
Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Athenagoras, Tatianus,
Clem. Alexand. Minutius Faelix, Arnobius, Lactantius, Cyprian, Athanasius,
Eusebius, Greg. Nazianzen, Epiphanius, Cyrill Hierosol. Synesius, Cyrill
Alaxandr. Macarius, Hierome, Salvian, Vincentius Lirin. Vigilius, or any
council were of your mind in any one of these points, and against mine, then I
will confess, at least my supine negligence in Reading, and my very faulty
Memory, in retaining their words. How fully you have proved the unfoundness,
either of the word, or opinion in question, others must judge, But whether the
novelty be so notorious, as you speak, is to be enquired into, and in order to
that, I shall request you,

Some things propounded to the Readers consideration
To take into consideration who they be that make the loudest noise, and send
out the greatest Cracks about the Fathers; If the Church of Rome may be
believed, all Antiquity is theirs. Hoping to put that cheat upon us, as the
Gibeonites sometimes did upon Israel, Ad patres si quando licebit accedere,
confectum est praelium; Tam sunt omnes nostri quam Gregorius 13. Papa, filiorum
ecclesiae amantissimus Pater. Testes fenestrae and omnes res and reculae.
It is still their pretense that all former ages were on their side. If we
might but appeal to the Fathers (says Campian) the controversy were ended,
They are all as fully ours, (says he) as Pope Gregory the 13. that most Loving
father of the Sons of the Church. As the windows in the Church and all other
things and thinglings (to take the liberty to coin English as he does Latin)
are their witnesses, So all the Fathers also, that the truth is with them. I
will say no more, but that these naked names will appear to Judicious Readers,
but as an empty sound; a voice and nothing more.

2. That some of untainted integrity, and of no less ability to give account
of the Judgment of Antiquity, in these controversies, have asserted the full
contrary to that, which you here with so much confidence deliver. Chemnitius
was a man differing from you, in every piece of this doctrine, in which you
dissent from me, and particularly your adversary in all these three points in
which you make this appeal to former ages. He is a man zealous for the
instrumentality of Faith in Justification, he is large in asserting the promise
of mercy in Christ, to be the special object of Justifying Faith; and against
your distinction of Justification, begun by Faith alone, and consummate by
works; yea, there is not a man that ever wrote, that appears more your
adversary in this point then he, being judged the most learned, grave, and
moderate of that party in the Reformed Churches, wherewith you are most
displeased, in this Controversy, yet he is full in quotation of Antiquity as
of his side, both in his Common places and in his Examination of the Council of
Trent, 144. After a List of authorities brought by him, his close is worth
observation, Haec pauca ideo annotavi, ut ostenderem doctrinam nostram de
Justificatione, habere testimonia omnium piorum qui omnibus temporibus fuerunt:
idque non in declamatoriis rhetoricationibus, nec in otiosis disputationibus,
sed in seriis exercitiis poenitentiae and fidei, quando conscientia in
tentationibus cum sua indignitate, vel coram ipso judicio Dei, vel in agone
mortis luctatur. Hoc enim solo modo, rectissime intelligi potest doctrina de
justificatione sicut in Scriptura traditur. Quaeres put concerning this Appeal.
These few (says he) I have noted, that it may appear that our doctrine of
Justification, is attested by all the Godly of all ages, that have lived in all
times, and that not in their Rhetorical declamations, or vain disputes, but
in their serious exercises of Repentance and Faith, in their Conflicts of
conscience in temptation, or with their own unworthiness, or before the
Tribunal of God, or in the Agony of death: For this way (says he) the doctrine
of Justification as it is delivered in Scripture, can alone rightly be
understood. What can be now more contrary then his Testimony and yours? how
high are both your confidences in full contradiction one against another. That
which you say is a notorious novelty, he says, has the attestation of all
antiquity; who shall he now believe, that has not, nor cannot search the
Authors themselves, that have lived in your 1300. or 1400. years?

3. I would have you to take into serious consideration these following Quaeres.

1. Whether the doctrine of those that bore the name, and outward face of the
Church, was uniforme, through out that whole series of time that you take in,
in you^ challenge? Whether in the time of Thomas Aquinas, and the following
ages, the doctrine concerning Justification, in the Latin Church, was the same
as in the days of Tertullian, Cyprian, and Austine? If so, then the doctrine
of merit, in the highest way, as it is now taught in the Ch^^^^ of Rome, was
delivered by the Fathers; and the oppositio^^ (...) is, as notorious a novelty,
as this of the instrumen^ (...) ^f Faith, or justifying act, by you is
pretended. How high Aquinas is for merit, as also his followers, all that cast
their eyes upon him may soon see: And in case in this time, a change
intervened, and a new way be introduced, you were not so advised to jumble
together so many ages of so different a complexion, even Lombard himself was
not the same man, as Schoolmen that in some ages followed him.

2. Whether there be any important change in the doctrine of Justification in
the Church of Rome, since that time that closes up your account, viz. ann.
1400. to this day? As I take it, their doctrine is substantially the same now,
as it was in Aquinas his age, and some time before him. The Council of Trent
laid down the same doctrine in this thing, that their Doctors had of several
ages held. And though they put upon it their sanction, yet they made no
sensible variation, as they expressly declare themselves, Sess. 6. Cap. 8. And
the present Church of Rome, rigidly adheres to it. It being therefore the same
for 1400. years time, as the most Ancient Fathers taught, yea as Christ and his
Apostles delivered (as afterward you take the boldness to assert) and the
same now as it was then, The doctrine of Rome in the doctrine of Justification
is now the same, as Christ and his Apostles left it, Being faithfully kept by
Fathers, Schoolmen, determined by the Council of Trent, and now maintained by
Jesuits and their adhaerents. This is too clearly by you implied; If it be
indeed your thoughts that there is none or very little difference betwixt us
and them in this point, see how much you dissent from your learned friend, Mr.
Gataker, where he tells you in his second letter, of that great difference that
is between us, and the Papists in the Doctrine of Justification: As I hear you
bring in the name of reverend Mr. Ball to give honor to this, that the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, and the Reformed Churches is one and the same,
or inconsiderably differing, in this of Justification; which you speak (as you
say) being so informed, and I believe you have heard as much. For many years
before his death, I heard it from an eminent hand, and acquainted Mr. Ball with
it, who with much ^xpression of trouble of Spirit, that it should be so voyced,
disclamed if, and afterward in his Treatise of Faith (not then published) and
his posthumus work of the (...) ^nt, has given to the world sufficient
testimony against (...) ^his b^uit perhaps, gave occasion to that which Mr.
Cran^^ ^nconsid^rately vented, and you have so praise-worthily vindicated, and
I judge it necessary that this of mine own knowledge (as being an ear witness)
should be added.

3. Whether the Fathers that you mention, and others their contemporaries that
you do not name, were so distinct, as might be desired, in and about the word
Justification, and other words of concernment touching this controversy?
Though as to the thing it self they speak according to the Scriptures; when
they speak of Justification, Reconcilliation, Remission, yet so far as I have
read, and find in the observation of others, they too usually confound the word
Justification and Sanctification together (which you declare your self at least
to dislike in others) making it not verbum forense, as you yield it is, but
rather relating to our inhaerent habitual Righteousness, whereby we are not
pronounced, and acquitted as just, upon the merit of Christ, (which otherwise
they orthodoxly own) but habitu^lly so, and therefore so denominated; Being
said to be Justified, because of unjust we are made just, which is the work of
Sanctification, and implies a real, and not a relative change, such as is
found in Justification; And if some terms of theirs need amendment, upon
further inquiry into this doctrine, then why not others?

4. Whether it be the word only when you speak of the instrumentality of Faith,
or Faith in Christ qua Lord, not to be the justifying act, or the thing it self
that you intend, in that so large challenge of yours? If it be the want of the
words only [ instrument, or qua Lord] that you mention, your charge is very
low, upon several accounts. 1. Words of art of this nature are seldom found
in the Fathers. There are few discourses in them about causes, whether
Efficient, Final, Material, Formal, Isntrumental, neither are there any, so
exact logical distinctions, under what notion they take that, which they are
upon in their writings; Words of this kind were brought in by Schoolmen, and
little use made of them, as I think, before Lombards days. Protestant writers
finding them in the Church, are necessitated to make use of them, as well that
their adversaries may understand them, as with their own weapons to deal with
them, And the Schoolmen having found another instrument in Justification, viz.
Baptism (as appears ^y the determination of the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. Cap.
7.) it is no marvel that when the Fathers use not the word at all, that these
do not so use it, as it ought according to Scriptures. 2. You would be (I doubt
not) as much wanting in making proof of the use of your own terms among the
Fathers, as your adversaries of theirs; we may find the word [instrument] and
the restrictive particle [qua] in your twenty six Fathers, ascribed to Faith in
Justification, as often as you can find your causa sine qua non, or, as I think,
your conditio cum qua. We may likewise find that distinction of fides qua, and
fides qua, which you make the general cheat, as often as you can find your
distinctions already examined, which Page 3. Sect. 1. you heap together; When
you challenge the words of others, as novel; it lies upon you, to assert the
antiquity of your own. If it be the thing it self, that you challenge, as not
found in any Authors in this Compass of time, I believe you will not be found
so happy in your defense of this provocation, as B. Jewel was in the defense
of his, that he published at Paul's Cross. I do not doubt but many Authors in
this time ascribe that office to Faith, and the whole of it, that the
Protestant Churches make the isntrumental work, and that they assign the same
specificall object of Faith, in the work of Justification, as is by the
Reformed Churches now asserted.

5. To acquaint us how many of the Fathers, by you mentioned, have purposely
treated upon, and particulary spoken to, this doctrine of Justification, and in
what part of their works this subject is by them thus handled, that they that
do not know it may turn and read it; I have a considerable part of those that
you mention, though some of them, I confess, I have not seen, as Polycarp,
Tatianus, Macarius, Athenagoras, Vigilius, as I have several others that you
mention not; and I would feign see what they have, either for or against the
Protestant belief. Those that have not treated at all on this subject (as in
some of them that you name, I am told by Dr. Prideaux that Christ is scarce
mentioned) or have spoken upon it, only be the [by] are as much as nothing,
their names might as well have been spared as mentioned. Mr. T. has done as
much for his Antipadobaptism, in naming some of the Ancients that never
appeared for Infant Baptism, when they have not at all spoken to it, and their
contemporaries have asserted it.

6. Whether the present Church of this age, in which we live (taking in our
Fathers that lived within this happy 150. years, since the Romish yoke has
been cast off) be not as considerable, and as much to be heeded in this
controversy, as all of those in your list mentioned, if you should put in, yet
more to increase (so far as names could do it) both weight and number? They
were subject to error, and humane frailty, as well as the Church that is, and
of late was. They were not able to decide their own Controversies, but
labored, as well as we, under contentions, and divisions; they were seldom
unanimous, but often at difference, not only with others, but themselves; Nay
have not our Writers the far greater advantage? 1. Being far above yours in
number; go through Protestant Learned Writers within this Compass of time, and
we shall find your List of names far exceeded. 2. They have fully debated the
cause, and in public Assemblies determined it, in Confessions openly professed
it, Considered of, and answered arguments against it, turning over every stone
to find out the truth in it, so it cannot be said of the Fathers in your List
mentioned, and Nil tam certum, quam quod ex dubio certum. The Fathers that
wrote before Pelagius have not been thought of that account, nor so meet
Judges, in the point of Grace and Freewill, (having no adversary, and therefore
spoke more loosly) as Austin, Prosper, Fulgentius, and those that followed, who
were by the adversary put upon the study of it; Quid opus est ut eorum
scrutemur opuscula, qui priusquam ista haeresis oriretur, non haebuerunt
necessitatem in hac aifficili ad solvendum quaestione versari, quod proculdubio
facerent, si respondere talibus cogerentur?
The greatest Doctors at some times, (says Dr. Fr. White Treat: of the Sabb.
p. 89.) before Errors and Heresies are openly defended, are not, neither can be
so circumspect in their writing, as to avoid all forms and expressions, all
sentences and propositions, all and every tenet, which in after times, may
yield advantage to the adversaries of truth. Quoting Austin de Praed. Sanct.
cap. 14. To what purpose should we search into their works, which before this
heresy arose, had not need to busy themselves in the answer of this difficult
question? which doubtless they had done, if they had been put to deal with such
adversaries? This we may fitly apply to this point of justification, we are
beholding the opposites of it, for a more industrious fifting of it, and more
clear light in it. Paul had never spoke so much to assert a resurrection, had
there been none in that age that had denied it. H^d not Popish Schoolmen
perverted the doctrine of justification, Protestant Divines had never appeared
with that zeal, and fervor of Spirit in it. And the Fathers doubtless had been
more exact in their Treatises of this point, had they seen it, (as we have
done,) perverted and abused.

7. If Fathers, and all Antiquity were so abhorrent from the instrumentality of
faith in justification, How is it probable that any singularly verst in
Antiquity, so, as to have few parallels, and no way affected to the Protestant
doctrine in the point of justification, but averse from it, and siding with the
adversary, should own the instrumentality of faith, and argue for it? if
Antiquity were so averse from it, he that takes it up, is sure either ignorant
in Antiquity, or much engaged in his affections to the Protestant party: But
such there have been, that can neither be challenged as ignorant, nor suspected
for partial engagement, that yet assert the instrumentality of faith, witness
Bp. Montague. In whatsoever he has otherwise been thought defective, and
detected by Bp. Carleton, Dr. Featley, and others, yet he has ever been of
eminent name for an Antiquary. For his averseness to the Protestant Doctrine of
justication, let not only his adversaries speak, that have appeared against
him, but Sanct. Clara our adversary, who Problem. 26. quotes Montagues Appeal,
Chap. 6. to prove, the justification of a sinner consists in the inward work of
grace inherent, agreeable, as he says, with the holy definition of the
Council of Trent. Now that this great Antiquary, and friend of our
adversaries, appears for the instrumentality of faith in the work of
justification, see his Appeal, cap. 9. part. 2. putting it into his title, that
God does justify originally, and faith isntrumental, and reasons for it in
the Chapter it self.

These things being pr^mised, as to the first, concerning the Instrumentality
of Faith, Proofs from antiquity for the instrumentality of faith.
I thus argue. They that are for justification alone by faith, without limit,
or distinction, as excluding all whatsoever else in man, they are for that
which we call the instrumentality of faith in justification; But Antiquity is
very large for justification alone by faith, without limit, or distinction, as
excluding all in man, except faith, in this work; Therefore Antiquity is for
that which we call the instrumentality of faith in justification. Here the
Proposition is first to be proved, and then the Assumption. The Proposition I
^hus prove. To be justified by faith alone plainly holds forth somewhat
peculiar to faith, which is not found in any other grace; this none can deny,
and you confess, page 96. of your Confession, Conclus. 29. But nothing else can
be faiths peculiar work, distinct from other graces, but to be an instrument in
this work; This is clear. This peculiar work, or office of faith must be,
either to be an instrument in this work, or else a Conditio cum qua, or, causa
sine qua non, or else somewhat more noble then all of these, as the formal
meritorious cause, etc. But its peculiar office cannot be merely to be Conditio
cum qua, or, causa sine qua non, both these equally belong to the works of
Sanctification; Though they be all present together (says our Book of
homilies) yet they do not justify together, page 15. At the same instant that
God justifies, says Davenant, he infuses inhaerent grace, which yet he denies
to be any cause, but an Appendix to our justification, de Justit. habit. cap.
23. page 315. Bellarmine says, That Protestants agree in this, that good work
are not necessary to Salvation, but only by a necessity of presence, lib. 4.
de justit. cap. 7. That necessity by his confession Protestants then
acknowledge, and he intends justification, as is plain by the Subject he has
in hand. Here then is nothing peculiar to faith, to be merely conditio cum qua,
or causa sine qua non, Neither can we ascribe any more noble causality, as to
be a formal, or meritorious cause, as needs not to be proved. The asserting of
justification by faith therefore, denotes that which we make an instrument in
justification. Now that the Ancients assert, that we are justified alone by
faith, putting in that exclusive particle, that Papists are wont to say, is not
in Scriptures, nor Fathers, may be made good, 1. By manifold authorities
asserting it. 2. By multitude of quotations. Our Book of Homilies, having
quoted several Scripture-Texts for justification by faith alone, adds, And
after this-wise to be justified only by this true and lively faith in Christ,
speaks all the old, and Ancient Authors, both Greek and Latin, Ser. of
Salvation, par. 2. page 16. And the Rhemists charging Protestants to foist the
word [onely] into the Text, in Romans 3.28. Fulk replies. You were best to charge
all the Ancient Fathers which use this term, of whom we have received it, to be
Foysters, and excluders of the Sacraments, and good works. The particle [alone
by faith] in the article of justification, was not first devised by us, says
Chemnitius, but was always used with great consent in all Antiquity, as
examples out of the writings of the Fathers do demonstrate, which sentences of
the Fathers, says he, are gathered by Robert Barnes, Aepinus, Bullinger, Otho
Corberus, etc. Loc. de justif. page 772. Octavo. And Chamier Panstrat. Cathol.
Tom. 3. lib. 22. c. 5. having quoted Scripture, that faith alone justifies,
concludes, so the Scripture is clear with us; The Fathers in order are to be
reckoned up by me, before I examine the exceptions of adversaries. The
induction of quotations yet remains, and I had it in my thoughts, to have set
down the words themselves (which for the most part are very express) but I find
that that would be tedious to my self, and wearisome to the Reader, and diverse
of the Authors quoted to my hands I have not, I shall content my self therefore
to point out the Authors, quoting them, and the places quoted. Ambrose in Roman
1. Romans 3. Romans 4. Romans 20. 1 Cor. 1. Galat. 1. Galat. 3. and Sermon. 45. (if
it be Ambroses) is quoted by Chemnitius in the place mentioned, who says, that
Ambrose repeats that exlusive particle [onely] fifteen times. By Eckhardus
Compend. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 3. page 391. By Chamier loco citato, Hilary lib 6.
de Trinit. Can. 8. in Matthew. 21. is quoted by Chemnitius ibid. Fulk in Romans
3.28. Chamier, ibid. Davenant, and Prideaux lect. 5. Hieron. in Romans 4. Romans
10. in Galat. 2. Galat. 3. is quoted by Chamier, and Eckhardus, ibid. Origin
lib. 3. in Romans cap. 3. and lib. 4. is quoted by Fulk, Eckhardus, and Chamier
ibid. Chrysostom in 1. Cor. 1 Romans 3. Hom. 7. in Tit. 2. Hom. 3. Romans 4. Hom.
8. Galat. 3. Sermon. de side and lege naturae, is quoted by Chamier, Eckhardus,
Fulk, Davenant de Justit. habit. cap. 29. page 378. and Prideaux Lect. 5. page
164. Athanasius Orat. contra Arrianos is quoted by Eckhardus ibid. Basil Hom.
de humil. 51. is quoted by Fulk, Eckhardus, Chamier, Davenant ibid. Nazianzen.
Orat. 22.26. is quoted by Fulk, Eckhardus, Chamier ibid. Theodoret in Romans 3.
Ephesians. 2. is quoted by Eckhardus, as also Therapeuticon Sept. by Chamier.
Bernard Sermon. 22. in Cant. Epist. 27. is quoted by Chamier, Eckhardut, Isychius
in Levit. 14. lib. 4. is quoted by Chamier, and Eckhardus. Theophilact in
Galat. 3. is quoted by Chamier, and Chemnitius. Sedulius in Romans 3. Romans 4. is
quoted by Chamier, and Chemnitius. Primasius in Romans 4. Romans 8. is quoted by
Chamier, and Eckhardus. Victor. Mar. lib. 3. in Gens. is quoted by Eckhard.
Fulk in Romans 4. Petrus Chrysologus Ser. 34. Prosper. Aquitan. Epigram. 9. are
quoted by Chamier. Ruffinus is quoted by Fulk. Beda in Psalm. 77. page 71. by
Davenant, and Bp Usher de statu and success. Eccles. cap. 2. page 46. Gennadius
in Romans 3. Haymo in Romans 1. Lyra in Galat. 3. Gloss. Ordinaria in Epist. Jac.
is quoted by Chemnitius. Theodolius in Romans 3. Fortunatus in Expos. Symboli,
Epiphanius in Ancor. Phylast. in Catal. Irenaeus adversus Haeres. lib. 4.
Haeres. 5. Maxentius de fide, are quoted by Eckhardus. And because Papists say,
that Austin uses not this exclusive particle [onely] therefore Chemnitius tells
us, that it is used by him, in Sermon. Quadrages. as also in his exposition of
these words, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness, which is in his 68. Sermon. de tempore lin. 1. also Tractat. 8.
Tractat. 42. in Johan. Contra duas Epistol. Petil. lib. 3. Sermon. 40. de verbis
domini, Chamier adds, In octoginta tribus quaestionibus Quaest. 76. Exposit.
in Galat. 3. Chemnitius having quoted these testimony (that I have mentioned
under his name) adds, we may then truly say with Erasmus, that this word
[sole] which is followed with so great clamours in this age in Luther, is
reverently read, and heard, in the Fathers. So that we see a peculiar interest,
that faith has in justification, which belongs to no other grace; And
therefore it is no wonder, that you who forsake all the reformed Churches, that
unanimously make it an instrument in justification, are at such a stand as you
are in Conclus. 29. and 30. of your Confession, what office in justification,
to assign to it; you confess you cannot hit upon the true and full difference
in the point of Conditionality, in this work between says and obedience; which
is no marvail, seeing you oppose that which is indeed the difference, and
Faiths peculiar office; which is, the isntrumental interesting us in Christ;
by way of acceptance, or apprehension, as Isychius in the place quoted says,
Sola fide apprehenditur, non ex operibus.
The grace (viz. of justification) is apprehended by faith, and not by works,
which is as plain a testimony as may be, for the instrumentality of this grace.
Chemnitius yet further notes the way that Papists take to evade these
testimonies. Objecting that the Ancients used that particle [sole] otherwise
then we do, and returns his answer.

1. That they use the word sole, or alone, to exclude all other sects;
intending no more, but that it is alone the Christian Faith, and not the
Jewish, or Turkish, that leads to Justification and Salvation. And this rule
Franc. a Sancta Clara produces from Vega, Page 191. with no other approbation,
but that it is sometimes true, and Chemnitius quite overthrowes it, making it
appear, that when the Fathers speak of the application, apprehension, or
acceptance of remission of sins by Faith, they still oppose it to works, and
not to other sects, giving clear instances.

2. They object. That in the use of this particle [sole] the Fathers exclude
all works going before Faith, and Regeneration, and denying only, that the
works of Infidels, and unregenerate, do justify. This Rule Franc. a Sanctae ^
Clara does produce out of Casalius, but plainly enough signifies, that it will
not satisfy. This Chemnitius also overthrowes, by several clear testimonies
out Origin, and Ambrose.

3. They object. That by the particle [sole] the Fathers do exclude ceremonial
works, and not all works, which indeed is unworthy of answer, the Law of
Ceremonies, being antiquated before their days.

4. Seeing none of these will hold, Franc. a Sancta Clara produces another
Rule out of Aquinas, Quando aliquod commune multis tribuitur specialiter
alicui, illud provenit, aut quia in illo excellentissime reperitur, aut quia
primo reperitur.
in Quaest. de veritate, Quaest. 14. artic. 5. ad 12. When any thing that is
common to many, is attributed specially to one, that comes to pass, either
because it is most eminent, or because it is first in it, which Rule might
serve with some reason as applied to this purpose, for answer both to
Scripture-texts, and testimonies of Fathers, in case they only said, that we
are Justified by Faith. But when the Scripture does not barely give it to
Faith, but denies it to works; and the Fathers do not only say that Faith
Justifies, but that Faith only Justifies, and particularly exclude works, this
Rule therefore can do nothing here. So that I conclude, that Faith has its
office in Justification, which other graces have not, which is not by you
denied; And that this office is ascribed to Faith in words implying an
instrumentality, as in Scriptures, so in the Fathers, an no other office
peculiar can be found for it, according to your Confession, therefore according
to Scriptures and Fathers, it Justifies as an instrument. Before I go off this
head, let me mind you of that of Dr. Prideaux, which you may find Lect. 5. de
Justific. Page 146. Arminio minime placuit, (ait ejus inter pres Corvinus) quod
fides dicitur instrumentalis Justificationis nostrae causa Bona igitur fide dic
Armini, pro tuo acumine qua ratione fides Justificat.
It did not, says he, please Arminius, ( as his interpreter Corvinus says)
that Faith should be called the isntrumental cause of our Justification;
Whereupon he addresses himself to him: Tell us in good earnest, O Arminius! how
it Justifies? May not I put the same question to you? He speaks for Arminius,
o^t of an Epistle of his to Hippolitus a Collibus, the Palsgrave's Ambassador.
The (...) credere, (...) credere, hoe est, actum fidei (dicit) imputari in
justitiam, idque proprio sensu, non Metonymice, quatenus objectum apprehendit,
in Ep. ad Hippolitum a Collibus principis Palatini legatum.
i. e. the act of Faith is imputed for Righteousness, and that in a proper,
not a Metonymicall sense, as it apprehends the object, which he there refutes.
But it will not serve you to answer thus, For with you, works justify, and yet
you confess that Faith has its peculiar way and prerogative, which agrees not
to works in Justification. We must either then yield that it Justifies as an
instrument, or shut it quite out from the office of Justification; or plainly
confess, we know not what office it has in this work, notwithstanding
Scripture speaks so much of it, and still in those words which in men's common
Language denote an instrument.

The second, That Faith in Christ qua Lord is not the Justifying act, is, with
you (as the former) a notorious novelty, and comes within the same Challenge;
And if the Contention be alone about the terms, in case it be yielded, what
would you be advantaged? Seeing I doubt not but we may say, that it was never
in Terminis, by the Ancients put to the question, and so you in affirming that
Faith in Christ qua Lord is the Justifying act, are in as notorious a novelty;
as we, on the other hand in denying it; you can no more find the one, in the
Ancients, then your adversaries can find the other. But if the question be
about the thing it self, I doubt not but many testimonies may be easily
produced. In order to which, the state of the question as it is laid down
between Protestants and their adversaries is to be looked into, which is,
Whether the whole word of God be the object of Justifying Faith, or the
special promises of mercy in Christ? Thus Bellarmine states it, Lib. 1. de
Justificatione cap. 4. and says, that the Heretics restrain it to the
promise of special mercy, but Catholics will have the object of Faith to be
as large as the whole word of God. Here Protestants yield somewhat to
Bellarmine, and somewhat they deny. They yield, that the Faith which Justifies,
looks upon the whole word of God as its object, that it believes the History of
the Creation, the narrative of the years of Mathusaleh, the flood of Noah, that
it acknowledges the equity of all Gods Commands, and a necessity of obedience,
but not as Justifying. We willingly grant that Justifying Faith is an
obedientiall affiance, yet it is the affiance, and no^ the obedience, nor yet
the assent to truths formerly mentioned, or the like, that acts in
Justification. Your self say, that obedience is only the modification of Faith,
in the first act of Justification, and the reforming party of Protestant
Divines say the same in the consummation of it. Now that these promises of
special mercy, or the blood of Christ held out in the free promises, is the
special object of Faith, in this act of Justification, and that it justifies
as it applies such promises, and does interest the Soul in this blood, may I
suppose be made good by diverse testimonies. Let that of Ambrose be consulted,
Lib. 1. Cap. 6. de Jacobo and vita beata. Non habeo unde gloriari in operibus
meis possum, non habeo unde me jactem, and ideo gloriabor in Christro. Non
gloriabor quia justus sum, sed gloriabor quia redemptus sum, Gloriabor non quia
vacuus peccati sum, sed quia remissa sunt peccata. Non gloriabor quia profui,
neque quia profuit mihi quisquam, sed quia pro me advocatus apud patrem
Christus est, sed quia pro me Christi sanguis effusus est. Facta est mihi culpa
mea, merces redemptionis, per quam mihi Christus advenit. Propter me Christus
mortem gustavit, fructuosior culpa quam innocentia. Innocentia arrogantem me
fecerat, culpa subjectum reddidit. And that of Gregory in Ezekiel. Hom. 7. Justus
igitur advocatus noster, justos nos defendet in judicio, quia and nos ispos
cognoscimus and accusamus injustos. Non ergo infletibus, non in actibus
nostris, sed in advocati nostri allegatione confidamus. And this I am sure, is
within Christ's Priestly and not his Kingly office. That of Bernard also super
Cantic. S^ct. 23. Sufficit mihi ad omnem justitiam solum habere propitium cui
soli peccavi, and Sect. 23. Ego fidenter quod ex me mihi deest, usurpo mihi ex
visceribus Domini, quoniam Misericordia affluunt, nec desunt foramina per quae
affluant; Memor abor justitiae tuae solius, ipsa enim est mea, nempe factus es
mihi tu Justitia a Deo. Nunquid mihi verendum est, ne non una ambobus
sufficiat? Non est pallium breve quod secundum prophetam non potest operire
duos; Justitia tua justitia in aeternum, and te pariter, and me apperiet larga
and aeterna justitia. That of Austine, lib. 3. de Trinit. Cap. 20. Fides ad
beatitudinem necessaria in Christo definita est, q^i in carne resurrexit a
mortuis, non enim nisi per illum liberabitur quisquam a Diaboli dominatu per
remissionem peccatorum; And Nyssenus lib. de vita Mosis. Caput eorum quae in
professione Christiana credimus est firma rectaque fide in passionem illius
respicere qui pro nobis passus est. That passage which Chemnitius quotes out of
the life of Bernard is observeable, Being at the point of death, and in an
ecstasy of Spirit, judging himself to be before Gods tribunal, and Satan over
against him present charging him with wicked accusations, and the Man of God
was to speak for himself, not at all afraid or troubled, he said, Fateor, non
sum dignus ego, nec propriis possum meritis regnum obtinere coelorum. Caeterum
duplici jure illud obtinens dominus meus, haereditate scilicet patris, and
merito passionis, altero ipse contentus, alterum mihi donat: Ex cujus dono,
jure illud mihi vendicans non confundor. Ita hoc verbo confusus est inimicus,
etc. The same Author tells us of an exhortation of Anselme to a dying Brother,
set out as a directory for the visit of the sick, ready to give up the Ghost,
which is almost wholly spent in leading the dying person to the death of
Christ, He concludes, Age ergo, dum in te est anima tua, ei semper gratias, and
in hac sola morte totam fiduciam tuam constitue, Huic morti te totum committes,
hac morte te totum cont^ge, eique te totum evolve. Et si dominus te voluerit
judicare, dic, Domine, Domini mortem nostri Jesu Christi objicio inter me and
te, and judicium tuum, aliter tecum non contendo; si dixerit quod merueris
damnationem, dic, Mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi, objicio inter me, and mala
merita mea, ipsiusque dignissimae passionis meritum affero pro merito, quod ego
habere debuissem, and heu non habeo. Many more passages may be found in
Chemnitius out of Anselme, Gerson, Bernard, and others, purposely brought to
make this good, that the special promises of mercy in Christ through his
blood, is the special object of Faith in Justification, largely disclaming any
act of Faith, as terminated on any other object in the word, to Justify. I
shall conclude with that which was quoted before by Davenant, out of Thomas
Aquinas, In ipsa Justificatione peccatoris, non est necesse ut cogitentur
caeteri articuli; Sed solum cogitetur Deus, peccata remittens.

In this work it self of the justification of a sinner, it is not necessary,
that other articles be thought up, but that God be thought on pardoning sin.

As for your last, of the interest in man's obedience, in Justification, as
continued, and consummate in judgment; In case you could bring forth the
distinction out of the Fathers, and make it appear that thy exclude all in man
except Faith, in Justification begun; but take in works in Justification
complete, and consummate, you had done somewhat. But to put your adversaries
upon it, to prove that the Fathers overthrow this distinction, when you do not
show that they any where assert it, is scarce equal dealing, yet you cannot
here go away clear. What judge you of the passages but now quoted? If Bernard
had been of your judgment, when he took himself, to be before Gods tribunal,
he would not have contented himself alone with the sufferings of Christ; but
must have put himself upon it, to have brought out a list (as large as the
Pharisees) of his works of obedience. Neither would Anselme in his Directory
have taught Prelates, and other Ministers, to have led persons, at the point of
death, alone to the death of Christ, and nothing else. What say you to that of
Clemens Alexand. Stromat. 7 quoted by Eckhardus, page 391. Per fidem solummodo
efficitur fidelis perfectus? And that of Hilary, quoted by Davenant de Justitia
habit. cap. 29 page 377? having urged these words out of Canon 8. in Matthew.
page 164. A christo remissum est quod lex laxure non poterat; fides enim sola
justificat, he adds another quotation out of lib. 20. de Trinitate. Justum
fides consummat, secundum quod dictum est, credidit Abraham deo, and reputatum
est ei ad justitiam, and then Comments himself upon both these quotations.
Jesuits are wont to ascribe justification to faith, but not to faith alone,
Hilary taxes this error, when he says, faith alone justifies: for they
attribute the beginning of justification to faith, but not the consummation,
but Hilary far otherwise. Faith consummates the just. So that your Reader may
see that Hilary in Davenants judgment, is full against you. And doubtless he
will still judge it, matter of wonder, that in the close of your Century of
witnesses, you say that Davenant most fully of all speaks your thoughts; If he
agree with you, no man (no not Mr. Crandon himself) I think dissents from you.

I confess that I come nearer to you, than he, as in words he expresses
himself, as you may see at large, de Justit. habit. cap. 30. page 397, 398. and
yet I cannot be brought to agree with you; And seeing I am brought in by you,
in your confession, page 456. as the first man after you Century of witnesses
is ended, as voting with you in these words, [Mr. Bl. in his late Treatise of
the Covenant is so full in asserting the conditionality of repentance and
obedience, that he spends whole Chapters upon it, and answers the objections of
the Antinomians against it, cap. 14. and 15 and 6, 7, 8.] I am put to it, to
let the Reader know how I explain my self, seeing you do it not, By which it
will appear, that nothing that I have said, in any of those Chapters by you
quoted (notwithstanding I assert such conditionality as you mention) will serve
at all to strengthen your opinion for the interest of works in justification,
yet for ought I know they may be as much for you, as the most of those that are
by you produced. You may see that I distinguish of conditions serviceable to
man in his return to God. 1. For recovery of his lost estate of happiness. 2.
For the repair, or new frame of his qualifications depraved and spoiled, cap.
11. page 74. The condition immediately serviceable for man's return to God
reconciled in Christ, I say is Faith, in the page quoted. The condition
respecting man's reparation in his qualifications to hold up communion with God,
I say is Repentance, cap. 14. page 93. This then, with me enters not the act of
justification, but is, the justified man's way to bliss and glory. And when
Repentance is at the highest, and obedience at the best, it is not repentance,
nor obedience; but the blood of Christ, in which faith alone interests us, that
must be our discharge. So that, if I may take the boldness to interpose my
thoughts, as to that multitude of quotations which you have produced, for the
interest of works in justification; I think for the greatest part, they labor
of that Fallacy, called Ignoratio Elenchi. Put them into Syllogistical form,
and the Reader shall find, that they do not conclude the thing in question.
They very fully speak a necessity of good works to Salvation (which is the
unanimous judgment of all Orthodox writers) and the question is about their
interest in Justification: Which two in the judgment of Protestant writers
very much differ, as you may see in Mr. Ball, Treatise of the Covenant, page
18. Whose testimony I have produced at large, p. 434. etc. and thither I here
refer you, Where you may see the sole interest of faith, the isntrumental
efficiency, or causality of it, with an utter denial of any interest of works
in this of justification. So that he alone may speak for all; that the
acknowledgement of the interest of works, according to the tenor of the
Covenant, as a way appointed of God for attainment of glory, does not argue any
interest at all of works in the work of justification.

But to return to that from which these quotations have caused this short
digression. I think you might have spared those words, If I were on one side,
and all the Divines in England on the other, there is yet the same reason to
prefer all the first Churches before all them, as there is to prefer all them
before me. In a word, I shall ever think him more culpably singular, who
differs from Christ, and his Apostles, and all his Church for 1200. or 1400.
years, then he that differs from any party now living, and differs not from
them forementioned, Unless you could make it better appear, that Christ, and
his Apostles, and the Church for this space of time, were more clearly for you.
It is the Churches Testimony, that is now our business; and if the Reader have
no more then Chemnitius bare word, affirming with so much confidence, as we
have heard, that all ages have been against you, it is enough against your bare
word, that all former ages have been for you.

You now see my thoughts, how they stand upon the Reading of that part of your
Apology, in which I am concerned. Though it be above my hopes to give you
satisfaction, yet others I doubt not will be more flexible in their opinion.
What you will please to do further, I know not, it is enough that I understand
my own mind; which is (so far as I can beforehand resolve) not to intermeddle
further, and whatsoever I shall hear from you, to impose silence on my self.
You have drawn me out to speak what is here said, in my own just defense. If
this will not do it, I shall think it will not be done. Let me request that
Christian Candor, that the Common cause may not suffer; and that you will not
dwell on literal mistakes, or unaptness, (as you may conceive, sometimes) of
the phrase, but take that which you shall judge to be my full meaning, which I
have made my business, as fully as I can, to make known. I have no more to make
yours, or the Readers trouble, but shall leave all to your candid
interpretation, and his impartial censure, and not only subscribe, but with
unfeigned resolution (by the help of grace) remain in acknowledgement of your
manifold eminent graces,

Your true affectionated Friend, Brother, and fellow labourer, THOMAS BLAKE.

An Alphabeticall Table relating to the chief heads handled in this Treatise.
A.
Abraham. WHether any Sacraments from Adam to him Page. 24 The question
discussed in several propositions. Ibid. etc.
Acts Of God are entitled to man, and the acts of man to God in Scripture Page.
451 Actions. Are denominated good or evil from the Law only -- Page. 613 Adam
Was not Created an infant in understanding, Page. 15 Admission Of men of years
to Baptism examined Page. 101 The way of the Primitives in it laid open ibid.
Admission by a Church Covenant examined Page. 102 Admission to the Lords
Supper, is no act of jurisdiction -- Page. 253 Admission to the Lords Supper
not to be exempted from cognizance of Church power Page. 273. etc. Rules for
admission to Sacraments more explicit in the Old Testament -- Page. 92
Antiquity. Who they be that make the highest claims to it, as being on their
party Page. 652 Chemnitius his thoughts of the judgment of Antiquity,
concerning the Protestants doctrine of justification Page. 65^, 653 Quere's put
concerning Mr. Brs appeal to Antiquity, in point of Controversy Page. 653,
etc. Proofs from Antiquity, for the instrumentality faith Page. 628, etc.
Evasions of these testimonies examined -- Page. 661 Proofs from Antiquity that
faith in Christ as pardoning sin is the justifying act. -- Page. 633 Proofs
from Antiquity against the interest of man's obedience in justification as
consummate. Page. 665
Apostates. Application of the Seals of the Covenant to them, is a putting a
Seal to a blank Page. 20 Assent. Essential in Faith Page. 502 It must be firm
Page. 503 Unlimited ibid.
Assurance. Of faith is possible Page. 496 What sins cloud it Page. 394

Astrology. Judicial Astrology censured Page. 39, etc. Arminianisme. The
Author vindicated from it Page. 158, etc.
B.
Mr. Ball. HIs testimony of the instrumentality of faith in justification Page.
434 That works do not justify ibid. That the New Covenant has its conditions
ib. That repentance is a condition of the Covenant Page. 435 No condition of
justification Page. 436
Baptism. John's Baptism, in the whole of it of divine institution Page. 436
Contempt and neglect of Baptism censured Page. 68 An emprovement is to be made
of it Page. 72 The sin of Covenant Parents destroys not the Child's right to
Baptism Page. 97 Visibility of interest the Churches guide in admission to
Baptism Page. 104. 110 How far Faith and Repentance anciently were required in
Baptism Page. 109 Their grounds, or reasons, who delayed Baptism in the
Primitive times Page. 110 Their way of admission of the Catechumeni to Baptism
Page. 111 Over much rigor in admission to Baptism, hinders the progress of
the Gospel Page. 112 The admission of some to Baptism in prudence may be
delayed Page. 113 Papists expect not grace for, but a convenient disposition to
grace, in the person to be Baptized Page. 111 The restraint of right to
Baptism -- a breach in the Church of Christ Page. 181 Baptism, a leading
Church-privilege Page. 161 In what sense Baptism works what it figures Page.
383 Babtisme engages to the first work of regeneration Page. 369 The Blood and
Spirit of Christ, are not always applied in it Page. 381 Dangers attending the
restraint of Baptism to the regenerate Page. 551
Baptized. A man unbaptized, is bound to believe in Jesus Christ for
justification Page. 144 The Author vindicated from a supposed assertion of the
contrary ibid. Titles given by the Apostle to Baptized persons do not argue
they were always answered with inherent grace Page. 149 Upon what grounds
Simon Magus was Baptized Page. 160, etc.
Believers. A title in Scripture not proper to the justified Believing. What
ordinarily meant by believing, in the History of the Acts. Page. 177 The
distinction of believing Christ, and believing in Christ groundless ibid.
Blood. Faith in the blood of Christ only justifies Page. 766 This assertion
quit from danger Page. 582 Blood and Spirit may be distinguished, but must not
be divided Page. 367

C.
Call. AN outward call asserted Page. 169 Calvin. Vindicated Page. 118. 550
Catholic And universal, in Authors use of them, distinguished Page. 155
Chemnitins. His testimony for the instrumentality of the word and faith in
justification Page. 490 See Antiquity.
Christ. The Covenant of works was without reference to Christ as Mediator Page
10 Whether the Covenant of works be made null, or repealed by Christ Page. 19
Faith in his blood only justifies Page. 566 Faith has respect to whole
Christ, to every part and piece of his Mediatorship Page. 562 Interest in him,
interests us in all other privileges Page. 458 Scripture speaks of receiving
Christ, and not of the Species of Christ only Page. 459 The healing of our
nature, and the removal of our guilt is his work Page. 366 Faiths
instrumentality in receiviug Christ being granted, it is instrumentality in
justification cannot be denied Page. 441 Communication of titles between Christ
and his Church Page. 448. 449
Christians. Vnregenerates are real and not equivocall members of visible
Churches Page. 153 Humane authority vouched for it ibid. etc. Christian, a
title in Scripture not proper to the justified Page. 149
Church Membership. What gives right to it Page. 201, 102 Circumcision. How
Infants were saved before Circumcision Page. 26, 27, 28 Several propositions
for clearing of the truth Page. 24 Circumcision and Baptism engaged to the
first work of regeneration Page. 369 The right of Circumcision employed the
propagation of corruption Page. 368 Circumcision was no earnall badge Page. 425
Cloud. Whether two or only one Cloud with Israel in the wilderness Page 521
No ordinary one, but supernatural Page. 522 The motion of it guided by an
Angel ibid. The form of it in appearance as a pillar ib. The use of it
twofold. As Isreal's guide Page. 522 As Isreal's guard ibid.
It was of the nature of a Sacrament Page. 525 No standing Sacrament Page. 526
Communicants. The Lords Supper must be administered for their edification Page.
199 Communication Of titles between Christ and his Church Page. 448
Conclusions. Desperate conclusions often inferred from right principles Page.
579 Condition. The great condition to which Baptism engages is not a
prerequisite to the essence, and being of Baptism Page. 143, 44 The Authors
meaning cleared Page. 145 In what sense faith is the condition of the promise
of remission of sin Page. 171 Actual existence not necessary to the being of
conditions in a Covenant Page. 462 One and the same thing, is not the condition
of both parties in a Covenant Page. 632
Confirmation Preferred by the Church of Rome before Baptism Page. 528
Perfects what Baptism begins ibid. The matter of it -- Page. 529 The form
Page. 529 The fruit Minister Ceremonies at consecration at administration.
Page. 529


Arguments evincing it to be no Sacrament Page. 530 The Apostles imposition of
hands, no proof of it Page. 530 The ancient use of it degenerated Page. 531
Consecration Respects not elements, but participants Page. 58 Whether the word
which gives being to Sacraments be Consecratorium, or Concionatorium ibid.
Contradiction. The Author acquit from any Page. 447 Conversion. The Lords
Supper with the word, as an Appendant to it, may be serviceable toward
Conversion Page. 200 Arguments evincing it Page. 200, 201, etc. Whether the
Lords Supper may be styled a Converting Ordinance Page 211 Explicatory
propositions ibid. etc. The Lords Supper does not necessarily suppose a through
conversion Page. 217
Covenant. Law and Covenant are not to be confounded Page. 598 Keeping
Covenant, failing in Covenant, and forfeiture of it, to be distinguished Page.
392 The Covenant falling, Sacraments annexed fall with it Page. 18, etc. Where
God denies his Covenant, there the seal must not be granted Page. 20 The
Covenant people of God, the adaequate subject of Sacraments Page. 74 All
relation to God in tendency to salvation is founded in the Covenant ibid.
Interest in Sacraments, is upon the account of the Covenant Page 75, etc. God
enters a Covenant with his people exactly and properly so called Page. 79 The
word Covenant asserted ibid. The thing it self asserted Page. 80 in the
essentials of it Page. 80, 81 in the solemnities Page. 81
Arguments evincing a Covenant between God and man in its proper nature Page.
82 Covenant and seal are commensurate Page. 120
Covenant outward and inward. This distinction examined Page. 83 The Author
vindicated in it Page. 124 The outward Covenant is most properly a Covenant
Page. 83, etc. To it belongs the definition of a Covenant, ibid. It usually
bears the name in Scripture Page. 84 Men enjoy privileges of Ordinances, and
interest in Sacraments, upon account of the outward Covenant Page. 86 Scripture
characters of men in Covenant Page. 115
Covenant God. Gods Covenant with his people not equivocall Page. 80 Men of a
visible profession timely and really not equivocally in Covenant with God Page.
128
Covenant of works Pass between God and man in an immediate way, without any
reference to Christ as Mediator Page. 10, 11 Whether this Covenant be made
null, or repealed by Christ. Page. 19
Covenant of Grace. Righteousness of faith the great promise of it Page. 414
Duty and condition in it are one and the same Page. 641, 643 It requires and
accepts sincerity Page. 637 Arguments evincing it vindicated Page. 639 Mr.
Cramdons Arguments against Mr. Br. herein answered Page. 645
Covenant absolute Conditional. Arguments offered against an absolute Covenant
Page. 626 Faith and Repentance are man's conditions, not Gods in the proper
conditional Covenant Page. 626
Covenant Old and New. Sacraments under the old and new Covenant one and the
same Page. 25
Disciple. D.
A Title in Scripture, not always proper to the justified Page. 149
Discipline. Church Discipline asserted Page. 266, etc. Objections answered
Page. 268
Dogmaticall Faith Is a true Faith Page. 176 Entitles to Baptism Page. 103 The
Authors Arguments proving That a Dogmaticall Faith, or a Faith short of
justifying, entitles to Baptism, uindicated. Page. 120, 121, etc 17. Arguments
added for the proof of it Page. 161 Arguments from humane authorities against a
Dogmaticall Faith examined Page. 147
Dogs. Dogs and Swine what they mean Page. 260
E.
Eldership. ALlegations for the power of an Eldership in admission to the
Sacrament Page. 252 These taken into consideration Page. 253 Ruling Elders
uindicated Page. 270, etc. Grotius his testimony concerning them Page 171
Election And the Covenant of grace not commensurate Page. 124 Elect.
Restriction of the Covenant to the the Elect regenerate confounds the Covenant,
the and conditions of it Page. 134 Exceptions against it answsred Page. 135,
136 Restraint of Covenant to the regenerate, denies any breach of Couenaut
Page. 138 Exception against it examined. ibid, etc.
Elements. No continual holiness in Sacramental Elements. Page. 324 Their
touch or abode makes not holy Page 325
Engagement. Answer to Sacramental engagements necessary to Salvation Page.
387 Arguments euincing it Page. 389 Sacraments without spiritual profit to
those that lived in breach of Covenant Page. 18 Sacraments are mere shadows,
and empty signs where conscience answers not to the engagements Page. 389,
etc. Sacraments are aggrauations of sin, and hightnings of judgments, when
conscience answers not to Sacramental engagements Page. 390 When conscience
answers not to Sacramental engagements, men subscribe to the equity of their
own condemnation Page. 391 When it is that conscience answers to Sacramental
engagements Page. 392
Equivocall. Men of a uisible profession, really and not equiuocally in
Covenant with God Page. 128 Gods Covenant with his people, no equivocal
Covenant. Page. 80 Scripture language not equivocal Page. 140. 150
Equivocation. What it is Page. 139 Errors. Reformers uindicated from a charge
of four supposed great errors Page. 438 Protestants uindicated from four
supposed great errors. Page. 452
Erroneous. Persons in an incapacity to receive any benefit from the Lords
Supper Page. 236, etc. Evidence. Men in grace often want assuring evidence of
grace Page. 190 Grounds laid down Page. 190, 191, etc,
Eunuch His Baptism enquired into Page. 176
F.
Faith THe alone grace that interests us in the righteousness of the Covenant
Page. 432 All foreign reformers make not faith a full persuasion Page. 439, etc.
Whether the act, or habit of faith, does justify? -- Page. 442 These phrases
to be justified by faith, and faith justifies, are one and the same -- Page.
444 Faiths instrumentality in justification asserted by Scriptures ibid. The
unanimous consent of Protestant writers in it -- Page. 445, etc. There is
somewhat of efficiency in man's faith for justification -- Page. 447 How Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith Page. 450 Faith does more then qualify the
subject to be a fit patient to be justified Page. 460 More then a bare presence
of faith is required to justification Page. 468 In what sense the Gospel
through faith is efficacious for justification Page. 481 Christians must bring
their faith to trial Page. 492 The absolute necessity of faith ibid. Manifold
benefits of it Page. 494. etc. The humbled soul the proper seat of faith Page.
498, etc. Faith has its seat in the will, as well as in the understanding
Page. 504 It is hold out in words in Scripture implying affiance, trust, etc.
ibid.
Faith defined Page. 505 Faith far under-values all earthly things respective
to Christ Page. 510 Faith is against all whatsoever is against Christ Page. 512
It suffers no lust to divide from Christ ibid. Faith in Christ qua Lord is not
the justifying act -- Page. 554 The distinction of fides quae, and fides qua
asserted Page. 565, 566 Protestant writers guilty of no cheat in it ibid.
Arguments evincing that faith in the blood of Christ only justifies Page. 566.
etc.
Faith dogmaticall, See dogmaticall. Faith justifying, See justification.
Faiths instrumentality, See instrument. Fathers And Councils often too rigorous
in their Rules respective to Church discipline Page. 112 Queres put touching
the authority of the Fathers in Controversies -- Page. 653, etc.
Mr. Firmin His Appendix as to the latitude of Infant Baptism examined Page.
94, etc. The Authhor vindicated Page. 95, 96 His Appendix as to admission of
men of years examined Page. 104, etc. Advertisments given to Mr. Br. touching
his undertakings for him Page. 180 Their disagreement Page. 180, etc.
Food. Ordinary and quickening food differenced Page. 218 The word as well as
the Sacrament is food. -- ibid.
Forum Dei Mr. Brs. distinction of Forum Dei, and Forum Ecclesiae examined
Page. 141 Form A precise form of words not of the essence of Sacraments Page.
59
G.
Gesture NO one Gesture of necessary observation in receiving of the Sacrament
Page. 310 God His great goodness in condescension to man's weakness in
institution of Sacraments Page. 52, etc. He is the Author of all Sacraments,
and Sacramental rites Page. 63 He is to prescribe in his own worship Page. 65
He alone must distinguish his servants in relation from others Page. 65, 66 He
only gives efficacy to Sacraments Page. 66 He only can seal his promise Page
66, 67 His great goodness, and the tender care of Christ in condescension to
our weakness Page. 349 His compassion to us should move us to compassionate our
selves Page 551
Gospel. Sacraments lead us unto Christ in his Priestly Office. Page. 567
Grace. Papists speak doubtfully of any work of inherent grace infused in
Baptism Page. 377 Protestants deny any such infusion of grace in Baptism
Page. 378 The Fathers acknowledge no such infusion of grace in Baptism ibid.
Common grace is real Page. 132

H.
Heresy IN the Parent divests not the Child from Church-privileges Page. 99
Holiness. Covenant-holiness must not be confounded with inward holiness Page.
148, 149 The doctrine of Covenant-holiness more ancient then Zuinglius Page.
117 Calvin and Beza not the inventers though the promoters of it Page. 118
Mr. Humphreys. His Treatise of a free admission to the Lords Supper Page. 247
I.
NAtural Idiots incapable of benefit by the Lords Supper Page. 229 Ignorance,
Ignorant. In Covenant Parents divests not the Child of Church-privileges Page.
99 Grossly ignorant ones in an incapacity of benefit by the Lords Supper Page.
230 Ignorance distinguished ibid.
Image. An Image less like the Pattern, is an Image. Page. 612 Impenitence And
unbelief in professed Christians are violations of the Covenant of grace Page.
622 Arguments evincing it Page. 624, etc.
Infants Of confederate Parents put no bar to their Baptism Page. 95 They are
incapable of benefit by the Lords Supper. Page. 226 The different practice of
Antiquity ibid. Schoolmen divided about it ibid. The present practice of the
Church of Rome in it Page. 227 Whether Infants were saved by their Parents
faith, and how before circumcision Page. 26, 27, 28 Several propositions laid
down Page. 29, etc.
Infant Baptism. Several benefits of it Page. 185, etc. See Baptism.
Infirmities. Men Covenant not with God to be above all infirmities Page. 392
Mere infirmities no Covenant-breaches ibid. Their happiness whose sins are not
above infirmities Page. 393 Sins above infirmities and toward presumption
ibid. See Sin.
Institution. A word of institution necessary to the being of Sacraments Page.
58 Repetition and explanation of this word of institution singularly useful
Page. 59 All Sacramental rites must be of divine institution
Instrument. Faith. The instrumentality of Faith in justification asserted
Page. 437 Scripture Texts holding out the instrumentality of Faith, as in other
actions, so in justification Page. 444 Whether the action of the principal
cause, and of the instrument in Moral operations is always one Page. 445 The
unanimous consent of Protestant writers, that Faith is an instrument ibid. etc.
Faiths instrumentality makes not man the efficient cause of his justification
Page. 438. 464 Faiths instrumentality in receiving Christ being granted, its
instrumentality in justification cannot be denied Page. 441 Faith is the
instrument of the soul, and not of it self in receiving Christ Page. 443
Instruments of mere reception, and further operation distinguished Page. 448
Faith an instrument of the proper reception of Christ Page. 460 It is the
instrument both of God and man in the work of justification Page. 448. 487 The
grant of the New Covenant, is not an instrument of justification solely
sufficient Page. 466 Concauses isntrumental have efficacy one from another
Page. 470 Instruments Cooperative, or Passive Page. 474 Whether the word be a
passive instrument, or Cooperative with the Spirit ibid. An isntrumental
effi^iency ascribed to Faith respective to Salvation Page. 486 Arguments for
the instrumentality of faith in justification Page. 485 Proofs from Antiquity
for its instrumentality in justification Page. 628, etc. See Faith.
Justification. The relative change in it necessarily presupposes a real Page.
447 God and man not coordinate causes in it Page. 449 In justification of man,
God acts not without man Page. 446 Quaeres put, in what sense the grant of the
New Covenant is said to be solely isntrumental in the work of justification
Page. 478 Arguments against the sole sufficiency of the grant of the New
Covenant for justification Page. 489 Justification by Gospel grant, and by the
sentence of the Judge, how they differ Page. 556, 557 Justification at the day
of judgment not specifically distinct from that which precedse. Page. 558 The
Father appoints the terms of justification and salvation Page. 559 Paul treats
directly and industriously of justification by faith Page. 576
Justifying Faith which is short of justifying gives title to Baptism Page.
163, etc. Several arguments vindicated Page. 120, etc. Exceptions examined
Page. 143 Additionall arguments to prove it Page. 161 Covenanting and
justifying not Synonima's Page. 135, 136 None able to Baptize, if justifying
faith only give admission Page. 160
Jurisdiction Admission to the Lords Supper is no act of jurisdiction Page. 253
Arguments evincing it ibid. etc. Objections answered Page. 262

K.
Knowledge A necessary prerequisite in faith Page. 500 Knowledge distinguished
Page. 501 See Ignorance.

L.
Law ANd Covenant are not to be confounded Page. 598 Law Moral. Arminians,
Socinians, and Papists oppose the perfection of the Moral Law Page. 601
Authorities of Protestant writers, for the perfection of the Moral Law Page.
602 Arguments evincing the perfection of the Moral Law Page. 603 Objections
answered Page. 605 There is no sin that is not condemned in the Moral Law
Page. 603 In what sense the preceptive part of the Moral Law is a perfect rule
of righteousness Page. 605, etc. Actions are denominated good or bad, from the
Law only Page. 613 Men are denominated really, and not equivocally righteous,
that imperfectly obey the Moral Law Page. 614 The Law commanding duty, and the
end of the duty are not opposite, but subordinate Page. 614
Law nature. What meant by the time of the Law of nature Page. 24 No Sacraments
appointed of God, during the time called the Law of nature Page. 24, etc.
Scripture silence a probable argument Page. 26 Jesuits arguments herein
examined. ibid. The preceptive part of the Law of nature delivered to Moses,
and as used by Christ, whether they differ Page. 600
Leiturgy. Divine ordinances must not stand or fall upon the want, or fruition
of any set leiturgy whatsoever Page. 308 Leiturgy of the Church of England
taken into consideration ibid. etc. 1. As to the work it self Page. 308 2. As
to the sanction put upon it Page. 309
Life. What meant by it in the Covenant of works Page. 11 Not barely an animal
life, ibid. etc. The tree of life had not any natural power to answer its name
Page. 12
Lord. Faith in Christ qua Lord, is not the justifying act Page. 554 The
position at large discussed Page. 555, etc.
Lords Supper. See Sacraments. Supper.
Lunatic Persons incapable of any benefit by the Lords Supper Page. 229
M.
Man His first original is in sin Page. 363 Arguments evincing it Page. 364 In
man's restitution, his nature must be healed, and his guilt removed Page. 366
The healing of his nature, and the removal of guilt is the work of Christ
Page. 366
Manna. Whence it has its name Page. 523 The time it continued with Israel
Page. 524 Miraculously provided ibid. A fable concerning it ibid. Of a
Sacramental nature Page. 525 No standing Sacrament Page. 526
Means. Their necessity for our help in the way of faith and obedience Page.
17 Objections answered Page. 17, 18
Mediator. See Christ. Metonymies Frequent in Scripture Page. 572 Marriage.
The Matter Page. 540 Form Page. 540 Minister. Page. 540 Reasons evincing it to
be no Sacrament Page. 541
Minister. Allegations for a Ministers sole power in admission to the Sacrament
Page. 251 Inconveniences objected against it answered. Page. 262 A Ministers
prudence in this work, to see with more eyes then his own Page. 272 Where an
Eldership is erected to make use of them ibid. To make scrutiny into men's
knowledge with all tenderness Page. 273 Not to refuse, but upon known crimes
ibid. When he cannot in this do what he would, he is to do what he is able
Page. 274
Ministerial Dispensation of Sacraments a part of the Ministerial function
Page. 277 Whether Ministerial dispensation be of the essence of Sacraments
Page. 277, etc. Gospel order transgrest, when Sacraments are not dispensed by
a Ministerial hand Page. 278 Doctor Abbots, and Mr. Hookers judgment in it
ibid.
Mixed. Lawful to communicate in mixed congregations Page. 314 Arguments
evincing it ibid. etc.
Moral. Perfection, or imperfection is in reference to a rule Page. 592 Duties
naturally Moral bind all Page. 195 Where a positive command is given, there is
a Moral tie to obedience. ibid See Law.
Moses. Baptism into him what Page. 526
N.
Names GIven by God not empty titles Page. 12 Nature What meant by the times of
the Law of nature? Page. 24 Necessity Of Sacraments asserted Page. 285, etc.
Argumeats evincing it Page. 288, etc. The kind of degree of the necessity of
Sacraments enquired into Page. 289 Not absolutely necessary to Salvation Page.
289 Objections answered Page. 290 Explicatory Rules delivered in it Page. 294,
etc. A greater degree of necessity in the initiatory leading Sacrament then in
that which follows Page. 298 Arguments evincing it ibid. etc.

O.
Obedience Man's sin disobligeth him not from obedience Page. 195, 196, 197
Obligation. Man's Obligation of himself unto God implies Gods mutual obligation
Page. 130 Oblige Man's inability for duty, does not disoblige from duty Page.
197 Orders Their number in the Church of Rome, and their divisions Page. 538
Most of this number doubted by themselves, whether they be Sacraments ibid. The
Matter Page. 539 Form Page. 539 Effect Page. 539 Minister Page. 539 Reasons
evincing it to be no Sacrament ib.
Ordinances All outward Ordinances are for the Church in fieri and not only in
facto Page. 189 Sacraments must have the Honor of divine Ordinances Page. 68
Original sin Asserted Page. 363 Distinguished into peccatum originans and
orinatum Page. 365 Original sin not a mere want of primitive integrity, but
attended with unversall defilement ibid. etc.
Oil Anointing with Oil, Jam. 14, 15. What it means Page. 536, 537 Queres put
to those that would revive this practice Page. 537

P.
Parables. CHrist speaking in Parables what it means Page. ^4 Pardon Closing
with God for pardon is not to pardon a man's self Page. 452 Passive Neither
believing, nor receiving are to be judged merely passive Page. 442 In what
sense faith passive in justification Page. 476, etc.
Pemble Not sole, and singular in asserting the word to be a passive instrument
Page. 476 He is large in reasons of it Page. 475
Penance The parts of it Contrition Page. 531, 532 Confession Page. 531, 532
Satisfaction. Page. 531, 532 Papists agree not what that is in Penance that
makes up a Sacrament Page. 533 Arguments evincing it to be no Sacrament ib.
People. Allegations for their power examined Page. 252, 264 Perfection Of the
subject, and perfection of parts respective to the universality of the object
distinguished Page. 586 Pighius A learned Papist, with diverse others, joins
with us in the doctrine of justification Page. 440 Pope He has his visible
pardoner as well as others Page. 464 Prayer A necessary means of faiths
nourishment Page. 509 Priest The several functions of Christ as Priest, King,
Prophet, are to be distinguished, but not divided Page. 562 Priestly Levitical
types lead us unto Christ in his Priestly office Page. 566 Privileges A faith
short of justifying entitles to visible privileges. Page. 161 Profession Men of
a visible profession truly and really in Covenant with God Page. 128 Profession
of faith engages to a lively working faith Page. 172, etc.
Promise. That which is the condition of the thing promised, is not the
condition of the Seal. Page. 173 Exceptions against it examined. ibid. Gospel
promises are a savor of death unto many Page. 469
Protestants. Vindicated from four supposed great errors Page. 452 The author
is confessed to appear in the common cause of Protestants ibid.

R.
Rainbow. DEfined -- Page. 516 It had respect to a Covenant improperly so
called Page. 517 It was an instituted sign ibid. Correspondencies between it
and the promise Page. 518 How far it was Sacramental ibid. How far it falls
short ibid 519
Real Covenants may be broke by men in Covenant Page. 138 Common grace is
real -- Page. 132 Men of a visible profession really in Covenant with God --
Page. 128
Regenerate Duties of positive institution do not only bind the regenerate
Page. 195 Repentance. How prerequired in Baptism Page. 108 Repentance and
Faith Are man's conditions not Gods in the proper conditional Covenant Page.
626 Right Fundamental, and actual distinguished Page. 88 The distinction
cleared In civil immunities Page. 88 Ecclesiastical privileges Page. 89
They must be both written Page. 90 Right unto, a bar to detain from Sacraments
not always express Page. 91
Righteous Men are so denominated, really and not equivocally that imperfectly
obey the Law Page. 614 Righteousness Non rea^us is not righteousness Page. 588
Imperfect righteousness is no contradiction Page. 589 Righteousness as well as
holiness is intended and remitted -- ib. Righteousness and holiness in what
sense commonly used Page. 592 Righteousness in an imperfect conformity to the
Law asserted Page. 595 There is a partial reparation of in herent
righteousness in regeneration Page. 611 That righteousness which the Covenant
requires the Sacraments appendant to it seal -- Page. 413
Righteousness. Christ. The natural righteousness of Christ is not our
justification Page. 439 Whether the righteousness whereby Christ's person was
righteous be given to us Page. 453 Queries put concerning this gift of
righteousness Page. 454 Faith being terminated on Christ, is terminated on his
righteousness Page. 455 To receive his righteousness for justification no fancy
or delusion Page. 456
Righteousness. Faith. The Righteousness of Faith is the great promise of the
Covenant of grace Page. 414 This righteousness is sealed in the Sacraments of
the Covenant of grace -- Page. 415 Proved by Scriptures -- Page. 417 Confirmed
by reasons -- Page. 418 Explained by rules -- Page. 419, 420 Bellarmines five
objections answered Page. 421, etc. Propositions explaining the meaning of the
righteousness of Faith Page. 415 So called in opposition to the righteousness
of works required in the Covenant. ibid. It is the Synechdochically put for the
whole of the Covenant that interests us in this righteousness ibid. etc. All
blessings and privileges flowing from, and following upon this Covenant unto
true blessedness are comprised under the righteousness of faith Page. 416
Christ the Mediator of the Covenant, is the fountain from whence the
blessedness of this righteousness comes ibid. Faith considered as an instrument
receiving this righteousness ib. All must see that they be right principled in
the doctrine of the righteousness of faith Page. 429 Ignorance here was the
Jews undoing ib. Papists mistake in this point Page. 429, etc. Faith the alone
grace that interests us in this righteousness. Page. 432
Rock. How it was said to follow Israel Page. 524 The Rock it self was not
intended as a sign, but the water flowing out of it Page. 525 Of the nature of
a Sacrament ib. No standing Sacrament Page. 526
Rule. See Law.
S.
Sacrament. THe word vindicated -- Page. 2, 3 The reason of the word enquired
after Page. 4, 5 The various acceptations of it Page. 6, 7, 8 Whether man
enjoyed, or was capable of a Sacrament in the state of integrity -- Page. 9 No
Sacrament instituted of God during the time called the Law of nature Page. 24,
etc. A Sacrament may be defined -- Page. 32, etc. The definition of a Sacrament
in general Page. 8 The Apostles definition, Romans 4, 11 Vindicated -- Page. 33,
34 A full definition thence laid down Page. 36 The sign and thing signifi^d in
every Sacrament are Analogically one Page. 49, 50 No Sacrament without a
promise preceding Page. 56
Sacraments. The distribution of them Page. 9 God not tied to Sacraments Page.
30, 31 They are standing Ordinances Page. 294 Reasons evincing it Page. 295,
296 When they are dispensed they may not without weighty reasons be omitted
Page. 306 The being of them consists in their us^. Page. 317, etc. Arguments
evincing it ib. The Sacrament of the Supper not exempted Page. 119 Reasons
given ibid. etc. Sacraments have respect both to the change of of our nature,
and the removal of our guilt Page. 368 We are to look for no more from
Sacraments then God has put into them Page. 405 As the word teaches by the
ear, so Sacraments by the help of the word teach by the eye Page. 413 Men
professing relation to God, may see in Sacraments further engagements, and
provocations to holiness ibid. Sacraments are necessary means of faiths
nourishment Page. 508 Sacraments are seals entrusted in the hand of men --
Page. 192, etc. Sacraments seal the promise of the Gospel condionally Page.
194 Gospel Sacraments lead us unto Christ in his priestly office Page. 567 All
Sacraments from the fall substantially one Page. 424, 426
Sacramental Gods condescension in sacramental signs Page. 52, 53
Sacramental signs must be explained Page. 56 Men's aptness to delude
themselves in Sacramental privileges Page. 405 All ages have over-highly
advanced Sacramental privileges Page. 406
Sacraments. Covenant. All interested in Sacraments must come up to the terms
of the Covenant Page. 280 Sacraments annexed te the Covenant of works were
without relation to Christ Page. 10, 11 That righteousness which the Covenant
requires the Sacraments appendant to it seal -- Page. 413 Sacraments are ever
suitable to Covenants Page. 413 All Sacraments must answer to the Covenant to
which they are annexed Page. 6 Sacraments without spiritual profit to them
that live in breach of Covenant Page. 18 A Covenant falling, Sacraments that
are annexed fall with it Page. 18, etc. Sacraments under the Old and New
Covenant one and the same Page. 25 The Covenant people of God, the adequat
subject of Sacraments Page. 74 All interest in Sacraments is upon the account
of the Covenant Page. 75, etc.
Sacraments. Number. The way to find out the number of Sacraments. Page. 514 No
express Scripture to determine their number Page. 515 Two only standing
ordinances in the Old Testament of the nature of Sacraments -- ibid. Five
suppositious Sacrments of Rome examined -- Page. 528
Sacrifices. Whether of the dictates of nature Page. 21 Not Sacraments -- Page.
529 How far Sacramental -- ibid. How they differ from Sacraments ibid.
Saint. A title in Scripture not proper in the justified, Page. 149
Sanctification. The Spirit of God, and not man, is to have the denomination in
it Page. 452 Satisfaction How Christ's satisfaction to God for us is received by
us -- Page. 457 Satan His imitation of God in the ways of his worship Page.
20 Sea. Isreal's passage through it of the nature of a Sacrament Page. 525 No
standing Sacrament Page. 526
Seals. Various acceptance of the word Page. 326 Several use of a Seal Page.
327 For secrecy ibid. For warranty ibid. For distinction ibid. For security
ibid. For ratification ib. etc.
Seal of the Covenant, and the Seal of the Spirit not of equal latitude --
Page. 141
Seals. Sacraments. Sacraments are Seals Page. 326 Serving for ratification of
promises Page. 328 Objections answered ibid. etc. The whole use and office of
Sacraments is by way of sign and seal Page. 352 Reasons confirming it Page.
354, 355 Humane authorities produced Page. 356 Variety of opinions about the
working of Sacraments Page. 359, etc. Propositions tending to clear the truth
-- Page. 363 Texts of Scripture brought by those that would raise the work of
Sacraments higher, of two sorts Page. 372 1. Such where no Sacrament is
mentioned ib. 2. Such where faith is required to the attainment of the effect
Page. 376 Objections answered -- Page. 380
Sermon Formally so called not essential to a Sacrament. -- Page. 61 Whether
the word which gives being to Sacraments be concionatorium, or consecratorium
Page. 57. etc.
Scripture Must not be left to hunt after humane authorities Page. 111
Scripture order of words no foundation for arguments Page. 170 Scripture
characters of men in grace, are laid down for men to try themselves by Page. 189
Sign What it is -- Page. 38, etc. Several kinds of Signs Page. 39 Natural
ibid. Prodigious -- Page. 41, etc. By institution -- Page. 42 Rules for the
right understanding of natural signs Page. 39 Remote causes are no signs
ibid. Partial causes are no signs Page. 40 Natural signs when causes work
unavoidably -- Page. 41
Sacramental signs. Sacraments are signs Page. 38 Sacraments are to be
defined as signs -- Page. 321 Objections answered ibid. etc.
Sacramental signs. Their properties -- Page. 43 External and sensible ibid.
Visible -- Page. 43, 44 Analogicall -- Page. 45 Rituall -- Page. 46
Distinguishing Page. 46, 47, 65, etc. Congregating Page. 47, 48 Engaging --
ibid. Remembrancing ibid. 49 Ratifying -- Page. 49 Gods condescension in
Sacramental signs Page. 52, 53 Sacramental signs must be explained -- Page.
56
Sin. All sins are not Spirit-grieving sins Page. 392 Notable sins in
regenerate persons followed with many dangers Page. 394 They cloud assurance of
glory ibid. They bring an inaptitude on the soul to enter into glory Page. 395
They bring under wrath and displeasure, though they work not into a state of
wrath Page. 396 They are such an obstruction in the way of bliss, that they
bring a necessity on the soul to come in by repentance Page. 397 Rules to
discern the nature and quality of sins. Page. 399 The more of light, the less
of weakness, and the crime more heinous -- ibid. The less of temptation, the
more of sin, and the less of weakness ibid. etc. The more of deliberation and
conviction, the more of sin Page. 400 The more opportunity for duty, the
greater the neglect. Page. 401 Several sorts of sins that are Covenant
forfeitures Page. 402, etc.
Sincerity Of heart in covenanting not of the essence and being of a Covenant
Page. 131 Spirit. The seal of the Covenant, and the seal of the Spirit not of
equal latitude -- Page. 141 Blood and Spirit way be distinguished, but must
not be divided Page. 367 The acts of the Spirit in a believing soul, are
ascribed to faith Page. 463 The Spirit works not in us respective to Salvation,
after faith is implanted, without us. ibid. The Spirit has a further hand in
justification, or pardon of sin then alone by enditing the Gospel Page. 483
Scriptures and humane authorities produced for it ibid. The Spirit of God and
not man is to have the denomination in Sanctification -- Page. 452
Lords Supper A privilege of the Church visible Page. 187 It is not limited to
the actually regenerate. Page. 189, 192 Arguments evincing it ibid. etc. It
must be administered for the communicants edification -- Page. 199 With the word
as an appendant to it, it may be serviceable toward conversion Page. 200
Arguments evincing it Page. 200, etc. Objections answered -- Page. 209, etc.
General charges Page. 209. to 216 Particular arguments. Page. 216 Whether the
Lords Supper may be styled a converting ordinance Page. 211 Explicatory
propositions ibid. etc. The Lords Supper supposes not thorough conversion, and
faith justifying Page. 217 Not instituted only for justified persons Page. 218
All of present incapacity to receive benefit by the Lords Supper, are to be
denied access to it. Page. 225 Scandalous persons of a vicious and profligate
course of life, are in an incapacity of profit by the Lords Supper -- Page. 238
Arguments evincing it Page. 239 Objections answered Page. 240 Who are to judge
of men's present aptitude for the Lords Supper. Page. 249 The judgment of the
Church of England formerly concerning it ib. The judgment of the Schoolmen
ibid. The judgment of the ancient Fathes Page. 250 The judgment of a great
party of the reformed Churches. ibid. The Lords supper may be occasionally
delayed Page. 299 The argument borrowed from delay of the passover vindicated
ibid. Just occasions of delay instanced in Page. 302 No prescript for the time,
frequency of observation of the Lords Supper Page. 303 Directions for our
guidance about it Page. 304 When dispensed it may not without weighty reasons
be omitted Page. 306 Excuses for absence from it removed ib. The excuse of
unfitness examined Page. 307 The excuse of the want of a wonted Leiturgy
examined Page. 308 The excuse from the variation of a gesture, or posture
examined Page. 310 The excuse from a call to give an account of knowledge
examined Page. 311 The excuse from mixture of such that are supposed unworthy
examined -- ibid. See Sacraments.

T.
Tree OF life in Paradise a Sacrament Page. 9. 14 Tree of knowledge a Sacrament
ibid. These Trees had somewhat that answered their name -- Page. 12 Not by any
natural power ib. Reasons and experience making it good Page. 13 Why the Tree
of knowledge bears that name Page. 15, 16
Transubstantiation There is no such thing -- Page. 51 Titles. A communication
of them between Christ, and his Church Page. 448, 449 Titles given by the
Apostle to Baptized ones, do not always argue that in their thoughts they were
answered by inherent grace Page. 149
Type Variously used -- Page. 428 Leviticall types lead unto Christ in his
Priestly office Page. 566

U.
Visible Baptism and the Lords Supper, privileges of the Church visible Page.
187 Visibility Of interest the Churches rule in administering Sacraments Page.
118.187 Extreme Unction. The Matter. Page. 534 Form. Page. 534 Minister. Page.
534 Effects. Page. 534 Qualifications of the subject ib. Arguments evincing it
so be no Sacrament Page. 585
Unfitness For the Lords Supper, no excuse for a continued neglect of it Page.
307 Unregenerate Man may assent to the whole truth -- Page. 178
W.
Doctor Ward. VIndicated -- Page. 116, 117 Water In Baptism implies
uncleaness, with a possibility of cleansing not by our own, but by another
power -- Page. 368 It holds out the Spirit for sanctification ib. With the
blood for pardon Page. 369
Word. One and the same word often repeated in the same verse or near to it, in
a different sense Page. 573 Word of God A necessary means of faiths
nourishment Page. 509 Works Paul excludes not only works of merit, but all
works from justification -- Page. 574 He excludes all works that we have done
ib. He excludes all those works, or righteousness which is inherent ib. He
excludes all those works which the Law commands. Page. 575 He excludes all
those works which any in the highest pitch of grace can attain unto. ibid.

FINIS.
A Table of those Scriptures which are occasionally cleared, briefly
illustrated, or largely vindicated in this Treatise.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 9 10 3 22, 33 13, 14 5 9 598 8 21 363 9 8, etc. 516 Exodus.
Chap. Verse. Page 12 25 301 43, 44, 45. 75. 78 48, 49 75 13 4, 5 399 21, 22 521
45 301 14 19, 20 521 21, 22 523 16 14, 15 ibid. 17 6 524 Numbers.
Chap. Verse. Page 9 1. 300 15 521 11 7 523 14 14 521 20 9 524 21 17, 18 525
Deuteronomie.
Chap. Verse. Page 8 3 523 10 16 380 12 5, 6, 7 300 10, 11 301 16 usque ad 8
299, 300 30 6 376. 379 4 25 523 2 Chronicles. 16 8, 9 -- 638 34 3 301 3, 4
ibid. 35 19 -- ibid. Ezra.
Chap. Verse. Page 6 19 301 Nehemiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 9 19 521 20 523 25 524 Psalms.
Chap. Verse. Page 32 7, 8 352 37 25, 26 30 51 5 363 7 373 54 3 363 78 13 523 15
524 23 ib. 24 523 98 14 521 105 41 524 112 2, 3 30 114 7, 8 524 Jeremiah.
Chap. Verse. Page 9 25 379 10 25 299 11 3, 4 281 23 6 449 31 32, 33 84, 85 33
16 449 Ezekiel.
Chap. Verse. Page 12 10 204 Matthew.
Chap. Verse. Page 5 48 645 6 30 590 7 6 230 9 22 486 11 28 460 13 11, 12 54 39,
40, 49 269 15 26 260 20 29 166 24 32 269. 295 Mark.
Chap. Verse. Page 4 33 54 5 34 486 6 13 534 10 14 227 16 16 170 Luke.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 6 598 75 596 7 59 486 14 15 219 15 33 188 15 22 225 17 6
590 John.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 4 645 2 23 220 3 5 290 5, 8, 10, 12. 53, 54 6 53 227 53, 54
373 31, 49, 58 523 8 31 188 12 42 177 Acts.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 38 367 37, 38 108 39 174 41 217 47 299 8 13 160 17 530 37
176 10 47 165, 217 15 9 449, 450 22 16 376. 380 Romans.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 28 128 3 25 432. 567 28 587 30 451 4 1. usque aed 12 352 3
177 11 33, 35 17 218 5 9 587 8, 9 567 19 365 9 4 151 7 22 594 1 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 4 4 431. 575 5 11 261 6 12 372 7 14 150. 176 10 1, 2, 3 424
1, 2 525 4 524 5, 6, 7, 11 428 16, 17, etc. 48 17 358 11 28 227 12 12 4^9 13
358 14 14, 15, 16, etc. 199 15 34 100 56 604 2 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse. Page 1 12 431 21 67 7 1 452 13 5 492 11 645 Galatians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 19 599 3 14 444 18 451 Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page 2 -- 12 -- 299 3 17 444, 448 4 24 592 5 26 372 32. 2. 541,
etc. 1 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 5 23 586 2 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse. Page 3 14 261 Titus.
chap. verse. page 3 5 374. 380 Hebrews.
chap. verse. page 4 2 471. 481 8 7 364 9 26 269 11 29 523 11 throughout. 569
James.
chap. verse. page 2 25 572. 577 5 14, 15 535, 536 1 Peter.
chap. verse. page 1 4 17 22 452 3 20, 21 353. 387 21 170 1 John.
chap. verse. page 4 7 596 Revelation.
chap. verse. page 22 2 10 11 592 2 7 10

FINIS.

