A DISCOVRSE OF FIRE and SALT, DISCOVERING Many secret Mysteries, AS WELL
PHILOSOPHICAL, AS THEOLOGICAL.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1649.

To his worthy friend Captain Thomas Falconbridge.
SIR,
J Have been informed of your zeal and forwardness in advancing Learning and
Truth, two commendable virtues, for a man of your merit and profession. And
meeting with a subject composed by a French Author, I present the Translation
to your favorable acceptance: It is of foreign birth, though swadled up in an
English habit: It has done much good abroad, and I am confident it will do the
like here, if supported with your approbation: It had not seen the Press here,
had I not been assured of the candor and integrity of the Author. I repose
confidence of acceptance, because the Translator has been of your long
acquaintance, and was lately sensible of your propensity and assistance, when
he came in your way: If this may find grace with you, you will engage him to
make further inquisition into this most sacred and secret mystery, and to rest,

SIR, Your most affectionate friend EDWARD STEPHENS.

AN EXCELLENT TREATISE OF FIRE and SALT. Composed by the Lord Blaise of
VIGENERE.
The first part.
PYTHAGORAS who of all Pagans was undoubtedly, by common consent and
approbation, held to have made more profound search, and with less incertainty
penetrated into the secrets as well of Divinity, as of Nature, having quaffed
full draughts from the living source of Mosaicall Traditions, amid'st his dark
sentences, where, accordlng to the Letter, he touched one thing, and mystically
understood and comprised another; (wherein he imitates the Egyptians and
Chaldaeans, or rather, the Hebrews, from whence all theirs proceeded) he here
sets down these two: Not to speak of God without Light; and to apply Salt in
all his Sacrifices and Offerings; which he borrowed word for word from Moses,
as we shall hereafter declare. For our intention is here to Treat of Fire and
of Salt.

And that upon the 9. of Saint Mark, ver. 49. Every man shall be salted with
Fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt. Wherein four things come
to be specified, Man, and Sacrifice, Fire, and Salt; which yet are reduced to
two, comprehending under them, the other two; Man and Sacrifice, Fire and Salt;
in respect of the conformity they bear each to other.

In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth; this said Moses on the entrance
upon Genesis. Whereupon the Jew Aristobulus, and some Ethniques willing to show
that Pythagoras and Plato had read Moses books, and from thence drawn the
greatest part of their most secret Philosophy, alleged that which Moses should
have said, that the heaven and the earth were first created; Plato in his
Timaeus, after, Timaeus Locrien said that God first assembled Fire and Earth,
to build an universe thereof; (we will show it more sensibly of Zohar in the
Weik of a Candle lighted, for all consists of light, being the first of all
Creatures.) These Philosophers presupposing that the World consisted (as indeed
it does) of the four Elements, which are as well in heaven, and yet higher, as
in the earth, and lower, but in a diverse manner.

The two highest, Air and Fire, being comprised under the name of Heaven and
of the Aethereall Region: for the word (...) comes from the verb (...) to
shine, and to inflame, the two proprieties of these Elements. And under the
word Earth, the two lower, Earth and Water, incorporated into one Globe. But
although Moses set Heaven before Earth; (and observe here that in all Genesis
he touches at nothing but things sensible, but not of intelligible things;
which is a point apart) for concerning this, there is no good agreement between
Jews and Christians; Saint Chrysostom in his first Homily. Observe a little
with what dignity the Divine Nature comes to shine in his manner of proceeding
to the creation of things; For God contrary to Artists in building his Edifice,
stretched out first the heavens round about, afterward planted the earth below.

He wrought first at the head, and afterward came to the foundation. But it
is the Hebrews custom, that when they speak most of a thing, they ordinarily
put the last in order, which they pretend to touch first: And the same is here
practiced, where Heaven is alleged before Earth, which he comes to discry
immediately after.

In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth, and the Earth was without Form
and void; Saint Matthew uses the same, upon the entrance to his Gospel, The
Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, the son of Abraham,
Abraham begat Isaac, etc. For it is well known, that Abraham was a long time
before David: Otherwise it seems, that Moses would particularly demonstrate,
that the Earth was made before the Heaven, by the Creation of man, that is, the
Image and pourtrait of the great World, for that in the second of Genesis, God
formed man of the slime of the earth, (that is to say,) his body which it
represents; and afterward breathed in his face the spirit, or breath of life:
that carries him back to heaven; whereunto suits that which is written in the
1 to the Cor. 15. The first man from the earth is earthly, and the second man
from heaven is heavenly: the first man Adam was made a living soul; and the
last Adam, a quickening spirit. Whereto the Generation of the Creature relates,
who six weeks after the Conception, is nothing but a mass of informed flesh,
till the soul that is infused from above, does vivifie it.

Moreover the four Elements (whereof all is made) consists of four qualities,
Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist; two of them are bound up in each of them: Earth,
that is to say, Cold and Dry, the Water, Cold and Moist; the Air, Moist and
Hot; the Fire, Hot and Dry: whence it comes to join with the earth; for the
Elements are circular, as Hermes would have it; each being engirded with two
others, with whom it agrees in one of their qualities; which is thereunto
appropriate: as Earth betwixt Fire and Water, participates with the Fire in
dryness, and with Water in coldness; and so of the rest.

Man then which is the Image of the great World, and therefrom is called the
Microcosme, or little World, as the World which is made after the resemblance
of his Archetype, is called the great man; being composed of four Elements,
shall have also its heaven and its earth: The soul, and understanding, are its
heaven, the body and sensuality, its earth: So that to know the heaven and
earth of man, is to have true and entire knowledge of all the Universe, and of
the Nature of things.

From the knowledge of the sensible World, we come to that of the Creator, and
the Intelligible world; by the Creature, the Creator is understood, says Saint
Augustine, Fire then gives motion to the body, Air feeling, Water nourishment,
and Earth subsistence. Moreover heaven designs the intelligible world, the
earth the sensible: Each of them is subdivided into two, (in every case I
speak not but after Zohar and the ancient Rabbis.) The intelligible into
Paradise and Hell; and the sensible, to the Celestial and Elementary world:
Upon this passage Origin makes a fair discourse at the entry on Genesis, that
God first made the heaven or the intelligible world, following that which is
spoken in the 66. of Esaias, Heaven is my seat and Earth my footstool; Or rather
it is God in whom the world dwells, and not the world which is Gods
habitation: For in him we live, Act. 17.28.
move, and have our being; for the true seat and habitation of God, is his
proper essence: and before the Creation of the World, as Rabbi Eliezer sets
down, in his Chapte^s, there was nothing but the essence of God, and his name,
which are but one thing: Then after the heaven, or the intelligible world,
Origin pursues, God made the Firmament, that is to say, this sensible world;
for every body has I know not what firmness and solidity, and all solidity is
corporal; and as that which God proposed to make, consists of Body and of
Spirit, for this cause it is written, that God first made the Heaven, that is
to say, all spiritual substance, upon which, as upon a certain throne, he
reposeth himself. The Firmament for our regard is the body, which Zohar
calls the Temple, and the Apostle also, Ye are Gods Temple, 1 Cor. 3.17. And
the Heaven, which is spiritual, is our soul, and the inner man; the Firmament
is the external, that neither sees, nor knows God but sensibly. So that man
is double, an animal, and spiritual body, the one Internal, Spiritual,
Invisible; that which Saint Mark in this place designeth for man; the other
External, Corporal, Animal, which he denotes by the Sacrifice which
comprehends not the things that are of the Spirit of God, but the Spiritual
discerns all; So that the exterior man is an animal compared to brute
beasts, whereout they took their offerings for Sacrifices: He is compared to
foolish Beasts, and is made like them; for a man has no more then a Beast: we
must understand the Carnal, and Animal, that consists of this visible body,
that dies as well as Beasts, are corrupt and return to Earth: Whence Plato
said very well, that which is seen of man, is not man properly. And in the
first of Alcibiades, yet more distinctly, that Man is I know not what else,
then his body, namely his soul, as it follows afterward. That which Cicero
borrowed out of Scipio's dream; But understand it thus, that thou art not
mortal, but this body; thou art not that, which this form declares, but every
man's mind is himself, not that figure which may be demonstrated by the
finger: And the Philosopher Anaxarchus while the Tyrant Nicocreon of Cyprus,
caused him to be brayed in a great Marble Mortar, cried out with a loud voice,
Stamp hard, bruise the bark of Anaxarchus, for it is not him that thou
stampest.

But will it be permitted for me here, to bring something of Metubales? All
that is, is either Invisible, or Visible; Intellectual, or Sensible; Agent,
and Patient; Form, and Matter; Spirit, and Body; the Interior and the
Exterior man; Fire, and Water; that which sees, and that which is seen.

But that which sees is much more excellent and more worthy then that which is
seen, and there is nothing that sees, but the invisible, where that which is
seen, is as a blind thing; therefore Water is a proper and serviceable
subject, over whom the Fire or Spirit may out-stretch his action.

Also he has elevated it for his habitation and residence; for by introducing
it, he elevates it on high in the nature of Air contiguous unto it: which
invisible Spirit (of the Lord was carried on the waters, or rather did sit over
the waters) did see the visible, moved the immovable, for water has no motion
of it self; there is none but Air, and Fire, that have, and speak by the
Organs of one that is dumb; for as when by our wind and breath, filling a pipe
or flute, we make it sound though never so mute.

This Body and Spirit, water and fire, are designed unto us by Cain and Abel,
the first Creatures of all others engendered of the seed of man and woman, and
by their Sacrifices, whence those of Cain issuing from the fruits of the earth,
were by consequent corporal, dead, and inanimate, and together destitute of
faith, which depends of the Spirit, and are by Fire dissolved into a waterish
vapor, Pour le nouveau.
so that to go to find it in its sphere and habitation, for the news, we are
to suffer thereunder. But those of Abel were spiritual, animate, full of life,
that resides in the blood; full of piety and devotion. This also Aben Ezra, and
the author of the Handful of Myrrh, call a fire descending from one above to
regather them: which happened not to those of Cain, which a strange fire
devoured; and from thence was declared the exterior man, sensual, animal,
that must be salted with Salt; But Abel the interior, spiritual, salted with
Fire; which is double, the material and essential, the actual and
potentiall, as it is in burnings. All what is sensible, and visible, is purged
by the actual, and the invisible, and intelligible, by the spiritual and
potentiall. Saint Ambrose, on the Treatise of Isaac and of the Soul. What is
man, the soul of him, or the flesh, or the assembly of those two? for the
clothing is one thing, and the thing clothed another. Indeed there are two men
(I leave the Messibe apart) Adam was made and formed of God; in respect of the
body, of ashes, and of earth, but afterward inspired in him the Spirit of
Life; if he had kept himself from misprision, he was like unto Angels, made
participant of eternal beatitude, but his transgression dispossessed him. The
other man is he, which comes successively to be borne of man and woman, who by
his original offense is made subject to death, to pains, travails, and
diseases, therefore must he return from whence he came. But touching the
soul that came from God, it remains in its free will: if it will adhere to
God, it is capable to be admitted into the rank of his children, who are
borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, Joh. 1.13.
nor of the will of man, but of God. Such was Adam before his first
transgression.

The soul then, which is the inner man, spirit, and the very true man which
lives properly, for the body has no life of it self, nor motion; and is
nothing else but as it were the bark and clothing of the inner man, according
to Zohar, alleging that out of the 10 of Job 11. Thou have clothed me with
skin and flesh; whereunto that in the 6. of S. Matthew seems to agree,
where to show us how much the soul ought to be in greater recommendation then
the body, as more worthy and precious; our Savior says, Take no care then how
to cloth your body, is not your body better then raiment? and by consequent,
the soul more then the body, since the body is but as it were the vestment of
the soul, which is subject to perish, and to use, (all shall wax old as does a
garment.) And the Apostle in the 1 to the Corinthians, The old man falls
away, but the inner man is renewed daily; for it washes it self (according to
Zohar) by the fire, as does a Salamander, and the outward man by water, with
Soaps and Lees that consist of Salts. Of which two manners of repurging, it is
thus said in the 31. of Numb. v. 23. All that which shall support the fire,
shall be purged thereby, and that which cannot bear it, shall be sanctified by
the water of Purification; which was a figure of that which the Forerunner
spoke in the 3. of Matthew, It is true that I baptize you with water unto
repentance, but he that comes after me, shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost,
and with Fire.

But behold how Zohar speaks more particularly. If it be so, Adam what is he?
it is naught but skin, and flesh, and bones, and nerves, he must not pass so.
But to speak truth, man is nothing else, but the immortal soul that is in
him; and the skin, flesh, blood, bones, and nerves, are the vestments wherein
it is wrapped, as a little creature newly borne within the beds and linen of
its Cradle: These are but the utensils, and instruments allotted to women's
children, not to man or Adam; for when this Adam so made, was elevated out of
this world, he is divested of those instruments, wherewith he had been clothed
and accommodated. This is the skin wherewith the Son of man is envelopped
with flesh, bones, and nerves; and this consists in the secret mystery of
Sapience, according to that which Moses taught in the Curtains or Vails of the
Tabernacle, which are the inward vestment, and the Tabernacle the outward: To
this purpose, the Apostle in the fifth of the 2 to the Corinthians, says, We
know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have an
Aedifice not built with man's hand, but eternally permanent in the high Heavens.
For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon, with our house
which is from heaven, if so be, that being clothed we shall not be found
naked. So Adam in respect of his body, is a representation of the sensible
world; where his skin corresponds with the Firmament, extending heaven like a
Curtain. For as the heaven covers and enveloppeth all things, so does the
skin every man; in which, are introduced and fastened its stars and signs,
that is to say, the draughts and lineaments in the hands, the forehead, and
visage, in which wise men know and reveal, and makes them discern the
inclination of its natural, imprinted in the inward; And he that does
conjecture from thence, is as he, to whom heaven being covered with Clouds,
cannot perceive the constellations that are there, or otherwise darkened from
his sight. And although the sagest and most expert in these things can find
out something therein denoted by the draughts and lineaments of the palm of
the hand, and fingers, or within them; for by the outside, (it is case a part)
and show nothing, but the nails which are not a little secret and mystery,
because by death they are obfuscate, but have a shining luster while they live,
in the hair, eyes, nose, and lips, and all the rest of his person. For as God
has made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, thereby to declare to the great World,
not only the day, night, and seasons* but the change of times, and many signs
that must appear in the earth. So has he manifested in the little world Man,
certain draughts and lineaments, holding place of lights and stars, whereby
men may attain to the knowledge of very great secrets, not common, nor known
of all. Hence is it that the Intelligences of the superior world do distill
and breath as it were, by some channels their influences, whereby the effects
come to struggle and accomplish their effects here below, as of things drawn
with a rude and strong bow, will plant themselves within a Butt, where they
rest themselves.

But to retake the discourse of this double man, and the vestment of him, the
Apostle in the 1 Cor. 15. says, That there are bodies Celestial, and bodies
Terrestrial, yet there is a glory both of the one, and of the other. There is a
natural, or animal body, and there is a body spiritual: he will raise up the
spiritual body incorruptible; To this relates the Fire, to the corruptible
Salt.

From these vestments furthermore the occasion presents it self to a larger
extension, the better to declare who must be seasoned with Fire, and who with
Salt; which is here expressed by the offering, to whom the exterior does
correspond, according to the Apostle, Romans 12. I pray you brethren, by the
mercy of God, that you offer up your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable unto him, which is your reasonable service: which it could not make
it self the habitation of the Holy Ghost, if it were not pure, neat, and
incontaminate. Know you not that your Body is the Temple of the holy Spirit
which is in you? which in Scripture is commonly designed by fire, with which
we must be salted inwardly, that is to say, preserved from corruption; and
from what corruption? from sin that putrifies our souls. Origin in his 7.
book against Celsus speaking of its vestments, sets down, that being of it
self incorporeall and invisible, in what corporal place soever it finds it
self, it must have a body convenable to the nature of the place where it
resides. As then when it is in this Elementary world, it must have also an
elementary body, which it takes when it is incorporated in the belly of a
woman, to grow there, and there to live this base life with the body, that it
has taken to the limited term; which expired, it devests it self of this
corruptible vestment, although necessary in the earth from whence it came
(following that which God said to Adam in the third of Genesis, Thou art dust,
and shall return to dust,) to be revested with an incorruptible, whose
perpetual abode is in Heaven. For this corruptible must put on incorruption,
and this mortal must put on immortality. And so the soul putting off its first
Terrestrial vestment, takes another more excellent above in the Aethereall
Region, which is of the nature of Fire: hitherto Origin, to which nothing could
be found more conformable, then that which Pythagoras puts toward the end of
his golden verses: Thus forsaking this mortal body, thou passest into the free
Aethereall Air, you shall become an immortal God, incorruptible, and no more
subject to death: as if he would say, that after this material corruptible
body, shall put off the Terrestrial and impure vestment, the perfect portion
of it shall shake off these filthinesses and impurities, and shall pass aloft
to heaven and adhere to God, which it could not do, but being pure and neat;
nor effect this, but by fire. Zohar speaks to the same purpose, when the
Elements destroy themselves, an aethereall body succeeds in their place which
does recloath them; or to speak better, the aethereall body which was reclad
with them, devests it self; and this is represented to us in the 5 of Esther,
where it is said, that on the third day she took off her clothes that she
was wont to wear, and put on her royal apparel to appear before the King;
which signifies the holy Spirit, and Esther the reasonable soul, whose
vestments are the garments of the kingdom of Heaven; of which he that Daniel
3. chap. was said to be like to the Son of God, that crowns the just, and
adornes them with royal apparel, to bring them into the presence of the King
of Kings, to the Paradise of pleasure, cleansed with air from above, which the
holy Spirit breathed into it. Origin in his second Homily upon the 36 Psalm.
It is the manner of holy Scripture to introduce two sorts of men, that is to
say, the interior and the exterior, each of which, has need as much as
concerns him, of apparel, as well as nourishment; the external corporal man,
maintains himself with meats corruptible, proper and familiar to himself,
having ever need of Salt, besides their own connaturall; but there is also meat
for the inward, whereof it is said in the 8 of Deuteronomy, Man does not live
by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. And
for matter of drink, the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 10. Our fathers did eat the
same spiritual meat, and did drink the same spiritual drink; for they did
drink of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ.
Who speaking of this drink in the 4. of Saint John, says, that he is the
fountain of living water, and who so drinks of the water that he shall give
them, shall never thirst. There are also two rayments in regard of the inner
man. If he be a sinner, it is said Psalm 109. He has put on malediction as a
garment, which must be to him as his apparel, wherewith he is covered, and as
a girdle wherewith he is girt. And on the contrary the Apostle Col. 3. Lie not
one to another, having cast off the old man with his deeds, and put on the new,
but be clothed with mercy, benignity, humility, and meekness of Spirit.

These are the vestments which Zohar said were the good works and the nuptial
accoustrements of the soul, which cannot be washed or cleansed but by Fire,
Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because
it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what
sort it is, 1 Cor. 3.13. wherein they shall persist without impair, or
consumption, but shall be purified when the soul shall therewith be clothed;
from this unclean scumme, wherein there may remain some spots that the fire
goes on to purge, consuming and defacing them. But what it this fire? It is it
which is said in the 4 and 9 of Deuteronomy, our God is a consuming fire: which
as Irenaeus interprets, was to strike fear and terror into the Israelites; and
this afterward in the 12 to the Hebrews, 28, 29. Let us serve God acceptably
with fear and reverence, for our God is a consuming fire. For they had
sufficiently understood that the world once perished by the universal deluge,
and that it may not incur the like accident, but suffer its last
extermination by fire. Add that in the 33. of the Mosaicall Law, it is called
The Law of fire, which is in the right hand of the Almighty, because of its
austerity and rigor, all filled with menaces, with fears, with horrors; as
much as the Christian is, with sweetness and mercy: in his right hand, there
is a fiery Law: which the Chaldean Paraphrase interprets, for that it was
given on Mount Horeb, through the midst of fire, according as it is said in
the 4. to the purpose touching this fear. The Lord speak unto me saying,
Assemble the people there below, that they may hear my words, and learn to
fear me: Then came you near to the foot that burned even to heaven, and the
Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of fire. And Exodus 3. the burning bush
wherein God appeared unto Moses, and was not consumed. Of this consuming fire,
further speaks Zohar thus in conformity to that received Maxim in natural
Philosophy, that a great flame does devour and quench a less: as we may
sensibly perceive by a lighted Torch, which is extinguished by the Sunbeams,
and by a kettle set near a great fire that sucks and draws all out to it
self: He says then upon this Text of the 35. of Exodus You shall kindle no
fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath: To which purpose, said Rabbi
Simeon, was that ordained? and why was it not lawful to kindle a fire on the
seventh day? because that when men kindle fire, it goes ever upwards according
to its natural, and moving above every thing, following that of the 7. of
Sapience, where it is compared to fire. In Wisdom is the spirit of
understanding, holy, one only, manifold, subtle, lively, clear, undefiled,
plain, moveable above every thing, and overtops all by reason of its purity.
The Fire has two properties, to be moving, and pure, not participating of any
uncleanness; and all motion, is a kind of action and operation, forbidden
expressly on the Sabbath day. Fire then mounting aloft, caries with it the
impurities designed in the 10. of Leviticus by strange fire, which is there
devoured by that which proceeds from the presence of the Lord. And should be
as much, as thereby to draw from it self a judgment of his offenses that must
not be renewed in the sanctification of the Sabbath, for fear that the fire of
Gods wrath do not devour and consume that of our iniquities, and us at once, if
this our fire be not first purged by a stronger fire, that consumes and
devoureth the lesser and more feeble: Zohar runs through all that, and upon the
passage of the foresaid fourth of Deuteronomy. Thy God is a consuming fire; he speaks
further,

There is a double fire, the one stronger, that devoures the other. He that
will know it, let him contemplate the flame that parts and mounteth from a
kindled Fire, or from a Lamp or Torch; for it mounteth not, except it be
incorporated to some visible substance, and united with the air, whereupon it
feeds. But in the flame that mounteth there are two lights, the one white,
which shines and illightneth, having its root somewhat blew; the other red,
fastened to the wood, or to the weik that it burns. That which is white,
mounteth directly upwards, and underneath the red remains firm, and departs
not from the matter, administering wherewith to flame and shine to the other;
but they come upon the point to join and unite together, the one burning, the
other burned, till they be converted into that which predominates and plays
the master, namely the white, always the same without variation and change, as
the other does; which now grows black, after becomes red, yellow, peach
color, sky color, azure reinforced above and below, above with a white flame,
below with the blackness of the matter, which furnishes it where withal to
burn, and at the last is therewith consumed. For this azure, red, and yellow
flame, the more gross and material it is, endeavors always to exterminate
and destroy that which nourished and maintained it: as sins do the conscience
which harbors them, to the end to make them the perdition and ruin of all
that which adheres to it here below, so long, till at the last it remains
extinct; there where the light annexed thereunto, is not eternally extinguished
but goes freely upward, and returns to its proper place of abode, or
residence; having accomplished its action below, without changing its
brightness into any other color then white. In the like case is it of a tree,
whose roots are fastened within the earth, from whence it takes it nourishment,
as the weik takes his from the tallow, wax, or oil, which makes it burn.

The branch that draws its juice or sap, by the root, is the same as the weik,
where the fire is maintained by the liquor which it draws unto it, and the
white flame, are the branches and boughs, clad with leaves, the flowers and
fruits, whereunto tends the final end of a tree, are the white flame when all
comes to be reduced: wherefore Moses said that thy God is a consuming fire, as
it is true; for the fire consumes and devoures all that which is under it, and
upon which it exercises its action. And therefore very proper in the Hebrew
text Elohenu, thy God, and not Anonenu, thy Lord, because the Prophet was in
this superior white light, which neither devoureth, nor can be devoured. And
the Israelites were the blew lights, who endeavor to lift up themselves, and
unite to him under the law: for the ordinary of this blew light, inclining
rather to blackness, then to whiteness; it is true that is constituted as in
the midst, and to ruin and destroy all that it lays hold on, and whereunto it
adheres.

But if sinners submit thereunto, then the white light shall be called Admenu,
our Lord, and not Elohenu, our God, for that it domineers and devours it. And
it is this blew flame designed by the little and last (...) He of the sacred
venerable four lettered Jehovah, which assembles and unites with the three
first (...) Jehu the white light, which shines in a most clear simplicity
Trin-one, having under it the blackish, ruddy, and azure color of the little
(...) He, which is the humane nature consisting of the four Elements, for that
it is sometimes represented by 4 (...), the fourth letter of the Alphabet, and
which marketh the number of 4. You will say I have brought you here a prolixe
place of Zohar, I do avow it, but it must have a more ample explication, for
there are great mysteries covered thereunder. This Rabbi superlative to all
others, endeavoring in his profound and abstracted meditations which transcend
all to elevate our spirits by the similitude of a light, to the knowledge of
spiritual things, which differs not from our principal purpose, which is fire
and its effects.

Of this white light, and of its collaterals: other Rabbis speak, as Kamban,
Gerundensis; That by the Caballe it appears unto us, that the Scripture was an
obscure and dark fire, upon the back of white fire, and marvailously
resplendent.

It is the fire (say they) of the holy Spirit, consuming our iniquities,
denoted by the red inflamed ardor, and the blew and azure flame, which is the
strange fire, as Saint Ambrose very well expounds it in his fourth Epistle to
Simplician.

Strange fire, is all the ardor of slippery concupiscence, of avarice, hatred,
rancour, and envy; And of this fire no man is purged nor expiated, but well
burned, which if men offer in the presence of the Lord, celestial fire will
devour, as it did Nadab and Abibu; and therefore, he that will purge his sin,
he must cast off from him this strange fire, and let him expiate therefrom;
whereof it is said in the 6 of Esaias 6. One of the Seraphims flew to me having a
live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the Tongs from off the Altar,
and touched my lips, saying, Lo this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity
is saken away, and thy sin purged. Having said a little before, that all the
house was filled with smoke, which is as an excrement and vapor of fire, be
it before it be lighted, or inflamed, or after it be mortified, and extinct;
from whence it comes to procreate soot, then which, there is nothing more
troublesome and hurtful to the eyes, having carried away with it a parcel of
a dustible corruption; which administered to the fire its nourishment and food
This may be seen in the distillation of soote, where there appears a notable
quantity of inflamable oil, which causes it yet to burn; and of this burning
there will arise a smoke, which will again be concreted into a burning
smoke, as a foresaid, but not so much.

These are the remnants of sin, whereof remained some stains printed in the
soul, until at the last, by a successive repurgation of fire, it be reduced
to a point of complete purity; whereof it is spoken in the 4. of the Canticles,
Thou art fair my welbeloved, there is no blemish in thee; which the white
flame notifies, which is the highest degree of burning. Those also well know it
that maintain a fire, for when a Furnace begins to be hot, it waxes black,
then enforcing the fire, it becomes red, and at last it waxes white when it is
in the supreme and high degree of heat, where it persisteth in whiteness more
and more. Such are the actions of fire, but there are great mysteries
thereunder, ever to declare further the advantage and praecellency, that the
white color has above the red, as to the Christian faith, designed by white
water, Apoc. 4, and 6. and 15.2. (In the middle of the Throne there was a Sea
of Glass, like unto Crystal,) far above the Judaicall faith, red, heat with
rigor, and severity, designed by a pillar of fire, that in the night season
conducted the Israelites through the Wilderness, and the white cloud by day,
Exodus 13.21. In the secret Hebrew Theology, the red always notes Gheburah,
Austerity; and the white Ghedulah, or Mercy; Eliah was transported, and by
force carried into heaven, in a fiery Chariot, drawn with the like horses. But
in the transfiguration of our Savior, Mat. 17.2. His vestments became white as
sn^w; and Apoc. 3.6. The Elect are ever clothed in white; and in the 6.11.
speaking of the martyred Saints for the faith of their Redeemer, there was
given unto every one of them white robes; Having set down a little before, that
the Angel which had gotten the victory, and the Crown, was mounted on a white
horse, (as in the 19, and 20. the Throne of God is dressed with white) and he
that was mounted on the red horse, had a great bloody sword in his hand, that
one might massacre another. But yet more expressly in the first of Isaiah,
Although your sins were as red as fine Scarlet, they should be as white as
Snow. And further, though they were as red as crimson, they will become as
white as wool.

But some may say here are many things, which by little and little do turn us
from our principal aim, and are as it were extravagant dresses. But not
altogether, yet as to mount some sharp precipice, we must turn about to go
at more ease, to shun cliffes and precipices: So are we sometimes to make
some small by-courses and digressions to facilitate our Theme. Rivers that go
turning are more commodious for Navigation, then those that run impetuously
one way down.

There shall be nothing at last (God willing) unprofitable, nor from the
purpose. Then all this red and white, is but Fire and Water, the pillar of fire
by night, and the white cloud by day; into which, as the Apostle says, the
people of the Jews were baptized; and in this cloud the divine Wisdom
established his Throne; that of the Law of Moses, this of grace; Fire and Salt.
Zohar speaking of Moses his two first Tables, broken for the Idolatry of the
Golden Calfe, with two pillars, the one of fire, representing natural heat,
by which all things are vivified; the other is water, that is radical moisture,
which maintains life, (from which, that is not much different in the 15. of
the Apoc. where it is said, that he saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with
fire,) which radical moisture was perverted and changed in the deluge by the
universal inundation, so that it was not since so vigorous as before: but
shall at last be brought to extermination on all sides, at the end of time by
a final conflagration. The first mutation shall meet with some mercy, the race
of mankind being at that time not wholly extinct, but the remainder was saved
with Noah, and his in the Arc: but the second shall have none, but all shall
perish by the extreme rigor of fire: To the purpose of these two substances,
the Assyrians and other people of the East adored Fire, as that which
represented to them natural heat, and the Egyptians with all those on the
South of Nilus, which is radical moisture which goes to render it self into a
Sea impregned with salt, to preserve it in the end from corruption: Now for
this effect, all humors of animal bodies, blood, spittle, urine, and the
rest, are salted, without which, all would corrupt each other, in an instant:
Behold the difference that there is in holy writ, that apply the meditations of
things sensible to Sacramental mysteries; and of ratiocinations of blind
Paganism, who not turning it but above the bark, penetrate no further, then
that which the uncertain and doubtful sense may make them comprehend, without
passing further to the relation of divine things; where at last al must refer
to spiritualty: resembling therein properly to the Ostrich, who beats
sufficiently with the wing as if she would mount to heaven, but yet her feet
for all that, do not forsake the earth.

The Phaenician Theology, admitted but of one Element, Fire; which is the
principal and chief of all, the productor, and destroyer of all things: which
does not much disagree from that in the 118. Psalm. is the fiery word by which
times were formed. Heraclitus also puts fire, for the first substance that
informed all, and from whence they drew all things from power into action, as
well superior, as inferior, celestial and terrestrial: For hot and cold,
moist and dry, are not substances, but qualities and accidents; from whence
natural Philosophers forged four Elements, whereas according to verity there
is but one; which according to the vestments that it receives from the
accidental quality, takes diverse appellations. If from the heat, it is from
the Air; from moisture, Water; from dryness, Earth; which three are but one
fire, but reclothed with diverse and different habits. Even as Fire extending it
self in all, and through all; so all things come to render unto it, as to the
center. So that it may be rightly called an infinite and indetermined vigor of
nature, or rather the vivification thereof, for without it nothing could be
comprehended, seen, or obtained, above or below; that which illightens is
celestial, that which concocts and digests Aereall, and that which burns, is
terrestrial; which cannot subsist without some gross matter coming from the
Earth, which he reduces in the end to it self; as we may see in things
burned, converted to ashes, from whence after the extraction of Salt, rests
nothing but pure earth. Salt being a potentiall fire, and waterish, that is to
say, terrestrial water, impregned with fire; from whence all sorts of
mineralls, come to production, for they are of the nature of Water. The
experiment may be seen in strong Waters, all composed of mineral Salts,
Alums, Saltpeters, which burn as Fire: which produces hot and dry exhalations
agitated with winds, easy to take flame, also of flints, of Iron, and of Wood,
and of scraped bones, especially those of a Lion, as says Pliny: whence we may
gather that there is potentiall fire in all.

Not without cause then did Pythagoras, after Moses, ordain not to speak of
God, or divine things, without fire: for of all things sensible, there is
nothing that symbolizeth, or more corresponds with Divinity then Fire:
Aristotle writing to Alexander related unto him, that he had learned of the
Brachmans, that there was a fifth Element or Essence, which is fire, wherein the
Divinity resides: because it is the noblest, and purest of all the Elements;
and that which purges all things according to Zoroastes: Plutarch alleges
that this Divinity is a spirit of a certain intellectual fire, that has no
form, but transformes to it self all that it touches, and transmutes it
self into all, as Proteus the Genius of Egypt was wont to say, Omnia
transformat sese in miraecula rerum.

And according to Zoroastes all things were engendered of this fire. It is the
light which dwells (this says Porphyrius) in an Ethereal fire, for the
elementary dissipates all: But more authentically, Saint Denis, in the 15. of
the Celestial Hierarchy. Fire, forasmuch as its essence is void of all form,
as well in color, as in figure, has been found the most proper to represent
Divinity to our senses, forasmuch as they can conceive and apprehend of the
nature and divine Essence. The very Scripture in many places, call God and
Angels Fire, and does not only propose unto us Chariots and wheels of Fire;
but of igneall animals, of burning brooks and rivers, of coals and men all
burned: All these celestial bodies are but flaming lights, and thrones, and
Seraphims all of fire; there is so great affinity and agreement with Divinity:
for the fire that the feeling and smelling perceives, is separated in respect
of the substance from all others, that may be joined and mingled therewith,
except it be of the matter, to which it is incorporated to burn. It shines,
it spreads it self from side to side, and gathering it self to its self,
with its light it illustrates all that is near it, nor can it be seen
without the matter whereto it adheres, and exercises its action no more then
Divinity, but by its effects; nor arrest, nor fasten, nor mingle with any
thing, nor change so long as it lives, there where it handles all things, and
draws them to its self, and to its nature. It renewes and rejoices all with
vital heat, it illustrates and illuminates all, tending always upward, with
agility and incomparable speed. It communicates his motion to all, its light,
its heat, without any diminution of its substance, what portion soever it
lends, but ever remains entire in it self. It comes suddenly and returns as
fast, without man's knowledge whence it comes, or whither it goes: with many
other worthy considerations of this common fire, which brings us to the
knowledge of the divine fire; whereof this material, is but as a garment and
coverture; and Salt the coverture of Fire, which is appeased in Salt, and
agrees with its enemy, Water; as Earth in Saltpeter does with its
contra-opposite the Air; by reason of the water that is between them, for
Saltpeter participates of the nature of Brimstone, and of Fire, for that it
burns; and of Salt, for that it resolves into water. For says Heber, it is
the property of Salts, and Alums, to be dissolved into water, since they were
made thereof. But of this more to the purpose hereafter in its place.

The meditations of the Covertures, and revestments are of no small importance,
to mount from things sensible, to things intelligible, for they are all
infolded one in another, as an Encyclie or a spirall Moon. Zohar makes these
revestments double, Page 29. Encyclides ab (...) round. Ephesians. 4.22, 24.
the one mounting and devesting its self, Put off the old man, and put on the
new; for no spiritual thing descending downwards, operates without a vestment;
Sit ye in Jerusalem till you be clad with power from above, Luke 24.49. And in
this case the body envelopeth and reclotheth the spirit, the spirit the soul,
the soul the intellect, the intellect the Temple, the Temple the Throne, the
Throne the Sechinah, or the glory and presence of God, which shines in the
Tabernacle. In descending, this glory is shut out from the Throne, and from the
Arc of the Covenant, which is within the Tabernacle, or Intellect, the
Tabernacle within the Temple, which is our Soul; Ye are the Temple of God the
Temple is in Jerusalem, our vital spirit, Jerusalem, in Palestine, our body,
and Palestine in the midst of the earth whence our body is composed.

God then being a pure Spirit, stripped of al corporeity and matter, (for our
soul being such, for more reason must he be so, that made it to his image and
resemblance) he cannot be in this simple and absolute nakedness
comprehended, nor apprehended by his Creatures, but by certain attributes
which they give him* which are as many vestments, which the Caballists do
particularize to ten Zephirots, or numerations; 3 in the intelligible world;
and 7 in the celestial; which come to terminate in the Moon, or Malcut, the
last in descending, and the first in mounting from the Elementary world
upwards, for it is a passage from here below to heaven. So that the
Pythagoreans call the Moon the Celestial earth; and the heaven or terrestrial
Star, all the nature here below in the elementary world, being in regard of the
celestial, and the celestial of the intelligible; this Zohar called feminine
and passible, as from the Moon toward the Sun, from whom so much as she
absents her self till she comes to its opposition, by so much she increases
in light for our regard here below; where on the contrarry in her conjunction,
that she remains all darkened, the party upward is all illightned, to show
us, that the more that our understanding does abate to things sensible, so much
the more does he disjoine or sever them from the intelligible; and
contrariwise, this was the cause that Adam was lodged in an earthly Paradise,
to have more leisure to contemplate on divine things; when he thought to turn
after sensible and temporal things, willing to taste of the fruit of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, whereby he departed from that of life, to
assubject himself to death, he was banished from thence and put out. To this
very purpose Zohar does yet add, that two vestments come from heaven to this
temporal life; The one formal, white, and resplendent; masculine, fatherly,
and agent; for whatsoever is active takes place from form, of the male and
from the father, and this very thing comes to us from fire, and from the
clearness of the stars to illustrate our understanding. The other is red,
maternall, faeminine; for the soul, coming from the substance of heaven, which
is more rare then that of heavenly bodies. That of the understanding is lodged
in the brain, and the other of the soul, in the heart. The intellect or
understanding, is that part of the reasonable soul made and formed after the
image and semblance of its Creators and the soul in it, the animal faculty
called Nephesch, the life, namely, that which resideth in the blood: and as the
heaven contains the stars, this contains the intellect, which to us is for the
rest common with brute beasts. But the intellect, or reasonable soul is proper
and particular to men, that which can merit or demerit; therefore it needs
repurgation and cleansing from the spots that it has drawn and conceived from
the flesh wherein it was plunged, according to that in the 8. of Genesis 21.
The thought and imagination of man's heart, were inclined to evil from his
youth. And fith it is a question, about cleansing the vestment which is of a
fiery nature, it must likewise be, that it be done b^ means of fire; for we
see by experience, that one fire chaseth away another, as it has been said
heretofore, so that if a man be burnt, there is no readier remedy, then to
burn it again in the same place; enduring the heat of the fire as much as you
can: which draws the inflammation to its self, out of the party, or else
tempering it with Aqua vitae wherein Vitriol has been calcined, from whence
Surgeons have not found a more sovereign remedy to take away the fire of a
musket sho^, to heal inflammations and gangrenes; and yet there are two fires
joined together. But ^h^at which during this life must repurge our souls, i^
that whereof ^^int Augustine in the 29. Sermon speaks thus out of the Apostles
words, for there is another afterward: Kindle in your selves a sparkle of good
and charitable dilection, blow it, and kindle it, for when it shall grow to a
great flame, that will consume the hay, wood, and chafe of all your carnal
concupiscences, but the matter wherewith this fire must be continued, are
prayers, and good works, which must always burn on your altar, for it is it
whereof our Savior said, I am come to put fire in the earth, and what will I
if in be already kindled Luke 12.49. There are further two fires: one on the
bad part, to wit, of carnal concupisence; the other of the good, which is
charity, which consumes all the bad, leaving nothing but good, which exalts it
self in a fume of a sweet odor; for the heart of every on, is as an altar,
either of God or of the adversary: and therefore he that is illuminated with
the torch of charity, which must more and more be increased by good works,
that it may nourish in it self the ardour that our Savior will vouchsafe to
kindle, whereby that is accomplished, which the Apostle says in the 5 to the
Ephesians. That Jesus Christ has appropriated to himself a Church, not having
spot or wrinckle, holy, and pure, without blemish. For that which the Church is
in general, and common toward God, the conscience of every one of us, is in
particular the same, when it is sincerely prepared, as it is requisite; and
that upon the f^^ndation thereof, men build Gold, Silver, precious stones; that
is to say, a firm faith, and belief, accompanied with good works, without
which faith is dead and buried; all upon the model and pattern of the heavenly
Jerusalem designed in the 21 of the Apoc. which is the type of the Church; as
is also the reasonabl^ soul, where it must burn always with fire upon the
Altar, and after the imitation of the wise and prudent virgins, we may have our
lamps ready, well lighted, and garnished with what is needful to maintain
light, attending the Bridegroom: as our Savior commanded is in Saint Luke 12.

Zohar furthermore makes this repurgation of the soul to be double, which is
not sa^r ^^sagreeing from our belief. One is whilst the soul is y^^ j^^ne
body, ^ee calls that according to the mystical manner of ^^king, the
conjunction of the Moon with the Sun then when i^^^^ard of ^^ here below it
is not illuminated; for as long as the soul is an^exed within the body, it
enjoyes very little of its own light, being all darkened thereby, as if it
were imprisoned in some dark obscure prison. And this repurgation does consist
in repentance of its misdoings, satisfaction for them, and conversion to a
better life; in fastings, alms, prayers, and other such penitences, which may
be exercised in this world. The other is, after the separation of soul and
body, which is made in the purgative fire; which neither Jews, Mahometans, or
Ethnicks, ever called in doubt.

But when with supreme light life leaves us, yet all evil from miserable men,
nor yet all coporeall plagues do pass away, and the punishment of old evils do
weigh us, some are exposed to vain winds; to others under a vast gulf their
infected wickedness is washed off, or burnt with fire.

Where there are set forth three repurgative Elements, Air, Water, and Fire;
But we must not understand (says Saint Augustine, on his third Sermon upon
such as are diseased) that by this transitory fire grievous and mortal
offenses, and capital sins are purged, if they have not been repented of in
this temporal life; or to blot out the expiation on the other side, where the
rest is perfected in the fire, as man-slayers, adulterers, false witnesses,
concussions, violences, rapines, injustices, infidelity, erroneous
obstinations, and the like; which are directly opposite to Gods Divine precepts
and commandments: but the smaller faults only, which they call venial
sins, as eating and drinking to excess, vain words, foolish desires, and
depraved concupiscences, not brought to effect: not to exercise the works of
mercy, whither common charity, and commiseration calls us, and such other
frailties: of which if we repent not, in this world, fire shall repurge us in
another, and more sharply. To this purpose the Hebrews make a triple
distinction of sins, Chataoth are those that we mistake against our selves,
without hurting any other, but our selves, gourmandizings, inconstancies,
lazines, idleness, anger, spite. The Avonoth, are addressed to our neighbor,
which do not blot out and pardon, but by means of reparation: and the Peschaim
the transgressions, praevarications, and impieties, directly addressed against
God: They draw this first out of the 34 of Exodus 7. pardoning iniquity,
rebellion, and offenses; more in the 106 Psalm. 6. We have sinned, we have
committed iniquity, we have done foolishly; and in the 9 of Dan. Chatanu,
Veavinu, Vehirsannu; there are sins says Zohar, imprinted above, others
below, and others both in the one and in the other; above, against God; below,
against our neighbor; and in the one, and in the other against our selves,
bodies and goods, as well our neighbors as our own; noting that below, the
soul; that above, made after the image and semblance of God. If they be
blotted out below, they are so above. Jesus Christ after his resurrection
breathed on his Disciples, and said unto them, Receive the holy Ghost; To whom
soever you pardon sins, they shall be pardoned; and whose sins soever ye
retain, they are retained. Joh, 20.23. that which you shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven.

But to return to the reclo^thing, and to say something thereof, the superior
is always clad with the inferior, the intelligible world, with the
celestial, which is but as it were a shadow thereof, and the celestial with
the elementary: and notwithstanding it would seem clean c^ntrary by the
figure of Hypallage as in the 18. Psalm. God has put his Tabernacle in the
Sun, which is to say, he has put the Sun in his Tabernacle, which is,
heaven; for God does not reside in this World, but rather the World in God, who
comprehends all, for in him we live, we move, and have our being. Also the
intelligible world should be clothed with the celestial, and the celestial
with the elementary. But this to show that we cannot well comprehend heaven,
being so remote from us; but by that which is expounded to the knowledge of our
senses here below, nor of the s parated Intelligences, but by the sensible.
There was nothing (said the Philosopher) in the intellect, that was not first
in the sensse. And the Apostle in the first to the Romans, that the invisible
things of God, are seen in the Creation of the world, by those that were made.
This all conformably unto Zohar, In thee (said he; in the prayer of Elias
addressing himself to God) there is no resemblance, nor any image interior,
or exterior; but further, thou have created heaven and earth, and produced out
of those the Sun, and the Moon, the Stars and the Signs of the Z^diack;
and in earth Trees, and Herbs, delights in Gardens, with Beasts, Birds, and
Fishes, and at last Men; that from thence things above might be known. And of
the su^eriours, the inferiors together, so that the one and the other may be
governed: Plutarch alleges in his Treatise of Osiris, that in the City of
Sais in Egypt, there was such an inscription in the Temple of Minerva, borne
out of Jupiters brain, which is nothing else but the sapience of the Father.

I am that which was, which is, and which shall be, and as yet there is none
amongst mortal men, that has yet discovered my veil: for Divinity is so
wrapped in darkness, that you cannot see day through it. I see him not, for he
is darkened with an over dark cloud, said Orpheus: and in the 17 Psalm. which
made darkness his hiding place. Further in the 4 of Deuteronomy. You came to the
foot of a mountain that burned, even to heaven, and therein was darkness,
thick clouds, and obscurity: for in regard of God toward us, light and
darkness, are but one thing: as is his darkness, such is his light: And in
the 16 of Isaiah, Make thy shadow as the night, in the midst of the noone day.
The very same, as well the affirmative, as the negative; by which, that which
is aequippollent unto darkness, we may better apprehend something of the
Divine Essence, but not by the affirmative, that relates unto light, as Rabbi
Moses does excellently well dispute it in his 57. chapter of his first book of
More: For the Divine light, is insupportable above all to all his Creatures,
even to the most perfect, following that which the Apostle sets down in the 1
of Tim. 6. God dwells in light in accessible, that no man can see: So that it is
to us in stead of darkness, as the brightness of the Sun is to Moulds, Owls,
and other night birds: which darknesses are the revestments, and as the borders
and cloisters of the light; for represent to your selves some Lantern placed
on the top of a mountain: all round about it as from the Center to the
Circumference, it shall spread its light equally, as far as it can extend it:
so that at the last darkness will terminate it, for darkness is nothing else,
but the absence and privation of light: Even the very same, the exterior man,
carnal, animal, is the coverture; yea darkness of the interior spiritual:
after the manner or fashion of some Lantern of wood, or stone, and other
dark matter, which keeps that the light there shut in, could not show forth
its light, the Lantern symbolizing to the body, and the light within to the
soul. But if the body be subtiliated to an aethereall nature, from thence it
comes to pass, as if the Lantern were of some clear Crystal, or of
transparent horn: for then the soul and its functions, do shine there about
openly without obstacle. Since then, to the one of these two, namely to the
inner man, is attributed fire, that answers to the soul, and salt to the
outward man, which is the body: as the sacrifice or man animal is the
revestment of the spiritual designed by the Man, and by Fire: The vestment of
this Fire will be Salt, in which, fire is potentially shut in; for all Salts
are of the nature of fire, as being thereof begotten. Geber says, that salt is
made of every thing that is burned, and by consequent, participant of its
proprieties, which are to purge, dry, hinder corruption, and unboile; as we
may see in all salted things which are as it were half boiled, and are kept
longer incorrupt then raw, also in potentiall burning irons which burn, and
are nothing else but Salt.

Will it be lawful for us here to bring one entire passage of Rhases in a
book of the Secret Triplicity? for it is not common to all, and we will
strongly insist on this number by reason of the three Fires and three Salts,
whereof we pretend to Treat. So that there is a Mystery in this number of 3
that must not be forgotten, for that it represents the operation, whereof Fire
is the Operator; for 1, 2, 3, makes 6. the 6 days wherein God in the Creation
of the world perfected all his works, and rested the seventh day.

There are (says Rhases) three natures, the first whereof cannot be known
nor apprehended, but by a deep elevated Meditation: This is, that all-good God
Almighty, Author, and the first Cause of all things; The other is neither
visible, nor tangible, although men should be all contrary; that is to say,
heaven in its rarity. The third is the Elementary World, comprehending all that
which is under the Aethereall Region, is perceived and known by our senses.
Moreover God which was from all aeternity, and with whom before the Creation of
the world, there was nothing but his proper name known to himself, and his
Sapience; that which he created on the first day, was the water wherein he
mingled earth, then came he to procreate after, that which had a being here
below. And in these two Elements, thick and gross, perceptible to our senses,
are comprehended the two other, more subtle and rare, Air, and Fire. These
four bodies being, (if we must call them bodies) bound together with such a
minglement, that they could ot perfectly separate. Two of them are fixed,
namely, Earth nd Fire, as being dry and solid; the other two volatile, Water,
and Air, which are moist and liquid: so that each Element is agreeable to the
other, two wherewith is bounded and enclosed, and by the same means, contains
two in it self, the one corruptible, the other not, the which participates of
the Divine nature: and therefore there are two sorts of Waters, the one pure,
simple, and elementary; and the other common, which we use in Lakes, Wels,
Springs, and Rivers, raines and other impressions of the Air. There is
likewise a gross Earth, filthy and infected; and a Virgin Earth, crystalline,
clear, and shining, contained and shut up in the Center of all the composed
Elementaries; where it remains revested, and covered with many foldings one
upon another. So that it is not easy to arrive there, but by a cautelous and
well graduated preparation by fire. There is also a fire which is maintained
almost of it self, and as it were of nothing, so small is the nourishment that
it needs; whence it comes to be more clear and lucent, and another obscure,
dark, and burning, and consuming all that to which it is fixed, and it self
at last. And Air on the other side pure and clean, with another corruptible
full of legerity, for of all the Elements, there is none more easy to be
corrupted then the air; all which substances so contrary and repugnant,
mingled with elementary bodies are the cause of their destruction: wherefore of
necessity that which is pure and incorruptible, must be separated from its
contrary, the corruptible and impure, which cannot be done but by fire, the
separator and purificator. But the three liquid Elements, Water, Air, and
Fire, are as inseparable one from the other, for if the Air were distracted
from the fire, the fire which has therefrom one of its principal
maintainments and food, would suddenly extinguish, and if the water were
separated from the Air, all would be in a flame. That if the Air should be
quite drawn from the water, for as much as by its legerity, it holds it
somewhat suspended, all would be drowned. Likewise if Fire should be separated
from the Water, all would be reduced into a deluge. For three Elements
nevertheless may well be disjoined from the Earth, but not wholly, there must
remain some part to give consistence to the Body: and render it tangible, by
the means of a most subtle and thin portion thereof, which they will
elevate with them, out of this gross thickness that remains below, as we may
sensibly see in glass, which by an industrious Artifice of fire, is depured of
the darkness that was in the ashes, to pass from thence to a transparent
clearness, which is of the nature of Fire and indissoluble Salt, accompanied
with a firm and solid thickness, having neither transpiration nor pores.

But wherefore should we not hereto file all in one train, those so excellent
Meditations of Zohar, since all depends on the same purpose? God formed Adam of
the slime of the earth, or according to the Hebrew, God formed man dust of the
earth; which word of forming belongs properly to Potters, who fashion of
earth all that they think good. And touching the dust, this is but to abate
our pride, with which we may be swollen, when we consider the vile and
corruptible matter, whereof we are made, in respect of our bodies, which is
nothing else but mire and dirt. Consider then three things (says Zohar) and
thou shall not fall into transgression. Remember from whence thou art come, of
such filthy and foul stuff, and whither thou must at last return, to dust,
worms, and rottenness; and before whom thou art to render an account, and
reason of all thy actions, and comportments; who is the sovereign Judge, the
King of all, who leaves no transgression unpunished, nor good work
irrecompensed. Adam then and all his posterity were formed of the dust of the
earth, which had before been moistened with the fountain or vapor, which was
highly elevated by the Sunnebeams to water and to soften the earth: For the
Earth being of it self cold, and dry, is altogether sterill and fruitless, if
it be not impregned with moisture and heat, whence proceed fecundity. So that
Adam was composed of Earth and Water mingled together: These two elements
betoken a double faculty in him, and double formation, the one of the body, in
regard of this age; the other of the soul, in another world. Water shows the
celestial Meditation whereto our spirit may exalt it self; and the earth of
it self immovable, and that can never budge from below, nor willingly mingle
with the other three volatile elements, by reason of its extreme dryness, so
that it does but grow hard by the action of fire, and makes it self more
contrary and untractable by the spirit of contradiction hard and refractory
from the flesh, against the spirit, so that she should reject the water which
men thought to put therein, if it were not by means of the subtle Air,
interposing and mingling therewith, and penetrating into the smallest parts:
which being sucked within the water, forces the earth to feed on it, to enclose
it in her self, as if she would detain it prisoner, and by that means
remains great; as the female by a male: for every superior thing in order and
degree, holds the place of male, to that which is inferior and subject
thereunto.

Now if the Air absent it self, which associates and unites them together, as
being suppeditated and banished, which is moist and hot, from the extreme
dryness and coldness of the earth, it will force it with all its power to
reject the water, and so reduce it self to its first dryness; which we may
perceive in Sand, which will never receive water, except it be quickly
separated. Even so the earth is always rebellious and contumacious of it self
to be mollified, be it by water, by air, by fire; and after this manner there
was a spirit of contradiction and disobedience introduced into Adam, by reason
of the earth, whereof he was formed: as his Companion and himself do show,
when by the suggestion of the Serpent, the most terrestrial animal of all
others, they so easily contradicted that extreme prohibition which was given
them of not tasting the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil: for the
punishment whereof, it was said to the Serpent, thou shallt eat earth all the
days of thy life: which Isaiah resumes in 65. chap. Dust is thy bread: And to
Adam, that the earth should produce nothing but thorns, briars, and thistles,
by means whereof, if he would live, he must cultivate it with the sweat of his
brows, till he return to that from whence he was drawn, for being dust he
must return to dust. But water which notifies Divine speculations, disirous to
mingle, and unite with all things, to whom it gave beginning, and made them
grow and multiply, is as the carriage or vestment of the spirit, following that
which was said in the beginning of the Creation, that the Spirit of God was
stretched over the waters, or as the Hebrew word Marachephet caries it,
hovering over them, fomenting and vivifying them, as a Hen does her Chickens,
with a connaturall heat; for this word Elobim imports I know not what, of heat
and fire. By Water then the docill spirit, obedient to the invitations of the
intellect, insinuated it self into Adam; and by Earth the refractory, and
opiniaster, that spurneth against the prick; for as the earth was the most
ignoble Element of all others, water rejects it, and disdaineth it, and could
agree with it, but as to a lee and excrement; but if the pure and neat spirit
remains within the water, where it made choice of its residence; for from the
three natures of earth, water at least never joines with the two, (that is to
say) sand, for its extreme dryness that causes a discontinuation of parts:
and the dirt to be fatty and unctuous: there is not any thing else, Argilla.
but slime only, with which some food and mingling which may be thereof made,
the water at last lets it reside below, and it swimmes over: as being of a
contrary nature, the one altogether immovable, solid, and compact; the other
fluent, removing, and gliding as blood through the veins, wherein the spirits
reside; who can easily be elevated to be of a fiery quality, always soring
upward: So that the water which notifies the interior spirit, endeavors to
divest it self of this external coagulation; for all coagulation is a kind
of death and waterishnesse of life; and would never more associate therewith,
nor revest it self by reason of its contumacy; were it not that the sovereign
Master, and Lord Adonai by his providence, for the propagation of things, (as
long as he shall please to maintain in being, this fair work of his hands)
constrain these two, Earth and Water, to agree in a sort together, by its
Angel or Minister that rules in the Air. Man moreover has toward himself
frank and free will in his full power and disposition: The appetite of sin
shall be under thee, and thou shall have domination over it, Genesis 4. But if he
be adheering to the earth, Genesis 4.7.
(that is to say) to carnal desires and concupiscences, whereunto he is most
inclinable, he shall do nothing but evil. And if to the spirit, designed by
water, all that he does shall go well. The River of God is filled with
waters. And in the 44. of Isaiah, I will power out water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will power out my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. So that as long as the water does
suffer and remain united with the earth, the good Spirit rests with man, by
which we are admonished by the wise man, Prove. 5.15. to drink waters out of
our Cisterne, and rivers out of our own Well. But when the earth by its
rebellious and repugnant drought, rejects water, there rests nothing
therein but its hard and refractary obstination, till that by means of the
air, the spirit that joines and unites them together (which are holy
inspirations) it be newly remoistned and watered: By means whereof when we
have this good spirit of salutary water, whereof it is written in the 15 of
Ecclesiasticus, Thou shall give him the water of wisdom to drink: we must
take heed of casting it away, and to make our selves all dry earth and sandy,
which is not satisfied with water, and therefore produces nothing.

But all this is more clearly expressed in the Gospel, where by the means of
this fructifying water, our Savior which is a Fountain that is never dry, the
holy Spirit comes to put into our hearts that which moistneth the hardness
of the earth, waters it, and dresseth it, to produce the ripe fruits of good
and charitable works. The water which I will give you (says he, Joh. 4.14.)
shall be a Fountain of living water, springing up into eternal life. Of this
water the Prophets have clearly spoken, as David in the 36. Psalm. For with
thee there is a Fountain of life, and in thy light we shall see light. Psalm.
36.6.
See how he joines water with light, which is fire; so that this digression
seems to be less impertinent; and in the 12. of Esaias 3. You shall draw water
with joy out of the wels of salvation. More Jerem. 2. They have forsaken me,
that am the Fountain of living water, and have dug to themselves Cisternes,
broken Cisternes that will hold no water.

In this of Zohar (as above) are comprised the principal secrets and actions
of Fire, and of its contrary, the Patient, which is, Water: for the acts of
Actives are in the disposition of the Patient, (said the Philosopher;) for the
effects cannot better be discerned then where they act. Fire then has three
proprieties: but in this respect, we must argue the thing more deeply.

As then, all that which is, are divided into 3, called Worlds, or Heavens, (it
must not be thought strange, if we repeat the same more then once; for from
thence proceed all the secret sciences,) that is to say, the elementary here
below, subject to perpetual alteration, and vicissitude of life, and of death;
the Celestial aloft, above the Circle of the Moon, incorruptible in respect
of it self, as well for its purity, and uniformity of substance, as for its
continual and equal motion; nothing therein praedominating the one or the
other; which two constitute the Sensible world. There is afterward the
Intelligible, abstracted from all corporeity and matter, which the Apostle calls
the third World, where he was ravished, this (said he) whether in the body or
out of the body, God knows, 2 Cor. 12.3. for not only the World and the
Heaven, are put one for the other, but yet the Heaven for Man; The heavens
declare the glory of God, according to which, most part of the Fathers
interpret it; and Man reciprocally for Heaven. As Origin sets it forth, upon
the 25 Treatise of Saint Matthew. Man's heart is properly called Heaven, and the
Throne not already of the Glory of God, as is the Temple, but of God properly.
For the Temple of the glory of God, is that wherein, as in a Glass, we see
our selves by Aenigma. But Heaven that is above the Temple of God, where his
Throne is, is to see him wholly as it were face to face: which he has almost
transcribed word for word out of the book Abahir to Zohar, and other ancient
Caballists, whereof he consists for the most part.

Moreover some say that the Heavens are sometimes put for God himself, as in
the 32 of Deuteronomy. Hear O Heaven the words I speak: and in the 8 chapter of the 1
of Kings, according to the Hebrew verity, in the prayer of King Solomon at the
dedic^tion of the Temple; Hear O Heaven. In this third Heaven or World,
whereof the Apostle spoke, although God be every where, yet the seat of his
Divinity is there more especially established, then elsewhere, with his
separated Intelligences that assist him to execute his commands. Bless the
Lord ye Angels, mighty in power, doing that which he ordains, hearing the
voice of his words: wherefore Theologians called it the Angelical world,
without all place and time; which Plato in his Phaed. said that no mortal men
ever yet had sufficiently celebrated it, according to its excellency and
dignity, being all of light; who from thence stretched out her self, and
derives it so, as out of an in exhaustible Fountain, to all sorts of
Creatures, even according as the ancient Phaenician Theology carried which the
Emperor Julian Parabates alleged in his prayer to the Sun. That Corporeal
Light proceeded from an Incorporeal Nature. The Celestial world participates of
darkness, and of light, whence proceed all the faculties and powers that it
brings it. And the elementary all of darkness, designed for the reason of its
instability by water. The Intelligible by Fire, because of its purity and
light, and the Celestial by the Air, where fire and water come to join; the
Earth by this reckoning, should remain for Hell; as in truth this earthly
habitation is nothing but a true Hell: But by Heaven Moses understood the
Intelligible World, and by earth the Sensible, attributing the two higher
elevated Elements, Air and Fire, to Heaven, because they always tend upwards,
and Water and Earth, which for their gravity tend downward: but all that, by
him was yet more mystically shadowed, as Z^har shows it, by the admirable
construction of his Tabernacle, then which, there is nothing more spiritual.
Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, representing the Sensible world, and
Bezaleel, that was the Conductor of the work, the Intelligible, and the
Workman filled with a Divine Spirit, with Sapience, Intelligence, Knowledge,
and all the most accomplished learning, as almost every word carries it, woven
with Bezel, the shadow, and El God.

The profane Poets have divided the Sensible World into 3, for they never
took much pains to penetrate into the Intelligible: And assigned the
superior part thereof, from the circle of the Moon upward, to Jupiter, the
low Terrestrial to Pluto, and the middlemost, which is from the Earth to the
Moon, to Neptune: which the Platonists call the Generative Virtue, because of
the humidity, impregned with Salt, which provokes much to generation,
according as the word Salacitas designs it, as Plutarch puts it in the 4
Question of Natural Causes, and in his Treaty of Osiris: wherefore the said
Poets attribute more fecundity to the said Neptune, then to all the other Gods.

Each of these 3 worlds furthermore, has particularly its science, which is
double; the one common and trivial, the other mystical and secret. The
Intelligible world to our Theology, and the Caballe the Celestial to
Astrology and Magie; and the elementary, to the Physiologie and Alchymie,
which reveals by the resolutions, and separations of Fire, all the more
hidden, and dark secrets of natures, in three kinds of the composed: for no
man can know the composition of a thing that is ignorant of its destruction,
says Geber. But these three divine sciences have been by the depravation of
ignorant and evil spirits turned aside to a crying down, that men durst
scarcely speak thereof, but must presently incur the brute of being an
Atheist, Witch, or a false money-coyner. We say then, after Empedocles and
Anaxagoras; All this our reason disputes by a Journey of composition and
resolution, going this way and that way, up and down. That all the Elementary
science consists in the mixtion and separation of the Elements, which is
perfected by fire, to which Alchymy turns all: As Avicen declares very openly
in his Treaty of l'Almahad, or Division of Sciences. And Hermes in that of his
7 chapters, Understand ye sons of the wise, the Science of the four
Elements, whose secret apparition is no where signified, except they be
divided and compounded, because out of the Elements nothing is made profitable
without such a Regiment; for where Nature ends her operations, there Art
begins. Take such a composed Elementary, what you will, herb, wood, or other
the like, upon which, fire may exercise its action, and put it in an Alembic or
Cornue; Cornue*
first let them separate the water, and afterward the oil, if the fire be
moderate, if more pressed and reinforced, both together: but the oil will
swim above the water, which may easily be separated by a fonnel of Glass.
This water is called Mercury, which of it self is pure and clean; and oil,
the sulphur, adustible and infect, that corrupts every compounded thing: In the
bottom of the vessel will rest the Ashes, of which by a form of lee, with
water the Salt will be extracted, and after you have withdrawn the water with
Balneum Mariae, as men call it: for the oily unctuosities do not mount by this
degree of fire, no more does the Salt, but much less; and the indissoluble
Earths stripped of all their humidities proper to vitrifie: for says Geber,
every private thing by its own humidity does perform none but a vitrificatory
fusion. So there are two volatill Elements, namely the liquid, Water and Air,
which is Oil, for all liquid substances naturally shun the fire, which
elevates the one, and burns the other. But not those two which are dry and
solid; which are Salt, wherein is contained Fire, and pure Earth, which is
Glass: over whom the fire has no power but to melt and refine them. See there
the four Elements redoubled, as Hermes calls them, and Raymund Lullius the great
Elements; for as every Element consists of two qualities, these great Elements
redoubled, Mercury, Sulphur, Salt, and Glass, participate of the two simple
Elements, (to say better) of all four; according to the more, or the less, of
the one, or of the other; Mercury holding more of the Air, to which it is
attributed; Oil or Sulphur, of the Air; Salt, of Fire; and Glass, of the
Earth, who finds it self pure and clean in the Center of all the composed
Elementaries, and is the last to reveal it self exempt from others. Of this
sort by the Artifice and operation of Fire, and of its effects, we depure all
infections and filth, even to reduce them to a purity of incorruptible
substance from this time forward; by the separation of their inflamable, and
terrestrial impurities; for (says Geber) the whole intention of the Operator,
is versed in this that the grosser parts being cast away, the work may be
perfected with the lighter; which is to mount from the corruptions here below,
to a purity of the Celestial world, where the Elements are more pure and
essential, fire there predominating which is the chief of all others. Hitherto
touching Alchymie, and wherein she is versed.

Magic for the Celestial world, was in times past, a holy and venerable
Science, which Plato in his Charmis calls the true Medicine of the soul; and in
the first, Alcibiades puts it, that it was wont to show the Elders of the great
Kings of Persia, to teach them to reverence God, to form their temporal
domination according to the pattern of the order and policy of the Universe.
But it is nothing else properly (as Orpheus says) but a form of marriage of
the starry heaven with the earth, whither he darts his influences, by which
she impregnes coming from the Intelligences who assist therein; and an
application of agent virtues upon the passive, and that without the cooperation
of Demons the most part, evil, false, and deceptive, yet some more then
others; with which it is thought that the three wise Kings, Magi, that came so
far to adore Jesus Christ, were willing to have some acquaintance and
commerce.

The third is that which men call Caballe, or reception, because men left it
there verbally, and by mouth from hand to hand, from one to another. It is
divided into two, the one of Ber^sith, that is to say, of the Creation, that
consists in the Sensible world, where Moses staid, without speaking of the
Intelligible, or of separated substances. The other is of Mercavah, or of the
Throne of God, which Ezekiel principally treats of, whose vision is almost all
of fire. So much is this Element throughout the whole holy Scripture
appropriated to Divinity, as one of the most perfect and near symboles and
marks in things sensible; by means whereof we are so elevated, that by
Jacobs Ladder, or Homers golden Chain, we come to the knowledge of things
spiritual and intelligible; for the invisible things of God from the Creation
of the World, are clearly seen, being understood ^by the things that are
made, even his eternal power and Godhead. For the world with the Creatures
being there, they are a portraict of God; for the Creator is understood by the
Creature; says Saint Augustine; for God has made two things to his image and
resemblance, according to Tresmegistus: the world, therein to rejoice, and
please our selves with the infinite brave pieces of work; and Man, wherein he
set his most singular delight and pleasure, which Moses has tacitly expressed
in Genesis 1. and 2. where when there was question of creating the world, Heaven,
Earth, Vegetables, Minerals, Animals, Sun, Moon, Stars, and all the rest,
he did no more but command by his word, for he said, and they were done; he
commanded and they were created. But in Man's formation, he insisted much
further therein then in all the rest, says he; Let us make man after our Image
and Similitude, he created him male and female, and formed him dust of the
earth, afterward breathed in his face the spirit of life, and he was made a
living soul. In which are touched 4 or 5 particularities. So Cyrill observes
it. After the same manner then, as the Image of God is the world, so the image
of the world, is man: therein there is such a relation of God with his
creatures, that they cannot be well comprehended, but reciprocally one by the
other, for all the Sensible nature, (as Zohar has it) in regard of the
intelligible, is as that of the Moon, toward the Sun, who thereinto
reverberates its light: or as the light of a Lamp or torch, which parts the
flame fastened to the weik, which is therein nourished by a gross matter,
viscous, adustible, without which this splendour and light could not communicate
it self to our sight, nor our sight comprehend it: And likewise the glory and
essence of God, which the Hebrews call Sequinah, could not appear but in the
matter of this Sensible world, which is an image or pattern thereof. And it is
that, which God said to Moses, Exodus 33. You shall not see my face, you shall
see my binder parts. The face of God is his true Essence in the intelligible
world, which no man ever saw, except the Messihe, I did set the Lord always
before me, Psalm. 16.8. And his posteriour parts are his effects in the
Sensible world. The soul likewise cannot be discerned and known, but by the
functions it exercises in the body whilst it is annexed thereunto: By which
Plato was moved to think that souls could not consist without bodies, no more
then fire without water. So that after long revolutions of times, they should
come again to incorporate themselves here below: whereunto adheres that in the
6 of Virgils Aeneads.

All these when they have turned for many years,
God calls them to the flood of Lethe, by great troops,
Being forgetful that they must review the upper convexe,
And begin again to be willing to return into bodies.
But this savours a little of new birth, and Pythagorean changings of souls
into bodies, in which Origin was likewise out of the way, as may be seen in
his book of Princes, and in Saint Jeromes Epistle to Avitus. But more
sincerely Porphyrius, although in the rest an impious adversary, a Calumniator
of Christianisme; that for the perfect beatitude of souls, they must: shun
and fly all bodies. So that, when the soul shall be repurged from all
corporal affections, and when it shall return to its Creator, in its first
simplicity, it has no great desire to fall again into the hands and
calamities of this age, when the option should be left unto it free.

From the Intelligible world then, it runs down into the Celestial, and from
thence to the Elementary, all that which the spirit of man can attain from the
knowledge of the admirable effects of Nature, which Art intimates, in what she
can, whence by the revelation of these rare secrets, by the action of fire, the
most part is magnified, the glory and magnificence of him who is the first
motor and author thereof; for man's understanding according to Hermes, is as a
Glass where we come to shave off, and to abate the clear and luminous rays
of the Divinity, represented to our senses by the Sun above, and the fire his
correspondent here below; which inflame the soul with an ardent desire of the
knowledge and veneration of his Creator, and by consequent of his love, for
men love nothing but what they know.

So each of these three worlds, which have their particular sciences, has also
its fire, and its salt apart: both which do inform us namely of Moses his fire
in the heaven. And the Salt for its firm consistence and solidity to the
earth. What is this Salt? ask one of your Chymicall Philosophers; a scorched
and burned earth, and congealed water, by the heat of fire, potentially
enclosed therein. Moreover Fire is the operatour here below, in the works of
Art, as the Sun and Celestial Fire is in them of that nature; and in the
intelligible, the holy Spirit by the Hebrews called Binah, or Intelligence,
which the Scripture designs ordinarily by fire, and this spiritual fire, or
igneal spirit, with the Chomah the verb, where the Sapience attributes to the
Son, Wisdom, the Artist of all things, taught me, are the fathers
operators. By the word of the Lord were the heavens firmed, and all their
beauty by the spirit of his mouth; from whence that maxim of the Peripateticks
differs not much, Every work of Nature is a work of Intelligence.

Behold the three fires, whereof we pretend to speak, of which there is none
more common amongst us then the elementary here below, gross, composed, and
material; that is to say, always, fastened to matter; nor on the the other
part less known. That which is of him, from whence he came, and whither he
goes; reducing in an instant all to nothing: as soon as his nourishment fails
him; without which he cannot consist a moment, but goes as he comes, being all
in the least of his parts: So that he can in less then nothing, multiply to
infinity, and in less then nothing empty it self: for one little wax light
will at pleasure enkindle the greatest fires we can imagine, without any loss
or diminution of its substance: Though they take a thousand, yet nothing
perishes: And in the third of Saint James, Behold how great a matter a little
fire kindles; yea one only small sparkle of fire, would press in the
twinkling of an eye, all the immense hollow of the Universe, if it were filled
with Gunpowder or Napthe and presently after will vanish away. So that of all
bodies, there is nothing that does approach nearer to the soul then fire, said
Plotin. And Aristotle in his fourth book of Metaphysickes, sets down, that
^ven to his time the most part of Philosophers had not well known fire, nor
yet Air to be perceivable to our sight and feeling. But men may say the same,
that neither Aristotle, nor other Grecians of his time knew so well the fire
and its effects, at least wise not so exactly as did (so long while after) the
Arabians, by Alchymie, on which all the knowledge of fire depends, The
Egyptians said, that it was a ravishing and insatiable Animal, that devoures
that which takes birth and increase, and at last it self; after it is
therewith well fed and gorged: when there is no more to feed or nourish it;
for that having heat and motion, he cannot pass from food and air to breath
therein; if for want hereof, it remains at last extinct, with that wherewith
it was fed: All things proper to animate substances, and which have life, for
life is ever accompanied with heat and motion, which pr^c eds from heat,
rather then heat from motion; although they be reciprocalls, for one cannot be
without the other. But Suidas thereupon formed such a contradiction, that not
only animals, but all that which take nourishment and increase, tend to a
certain butt, whither being come, it stays without passing any further, where
neither nourishment nor increase of fire are limited nor determined; for the
more is administered, so much the more it would have, and grow every day
greater: for neither the one nor the other can be limited, as do these animals.
Then by consequent it must not be put in their rank; So that the motion of
fire should rather be called generation, then nourishment or growth; for there
is but that one element, that nourishes and increases it. In the others, that
which superabounds therein is by apposition, as if you would join water to
water, or earth to earth; you shall never do the same to fire, to think to
make it greater by joining thereunto other fire, but by the apposition of
matter, upon which it may bite and exercise its action, as wood and other like
things, which perforce must turn into its nature, and so it augments it self.
The Poetical fictions relate that Prometheus went into Heaven to steal it to
accommodate mortals; for which he was so grievously punished by the Gods, as to
remain 30. years bound to a Rock in Mount Cancasus, where a Vulter daily
eat up his entrails which did grow again in course. Author de roolle p 61. in
course, in order one after a^oth^r.
But it is to be believed that the Gods that are so watchful, and so
affectionate toward mankind, would not deny this so necessary a portion of
Nature, without which the condition of their life were worse then that of
beasts, as well for the boiling of their meats, as to warm them, and dry them,
and infinite other necessary commodities. Besides of that which soars always
upwards, being of one celestial original, whither he aspires to return, it
seems that this belongs properly to man.

Since other thingt looks down unto the earth
It gave man a face, to look up, and see the heavens,
To erect his countenance unto the Stars.
Almost all other animals do shun the fire, whence Lactantius to show that man
was a divine Animal, alleges for one of his most pregnant reasons, that he
only amongst others used fire. And Vitruvius in his second book, sets down
that the first acquaintances of men, were contracted by coming to meet, to
warm themselves at common fires: So that the cause why God sent fire down to
men must be, that by the means thereof, they are come to penetrate into the
profound and hidden secrets of Nature: whereof they could not well discover,
and know the manner of proceeding, for that she works so rarely: but by his
counterfoote, (...)
which the Greeks call (...) the resolution and separation of the Elementary
parts, which are made by fire; whereof proceeds the execution almost of all
Artifices, that the spirit of man has invented; So that if the first had no
other instrument, and tool, then the fire, as we may lately see by the
discoveries of the West Indies; Homer in the Song of Vulcan sets down that he
assisted with Minerva, taught men their Arts and brave Workmanship; having
formerly been accustomed to dwell in Caves and hollow Rocks, after the fashion
of wild beasts; willing to infer by Minerva the Goddess of Arts, and
Sciences, the understanding and industry, and by the fire, Vulcan, that puts
them in execution; wherefore the Egyptians were accustomed to marry these two
Deities together, willing thereby to declare nothing else but that from the
understanding proceeds the invention of all Arts and Sciences, which fire
afterward effected, and brought from power to action; for the Agent in all
this world is nothing else but fire and heat, says Johannicius, and Homer,
Whom Vulcan and Minerva knew. Which was the cause (as may be seen in
Philostratus by the birth of Minerva) that she forsook the Rhodians, for that
they sacrificed unto her without fire, to go to the Athenians. Moreover
Vulcan, according to Diadorus, was a man, who from an accident by a clap of
Lightning, whereby a Tree was set on fire, first revealed to the Egyptians the
commod^ty and use of Fire: for being therewithal overcome, all joyful of his
light and heat; he thereunto added other matter to keep it, whilst he went
to seek the people, who afterward for this, deified him. Whereto Lucretius
agrees, Do not in these tbings tacitly and by chance require,
Lightning brought fire on earth to mortals
First: thence all heat of flame was given.


The Greeks attribute it to Phoroneus, and put it, that it was near to Argos.
That fire being fallen from heaven there-about, it was afterward there kept
within the Temple of Apollo; which if by chance it came to extinguish, they
lighted it again anew by the Sunnebeames; as also they did at Rome that of the
Vestals. And in Persia their sacred fire which they carried ordinarily where
the King marched in person singularly reverencing it, for their respect to the
Sun, which they adored above all other Deities; for they esteemed it here
below, their Image. They carried it (I say) in great pomp and solemnity on a
magnificent Chariot drawn by four great Coursers, and followed by 365 young
Ministers, for as much as there are so many days in the year, which describe
the Sun by its course, clad with yellow gilded, the color conformable to
the Sun, and fire, singing hymns to their praise. And there was amongst
them, no crime more capital and irremissible, then to cast any dead carcass
or other uncleanness therein, or to blow it with your breath, for fear to
infect it, but they did it to give it air, for in all this they hazzarded no
less then life; as to quench it otherwise in water: So that if any one had
perpetrated any grievous forfeit, to obtain grace and pardon therein; the best
expedient then was, as Plutarch puts in his first Treatise of the first cold,
to put himself in running water with fire in the hand, threatening to quench it
in the water if they did not grant his request; but after he had obtained it
he was not left unpunished for his offense, but for the impiety that he had
forethought to commit. And from thence it became a common proverb mentioned in
Suidas: I am a Persian, borne of Persian parents; what a strange Persian? yea
Sir, for us to pollute fire, it is sharper then cruel death. But all this which
may be said of fire, and by the means thereof, has not yet been revealed,
nor known by men: Is there any thing more admirable then Gunpowder, so easy to
make, and consisting of so few ingredients; and so common Sulphur, Saltpeter
and coal? which seem to have been mystically designed by the Egyptians, by
the three Celestial powers, whence they allege Thunder, Lightning, Tempests,
to be conducted and governed, Jupiter, Vesta, and Vulcan. By Vulcan, Sulphur;
by Jupiter, Saltpeter, full of air and wind, as Raymund Lullius puts it, who
well knew it, and its nature, and its, effects if he would have discovered
them; and by Vesta Coal; as well for the Terrestreity that is in it, as for
that it is incorruptible, being able to keep it many thousands of years
within the ground, without alteration or spoiling, which was the cause that
they made a place and stage for it, in the foundation of the Temple of Diana at
Ephesiu: Saltpeter is appropriated to the Air; because it is as of a mean
disposition of nature, betwixt Sea water, and the Fire, or Sulphur, whereof it
participates, for that it is so inflamable, and saltish, on the other side,
resolving it self into moisture, and water, as the Salts do; from whence it
has bitterness and acuity; and as the enclosed and retained air, within the
clouds, does break and lighten by the impetuosity of Thunder, the same does
Saltpeter: But this will come to better purpose hereafter in Salts. Moreover
he that can make powder composed of certain proportions of Sulphur and
Saltpeter, and in stead of Coal, with the Terrestrial scurf of Antimony, which
must be separated by frequent and reiterated ablutions of lukewarm water; may
come to an artificial fire, not to be disdained; of a powder, that will give
a small report; it is true that it is not so impetuous and full of force, as the
common. In regard of the invention of Gunpowder, the relations of China do
carry, that by their ancient Chronicles it is found out, that they have had the
use of it more then 1500 years; as also of printing. Roger Bacon, 1500 years.
the famous English Philosopher, who writ above 300 years ago, in his book
of the admirable power of Nature and Art, sets down, that with a certain
composition imitating lightning and thunder, Gideon was wont to fear his
Enemies with. And yet that it is not formally as it is written in the 7 of
Judges, yet it is said nevertheless more then sixscore years before the
divulgation of Gunpowder; see his word: furthermore there may be made
perpetual lights and bathes, burning without end, for we have known many
things that are not burned, but purified; but besides these, there are other
stupendous things of Nature and Art; for sounds may be made in the air, like
thunders, and of greater horror then such as are made by nature. And a little
matter adapted to the quantity of a thumb, makes a horrible sound, and shows a
vehement coruscation; and this may be done many ways, by which every City and
Army may be destroyed; after the manner of Gideons Artifice, who with broken
pitchers and lamps, fire breaking out with ineffable fragor, destroyed the
Midianitish Army, with only 300 men. These may be Grenades and fire pots. And
to be short, nothing could better agree on all points to Gunpowder; but these
good men foreseeing the ruin that such things might bring, made too great
conscience to reveal it. To the purpose of perpetual fires, by means of most
long durance; Hermolaus Barbarus in his notes upon Pliny, relates that in his
time there was an old Sepulcher opened in the Territory of Padoua, and therein
found a little Coffer, where there was a Lamp yet burning, although that
according to the inscription it must have been more then 500 years since it
was lighted. 500
So that by this reckoning, it should not be altogether impossible to make
fires, that will not be put out; for we see the same in many sorts of that
which men call Grec; whereof Aristotle as it is reported heretofore composed a
Treatise, which could not be quenched with water, chiefly Sea water, by reason
of the fatty and unctuous Salt mingled therewith, but they grow worser, and
wax more fiery. But what hurt were there to stay thereon a little, since
likewise it is a question of Fire: Of Acornes steeped in wine, afterward dried
and put in a mill so long till the liquor come forth, which afterward
accompanied with other oils besmeared upon quick chal^, Pumice stone,
spectacle glass, and Alum calcined together with Soap, and other the like
things, that hold their adustible impurities in the bottom of a vessel,
whilst that the oil by distillation mounts clear, neat, and purified, and
less inflamable; but this requires a sufficient good fire; for the matches
corresponding thereto, make them of cotton yearne besmeared within the Lee:
then bath them in the oil, or liquor of Tartar, Saltpetring them over Alum
plumed, intermingled with pitch, rozin finely bruised and beaten, or of
Colophon. These fires of so long duration would seem to us a thing fabulous,
if we were not ascertained by authentic Authors of that so famous a Lamp
hung in a certain Temple of Venus, where there burned without ceasing the
Stone called Asbestus, which being once set on fire, never goes out. But some
will say that that is also a fable; I will leave others to decide it, and I
will tell you what befell me, seeking nothing less then that, to meet with a
substance, conducted thereunto, by graduall artifices of fire: which being
bound fast within a Vial of glass and sealed with Hermes his Seal, that no
air could any way enter in, might be kept 1000 years (after the manner of
speech) in the bottom of the Sea: and opening it at the termination of so long
a season, or when you shall please, you shall therein find a sudden fire,
(which when it sents the air) will light matches. We read in the second book
of the Maccabees, chap. 1. verse. 20. that at the transmigration of Babylon, the
Levites having hid their sacred fire in the bottom of a well or pit, 70
years, after they found there a thick water and whitish, who as soon as ever
the Sunbeames gave thereon, took fire.

These two Deities aforesaid, Pallas and Vesta, one and the other, chaste
Virgins, as is also Fire; represent unto us the two fires of the Sensible
world; that is to say, Pallas, the Celestial; and Vesta, the Elementary here
below, the which notwithstanding it be more gross and material, then that
above, tends nevertheless always upward, as if it endeavored to unmingle it
self from a corruptible substance, where it remains fixed, to return free
and exempt from all these hindrances to its first Original from whence it
came, as an imprisoned soul, There is in them fiery vigor and celestial
Origin,
In seeds as much as our harmless bodies stay them,
And our terrene joints dull them, and our dying members.


The other on the contrary, though more subtle and essential rusheth out here
below toward the earth, as if these two aspired incessantly to encounter each
other, and to face each other, in the fashion of two Pyramides; whereof that
above should have its basis planted in the Zodiac, where the Sun perfects
his annual course through the 12 Signs: from the point of which Pyramid, comes
to cast here below all that which is here procreated, and has being, according
to the Astologers of Egypt; that there is nothing produced in the earth, and
in the water, which was not first sowed in heaven, which is there, as a
labourer to cultivate it, and by his heat, impregned here below, with the
efficacy of his influences, conducts the whole to its complete perfection and
maturity, which Aristotle also confirms in his books of Beginning and Ending.
But the fire here below on the contrary at the basis of his Pyramid, fastened to
the earth, making one of six faces of the Cube, whereof the Pythagoreans give
him the form and figure, because of its form, and invariable stability; and
from the point of this Pyramid the subtle vapors mount upwards, which serve
as nourishment to the Sun, and to all the rest of the Celestial bodies,
according as Phurnutus writes after others. Men attribute (says he)
inextinguished fire unto Vesta, peradventure for that the power of fire that is
in the world, takes it nourishment from thence, and that from thence the Sun
is maintained and consists. This is that also, that Hermes would infer in
his Table of Emerandes: That which is below, is as that which is above, and
contrariwise, to perpetrate miracles of one thing. And Rabbi Joseph the son
of Carnitol in his ports of Justice, the foundation of all the inferior
aedifices is placed above, and their heap or top here below as a Tree inverted.
So that a man is but as a spiritual tree planted in the Paradise of delights,
which is the earth of the living, by the roots of his hairs; following that
which is written in the Canticles 7. The hair of thy head like purple, the
King is bound in the Galleries.

These two fires then, the high and the low, who do know themselves, and so one
another, have been no less unknown to the Poets, for Homer in the 18 of his
Iliads, having placed Vulcans forge in the eighth starry heaven, where he is
accompanied with his Artisans endowed with singular prudence, and who know two
sorts of works, which were taught them by the immortal Gods, wherein they
labor in his presence; Virgill in his 8 of the Aeneads has suffered him to
set his shop here below in the earth, in an Island called Vulcanian.

Vulcans house, and by name, Vulcans earth. To show that there is fire in the
one, and the other Region, the Celestial, and Elementary; but diversely: Men
make moreover four sorts of fire; that of the intelligible world, which is all
light; the Celestial participates of heat and light; the Elementary of light,
heat, and ardour; And the infernal opposite to the intelligible, with ardor
and burning without light; we see Lanthornes upon Mountains that burn on the
inside, and other like called Vulcans. And it is a thing very admirable, as one
of the Rabbis quoteth, that Sulphur and Pitch that are so ready and easy to
take fire, and continue so little in their combustion being exposed to the
air, restrained nevertheless within the Earths intrails, it seems they there
renew themselves, and multiply by their own consumption, although their heat
and burning be there much more violent without comparison, then here above.
According as we may see in Mountains that burn for so many continued ages,
and hot Bathes. This seems to emancipate from the common order of Nature by a
secret disposition of Divine providence, who will have them continue so; till
the scurf and impurity of this inferior world be exterminate, with this
infected stinking and corruptible odor; and to banish it from hence and send it
back to hell for the punishment and torment of the damned; whereof it is
written in Psalm. 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup.
This fire there, which is black, obscure, thick, and dark, the more devouring
and burning it is, resembles that of some great coals of stone, which conceive
a most strong ignition, whereof it is spoken in the 20 of Job 26. A fire shall
devour them which is not kindled. And more particularly in the 4 of Baruch 26.
Fire shall come upon them from the everlasting to continue many days, and
Devils shall a long time dwell there.

There where the Celestial fire is all clear and shining as a lamp, whose flame
should be nourished with water of Life, mingled with a certain composition of
Camphire, Salnitre, and other inflamative matters. So that these combustible
substances, whereof there are infinite varieties, may endure very long, but it
is true that it will be but a gentle and weak flame. And of the like, but more
subtle without comparison, the Celestial bodies are nourished and fed, that
need but little nourishment, as approaching from spirituality. I can tell you,
being at any other time brought, to make the fashion of a shining Sun, in the
dark, P. 73. Lamp.
(it was a fire of a Lamp) so glittering, that a whole great Hall might be
therewith rather dazzled, then lightened; for this did more effect then two or
three dozen of great Torches, and yet in 24 hours used no more oil then I
gave it, with matches corresponding thereunto, which held no more then a nut
shell, for this was a Lamp of Glass, plunged or dipped within a Globe of
Crystal as great as a bead filled with vinegar, distilled three or four
times; for there is nothing more transparent, nor more splendent. Sea water is
also good thereto, and much better then fresh water, how pure soever it may
be; It is the Salt mingled among that gives it this luminous brightness.

But to return to our discourse, some have thought that since the Stars
receive nourishment, they should also vanish in certain periods of time, and
others come in their stead; which were no other thing then a separation of
their clearness and light, with their Globe of substance more gross and
material, by which they come to dissipate themselves, and to vanish within the
heaven; as vital spirits within the air: whilst they are absented from some
animated body, and leave it void of life. So that by this means, their Globe
from this time forward would remain dark as a Lamp, whereby light, which
before gave it light, should be quenched for lack of nourishment, or other
accident. This light or luminous fire is in the Stars, as the blood is in
animals, or juice in vegetables, whereto Homer seems willing to grant in the
5. of his Iliads, where he puts, that for as much as the Gods do not live by
bread and wine, as mortals, but by Ambrosia and Nectar, so they have no blood,
but in lieu thereof, (...)
a substance which they call (...) which is as it were a subtle saltish
waterishnesse: hindering corruption in animals, and all other composed
Elements; but we must here a little better clear this, for the great affinity
that the Sun and Fire have together: We must then understand, that the Sun
arising by its attraction elevates the spirits of the earth, which are of two
natures, (a moist vapor including, and a dry vapor included) are together
exalted, (says the Philosopher in the 5. of his Meteors) the one hot and
moist, as is the Air and Water, potentially; this which is properly called
Vapor; the other hot and dry, of the nature and power of fire, called
Exhalation. The first resolves into water, as raines, snowes, hailes, mists,
fogges, and other such moist impressions as are formed of this vapor, in the
middle Region of the Air, for being gross and heavy, they cannot mount
higher, but afterward being thickened, and congealed by the cold that resides
there, they fall back here below, more material then those which were not
mounted from thence, and at last, all do resolve into water. The second, called
Exhalation, is subdivided into three kinds; the first, more viscous, gross,
and heavy, is that whereof your fires are formed, which are called Castor and
Pollux, otherwise Saint Herme; the fool fires, and the like, which cannot
mount higher then the low Region of the Air: the second is a little lighter,
more subtle, and depured, penetrating even to the middle Region, where
thunders and lightnings are formed, the wandering stars, bars of fire,
cheurons, and other such inflammations. P. 75.
The third, is yet more dry and light, and more free from unct^osity, almost of
the nature of that Quintessence, which we observe in Aqua vitae soveraignly
depured: therefore it may mount not only to the highest Region of the Air,
and that of Fire contiguous; but escape yet whole and safe higher then the
Heaven, with which, for its greatest subtilty and depuration which it has
gotten in this long way, it has a great conformity: For being come to the
Globe of the Sun, it is there perfected to concoct and to digest into a pure
and clear light; for the nourishment, as well of it self, as of other
stars; the same that Pliny touches in the 8 and 9 chapters of his second
book: So that the Stars receive all their light and nourishment from the
Sun, after that it has been there concocted and fitted, and not by the form
of reflection, as from its rays, which would lessen themselves either in water,
or in a looking Glassse; for all that which participates of fire, has need of
nourishment. This is done as in the Animal, where the most pure blood, comes
from the Liver to empty it self through the Arteries into the heart which
conducts it to its last perfection for the nourishment of Spirits. But this
must be understood, if these Exhalations and vapors find issue atwhart the
pores and spongiosities of the Earth, Tuffe p. 76. a kind of white Sand, or
soft and brittle Stone.
to evaporate upwards. But if peradventure it meet with Tuffe, or Sand, or the
like lets, and hindrances, which do contradict them, or let them, they stay
there and wax thick, for procreation of minerals: that is to say, a hot and a
dry exhalation, in the nature of Brimstone, and a moist vapor in the nature of
Quicksilver; not vulgar, but a substance yet spiritual and full of fume, from
the assembling of which two, in a subtle vapor, they come to procreate in
themselves afterward by a long continuance of time, metals, and mean
minerals, according to the purity or impurity of their coagulated substances;
and the temperature, defect, or excess of the heat that recocts them in the
entrails of the earth. Without going from my intention of the foresaid
exhalations, I thought fit to touch a little upon an experiment whereunto I
arrived by my industry, which I think will not be disagreeable. Take good old
Wine, and put therein a certain quantity of Salnitre, and Camphire, in a
Platter upon a fire pan, within a Closet well firmed, that air cannot enter,
and make it evaporate therein, and that there be no more covering then the
thickness of the back of a knife, to give it so much air as it must have, to
make it burn. This being done, shut well your little window, that nothing may
vapor out after you have withdrawn the dish, or platter, from thence to 10.
20. or 30. years; provided that the air do not enter, and that the wind blow
not in; bringing in thither a lighted wax candle, you shall see infinite
little fires capring as lightnings in the great heat of Summer, which are not
accompanied with thunders and lightnings, nor with storms, winds, and raines,
having nothing but an inflammation of Air, by reason of Saltpeter, and Sulphur,
which are elevated from the Earth.

Before we pass from our intention of vapors and exhalations, that no man
doubts but do proceed from heat introduced within the earth by the continual
motion of the heaven round about, and of the Celestial bodies, whence light is
accompanied with some heat that it darts thereinto: Let us come to the
experiments next approaching to our sensible knowledge, we see, that the fire
leaves two sorts of excrements, the one grossers namely, Ashes; remaining in
the bottom of its adustion, that contains Salt and Glass; and the two fixed
and solid Elements, Fire and Earth: The other more light, and subtle, which
the fume carries upwards; that is, the Soote, wherein are contained the two
volatill and liquid Elements, called by the Chemists, Mercury and Sulphur, and
by the Naturalists, Vapor, and Exhalation. By Mercury, is designed Water, or
Vapor, and by Sulphur, Oil, and Exhalation; Of Salt and of Earths therein,
there are found a very small quantity, yet sufficient, thereby to perceive how
the four Elements are found out in the resolution of all the composed
Elementaries: Take then the Soote of Chimney, but of that which shall mount
highest in a very long Chimney pipe, and in the very top, where it must be
most subtle, thereof fill a great Cornue, or an Alembic two parts of three,
then apply thereunto a great recipient, which you wrap about with linen wet
with fresh water. Give fire by small quantities, the water and the oil will
distill together, although the water ought in order to issue out first. After
that, all these two liquors shall pass through the Recipient, and when nothing
else shall arise, increase your fire with faggot sticks well dried, or other
like, continuing it for 8 or 10 hours, so long that the earths which shall
rest in the bottom be well calcined: but for that they are in small quantity
put to more Soote, and continue it as aforesaid, until you have earth enough
which you shall take out of the Alembic, which you shall put into a little
earthen pot, of Parris, not smoothed, or in a little hollow pot. The water and
oil, which you shall have distilled may be easily separated by a glass
fonnell, where the water will swim above the oil: This done you shall
rectify your water by Balneum Mariae, by redistilling of it two or three times;
for oil does not mount by this degree of fire but by Sand; keep them asunder
upon the earths, that shall be calcined within the said pot or cruset, put
their water thereon a little warm stirring it with a spit, so long till the
Salt which shall therein be revealed by the fires action, do totally dissolve
it self into this Water; withdraw it by distillation, and the Salt shall be
left you in the bottom, of the nature of Salarmoniac, so that by pressing it,
it will elevate it self. But of this more plainly hereafter in its own
place, when we shall speak of Salt. Of Earthes we need not take much care,
for we must seek for the best in the Ashes, as also fixed Salt. So by the
means of Water, extracted out of ashes (we will here a little pass from
Soote, a little better to declare the subject of Earthes.)

In this Element the more gross and material of all, which we call Earth, we
must consider three substances; the Hebrews also have better distinguished
them then we, by giving them 3 names, Erehs, Adamah, and Jabassah. Erehs is
properly dirt or mud, Jabassah sand, and Adamah clay, wash of the common earth
with water, and power it suddenly into another vessel, with the slime that it
has gathered; reiterate it so long, that there remain no more in the bottom
but Sand, in the Scripture called Arida: And his hands laid the foundation of
the earth, Psalm. 94. where he properly uses the word of laying a foundation,
because that Sand is the subsistence, and retention of the earth, where it is
mingled with slime by a certain providence of nature to strengthen it against
the moisture of water, as we see in Mortar, where we adjoine sand with
chalk, for fear lest it melt, and dissolve into moisture. It serves also, to
give it counterpoise, for that Sand is very heavy, A stone is heavy, and sand
burdensome, or weighty, Prove. 27. But the slime is lighter, wherein minerals,
vegetables, animals, are procreated, as we see by experience, by putting pure
slime to the Erthree; for in less then three weeks, you will find therein
small stones, herbs, worms, and snailes, and other little beasts, producted
therefrom. Of the nourishment remaining that these individuals shall be, as
that of Sand, deprived of all humidity; accordng to what we see in Earths,
which having been too much cultivated, and sowed, without bettering of them,
are reduced from being fertile, as formerly they were, and become sandy and
sterill; for Sand produces nothing, as we see in Deserts and Sea coasts:
whence comes this proverb, (You plough the Sands) for a vain and unprofitable
labor: for of the two qualities, whereof each Element participates, there is
one that is more proper to it, and the other appropriated: Dryness is the
proper quality of the Earth, for that cold is more proper to Water: wherefore
is it that the Earth, as aforesaid, is called in Hebrew Jabassah, and in Greek
(...) dry land; and God called the earth dry land. Slime is more waterish; for
of the grosseness of the water, earth was made, says Hermes; as we may see in
snow, in hail, in rain, or with water so condensed, there is much slime
mingled, of which (as aforesaid) every thing here in the earth below is
produced. Man himself according to his body, was formed of this slime; and
from thence it follows that all the fertility of the earth comes from Water.
God created all the buddes of the earth before they grew, and all the herbs of
the field before they brought forth seed; for the Lord God had not yet made it
to rain upon the earth, but a mist went up therefrom, that watered the whole
face thereof. Or as the Chaldaick Paraphrast turns it, Onkelos, in stead of
source and fountain, vapor and clouds, which are engendered from the vapors
that the Sun elevates here below to the height in the middle Region of the
Air, from thence to water the earth. But neither the slime, nor the sand, nor
the clay on the other side, are not each by it self, nor reduced together, are
this virgin and pure earth, that is shut up in the Center of all the composed
Elements, that is to say, in the bottom of them, for that produces nothing,
because it is incorruptible: and that which cannot corrupt, cannot produce any
thing that should be subject to corruption; as we see in Fire, Salt, and Sand,
which are of the nature of Glass, all substances not only incorruptible for
their respect, but which preserves from corruption, that wherewith they are
mingled; witness herbs, fruits, flesh, fish, and other the like, which being
salted or buried in Sand are thereby kept the longer. And in Mummies, of those
that remain choked and buried in the Sands passing the Deserts, which are
preserved whole many suits of years, even as well, nay better then if they had
been enbalmed. So that this earth is formed of two incorruptible substances,
Salt, and Sand, by means of the water whch is thereupon congealed; as we see
in this fair Crystalline Glass, made of Salt, of glass wort, amongst which
they mingle sand to retain it; otherwise, in the great sharpness of fire that
it must endure, to work therewith, it would all vanish into smoke; we depure
and refine it afterward in clear Crystalline, joining thereunto perigort, or
sinople made of Lead.

Their are some that carry their Sand with them, as Foulgere, Charm, or
Foutean, firebrakes, charm, or beech, and some others.

But this comes better to our discourse, of Gold and Glass, and some others
upon the 28. of Job, where speaking of Sapience, he says, that nothing can
compare with it, nor Gold it self, nor Glass. This Earth then, so excellent,
and incorruptible, is not this vile and gross Element, that we trample on, and
cultivate to draw there hence our nutritune and sustentation, but that whereof
it is spoken in the 21. of the Revel. cl^ar and transparent: I saw a new Heavnn
and a new Earth, and the holy City was of pure Gold, like unto pure Glass, and
the streets thereof were of shining and resplendent Gold: See how he does
liken more then once Gold and Glass, which is produced by the depurations of
Fire: for that is the last action thereof, having therein no power but to
refine and depure, as he does Gold. Which the Sun produces in long millions of
years: To the imitation of that, the speculative understandings are forced by
means of fire, to extract out of the corruption of these inferior elements, and
their compounds and incorruptible substance, which was to them a model and
pattern of that, whereto the whole universe should at last be reduced: from
hence we here draw from Soot a representation and image of the works of nature,
upon vapors and exhalations, whence Meteors are formed, and impressions from
the middle Region of the Air, Water holding place of the waterish, and oil of
the fiery, and inflamable, which oil is altogether impure, to be adustible and
unprofitable to the procreation of this Virgin Earth: called by some the
Philosophers Stone, which so many ignorant avaricious men have sought for, but
could not find because they sought it with blind eyes, darkened with a sordid
desire of unlawful gain: to make themselves on a sudain richer then another
Midas, who at last got naught, but the ears of an Ass, and did not cherish it
to praise and admire God in his admirable works following that which is said
in the 37. of Job, consider the wondrous works of God, for we cannot do a
greater pleasure to a workman, then to mark attentively, to admire and magnify
his works; nor a greater reproach then to scorn and slight them: And of such the
Apostle in the 4. to the Ephesians. speaks thus, They have their thoughts
obscured with darkness, being alienated from the life of God, because of the
ignorance that is in them, in respect of the blindness of their heart: Take
then this Oil so extracted from Soot, and repasse it three or four times upon
Sand; for it is one of those, that lasts very long. And after the extraction
of the Water and Oil, and the Calcination of the earths, that shall remain in
the bottom of the vessel, cast your water thereon, and put the matter to
putrify ten or twelve days in dung: then draw back the water by distillation
calcining at the end thereof the Earths seven or eight hours by the fires
flame. Put again the water upon the Earths, putrified, distilled, and calcined,
reiterating as abovesaid. For by means of water and fire, the Earths will be
calcined, until they have drunk up and retained all their water: or the
greatest part: which will be done at the six or seventh reiteration. This done,
give it the fire of sublimation, and it will elevate it self a pure earth,
clear and Crystalline fastened in the Center. The water has great proprieties
and virtues, but this Earth has yet more, whereof I will endeavor to speak
more at large. There may be also Salt extracted by the dissolutions of its
water and glass, of the Earths that shall remain after the elevation of the
said Virgin Earth. For every private thing by its proper humidity does perform
nothing but vitrificatory fusion, says Geber. And there are here three: two
volatiles, water, and oil, and the third fixed and permanent; which is
congealed, namely Salt: which beyond all other moistures expects the conflict
of fire, says the said Geber. For there is nothing more moist, and more
unctuous then Salt, nor that better endures fire: Also all metals are naught
else but fusible salts; whereunto they are easily resolved: common Salt melts
also, after it has been recalcined, and dissolved, three or four times,
whereof we will speak more plainly in its place.

I have here a little extended my self upon Soot, as upon a Subject, where rare
sec^ets appear remarkable; and the same upon charcole, made of stone, and of
that vitrification of sky color, that remains of Iron whereof we see great
heaps in furnaces and forges, and being so dry, yet there may be water, and oil
drawn therefrom: we will yet say the same concerning Soot: Fire burning wood,
or other adustible matter, chaseth away the waterish humidity, therein
contained, and feeds it self with oil, or aereall substance. The terrestrial
part, which are the ashes, remaining in the bottom calcined, where the Salt
resides, which thereby being separated by the washings, and dissolutions of the
water, the remainder is naught but slime, which is drawn away by frequent
ablutions, and the Sand remains at the last proper to be vitrified; observe in
respect of one of the excrements of fire, which is not contented therewith, but
by its impetuosity, and heat tending naturally upwards, carries on high with
violence a part of the subtiliated substances. Let us adapt this to the
Coupelles. ^oupelles. page 6. ^he little ^hen pot, ^herein gold^miths melt and
fine their ^etals.


We see that part of the lead, from thence goes away in smoke as in the fire,
whence Soot is procreated, a part thereof is burned, namely its sulphurous
part, and part grows tough within the coupelles almost in the manner of Glass
or varnish. Of the two first volatils, there is no account to be made thereof,
for they go and disperse themselves. But bray the Coupelles where this
vitrification is as it were baked, wash them well with warm water, to depure
them from their grosnesse and uncleanness, then put them into a descensory
with a strong expression of a bellows fire with the Salt of Tartar and
Salnitre, and there will fall down through a Metalline: which being recoupled
with new lead you will find more fine, without comparison then at first, and
ever from that time forward, more and more, by reiteration as abovesaid. So
that he, that would take the patience to boil the lead on a regulated and
continual fire, that should not exceed its fusion, that is to say, that the
lead should therein remain always melted and no more, putting thereto a small
portion of quicksilver or sublimate to keep it from Calcination, and to reduce
it to powder: at the end of a certain time, you shall find that Lamwell has
not spoken frivolously to say that the six grain is contained in power with
lead, (that is to say) gold and silver, would multiply and increase themselves
as the fruit upon a tree does.

But to return to these oils of long durance, whereof he might make a large
volume that would run through not all but a part: Let him draw from the Tartar
of wine, of which the best comes from Mompellier, even that which adheres unto
the Tun. One which is very important, Tartar is one of the subjects, Coupta
ruer. page 87.
where those who practice in the fire, do find so many blows to cast. Take of
this Tartar beaten into small powder and put it in a leaded earthen pot with
clear fountain water, upon a Trevet or furnace, making it boil easily and scum
the villainies and filthiness off with a feather: the silver Crusts that shall
afterwatds arise, gather them with a head of Glass, where these gross moules
destang, of mudd, so long till they rise no more, renewing the water by measure
when it comes to diminish. Turn it by Inclination, and put a part, that which
rests in the bottom in the shape of Sand. Put again the Crusts in new water,
make them boil gently as before, and gather together the Crusts that shall rise
up more clear and lucent then the first, separating their dregs and impurities,
if there be any presented, and reiterate this six or seven times, till your
Crusts be clear and shining as silver or pearls. Dry them in the Sun, or before
the fire upon a linen, and put them in a cornue with an open breech, and a
graduate fire reinforcing it by smalls: and through the beak of the Cornue,
there will issue as a small rivolet of milk, that will resolve into oil with the
Recipient. Pass it once again, or twice upon Sand, or salt of Tartar: which is
done by calcining of Tartar, within a pot of Earth of Paris, not leaded in a
fire of reverberation, or in Charcoles: afterward dissolve it, with hot water
and filter, and congeal it, and there will remain white Salt which will resolve
it self into a liquor called the oil of Tartar; or after it is well calcined
let it resolve to it self in moisture. This Liquor is of great efficacy to
quench and root out all sorts of wildfires. But of the sands that remain in the
bottom, without being unwilling to rise in Crusts: there will be extracted
another more exquisite oil and less adustible.

Tartar may be governed after another fashion.

We insist therein in this respect, because it shows to have I know not what
agreement with Soot: for as Soot is an excrement of fire, so are Tartar and
lees, the same of wine, that have great affinity with fire. Take then of Tartar
in Powder within a leaded earthen vessel, and cast hot water there on stirring
it strongly with a stick; and letting it rest a little, put out the water; with
that which it has gotten from the Tartar: which is after the form of slime
within another dish: and put new luke warm water upon the Tartar: reiterating
as aforesaid so many times that the water may come forth neat and clear; which
will be perfected at the fifth or sixth time. And in the bottom there will
remain the foresaid sand, which being dried dis^olves it self within the
distilled vinegar, and not into common water. Aqua vitae likewise dissolves in
a little space, when the one and the other would take no more. Wash that which
remains, with common water, then dry it slowly, and having put it into a
Cornue with a sufficient good expression of fire graduating it by small pieces,
there will be extracted an odoriferous oil, as of aspic. one of Raimond Lullius
his secrets: which is one of his principal keys, and entries into Metallic
dissolutions. Take the foresaid evacuations, and elevate the Crusts as
aforesaid. There are too many things to speak of Tartar, and that which we
have now set down is not vulgar, but the rarest of our experiments; Of vinegar,
after that the clear shall be distilled, and that the white fumes shall begin
to appear, which is his adustible oilynesse, put the dregs that shall remain
(for you must have a great quantity) in a cellar or other fresh place, and in
five or six days there will be procreated small Crystalline little stones;
separate them from their residences, by ablutions of common water, and dry
them; and you shall draw thereout an oil of no small importance, so great
certainly and admirable are the substances, which the art of Fire extracts from
Wine.

The most part of the oils that we have touched on, heretofore, being
adustible, are by consequent of a strong and troublesome odor, as smelling the
burnt, when they burn, you must therefore set them in the Sun certain days,
that is to say, to dry them in the Sun, and in the Air, to take away from them
this fiery smell: for recompense we will here treat of some rare ones and of
good agreeable odor. And in the first that of Been, which prefumers use, has
neither color, odor, nor savor: and therefore it is susceptible of all those
which you shall apply thereunto. Being repassed upon Sand to take away the
fatness, it would be of long durance, and without an ill sent, but it is too
dear. As for oils of Olive, rapes or long turnips, chenevy, sesamum, but is
rare in these quarters: and other the like which are drawn by the press, by
means of the heat of fire: what repasses soever there may be, yet they never
desist to be of a good odor, but so much less, according as they shall be
depured and by the same means of longer durance: Oils of Sage, Thyme, Pepper
and other the like, drawn by an instrument proper thereunto, such artifices,
are so divulged even unto Chamber maids, that I should be ashamed to speak of:
That of Benzoine is more rare, and less known, and more laborious to make.
Take Benzoin thoroughly beaten to gross powder, and put it into a Cornue with
fine Aqua vitae, which swimmeth there over three or four fingers, and leave
them so for two or three days upon a moderate fire of ashes, that the Aqua
vitae may not distill, removing them every hour; this done, accommodate the
Cornue upon the furnace with an earthen vessel full of Sand. Distill the Aqua
vitae, with a gentle fire, afterward increasing it by degrees, there will
appear infinite little aiguilles and filaments, such as in the dissolutions of
lead and quicksilver. The which shows sufficiently that Benzoin participates
thereof: It whitens Copper, quickens Gold, and put in decoction of gaya^,
Liguum vitae.
does admirable effects, as also Tartar, which contains much quick-si^ver.
When then these veins or little aiguilles shall show themselves, continue this
degree of fire, and let them play within the Cornue a certain space, so long
that all vanish away. In the interim have in a readiness a little stick which
may enter within the neck of the Cornue for these aiguilles will come thither
to bring again as in an mouelle, and if you take them not away speedily the
vessel will break when this Gum or Mouelle shall be all past, with a
certain form of butter, which will cast it self afterward within the
Recipient, the oil will begin to distill fair and clear, of an hyacinth color,
and fragrant odor: after which reinforcing the fire, there will issue out
another more thick and dark, which you must receive apart. This Gum or white
marrow, which you shall have drawn out of the neck of the Cornue, wash it with
the Aqua vitae which you distilled therefrom, in the beginning, which shall
extract therefrom a tincture or Citrine color, as Saffron, and shall leave the
Gum very white, and of a most agreeable smell, fit to make Pater Nosters of
sents, of such a color as you will ^lease to give it: withdraw your Aqua vitae
by a bath, and in the bottom there will remain a yellow Tincture of a good
sent likewise, which has great proprieties and virtues. The black oil is, a
sovereign balm against all hurts: and of the remaining earths a Salt of great
efficacy. Thus you have of Benzoin five or six substances, a white Gomme, with
its yellow Tincture, the two oils and Salt.

Aqua vitae which is its principal manifestation, and without which nothing
would be done therein, there is also Storax, Calamint, Ladanum, Myrrh, and the
like Gums, out of which oil is extracted by the means of the carriage of Aqua
vitae, and therein you must proceed as in Benzoin: But ther^ are not so many
things to mingle together: Out of Myrrh there is likewise extracted a liquor,
very proper to take away all spots and marks remaining of scabs, or pox and
other like accidents. Take hard Eggs, and cleave them in the middle, take away
the yellow, then fill the hollows with grains of Myrrh, and cover them again
with the other half: Leave them three or four days in the clear and in the
air, where the Sun comes not: and they will resolve themselves into a liquor
like unto honey, or thick dew, frankincense likewise does the same.

Out of Sulphur also there may be drawn an adustible oil by opening it, with
Aqua vitae, and also by other ways. For Sulphur has in it two substances, the
one inflammative, the other not, but aluminous and vitriolique: whence proceeds
this liquor which is called oil of Sulphur: which has yet greater properties
and virtues then the oil of vitriol, which is more caustic and burning: as
well against evil inward affections, as in Cankers and ulcers of the mouth,
tooth ach, cankers, and other the like, where it works more moderately.

Take then first a match of Cotton yarn of the bigness of your little finger
and two else long, which you shall besmear with molten wax and with Turpentine,
as to make wax Lights.

Take on the other side a pot of Paris earth leaded, wherein you shall put a
bed of sulphur enough grossly beaten, and thereupon lay a round of your
foresaid matches, until the pot be full* on the top whereof, you shall leave a
little end of your Ma^ch to light it: (fine musket match is very good also).
Put your pot under a chimney and hang thereupon an Alembic Cap, whose mouth
should relate ^o that of the pot. But you must first besmear and crust over the
clay to the thickness of a thumb: you must not join it just to the pot, but
that there may be an inch opening betwixt them. Light the Match, and make the
Sulphur burn, which will cast from it a small white fume, which will adhere
within the Cap and from thence it will resolve into a liquor of peach color,
that will fall into the Recipient, when you have to such an end, applied it to
the beak of the Cap: But this will do better in soft weather with south winds
and d'aval, and not in dry weather.

We have long insisted on these oils, as well for that they are produced for
the most part out of the action of fire, of which there is here a question as
for that nothing is nearer of kin to fire, then fatty oils, unctuosities, pitch
rozin, and black Turpentines, Gums, and other like Inflammative substances,
that are the true food, and nourishment thereof: And for that we are so far
enbarked therein, there will be no hurt, here in one train to prosecute
something of the Artifices which are commonly called Grecian fires, whereof
there are many sorts, that cannot be quenched with water.

The foundation of them are Sulphur and Bitumen, black pitch, and rosin,
Turpentine, Colophone, Sarcocoll, oils of Lin, petroll, and Laurel,
Saltpeter, Camphere, Tallow, Grease and other unctuosities facil to conceive
flame: Of these Greek fires Plutarch spe^keth in his Treatise of not lending
upon usury: and more lately by Zonaras, in his 3. Tome in the life of
Constantine the P^gonate where it is said that in the year of our Lord 678. the
Saracens being come to besige Constantinople, an Ingenier by name Callini^us
brought an Artifice of certain fire, by means whereof the Saracens Fleet was
d^feated: But Gunpowder, and the artifices that may be made thereby, has
slubbered them all; whence consists the most part of our artificial fires,
pots, and fire pikes, circles, grenades, saucig^s, petards, fuses, and
infinite other the like, which we pretend not here to specify in particular.

Take then a pound of Saltpeter, 8. ounces of Sulphur, 6. ounces of Gunpowder,
incorporate them together for Grenades, and fire-pots, which make great noise
in the breaking. But to tie fire to wood, and other inflammative matters,
mingle a pound of pitch, rosin, a quartern of black pitch, 3. ounces of
Colophon, and 5. of Sulphur, bruise the Gums, and cast into the melted
Sulphurs, when it is cold beat them again, and moisten them with oil of Bays,
or linen. There is another composition much more violent, but more dangerous.

Melt a pound of Sulphur within a leaded earthen pot, and put therein by little
and little, but discreetly, a quartern of powder gross grained, with as much
salt Peter, stirring them often with a rod of Iron. Take them off the fire and
let them dry. This mingled with the aforesaid Artifices will work wondrous
effects. Some mingle also a little beaten glass, which coming to be warmed,
rewarms consequently the matter, when it comes to flame: whose heat makes it
stronger, and of longer durance. Camphere serves to make it burn in the water,
as likewise all other greases do, and above all oil of brimstone, drawn by a
bath, then which there is nothing more subtible or inflameable. But it would
be too tedious to penetrate into the ruins of mankind, of which there would
be no end, if a man should ^unne through them all.

Therefore let us return to our left purpose, of two fires. That above,
designed by Pallas and Minerva, and that below by Vesta. Which although they be
so far distant, yet fail not to have such an affinity together, that they
easily transmute one into the other: for the Sun beams are illightned by fire,
by reason of a violl filled with water, as Plutarch relate in the life of Numa.
Where from a burning looking glass, of which I remember that I saw one so
puissant, in the States of Orleans, that in less then nothing, and yet in the
month of January, ^t set a fire the staff of a torch, and the fire
contrariwise by many conveyances and contrivings from the top to the bottom,
and through the sides in many circular revolutions, as in those of a Labyrinth,
and in furnaces which they call a Tower, its heat comes to be so moderated,
that it passes into a natural heat, vivifying, and nourishing in stead of
burning, baking or consuming: And with such a fire I can say that there were
hatched at Rome, at one time more then 100. or 120. Chickens, the Eggs being
therein couved and settled as under a Hen.

The Persians and Vestalls fire at Rome reverenced as well by the one, as by
the other, as very holy, was very carefully entertained. Touching the Persian,
Strabo in his 15. Book writes that the Magi had a custom to conserve it under
ashes, before which they went every day to make their prayers and devotions,
which is not without some mystery. The ashes denoting the sensible world and
the body of man which it represents: being nothing else but ashes: and the fire
therein enclosed and covered, the sparkle of life, wherewith it is animated and
vivified. These ashes furthermore, must be of some gummy trees, Coals kept in
Junipe^ for t^^ space of a yea
to make it of longer durance: namely, of Juniper, wherein I heretofore have
kept living coals, more than a year, heaping up bed upon bed within the ashes,
being all locked fast within a little barrel that no air may enter; and this
is that which is meant in the 120. Psalm. 4. ver. with Juniper coals, according
to the Hebrew, in place of uncomfortable. With these burning coals the Persians
came to light the luminaries of their Temples when they came to be
extinguished. But the Vestals in case their fire should extinguish, as it
sometimes happened, it was not lawful for them to light it again, but must
draw it from the Sun beams: And did not only attend that it should quench of it
self, or by some casual accident, but they renewed it yearly, the first day
of March from that of heaven, as Ovidius observes tertio Fastorum. Add that
new fire was made in the secret house and the renewed fire took force. Which
Macrobius also touches in his second of Saturnals, 12. chap. The first day of
March the Vestals lighted a new fire on the Altar of the Goddess; that by the
renewing of the year, they should renew in themselves their care of keeping it
from going out. Saint Augustine in his third Book of the City of God, 18 chapter In
what reputation (says he) this sacred fire was at Rome, men may know by this,
that when the City was a fire, the grand Pontifex Metellus, for fear that this
strange fire should not mingle with the other, put himself in danger to be
consumed by the flames, to make it retire. So that there is nothing more
conformable to the tenth of Leviticus. That if these poor blind people, which
took the Symbols and Mysteries of Religion but superficially, and from the
bark, as do also the Jews, from whom they borrowed all their important
Traditions, had known that which was covered and prefigured thereunder, what
account is there to believe that they made thereof? Some do allege that this
sacred fire of the Vestals, was illuminated by means of fusil, bruising two
pieces of wood one against another, or in piercing them with a borrier as
Festus would have it, and Simplicius upon the third Book of Heaven, according
to Aristotle. Pliny in the 16. Book, 4. chap. Men rub two woods one against
another, from whence fire is forced; which is received in by a bait made of
dried leaves and put in powder, or in the match of the touchwood of a tree. But
there is nothing, which does better conduce thereunto, then Ivy beaten or
bruised with Laurel; the same is of late more practiced by the Savages of the
West Indies, as Gonzale d'Ovidiedo in his natural History of those quarters,
lib. 6. cap. 5. binding (says he) two dry sticks hard one against another, and
putting betwixt their juncture the point of a rod well rounded, which they rub
thick and thin betwixt the hands, so long till the fire by rubbing, and the
rarefaction of the air that follows them may lighten them. Of this new
relightning, to show us, that we must renew and be borne again to a better and
more praisable life, not far different from the Ceremonies of the Christian
Church, when on the Eves of Easter, and Whitsontide, at the Benediction of
Springs and Fountains, they make a new great wax Taper, wherewith all the other
luminaries are set on fire.

Touching Moses fire, it was first sent from Heaven, and las^ed to the
construction of Solomon's Temple, which was again renewed from Heaven; and
maintained to King Mamasses his time, when the Jews were carried captives into
Babylon, which the Levites kept in the bottom of a Well, where it was found
again at their return 70 years after, in the form of a gluish and white water,
as has been said heretofore. Pausanias to the Corinthians, sets down, that in
the days of Antigonus son of D^metrius, there appeared a fountain of warm
water near to the City of Mathana, but from the beginning it appeared not in
water, but in great flames of Fire which were resolved into hot and salt water.
Saint Ambrose yet discoursing upon this water of the Levites, in the third of
his offices, sets down, that this does sufficiently demonstrate, that this was
a perpetual fire which could not be taken from another place, to show that they
must not acknowledge any other God, or other religion, and ceremonies then
those that were established by the inspiration of the holy Spirit designed by
fire; for we may see what the children of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, found in the
10 of Leviticus, being willing to take upon them to offer strange fire unto
God. Then all false doctrine, idolatry, heresy, and impiety, may be called
strange fire, that devours the soul as a fever does the body, with the life
that maintains it; there where this true fire sent from Heaven, is that of the
holy Spirit, which salteth our hearts and consciences, that is to say,
preserves them from corruption, according whereunto the Prophet Jeremie spoke
in his 20. chapter when he had received it. Then it was made as a burning fire
in my heart, and shut up in my bones, and I was weary in forbearing and could
not stay. That the Holy Spirit should not be only light, but very fire, Esaias
does manifest chap. 10.17. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his
holy one for a flame. For even so as the burnings, which are a potentiall fire,
composed of igneal and burning sa^ts, work not upon a dead part, insensible,
and deprived of Natures heat; so the holy Spirit does not exercise its actions
upon cold languishing hearts, that make no account of its ticklings, and
invitations, but show themselves contumacious and refractary; just so as the
heat of the Sun, and of the fire, but more and more hardens earth, and clay, in
stead of softning it, and melts it as they do wax, butter, and grease. For the
acts of Actives are in the disposition of the Patient, where we see fire does
diverse effects in disagreeable subjects, but not wholly contrary, and directly
opposite; as when it blacks a coal, and white chalk where its virtue is
imprinted, but all to the contrary; for fire by custom is extinguished by
water, it is it, that in this respect inflames and renewes that which was
imprinted and hidden in the chalk: whence a fair meditation is presented; that
as fire is the symboll of life; water (that is its contrary) and extinguisheth
it, must be of consequence the symboll of death; water naturally tending
downwards, and fire upwards, wherein consists life.

Strabo to this purpose in his 15. Book, speaking of the Brachmans, sets down,
that which we call death, to be renewing of life, and that this temporal is
but a conception as it were, and a carriage which comes about the end of its
term, to bring forth to death, to pass from thence to eternal life. Which
Seneca imitates in the 103 Epistle, The day that we fear so much, as the last
of our life, is a renascence of an eternal day; let us then cheerfully leave
behind that which serves for nothing but a tedious charge. Why do we so much
turn our backs, as if we had not been before this first frail body, in which we
remain included and hid? we struggle and temporize therein, to the best of our
power, and not without cause, for we have been forced out by a endeavor of our
mother in bearing us; and we weep and lament when we arrive to this, which we
think to be the last day, but to complain, cry, and weep, are they not marks
and tokens of one that is to be borne? And a little more Christian-like,
although a little before; I will lay down this body where I have found it, and
clothed it, and will render my self above to the immortal Gods, although I am
not without them at this present, but whilst I am detained here within this
grievous mass of earth, in the low abode of mortality, my sensuality will
fight and combat against this other better and longer life. Now as we have been
for nine or ten months, shut up within our mothers belly, not to prepare
therein for it self, but at last, to come to this place, whither we ought to
be sent, when we should be perfectly accomplished and made fit to breath, and
remain openly out of this closet, where we were formed. In like manner during
the space that we have run through from our infancy to old age, we dye to go
whither another original attends us, and a new state of things. All this does
in nothing derogate from the Traditions of our Church, who celebrated for the
nativity of Martyrs the day of their death and martyrdom.

To conclude then, that which was heretofore said of fire, and of the four
worlds; that of the Int^lligible is all lumin^us; of the Celestial, shining,
and hot, by reason of its motion; of the Elementary here below, shining, hot,
and burning; and of Hell nothing but burning. So these three proprieties of
fire, to light, to warm, and to burn, though the effects be diverse and strange,
and the operations almost infinite, only of the elementary to begin with that
which is nearest to our senses. Rabbi Elchana greatly honored amongst the
Hebrews, sets forth, that out of the 10. fingers of the hand, being addressed
and conducted, by the understanding, may proceed more different sorts of works
then there are stars in Heaven; the most part whereof come from the action of
fire, on which almost all laboring instruments do depend. Fire principally
served the first men, who had nothing but it for all working instruments. In
regard of its motion, we may sufficiently see, that there is nothing more
glistring and moving then the fire, which is the very cause of all motion. Take
away heat, there will be no motion, says the Chymicall Philosopher Alphidius,
and this motion is accompa^ied with depu^ation, for fire will have none but
pure things, according to Raymond Lullius. For it is not only the pure
substance of all others, but it purges, mundifieth, and cleanses all that,
upon which it can have Action, of that which therein may be corruptible. The
Lord will wash away the filth of the children of Israel, by the spirit of
burning, Esaias. 4.4. wherefore the Greeks call it (...), Purging. So that the
(...) or (...) purifying, was not made but by fire, as the solemn annual feast
of Candlemasse witnesses. And in all the Eastern Churches, when they would say
the Evangel they burn great Tapers, as we do upon the day of Purification, and
that for token of joy and rejoicing, whereof fire is a symbol; and according
to that, we make two fires upon the feast of Saint John Baptist, conformable to
that, in the first of Luke 14. Many shall rejoice at his birth; and fires of
joy, in some happy successes of victories, at the birth of Kings children, and
the like occasions of alacrity.

We have alleged heretofore, out of the 31. of Numbers 23 that which is said
of fire and water, the two purifying Elements, whereby in our baptisms we are
accustomed to put a little piece of wax light or match, which they make the
Creature to hold when they hold it over the font, the Church being thereby
regulated by the pillar of fire which guarded the Israelites, and the cloud
(baptismall water) by day, whereunto suits that of Saint John, in the 3. of
Matthew, That in respect of himself he baptized with Water unto repentance,
but he that comes after, shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with
Fire, to the remission of sins; for fire is a mark of the Holy Spirit, by
which grace is conferred, and descended upon the Apostles on the day of
Pentecost, in the form of fiery tongues, Act. 2.3. The Stoics, although too
superstitious therein, made great account of this Element, which they said, was
I know not what living thing, the most wise Fabricator of the whole universe,
and of all that which is contained therein; to which purpose, as I alleged
before out of the 7. of Wisdom 24. that Wisdom the Artist of all things
taught me, that it is more moving then motion, for she passes through all
things by her pureness. Wherein two properties of fire are attributed to
Wisdom, Motion, and Purity: And in sum esteemed it to be a God, according to
which Saint Augustine in his 8. Book of the City of God, 5. chapter sets down
Zohar according to his high elevated contemplations alleging upon Exodus this
passage of the 7. of Daniel 9. The Throne of the ancient of days, was flames
of fire, and a River of fire running lightly issued from his face, his vestment
white as snow; says, that within this shining river of fire, were washed the
vestments of the souls that mounted on high, and repurged themselves there from
the old scum of the Serpent without consuming it self, which did but clear it
self from the old filth that it had the^e gathered. And this is very properly
said because we see by experience, that greases are not cleansed, but by other
grease, which carries one the other, as does Soap and Lees, which consists all
of gross and unctuous salts; for if those were not, they would not bite upon
unctuosity and fatness; witness simple water, which does nothing, by reason
of the contrarieties of their natures, which do not suffer them to be able to
join and unite. And where there is no mixtion, there is also no alteration,
because that which does not enter, does not change (says Gebe^:) So that Salts
being in the nature of Fires, have from them their proprieties and effects,
that is to say, to purify and cleanse all ordures and uncleanness. For as Salt
(the same Zohar pursues it) hinders putrefaction, to which every corruptible
thing is subject; so the Fire of Gods love, and of Gods knowledge, which is
illightned in the soul, repurging it from all corporal coinquinations,
causes, that after it has been duly purged and cleansed, it remains for ever
in its purity, for as much as fire devours and consumes the filthy scumme
thereunto fastened, clothing it self with a new and pure fire, which it could
not otherwise do. For if it were not so assisted with this pure fire, the
Cherubin which is committed to the keeping of the Gate of the City of Delices,
with a fiery sword, to forbid the approach to the tree of Life, would not
permit it to enter therein; from whence the curiosity of tasting of the
knowledge of good and evil excluded our forefathers, and us with them
hereditarily.

Hitherto Zohar, then which nothing could seem more conformable, nor which
carried it self better to our subject. Every man shall be salted with Fire,
and every Sacrifice with Salt. For to salt, in this regard, to cleanse, and
purify, are but one thing, as also to salt, and to burn, because of their
consemblable effects. Burn my reins and my heart; where burning, is put for
repurging and cleansing, according to the Hebrew, and the Chaldee; and in the
13 of Zachary 9. I will burn them, as silver is burned. To which suits also
that which the Apostle writ in the 1 Cor. 3.12. If any man build upon this
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, or wood, hay, stubble; Every man's
work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If
any man's work abide, which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.
If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be
saved, yet so, as by fire. Saint Augustine, citing this place throughout the
whole scope of his works interprets it in the 21. of the City of God, 26.
chap. for the vanities which men have too narrowly embraced in this age, which
we shall not enjoy in another, but they must be abolished and defaced by the
repurgation of fire; for that which he had not without provoking love, he shall
not lose without burning grief. And at length shall be saved as by fire,
because nothing shall be able to remove it from this foundation upon which it
shall be built. S. Ambrose to the same purpose, in his third Sermon upon the
118. Psalm. As good gold, even the very Church when it is burnt, receives not
detriment, but its luster and resplendency increase more and more. The Persians
esteemed that when they voluntarily burned themselves, the soul remained
thereby repurged from all iniquities and misdoings, which consumed by the
flames as touching the body, which had power to move the Indian Calanus and
some others to come from thence, (for God would not that we should advance our
days by one moment) who, at the time they receive him, he washes us, and
cleanses us from all preceding faults. Whereby some abusing themselves
thereby, attended to receive it as slowly as they could; and others baptized
themselves for those which were already deceased. In Aethiopia one who had
conspired against the proper person of their Neguz, or Emperor, by baptizing
himself thereupon, before he was imprisoned, remained quit.

So the proprieties of fire, are in the first place to shine and lighten, and
that is, by it, common to the Sun, but it is thereby much surmounted. And
afterward to warm, digest and bake, which this luminary does also primitively,
as we may see in that the Earth produces, but for that the natural heat does
not bring them wholly for our use, to the last and perfect degree of maturity,
fire for the most part supplies its wants, and defaults; for the regard of the
concocting of what we eat, for we hardly thereby make our profit being raw,
there where it is baked in the fire, it becomes of more facil digestion, and
less corruptible, as having less of crudities; afterward the fire separates
strange things, and not alike, and after, having taken away the corrupting
superfluities, namely the waterish humidity, which it d^iveth out, and the oily
unctuosity, which it burns and consumes with the terrestrieties that remain, at
last it does gather together in a new composure, the pure homogenealities;
which composure, then consists of soul, body, and spirit, from now forwards
inseparable, and incorruptible, which relates to the three worlds, the soul to
the intelligible, the spirit to the celestial, and the body to the elementary;
but this is not a reasonable soul, or sensitive, nor a vital spirit, such as
is in animals; but substances equipollent unto them: which may be seen in
glass, which is an image of the Philosophical Stone. Whereupon Raymond Lullius
enquiring of the confection of the said Stone, and how men may attain
thereunto, made answer, he that knows to make glass, because their manner
of proceeding are alike; and such ought that precious substance to be, which
Hermolaus Barbarus in his Annotations upon Pliny, and Appian, in his
disquisition of antiquities, alleges to have been found in an old Sepulcher,
in the Territory of Padua, not above a hundred years since, having this
Distique with two others. For he shut in with great labor, the digested
Elements
under this small vessel; greatest Olybius.
The Roman Morienes to Calid King of Egypt on his Treatise of Metallic
transmutation. Whosoever shall know well how to neatify, and whiten the soul,
and make it mount on high, and can well preserve its body, and take therefrom
all obscurity and blackness, with the evil smell, she may then replace it in
its body and in the hour of their rejunction great marvels will appear: yet
Rhases in his Epistle. So every soul does reconjoin to its first body: which in
any other manner cannot be reunited to another, and from thence forwards shall
never separate; for then the body shall be glorified, and reduced to
incorruption, and to a subtilty and brightness unspeakable. So that it will
penetrate all solid things whatsoever they be; bccause its nature shall be
such, as of a Spirit: that which he borrowed out of Hermes, it shall penetrate
every subtle thing. An admirable thing that these Chymicall Philosophers under
the veil and curtain of this Art, treating wholly about things so material as
are metals, and that which depends thereon, with their transmutations by fire,
have comprised the most high secrets of Intelligibles and even of the
resurrection, whereunto it seems this would seem to strike, wherein bodies
shall be glorified and reduced as into a spiritual Nature, against which no
spiritual obstacle can contradict, nor hinder its actions; from this the
Apostle in the 15. of the 1. to the Corinthians does not much vary, It is sown
a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and
there is a spiritual body: howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual,
but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual. I know
moreover, an Artifice whereunto I have obtained in diverse subjects, that
burning an herb, the salt extracted from these ashes and sowed in the earth, a
like herb will grow therefrom. But this burning must be made in a very close
vessel, wherein we shall say more hereafter about Salt, and yet we will yet
bring further another of our experiments which ought not be disregarded. Of
three liquors swimming one above another without either mingling or confounding
together, what mingling soever they be; that they may not return into their
residence and separated: to represent the four Elements in a little vessel of
glass, or a little black enammill grossily beaten will hold place of earth in
the bottom, water will do thus, Take calcined Tartar, or gravelled ashes, which
is almost the very same thing, and let them go to the moist air taking the
dissolution that shall be made thereof, the clearest that you can, and mingle
therewith a little blew stone, to give it the color of Sea water. Note here a
maxim, and let this be said by the by, for those that exercise themselves in
the Spagirique, that in one of these resolutions into moisture, which are made
by themselves, all salts and alums, do depure and subtiliate, more then 12, or
15 dissolutions made with vinegar and other like dissolvants.

Every thing that dissolveth it self, is of the nature of Salt and Alum, as
Geber says, For air, take fine aqua vitae which you shall turn into a
Celestial blew, with a little turnsol; and for fire, the oil of Been, but for
that it is more rare, take of Turpentine oil, which is made thus, Distill
common Turpentine in Balneo Marie, there will mount up together both water and
oil, so white and transparent, the one as the other: but the oil will swim
above the water; separate them by a glass fonnell, and dye this oil, into a
fire color, with Orchanet and with Saffern. The three liquors will never
mingle, what ever trouble you use to them; but will separate themselves
distinctly, into less then nothing, by swimming one above another: Of the
Turpentine, that remains in the Alembique, you shall extract it by Sand, in a
Cornue with a stronger fire, then by the bath, a thick red oil, which is most
excellent balm: water and oil extracted by the bath are very serviceable also,
in many accidents of Medicine and Surgery; only the white oil will make
scars quickly fall away without pain, or evil impression. But if with the
water of the said Turpentine, you dissolve salt of lead, you shall have yet a
more Sovereign balm. But we must a little better clear this: for since we treat
here of fire, and of its effects, what hinders but that we may extend our
selves at length upon many things which our long labor and experience have
acquired? This oil of lead, was one of Raymond Lullius, his great secrets: and
of many other excellent personages, who have as it were made conscience to
remember it: for this has been to them an entry of more admirable works. Some,
as Riply, and others, have taken the minium of lead, but it is too easy, and
of an uneasy resolution, as also ceruse and calcined lead. For my part I have
found litharge, which is nothing else but lead, for a pound of litharge, you
shall extract 14. or 15. ounces of lead: put them into powder, and pour
thereon distilled boiling vinegar, stirring it strongly with a staff, and
suddenly the vinegar will charge it self, with the dissolution of litharge:
Evacuate the clear, and reiterate with new vinegar, so long till all the
litharge be dissolved: Evaporate the vinegar, which shall be unsavory as the
water, until the salt shall remain congealed in the bottom. Take thereof a
good quantity, and put thereof within your Cornue, as much as it will hold half
full: and put it on the furnace with an open breech: in the beginning with an
easy fire chasing away that which therein may appear a remainder of strange
humidity: And when the white fumes shall begin to appear apply thereunto a
Recipient big enough, and lute it well in the Jointures: after reinforcing your
fire by little and little until it become a very great one, and the Cornue
buried in the ashes, you shall see issue as a little continued torrent after the
fashion of a filet of oil, but white as milk, and could as ice, which will come
within the Recipient to resolve into an oil of the color of an Hyacinth, and
odoriferous, as that of Aspio. Continue the fire till there comes no more out
of the Cornue, and leave it there to settle, all the night long. So now this
secret oil, whereof that which Raimond Lullius never more expressly said was
toward the end of his short Epistle, in these very terms. Out of black lead is
extracted the Philosophers oil, of a golden color, or as it were: and know that
there is nothing in the world more secret then it. That which remains in the
Cornue, put burning charcoals upon it, and that will take fire as the match of
a fusee: whence you may draw a fair secret: for as long as it feels not the
air, it will not flame, and it may dissolve again with vinegar, to do as
before. But salt of lead dissolved in water, and yet better then Turpentine,
oil will resolve to a greater quantity of oil; and thereof may see more ample
marvailes. Take this oil, which Raimond Lullius calls his wine, and put it
into a small Alembic of glass; in Balneo Mariae, and distill tkerein aqua
vitae, which will come in vains even as that of wine. Draw all out so long till
the drops and tears come to appear in the Chap, which is a sign that there is
no more phlegm: which being out in the bottom, there will remain a precious oil
that dissolves gold and is admirable against wounds, and great accidents, from
within, for it holds the same place with potable gold: Lead having great
affinity with gold, as Geber says, with which it agrees in Surdity, in weight,
and in that it cannot rust: And George Riplay the most learned English
Philosopher, in his book of the 12. ports.

There is extracted oil of golden color,
Or like it, out of our subtle red lead:
When Raimond said, when he was old,
Was much more precious then gold.
For when through age he was near death,
He thereof made, his potable Gold,
Which revived him; as may be seen.
This is that oil and vegetable Menstruum, etc.
In regard of the burning water therout extracted, more inflameable then the
most fine powder of a harguebuze, it dissolves silver into subtle Crystalline
flakes, whieh melt at the fire of a lamp, as easily as butter, and are fix as
silver in the same proofs of fire: further see that which the said Riplay sets
down in his marrow of Alchym^e: The body being prepared, put upon this water to
the thickness of your thumb which will straight boil above chalks of the body,
without other external fire, by dissolving the body, and by elevating it, in
the shape of ice, with the drying of the said water: and so let it be
reiterated, by removing that which was elevated. But to abridge (for this Aqua
vitae is in very small quantity and very uneasy to make) if you pass two
parties of water of the the departure, that dissolves the silver upon one party
of the salt of lead, this will do the same effect for the transmutation of
matals, but not within a man's body, where it must not in any case be applied,
except after great sweetning, that is to say, a demi sextier of the dissolution
of strong water, to make evaporate three or four pails of water, running down
within by a filter to the measure that elevates the strong water with the
spirits and malignity of this fire against Nature. Think not that I would stay
my self here so precisely, nor restrain to the Text of Saint Mark, nor upon
that, which depends upon the religion in this regard, although our principal
aim tends thitherward, that we would not enlarge by the same means to the
works and progress of nature, whose principal key is Alchymie, to mount from
thence to the Architype the Creator by means of the Caballe. But we would not
likewise here so reveal occasions to abuse this divine Art, to the ill turnings
of perverse ignorants, who to gain a piece of silver would make no difficulty
to deceive the world one way or other, as we could do in revealing unto the
means of blanching copper, to the likeness of silver, with Iscicles
accompanied with a Metalline of Orpiment, the which, as yellow gilded as it is,
and its red elevations as rubies, being notwithstanding bruised in a copper
mortar, and sublimed upon burned brass, passes within the head of the Cornue,
white as silver; But if it be well governed, with the foresaid Isicles would
make indeed great alterations upon the Copper which men may well misuse,
wherefore we will forbear to speak thereof any further. We may too well say,
that the preparation of this body, that Riplay intends silver, is to calcine
and reduce it into salt, which is done after this manner. But if in the
dissolving there be aqua fortis, it suffices to calcine it. Take then silver
plates of the bigness and thickness of a riall and put them in a Cruset, or a
little pot of Paris earth, not leaded, bed upon bed, with prepared Salt, that
is to say, dissolved in common water, afterward filtred, congealed, and
decrepited, and leave it 10. or 12. hours with burning coals, (it would be
better in an oven of reverberation) draw it from the fire and cast it yet all
hot into an earthen vessel, leaded, full of water, salt will dissolve it self
therein, and that of the silver which shall be calcined will go to the
bottom: Let them reside well; and separate them warily, by inclination: after
put again the plates to be recalcined with new salt, and reiterated as before,
evaporate the water, or the salt if it be dissolved, and that which remains
shall be as good as new, to the third or fourth reiteration, all your plates
will find themselves reduced into chalk: which you shall easily dissolve in
distilled vinegar, for silver, lead, and iron, are not of ^ard resolution, nor
also Copper to take it in Roche of azur: Tin much more, and Gold more then all
the rest, for that its calcination, is very uneasy. Which Geber knew very
well: the complete calcination of Sol, is most difficult: He rend^rs the causes
thereof. But it would be too long to dilaee upon all these things: we will
content our selves, to trace some shadows of that which our perquisition and
labor has enabled us to acquire, by the space of 50. years of one side, and
another, and proved more then once, not to speak unadvisedly: All which
secrets are revealed as is said; by the Fire. And not by mervails, since it
analogically discovers the spiritual: Thou have tried me with fire, and in
me, there is found no iniquity; said the Prophet, Psalm. 16. There where you
see, how he couples fire with iniquities, as if it were it, that revealed them
as well as he did the impurities of mettalls, where it does the same
operation, and effect, as salt does, in corruptible things; for although
metalls, be the permanent substance of all others, by reason of their most
strong composition which does not permit them easily to cast away out of their
radical form any alteration which men may make them endure in powder, chalk,
salt, water, oil, glass, Isicles, and infinite others: which happens not to
one of the other elementaries, Minerals, Vegetables, Animals; the which being
once changed from their primitive form, they cannot again reintegrate or be put
together. By means whereof, to speak of fire without metals, which are its true
subject, it would be as to propose to an Artist furnished with necessaries and
instruments, but had no stuffes proper to employ them, so that would remain to
him unprofitable. In metalls then there may be revealed and considered the
fairest secrets of nature, by the help of fires action. Which if in some more
particularly then in others, she has showed a will to recreate, yea to put in
evidence her greater knowledge. It seems this was in stones and and metals,
then which nothing could be presented more fair or agreeable to the sight, nor
more profitable and necessary, at least in regard of Iron without which man's
life would irksomely pass away, she receiving so many commodit^es thereby.
But precious stones beyond the simple contentment and pleasure of the eye, have
nothing wherewith men may know to draw out profit or succors in any one of our
businesses. And if they be once deprived of their natural shining form, they
never return thereto again, as metals do, so puissant and indissoluble is the
assembling of their elementarie parties, and their mixtion one with another.
Wherefore we must not marvail if so many good spirits have traveled all their
time to meditate upon this subject, and their diverse transmutations, having
been there unto drawn rather out of those fair considerations which they found
therein for their spirits contentation, then for any sordid and greedy desire
of gain, which has made the ignorant so obstinat^, who have so cried down this
divine Art, sister germane to the Caballe: for that which the Caballe is divine
and intelligible things, into the profound secrets whereof, she penetrates,
Alchymie is in natural and elementary, which she reveals unto us. Geber says
some man cannot know the composition of a thing, that is ignorant of its
destruction; which destruction is perfected by the separations caused by fire.

Nature then takes great pains, care, and pleasure, to labor in metals; and
puts in them a very great length of Time, to bring them to the last degree of
perfection, which settles in Gold, the most perfect and incorruptible substance
of all others, and the homogeneall and equal in all his parties: whence it is
taken for distributive justice, for mingle a party of Gold with 3. or 4.
hundreds of silver, or Copper, leaving them melted together to sport never so
little within a little Cruset, every portion how small soever it may be, of
silver or copper, will suck up its equ^ll part and portion of gold. It is
moreover so exactly depured, that it cannot be altered or corrupted by any
thing, that is either in the earth, water, air, or fire, nor by any corrosive
or poison that you can apply thereunto. It is not corrupted by clay, nor burnt
with any burning thing: nor mortified or devoured, by any green coloring, or
dividing water, there is nothing in it superfluous or defective: There are
(says Hermes) seven Metallic bodies, of which the most worthy and principal
is gold, attributed unto the Sun: from whence it has its name, for the same
that the Sun is to the stars, gold is toward the elementary bodies, what thing
soever burning it can be, cannot burn it, the earth cannot corrupt it, nor
the water destroy nor alter, because its complexion is tempered in heat,
moisture, coldness and dryness, and there is nothing in it superfluous or
deficient. By reason whereof, I find that those are far wide of their
account, which to keep themselves from poisoning, would serve themselves with
vessels of gold to eat and drink in; for gold respects no more poisons nor
venomes, then it would do of capon broth: So do silver, pewter, copper, lead
and iron, which would therewith change immediately. Even as a fearful man, and
of small resolution, who at the encounter of a Serpent or other venomous beast,
would grow suddenly pale, and come to change color: The care, curiosity, and
assiduous travel of infinite, rare, and meditating spirits, by the space of 4
or 5000 years, have found in metals secrets without number, and yet knew not to
do so well, but that they have left much more to enquire into, and to search
after: although there be but seven in all, comprehending therein running
quicksilver.

Wherein it is wonderful, that Nature so copious and abundant in all her
procreations, which are diverse, is pleased in this respect with so small a
number. Metals then, being such whose regiment depends on fire; which is one of
the proper visible symboles to represent the most hidden secrets, and mysteries
of Divinity; invisible, and imperceptible to our senses.

The Prophets also, were willing to serve themselves for the most part of their
parables, and similitudes, aenigmaes, allegories and figures; where they have
covered and hid that which they would not so openly declare, for they have very
seldom expressed themselves, as did Esaias in his 5 Chapter, where he interprets
that the vision of the Lord of Hosts, whereof he there brought a parable, was
the people of Israel, and the men of Judah his delectable plant. And in another
passage many waters, are many nations. Moreover Ezekiel, 23. having spoken of
the two sisters Aho^ah and Aholibah, he set down that this was Samaria and
that Jerusalem. God by the mouth of Moses, in the 28. of Leviticus, and in the
28. of Deuteronomy, threatened the Israelites, said, if they come to mis-know
him, and do not keep well his commandments, that he would make the heaven over
their head brass, and the earth under them iron, which are the two most
terrestrial metals, and most hard and rebellious to melt and to handle,
opposing them to the durity of this people, as it is there said. I will bruise
the pride of your hardness, and will make heaven over you as iron, and earth
as brass, your labor shall consume unprofitably, your earth shall not bring
forth its seed, nor the tree yield any fruit. For metals produce nothing, but
are barren; the Poets of their side have used many sorts of Metaphores, and
figures, as in the 6. of the Aeneid. an iron voice, for a strong and resounding
voice, and Hesiod calls the infernal dog Cerberus, (...), a voice of brass,
because it is the most sounding metal; His voice shall sound as brass, Jer.
16. and Origin upon the 25. of Exodus Brass is taken for a strong and thundering
voice, because of its resounding. Although I should speak with the tongue of
Angels, and have not charity in me, I am as sounding brass, and as a tinkling
cymball. Pindarus has appropriated to Heaven the Epithet of (...), Heaven of
brass, in the 10. of the Pythians; because of the firm solidity of the
firmament, as the word imports. Homer does the same in the 3. of his Odes,
calls it (...), most brass, as Euripedes and Anaxagoras, make the Sun a
fired iron; for the Greek Poets ordinarily do put fire and brass one for
another; the same does Homer in many places, as in the 4. of the Iliads, where
Apollo to encourage the Trojans, remonstrates unto them, that the Greeks have
not impenetrable bodies, of stone, or of iron, that they should be able to
resist blows of cutting brass, without hurting them. These are manners of
speech, which are not very strange amongst the Prophets, who have thereby
figured out the most part of their solutions, under which some mysteries were
shadowed; which if men would take altogether raw according to the letter,
without allegorizing thereupon, they would find themselves far from their
reckoning, as the Martyr Pamphilus said well in the defense of Origin, speaking
of those who to shun allegories were constrained to stumble at gross
impertinencies. They think it of this sort, said he, for that they would not
admit of allegories in the holy writ, by reason whereof, assubjecting
themselves to the literal sense, they imagine and invent to themselves fine
fables, and fictions. And indeed how could a man take according to the letter
that of the 33. of Deuteronomy. speaking of Aser? Thy shoes shall be iron and brass,
for he would not say that Aser was shod with iron and brass, but he would
understand thereby his force and power, denoted as well by the two metals, as
by the shoe; I will extend my shoe against Idumaea, strangers are my subjects;
These are all allegories and figure, as also in the 60. of Esaias, For brass I
bring thee gold, and silver in stead of Iron, brass for wood, and fire for
stones. Mark well how the Prophet observes the relations opposing brass to
gold, and iron to silver; and again, brass to wood, and iron to stones; for
as gold excels silver, and trees stones, it is the same in the metallique
order, brass is more precious then iron. But all tends to denote that the
heavenly mystical Jerusalem, which is the Church triumphant, so much more
excellent then the Jewish Synagogue, which was but a figure thereof. And
certainly he that would look more narrowly thereinto, the Prophets never
spoke any thing improperly, even to the least trade or mechanic arts; for in
their ravishments they saw things in their real being, within the Zapheret or
supercelestiall Sun, which is a clear shining looking-glass, a living source
of all Idea's, as Idea's are of forms. This is furthermore well to be
observed, for the regard of metals, which they associate commonly iron and
copper for their affinity; will iron make a covenant with iron from the North?
and brass? for iron is easily changed into copper, by means of vitrioll, by
putting them bed upon bed in a descensory with a strong fire of bellows, so
long till the iron grow liquid and melt into copper, having first moistened them
with a little vinegar, wherein there should be dissolved sal niter, or salt
peter, sal alcali, and salt of tartar, with verdigrease. Otherwise put of
vitriol in powder, and distill the water in a cornue, that which shall remain
calcined in the bottom, impost it with its water, and therein quench the
glowing gads of iron, or filings of iron, you shall find them by little and
little reduced into copper: Otherwise yet, dissolve vitrioll in common water,
evaporate the water, and calcine the congelation that shall rest in the
bottom; dissolve that in the like water, and it will become green, evaporate a
part thereof, and put the rest in a cave for a night, and you shall see green
flakes. Make them red in the fire, after dissolve them three or four times with
distilled vinegar, drying them every time, and the flakes will become red,
dissolve them again in the same vinegar, and therein quench the gads or other
iron work, as above said. In brief, that by the means of vitriol, iron is
conve^ted into copper, as we may see in penknifes steeped in ink made of
copper as or vitriol.

These flakes here are an entry to a higher work, and of more things for
Surgery and Medicine. But all these practices (you may say) are long and
troublesome and rather chargeable then gainful, and profitable. Also our
intention here, is not to stretch to gain, this book is not to get brend, but
to penetrate into the secrets of nature: from thence to mount and elevate his
spirit to spiritual things, whereto sensible do serve as a stair or as Jacobs
ladder; and there are no rarer considerations and observances, then in fire,
and metallique transmutations: Copper on the other side, is changed into
steel; if it be true that some Rabbines quote, upon that passage lately
alleged out of the 15. of Jeremiah 12. Iron and Brass, the Prophet (say they)
calls Iron mixed with Brass, Steel, which shows (for we must disdain
nothing of theirs) that Damake Steel was composed of Iron and Copper, that is
to say, of Iron half covered in Copper, and softened to restrengthen it the
more by means of lead. Whereupon make what Abuhali sets down in a Book of the
nature of things.

Make a little long trench within a bar of iron, and cast thereinto melted
lead, then make it evaporate with a strong fire as of a coupelle. Put again
therein new lead four or five times, and the iron will grow soft, which you may
afte wards make hard again quenching it in forge water, to make lancets, and
other subtle cutting irons, yea that shall cut other iron, without splinters
or gapping. And indeed we have found by experience, that to temper well a
harness against the shot of harquebuse, we first sweeten it with oils and
gums, with wax and the like incerative things; and after we harden them by
frequent extinctions, in waters that make it fast again. John the Grammarian
expounding this place of Hesiod, they wrought in brass, for iron was not yet
known, was forced to relate the word (...) to the people Chalybs in Scythia,
who (says he) first found out the use of iron and steel: the Poet Lucretius in
his 5. book imitates Hesiod in this kind, Ancient arms were hands and nails,
Stones and fragments of tree boughs,
And flames and fires, were first known,
Afterward the force of Iron and Brass,
But the use of Brass, before Iron.
Steel furthermore is made of the most pure and subtiliate iron; for that it
participates less of the earthinesse, then iron. The artifice of it, is
sufficiently known, and is common in forges. But to come to that of Damas, you
must first resweeten it of its too much bitter tartness, and after it is
reduced into filings to make it red in a cruset, and quench it many times with
oil of Olives, where there has often times been quenched molten lead, suddenly
covering the vessel, for fear lest the oil take flame. There are yet other
secret observations, which our intention is not to reveal all; it is enough to
have attained to the maxims.

Now for that there is such an affinity between iron, and copper, that they may
easily be converted one into the other; the same may likewise be done with
lead, and tin, by means of Sal Armonaick, and of certain incerative powders
of Borax, Salt peter, salt of Tartar, Salalchali, and other the like, which are
called Atinears. Panthee in his Voarchadumie, oil of glass. Quicksilver also,
is changed into lead or tin, according as it is congealed to an imperceptible
vapor, either of the one, or of the other, in this manner. Melt lead or tin
in a cruset, then let them a little cool, so long that they may be taken, but
yet hot, or with a staff of a torch, or the like, make a trench therein,
wherein you shall put quicksilver which will be suddenly congealed, but
bruiseable into powder. Reiterate that two or three times, and make it
afterward boil in the juice of Mercuriale, and will convert it self into
metal according to the odor of that it was congealed* there is loss therein
and that not a little: but yet at least, we may thereby see a possibility of
transmutations of metals: In this respect, furthermore of lead, and tin,
there presents a very fair consideration, very uneasy to comprehend, and does
merit, that the cause thereof should be sought after. We see by experience,
that these two metals, each apart, are very soft, and of a tender fusion, yet
b^ing mingled they grow hard, and become firm and solid, touching which see
what Av^erroes sets down in his Book of Vapors. That which does consolide,
and strengthen tin, is lead; and reciprocally, lead tin; for the glewish
viscosity, which binds their partie^, must consist of moisture and dryness,
this being done, there is no conglutination of tin with tin, therefore lead
is mingled therewith, which is more moist, and with lead, tin, which is more
dry: so that those two mingled together, strengthen one another, better then
being separated, and of their mingling, comes to procreate a glewing viscosity,
which causes in them a greater durity then they had, and binds them more
firmly; just as sand, and chalk in the composition of Mortar, which Albertus
also confirms in his fourth and fifth chapters of Minerals. But we will put
off all these metallique particularities, and their diverse transmutations, to
our Treatise of Gold and Glass, upon the 28. of Job, where under gold we will
comprehend all that sh^l depend on metals: and under glass, stones, as well
natural, as artificial; and all vitrifications, and enamels. Here we will
take but that which will conduce to our subject, which is to treat of things
intelligible, by the sensible: after the imitation of the Prophets, and chiefly
metals and fire, whose operation is better known in metals, then in the other
composed elements. The Prophets then have set down iron and brass for a firm
resistance. My strength is not the strength of stones, nor is my flesh brass,
Job 6. and in the 18. Psalm. Thou have made my arms as a bow of brass.
Furthermore in the 4. of Micah, I will make thy horn iron, and will make thy
hoofs brass.

As touching iron, for a hard and rigorous oppression, according as it is hard
and inflexible of its nature, and which does suppeditate almost all; I will
rule them with a rod of iron in the 2. Psalm. and in the 4. of Deuteronomy. I have
brought thee out of the iron furnace of Egypt; there where iron denotes
servitude, wherein they were, for the oppression of their persons, and the
furnace of fire, was that of their souls and consciences constituted amidst so
many Idolatries and impieties, which must be unto them a servitude, more
intolerable then all travails and afflictions; and the most cruel and
pitilesse usages of their bodies, for as much as the soul excels it, for the
zeal which they carry to their God, with the same locution the Ecclesiasticke
served himself in his 28. speaking of a wicked tongue; happy is he that can
save himself from a wicked tongue, for the yoke thereof is as iron, and his
band as the band of brass. But for affliction and anguish, all openly in the
105. Psalm. v. 18. Iron pierced his soul, speaking of Joseph a prisoner in
Egypt, until his word came. To be short, there is not a point of locution
figurative, more frequent in the Prophets, then those that are drawn from
metals and from fire, which for the reason of its proprieties and effects, as
it is one of the most commodious and necessary things of all others, according
as it is said before, for it bakes our viands, it warms us, and does revigour
us against the colds; it clears and lightens in the darkness, in lieu of the
suns brightness, and other infinite usages, and chiefly for the execution of
arts and trades: Otherwise we may say that without iron, fire it self would as
it were be almost unprofitable for this respect. And Plato does not exempt one
only art from fire, but the pottery of clay, in the 3. of his Laws, where he
treats very excellently of the life of the first men; and although iron and
copper had brought them commodities to civilize themselves and to polish them
to a more humane life. So that not without cause, these poor beastly Savages of
the West Indies, did wonder in their gross understanding, how people in these
parts, so well advised and industrious, for a little piece of gold or silver,
unprofitable to all uses, should offer them so liberally hatchets, sithes,
reaphooks, and other iron work, commodious for all usages, and which they ^ould
so shorten that which they had with so great pain perfected but to the half
with fire, which was to to them for all instruments and tools, with some base
pointed flints. But we may here likewise allege to the contrary the hurts and
incommodities that iron brings, for of it, are forged all offensive arms,
wherewith men shorten their days by their reciprocal Massacres: for that, it
is Mars his true Minister, and exterminator and ruin of mankind, as Jupiter
qualifies it in the 5. of the Iliads, Mars, Mars, the plague and ruin of men,
contaminated with murders, overthrower of walls.

Which he could not do, at the least very uneasily without the means and aid of
fire. Also they give it the name of Mars. But let us here a little consider a
pleasant allegory covered under the fiction of Venus, Vulcan, and Mars. Venus
without doubt is mankind, which is continued by venereall propagation of
lineage. Its lawful spouse is Vulcan, which by conjugall love, brings him all
or the greatest part of his necessary commodities, by reason of Mars, which is
iron. But for that he is his adultererer, he also destroys the greatest part
of what she procreates; and the husband maintains iron for a double use, good,
and bad; for we must not measure the works of the Creator by their apparent
incommodities or commodities. For God saw all that he had made, and they were
very good; for this goes according as the Creatures apply it. Is there any
thing more fair, more pleasant or more delectable to the sight, then a clear
shining flame? any thing that does more rejoice then light? And on the other
side, there is nothing more hurtful, fuller of damage, nor more dangerous then
fire, which burns and consumes all that comes near it. A Satyr the first
time he saw it, he rejoiced st^angely to see it so fair, so clear, but thinking
to approach nearer, to embrace, and to caresse it, when he perceived it so
offended, with extreme grief, he was never after able to come near it. We
may also say the same of iron, as Pliny calls it the best and the worst
instrument of life; for therewith (says he) we til the earth, graffe trees,
prune vines, with other infinite commodities and usages, as chiefly to build
houses for our covert and safety. But on the other side, we employ it no less,
if not more, in our mutual assassinates and massacres to shorten our life; as
if it were troublesome to continue so long. Yet it is so short without the
inconveniences that shorten it and make of iron the most pernicious minister
and instrument of all others. To which purpose Isiodorus said very well, From
whence a long while agone earth was drawn from thence now blood is shed,

Which proceeds rather from our malice and depravation, then from the fault of
this inanimate insensible substance, which neither moves to good or to bad, but
by our selves.

And yet, says the same Pliny, it seems that nature was not willing wholly to
excuse it, but to punish it only, rendering it subject so to rust, more then
any other of the brother hood, and principally by man's blood, which it is so
apt to spill.

The same natures benignity, exacting punishment from very iron by rust, from
whence humane blood revengeth it self; for being touched therewith it more
speedily draws rust therefrom. And indeed there is nothing which sooner
rusteth iron then man's blood. But this rust because we are purposely fallen upon
it, it is not altogether unprofitable, though most wholesome to many good
effects, as well within as without the body, beyond that which it does in
tinctures. Wherefore it will do no hurt to touch some thing therein in this
place, and therein to reveal that which experience has manifested unto us to
be most rare, and most important, but this is handled diverse ways. Take then
filings of iron very clean, and besprinkle them with a little distilled
vineg^r, leaving it so in a cave for two or three days or other fresh and
moist place; and that will all convert into rust, which you shall bruise very
subtly in an iron or a stone mortar. Put it in a little pot, and put thereon
boiling distilled vinegar, stirring it lustily with a staff or rod of iron,
and the vinegar will charge it self with the dissolution of the rust: turn it
by inclination, and put therein other vinegar, reiterating tha^ so long, that
all the aluminosity and tincture of the iron be dissolved, and that nothing
remains but black and dead earths which you must cast away: cause the vinegar
to evaporate very sweetly, and there will remain a powder of Canneale color,
which the chemists call saffron of iron; which is made also by putting of small
pieces of iron to calcine in Glass makers Ove^^ for the space of three weeks
or a month; and they will reduce themselves to a small and impalpable powder,
as dough, red as blood, but it does not dissolve it self in strong waters.
There is neither Bole-armonaic, or Terra sigillata, which can compare to them,
who know well to practice their proprieties and consemblable effects.

In regard of the former, take of the phlegm of Aqua vitae, and do upon all
the same just that which you did with the distilled vinegar upon the rust, it
will dissolve more then the half: withdraw your phlegm by a light
distillation, and upon the gum that shall rest congealed, cast ^ine Aqua vitae,
stirring it strongly with a baston upon warm ashes, but you must not warm it
so much as the vinegar and the phlegm, and when the aqua vitae shall be well
charged of its dissolution, retire it by a slow distillation in Balneo Marie,
in a limbeck; for it will serve you again as before: and if that be very
proper for the dysenteries, and fluxes of the belly, with exulcerations and
gangrens with small shot; as also is the second Crocum drawn by the phlegm,
of very great efficacy: and the third yet of more, drawn by Aqua vitae, which
will remain in yellow powder the true essence of iron, which we have searched
even to the Center. But in all dissolutions take heed to leave them well in
repose, and not to receive but the clear, pure, and neat, without any feces or
residences; rather put them for an hour in a warm bath to clarify them. The
vinegar that remains, and the phlegm, you may filter, but not the aqua vitae,
because of its unctuosity: which makes it difficult to separate it, from its
residences; we must therefore attend till it be clear.

Behold these three earths, and the three dissolvants proceeding one and the
other from the vegetable, that is to say, wine, the most excellent substance of
all the vegetabl^s, which the Philosopher Calisthenes called the blood of the
earth. Now for the affinity that is betwixt iron and copper, we will here
pursue in one train some experiments proceeding from the said copper. Take (to
shorten as much as may be) of the stone of Azur, which is a mineral of copper,
which will render you more then twelve ounces neat and liquid for a pound.

But here we shall be constrained to make a little digression to serve for
advertisement. In metallic dissolutions, (and let this be a maxim) we must
rather take raw minerals, coming from the earth, and not the accomplished
metals, and that for three reasons. The first, for that excuses you of labor,
and length of time, to calcine them, and make them dissoluble. The second, that
in the dissolution of the mineral you shall find more of the salt, and shall
extract it more easily, then in six of one of their chalx. And the third, for
that the spirits of metal, are not yet at first so imprisoned in their
corporal mass, as in the superficies within this mineral and in much greater
abundance: there when it has passed the asperity and rigor of the fire, to
separate the metal, most part of the spirits disperse themselves and the ^est
are drowned and barred fast in the bottom of the body: whence it is a
difficulty to draw them; so that afterward the oil is worse easy to extract
from salt, in the dissolution of chalks, then of that which shall be drawn from
the minerals. Take then of this Azure stone for the shorter, or if you have it
not of aes ustum burned Brass, which we make coupellans of brass, in three
parts of lead, (verdigrease is too gummy and unfit) or making meal of the
filings of copper, even as we said heretofore of iron, putting thereunto a
little aqua fortis, make it clear, which will be green, as an Emeraud, and
pursue it, in and through all as you did iron: till the salt or gum remain in
the bottom congealed, proper for hollow ulcers, and many other effects of
surgery; you may yet govern this gum with phlegm and aqua vitae, as you
did iron. And of the first very gum extracted by the vinegar, may thence draw
an oil, as it was said of lead. In regard of the earths that remain of the
dissolutions of the aqua vitae, without any further dissolving of it, nor
leaving any tincture therein, nor to disjoin them which is hard to do, nor to
clarify the aqua vitae, but will remain impasted together as milk with dough,
for they will be white, after you have dried them well in the Sun, or before
a gentle fire. Put them upon a plate of iron, or of warmed copper: and if they
fume not, it is a sign they are all deprived of their spirits. Yet put them in
a cornue, with a naked bottom among coals, and perfect the drying of them;
then at last give a fire of calcination. Cast aqua vitae thereon to dissolve
that which you can; and evacuating the dissolution, perfect to dry the moisture
which may thereof remain giving again fire of calcination in the end: and
again putting aqua vitae thereon to perfect the extraction of all the salt
therein remaining, which will be perfected in the third or fourth reiteration.
I have put you to an address of great effects, where I do not pretend to lead
you by the hand any further, not to injure good and curious spirits, that by
long labors and perquisitions have traveled to obtain that which others had
better cheap, and also to that which we reserve for our discourse of Gold and
Glass, where we will declare that which shall here be left imperfect, not
having attained, but by the end of the lip: wherefore we will take but that
which is necessary to clear what the Prophets have thereupon touched in their
parables and similitudes. In the first place of the two perfect gold and
silver, on which they have most insisted on the good part, for the imperfect
tin, copper, and iron, they have ordinarily applied to the worst part for
vices and depravations, contumacies and durities; and lead for vexations and
molestations. Gold for true belief, faith, piety, and religion, and in sum,
all that which concerns the honor and service of God; Silver, for good and
charitable works of mercy; due in respect of our neighbor. So that these two
metals represent the two tables of the Decalogue. And it would not be far
from the purpose to make a trimming of the Altar. The first of gold, containing
four precepts, in four azure letters, which signifies heaven, and the other of
silver in green letters, signifying the earth. Origin in the 2. Homil. upon
this text of the first of Canticles (We will make thee borders of gold, with
studs of silver,) triumphs to allegorize the shape of gold, this (says he)
holds the figure of the invisible and incorporeall nature, (and this for that
it is of a substance so homogeneall and subtle, that nothing can extend it
self more fine) and silver, represents the virtue of the Verb, following that
which the Lord said in the 2. of Hosea, I have given you gold and silver, and
you have therewith made Idols to Baal. But we make the Holy Scripture Idols of
gold and silver, when we turn the sense thereof to some perverted
interpretation: or that we would Pindarize it by elegances, as if virtue
consisted on the vain flowers of Rhetoric, for in doing this we open our
mouth, as if we would swallow and suck in heaven, whilst our tongue licketh the
earth, like as if the Prophet should say, I have given you sense and reason,
whereby you ought to acknowledge me for your God, and reverence me; but you
have turned them aside, and therewith have made Idols: By sense are understood
the internal cogitations which represents them; and by Reason, which is (...)
the word, for it signifies the one and the other, as silver denotes, Psalm.
12.6. the words of the Lord are pure words, as silver proved in the fire, when
they say, or hold, that silver tried in the fire, is the tongue of the just,
are not my words as fire? But Cherubins are said to be gold, because they
interpret them for the ple^itude of divine Science. And the Tabernacle of the
alliance is of Gold also, because it carries the type and i^ age of the law of
nature, where consisted the gold of science; so that Gold is referred to the
conc^ption and thought, and silver to the word, according to which the wise man
alludeth in the 25. of the Pro^erbe, As Golden apples with silver nets, so is
he that speak^ words in a fit sea^on. Hitherto Origin. But will we hear what
Zohar sets down, from whence Origin has fished out the greatest part of his
rare and profound meditations and allegories, and to the purpose of those
apples of gold, enchased within the nets of silver. The gold from above is the
gold sagur, enclosed or folded up; that from below is more exeposed to our
senses, (nothing should better agree to the M^ssihe which is the true pure gold
of Evihah, mentioned Genesis 2. he which is reinclosed within silver,) namely his
divinity, and reshut up with the humanity. Zohar pursues it; In the Tabernacle
there were mingled gold, and silver, to assemble the divine mystery above in
one subject, where sovereign perfection was found. But the Cherubims were all
of gold, showing their Angelical nature which does not participate of any
corporeity, without any silver or copper mingled therewith. Gold within silver
expresses mercy, by which the whole universe was built, (the world was built
in mercy,) upon which Gods Throne is established, His Royal seat shall be
prepared in mercy. But the rigor of judgment is designed by copper, which
approaches to the color of blood, without the effusion whereof, also there is
no remission.

And therefore it was ordained, that Moses should erect a Serpent in the
Wilderness to heal those who were bitten by the vermin and cast their eyes
upon it. Then gold, silver, and copper, are the three metals that go together,
the Chasma'l, or the electrum of Ezechiel. And there is a fair meditation upon
the 3 colors, which are these, white, of silver, that represents water, is
mercy, manifested by the particle Jah, assigned to the Father, which the
Apostle calls the father of mercies, 1 Cor. 1.3. Copper that in redness
imitates fire, is the rigor and the severity of justice, which the Egyptians
call Din, attributed to the Holy Spirit, against which if any blaspheme, he
shall neither be pardoned in this world here, nor in the other. The third, in
the middle of two, is the citrinity of the gold, composed of white and red, as
we may see in saffron, blood, vermillion, and other the like, tempered with
water, which is white, for from thence is procreated a golden yellow; for
Citrinity, says Geb^r, is nothing else, but a determinate proportion of white
and red. And this gilded citrinity is attributed to the Son, who
participates of Mercy and Justice: in pursuance of that spoken in the 16. of
Eccl. 11. because mercy and wrath are with him. But latten or copper, which in
its exterior has some resemblance with gold, but within all impure and
corrupt, denoting hypocrisy, which under a masque of pious zeal, and religion
hatcheth its wicked desires, and detestable ambitions, impieties, erroneous
opinions, lusts, animosities, revenges, and other unjust and perverse
intentions. The whiteness of the silver, on the one side, of which this let
on participates, for it is but at 16 Carats being pallied by the redness of
copper, that causes it citrinity. But this redness is but cruelty, and
malice, which corrupts gentle sincerity. If your sins were as red as
scarlet, or vermillion, they shall be as white as snow, Esaias 1.16.

In regard of lead, it is put for vexations and molestations, wherewith God
does visit us; by means whereof, he brings us unto repentance; for as lead
burns, and exterminateth all the imperfections of metal, which Boethius the
Arabian, calls water of Sulphur; so tribulation divesteth us here below, from
many spots, which we thereby have contracted, so that, St. Ambrose calls it,
Heavens Key, following that which is written, Act. 14.22. Through many
temptations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle Romans 5.3.
and 4. etc. uses a very fine gradation, Trihulations begets patience tpatience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy spirit, that is given unto us.
Fire denotes tribulation, whereupon the said Saint Ambrose upon the first
psalm, Fire says he, burns wax, which melts it self to be purged, and we
are proved by fire, for God desiring to convert a sinner chastises him, and
burns him, to purge him: for fire is light to Believers, and punishment, to
the incredulous. Said Saint Jerome very well upon Ezechiel. That fire
illuminates Believers, and blinds Infidels, serving for nothing but smoke which
makes them weep, and darkness, as smoke which is noxious to the eyes. With
which fume the house of Israel was all filled and darkened; Prove. 10 26. Esa.
6.4.
Let the just then rejoice, when they shall find themselves upon this text of
the 50. Psalm. 3. A fire shall burn in his sight, for they shall be thereby
illuminated, and obstinate sinners burnt by the same, having the two properties
to illuminate, and burn: for that it illuminates, it must be the holy Spirit,
which is the true fire, that is kindled in our hearts, and not foolish and
preverse opinions, vain and erroneous, which would quickly draw us to that
which the Prophet Esaias says, Chap. 50.11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire,
and that compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your
fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled, and you shall sleep in sorrow.
From thence says Origin, it seems that sinners kindle themselves a fire,
wherewith they must be crucified. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, Hos.
13. And in the 28. of Ezekiel. 18. I will bring forth a fire, from the midst of
thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon Earth. The
matter then which entertains it, are our iniquities, and our offenses, their
iniquity shall burn as fire. And in the 7. of Eccles. 17. The vengeance of the
ungodly is fire, and worms, which touches upon that in the 9. of St. Mark.
44. alleged out of the 66. of Esaiah 24. Whose worm shall not dye, nor their
fire be quenched: for the one and the other are endless, namely the fire that
burns them, and the worm that gnawes their consciences in this world, and in
the other, torments them for ever. There where on the contrary, if God set it
on fire, we may say with one of our ancient fathers, O happy flame, but not
burning, illuminating, but not consuming: Thou do transform whom thou do
touch, so that they, even merit to be called Gods. Thou have warmed thy
Apostles, who forsaking all things but thee, have been made Gods children: Thou
have warmed the Martyrs, who have spilt their blood: Thou have warmed the
Virgins, who by the fire of Divine Love, have quenched the heat of
concupiscence. The Confessors likewise, that have separated themselves from the
world, to join and to unite unto thee. So that every creature, by the
beneficence of this fire, repurgeth it self, from its coinquinations, and
ordures, and there is nothing exempted from its heat, if it would come to enjoy
the fellowship of God; for it is this fire, that kindles in us by the
illuminations of the holy Spirit, by means of our corporal tribulations, which
brings us sooner to God, then any other thing, of which Lead is one of their
symboles, working the same operations in metals, as afflictions do in us. There
is so gallant a passage in the 6. of Jer. under the figure of a Coupelle, which
I think, that there is not a Goldsmith, Refiner, or a Mettleman, which has
spoken more properly: They are all corrupters, speaking of the Jewish people,
then iron or copper. The bellows are bu^nt, the Lead is consumed in the fire,
the Founder melts in vain, for their wickedness^s are not plucked away,
R^probate silver shall men call them, for the Lord has rejected them. Whereupon
Rab. Sol. is a little interveared for that he does not well understand the
Coupelles, being willing to adjoin one of his own. The prophet speaks here
(says he) of God as of a Goldsmith, who desirous to purge gold puts thereunto
lead or tin, that the fire should not consume the gold: for after the lead is
consumed, the fire hurts the gold by consuming it. Mark what it is to speek
unadvisedly of things we do not understand, for so doing we suffer our selves
to fall easily into gross absurdities: There are are here two faults so
apparent, that even appr^ntices would mock at them: the one to mix Tin at the
Coupelle or ashes in stead of lead: for it would not be fit: also the Prophet
takes heed therein. See what Geber sets down, in the Chap. of Ashes, Metalls
that participate least of the substance of quicksilver, and more of Sulphur,
separate themselves sooner and more easily from their mixtions. So that lead,
because it has more of the Sulphureall terrestreity, and less quicksilver,
it is of more tender and light fusion, then any other: hardens less in the
coupple and separates soonest: therefore it is more proper to this examination,
for that it carries away with less time and pains, the impu^iti^s of imperfect
metals, mingled with gold and silver. Upon which there is no action, and by
consequent b^ings less damage thereunto: the^e where because the substance of
tin participates of much quick silver, and of little sulphurous earthinesse, so
that being more pure and subtle, the more profoundly it mingles it self, and
adheres more strongly to gold and silver, from which it is separated more
slowly and more unwillingly, with so much of their loss and falling off: the
other error is to think, that when the lead in the Coupelle has exterminated
the imperfect metals, and it self is partly gone away in smoke, partly burned,
and partly inglued, within the Coupelle as in vitrified litarge, fire cannot in
any thing hurt gold, for being fire and pure, it would remain there a thousand
years without the loss of one grain: to which nothing of things is wanting, it
is even safe in burnings, and great fires; the matter remaining said Pliny
well, speaking of gold in his 33. Book, chap. 3. as we may see by experience.
The prophet said then, and that so properly as nothing more, that even as when
there are more impurities mingled with gold and silver, to repurge them we must
put thereunto more lead at once. So the Jews iniquities were so great that it
was needful to visit them with more afflictions one upon another to make them
know their offenses and to forsake them: as Physicians who redouble oftentimes
their purgations and medicaments in those bodies, where the malady is
contumacious and rebellious: for tribulations and adversities, are in us as
fire, and as lead, in impure metalls: As gold and silver are tried by the fire,
so the Lord tries our hearts, Prove. 2. and in the 2. of Eccles. 5. Whatsoever
is brought upon thee, take patiently, for gold and silver, are tried by fire,
and men by the furnace of tribulation, and anguish: Saint Gregory in his
Pastoralls upon this passage of the 11. of Ez^kiel, who dilateth and insisteth
hard upon this metaphor and similitude. The house of Israel is to me become
dross, all they are brass and tin, and iron in the midst of the furnace, and
they are the dross of silver, and therefore says the Lord, I will gather you
in the midst of Jerusalem, as a mass of silver, brass, tin, and iron, and of
lead, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon them to melt them.
So I will gather them in mine anger, and in my fury, yea I will gather them and
blow upon them, in the fire of my wrath, and they shall be melted, in the midst
thereof. As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall they be
melted in the midst thereof, and they shall know, that I the Lord have poured
my fury upon them. Saint Gregory, interprets this for the Jews, who in their
strong adversities would not leave to go out of the way of their vices, and
depravations, and would receive no correction but made themselves worse:
Malachy 3.3. uses the same form of speech. The Lord shall fit to melt and
purge silver, he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as gold, and
silver, and they shall offer to the Lord an offering of righteousness. See how
he there resembles very well, Gold to Faith, and Religion and Silver to
works, for i^ the one and not the other be not very clean, in vain would we
present them unto God. And all this must be perfected by fire: according ^o
which the Psalmist speaks, Thou have proved my heart, and have visited me in
the night, thou have examined me by fire, and there is no iniquity found in
me, Psalm. 17.3. for (as St. Chrysostom says) fire according to the will of
God, does diverse operations. It did not burn the three children in the furnace,
yet burned those that were without: and as the Sea gave way to the Israelites,
to pass on dry foot, and drowned Pharaoh, and all his that pursued them. There
is a fi^e, says St. Ambrose, upon the 39. Psalm. verse. 3. which with its Ardor
devoureth the transgression, and blotteth out the sin: But we most not
understand it material fire here below, for there is nothing common here, with
spirituality, but by way of analogy, and correspondence; there being a very
great disproportion betwixt intelligible and sensible things, as in Jer. 20.9.
And there was a burning fire in my bones. In sum that the holy Scripture is
stuffed with these manner of speeches drawn from fire and metals. As in Hag.
2.8. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts. Gold,
silver, and all metals, yea generally, all things whatsoever, although they may
be said to be of God; as St. Jerome said very well, forasmuch as he created
them, and gave them being, subsistence, and maintenance. The earth is the Lord
and the fullness thereof: notwithstanding this gold and silver, which God
alleges here more particularly to be his, must be understood mystically.
By silver, interpret the law of the mouth, Tbe words of the Lord are pure
words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times. And by Gold
(says Zohar) the written Law, where there are many brave meditations to be
considered; for there i^ not a form of a letter, point nor accent, but
imports some mystery, as it is particularly specified in Ghinab Egoz, in the
garden of drowning of Rabbi Joseph Castiglia^. On the other side silver is
applied to the old Testament, gold to the New. Origin confronts Faith to Gold,
and the confession and preaching thereof to silver. That there, to the
conceptions of the thought, and this here, to the word and enuntiation made by
month which expresses it, and puts it out. The tongue of the just is chosen
silver. Of which two metal^, namely of right Faith and purity of conscience,
and of verbal confession, the Temple, and Church of God in Christianism, and
the glory of him was greater then the Jewish Law, which was but a dark shadow
th^reeof. So that gold, designs the heart, that corresponds to the Sun, and to
fire: and silver words, with Salt wherewith they must be seasoned: The word is
near unto thee even in thy mouth, and in thy heart that thou may do it:
which the Apostle appropriating, If thou confess the Lord Jesus with thy
mouth, and do believe in thy heart, that God has raised him from the dead
thou shall be saved: for we believe with the heart to Justification, and
confess with the mouth to have Salvation. It is gold and silver which he
would that we should build on his foundation: the gold of Havilah, that
grows within the terrestrial Paradise, with the Carbuncle and the Emrauld
which the Psalmist in the 67. Psalm calls the Greens of Gold.

Behold here the depurements that fire operates where it passes: and chiefly
upon metals, which are of a most strong and persisting composition, as any
other Elementary substance, therefore we have therein a little insisted,
because that the Prophets have therein founded the greatest part of their
Allegories: where we must note, that they have commonly put the imperfect,
lead, tin, iron, and copper, in the bad part, and sometimes gold also: as in
Jer. 51.7. Babylon is a golden Cup: and in the 2. of Dan. 32. speaking of
Nebuchadnezar, Thou art the Golden head, more in the 31. of Eccles. there are
many chances in gold: Zohar calls it Satan's dung, following the Text of the 37.
of Job: Gold comes from the North: for the North is always taken by the
Cabalists in the evil part, because the Sun never passes thereby, and it
relates to midnight, where the hurtful powers are in their great reputation
and vigor: as on the contrary, Noon in good part; We must not then
understand, that Job would say that gold came from the Northern parts, for it
grows not there by reason of their continual colds: but in some certain place,
where it procreates; this is more ordinarily toward the North: against which
the Sun, as against a But, darts its beams, being to the Meridion all part, as
likewise all good wines. And to this purpose Franciscus Oviedus in his 16.
Book, Chap. 1. of his general history of the Indies, speaking of the Isle of
Borichen, puts this, Borichen, otherwise called St. John's Island, is very rich
in gold, and men draw it, in great quantity, even on the Northern side, as in
the opposite part toward the South, it is very fruitful of victuals: the
same also is found even in Spain it self. Gold then is sometimes taken in the
worser part, as in the golden Calf which the Israelites melted in Moses his
absence, from whence one of their Rabbis said, there had never befallen them
any calamity and misery, but there was an ounce of that Idol mingled therewith:
Silver because of its whiteness, denotes Mercy, is always in the good part,
and first in esteem before gold, as it is Hag. the 2. Mine is the silver, and
mine is the gold. The Onorocrites also hold, that to dream of gold presageth
some near affliction, because it agrees in color with gall, and the pain in
the ears, two subsistences extremely bitter: and bitterness signifies,
trouble, anguish, and grief; as Pearls do tears for their resemblance: But
silver expresses joy and merriment. And therefore says the same Zohar, Gold
is attributed to Gabriel, and Silver to Michael, which in order is his
superior, Brass to Vriel, because it represents him in color of fire, faith
to Vr of the Caldees, Gold, says he, and fire march together, and copper with
them, where was built the little Altar without, where the blood of the
Sacrifices was spilt, and that within was of gold, Exodus 38. and 39. Silver is
the primary light of the day, and Jacob. And gold, that of the night, and Esau
or Edom red: Silver represents milk; and gold wine, alluding to craft and
subtilty, where it is said, in the 2. Eccles. I thought to draw my flesh with
Wine, to give myself unto Wisdom.

But to return to our principal purpose, fire amongst other its properties and
effects, is very purging, and also in flesh, and other corruptible substances,
Salt consumes the greatest part of their corrupting humors: fire also does the
same, and analogically spiritual fire, which is nothing but the charitable
ardor of the Holy Spirit, that inflames us with Faith, Charity, Hope. Shakes
off the impurities of our souls, as it is Esa. 1.25. I will purely purge away
thy dross, and take away all thy tin, for this place here in the 10. of the
same Prophet, verse. 17. And the light of Israel, shall be for a fire, and his
holy one for a flame, shows sufficiently that the Holy Spirit is not only
light, but fire and flame, which salteth and repurgeth our consciences from
corruption, vices, and iniquities.

The Sun also, which is a visible Image of the invisible Divinity, as for
light, fo for its vivifying heat, wherewith all sensible things are maintained,
as the intelligible by the super c^lestial Sun, works the same effect in case
of purification, as fire. As we may see by experience, as the places where the
Sunbeams come not, are ever musty and moldy, and to purify them we open
windows to admit light into them: and there make great fires, which is very
proper in the time of the Plague, for it chaseth away ill air, as light does
darkness. Also evil spirits, who have more reputation in the dark, from
plague walking in darkness, the Hebrews call this Devil ravaging by night
Deber, and from his violence and Meridian Devil, that of the day Ketch; the
Greeks (...). There is in the fire, says Pliny, a certain faculty and
medicinal virtue against the Plague. Who for the absence and hiding of the
Sun, comes to form it self: wherein we find by lightning it here and there may
bring great comfort and succor in many kinds. As Empedocles and Hippocrates
do elsewhere sufficiently demonstrate. There was also a Physician at Athens
that got much reputation, by causing them to kindle many fires during the
Plague time. So that, the true Plague of the soul being iniquities and
offenses, which poison it, its theriac or counter-poyson, cannot be better
found then in the fire of contrition that the Holy Spirit kindles therein: My
heart was hot within me, while I was musing, the fire burned, Psalm. 39.3.
There is also a fire of Tribulation which was spoken of before, that consumes
our vanities, and unruly concupiscences; and makes us retun to God, whereupon
one of the ancient Fathers said, it was a happy tribulation that forces to
repentance. And St. Gregory, the evils that press us here, do compel us the
sooner to come to God. And that for our greater good, that God does thus burn
us by the fire of tribuation: that which was said by the Psalmist 26.3. Prove
me O Lord, and examine me, try my reins, and my heart: And in the 13. of Zach.
verse. 9. I will bring the third part through the fire, and I will refine them
as silver is refined, and I will try them as Gold is tried: For fire has a
double property, as has been said, the one to separate the pure from the
impure, and the other to perfect that which remains of the pure. Take away rust
from silver, and it will go forth a most pure vessel: But the propriety of
these significations is better kept in the Hebrew, then in any other tongue.
Where the verb Szaraph is joined and attributed unto silver, which signifies,
to melt, and to refine, and to Gold Baban to prove. The one denotes Gods in
Elect an holy purity of conscience by silver, the other by gold a perfection of
constancy, which we cannot know better then by proof: and from thence comes
dignity and eternal glory, the one and the other acquired by the fire of
Examination and of probation; for, as says St. Chrysostom, that which fire is
toward gold and silver, the same is tribulation in our souls from which fire
cleanses the impurities and uncleanness, and makes them neat shining:
following that which is said in the 17. of Prove. As silver is tried by fire, in
the furnace, so God proves the hearts of his Creatures, and in the 27. of
Eccles. ver. 5. The furnace tries the Potters vessel, and tentation of
tribulation, tries good men. There are many, says one of the Fathers, who
whilst they are red in the fire of adversity, make themselves flexible, and
malleable, but departing therefrom, they harden themselves again as before,
making themselves unfit for conversion or amendment; Origin in his 5. Homily
upon the 3. Chap. of Jesus Nave, they that draw near unto me, draw near unto
fire: If you be (says he there) Gold or silver, the nearer you come to the
fire, the more you will become resplendant: but if you build with wood, straw,
or chafe, upon the foundation of Faith, and come near the fire, you shall be
consumed: very happy then are those that drawing near the fire, are therewith
lightened and not burnt. According as it is written in the 3. of Mal. The Lord
will sanctify thee in burning fire. St. Augustine, upon a verse of the 45.
Psalm. We have passed through water, and fire: Fire burns (says he) and
water corrupts: When adversity comes upon us, it is as it were fire unto us:
and worldly prosperities on the contrary are as water. The earthen vessel that
is well hardened in the fire, fears neither water nor fire. Let us then study
to amend our selves by the fire of tribulation, by bearing it patiently; for if
the pottery be not firmly strengthened by fire, the water of temporal vanity
will soften it and mingle it as dirt. And therefore we must pass through the
fire, to come to the water of Mercy, and Grace, whereof St. John speaks in
the 3. of S. Mat. I Baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes
after me is stronger then I, and he will B^ptize you with the holy Spirit, and
with fire. Of which fire we may see in the 16. of Wisdom, 17. for it is
wonderful, that in the water that quenches all things, fire should be most
powerful. That which made St. Auguistine himself say; that in the Sacrament of
Baptism, which they exercise and Catechize, they first came to fire, and after
to the Baptism of water: where the same comes to the temptations of this age,
where in the anguish which oppresses us, the fire first presents it self, but
when the fear therein is out, it is to be feared that a wind of vain glory
proceeding from temporal felicity, dissolve it not into rain, which will come
to quench the fire of heat and Charity, which affliction has taken within our
Souls. To this purpose, from fire to baptismall water, designed by the
aforesaid passage, we have passed through water and fire, this b^ats upon the
31. of Numb. of clensing by fire, and b^ water, according as the things may
suffer: for visible baptism, is made by visible water, and wherein the water
consists in parts which is nothing else but congealed water, by the acuity of
fire thrust thereinto: with which salt every Sacrifice must be salted, that is
to say, the external man, and the invisible baptism of the internal
spiritual man is wrought by the Grace of the holy Spirit represented by fire
which of it self is invisible, and unperceivable, except it be attached to
some matter, as the soul is in the body: This fire there burns in us mortal
sins, and the water washes away Venial and Original.

But some will demand, What is that fire, from whence comes it, that so purifies
our souls, and warms them in the Love of God, and illightens them with his
knowledge? for we love nothing but what we know: and we cannot know God, nor
see his light, but by his light (In thy light we shall see light:) that is to
say, by his word and parol who has vouchsafed to revest us with our flesh. Thy
word is a fiery word, and thy servant loves it. It this fire then which our
Savior says, he was come to send into the earth: and what will I, if it be
already kindled? For as Prometheus brought fire here below, which he had
lighted, in one of the wheels of the Suns Chariot: The word has rendered,
lightened in the Mercavah Chariot or throne of God, which is all of fire; as
also in the 17. of Dan. verse. 9. Origin in his 13. Homil. upon the 25. of
Exodus. Jacinth, Purple, double Scarlet, and Silk: sets down, that these four
represented the four Elements, Silk or Linen, the Earth from whence it came;
Purple, Water, because extracted from blood with the shell or cockle of the
sea; Jacinth in Hebrew Techeleh, the Air, for it is without heavenly blew; and
Scarlet, fire, by reason of its red enflamed color. But wherefore is it there
said, that Moses redoubled the fire; and not one of the rest? Because that fire
has a double propriety, the one to shine, and to be bright, and the other to
burn: we must understand corruptible things, for upon the incorruptible, we
must look upon for this regard, to refine them and amend more and more. Did not
our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he
opened to us the Scriptures? Luke 24.32. said the Pilgrims of Emaus. And this
is it wherefore it is commanded in the Law to offer double Scarlet* to adorn
the Tabernacle. But how can this be? Ask Origin, a Doctor instructing people
in the Church of God, designed by the Tabernacle, if he did but cry after the
vices, blasphem, and reprove them; without bringing instruction and consolation
to the people, explaining to them the Scriptures, and the obscure sense therein
concealed, wherein consists the internal Doctrine, and the mystical
understanding: he well offers Scarlet, but simple and not double, because that
this fire does not but burn and not lighten. But on the other side, if they do
but clear and interpret Scripture without reprehension of vice and sin, and to
show requisite severity to a declarer of the Word of God, we offer as it were
simple Scarlet: for this fire there, does not but illuminate and does not
inflame persons to repentance of their misdoings, correction and amendment of
life: whereunto cooperates the Grace of the Holy Spirit, which is domestique
fire, with which we must salt our souls to preserve them from corruption: for
there is nothing that does more symbolize to the nature of the soul then fire:
because it is that of al things sensible, which approaches more to
spirituality, as well for its continual and light motion which soars always
upwards, as for its light, which Plotin says must properly be attributed to
the intelligible world, heat to the Celestial, and burning, to the Elementary.
And for as much as it participates more of light then any of the other
Elements: that likewise acquires unto it a precellency above the rest: for the
Earth being a body wholly without motion, dark and duskish; is by consequent
less in dignity, as the settlement and lees of all others. Water because it is
clearer, is more worthy, and the Air yet more: But fire is that which
surpasses all, therefore it is lodged in a higher place, and nearer to the
Region of the air: It is that, which Vincent no despicable Author, was pleased
to say in his Philosophical Mirror, 2. Book, 33. chap. Every thing for as much
as it participates more of light, so much the more it approaches nearer to the
Divine Essence, which is perfect light, by which God began the Creation of the
Universe, or the first thing that he ordained to be made, was light: and to
show us, that we must always walk in light and not in darkness. And on the
contrary, how much more the Elements are distant from light, by so much they
approach to their dissemblance and deformity, which is a token of corruption.
For as much as the parties of the composed Elements are homogeneall and
homomaternall, or like one to another, so much less are they corruptible and
separable, as we may see in gold, the most proportionate substance of all, and
which approaches nearest to fire: that which moved Pindarus from the beginning
of his first Olympian, to join these three, water, fire and gold together,
water is best, gold, and shining fire, etc.

Do we not see that at every end of a field almost that the Earth does change
nature and quality, and that there are infinite sorts of them? Not so many of
Water, Air is most like unto it self: but if there be any changes or
alteration therein it is by accident, as if some maladies should fall
thereupon: which do more readily adhere thereunto, because of its rarity of
substance then to any others. Fire is altogether exempt therefrom, being
always one, and in its al like to his parts, which are like to themselves,
except the matter to which it does adhere makes it vary. And this it is in
which it comes nearest to the Celestial nature which is all Uniform in it
self, and so well regulated, that it has nothing unlike: which makes that the
fire is repurgative above the rest of his fellow Elements, to clear them and
put in evidence. In the 12. of St. Luke our Savior warns his Disciples to
have their Lamps burning in their hands, that their light might come to shine
amongst men, that their good works may be seen, to glorify their Father
which is in heaven, for he that does ill hates the light, which Job says is
worse to Malefactors, then the shadow of death. It is the same also that Moses
would secretly infer in the 3. of Genesis where he makes God to walk at noon,
which is the clearest light of the day. And the Apostle in the 1. of Tim. 6.16.
says that he dwells in light in accessible, without which all would be
confusedly folded up in hideous darkness. Let us then take heed, that the
light which he has pleased to put into our soul, be not obfuscate and
converted into black obscurity: and that on this solid foundation which he
has granted us of his knowledge, we build not hay, wood, and chafe, all
things of themselves obscure and dark, in lieu of gold, silver, precious
stones, so clear, shining and bright. Let us hear again that which Zohar
divinely discourses of, about fire and light, upon the Text of the 4. of
Levit. Thy Lord God is a consuming fire. That there is one fire which devoures
another being the stronger, as we may see in some burning firebrand, or torch,
that which proceeds therefrom is of two sorts: the one blew, attached to a
black match, which retains it self there nourishing it self from corruption.
The other flame proceeding from the red inflamed Match is white, and the blew
is white in the highest, as to return to the first original: this Homer was
not ignorant of, when in the 6. of his Odysses he attributed to the Olympus a
pure and bright splendour.

Nothing should better represent unto us the four worlds namely the white which
is supercelestial, the blew celestial, the match fired, the Elementary, and
the burning darkness, Hell: which abundantly shows us the body. Rednes, the
vital spirit, resident in the blood; the blew, the soul; the white, the
intellect, and the divine character imprinted in the soul: and as the blew
light does quickly change into yellow, quickly into white, the soul also can
do the same according as it shall incline it self to good or to evil: or
whether she follows the provocations of the flesh or the invitations and
exhortations of the intellect, following that which is written in the 4. Genesis
7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well,
sin lies at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shall rule
over him. The white flame is always the same, without variation or change, as
does the blew: So the fire in this respect is fourfold. Black in the lower part
of its weik, where the flame that is fastened to it, is blew. Red in the top of
the weik, and the flame white. This which relates also, to the four Elements,
black, material, to the Earth: Blew more spiritual to the air, Red to fire,
and white to water. For heaven is composed of fire and water, which is above
the heavens. Let the waters that are above the heavens praise the Lord. Yet
nevertheless all this is but fire, as Moses the son of Maynon declares very
well in the second Book of his Mor. chap. 31. where he says that under the
name of Earth are comprised the four Elements, and by darkness was understood
the first fire: for it is said in the of Deuteronomy. You have heard his words out of
the midst of fire, and then he adds of a sudden, You have heard his voice out
of darkness: This fire moreover, was called the first fire, because that is
not it which is shining and clear, but it is only, so transparent to the sight,
as is the Air: and could not comprehend it self therewith, for if it were
shining we should in the night see all the air shine as fire. And for that the
darkness, which was first named, denoted fire, namely that whereof it is said,
that darkness was upon the face of the Abyss: because the fire was under the
three Elements; comprised under this word Abyssus. There are other darknesses
which follow after: then when the separation of things was made, and the
Darknesses he called Night. All this, the foresaid Rabbin put out. To which
that would touch, which the Alcoran carries in Azoare. 65. I will send you a
clear and beautiful fire. All this which adheres then to the low black part,
is therewith consumed and destroyed, and holds place of death: after which,
comes true life: the blue flame likewise if it therein degenerate, and lets it
predominate; but the white does not endeavor but to uncover it self here below
to transport it self upwards: and not suffer it self to be over mastered by
others. And does not devour nor destroy, nor is not thereby devoured, nor his
clear shining splendour altered, as are those of the others: By reason whereof
we must adhere and let our selves be salted with this white fire, and be
illuminated with this fair white light that never varies, following that which
is said in the 4. of Deuteronomy. You which adhere to the Lord your God, you are all
living also, as at this day. But if our blew light the soul, adhere to the
black, and to the red, which are our sensualities and concupiscences, the
strange fire will force it self into us, and will devour and consume us. This
knowledge of the Elements, and of their colors, does not insist only in
composed bodies, here below, but thereby we may mount as by Jacobs Ladder, the
height of this celestial world, where the Elements are also, yet of another
sort, more simple and depured: and from thence to pass beyond into the
intelligible world, where they are in their true essence; for all consists in
the four Elements. Sons of wisdom understand (says Hermes in his Tract of 7.
chapters) not only corporally, but also spiritually, the science of the four
Elements, whose secret apparition is in no wise signified, except they be
first compounded, because of the Elements; there is nothing made without their
composition and Regiment. Will we dive more deeply into the secrets of this
Caball? This Composition and Regiment of the Elements, is no other thing then
the Sacrosanct. four-lettered ineffable Jehovah: which comprehends all that
which is, was, and shall be: where the little and final notes the body and
matter, or other the like, where the Fire cleaves or fasteneth unto: The vau
or cloud copulative which assembles the two the intelligible and the sensible,
are the spirits that join the Soul with the Body: the red inflammation of the
coal or weik, with the azure flame, do signify the soul: and the Jod is the
white unchangeable and permanent flame of the intellect, where all at length
comes to terminate, which whiteness is the seat of the true spiritual hidden
light, which is not seen nor known, but by it self: for indeed our nature to
take it in it self, is but a dark substance; right resembling the Moon, which
has no light but what it receives from the Sun, which she is apt to receive,
as our soul is that of the intellectual light: And there is not a creature
whatsoever, which is of it self a substantial light; but only a participation
of the only true light, which shines in all, and through all, plainly and
sensibly. It is the Chasmall of Ezechiel according to Zohar, whence proceeds
fire or light assembled of two, which are yet but one thing: the white light,
namely which mounteth and clears that, which no mortal eye could suffer,
that of which is written in 46. Psalm. Light is risen to the just, and gladness
to the upright in heart: which corresponds to the intelligible world, and the
inward man. The other is a twinkling and flaming light, of a red fiery color,
joined and united to a coal, or a weik, signifying the sensible world, and the
outward corporal man. The soul is placed in the middle, namely the blew light,
part whereof, is fastened to the weik, and part to the white flame; quickly
adhering to one, and quickly to another, whence according as she applies it
self it comes to be either burned or illuminated, following that which Origin
sets down upon the 14. of Jer. That God is a red burning fire, consuming and
destroying, as concerning sinners, and to holy and just persons, a white
rejoicing and vivifying light: Jamblicus, that does not soar so high as Zohar,
being not assisted but by the light and instinct of nature, said very well, but
afterward the Phaenician Theology, that al which we can perceive of goodness
and contentment, in this sensible world, comes from the light which is imparted
to us from the Sun, and Stars illustrated with it. And as the Sun imparts his
light to the Moon, to the Stars, and to the Heavens: so God (communicates his
to the intelligible world:) the lively Fountain of all others, to his blessed
Intelligences. So that, all what our souls can have of good, of joy, of
beatitude, be it whilst they are annexed to the bodies, or separated
therefrom, comes from this primordiall light, which shines in them by
reflection, as the Sun beams in a basin, a concave looking glass, or in water,
or twhart a looking glass, according as St. Denis sets it down, in his 4.
chapter of divine names: which proceeding from the Sovereign good, carries
therewith the same appellation. And Rabbi Eliezer in his chapters sets down,
that the heavens were created with the light of the Creators vestment,
grounding himself upon the Psalmist, 204.2. Clad with light as with a vestment,
and the Earth with snow, which was under the throne of his glory. All Rabinique
Allegories, may men say, but where do the great mysteries consist, from which
St. Denis does not straddle far in the place alleged? for even as this fair
great and clear shining Sun, that has in it self such a manifest
representation and image of Sovereign good, extends it light throughout the
Univers, and does communicate it to all that are capable to receive it. So that
there is nothing, which does not participate of his light, and vivifying heat:
there is nothing, that can hide it self from the heat thereof. In the same
manner this Eternal supercelestiall light, illustrates, vivifies, and perfects
all that which has being, and banisheth darknesses and all softning
hoarinesse, that may be brought thereinto, lightning our souls with a desire
always to participate more and more of this light: for when she comes to prove
it by little and little, and by degrees that helps it and conducts to the joy
and fruition of a Sovereign good, which is the light of the Soul, namely the
Intellect that clears it, to be able to apprehend the living spring from whence
it came; for light is not seen, but by her self the most worthy and excellent
property of fire, with which it has this in particular and proper, that she
makes her self to see, as it does, and by her means manifests all that which
our sight may apprehend. Yet there is nothing harder to comprehend, then that
which is either of the one or of the other, for in showing us, and revealing us
all it is then, when she hides her self most from us, even to blind us and to
reduce our brightness into darkness; As is his darkness, so is his light.

We must then not speak of God without light, because he is the crew light
because, O Lord, thou art my Lantern: which does enlighten us, by thy word, Thy
word is a Lantern to my feet, the splendour of the Father, and the living
fountain of life: as holy St. Augustine after St. John. In him was life, and
the life was the light of men, and light shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. So that from this light, we have double commodity: the
one, that life, by which we live, the other the light by which we see, that
which enlightens us. The spiritual man, the true man enjoyes the one and the
other: the Carnal man, life only: for touching the rest, he is in darkness,
because they have been rebels to light, says Job, because they have not her
ways. Even as if one should enclose a to^ch within a Lantern of cut-stone, or
the like obscure and dark matter, where its light would remain as quenched and
buried, without ability to extend it self abroad for the obstacle that hinders
it. And if we want light (says St. Ambrose) there would be no more
comeliness, be^uty, or pleasure in our house: for it is it which makes all
seem agreeable: which he borrowed from Homer according to what was attributed
in Suidas, who through an unseasonable time of cold, and rain having been
received into an Inn, where they made him a fire, he suddenly made verses
containing in substance, that children were the ornament and Crown of the
Father; Towers, of walls; horses, of the fields; ships, of the Sea;
Magistrates, of the places of the Assembly, where they administered justice to
the people; and a fair burning and lighted fire, the comeliness and rejoicing
of an house, which renders it so much the more honorable. To see a burning fire
in an old h^use. Some attribute them to, Hesiod: Trismegistus amongst the rest
calls light the father of all, who has procreated man like unto i^, participant
of light, and of life depending thereon: and life was the light of men. The
Father is as the Sun in his Essence: from whence comes splendour and heat, which
three are not separated one from another, but remain united together, ^lthough
they are distinct: in this fire then our souls are warmed in the Love and fear
of God, and lightened in his knowledge. Whereupon Pope Inn^cent the 3. in a
Sermon upon the Holy Spirit sets down, that he was sent to the Disciples in
shape of fire, to m^ke them shine by wisdom, and to warm them by charity, that
which regulates and forms life, and wisdom forms doctrine, and as this fire
has life, and heat by which it purifieth and cleanses: so the Holy Ghost by
its light illuminates the spirit of man by wisdom, and repurgeth it by its
ardent charity. This is the fire with which the inner man, should be salted,
for to salt, bake, and burn, do communicate their appellations and
significations, by their consemblable proprieties and effects: because that
Salt boils in the tastes by reason of its acrimony, and fire the sense when it
burns, and a thing salted is half boiled, as is before said: as well to make
it of more easy digestion, as to conserve it longer, which are the proprieties
and effects of fire.

But to mount from fire here below to the Celestial, which is the Sun, the
eye and heart of the sensible world, and the visible Image of the invisible
God. Saint Denis calls it an all-apparent and clear Statue of God; and
Iamblichus the Image of Divine intelligence, the father of life, the Image and
portraict of the Prince, and Sovereign Dominator of all the universe, the
light of the one, and the other world, the Celestial and Elementary. But may
we not here allege at once this brave authority of Plutarch on the
interpretation of the word El, where after he had turned it, and returned it
about a pot by many discourses, which at last concluding nothing, vanished away
in smoke: he concludes that this word, as indeed it is, would say nothing else,
but thou art? which has been drawn from the two first letters of the holy four
lettered word JEHOVAH, transposed the one before the other, in the Greek E.L.
which shows that they have all drunk of this Caballine or Mosaicall
fountain. And at last come to say, We worship God in his essence, by our
thoughts, and reverence the Sun, which is its Image, for the virtue which it
has given it, to produce things here below: only representing by its splendour,
which he communicates to all, I know not what appearance, or rather shadow of
beatitude and mercy, so much as it is possible for a visible Nature to
represent an Intelligible, and a moving to that which is immovable and stable.
We see the Sun, as well as fire, but not so near, to be able so exactly to
mark it, we shall very well conjecture in our spirit of that which we may well
apprehend by sight, that this must be the most admirable piece of work of all
visible Creatures. For although it appears unto us little bigger then a dish or
platter, in regard of the great distance betwixt us and it, so that I tremble
to conceive it, after the very demonstrations Mathematical, which are certain
and infallible, yet it is many times greater then the Globe of the Earth and
Water joined together, which contains more then 6000 miles about, an apparent
witness of the wisdom and greatness of its Architect. Of which
Ecclesiasticus in the 43. chapter makes this fine Epiphonema* Who is he that
can ever satisfy himself to contemplate the glory of the Creator? the
Firmament in its height which comprehends all things under it, so pure and
clear? and the form of this vast and immense hollow of Heaven so fair and
admirable to the sight? Is not this an apparent vision of his glorious and
triumphant Majesty? The Sun at his rising showing the light of the day (an
admirable vessel) arrived in the middle of his daily Carreer, it burns and
rosteth the earth, and who is it that can subsist before its extreme heat? It
burns thrice double the mountains, more then the fiery furnaces the pottery
which they put to scum off, exhaling from it self flaming vapors, and a
splendour which darkens the most strong assured sight. Surely the Lord which
has made and formed it of nothing so fair, so great, and admirable, may well
say it to be greater then his own work, and which hastes it so speedily, as
to measure this incomprehensible space in 24 hours. With the surplus of this
discourse, which refers it self, and is as a Paraphrase upon the 19. Psalm.
where in few terms, there are touched three principal points of the Sun:
Its beauty compared to a spouse coming out of his bed chamber, and he as a
B^idegroome coming out of his chamber, his force and impetuosity as a Giant to
run his course: nor is there any thing that can hide himself from the heat
thereof. And its extreme celerity, his going forth is from the end of the
Heaven, and his circuit to the ends of it. So that as Saint Augustine in his
third Sermon upon Advent, there are three things in the Sun, its course, its
splendour, and its heat; the heat dries, the splendour illuminates, and its
course runs through the universe. And as in man, which is the little world, the
heart is the chief seat of life, first living, and last dying: So the Sun in
the great man, which is the World, is the spring, the light and heat which
vivifieth all things which imparteth to the Stars and to the Moon the light
by which they shine; even as Christ, which is the Sun of Righteousness, and
the light of our Souls, which without it, would remain buried in a blind
obscurity. He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life, which conserves it self for the good, and extinguisheth it self
against the wicked witness, Job 18. The light of the wicked shall be put out.
Where light is such, that sometimes the evil Angels transform themselves to
deceive us; for in as little as we can blow it back behind us, it grows dead
and dissipates. But the true and right light does illighten us without
variation as well in the knowledge of God, in this which depends on our
Salvation, as of things sensible and natural; whereunto the clearness of the
Sun and of Fire, and their effects do guide us more then any other thing, to
apprehend some sparkle of this sovereign Wisdom, wherewith God built this
great All by his Word. For every science to which we may attain by our
ratiocination and discourse, proceeds from the knowledge of sensible things,
(for there is nothing in the intellect, but was first in the sense) but
incertaine and variable, to be in continual variation and vicissitude. So that
the knowledge that comes from the light of Nature, is very weak, and full of
doubts, and incertitudes, if it be not illustrated by Divine Revelation, which
makes us see all as it is in its true and real essence, as the light of the
Sun does all things corporal. So that the most part of heathen Philosophers,
after they have alembeck't their spirit to the perquisition of natural causes,
they find themselves so confounded, that they are forced to avow that by the
only way of ratiocination you cannot draw truth therefrom. As Aristotle
discourses thereupon well at large, in the 4. of the Metaphysics. Ptolomie
also, that we must not ground and rule our conceptions for regard of corporal
things above spiritual; for they are far distant each from other, and there
is much disparity and disproportion between them. But yet less between
intelligible above sensible; although they serve us herein as a ladder,
following that which the Apostle says, That the invisible things of God are
seen by the Creation of the world, by things made, also his eternal power and
divinity. We must therefore run back to this spiritual light, which holds the
highest and sovereign place in the knowledge of the understanding; So that
light is more properly of things spiritual, then corporal, and more certain and
true are the invisible then the visible; for as much as God only is a true
light in his essence from whence he derives into our spirit all the knowledge
wherewith it can be illustrated, as the potentiall light of our eye is from the
brightness of the Sun, or of something artificial, traversing the transparence
of the air, the place of which eye the soul holds in spiritualty, as the divine
Intelligence makes that of the Sun, which is a representation and image
thereof.

By reason whereof, so long as our understanding shall leave it felfe to be
cleansed by the fire of Divine love, he will ever keep its living and luminous
brightness. But if it suffer it self foolishly to go after exterior light, it
shall be also obscured and extinguished with the interior which domineers over
it, even as a small candle or wax taper with the twinkling beams of a clear
shining Summer Sun. Since then this sensible light, says Saint Thomas upon
the 36. of Job, by the absolute Omnipotency of God, who disposes it as he
pleases, it is sometimes hid to mortals, sometimes communicated; from whence
we may gather that there is another light more perfect and excellent, namely
the spiritual, which God reserves for a recompense of good works, following
that which Job sets down, God covers the light in his hands, and ordains
it that it should return again and manifest it self. He shows it to those
he loves, that they may well mount unto it. Whereto that of Zoroastres word
for word was conformable. You must mount up to the true light and to the bright
b^ams of your father, from whom the soul was sent you, revested with much
intellect. Behold the relations of these Suns the sensible and intelligible,
and of the two lights that proceed therefrom. For as that of the Sun obtains
the first place in corporal things, says Saint Augustine in his book of
freewill, and that by means thereof, the inferior communicate with the
superior, the same does the light of the spiritual Sun in regard of
intelligibles.

There are also things that have heat, and no light, as that of Animals of
quick chalk besprinkled with water, horse and pigeon dung, which Galen writes,
he has seen to wax a fire of it self, heaps of oats, and other grains,
except Barley, new wines which boil, the lees in the vintage, heaps of Olives,
Apples, and Pears, which is a kind of putrefaction, whence also there is
engendered some strange heat, as we see in Apostemaes, and in flesh which begins
to be corrupted; and on the contrary we see others that have light and no
heat; as worms that glister in the night, and of little flies that fly in the
dark in summer time; of shells and scales of fish, in rotten wood, in stones,
and in the eyes of ravenous beasts. Suidas speaking of the visible and
invisible, this said he, cannot well be expressed in words; it is as little
flies which fly in the summer, which by displaying their wings, fly into the
eyes with small sparkling fires; the worms also that shine in the night, the
shells and scales of some fishes, and other the like, which cannot be perceived
in the light, but very well in the dark, for the fire which so shines from
them in the dark, is not a color, whose property is to make it seen at the
brightness of the Sun, or other light, because that the air being
transparent and deprived of all colors, the sight might very easily pierce it,
and pass through to apprehend them.

But there are four differences of visible things, some cannot see but by day,
the others, on the contrary, but by night, others by day and night, and others
that have no place in darkness. Colors are not seen but by day, not by night;
Of things called resplendent, some by day, others by night, others by day and
night; for there are some that are illustrious and clear, others dark and
heavy, and others betwixt both; others that have lu^tre and splendour, dark and
waterish, and are not seen but by night, as the foresaid flies, worms, fish
scales, rotten wood, and the like, for in the day time their splendour is
surmounted by another more powerful which defaceth it; as also there are more
stars, so that the darker the night is, the clearer they shine. Those betwixt
both, as the Moon and some Stars, by day and by night, as the morning and the
evening Stars, called by the Greeks Phosphor, by the Latins Lucifer, this is
Venus Star. Fire also which pierces the air more then it may, and
illustrates it to demonstrate the colors that are therein; for the rest it is
content to make it see, without bringing into action the transparence that is
in the air, as we may see in the dark, where we see fire a great way off, but
not by the colors that are betwixt them. By day it shines also, but not act
against the air, for that it is suffocated and extinguished by a stronger
light. The clearness of the Moon likewise, for that she is not very dark,
she is seen in the day time, but better in the night. Suidas runs through all
this; But to the purpose of lights without heat, I have read of nothing more
admirable and strange, then that which Gonzalo de Oviedo in the 15. Book 8.
chap. of his Natural History of the Indies, alleges of a certain little
flying animal, of the bigness of an Hanneton, very frequent in the Isle of
Spain, and in other Islands thereabouts, having two wings above, strong and
hard, and two below them, two others more thin and fine. The little beast
called Cocuye, has shining eyes as lighted candles, so that wheresoever he
passes he illuminates the air, and gives it such a brightness that a man may
see him a great way off, and in a chamber as dark as it may be, even at
midnight, men may read and write by the light that comes from them: So that if
a man bind two or three together, this would give more light then a Lantern
or a Torch, in the field: and amidst the Woods in the night, as dark as may
be, they make themselves to be seen more then a mile. This clearness consists
not only in the eyes but also in their flanks, when they open their wings.
They are accustomed to serve themselves with them, as we do with a Lamp or
other light, to sup at night* and to do the affairs of the house. But when he
comes to determine and dye, its light extinguisheth also. The Indians had a
custom to make a post of them to strike fear in seeing them by night, for
that it seemed that they had a visage, being rubbed therewith, as if it were all
fire. Pliny in his 21. Book, chap. 11. speaks of a shining herb in the
night, called Nyctegretes or Nyctilops for that we may see it shine a far
off, but he alleges many things by hearsay, as not having seen them.

But to return to the Suns light which is therein more perfect, then in any
other thing sensible with heat, for it is the true heavenly fire, as Speusippus
said, which describes all that appertains to the nourishment of this great
man, the Universe; as the Elementary does the viands of the animal man. And as
the heart in animals is the principal soul of life, the same is the Sun in
the heart of the world; and the primordiall spring of all light therein, which
he departs to the Stars, as does Jesus Christ to our souls. And no more nor
less then the Sun and the Moon (said Origin upon Genesis) illightens our
bodies; likewise our consciences and thoughts are from this splendor of the
Father if we be not blind, and that this proceeds not by our faults: Now if
we be not all equally illuminated, no more then the Stars are by the Sun,
which differ in brightness one from the other but according to our capacity
and carriage, and as more or less, we lift up the eyes of our contemplation to
receive this light. Return you toward me, and I will return toward you, for
he is a God at hand, and not a God a far off. That which we can have of
intelligence (says Zohar) by our natural ratiocination, is as if our spirit
were lightened by the Moon: but the Divine relation holds place of the Sun,
whence the light chaseth away and banisheth the Princes of Darkness, where
their greatest force and vigor reigns. The Sun is risen, they shall be
placed in their chambers, says the 104 Psalm speaking of Devils and wicked
Spirits, under the name of savage and revenous Beasts. For (as Zohar puts it)
these tenebrions are stronger and more gallant in the dark, so the good Angels
that assist and favor us, receive great reinforcement from the light, not
only from the Divine, but from the Celestial and solar, by which the Divine
and Supreme shining brightness, imparts her virtue to the heavens, and by
them communicates it to all that is under the sphere of the Moon within the
elementary world. Wherefore, not without cause, about dead bodies till they be
put in the grave, they employ lights to drive far off this ancient Serpent
Zamael, to whom for malediction it is said, thou shall ^at earth all the days
of thy life; for our Bodies being deprived thereof, are no more but dust and
earth. So that fire is a great aid and comfort to us, not only during our
life, but yet after our death against these wicked dark powers which gnaw in
obscurity, as these night birds and savage beasts which dare not appear in the
day, fearing the light of the Sun; how much more then that of good spirits
their adversaries, which receive it from the divine resplendence? for the same,
as is the Sun toward it, the fire is in regard of the Sun, who serves us,
amongst other things to make us see this so great accomplished work of the
universe built by the Sovereign Creator of so excellent Artifice, and that
which his light does manifest unto us, in this sensible world, it is nothing
for this regard, for the true being does consist of things intellectual, stripped
of all corporeity and matter, the Sun it self, the rarest masterpiece of
all others could not see it self, but by its proper light, which is presently
accompanied with a heat vivifying all things; for there is a double propriety,
one to shine and clarify, the other to warm, yea to burn the subjacent
matters which illuminates the whiteness, and waxes black with the Suns
heat. The Sun has colored me, Cant. 1. Whereupon Origin notes, that there
where there is no sin, nor matter of sin, there is scorching or burning
following, the 121 Psalm. The Sun shall not burn thee by day, nor the Moon by
night; for the Sun illuminates good men, but it burns up sinners; who hating
light for the evil they have done; for in many places of Scripture you shall
find that the Sun and the Fire, whereof it speak, they are not those that
we see, but the spiritual. The spiritual Sun says Saint Augustine, does
not rise, but upon holy persons, following that which is spoken of the
perverse, in the 5. of Wisdom, The light of Justice is not risen upon us, nor
the Sun of Intelligence is not come to illighten us. As for its heat, it must
rather be kept for witness of Holy Scripture, there is no man can hide him
from the heat thereof; not to frivolous imaginations and subtilities of those
that maintain it to be neither hot nor cold, grounding themselves upon this
argument, All heat in long continuance although that it remain always in the
same estate and degree, does notwithstanding augment it self, so that it would
be intolerable.

If then the Sun be so hot, as it seems, after five or six thousand years
since when it was first created, it would follow that there would come a
conflagration under the torrid Z^ne, from whence he stirs not; who from thence
was extended to all the rest of the earth; there where we see the contrary, for
the whole is always in the same estate. And afterward for that the sun is
many times greater then the globe of the Sea, and the Earth, and its Sphere, so
far esloigned from it, that it has no proportion with it, it should follow,
that it was as hot in one time and place, as in another. With semblable
deductions, against which it is easy to contradict, but this would turn us
aside too far from our principal Subject. Anaxagoras also said, that it was
a gross enflamed stone, or a plate of burning fire. Anaximander, a wheel full
of fire, 25. times greater then all the earth. Xenophanes, an heap of little
fires. The Stoics, an inflamed body, proceeding from the Sea, wherein they
have showed the affinity of fire and salt together. Plato a body of much fire;
and thus, one after one fashion, one after another, but all tending to make it
of the nature of fire. Moreover, it is a thing too admirable, of its
greatness, so immense, whereupon the spirit of man has fair Galleries to
walk, in pursuit of the high fetched meditations of Gods mervails; for (as
Chrysostom said well upon Genesis) we must from the contemplation of the
creatures, ascend and come to the Creator. So that those then, are very
ignorant and void of understanding, who cannot from the Creatures, attain to
the knowledge of the Creator. Those that dwell in the extremities of the West,
where it goes as it were to bed, in the waters of the Ocean, see it at his
rising of the same grandeur, as those of Catai, where it rises; which shows
the smallness and disproportion of the earth in comparison thereof. That if
the Moon, which is far inferior in greatness thereunto, shows it self
almost equal, it is by reason of the great distance from the one and the
other, for by so much as things are at a distance, by so much the more they
lessen themselves to our sight, and this is sufficiently verified by the rules
of perspective. Surely these are two chief Masterworks, that of these two
great luminaries, which are not of small ornament and commodity, for the life
of man, as Saint Chrysostom puts it, upon the 135. Psalm, but it does
contribute much thereto, yea almost all, in regard of that which concerns the
body; for besides the light wherewith they enlighten us by day and by night,
they distinguish times and seasons, help us to make voyages, as well by Sea, as
Land, they ripen fruits, without which our corporal life could not be
maintained, with other infinite usages which proceed from them. The Sun is
put for the whole Heaven, for that it is the greater part thereof, and for
fire; and Heaven is the seat and vessel of incorruptible and unalterable
bodies. The Moon president of moisture, represents water and earth, and salt
composed thereof; for there is nothing wherein moisture is more permanent, nor
which is more moist then salt, whereof the Sea for the most part does consist;
and there is nothing where the Moon does more distinctly make her motions to
appear, then in the Sea, as we perceive in the ebbing and flowing thereof, and
in the brains and marrows of Animals, so that for good cause she is called the
Regent of the waters, and of phlegmatic and waterish moisture; which although
it seem to be dead and inanimate, (in respect of fire which is living) she is
permanent chiefly in salt, which has an inexterminable humidity; and is that
which keeps the Sea from drying up, for without Salt it had been long agone
drawn out and dried up, there where the fire lives not in it, but in another;
for in that it is a material Element, it has no place proper to it. Of these
two, namely, the heat of the Sun, and moisture of the Moon, in which
consists the life of all things; and without which nothing would grow,
increase, nor be maintained, not fire it self, which cannot subsist without
air, which is double, one participating of the heat of fire, ascending from the
water (out of the bowels of moist nature, a sincere and light fire forthwith
flying out, seeks things aloft, says Trismegistus.) And the other as water
descending from fire, so long till it come to congeal. For so there is one
moist water which tends upwards, to rarifie it self in the air, and another
cold coming down to thicken it self in the nature of Earth, until at last
it comes to terminate in red fire, which is in gold, for gold is the last
substance of all. And Air is the mediating conciliator betwixt the moisture of
passable water, that constitutes matter and the fires heat, on which the Agent
and form does depend: Earth is as the matrix where fire, by the means of air
and fire introducing its action, excites, and thrusts out, which is thereby
engendered to its determined end. The other five Planets, and the fixed stars
come in but collaterally, as assistants and coadjutors of the effects of the
two luminaries, where all their influxions are reduced, as do the rivers of the
Sea, and from the earth reciprocally comes back their norriture; so that heaven
and fire, are as the male, the agent, and water and earth, as the female,
patient; but under heaven, the air is comprised. And as man's seed, enclosed and
l^pped within the matrix, is nourished, fomented, and entertained with corrupt
blood by the help of natural heat, so fi^e, by the means of air and water, is
maintained in the earth for the production of things which engender thereof. So
the Heaven, Sun, Fire, and Air, march together, and the earth under, which
are comprised in the Elements below, water and dry land, on their side. It is
Moses Heaven and Earth, and Hermes his high and low, which relate one to the
other; that which is above, is as that which is below; and on the contrary, to
perpetuate the miracles of one thing as he says in his Table of Esmeraulds.
Zohar the intell^gible and sensible World, by the contemplation whereof we come
to the contemplation of spiritual things, which the Apostle before him had
touch^d in the first to the Romans, The invisible things of him from the
creation of the Word, are made known in those things which are scene; for all
that is here below in the earth, is of the same manner as in heaven above; for
God the Creator made all things annexed one to another, which Homer was not
ignorant of, by his golden chain to bind together this inferior and superior
World, and that they adhere one to the other, that his glory may stretch
through all, above and below. And in imitation thereof, man the image of the
great world, and the measure of every thing was thereof made and formed of
things low and high. And God took dust and thereof formed Adam, and breathed
into him the breath of life; the very light that shines in the sensible world,
depends upon this superior light that is hid from us; from whence proceed all
faculties and virtues, which from thence are expressed to our knowledge, for
there is nothing here below that does not depend from that above, by a
particular power, committed unto it, to govern and excite it to all its
appetites, and motions, so that all is bound together.

We hold well for the remainder, that all we have from light in the sensible
world, comes from the Sun, for that of the Moon, and of the Stars although
inumerable, is a very small thing; yet it proceeds from the Sun; and that of
fire, is but artificial to give us light for default of the Sun, But how
shall it square with that to be willing to attribute the primitive source of
light, and chiefly that of the producing and vivifying to the sun, for that
we see in the beginning of Genesis, that the first thing that was made, was the
light on the first day, and the Sun not till the fourth, vegetables being
produced from the former? This was (say the Rabbis thereto) most wisely
advised by Moses, as all his other writings proceeding from divine inspiration,
to take away from men all occasion to Idolize this luminary, when we see that
light was procreated before it. But in this respect there presents a very rare
mystery, and worthy of observation, that the complete perfection of things falls
out always on the fourth day, as of the light. The Sun and Moon were made
the fourth day, waters on the second day, produced naught but fishes; the
fifth, which is the fourth after, and al animals; the sixth with man, for whom
the fruits of the earth were made the third. Which shows us that the 4 number
so much celebrated by Pythagoras, denotes the perfection that resides in ten,
resulting from the four first numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, make ^en.

So Plato was willing to inform his Timaeus, where he treats of the
procreation of things by these words, one, two, three, but where is the fourth?
Zohar upon this particle of the 14. of Leviticus, you shall keep my Sabbaths.
See says Rabbi Eliezer, what is the mystery here contained. In six days was
the world created, in each of those is manifested the work that was made
therein, and God gave it his particular virtue after he had finished it; but on
the fourth he attributed one more express, for those of the third preceding,
being secret and hidden, came not in evidence, except that the fourth day
happened their faculties would reveal themselves; for water, air, and fire, the
three superior elements remained as suspended, and the workmanship of them did
not appear till the fourth day manifested them, and then appeared all that was
made on each. But if you will allege that this was the third day, that then
God said, Let the earth sprout and produce the green herb, producing seed, and
the fruit trees bearing fruit after his kind, which has his seed in it self
upon the earth, and it was so; yet this, notwithstanding that this happened on
the third day, he suffered not to be annexed with the fourth, without any
separation; the which fourth comes to meet with the Sabbath, which is the
fourth day, the fourth, and is by it self the perfect fourth, where there
appeared all the works of the six preceding days: and it is the fourth foot
of the Merchavah, O the divine throne, whereon God sat for his repose all the
six days, Thus discourses Zohar.

We must not here pass over another mystery, which these two luminaries have,
each three names, the Sun is called Chomah wisdom, Scemesch heat, and Cheres
dryness Plato in Timaeus, All moisture that the celerity of fire raised, and
that which remained arid and dry, we call (...) potters earth. That of Maor
Luminary, is common to the one, and to the other. The Moon is called Malchut,
reign, or kingdom, Jareha, which the Greek call (...), for that she perfects
her course in a month, and lebenab white, for as the Sun represents Jesus
Christ, the Moon denotes the Church which is all fair without any blemish,
following that which is written in the 6. of Canticles 10. Who is she that
looks forth, as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun? Of this
light of the Sun of Righteousness, whereof it is said in the fourth of
Malachy, But unto you that do fear my name, the Sun of Justice shall arise,
4. 2. Where the Moon the Church is illustrated on a perpetual day without
darkness, according to Esaias 60. v. 20. The Lord shall be thine everlasting
light, who has planted his Tabernaele, or Church, within the fair clear
shining Sun, that illuminates every man that comes into the world; no more
nor less then the stars, which are innumerable, and the least as big as the
whole earth, receive all their light from the visible sun. Of whom shall it
not here be lawful to relate something of his praises of the Song that
Orpheus made unto it.

Hear m^e most blessed
Sun, Worlds heart and eye,
Heavenly brightness shining,
Living men's pleasing aspect,
Begetting Aurora in thy right hand,
And the night on thy left.
Thou governest the four seasons,
Who dance in a round,
At the found of thy golden harp
Thou runnest through this great vault,
Upon thy shining Chariot
Drawn with thy Coursers
That respire heat and life.
Ardent, unpolluted measurer
Of times, that shows thy self to all.
A Sovereign aid to each,
Keeping faith, eye of Justice.
Brightness of shining light.
Behold that which we here thought to run through concerning these three
fires, (as for the three salts which relate thereunto, we will speak thereof
hereafter) namely, the Terrestrial and Elementary, the Heavenly and Solary,
and the Intelligible, that of the Divine Essence denoting the Father, from
whence proceeds the light which is the Sun, and these two the heat of the
Holy Spirit, which kindles our hearts with the love and knowledge of God, and
with charitable love to our neighbor.

The same in heaven, the light of the Sun expands it self to illighten all
the stars, and here below to the production and vivification of all that
which is there begotten, and maintained. And in the Elementary world, fire does
clear us, warm us, and boil our viands, and lends us all other commodities, and
usages.

As for fire in the 66. of Esaias 15, 16. which the Evangelist cites here, whose
fire shall not extinguish, and whose worm dies not. It is without doubt
destinated to the punishment of reprobates, which shall never be quenched, nor
the worm that stingeth the conscience shall never dye; To keep that this worm
that is engendered of corruption may not procreate, we must salt it with
discretion and prudence, that it may do nothing which may offend and scandalize
his neighbor, according as the Evangelist specifies it, He that shall
scandalize one of these little ones that believe in me. And as for banishing
and chasing away strange fire, that devours our soul, as a burning fever does
vital heat, this must be done by the mediating intervention of divine fire,
which is much more puissant then any other. Let us hear that which to this
purpose Saint Ambrose alleges in the 3. chap. of his Offices, Saint John
baptized Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost and with fire, which is the type and
image of the Holy Ghost, who after his ascension, must descend for the
remission of sins, so enflaming as a fire does the soul and heart of the
faithful, according as Jeremie says in 20. and 9. after he had received the
Holy Ghost, and it was as a burning fire in my heart, shut up in my bones. What
is the meaning then of that in the Maccabees, that the fire was become water,
and this water excites the fire, but that the spiritual grace burns by the
fire, and by the water it does purify and cleanse our sins? for sin
washes and burns, according to which the Apostle says, fire will prove what
each man's works shall be; for it must necessarily be, that this examination
should be perfected in all those that desire to return into Paradise. It was
not without cause, nor idly set down in the 3. of Genesis, that after Adam
and Eve were banished from thence, he placed at its entrance a brandishing
sword of fire, to keep the passage to the tree of life. With this fire then we
must all be salted that are in the way of salvation; following that which
Origin sets down in his 3. Homil. upon the 36. Psalm, We must all go to the
fire of Purgatory, and Peter and Paul, but all shall not pass thereby, after
the same sort as they did, whereof it is said in the 43. of Esaias 2. When thou
shall pass through the waters, the waves shall not cover thee, for I will be
with thee, when thou shall march through the fire, thou shall not be burnt.
The Israelites passed through the red Sea dry-shod, and the Egyptians were
drowned therein: The three children in Nebuchadnezzars furnace, had no
detriment, and those that heated the fire without, were therewith consumed. And
in the 19. Hom. upon the 16. of Leviticus, All are not purged by this fire that
parts from the Altar, it is the fire of the Lord; for he that is from the
Altar, is not of God, but a strange fire, dedicated for the cruciating of
sinners, which shall never be quenched, nor the worm that gnaweth shall never
dye: for after that the soul by a multitude of its wicked comportments has
heaped up within him abundance of sins, this congregation of evils in
succession of times, comes to boil and inflame us with a pain and punishment
internal, as the body does of a fever proceeding from the excess of the
mouth, or other superfluities, when she shall come to think and relate a
history of its delinquencies, which will be a perpetual prickle, wherewith it
will be tormented, so that she will make her self as an accuser and witness
against her self, a^cording as the Apostle said, Romans 2.15. Their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts either accusing or excusing one
another, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men. But Jeremie on
the other side, speaking of a drink of the wrath of God, which shall be poured
out upon all manner of Nations, whereof whosoever will not drink, shall not be
purified; and from that we learn, that the fury of Gods vengeance, profits
for the purgation of souls, as well in general as in particular, and there is
nothing more purgative then fire, of which the Prophet Malachy should say in
his 3. chap. 3. The Lord will sanctify them in a burning fire, and such is the
fire of tribulations and adversity, with which we must be salted and purged;
for salt is purgative above any other thing, as we may sufficiently perceive
in those that drink Sea water, who all dye of a flux. Of the other fire which
is exterminative and strange, of which it is also in the 10. of Leviticus 2.
And a fire went out from the Lord, and devoured Nadab and Abihu: God said in
the 32. of Deuteronomy. v. 22. They shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall
consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the
Mountains. For the justice of the Almighty, said one of the good Fathers
foreseeing that which must come, from the beginning of the world, created this
fire of eternal hell, that whereof Esaias intends to speak, whose fire is not
quenched, to begin to be the punishment of the wicked, without that burning
and heat should cease, now for that it is neither wood nor charcoale, nor other
matter to maintain it, but shall be eternally t^rmented therewith in body and
soul, because they have offended with the one and the other; for sins are the
bait and nourishment of this fire, which by a gathering together of misdeeds,
and superabundance of iniquity heaped one upon another, inflame the soul to a
perdurable punishment, even as a burning fever, the repleat body, and render
it a joice of ill digestion, by a superfluity of viands, and other disorders,
and excess from whence there was drawn a wicked habitude; for the soul then
coming to remember her delights, agitated with the living and most rigorous
pricks which gall it, she comes to be her own accuser, by certain remorse of
conscience that can profit them no more, (because in hell there is no
redemption) and to be his witness and judge, as the Apostle sets it down in
the 2. of the Romans, Their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts
accusing them, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men. But there is
also a fire in this world, by which we must be salted and purified, for as much
deduction of it as we must endure from thence, namely, tribulations, which are
to us as a Minorative in Physic, of the complete purgation that we must
receive thereby.

The two foresaid fires furthermore, that of the Altar, and the strange, may be
very properly compared, that there to aqua vitae, the other to aqua fortis,
which ends and destroys all, where aqua vitae serves for nourishment, for all
that we eat or drink participates thereof, and is that which passes and
converts into nutriment. It is true that it is revealed more nearly in some
subjects then in other. Wine is that where it manifests it self soonest, and
with less preparation and pa^ne, afterward wheat, and so of the rest; for
there is nothing wherein nature does so soon make his profit, as of these two.
Aqua vitae is also called burning, because it conceives so easily the flame and
burns, for that it is necessary, that whatsoever does nourish must suffer
under the fires action. Otherwise how is it that natural heat could work
thereupon, which is much weaker then that of fire? we know by experience that
we could not draw any nourishment from stones, metals, earth, and other
substances, whereupon fire cannot bite: and if wolves do sometimes eat clay,
wild-ducks, and other birds, small flints, and gravel, it is either to avoid
vacuity, or for some medicament to them known by a secret instinct of nature,
but not that this does digest or serve them for maintenance, no more then Iron
does Ostriches; which yet they corrupt by a strong and great heat of their
stomach. But you will say, that this assimilation contraries the text of the
10. of Leviticus where Aarons sons are so burned for offering strange fire.

That which Rabbi Simeon to Zohar relates in part, that they served at the
Altar, being drunk, and overcome with wine, for that which follows after
demonstrates it; that God said unto Aaron, Thou nor thy sons shall not drink
wine when you enter into the Tabernacle: whereto may be answered, that
similitudes cannot in all, or through all agree, otherwise it would be the same
thing they represent. Aqua vitae does not make drunk if men take not so much
at a time, that it may alienate people from their spirit. And yet being
separate from wine, the remainder should be nothing but phlegm, and
residences, which cannot in any sort make drunk, nor being therewith mingled
and adjoined by nature, as to stop again the acuity of the aqua vitae. Yet we
see by experience, in Germany and other cold Regions, where aqua vitae is in
good esteem, as well for the quantity which they take; it does not for that
make men drunk, as wine would do in such a quantity, as that, wherewith it
should be quenched; and putting a little Salt in very strong wine, it will make
men drunk sooner then to drink it pure. I have often made trial, that often
joining together aqua vitae to that which men had drawn, this mingling could
not cause drunkenness any more, because the parts once separated of the
compounded elements, and then reconjoined, take another nature then it had at
the first. Cer^tes it is a great support and comfort that aqua vitae has for a
weak stomach, either through age or other accident, although men think that it
burns and offends the noble parts; for though it be inflamable, it is not
therefore burning. He that would see the great virtues thereof, let him read
the Quintess^nces of Raimund Lullius, Rupescissa, Vlstadius his heaven of
Philosophers, for we will not stay here as on a thing too trivial and beaten.
They call it the quintessence for the conformity it has with the celestial
nature, because that as the heaven, which is as another Air, but more subtle
then the Elementary, contains the Stars, whence it receives diverse impressions
and effects that it does infuse and communicate unto us, here below, the same
Aqua vitae does easily impregn it self, with the qualities and specificall
virtues which are therein put to infusion. To this proposition of heaven and
Stars, and of their different impressions, we will not here pass over a fine
dispute which here presents it self. The Earl Pica de Mirandula, truly a
prodigious spirit accompanied with great Literature, in his 3. Book against
Judicial Astrolog^, 25. chap. transported with too hot a curiosity to impugn
this Art, Will we (says he) prove that the virtue of all the Stars is but even
one? Let us suppose this Maxim. That the nature of heaven cannot more openly
and sucinctly, express, then by saying heaven to be a unity of all bodies, for
there is nothing in all the universe that does not depend upon this certain
one, as from his primitive course, with many other premises wherewith he would
conclude that of the propriety and virtue of each Star indifferently, depends
the faculty and virtue of all the composed Elements, without having there
other difference between them, if peradventure, this was not in greatness; as
it is apparently seen: nor can men say, that one presides more particularly to
one thing here below, then to another: for every Star presides to all; so that
if all were ^oined and united together in one only body, this should be as if
infinite flames and fires should come to assemble, to make but one, which would
be stronger then true, but not of diverse propriety and nature, which does not
change it self into homogeneall, and homomaternall substances, by a
coacervation, nor which comes to produce other effects then it did, being
separated, as one may see in water, and a great torch in respect of a little
wax light, which will light infinite others as well as the torch, though more
powerful, to heat, boil, and burn, as being in a greater volume.

But it is a very hard thing to overthrow an opinion already received of long
durance, chiefly if it be supported with authority of holy Scripture; which
must be to us as a touchstone, by it to verify our ratiocinations, for the
most part uncertain and erroneous, if they be not conducted by divine
inspiration: Is is written in the 147. Psalm. 5. He knows all the Stars, and
calls them all by their names. That if they have all different and particular
names, wherefore should it serve but to distinguish them in their effects,
proprieties, qualities and virtues? for the name of things, imports the same.
Follow that which is said in the 2. of Genesis as Adam named every thing, such was
its true and proper name: which Plato in his Cratylus says is not only the
type and representation of things, but their Essence. And in this case there is
a fair consideration to be marked, that God left to Adam the nomination of
terrestrial things: but reserved to himself that of Celestial: as he
expresses in the 115. Psalm. 16. The Heaven of Heavens are the Lords, but the
Earth has he given to the children of men: which is as much to say, according
to Rabbi the Egyptian in the 2. Book of his More, or director, 25. Cha. That
the Creator knows himself alone the certain verity of the heavens, what is
their form, substance, and their motions; but upon that under heaven he has
given power to man to know, for Earth is properly man's world, where he
produces, and the place of his conversation, as long as he lives: as fire
and light attached to matter: there where the causes upon which we might found
our demonstrations concerning heaven, are out of our knowledge, being so far
remote from us. And in this case the Heaven of Heavens, are the Lords, there
may be a double exposition, according to the punctuation and reading. That
Heaven belongs to the Lord of Heaven, and so the Hebrews take it, but who
doubts, but that the Earth also belongs to him, as well as the Heaven? The
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and in the 23. of Jer. Do not I
fill the Heaven and the Earth? And the Heaven of Heavens is reserved for God,
and the Earth is left to the children of men, which is a manner of speech
usual in the holy Scripture. For if the Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens
cannot comprehend thee, says Solomon to God; for the H^brewes metaphorically
call Heaven, things that are far distant from our sight: and we also after
their imitation, as when we speak of a Kite, Heron or Gerfalcon, when they fly
so high, that we can hardly discern them, that they go to loose themselves in
Heaven: so that all which is here under the sphere of the Moon, and generally
all that is above us, they call it Heaven: and the Heaven of Heavens, the
Aethereall Region from the Moon to the Firmament, as well the Firmament it
self, or the Empyrean Heaven. But farther that the Stars should be all of one
nature, propriety and effect, to see them so like, besides their greatness and
clearness, it follows not that the same appears of the same sort as of fire,
yet we commonly call them fires and celestial lights: It is as if the seeds
of trees and plants, whereof there are infinite, should all mix together, and
the first buds also, that they cast, which differ as nothing, but to the
measure whereunto they grow, their differences do manifest them. The Hebrews
hold that there is not so little, and poor a herb on the Earth, nor any other
thing of the three kinds of the composed Mineralls, Vegetables, or animals,
that has not above its correspondent Star, that assists it, and from which it
receives its maintenance and conservation. But how can that agree? will some
say to the contrary; because it seems to derogate and contradict that which in
express terms is set down in the 1. of Genesis where it is written, that in the
third day, the Earth of her self brought forth herbs, and trees, containing in
them their seeds: according to their kinds: nevertheless the Sun, nor the
Moon, nor the Stars, were created till the day after, the fourth by which is
designed its effect and function: Let there be lights made, in the firmament
of the heaven, namely the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, to separate the night
from the day: and let them be for signs, and seasons, for days and years:
without attributing any thing of their assistance, upon trees and plants, and
other elementary things.

But to return to the particulars of Aqua vitae, there will be no hurt here to
touch upon this experiment thereof made, very gentile and rare, leaving others
that are more common, Aqua vitae has this particular, that it dissolves not
sugar, nor joines not with it, as does its phlegm and common water, vinegar, and
other liquors: but by artifice it self, of two it makes a thrice sweet liquor,
very proper against the fluxes of Catarrhs, and salt rheumes, that molest the
stomach, and throat, and is thereunto very good and comfortable. Lay in steep a
day or two Cinnamon grossly beaten; and take off the infusion very neat: take
fine sugar within a pottage dish that has ears, brought into fine small
powder, and so perfume it, mingle it with a small portion of Sugar roset. Pour
thereon this Aqua vitae and make them a little warm upon ashes, then put fire
thereto with a lighted paper, stirring all well with a little spit of clean
wood, so long until the Aqua vitae burn no more, and there will remain a
liquor most agreeable to the taste, and mervailously comfortable: you may add
the^eto liquor of pearls, Coral and other the like, which dissolve easily in
the juice of Citron or distilled vinegar, which makes it sweet to stream out
upon it a quantity of common water or the phlegm of Aqua vitae: and not by
calcining it as Paracelsus and his followers do, with Saltpeter, which is
manifest poison: so that things are done in vain by more, that may be done by
fewer, so that it be justly done. Further, every one sufficiently knows how
to draw Aqua vitae, filling two parts of the Alimbeck with Glass, or Beuvois
Earth, with good old wine, and distilling it with an easy fire through a Bath
in a Caldron full of water, with chafe. Continue the distillation until you
see long veins and sprouts appear, in the Chappe and in the Recipient. For it
is Aqua vitae, which mounts first, and the phlegm comes after in gross drops,
as tears; which is a token that there is no more Aqua vitae. Men may refine it,
passing again another time: But I should not be of an opinion, that to take it
into the body, it should be more then once. And it is a strange thing that by
its own subtilty, for it will mount through five or six doubles of paper
brovillas without wetting it. I have seen them cast a full glass thereof in
the air, and not one drop to fall to the earth: It is of sovereign force
against all burnings and chiefly that of small shot, with which she hinders
(as was said before) the Estiomenes and Gangreenes: An inflammation arising from
purecholer in the skin exulcerating it with pain.
which shows sufficiently the purity of its fire which may by good right be
called Celestial. See here that which Raimund Lullius sets down of his
proprieties and virtues. We must not understand (says he) that neither
quintessence nor any other thing here below, can render us immortal. It is
ordained for all men once to die: nor can we prolong our days beyond and above
the prefixed time, for that is reserved to God. Man's days are short, and the
numher of his months are with th^^^ thou have appointed his limits which he
cannot pass, there where on the contrary they may well be accidentally
shortened: Aqua vitae then, nor all other sorts of quintessences and
restoratives, cannot prolong our life for one minute of an hour; yet they may
conserve and maintain it to the last but, preserving it from putrefaction,
which is it, that shortens it most: But to defend putrefaction by corruptible
things, that cannot be: we must therefore find out some incorruptible
substance, proper and familiar to our nature, which conserves and maintains the
radical heat, as oil does the light of a Lamp. Such is the aqua vitae drawn
from wine, the most comfortable and connaturall substance of all others,
provided it be not abused with excess. Plutarch in the 3. Book, the 8.
question of his Symposiaques, compares wine to fire, and our body to clay. If
you give fire (he sets it down there) which is of a mediocrity to the clay, and
earth to the Potter, he will consolidate it in the pots, bricks, tiles, and
other the like works, but if it be excessive, he resolves it, and makes it
melt and run. Moreover Aqua vitae, preserves strongly from their corruption, as
we may see by things vegetable and Animal, which men put there to mingle,
which by this means conserves them in their entire length. It comforts and
maintains a man in vigor of youth: which it restores from day to day, it
rejoices and strengthens the vital spirits: it digests crudities taken
fasting, and reduces the equality, the excessive superfluities, and the
defaults which may be in our bodies; causing diverse effects according to the
disposition of the subject where she applies her self, as does the Suns
heat, which melts wax and hardens dirt, and fire does the same. And there is
that celestial spirit residing in Aqua vitae, so susceptible of all qualities,
proprieties, and virtues, that she can make her hot, empregning it with hot
things, cold with cold things, and so of the rest; being she is natural,
conformably to our soul, inclinable to good and evil, for although it
consists of the four Elements, they are therein so proportioned, that the one
does not domineer over the other. Wherefore they call it Heaven, whereto we
apply such stars as we will, namely of the simple Elements, of which she
conceives the proprieties and the effects: herein we may compare celestial
fire to the Altar.

But strong waters, which dissipate and ruin all, are this strange fire, and
so Alchymists call them, and fire against nature external fire, and other the
like exterminatives. Certes if the effects of Cannon Powder be so admirable,
consisting of so few species, and ingredients, which may be well called the
true infernal fire, the devourer of mankind. The action of strong waters is no
less which burn all, being compounded only of two or three substances, that
which we commonly call the Separator, Saltpeter, Vitriol, or Alum Ice, and
this dissolves Silver, Copper, Quicksilver, and Iron in part. La Regalle which
is no other thing then the prec ding rectified upon Salarmoniac, or common
Salt, dissolved partly with Iron, Lead, Tin, and intameable Gold, with all
sorts of fire. It is true, that strong waters do not destroy metals, that they
return not to their first form and nature, but draws them to water, and a
melting liquor. This was certainly a good Artificial industry in man's spirit,
to excogitate so short a way to separate Gold and Silver melted together, and
so uniformedly mixed, that an ounce of Gold melted with an hundred marks of
Silver, each part thereof will equally attract his portion, as we may see by
the refiners practice, which to prove that which it holds of Gold and of
Silver, a confused mass of diverse metals will take but 30. grains to make
their essay in the Coupelle, and from thence will judge that the same
proportion that you shall find in this small volume, shall be also in the
whole mass; all that which may be therein of impure imperfect metal goes
away partly in smoke, and is partly consumed by fire, and partly sticks like
Birdlime within the Coupelle, nothing remaining above it but what is fine,
namely Silver and Gold, which is there enclosed, with which they separate
strong waters called on the occasion the divider, which dissolves Silver into
water, and Gold falls to the bottom as sand; the water afterward evaporated,
the Silver retires it self. But here it would be too much to speak of the
effects of strong waters, one of the principal and short instruments of
Alchymie, and the Art of fire and Salt, infinite fine allegories, which thereby
may be appropriated upon Holy Writ.

Yet these two fires may be compared, namely the strange fire to Leaven, to the
Sea water which is salt, and to Vinegar, a corrupted Wine, and other sorts of
Leavens Fires against nature. And the Celestial to the Altar to pure and
unleavened Past, to sweet water fit to drink, to Aqua vitae, without Vinegar,
representing the state of innocence in our first fathers, before their
transgression, and the simplicity of their knowledge, infused into them by the
Creator. But when they were once tempted afterward with ambition, to know more
then they should, they would by humane discourse become more subtle and sage,
in tasting the fruit of knowledge of good and evil; their Past without Leaven
began to swell, to be proud with the Leaven themselves introduced, which
perverted and spoiled it, appropriating it to corporal and sensible things,
for the bread which we eat is leavened, but that which we use in the Church
must not be so, and not without cause, for unleavened bread will be kept six
months without molding or corrupting; that leavened bread will not keep so
many weeks. It is therefore that the Apostle said, a little Leaven corrupts
the whole Mass: Because that one propriety of the Leaven is to convert into
their corruption all that is adjoining of their nature, as Vinegar does Wine,
and Leaven pure Past, also Rennet which is in the number of Leavens. And when
they have no Leaven, they make some, corrupting the Past with Vinegar, Lees of
Beer, Eggs, and like substances, who by their corruption acquire to
themselves the property of strange fire which is able to convert into its
nature, that where it can bite, as we may see in a Fever against natural
heat, so that he turns it self into all things, and all into it self,
according to Heraclitus, who set it down for the Principal, yet after
Zoroastres, who thought all things were begotten of Fire after it was
extinguished, for being living it begets nothing, no more does Salt, nor the
Sea which Homer calls (...), unfruitful, which does nothing but consume and
destroy: An immense and wicked portion of things (says Pliny) and wherein it
is doubtful whether it consume or bring forth more things. Leaven then is a
strange fire, and is indeed caustique or burning, for applied to naked flesh,
it engenders therein little cloches, which shows its fierynesse, (also it does
not so without Salt) called for this reason in Latin fermentum, Leaven which
increases by being warm: and in Greek (...) Leaven from (...) to boil. The
Chymicks call it the interior fire, fire within the vessel, for we see by
experience, that bread, if the Past be not leavened, what boiling soever you
give it, shall never be but of a hard and uneasy digestion, greatly oppressing
the stomach, if the Leaven which they join thereunto make it boil within;
whence then it comes that Moses so knowing a man, and so illustrated with the
Divine Spirit, so rejects a thing so profitable and necessary, and banisheth
so expressly the Leaven of the Sacrifices, which is so great an aid and succor
in our principal aliment, Bread. You shall burn no Leaven nor Honey in the
Lords Sacrifice, Levit. 2.11. And Exodus 12.15. he condemns to death those
who in the days of unleavened bread should eat leavened bread, or should have
ever so little in his house. Is it not because Idolaters use Leaven? but he
does not forbid it in all and throughout all; for in the 23. of Levit. 17. he
commands them to offer two leaven loaves. Moreover Idolaters employ also in
their Sacrifices Salt and Incense, and many other things that are not
forbidden. It must then be that some mystery lies hidden hereunder. Origin in
his 5. Homil. upon Levit. interprets Leaven for arrogance, that we conceive
of a vain worldly doctrine, which blows us up as leaven does Past, and makes
us proud, thinking that we know more then we do. So that we quit the
express and direct Word of God, to retain our selves within our phantastique
traditions, as our Savior reproacheth it to the Pharisees, Mark. 7. Truly
Esaias prophesied very well of you Hypocrites, when he says, This people
honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, howbeit in vain
do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, Mark.
7.6, 7. And therefore admonishes us to beware of this Leaven. And upon
Numbers, it is not to believe said the said Origin, that God would punish with
death those who during the solennitie of unleavened bread had eaten leavened
bread, or that had leaven found in their houses, but by leaven is understood
malignitie, envy, rancor, concupiscence, and the like vices that inflame our
souls, and make them boil with wicked and pernicious desires, corrupting,
altering, and perverting all that which might be good, following what the
Apostle said, a little Leaven corrupts the whole mass. Therefore we may not
undervalue any little sin, for after the manner of Leaven it will very soon
produce others; undervalue not, says St. Augustine, the machinations and
ambushes of a few men; for as a sparkle of fire is a small thing, and which can
hardly be discerned if it meet with food and nourishment, it will in a short
time set on fire great Towns and Cities, Forests, and whole Countries. Leaven
is the same, for how little soever you put in your Past or Dough, it will alter
it in short space and convert it to its own nature. Perverse Doctrine is of
the very same, which gains Countries by little and little, as a Canker does
in the whole body.

And in his third Book against Parmenian to glorify himself, not in his
sinn^s, but in those of others, as the Pharisee said, Luke 18.11. I give thee
thanks O Lord God, that I am not as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust,
Adulterers, etc. I fast twice in the week etc. comparing his own innocence to
the defaults of others, this is but a little leaven, but to boast himself in
iniquities, and trespasses, is a great one; Furthermore, Leaven is taken in
good part, as well as in bad part, in holy Writ, which relates to the two
fires. The first has been touched heretofore for pride, and naughtiness, that
corrupts the soul. Touching the good, in the 7. of Levit. 12, 13. there are
loaves of leavened bread, which they offer for peace offerings, with oblation
of thanksgiving, and in the 23. 17. of every family two loaves of the first
ears of wheat at Pentecost; and in St. Matthew, and the 23 of St. Luke Jesus
Christ compared the Kingdom of God to leaven that a woman had put into three
measures of dough, till it was all leavened; for there it is taken for the
fervent zeal of ardent faith; and it is the fire wherewith we must be salted:
for as the fire boyles our meats, and the salt seasons them, also leaven is the
cause that the past bakes the better, and prepares thereby to make more
wholesome, and of lighter digestion, more savoury, and of better taste. In which
case leaven relates to the Evangelicall Law, as Saint Augustine says, and old
leaven to the Mosaicall, which the Jews took by the bark, and by the hairs.
By reason whereof the Apostle admonishes us, to cast it far from us: that is
to say, all superstition, and malice; Cast off the old leaven, that you may be
a new lump, as ye are unleavened, for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed
for you. Therefore let us keep the Feast not with old leaven, neither with the
leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth, which leaven is without doubt this strange fire, that devoures and
consumes us within; that is to say, our soul, to swallow us up, and make us go
down living into Hell. And the Fire of the Altar, the celestial fire of
charity, faith, hope, it is that which we must desire of God to kindle in our
hearts, and to season our thoughts and our desires, that no corruption be
begotten there; as it does here below in things corruptible and corporal; the
prompt Minister, and executor of that, which the divine goodness will please
to give of comforts and commodities in this temporal life. What obligations
then do we owe thee, thou excellent portion of Nature, without which we should
live in so great misery? thou do lighten in darkness, thou do make us
rejoice in obscurity, bringing us another day. Thou do chase away from about
us, hurtful powers, fears, and nocturnall illusions; thou do warm us being
cold, thou do redry us being wet; thou bakest our viands; thou art the
sovereign Artizan of all arts and manufactures which have been revealed unto
us, to serve as a rampard against our natural Imbecillities, that make us in
regard of our bodies the feeble and infirm animal of all others. All this by
reason of thy Divine beneficence, thou do communicate to all mortals. And
thou, O clear luminous Sun, the visible image of the invisible God, the
light whereof, does rebate it self in thee, as within a fair manifold
multiplying glass, rendering thy self overflowing with all sorts of
happinesses, which afterward thou communicatest to all thy sensible Creatures,
being so fair and so desirable a liberal benefactor, thou arisest most
resplendent, with luminous beams, which thou do spread abroad into all parts
of the world, and by the virtue of thy spirit, and breath, by thy vivifying
vigor, thou governest and maintainest this little All. Thou the illustrious
Torch of Heaven, thou the light of all things; cause and secondary Author of
all that grows here below, which by the faculty and power, which the
Sovereign dispensator of all goodness has given thee, obliges all nature to
thy self; which with an unwearied course, do daily run through the four
corners of the Universe. Thy beauty, thy light, thou do lend unto our senses
by thy unknown and imperceptible Divinity, and impartest it with a liberal
largess; without any veil or covverture that come to enterpose betwixt them
to the Church, thy dear spouse, to break open to us here below, the effects
illightning by the same mean of thy inextinguible and inexhaustible Torch, all
the celestial fires. Look upon us then with a benign and favorable eye, and
by the excellent beauty which shows it self in thee, elevate our
understanding to the contemplation of this other more great, that no mortal
eye can behold, nor spirit apprehend, but by a profound and pious thought, for
as much as it will please him to gratify it.

But thou Sovereign Father of this intellectual fire and light, what can we
bring thee here, but devout supplications and prayers? that it will please thee
to burn with the fire of thy Holy Spirit, the wills and courages of us thy
most humble Creatures, that we may serve thee with a chaste body, and to agree
with thee by a pure and neat conscience: to the honor and glory of thy holy
name, and salvation of our souls: through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy dear
Son, who lives and reigns with thee, God coeternall, for ever and ever,
AMEN.

The second Part of the Lord BLAISE his Treatise touching FIRE and SALT.
EVery man shall be salted with Fire and every Sacrifice shall be salted with
Salt, Mark. 9.49. We have already spoken of Fire, Salt remains, of which
there is no less to say. But it is strange that the Ceremonies of Paganism,
should be found in this respect, and many other in Mosaicall Traditions; Fire
shall always burn on the Altar; Lev. 6.12, 13, The Priest shall burn wood
thereon every morning, etc. And in the 2.13. Thou shall season with salt all
the Oblations of thy Sacrifices; and thou shall not forget to put the salt of
Gods Covenant under them; with all thy Offerings thou shall offer Salt, which
Salt Numb. 18.19. is called the everlasting Covenant before God to Aaron and
his sons. And Pythagoras in his Symboles, ordaines not to speak of God
without light, and to apply Salt in all Sacrifices and Oblations. And not only
Pythagoras, but also Numa, which most part of men, hold to have been 100 years
before Pythagoras, instituted the same according to the Doctrine of the
Hetrurians. It is not beleeveable that Moses so dear and and welbeloved of
God, and so illustrated with his inspirations, whence proceeded all the
documents that he left, and so hot a persecutor of Idolatries and Ethnique
superstitions, that he would borrow any thing from them. But more likely that
the Devils instigations who makes himself always as his Creators ape, to make
himself to idolize, was willing to divert those sacred mysteries to their
abusive impieties, according to which Josephus against Appion, and Saint Jerome
against Vigilantius, do very well suit: so that as in the Judaicall Law they
used no Sacrifices and oblations in Paganism, but they used Salt as Pliny
witnesses in 31. Book 7. Chap. Especially in holy things the authority of
Salt is understood, when none were made without a Salt Mill. Plato to Timaeus,
when in the medly and commixtion of the elements, the composed is destitute of
much water, and of the more subtle parts of the earth, water resting therein
comes to be half congealed, saltness is there brought in which hardens it
the more, and so there is procreated a body of Salt, communicated to the use of
our life, for as much touches the body and senses, accommodated by the same
means according to the tenor of the Law; on that which depends the service of
God, as being sacred and agreeable to God, wherefrom he called it a body
beloved of God, for which Homer called it Divine, whereof Plutarque in his 5.
Book of his Symposiaques 10. question renders many reasons, and among others,
for that it symbolizeth with the soul that is of Divine nature, and as long as
it resides in the body, keeps it from putrefaction, as Salt does dead flesh,
where it is brought in in stead of a soul that keeps it from corruption,
whence some of the Stoics would say, that Hogs flesh of it self was dead, and
that a soul which was sowed therein in a manner of salt to conserve it longer
exempt from putrefaction, to which a soul was given for Salt. Our Theologians
say that the ceremony of putting Salt into water when they hallow it, came from
that which Elisha did, 2 Kings 2.22, 23. to sweeten the waters of Jericho, by
casting Salt upon the Spring. And that notes the people (which is designed by
water (many waters are many Nations) were sanctified, must teach us by the Word
of God, what Salt signifies, with the bitterness and repentance that men
should have for offending God, as water also does the confession as well of
faith as of sins. Of the commixtion of these two, salt and water, proceeds a
double fruit to separate from ill doing, and convert to good works. And for
that repentance for sin ought to precede auricular confession, which
repentance is denoted by the bitterness of salt, they bless it also before
water: It is also taken for wisdom, You are the salt of the earth, and have
salt in your selves. And because that in all their ancient Sacrifices they used
salt, from thence it came that in Baptism they put salt in the mouth of the
Creature before it is baptized with water, for that it cannot yet actually have
the mystery of salt applied for the present.

On fire then and on salt depend great and secret mysteries, comprised under
two principal colors, red and white, for (as Zohar has it) all things are
white, and red, but there is a great space betwixt the one and the other. God
dies our sins which are red, for concupiscence comes from the blood, and
from the sensuality of the flesh besprinkled with blood, and we do die his
whiteness in red or rigor of Justice, by the fire which inflameth our carnal
desires, and purchases their judgment, which is throughout where there is
fire, if it be not mortified with saving water. And when the perverse do
prevail in the world, as ordinarily they do, redness and judgment extend
themselves therein, and all whiteness covers it self, which is rather changed
into redness then redness into whiteness; which if it have domination, all
on the contrary grows resplendent therewith. To these two colors also the
ancient and the Evangelicall Law, the rigor of justice and mercy; the pillar
of fire in the nights darkness, and the white cloud by day, wine and bread,
blood and fat, which were not lawful to eat. You shall not eat flesh with
the blood, Genesis 9.4. And in Levit. 3.16, 17. All the fat is the Lords, it shall
be a perpetual Statute for your generations throughout all your dwellings,
that ye eat neither fat nor blood; where it is yet more particularly repeated
in the 17. and 14. where the reason is rendered, for that the soul, that is to
say, the life of the flesh, is in the blood, which mystically represents that
of Messiah, wherein consisted eternal life, so that it was not lawful to use
any other before his coming. Of the same fat was reserved for God as well that
which the Hebrews call cheleb, that covers the inwards, and is separated
from the flesh, as the other called schumen, which is thereunto annexed; but
metaphorically the fat is taken for the most exquisite substance, as in Numb.
18. the tenths the best of the fruits are called the fat of them, which manner
of speech we also life when we say, make the portion to be very fat of any
thing that there is. And in the 81. Psalm. 16. He fed them with the fat of
Wheat. It may be also that Moses well knowing that these two substances,
blood and fat, are of ill taste and nourishment, and quickly corrupted out of
their vessels, he forebad them the use thereof. Or if we would enter into a
certain mystery, for that the vital spirits consist in the blood, which are
of a fiery nature, and that fat is very susceptible of flame, and proper to
make lights, which are a representation of the soul. But Oil is also for
Lamps, which was not forbidden to be eaten, and we do not see that in Divine
service we use Tallow Candles; yet these two, fire and salt, do signify Wine
and Milk, I have drunk Wine with my Milk, Cant. 5.1. By Wine is designed the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, namely vain curiosities of worldly
things, and by Milk, that of life, whereof Adam was deprived, being desirous
to taste of that other, which was humane prudence. Before Adam had transgressed
(said Zohar) he was made participant of the sapience of superior light, being
not yet separated from the tree of life, but when he would distract himself
after the knowledge of base things, this curiosity ceased not till he had
wholly cast off life to incorporate himself to death. Jacob and Esau, the two
principal Potentates on earth which are descended therefrom, Item the Rose and
the Lilly, whose water extracted mounts by the fires heat that elevates it and
becomes white, although the Roses be red, as is the fume exhaled from blood
and fat which they burn to God, to send it on high as a vapor, to imply
(says the same Zohar) that we must offer him nothing but what is clean and
candid; for redness represents sin, and punishment that follows it; and the
white, sincerity, with mercy and the final recompense that does accompany it.
What is it (says Zohar) which is designed by the red Roses, and the white
Lillies? It is the odor of the oblation proceeding from red blood, and from
fat which is white, which God reserveth for his own portion, which fatness
relates to the sacrifice, or animal man, who is nourished with this fat, as
the vital spirits with blood; wherefore it is said, when we fast to extenuate
and macerate the pricks of the flesh and concupiscence, that we offer unto God
fatness, who will have from his Creature the soul, which is fire and blood;
and the body, namely fat, wherewith it is nourished, but the one and the other
incontaminate, pure and neat without corruption, as if they were to pass
through the fire and salted; Therefore he would that they should be burned to
him, that they may ascend in a white fume and an odor of suavity before him;
for fume is more spiritual then matter, which the fire by subtiliation raises
it, after the manner of Incense. And indeed all this world here, is but an
odor that mounts unto God, sometimes good and agreeable, sometimes wicked and
hurtful. The form of the thing which consists in its color, and figure,
remains incorporeall in the matter, where the eye goes to apprehend it, and
associates with it. The taste also, remains attached to it, as the spittle
moistens it, and communicates it to the taste: But odor or smell, separates
them, and comes from far by an unperceivable vapor, to the sense of the nose
and brain. Wherefore the Scripture does particularize in the rose and in the
lillies, the Red and White; whose smell does not vanish. And yet though the
roses be red, yet the water of them distilled, and the fume if you burn them,
are white, as those of incense, whereof it is spoken in Psalm. 41.2. Let my
prayer he directed as incense, in thy sight: by prayers are understood not only
prayers, but all our desires, thoughts and comportmens, and thereupon Rabbi
Eliezer, son of Rabbi Simeon, the author of Zohar, making his prayer, does
thus paraphrase. This is well known, and manifest before thee O Lord my God,
God of our prayers, that I have offered unto thee my fat, and my blood: I have
offered them in an odor of Suavity, with firm faith and belief, macerating,
chastising the sensuality of my flesh: That it will please thee then Lord, that
the odor of my prayer, proceeding from my mouth, may be presently addressed
before thy face, as an odor of a burnt offering, which they burn unto thee,
upon the altar of propitiation, and that thou will accept it as agreeable. He
said that because that after the coming of our Savior, and the destruction of
the second Temple by the Romans, the Jewish sacrifices were converted into
prayers, the bloody sacrifices signified by the red roses, and color of blood,
and those without blood, as the minchad and other the like, of meal, by the
white lillies, following that which was said Cant. Chap. 5. and 6. My beloved
is white and ruddy, he feeds among the lillies.

Under these four colors furthermore, which signify the four Elements, Black
the Earth, White the Water, Blew the Air, and Red the fire, are comprised the
greatest secrets and mysteries. Otherwise reading in chapter 10. of 35 book Pliny,
that Apelles had painted Alexander holding lightning in his hand; fingers
seemed to hang out, and lightning to be without the Table; but reading they
remembered that all those consisted of four colors. I cannot well specify what
those four colors were, which must be principal in nature, till I had learned
out of Zohar, to consider them in the light: where, that is to be noted, that
there are two fastened to the week, namely black, noting the Earth, and red
proceeding there from fire; and two to the flame, Blew in the root, over
against the black, and white on the top, opposite to red. But let us see how
this does well suit with Chymicall Theorie, which constitutes of these four
Elements, two solid and fixed, which prepare themselves together, the earth,
and the fire, which adhere to the week, and the other two liquid volatills and
flitting, water, and air, white and blew, as is the flame which is liquid, and
in perpetual motion: And we must not think it strange, that the air, the blew,
should be lower then the water, or the white flame which is aloft, because the
aereall party which is the oil and fat, separate more hardly, and more
difficultly from the composed, then does the water more opposite to fire. But
let us look more mystically thereinto, which the Zohar has more abundantly run
through. The red light, as well in earth as in heaven, is that which destroys
all, dissipates all; for it is the bark of the tree of death, as we may see in
a lamp, candle, and other light, whose root is in the earth, namely, this
corruptible and corrupting blackness which waters the week; the branches and
the boughs are the flames, blew and white. The week with its blackness and
redness is the Elementary world, and the flame the Celestial. The red color
commands all that is under it, and devoureth it. And if you say that it
domineers also in heaven, not as in the inferior world, we may answer. And
although there be virtues and powers above that are destructive, and dissipate
all base subjacent things. All these superiors are anchored in this red light,
and not the inferiors, for they are thick, gross, and obscure; and this red
light which is contiguous to that above, gnawes, and devours them; and there ia
nothing in the low world which shall not be destroyed. It penetrates and enters
into stones, it pierces them, and hollowes them, that waters may pass over
them, and drowns all in the depths and hollowes of the earth, where they divide
themselves, of the one side, and on the other, till they come to resemble anew
in their Abyssus, passing cross the darknesses that are confounded with them;
which is the cause that waters rise and fall, (they mount when they come from
the sea under earth to their sources, to glide anew above the earth downwards,
returning to the place from which they parted.) So that the waters darkness
and light mingling themselves pellmell, there is made within another Chaos,
which nature comes to unmingle (the heat namely which is therein enclosed) by
Ordinance of the Sovereign Dispensator that commands it. And there make lights
which men cannot see, because they are dark. Every channel (to be brief)
mounts upwards with his voices, whence Abyssus are shaken, and cry to their
companion, One depth calls to another, in the voice of their Catarracts. And
who is it that cries? Open thee with thy waters, and I will enter into thee.
These are all mysteries uneasy to comprehend, which intend nothing, but to
demonstrate the affinity and connection of the sensible with the intelligible
world, and of the Elementary with the Celestial; for, as it is said in another
case, the Universal firmament, called the firmament of heaven, contains
things superior and inferior; although after diverse manners. This is well seen
in a torch, where blackness, that is, the Earth, is the ground of three
elements and colors, the red being but an inflammation and heat joined to the
blackness, without any flame or light; as are the blew and white, which
proceed from one very root, all tend a going to unite with the white flame that
is above, and more highly elevated then others. Yet it is not therefore so pure
and quit of all filthiness, but that it procreates soot, with black and
infected fume, whereof it must be depured by fire, till it has perfected the
consumption of its corruption, and made it a perfect whiteness, which from
that time forwards never alters. And this is that which we said before, that
fire leaves two sorts of excrements, not sufficiently depured for the first
proof. Ashes below, whence by the same fire is extracted an incorruptible
substance of salt; and of glass at the last, which the Zohar was not ignorant
of, when he said upon Exodus of the lees of any confected a shes, salt and
glass is drawn. But now for that it was not so said, it is a thing
sufficiently common and manifest to those that deal with fire, which Cinerall
excrement comes from the adustion and burning of coals: but the foot which is
more spiritual, for that mounts and elevates higher, is born of the flame
which has no leisure or power to perfect its mundification, so that the pure
and impure mount together. And assuredly nothing can better agree with our
souls after their separation from the body, which carries away with them the
imapurities which they have attracted from it, during their residence here
below, which they must repass by fire, and be perfected by white throughout.
Every man shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with
salt. The weik and ashes representing man, the exterior animal, and his body,
and the two flames, blew, and white; the blew the Celestial and Ethereall
body, and the white, souls stripped of all Corporeity: which in good men shall be
burnt with fire that burns always upon the altar, and salted with salt from
the Covenant, the promises namely of his Messiah, into which the Prince of this
world, has but seen, as it has done in the posterity of Adam, which is al
filled with ashes whereof it was first built, and with the soot of original
sin, whereunto he fastened by his disobedience, prevarication: So that we are
the night where Moses began to reckon the day, for that we are according to the
flesh, before the Messiah, who being come after, is the enlightened day of this
clear sun of Justice, which the Cabballists say is the representation of
Jehovah, whose sheath (as they call it) is Adonei, from whence God must be
drawn out: for it is he, that mundifies the righteous, and burns the wicked
with dark and obscure fire. To which that also beats, which is said of the
Thrones Animalls, there shall descend a Lion enflamed, that shall devour the
oblations. There are Angels committed upon every member that sins, of whom
they constitute themselves the bringers on: for every man that commits any
offense, he suddenly delegates to himself an accuser, which will be no more
favorable to him then he must be, but will lend him a fire from above, to burn
that member that shall have trespassed. But Jehovah intervene^ from above, who
with his water of mercy, quenches this fire, after the party Delinquent shall
have his spots purged away. And there is but he alone, that is the angel of
peace, that make the souls reconcilation with God, to whom she comes by the
intercession of this sacred name: there is no other name; all that the Zohar
sets down, which is as Christian-like spoken by a Rabbin which was never
baptized.

That premised for a ground work of what we shall say hereafter, St. Marks
Greek text carries it, (...), every sacrifice shall be seasoned with salt;
where the Latin version which the Church holds, for (...) a sacrifice, as in
truth this Greek word signifies, all sorts of sacrifices, hostia's, victima's,
and ceremonies: But Porphyrius in his second book of sacrifices, does
particularize it to herbs that men offered to the Gods, for from the beginning
they did not present them: this he spoke of Incense, Myrrh, Benjamin, Storax,
Aloes, Labdanum and other the like odoriferous gums; but only certain green
herbs, as certain first fruits of seeds that the earth produced; and trees were
procreated from the Earth before Animalls, and the earth was clothed with
herbs, before it produced trees. By reason whereof, the gathering certain pieds
of herbs all entire with their leaves and roots, and seeds, they burned them,
and sacrificed the odor and fume that proceeded therefrom to the Immortal
Gods: and of this exhalation they cast, which the Greeks call (...) suffitus,
perfumed, whence comes the word (...) victima sacrifice. Therefore they do not
refer them properly to bloody sacrifices, for the Romans for more then 800
years since, by Numaes Ordinance, had no Images of Gods, nor other sacrifices,
then dough with salt, which were from thence called (...), that is to say,
without blood. Hitherto Porphyrie.

It has been said heretofore that there was nothing more common, nor less
well known then fire. And as much we may say of salt: wherefore it is that
Moses made so great account of it, as to apply it to all sacrifices. Calling it
the perpetual Covenant that God made with his people; of which alliance by the
Hebrews called Berith, they found three or four marks in the Scripture; The bow
of heaven, Genesis 9.9. Genesis 17.2. Circumcision to Abraham, and the universal
paction, Numb. 18.19. Further yet the Paction of the Law received in Horeb,
Deuteronomy. 5.2, and 3. The Lord our God made a Covenant with us in Horeb; which has
been time out of mind in singular and venerable recommendation toward all
sorts of people; you bless your tables by putting on of saltsellers (says
Arnobius to the Gentiles.) But Titus Livius in his 26. that they may have a
saltseller and a dish or platter for Gods cause. And Fabricius, that thrice
valiant Roman Captain, had never gold nor silver but a little drinking cup,
whose foot was of horn, to make his offerings to the Gods, and saltseller to
serve for sacrifices forbiddding, as Pliny has it, in his 33. book, 12. chapter
to have other Silvery then those two. It was furthermore a mark and symbol of
Amity, as was salt: Wherefore the first thing that they served strangers,
coming to them, was Salt, to note a firmity of their contracted Amity. And the
great Duke of Muscovie, as Sigismund puts it down in his Treatise of the
affairs of Muscovie, he could not do greater honor to those that he favored
then to send them of his salt. Archilocus as Origin alleges against Celsus,
among other things, reproacheth Lycambas to have violated a very holy and
sacred Mystery, of the amity conceived betwixt them by the salt and the common
table. And upon Saint Matthew speaking of Judas, he had not (says he) any
respect either to the remembrance of their common table, or to salt or bread
which we did at together. And Lycophron in a poem of Alexander called salt
(...) purifying and cleansing; alluding to that of Euripides, that the sea
washes away all faults from men, for that the sea which the Pythagoreans
because of its bitterness and saltness, call it Saturnes tears, and a fifth
Element, and is nothing but salt dissolved in water. And certes it is a thing
very admirable, the great quantity that there is of salt; since that we hold it
for an infallible maxim, that God and Nature made nothing in vain. For besides
that there is found thereof in the earth, part in liquor which they scum off,
part in ye, as at Halle in Saxony, and at Borre in Provence, part in hard
rocks, as in Teplaga a land of Negroes, where they carry it more then two
hundred miles off upon their heads, and transport from hand to hand by relayes,
even to the Kingdom of Tombur, serving for money that passes for current in
all those quarters, as it does also in the Province of Caindu in East Tartarie.
According to Marc. Pole in his 2 book, 38 chap. and also that if they have it
not for all purposes in their mouths, their gums rot, because of the extreme
heats that reign there, accompanied with corrupting Moorish moistures; for
which reason they must hold thereof continually moistening it with a thing that
does hinder putrefaction.

I have many times made trial very exactly, that of Seawater, men make or
draw more then half of salt, causing the fresh water that is therein, sweetly
to evaporate away; what an enormous quantity then would there remain of salt,
if the fresh substance of the Sea were there from extracted? There are no sands
or deserts, of what long extenditure soever, that can compare therewith, not by
the 2. thousand part; for many men would equal, yea prefer the Sea in
quantity and greatness unto the earth. We must not here dwell long on
particularities that concern salt. Pliny in his 35. Book Chap. 7. The
greatest part depending upon nothing but hearesay, for all tend to no other
thing, but in the first place to show that there are two sorts of salt (as it is
true) Natural, and Artificial. The Natural grows in flakes, or in a rock by
it self, within the earth, as is aforesaid: the Artificial is made with
seawater, or with liquor, as a pickle drawn out of salt pits, as they do in
Lorrain, and the French County of Burgundy: which they boil and congeale upon
the fire. He there shows many examples, and indeed those which are more
difficult to believe: let the faith be on the sayers part, and among others of
a certain lake of Tarentin in Poville, not deeper then the height of knees
where water in summer time by the Suns heat is all converted into salt. And in
the Province of Babylon, there grows a liquid Bitumem, a little thick, which
they use in Lamps in stead of oil. This inflamable substance being stripped
therefrom, there remains salt, there under hidden: as indeed we see it by
experience that out of every thing that burns there may be salt extracted, but
there does not appear any thing therein but waterishnesse and inflamable
unctuosity which must be taken away by fire, this done salt remains in the
ashes. And this salt (says Geber) in his testament retains always the nature
and property of the thing from which it is extracted, if this be done in a
close vessel that the spirits may not vapor away, for there would remain that
which the Gospel calls sal infatuatum, as we shall say hereafter.

The best salt then that may be, and the wholesomest, is that which is made
with seawater in Bronage. And after the example thereof, that the trough
throughout, where the salt water is made of clay or glue, as potters earth: and
that whereof tiles is made; furthermore you must courry this trough by Artifice
that it drink not, nor suck up the water which men draw therefrom, which is
done by beating it with a great number of Horses, Asses, and Mullets, tied one
to another that they may trample thereon, so long that it be firm and solid,
as a certain barns flore to thresh wheat. This done, and having hollowed the
channels, to put in the water, then we must have a care that the salt-pans be
something lower then the Sea ( Pliny in his 2. Book Chap. 106. sets down that
salt cannot be made without fresh water) they set in the first place a great
receptacle where they draw the water which is called the The first receptacle
or bond of salt water whereof salt is made.
Jard: and at the end thereof a sluice by which having applied thereunto below a
hanch with a stopple called the A trunck or pipe of wood through which
seawater passes, one of the last receptacles whereof salt is made.
Amezau, they make the water run from the Jard into Parquets, which they call
Couches, and of these Couches giving thereto a requisite hanging, by other
stopples, 2. in number, called the gate of the Poelles, which are therein
enchased within other Parquets called soldering or planching with board,
windings and means to make the water turn, by diverse windings and channels
almost after the manner of a Labyrinth, which it is does for a great way before
it come to render it self at last, within the Parquets and hollowes where the
salt must be congealed: always diminishing the quantity of water, that the
Sunbeams have therein more action, and that it be better warmed before it
enter the floores, where it makes its final congelation. But to come thereunto
by certain degrees, and proportionate measures, there are throughout the
Palles which they lift up and down as those of a mill. All the earth that
remains, which men draw by the Parquets and the flores they Arrange about
them as a Trench or rampart, High grounds or little hills raised by men's hands.
which is called Bassis of the convenient breadth, to pass two horses a front;
which serves as well to retain the water, as to put upon the heaps of salt,
made and congealed, called Vaches, and to come and go as upon a dike, or
causway from one marish to another, to lade and carry upon the beasts of
carriage of the vessels which attend there near to the shore: In the winter
they content themselves with bulrushes which they sell afterward very well for
the profit they draw from them: and that for fear of rains and snows, and other
aereall moisture, that moisten then anew. And all the risings are so oblique,
and turning, that for a mile travers of right way, we must m^ke 7. or 8. so
that being therein once cast a little on, one may lose himself, which knew not
the addresses, or had not a good guide, by reason of the turnings and
bridge-ponts, that men must go to make choice of, to pass from one place to
another. And it would be very hard to make thereof a Chart or description,
principally in winter, where all is well-nigh covered with water, and yet more
to enter in by a strong hand, for conservation of these salt pits every year,
after the heats are over, the Sun not being able to make it, but in the Months
of May, June, July, and August, the salt makers do use to open certain Bonds,
to suffer the seawater to enter till all the forms and Parquets be covered,
otherwise the frosts would destroy them: that if while the salt freezeth or
creameth there come any rain, it is so great a retardmen^ (and for fifteen
days at the least) we must empty all the water out of the Parquets, that the
rain had altered, and therefore in rainy and cold years, they can very hardly
make it.

In this regard, I come to remember an experiment that I have tried more then
ones, which gave me to think whether it were Aristotle, I took eight or ten
pound of common gross salt, which I made to dissolve in hot water, scumming
the froth which may be there, and being left to settle, I put the clear by
inclination in a caldron over the fire, where I made all the water evaporate,
so that the salt remained in the bottom, white as snow; then I endeavored to
dry it in a pot, giving it at last a goo^ estret of fire for four or five
hours, when it was cold I parted it into four platters of Beuvais to shorten
and gain time, in fair weather at a window where the Sun came not, and did
choose a moist time to facilitate the dissolution, recollecting every morning
that which was resolved in water, so long that at the end of seven or eight
days the salts dissolution was perfected, nothing remaining but I know not
what thickness or slime, in a small quantity which I set apart, I put all my
dissolutions into Cornues and distilled all the water which could mount, being
very fresh, for the saltness did not ascend, but remained fixed in the bottom
of the vessel, and gave at last a good estret of fire, with staves of Cotteret,
having broken the Cornues: I put the salt that therein remained congealed to
dissolve in moisture as before, till there remained nothing but grossness and
slime as in the former I distilled that which ascended from the water, and
reiterated all those Regiments till all my salt was resolved and distilled into
salt water, that which came the seven or eight time. The slime I washed well
with water, to extract what might be the Remainder of saltness; and so
recalcined and washed them till there rested nothing but slime or pure earth
without taste. Of this little salt that I had extracted, I did as I had done
with others, so that all my salt, without losing any of its substance, went
away in sweet water, and in this insensible slime, which came at last to one or
two ounces. What then became of the saltness of this salt? Certes herein I
have lost all my Latin, and know not what to say thereof, only it is gone in
verity as I say: If any one would untie this knot, would indeed do me a great
pleasure: I will leave it to mix with others, to come to the particular praises
of salt, without which, says Pliny, we could not live civilly. All the grace,
gentility, ornament, pleasures and delights of humane life, cannot be better
expressed then by this word; which extends also to the pleasures of the soul,
the sweetness and tranquillity of life, and to a Sovereign rejoicing and
repose of all troubles and sorrows. It renews the pricks and amorous desires so
beget its like, and has obtained this honorable quality of Soldiers, and of
pleasant and witty words, and joyous meetings, without hurt to any; from whence
it should be called the Graces. According to which St. Paul says in the 4 to
the Col. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt. And in
the end it is the seasoning of all our viands, which without it would remain
unsavory and without taste. So that it is said to right sense in the common
proverb, there is nothing more profitable then the sun and salt. So Pliny
discourses thereof, in the place alleged, and Plutarch in his book and 4
question of his Sympofiacques, without salt we can eat nothing agreeable to the
taste, for bread it self is more savoury if it be mingled therewith: therefore
ordinarily in Churches and covering of tables, they couple Neptune with Ceres,
for salt things are as it it were an allurement and a spur to excite appetite:
So that before any other nouriture we take that which is sharp and salt,
whereas, if they begin with others they would incontinently prostrate
themselves. That which has no taste can it be eaten without Salt? Job. 6.6.
Salt also renders drink more delicious, and it is of infinite other uses and
commodities of life, that holds more of man; whereas the privation thereof,
makes it brutall. It is furthermore a mark and symbol of Justice, because it
guards and conserves that to which it is introduced and fastened. Of Amity
also, and Gratitude, suitable to that in the first of Esdr^s chap. 4. where the
Lieutenants of King Artaxerxes writ to him in this manner. We remember the salt
thou gave us in thy Palace, we would not fail to advertise thee faithfully of
what shall come to out knowledge concerning the service of they highness.

Salt being there put for one of the greatest obligations that can be had,
because it is a thing pure, neat, holy and sacred, which men first set on the
table. So that Aeschines in his prayer of the ill administered Ambassie, makes
great account of salt, and a public table, of one City confederate with
another. And indeed there is nothing more permanent nor more fixed in the fire,
nor more approaching to its nature, because it is mordicant, sharp, tart,
cutting, subtle, penetrative, pure and neat, fragrant, incombustible and
incorruptible. Yea, that which preserves all things from corruption, and by its
preparations makes it self clear, crystalline, and transparent as Air; for
glass is nothing else then a most fixed salt that may be extracted from all
sorts of ashes, and of some nearer then of others; but it is not so dissoluble
into moisture as common salt; nor that which is extracted out of ashes by way
of lee, which is liquid with it by strong expressions of fire, which are
notwithstanding two contrary resolutions, and resisting one the other: chiefly
afterward from all liquid humidity, unctuous but inconsumptible. It is moreover
the first original as well of mineralls as of stones, and precious stones, yea
of all other mineralls. Likewise of vegetables and of Animalls, whose blood and
urinall humor, and all other substance is salted, to preserve it from
putrefaction: and in general, from all mixed and composed Elements; which is
herein verified that they resolve themselves into it, so that it is as the
other life of all things; and without it says the Philosopher Morien, nature
can no ways work, nor can any other thing be engendered, according to Raimund
Lullus in his testament. Whereunto all chymicall Philosophers do adhere; that
nothing has been created here below, in the Elementary part better, nor more
precious then salt.

There is salt then, in every thing, and nothing can subsist but for the salt
which is therein mixed; which ties the parts together as a chain, otherwise
they would all go into small powder, and give them nourishment; for there are
two substances in salt, the one viscous, gluish, and unctuous, of the nature of
air, which is sweet; and indeed there is nothing that nourishes but what is
sweet; the bitter and the salt do not. The other is a dust, sharp pricking and
biting, of the nature of fire, which is laxative. For all salts are laxative,
and nothing does loose the body, that participates not of the nature of salt:
Mark then, wherefore is it that those that drink salt water die speedily of
dysenteries? the salt which is mingled therewith causing a gnawing in the
bowels; for there is nothing corrosive but salt, or of the nature of salt,
fiery of it self, says Pliny, lib. 31. chapter 9. and yet enemy of actual fire,
for it leaps up and down, it danceth to and fro, and crackles, corroding also
all to which it is fastened; and drying it, although it be the strongest and
most permanent humidity of all others, and it is a moisture (says Geber) that
above all other moistures expects an encounter with fire.

So we see in metals, which are nothing else but congealed and baked salts, by
a long and successive decoction, within the earths entralls, where their
humidity is abundantly fixed by the temperate air it meets withal there. And
these salts do participate of sulphur and quicksilver, which joined together
make a third name Metalline salt, which has the same fashion and resolution as
common salt; which is taken for a symbol of equity and justice; as also are
metals, but for another consideration. For melt Gold, Silver, Copper, and other
metals together, they will all mingle equally: So that if upon a hundred parts
of silver, yea two hundred you melt one of gold, the least part of this silver,
in what regard soever you will take it from the total mass, shall in respect
of it self, take its just and equal portion of gold and no more nor less,
wherefore they are taken for distributive justice. But salt is for that
throughout, where it attacheth flesh, fish, vegetables, it keeps them from
corruption, and conserves them in their entire, and makes them durable for many
ages. Fire on the contrary, is an evil host, for it steals and destroys
all that lodges near it, never ceasing till it has converted all into ashes,
whence salt was extracted, that was before therein contained: So that these
two, fire and salt, accord and convene together and also with the ferments in
this, that they convert all that whereupon they can exercise their action.
Plutarch in his book and 4 question of Symposiaques, extolling salt, sets down,
that all flesh and fish that was eat is a dead thing, and proceeds from a dead
body; but when the faculty of salt comes to be introduced, it is a soul that
revivifies and gives them grace and savor. And in the 5 book 10. quest. renders
a reason why Homer calls salt divine; he puts that salt is as a temperament and
fortification of the viands within the body: and that it gives it an agreement
with the appetite. But it is rather for the virtue that it has to preserve
dead bodies from putrefaction; which is as to resist death, that which
appertains to Divinity. Thou shall (not suffer thy holy one to see corruption,)
not permitting that what is deprived of life should perish so suddenly in all
kinds: but as the soul, that divine part within us, keeps the body alive (a
soul is given to hogs for their safety,) this Pliny sets down after the
Stoics. So salt also takes into its safeguard dead flesh to keep it from
putrefaction; whence the fire of lightning is reputed for divine; because those
that have been touched therewith remain a great while without corruption; as
salt does on its part, which has this property and virtue; which shows the
great affinity and agreement which they have together. Wherefore Evenus was
wont to say, that fire was the best sauce in the world, and the very same is
also attributed to salt. All which things here above do confirm the occasion
for which Moses, and after him Pythagoras made so great esteem of salt, to
cover under his Allegory that which they would give to understand by it; that
our souls and consciences signified by man in St. Mark, namely, the internal
man, and our body for the sacrifice ought to be offered up unto God, pure and
not soiled with corruption; That you offer up your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy pleasing unto God, etc. Therein was there (it may be) another reason, that
moved Moses to exalt salt so much, that according as Rabbi Moses the Egyptian
discourses at large in his third book of his More, 47* chapter where he renders a
particular reason for the most part of Mosaical ceremomonies, his principal
aim was to overthrow all Idolatries, even rhose of the Egyptians, where they
had a greater vogue then in any other part. He seeing that their Priests so
greatly detested salt, that they would not use it in any sort, for that of the
sea from whence it proceeded; in the bitterness whereof, the sweet substance
of Nilus went to lose and salt it self; which they held to be for the radical
moisture from whence all things here below do sprout and nourish themselves in
despite of them, and contrary to their traditions; he would thereof make a form
of alliance and paction from God with the Jewish people, that all their
oblations should be accompanied with sait: And in the 2 of Paralip. 13.5 chap.
It is said, that God gave to David and his children the Kingdom of Israel by a
Covenant of Salt; that is to say, most firm and indissoluble; for that salt
hinders corruption. And therefore the Savior chose his Apostles to be as the
salt of men; that is to say, to deliver the pure and incorruptible doctrine of
the Gospel; and to confirm them firm persistent faith, as well by words as
deeds. The Caballists penetrating further into the mysteries enclosed
therewithin, meditate certain subtilties by a rule of Ghematrie, called
Ghilcal, which consists in equivalencies of Numbers, which the Hebrews
assign unto Letters. Those of this word Malach which signifies salt, mounts
in their supputation to 78. for Mem valued 40. Lamed 30. and heth 8. or divided
in any sort that you will, always there will result a certain number,
representing a mystery of Divine names; the half which makes 39. mount to as
much as the letters of Chuzu; the scabbard or covering of this great Name for
caph. val. 20. vau 6. Z. 7. and the other vau 6, if in 3 parts, each will mount
to 26. which is the number tetragrammaton Jehovah, vau making 10. he 5. vau 6.
and he 5. In six parts this will be 13. for each, which are equipollent to the
number of Piety. In 13. there are 6. which vau is valued at, a letter
representing eternal life; besides that six is the first perfect number,
because his parts do constitute it, his sixth namely 1. his third 2. and its
half 3. which perfection has not any one of the other numbers, and in six
days the structure of the Universe was perfected.

There are other mysteries in the Scripture; in 26. will be the number of the
most holy and sacred Trinity, for three times 26. makes 78. In 39. twice;
which Beth stands for a symbol of a word, where the second person, and the
house of Idea's of the Archetype, which Plato has well acknowledged, Aristotle
not. And finally 87. denotes as many unities, whereof each represents the unity
of the essence of one God alone. The same is in the Lechem bread, which is an
anagram of the former, and consists of the same letters. It was therefore
some cause of the Proverb, To eat salt with thy bread. Rabbi Solomon upon the
places aforesaid, of Gods alliance with his people, designed by salt, by which
is understood the Eternal paction of the great Priesthood of the Messiah,
brings us a form of an Allegory, very strange and fantastic. That the waters
here below do mutiny, that they are separated from the supercelestiall, having
the firmament set betwixt them; by means whereof, God to appease them, promised
that they should be perpetually in his service, in all offerings, sacrifices,
as he did afterward in the Law, which he gave to the Jews; Whatsoever thou
shall offer to the Lord, thou shall season it with salt.

Yet there are diverse sorts of salt, that have different properties and
virtues, according to the things from which they are extracted; for salt
retain a propriety of the thing from whence it came, says Geber in his
Testament, yea as many odors, and sapors as there are, they all do depend upon
salt; for where there is no salt, there is no smell nor taste; and yet of all
the tastes which Plutarch in his Natural causes does limit to eight, Pliny
lib. 15. cap. 27. extends them to 13. there is not one, that is not salt,
because taste (as Plato will have it) comes from water, which creep athwart the
stalk of every plant, and keeps the saltness that it cannot pass as it is more
gross and terrestrial, as we see in seawater when it is distilled; where
when they pass it through sand, where it leaves its saltness. But it may be
said to Plato, that the taste does not only ly in plants, but also in Animalls
and mineralls, and all other compounded Elements. It is that which he and
Aristotle and other rational Philosophers, are only satisfied with, that which
their arguments and discourse do imprint in their fantasies: esteeming that it
cannot be otherwise, then that which their reasons do demonstrate unto them,
for the most part false and erroneous; there were if they would penetrate
empirickly by the experiments, they might have been showed by the finger of the
eye, the truth of the thing, they might have been better ascertained therein,
as the Arabians have since done; and the Chymicall Philosophers, who will
assure themselves of nothing, but what they have oftentimes tried without
variation to the sense. It is a maxim of all Naturalists, received for
Infallible, that the transparence comes from this, when the water in the
composition and mixtion superabounds, over the earth, and darkness on the
contrary, when Terrestreity predominates the water, and it would be accounted
an irremissible crime Laesa Ma^estatis to doubt thereof, for who is there that
doubts it, will they say, that it is not so? I will reply that it is I, to
whom experience, shows the contrary, at least for that the cause of
transparence, and opacity, does not proceed from that which they allege. Take
Crystal and pass it never so little through hot ashes, so long as one would
roast a chestnut you will find it all dark, without any more transparence within
or without in the superficies, and that without any loss of its substance, or
diminution of its weight. And on the contrary in a strong expression of fire
blowing upon the lead, then which nothing can be darker, it will convert into a
form of a hyacinth so transparent, that one may read a small letter through
it: though it were an inch thick, and this hyacinth by the same fire return
into lead, and lead into an hyacinth.

If then these profound Contemplators of nature, and her effects, had been
willing to accompany their Imaginary discourses, with experience that reveals
infinite secrets by fire, they could never have fallen into such absurdities:
and had manifestly seen without any vail or obstacle all full of things whereof
they remain in irresolution and doubt not having spoken therein but as blind
men and by guess, for we cannot discover the secrets of things to proceed
therein directly, nor come to it by entering on it, after manner of speech, by
the foregate: for nature goes in her works rarely and in secret, as by the
posterne gate: or by setting ladders against the windows: The Greeks call that
(...), solution: No man can know the composition of a thing, said Geber very
well, that was ignorant of its destruction. And this is done by fire, which
separates the parts, as has been said before. There are then two diverse
substances of salt, therefore it causes diverse effects, the one is sweet,
glutinous and inflamable, of the nature of air, nourishing, binding. The other
sharp, mordicant and separative that begets nothing. The Poets in their
mythologies have called this the Ocean, and the sweet wherewith the pickle of
the Sea is moistened made liquid Te^bys as Plutarch has it in his Osiris which
gives milk to and nourishes all things. But simple water of it self alone
would not be sufficient to nourish, if it were not assisted with things
fastened to the earth, the salt therein enclosed and therewith mingled, having
a sweet and glutinous unctuosity, for as in the Seawater there are two
substances, sweet and salt, there are subalternately two in salt: But we cannot
say that they do nourish or produce any thing. Therefore is it, that they use
to raze Traiters-houses, and sow them with salt as reputed unworthy to produce
any more. Salt indeed produces nothing as it is, where its sweet substance is
so drowned with the salt, that it cannot express it self in action, so as it
is, except it be freed out of prison, for the saltness predominates over it,
and covers it. But for replication thereunto which was said before, that fresh
water alone, does neither nourish nor produce any thing: which we see to the
contrary, by experience in many waterish herbs that grow in the midst of
waters, and in flints that it engenders shells, and fishes, and worms: to be
short, that its procreation does extend to the three composed kinds of
Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals: And indeed put little pebbles in a phial,
and water thereon, every day, renewing it daily, at the end of certain time,
you will find them so great, and so big, that they cannot come out at the
neck by which they were put in. But indeed all this proceeds from the slime,
which is mingled with the water, as frogs, and other things, which are
procreated in the middle Region of the air of the slime which the Sun beams
has thence raised with the water, for all rains, snowes, and other such
impressions participate much of the slime; from thence it comes that the snow
does smoke and fatten the earth, and the water of rain, is more connaturall to
trees, herbs, and seeds, chiefly those which fall by storms and thunders,
then those of wels and rivers: whereof Plutarch forces himself to bring forth
many reasons in natural causes, which have no great appearance: There is yet
more to say, for that they are better baked and accompanied with more subtle
and hot slime, and are of lighter concoction and nourishment then plants; as of
meat in the stomach of Animals, some more then others, where the waters here
below are more raw and indigested: we insist a little in water, because salt is
nothing else, but water mingled and settled with dry and burned earth, of the
nature of fire which makes it bitter and salt. So that before we pass from
this subject of fresh water, we will here touch upon an experiment of more rare
things from whence come many fair and scret considerations. Sweet water is a
body so homogeneal, that it would seem to the sight so clear, transparent, and
liquid, in all its parts, resembling to it self, that there is in it but one
only substance: since that by d stillations she passes all. But yet there is
another found substance, solid, and compact, in the form of earth, mingled
with its liquid homogeneity, which it separates by Artifice, and it is that
which Aristotle says in the swarm of Philosophers. The earth is concreat by
the grossness of the water. And this may be seen with water agitated and
beaten and after redistilled many times, always separating the fifth or sixth
part which shall pass the first. You must then take a good quantity of well
water, or the same of fountain, river or rain water, and let it settle twenty
or thirty hours until there be some ordure or slime, it separates it self.

Take of this water as you may say forty pintes, and cause the half to vapor
away by very easy fire, that it boil not, put these twenty pintes apart, and
take new water as above, of which you shall evaporate the moity; and so long
continue it, that you may have well a hundred pintes half evaporated; from
this one hundred, make to evaporate thirty pintes, and of sixty, ten, twenty,
of fifty, that shall remain twenty of thirty, ten, and of twenty, ten; and cast
away all these slimes that shall reside, for they are nothing worth, and are
but immundicity and ordure, unto the seventh or eighth evaporation or
distillation, after which there will appear in your water infinite little
atoms and little bodies; which at last by little and little will be congealed
into one solid substance, of a grisly color, soft as dough: Of which I have
seen such admirable effects that men would hardly believe it; Abundance of
fluxes of blood.
in Cankers, Gangrenes, Hemorrhagies, bloody flux, Women newly laid in bed; and
at nose, diseases in the stomach, and infinite other such accidents that no
terra sigillata nor Bolarmoniac could compare with. You may make your round
pills impasting them with the last waters that were extracted, which are also
of great virtue, to wash wounds, inveterate Maladies of the stomach, and other
the like; wherefore you must keep them well. You may also calcine it for six
or seven hours in a small pot well luted, and casting thereon vinegar
distilled, boiling, dissolving one part, nourishing the rest; calcine it
again, and dissolve it till you have all the salt which will be white and of
sweet taste, make it dissolve to oil, you may draw from thence great effects
even upon Gold. But seawater is yet of more efficacy then that of wels and
rivers, sweet water (I say) which shall be separated from salt by distillation:
which would be easy to do near the Sea, having to that end four or five
alembies of leaden earth, and yet more of sweet water which is drawn by
distillation of salt resolved in liquor to humidity.

But there is yet another manner of proceeding, in the separation of the
substances of common water: and more spiritual then the precedent. Take very
clean water: out of a well, river or fountain, let it settle twenty four
hours, and take the pure and the clear, which you shall put in vessels of
Beauvois earth: well stopped to putrify in hot dung forty days, renewing it
two or three times every week, filter the water, and give only five or six
boylings, scumming off the scurfes that arise thereon with a feather, then put
it in Cornues of glass, not putting therein but the third part, or the moity
at most, of that which they may contain and distill of two parts three; then
change the Recipient, and accomplish to distill all the water, but with an
easy fire. Then strengthen the fire, by little and little, till you see small
fumes ascend, continue this degree of fire, with increasing until it mount no
more. Let the fire quench of it self and recoole the vessel: then gather the
salt which shall be so elevated toward the beck of the Cornue, and within the
recipient, and keep it in a vessel of earth, very close and sealed in a warm
and dry place that it melt not, nor dissolve. Put the Cornue to again with
that which remains in the bottom, and strengthen the fire until you see a
reddish oil; end your distillation, after cease the fire. Take the black
feces, that remain in the bottom, stamp them, and put them in a sublimatory
of good earth, of an inch thick, and no more, for s^x hours, first a little
fire, then reinforce it for twelve others, till the sublimatory be red, the
fire being always in the same degree: let it cool and gather the salt which
will be mounted, and keep it as the former. This is the second sal Ammoniac
volatill, which is extracted from the water: and the one, and the other, have
great power to the dissolution of gold, carrying no danger with then as your
common sal Ammoniac may do; which has bad qualities in it, there, where this
is extracted from a substance so familiar to man's body, which is sweet water.
Now take all the feces and residences, which remain in the bottom of the
vessel, bruise them, and make them dissolve in the first water, which you
shall have distilled, after you have warmed it a little; that it may dissolve
the salt that may be there. Let them repose, then evacuate, and put them to
distill with half the water: Then change the Recipient, and with a little
stronger fire, distill the Surplusage of the water, and keep them each a part,
in a cold place. But do not perfect to congeal all the salt in the bottom of
the vessel, but leave therein a little moisture, to create flakes of ice. If
it be not white enough, let it calcine for three or four hours in a pot of
earth not leaded, after dissolve it in the second water, filter and congeale
it, and keep it in a dry place, for this is salt fix and fusible. If in drawing
the first Salarmoniac, volatill, the foul oil that is nothing worth mounts
with it, you must put salt and oil in new water, and depure and putrify it as
before, which was to begin again, therefore we must go wisely to work. There
is another manner of proceeding therein, which is shorter, for there are more
ways to one intent, and to one end, says Geber. Take rain or fountain water,
put it in a Cornue, upon the sand with a slow fire: and distill thereof a
fourth part, which is more rare and subtle. Continue afterward the
distillation even to the feces, which you cast away. And see that you have good
store of this mean substance, with which, you shall reiterate the distillation
seven times, being always the fourth part that will first issue out, which is
the phlegm, and the feces are the slime. In the fourth, you shall begin to see
the sulphurities of all colors in the form of husks and pieces of gold. The
seven distillations being perfected put your mean substance in an alembec, to
the fire with a soft bath: and draw that which may ascend, which shall be yet
of phlegm, then you shall see created little stones, and pieces of all colors
which will go to the bottom: stay your distillation, and let them settle,
then evacuate that which remains sweetly with water: and do so, with all your
mean substance, and make there little stones to multiply in the bath. When you
shall have enough dry them in the Sun, or before an easy fire, and put them in
a glasse-bottle well sealed, with the fire of a lamp or the like, for three or
four months, and your matter will be congealed and fixed except a certain
small portion thereof, which will arise along the sides of the vessel: This
here is the mean substance, of the first matter of all things, which is water.
But that we be not deceived or abused, all these practices, which are but an
image and portrait half rudely hewn out of the manner which we must hold in
the extraction of liquors. From whence they resolve of themselves into
moisture, all sorts of salt, as well common, as Salalkali, tartar, and other
the like; the sweet oleaginous substance swimming above the water with the salt
and bitter, which there remains dissolved, and after the extraction of the
water, remains a congealed salt in the bottom; that is to say, to separate
the oil from salts: which cannot be done without great artifice: But it is not
reasonable to discover it, and divulge all openly; but to reserve something
therein, for far of doing wrong to the curious endeavors of some learned men
who have taken so much pains and travail, to come to the knowledge of these
fine secrets.

It has pleased me in some sort to run through the foresaid experiments of
water as well for the importance and rarity which they have, as for that it
depends upon salt whereof water makes the principal part: and likewise of the
sea, from whence separating the sweet substance the salt remains solid
congealed; and of this salt resolved by it self, to moisture, they extract by
distillation the greatest part of sweet water; by means whereof, without
departure from this subject of salt, it will not be amiss, to touch here
something of the Sea, whose water is as a body, the salt enclosed not
perceiveable to the sight, but well to the taste, are the vital spirits, and
the oleaginous inflamable substance envelopped within the salt; the soul, and
the life of the nature of air, or of wind; remember because wind is my life.
There are then two substances in the Sea, and by consequent in salt; the one
liquid, and volatile, which ascends upward, and is double, water namely and
oil; the one and the other sweet and fresh: And the other fix, and solid,
which is bitter and salt; wherefore it was that Homer called the Ocean the
father of Gods and of men, for by stretching out of all side crossewise, the
Conduits and spongiosities of the earth which he holds encompassed round
about: as a dry hanging on to some rock there within by a providence of nature
is made a separation of substances of the fresh, namely, and of the salt: for
the Marine water, passes through these Conduits, they unsalt it, even as they
should distill it by an Alembic of Cornue, or as one should pass it through
sand many times, part whereof should remain baked in the earth for the
production and nouriture of vegetables part passes through springs, wells, and
fountains, whence all floods and rivers are formed, Eccles. 1.7. All rivers
run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full, unto the place from whence the
rivers come, thither they return again. And part elevates it self aloft, by
means of the Sun and stars, which draw and suck them, as well for their
nouriture, as for the formation of raines, snowes, hailes, and other aqueous
expressions in the air. The salt which is more gross, heavy and terrestrial
remains invisqued in the veins, and conduits of the earth, where heat enclosed
bakes it, digests, alters, and changes it into another nature for the
production of all sorts of Minerals, by means of the portion of fresh water
mingled therewith, which dissolves and washes off these salts, so that
finally, having been brought to their last perfection according to natures
intention, she enformes that which she has determined. The Sea then is not
so barren and unfruitful as some poets and Philosophers have made it; Plato
himself, in his Phaedon, where he says, that nothing could be there
procreated worthy of Jupiter: because all the Animals procreated therein are
wild, untameable and indocill, and in which there is neither amity nor
sweetness. But what shall we say of the Dolphin that saved Arion, and of many
others, alleged by Plutarch in his treaty: What animalls are the wisest, those
on land, or those in the water? of fishes likewise wherewith the Indians are
served, as with a chained Grayhound? But it is very small, to take fish, never
letting go what he has once fastened on. Truly a Brach nor couching spaniell,
cannot be more spiritual, or docible then this fish, at least if it be true
what is related to have often times been seen by the eye, in the thirteenth
book of Gonzalo d'Ovidiedo of his natural history of the Indies. Chap 10. And
of Peter Martyr, of another sort of fish called Manati, which being taken at
Sea very little, and from thence put into a standing lake, became tame, and
privately would come, and take bread from men's hands: and would not fail to
come a good way off, when he was called, leaving himself to be handled at
their pleasure, and carried them upon his back, as on a bridge cross the lake,
from one side to the other: But fresh water fishes, are they more docile then
those of the Sea? The Egyptian Priests, above all others abhorred the Sea,
calling it the final end, the death, and destruction of all things: because
the water thereof, kills all Animalls that drink thereof: and is as the
sepulcher of all rivers, that go lose themselves and die therein; and the
earth is the same for all bodies, from whence none are spewed out. To this
purpose Chiia in the Zohar deploring the death of Rabbi Simeon author thereof,
after he had cast himself on the earth and embraced him, used such a language,
O earth, earth, dust, dust, how hard and unpitifull art thou? For whatsoever is
most desirable to the sight, thou make old and deformed, thou breakest in
pieces the shining Columns of the world. How do thou quench the clear
resplendent lights which received theirs from the eternal living spring,
wherewith the whole world was illustrated! The Princes and Potentates given to
the people to govern them, and to administer Justice unto them, by which they
are maintained, and subsist, wax old and end in thee: and thou remainest
always persistent in thy self, not being able to satisfy or satiate thy
self with so many bodies, that return thither: so that the world is therein
confounded and lost, and afterward renewes it self of a sudden. But for the
regard of the Sea, the Egyptian Priests had it in such detestation, that they
could not endure to see the very Mariners, nor the Islanders as people which on
all parts were cut off from humane commerce. And the Britains, (separated from
the world by an element which they say is the fifth,) so austere, outrageous,
and unpittiable: and for that cause they abstained from salt, because that
among other things it provoked to lasciviousness. The occasion also for which
they so much rejected the Sea, was something mystical and allegorical:
because it does not wash spots or uncleanness. So that Homer made, and not
without reason, that Nausicaa Alcinous daughter, washed her linen and clothes
in a fountain of fresh water on the Sea shore, for the truth is that Seawater
does not wash. That which Aristotle, (as Plutarch puts it) in the first of the
Symposiaques 9. question, refer to the pickle wherewith the Seawater is
always filled, so that there being nothing empty therein it could receive no
filthiness. And lee, is it not the same; yea more full of salt; yea more
unctuous and fat then that of the sea? so that according to Aristotle's
testimony, men put seawater in their lamps, to make them shine clearer, and
cast upon the flame, it becomes lighted; in which there may be also mystery
contained, concerning fire and salt, and their affinity together.

Join hereunto that we may see that salt is an enemy to all filthiness and
uncleanness; and will not thereto adjoin or associate; no more then fire,
which will nothing but pure things, said good Raimund Lullius. Yet to the
aforesaid purpose, Plutarch in his natural causes, sets down that the
seawater, does neither nourish nor feed, trees, or plants: because being
gross and heavy it cannot mount into their stalks, which thickness and
grosnesse is seen, for that carries greater burdens then the fresh water: and
this comes from the salt therein dissolved, and it is earthly and consequently
more uneasy to sink. Moreover trees being (according to the opinion of Plato,
Democritus, Anaxagoras, and others,) a terrestrial Animal, it cannot give it
nourishment; for bitter does not nourish, but sweet only. But what shall we
say of so many fishes that are procreated and nourished in the sea, of herbs
also, and of trees? Francisco de Oviedo lib. 2. chapter 5. sets down that in the
first discovery of Christopher Columbus, they found as of great green and
yellow meadows in the main sea, more then two hundred leagues from land, of
certain herbs called Salgazzi, which go floting on the top of the waters, as
the winds carry them from one side to another. In the relation of Francis
Vlloa, he sets down that the root of the herbs, whereof he gives the
description and figure, do not sink more then 12 or 15 fadome in the water,
yellow yet, as wax.

But we sufficiently see trees and bushes growing along the seashore, and
even in the very sea: yet Plutarch insisteth that those that grow along the
shore of the Red Sea, are there procreated and nourished with the slime which
the floods carry thither, and fall therein; which he might have spoken more
properly of the greater sea, otherwise called Pontus Euxinus. And Pliny lib.
18. cha. 22. that the herbs which grow within the water are nourished with
rains: but it would follow, that if so, they should procreate in all other
places where it rains indifferently.

Aristotle with better reason refers it to the gross and unctuous saltness
which is therewith mingled. Salt being fat and unctuous, which is the cause
that salt water does not so easily quench fire, as fresh water. But this
saltness is equal throughout all the sea. Pliny himself lib. 19. chapter 11.
specifies, Certain herbs which salt waters do much profit. These are secrets
of Nature to which man's discourse can hardly arrive. For herbs by a providence
thereof may well suck and draw from salt water, a fresh or sweet substance
wherewith they are procreated and nourished as the fishes.

But this is not our principal drift: we have here endeavored to show that
Salt is not unfruitful, but the cause of fertility provoking venereall
appetite, whence Venus is said to be begotten of the sea; if men give salt unto
animalls to heat them the more, and make them eat salt as Plutarch puts it in
his 3. queston of Natural causes. And we see by experience, that in ships
laden with salt, rats and mice, are sooner engendered then in others; this which
must so much the more cry down salt in regard of holy things, from whence all
mutability and lubricity must be bannished; but salt is in the number of things
that are applied to the good, and to the bad part. Of the good we have
heretofore alleged many places. Of the bad for the sterility, Genesis 14.5. All
shall assemble themselves in the wild valley which is now the sea of salt. And
in the 19. chap. 26. as also in the 10. of Wisdom, v. 7. of Lots wife, who for
her incredulity and disobeying the Angels voice, she was turned into a pillar
of salt: And Judges 9.45. the habitations of Rebels and Traitors were razed
and sowed with salt. And in the 2 of Zephaniah v. 9. Moab shall be as Sodom, a
desolation of nettles, and thistles and heaps of salt.

But we see upon the ebbing and flowing of the salt pits in the Marshes of
Zai^tonge, where they empty the dirt, which are as salt as the sea itself,
where it produces the best wheat, that possibly can be, and in great quantity,
and very excellent wines also: But there is another consideration in that, as
in Marle, and in the dry places of Ardonne, where they burn the cuttings of
trees, of 7 or 8 years, as also quick chalk which supplies the place of dung in
their grounds: for those ashes would produce nothing of themselves, no more
then Marle or salt, but they are the cause of production because they warm and
fatten the land. There is yet another reason, that Plutarch alleges, That
throughout where there is Salt nothing can grow thick, or be close together:
which constipation would hinder herbs to thrust out: Moreover many medicaments
and remedies do come from salt: whereupon I will not here lose time, on that
which Pliny, Dioscorides, and others, have set down and treated of cursorily
and in have, with closed eyes one after another, not having made proof thereof;
add to this, it is so trivial and beaten as nothing more, but will touch here,
in passing the Country, an experiment, whereof I have seen very admirable
effects in burning fevers and unquietness, where they could not take rest. It
is a frontall made in this manner.

Take the yolk of a fresh Eg, and as much gross salt, beat them together in
shape of an ointment, which you shall apply to your forehead, between two
folded linen clothes: It does not cool the brain, nor cause such accidents;
as conserve of Roses do, Oxyrhodinon likewise, and brings much more comfort.

FINIS.

