RESOLVED UPON THE QUESTION.

OR A Question Resolved concerning the Right which the King has to Hull, or
any other Fort or place of strength for the defense of the Kingdom.

Wherein is likewise proved, that neither the settling of the Militia as it is
done by the Parliament, nor the keeping of Hull by Sir John Hotham, nor any
other Act that the Parliament have yet done is illegal, but necessary, just,
and according to that power which the Law has given them.

By Peter Bland of Grays-Inne Gent.

Printed for Matthew Walbancke, 1642.

TO THE WORTHY TO be honored JOHN PYM Esquier, one of the Members of the
Honorable House of Commons in Parliament assembled.
SIR,
WHen my reason is made known, I hope my presumption in dedicating these poor
lines to your worthy self will appear more pardonable: I wrote, not out of an
ambitious thought of instructing the profoundest judgments, but only to
satisfy them, that for want of knowledge, lay scandalous imputations, not only
upon that honorable House of Parliament in general whereof you are a member,
but especially and in particular upon your upright self; for my own part, I
am the least member of this distracted Kingdom, but have as good a right to
the benefit of those laws this happy Parliament has enacted as the greatest,
and therefore am bound by way of thankfulness to vindicate their just intents
and actions, against the opprobrious language of malignant Spirits: to the
doing of which, this is my weak but hearty endeavor if you please to give it
patronage it may deserve the press, therefore let your acceptance add courage
to the future employments of him, who is both to your self and to his country.

A faithful servant PETER BLAND.

To the Reader.
READER,
WHo ere thou be, read with a spirit as free from Faction as your Author,
who desires neither to trample on Majesty, nor despise the authority of so
high a Court as that of Parliament, but to give his due respects to both: What
you find amiss gently correct; his ambition is either to convince others more
ignorant, or be satisfied from others more knowing than himself. He wrote not
this as if the Parliament knew not Law sufficient to justify their own
actions, but to destroy their wonder whom he has heard admire that the
Parliament did not prove their own acts by visible Law, as well as disprove the
Kings: time and greater engagements will not permit them to show every private
man the public necessities; It Is sufficient they discern them, and this is
argument enough to prove that sinister respects can never prevail with them to
do unlawful acts, viz. because it can be no benefit to them (were it not the
Kingdoms safety only that they aymd at) to spend their time, and hazard their
lives and fortunes by steering in such cruel storms, for 'twere not wisdom
in them that would fish, to trouble the waters themselves.

FAREWELL
The Question that is RESOLVED.
WHether the right which the King has to Hull, and all other Forts of strength
for the defense of the Kingdom be by descent from the Blood-Royall, or by way
of trust.

And for my part, I conceive He has it by way of trust: but to resolve this
question, I shall take leave of my self to use my own method. Which shall be
first to show the strongest arguments that can be urged by them of the contrary
opinion, who stand so much upon the descent, as to drown the trust; and
afterward I shall prove that notwithstanding all that they can say, he has it
by way of trust only.

First then to argue for his descent thus I prove it: If He have it in His
natural capacity, then he has it by descent; but He has it in His natural
capacity, ergo,

The consequence will not be denied, for I Intend by His natural capacity, as
Charles the Son and Heir apparent of King James His Father of blessed
memory; and if it be granted He has it so, then surely the consequence must
stand good.

Then for the Minor, that He has it in that capacity, thus I prove it.

If the Treason which he commits that keeps one of those Forts, and levieth
War against the King and His Liege people be against the King in His natural
capacity, then the minor is good; and that that Treason when any one commits,
it is against him in that capacity, thus I prove it.

But I desire not to be mistaken, for I aim not at the worthy act of Sir John
Hotham; for I hold it not levying of War within the letter of the Statute of
25. Ed. 3. if it were an offenc^ that might taste of Treason (but I hold it is
not) yet being out of the words of that Statute the Parliament and not the King
himself nor his ^^^ge are to Judge of it by virtue of a clause in that act by
which their ^erdecess^^^ ^^ve reserved that power for them:

But to go forward with what I am to prove, viz. that such a Teason as is
mentioned before, nay any Treason is against him in his natural capacity: it
appears by the form of indictment for Treason, for they must and do always
conclude contra ligeantiae suae debitum and so Cook lib. 7. Calvin's case:
which words prove that Treason is against him to whom ligeance is due, and
then pray if it be against him to whom ligeance is due, is it not against the
natural King, that is, against the King in his natural capacity? for all that
knows but the definition of the politic capacity will confess that ligeance
or homage cannot be done to such a body as is invisible.

And therefore of an Alien enemy come and possess himself of any of the Kings
Forts, and levies war against him, and then is taken, this is Treason and yet
our law in this case does refuse to try him as out of its jurisdiction because
he cannot be tried by indictment, for being no liege man to the King, the
indictment cannot conclude that it was contra ligeantiae suae debitum: and
therefore he shall be put to death by Matiall law: and so it was in 15. H. 7.
Parking Warbecks case, who being an Alien borne in Flanders fained himself to
be one of the sons of Edward the Fourth, and invaded this Realm with great
power, with an intent to take upon him the dignity royal: But being taken in
the war, it was resolved by the Justices that he could not be punished by
the Common Law; but before the Constable and Marshall (who had special
commission to hear and determine the same according to Marshall Law) he was
sentenced to be drawn, hanged, and quartered, which was done and executed
accordingly: and this appears in the book of Griffeth Attorney General and
in the book of Hobert General to Henry the Seventh, and you may read it
likewise in Calvin's case Cook Lib. 7. fol. 6. b. and cases to the same purpose
may read in 4. Mar. br. 32. and 3. and 4. Ph. and Mar. Dyer. 144.

I shall not raise arguments to prove that Ligeance is due to the King in his
natural capacity, as it was adiugded in 6. Iacobi neither shall I mention how
that the words of the letters pattents of qeniztion be that the Patentee shall
behave himself tanquam verus et fidelis ligeus domini regis, which proves that
ligeance is due to the King in his natural capacity, for all this is not to my
purpose, but because the Kings Majesty himself whom I never think on but with
reverence has made use of the last argument, and others may and do urge the
former, I shall sert down the definition of the Kings politipue capacity out
of which the reader himself (thgogh but of slender Judgment) may have reason
sufficient to answer all the arguments hither to which seem to be of such
force.

The definition of it is this, it is a body framed by the polocy of man,
invisible, immortal, not subject to any infirmity, nonnage, or infancy, so it is
definid in Calvin's case.

And who cannot gather a reason (from hence) sufficient to deny the last
Consequence; and say that though treason committed against the King by keeping
of those sorts from him be treason against his natural capacity, yet it does
not follow that he has them, it has capacity: for the King has but two
capacities, his natural and his pollitique: now according to the definition of
the latter their can be no treason committed against that cappacity it being an
inanimate and invisible body, therefore needs must indictments conclude the
treason to be against the natuerall capacity; but if that should be a good
consequence that therefore he holds them in that capacity, then the next
consequence would be that he might sell them when he please, which is
directly against the Law, as was resolved by the whole Parliament in Ed. the
thirds time, at which Parliament King John his resigning his Crown and
Kingdom of England to the Pope, being discussed, upon mature deliberation, the
Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and all the Commons resolved with one
accord that no King can put his Realm nor his people under such subjection
without their assent, and contrary to his oath.

The next argument may be urged is this, if immediately upon the death of any
King the next heir is completely and absolutely King without any essential
ceremony or act to be done, expost facto: then he that comes in as next heir
has it by descent and not by way of trust. But when a King dies, immediately
the next heir is King without any especial ceremony. ergo,

For the Minor thus I prove it, it is expressly said in Calvin's case, that the
King holds the Kingdom of England by birthright inherent by descent from the
blood Royal, whereupon succession does attend, and therefore it is usually said
to the King his Heirs and Successors, where the word Heirs is first named and
in primo Maria Dyer. 92. a. it is expressly said, that the customs are annexed to
the Crown, and the King has an inheritance in them.

In the first year of King James his reign if I mistake not; before his
Majesty's Coronation Watson and Clarke Seminary Priests, were of opinion that
his Majesty was not complete and absolute King before his Coronation: Now if
that were not Law, the minor must needs fall for then though a right to the
Crown descended, yet it was in the power of others to make him completely King
by turning his possession in Law (as it were) into an actual possession, or
else to hinder him from ragining: But you shall find it resolved (by all the
Judges of England then being) con rary to the opinion of those Priests that
presently by the descent his Majesty was completely and absolutely King without
that cerimony, and that Corronation was but a Roy^ll ornament and outward
sollemnisation of the descent: for example.

You shall find that Henry the sixth was not crowned until the eight year of
h^^ Reign: and yet diverse men before his Coronation were attain ed of treason,
which clearly proves he was King before that cerimony was performed, for if he
had not been King how could any man h^ve been attainted of treason for
treason is a breach of allegiance and if there had been n^ King there could be
no allegiance due, and ^f no ligeance had been due, no bre^ch of it could be
made, and then no treason; and this is made manifest by the reports of the 5.
6. 7. years of the same King which you may read at large in Cooks reports lib.
7. fol. 11. a.

Another argument to prove that when any King of Eng. dies, his next Heir is
King presently by descent, without any ceremony, may be this: If he should not
be King presently upon the death of the Father or Ancstour, but must stay for
some other ceremony to be done; then there would be an interregnum in Eng.
which the Laws will not suffer.

And to prove that the Laws do not suffer an inter regnum, it is easily gathered
from the case in 9. E. 4. 51. where it is said, that if the King be seized of
land by a defeaseable title, and dies seizd this descent shall toll the entry
of him that has right, which proves that he that is next King coming in as
Son, has it by descent, otherwise the entry of him that has right could not
be taken away: and it proves likewise, that he must not stay for His Majesty
till some Act or other be done, for then there would be an inter regnum till
that Act or ceremony were past, and when that Act or ceremony were past, then
he should be in (as it were) from that Act, and then the entry of him that has
right cannot be taken away, and so is Litleton in his chap. of discents.

There is likewise another case in our books, from whence you may draw the same
conclusion, viz. If the Prince commit treason or murder, he must be tried
according to Law as well as another subject, for he is but a Subject for there
can be but one King at the self same time, in the self same Kingdom: But now
if the King dies before the Prince be tried the very immediate descent of the
Crown purges him of his treason or murder, or what ever his fact be, so that
he shall not be arraigned, or tried for it.

Which case proves that he has the Crown immediately upon the descent; for if
there were any ceremony that were essential to making him King, that ceremony
might be delaid and the Prince might be attainted.

If the Disseisor of an Infant convey the Land to the King who dies seized,
this is such a descent as shall take away the entry of the Infant, and so are
the Books of 34. H. 6. 34. and 45. Ass. pl. 6. and Plowd. com. 234. which
proves clearly the descent. it is part of the oath of allegiance which is used to
this day in every Leet, That you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign
Lord King Charles and his heirs; which word heirs, proves the descent.

And thus I have showed you other arguments, which may be used to destroy the
trust: but according to my promise in the beginning, I must now show where the
fallacy and their mistake lies that use those arguments. And it lies in the
consequence; for though the King comes to the Crown by descent, yet it does
not follow that therefore he has it not by way of trust: for without doubt,
the trust descends with it and the trust is that only which he has by
descent: for, as I said before, if the King had such an estate by descent, as
they conceive he has, then he might sell the Crown, or dispose of it as he
pleased.

The Parliament did give Henry the eight power to dispose of the Crown to whom
he pleased, by his Letters Patents or last Will; but when he intended to go in
person against France, and therefore desired to have the Crown settled because
he would not break that trust his people had reposed in him; you shall find
that in 35. of that King, the Crown was settled by a Parliament then holden;
and in the Preamble of that Statute that King himself did acknowledge the trust
and confidence his people had formerly reposed in him.

And to prove farther that a trust does descend to the King of England with his
Crown I shall show how Kingoms first began, and I shall take a difference
between Kingdoms ruled by royal government, and Kingdoms of politic
governance: and that was the difference made in answer to the Prince, who
demanded how it came to pass, quod Rex unus plebem suam reguliter tantum
regere valeat, sed regi alteri potestas hujusmodi denegatur Fortescue de
laudibus legum Angliae, cap. 10. and I hope the same difference which did
satisfy the Prince, will satisfy any troublesome spirit of these times.

For the first, the Kingdom ruled by royal government, I shall show you how
it first began, as it appears by the Author last coted, cap. 12. and it was
thus; Men in times passed excelling in power, and being greedy of glory and
dignity, did many times by plain (...) subdue unto them their neighbors the
Nations adjoining, and compelled them to do them service, and to obey their
commands, which commandments afterward they decreed to be unto these people
very Laws; and by long sufferance of the same, the people so subdued, being by
their subduers defended from the injuries of others, agreed and consented to
live under the Dominion of the same their subduers, thinking it better for them
to be under the empire of one man, which might be able to defend them against
others, then to be in danger to be oppressed by all sich as would offer them
wrong by violence: and those subduers thus ruling the people unto them subdued,
took upon them to be called Rulers which our language terms Kings; reges a
regendo, eorum quoque dominatus tantum regalis dictus fuit; and their rule or
domination only was named royal or Kingly, Fortescu.

Now in such a Kingdom I believe no trust was anext to the Crown, for that King
usurpt and compelled them to obedience; and it is such a Kingdom that those who
are so violent against the Parliament do imagine this Kingdom of England to
be, or else would have it so. But outs is the Kingdom of Politic and Regal
governance, and it has raised it self into a body, whereof the King is the
head; and ut non potest caput corporis phesi ei nervos suos commutare, neque
membris suis propriae vires and propria sanguinis alimenta denegare; sic neque
rex qui est caput corporis pollitici mutare potest leges corporis illius, nec
ejusdem populi substantias proprias subtrahere, reclamuntibus eis aut invitis,
Fort. cap. 13. fol. 32.

Sicut in naturali corpore, ut dicit Philosophus, cor est primum vivens, habeus
in se sanguinem quem emittit in omnia ejus membru unde illa vegetantur and
viuunt: So in the body politic (sa th Fortesc. fol. 31.) the intent of the
people is the first lively thing having within it blood, that is to say,
politic provision for the utility and wealth of the same people, which it
deals forth and imparteth as well to the head as to all the members of the
same body, whereby the body is nourished and maintained.

So that you see hereby that our Kingdom of England is not of a Royal
Government only, neither is the Crown of so divine a temper as to enable the
King to rule by the Law within his own breast; no you see the intent of the
people is the primum vevens, which like the heart, emittit sanguinem both to
the head and all the members.

And thus the Kingdom of England out of Brutes retinue of the Trojans which he
first brought out of the coasts of Italy and Greece, first grew to a politic
and regal Dominion; and ad tutelam legis subditor^m, ac little corporum ac
bonorum, rex talis erectus. For^. 32. and the same Author goes forward, and ad
hanc potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet, quo non licet et potestate al^a
populo suo Dominari.

And see the Prince himself acknowledges as much to his Chancellor being
satisfied with the difference before taken; for in the 14. chapter of the same
Author fol. 34. says the Prince, effugasti c^ncellarie, declarationis tuae
lumine tenebras, quibus obducta erat a^^dmentis cridae: So that said he, I do
most evidently see that no Nation did ever of their own voluntary mind
incorporate themsel^es into a Kingdom for any other intent, but only to the
end, (...) thereby they might with more safety then before maintain t^^^selves
^^d enjoy their goods from such misfortunes and losses (...) ^^ey s^^od in
fear of; for if they had not bin, says he nullam ob^^^^ (...) ^^em super
ipsos rex hujusmodi: which proves without (...) di^cent of a trust.

An^ (...) further proof that our Kingdom is not of regal only, but also of
a politic governance: see Fort. fol, 25. b. where you may read word for word
what I have penned. viz. the King of England cannot alter nor change the Laws
of his Realm at his pleasure; for why? principatu namque nedum regali, sed and
pollitico, suo populo Dominat^r. And were it otherwise, the King might take
away the lives and ^states of any Subjects at his pleasure; but in our Kingdom
non stat ^ro ra^^one voluntas.

And as much may be gathered from the words of Severus the Emperor, who being
at York, and one lying prostrate at his feet c^aving pardon for some small
fact he had committed, in the midst of his fury forbore to strike, saying, it is
not my hand must govern the Empire.

And the same Emperor shortly after ended his life in the City of York with
these words, I found the State troublesome every where, and I leave it quiet
even to the Britains, and the Empire sure and firm to my children if they be
good, but unsure and weak if they be bad.

My Lord Cook in the first part of his Institutes, fol. 60. b. observes that
Littleton speaks of the Kings prerogative but twice in all his Book, and in
both places, says Cook, he makes it part of the Laws of England; so that
hence we may gather, that though the working brains of these times plead his
Prerogative to him, yet that cannot enable him to do what the Law forbids: for
his Prerogative is but what power the Law gives him, and that power cannot be
made greater without the assent of the whole Realm; Fort. fol. 40. ca. 18. and
what is the reason of this our happiness, that the King cannot make new Laws,
dam old ones without the Subjects consent, but this? because our Kingdom is not
governed with a power only royal but also politic.

Aristotle in 3. Pollitic. says, melius est civitatem regi viro optimo quam
lege optima: it is better for a City to be governed by a good King then by a
good Law. But for as much as every King is not such a man, therefore Saint
Thomas, in the Book which he wrote to the King of Cyprus of the governance of
Princes, wishes the State of a Realm to be such, that it may not be in the
Kings power to oppress his people with tyranny.

For my part I did not look upon our gracious King when I coated this; for of
himself I take him to be that vir optimus, were he not misled and drawn to
such engagements as will ruin himself, his posterity and Kingdom, if not by
those of his best Council prevented; I mean the Parliament, who are engaged
both for the safety of the Kings Majesty's person and posterity, of themselves
and the whole Kingdom, to strike all those who persuade his Majesty to do
such acts as make the Laws seem but as cobwebs, which by his Prerogotive may
be stretched, nay broken.

Some there are which Object, that the Kings Majesty has bin pleased to pass
many gracious Acts already, and therefore seeing we have so many tokens of his
good intent, why should he be doubted, or his intent questioned?

Truly the Parliament and all the rest of his Subjects, must acknowledge his
Fatherly care of them, in those Acts expressed: But if he be persuaded, nay
resolved to break those Acts again by violence, what are we the better to say
we have been happy in the making those Acts, the breach of which is ten times
a greater misery? if a Father breeds his Son well, or allows him well
whilst he lives, but when he dies, leaves him nothing whereby both he and
his children, and his childrens children may be the better, surely the care and
piety of a Father is not in him complete. So Kings, if they make part of an age
happy by governing well, or making good Laws, but at last breaks them again,
and does not leave them as Testaments, whereby a perpetuity of good may descend
to their Country; they are but mortal and transitory benefactours.

I speak not this to incense the Subject against their lawful Prince, for I
know no warrant for that: for, for his Majesty's pure self. His serious and
often protestations command my Faith, both for his maintaining our Protestant
Religion, and defense of his Subjects and their Liberttes; and I discern his
words actuated, his building or repairing of Temples, his late Proclamations
against Recusants, his excluding them his Army that will not take the oath of
Supremacy and Alleagiance, are for the first: his building of Ships in these
late times, and his passing the Act for the continuance of this Parliament, are
testimonies for the second: only the danger is, if those malignant spirits
about him, should prevail with him (which I hope is impossible) to add ill
endings to those good Acts, by changing the use they were pretended for.

Others there are, that grant the KING has it by way of trust, but yet Object,
that by Law a trust cannot be countermanded; and therefore Sir John Hothams
keeping of Hull was against Law.

To which I answer thus; I confess that by law a trust cannot be
countermanded, but yet I shall take a difference between the trust of a private
man's estate, and a trust of a kingdom; and if this difference should not stand
good, see what a mischief would follow; and argumentum ab inconvenients is of
great force in law, if that were a good argument, then our case in short were
but thus:

We have entrusted the King with the whole Kingdom, and this trust cannot be
countermanded by us again, and if not then the Kings estate in the kingdom,
is as good as absolutely his own in Fee, and if so, then he may do what he
will with the Crown: and if this mischief were remediless, what estate or
property had any man in his own fortunes, when they all lay open to so great a
hazard.

Again, though for the avoydance of that mischief, it might be thought
countermandable; yet that Act of Sir John Hotham is not a countermande but
rather a strengthening of it: for by common presumption, the King being but one
cannot pry into the actions and intents of all those that have procured his
employments so well as his Parliament may, for plus vident oculi quam oculus:
and therefore they finding such treachery and falsenesse in them (which the
King either does not see, or else is wilfully impolliticke) thought it fit (as
it was most seasonable indeed) to employ another whose faithfulness might
prevent what they intended against both King and Kingdom; to which truth so
soon as his Majesty shall give credit, and by that means they and the Kingdom
be secured, his trust will appear the same it ever was, and he more able to
discharge that trust reposed in him.

Others there are that do object the authority of Parliament to be much, but
this is not binding which this Parliament does now, because the King does not
join with them; for it is no complete Parliament the head of that body being
absent.

But I shall prove by presidents, and reason, upon which law is partly grounded
that the Parliament have that power in them which they so carefully make use of.

I confess my Lord Cook in the first part of his Institues, thus derives the
word Praerogativa: a prae id est ante and rogare, and says he, it carries with
it this sense, when an Act is passed by both houses of Parliament, before it
can be made a Law they must praerogare the Kings consent; but this dirivation
of the word does, not prove that the King has an absolute power of denying to
pass any Bill that is brought him for the good of the Kingdom: but it
signifies on his part as well, that he cannot of himself enact any thing or lay
any tax upon his Subject, but he must praerogare too, asking the consent of the
Parliament.

Besides, though what they do cannot be binding by way of Act without his
consent, yet by way of Ordinance it may; in term. Micael. 21. E. 3. fol. 60. b.
In a case touching the exemption of the Abbey of Saint Edmons Berry from the
Bishop of Norwich, there was an Ordinance made by the Parliament without the
King, and if you turn to the book you shall find these words in the
judgment fuit ordeigne, which you may read likewise in Seldens title of
honor: But if I should admit that there were no law to prove their Act legal,
yet sure I am there is good reason for it.

As first from the words of the writ nostro quibusdam arduis rebus et gotiis
urgentibus statu et diffentionem regni nostri Angliae concernentibus; which
words rebus arduis et urgentibus negotiis proves they have power upon urgent
occasions to do that which at the time of their doing it, they had no law to
enable them thereto; for their calling by writ is authorty to enable them to
sit in Parliament, and then their consent is law enough to bind us, and
therefore if the Parliament do grant Subsidies by way of Ordinance and the
Kings hand is never put to it, yet it is sufficient enough to force a Payment
from us because the Countries are bound by Indentures sealed to the Sheriff at
the time of their election to stand to what they shall consent to in Parliament
whom they have chosen: but by way of Act6 it cannot force us, because it cannot
be pleaded as an Act but that upon a demurrer it will be overruled.

Now if the Parliament could do nothing but what they had a law to enable them
to do, what need the Country seal Indentures to wand to what they do, when as
that law the Parliament went by, would force them to obey it without that waxen
ceremony.

Besides if the Parliament had not power to do an Act, to the doing of which
there was no law at the time of their summons to enable them; then what need a
Parliament be called at any time, for then any inferior Court had had as much
authority (upon the matter) as that: but I conceave necessity is the law they
are to look at, fot they need not defer the doing of that which is for the
Kingdoms good, for want of a law or a president to steer by; for if in times
past the grave lawmakers had not done things according to their profound
judgment, and as they saw fit without Presidents, how should any presidents
have been left to future ages, and to this present Parliament? but surely they
did, and surely this Parliament may, unless any one can prove the power of
Parliament to be abated, and less now then in former times.

I agree if a Parliament should assume to themselves that power, to sway every
thing and never ask the Kings consent, it were an abridgement of that
prerogative the King has in him by law; but there are many humble Petitions
full of submission and alleagiance to his Majesty that can prove this
Parliament not guilty; were they not adjudged Traitors without trial: But
again, if the King forsake them, and deny to pass those Bills they bring him
for the good of the Kingdom, I think necessity enables, nay commands them to
do it without him.

I shall prove it all by one example, the like I hope shall not be heard of in
our days; has no man heard of a king deposed by a Parliament? Surely yes, and
what law had they for it that did it besides convenience and the common good?
and surely they did it without the Kings consent too, or at least he consented
whether he would or no, for if he had had an absolute power of denying, and by
that could have frustrated their endeavors, he would never have consented to
his own deposing; which proves strongly that they may do that which is for the
good of the kingdom without the King if he refuse to join with them.

But this I desire not, and the Parliament intend it not as they have declared
themselves in several Declarations and Petitions; and I hope the most
ignorantly violent of the vulgars, and the greatest zealots of any Sect what
ever, will wish so much good to our kingdom, as that it may long be governd by
this our gracious King Charles and his posterity, and that he may soon be free
from those cruel engagements and inconveniences which the malignant party has
drawn him into. This is my heart prayer, only I used that great argument to
prove a lesser, to argue a mejori ad minus, for omn^ majus continet in se minus.

FINIS.

