A Bloody Fight in the NORTH On Monday last July 17. 1648.

12000 Scots with Duke Hambleton pursued Major General Lambert to Appleby, and
wounded Col. Harrison, a Member of the House of Commons, killed Captain
Crumwels Lieutenant, and others.

With the loss of a Collonell, and 300 Officers and Soldiers.

AND A List of the particulars on both sides, With the Taking of Appleby Town
by the Scots.

July 25 LONDON Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley.
1648.

A BLOODY FIGHT IN The NORTH on Monday last, July 17. 1648.
Sir,
I Wrote to you by Captain Lisley, but could not get time then to send you the
Copies of Duke Hamiltons letter to the Major General of the 6th of July, dated
at Annan, and of his answer thereunto but I doubt not but you have seen them
both ere this time. Since which, upon our certain information that the Scots
were in England, the Major General sent a letter to the Duke, and has
received an answer from him, a copy of both which I have here enclosed sent
you.

The Scots and Langdale together, we hear are about 12000. the Duke commands
in chief both English and Scots.

We have sent for such Forces as we expect out of the rest of the Northern
Counties to come up to us, which we hope will not be inconsiderable, and will
not be long before they come to us, and when they come, we shall, I think,
visit our enemy, unless we have command from the Parliament to the contrary.

With my Lord Dukes Trumpet came another Messenger with a large Declaration
from the Committee of Estates in Scotland, and from the said Committee had
lines to the King and to the Parliament, and many private lines directed with
ciphers, which that key perhaps may open, We have sent an Officer with the said
Messenger, and have sent all the private lines enclosed together to the
Parliament, with the said ciphers, By which we think there will (if they be
wise in discovery) appear much of design*

We hear there were much discontent among Langdales Forces in regard the Scots
would do little, and put the English to the duty, and front, and themselves
lie behind, which the Cavaliers would not be gulled in, and therefore made the
Scots march in the Van.

Upon the advance of the Scots toward Penrith, Major General Lambert having
no Garrison thereabouts, retreated to Appleby, where he gave order for the
securing of the Castle, and to make good the Town with what security might be.

On Monday July 17 Major General Lambert, ordered Collonell Harrison to keep a
pass at Appleby bridge, with a Guard of Horse, and put in a Regiament of Foot
into the Town, and sent the rest of the Foot of his Army to quarters
Southward, and six Regiaments of Horse were ordered for their out-guards,

That day Duke Hamilton with the Scots Forces, and Sir Marmaduke Langdales
joined together which made about 12000 marched up toward Appleby with their
whole body.

The Scots came up about noon that day with their van, within a few miles of
Appleby, and their whole Army following in a body.

They had a Design to have then surprised our Forces in Appleby. But the
waters were so high, by reason of much rain; that had lately fallen, that they
could not come over the brooks as at other times.

Colonel Harrison charged the Scots at Appleby towns end, and led on his men
himself about two of the clock in the afternoon, but the Scots came so thick
upon him that he was exceedingly overpowered.

And at last (after a valiant and stout charge) they had so hemmed in Col.
Harrison, that he was forced to surrender himself prisoner.

But his Soldiers seeing themselves like to have no quarter by reason of their
cutting of Col. Harrison, rather then to see so gallant a man put to the sword,
they resolved as one man to die presently rather then to suffer it.

Hereupon they fell upon the Scots with such resolution, that they slew diverse
of them and rescued Collonell Harrison from them. And by that time the Foot in
Appleby Town having taken an Alarm, came up, and relieved the Horse, whereby
the Scots were beaten off, and after this 60 of them were surprised in a Barn,
all put to the Sword by Major General Lamberts forces. This fight lasted
until ten of the clock at night, there having bin many slain, and wounded. And
at last, the business was so ordered, Col. Harison made an honorable retreat,
having left a sufficient strength in Appleby Castle, which it is hoped will be
sufficient to keep out the Scots.

Liverpoole 21 July, 1648.
SIR,
ON Monday last Major General Lambert, did for ease of his men and their
Quarters, send a great party of his Foot, and six Regiaments of Horse from
Appleby, about four or five miles. Afterward, that day the Scots army
supposed to be about 10000 joined with Langdales Forces, endeavored to have
surprised our forces at Appleby, where Col. Harrison and only one Regiament of
horse had the guard that day. But the water being up by the rain which fell on
Sunday last. Col. Harrison secured the Bridge, and sent parties both horse and
foot over the Bridge, the enemies Dragoones played sore upon our Fort. The
fight lasted from about two of the clock, till near ten at night, with extreme
hard service, but the enemies courage was so cooled with the round check which
the Lancashire men gave them at the first charge, after our men were relieved;
that the Scots continually fled off with loss: God gloriously appeared for us,
we lost not above 3 or 4 men, the Enemy very many, and abundance of Arms. Col:
Harison is sore wounded, but as is reported to me, not mortally, my
intelligence says further, that the Enemy fought very cowardly, threw down
their arms and run away, and night coming, the enemy drew off, and lodged on
a Moore, our men at break of day marched away to join with our other forces.

Manchester in Lancashire July 21. 1648
A List of the particulars of the fight at Appleby, between the Scots and
English Armies, on Monday July the 17. 1648.
Of the Scots loss;
1 Colonel slain. 15 Officers and Soldiers slain in Appleby, 200 and odd
(said to be) slain afterward. 60 slain in a Barn, 300 Wounded. 50 Taken
prisoners, 300 Arms taken.
Of the English loss.
Collonell Harrison wounded in three places. Captain Crumwels Lieutenant slain,
5 slain at Appleby. Diverse Officers and Soldiers wounded.
FINIS.

