A BLOODY FIGHT IN SCOTLAND, BETWEEN THE English Irish, and Scots, AND A total
Rout given to the Adverse party in that Kingdom, 1500. taken prisoners and
dispersed, 120 killed upon the place, and many wounded.

ALSO, The Resolution of Lieutenant General David Lesley, concerning the
Parliament of England, and the ARMY.

TOGETHER With a great Fight at Sea, betwixt the Parliament, and the Princes
Fleet; And the further proceedings of the forces in Lancashire: With Major
General Ashtons Letter to the Parliament.

Published by Authority.

Imprinted at London for R. W. 26. March, 1649.

A Great FIGHT In SCOTLAND.
Between the English, Irish, and the Scots, and a total Rodt given to the
adverse party in that Kingdom, 1500 taken prisoners, and dispersed, 120 killed
upon the place, and many wounded.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last, of the 2. of this instant, here has happened a great alteration
in this kingdom, and those who seemed powerful and potent, are now moultted
away, and come to nothing; for upon Lieu. Genesis Lesleys advancing toward them
with 3000. horse and foot, diverse of the adverse party desisted from any
further military prosecution, and deserted the engagement for Charles the
second; others resolved to persist therein, and to give Battle, preparing
themselves to receive the Parliaments Forces: But upon the Lieut. Generals near
approach, he sent a summons to Col. Frizle (the commander in chief) to come in,
and desist from any further acts of hostility, and to know by what authority
and commission, they entered into this engagement; who returned answer, That he
acted nothing, but what he had commission for from his dread sovereign, Charles
the second, and that if he made any opposition, he would dispute it by the
sword, and immediately (during the time of treaty) sent forth a party of horse
and foot, who fell upon some of the Lieutenant Generals out quarters, killed
some, and took some prisoners: whereupon the parliaments forces being sore
enraged, fell upon them with great violence, routed them took and scattered
1500 (upon articles) the chief of them are to be brought prisoners to this
City, the meaner sort to depart to their own homes, Col. Frizle escaped, and
fled to Endernesse with about 500 men, leaving about 120 dead in the field. The
aforesaid Lieut. Genesis has declared, that he will use his utmost endeavors for
preiervation of the union between both kingdoms, and that he is resolved not to
engage against the parliament of England and the army, which causes great
triumph and joy amongst the well affected party.

Edinburgh 14 March, 2648.
The further proceedings of the forces in Lancashire.
Sir,
The distractions in these parts begin to increase daily, and the coals of
Enmity and Discord are now kindling again; for the adverse party grow both
numerous and potent, and the Lancashire Soldiery exceeding insolent and
stubborn, rejecting and disobeying the orders of his Excellency, and refusing
to disband; and instead of yielding obedience thereunto, brake forth into
passions of contempt, reviling against the parliament, and in a most rebellious
manner, laying their hands upon the hilt of their swords, said; They would
rather die, then disband, until they had their full Arrears, and a good
Government erected and set up within this Nation. They are now fortifying
themselves in several places of this County; at the time of their late
Randezvouz they were not above 500 horse and foot, but since their Rebellious
declaring against the parliament they are increased to a far greater number,
above 2000 more being added to them within these few days, who make in all
about 3000 horse and foot, the Clergy (who have been the most isntrumental in
our late troubles and distractions) sides with them, and preaches much in
their pulpits for the propagation and advancement of their Design, the spirits
of Malignity are ready to unite, and diverse other come in daily to their
assistance: if a speedy course be not taken to allay and quench the future
issue of this present flame, in all probability it will suddenly break forth,
and show its self in streams of blood throughout this Northern Climate; for we
are now in great fear of new and present troubles, God avert them or sanctify
them to us, which is the earnest prayer of him, who remains

Lancaster 15 March 1648. Your most obliged friend, J. Thorney.
Postscript. Sir, Col. Ashton endeavors the composing of all differences in
these parts, and has sent a letter to the parl. declaring and protesting to
submit to all Orders of Parliament, tending to the settling of peace and
happiness within this bleeding Nation, and in order thereunto desires moneys
for his men that are to be disbanded.



A Message from Holland.
SIR,
THe Prince is here yet, but his departure expected, and by many longed for: I
cannot certainly inform you, whether it be into Scotland, or into Ireland, he
is expected at both. Sir George Radcliffe is sent after Gen: Riven, to hasten
the Swedish Army into their quarters: there are 6000 men at Necopia, ready to
put to Sea, and 1200 at Lodusia, waiting only for the melting of the Ise: and
the Duke of Helsigna their General.

There is at Hamborough, waiting only for a wind, great store of Soldiers:
6000 Danes are raising in Denmark, but upon what design is not as yet known,
there is another great Army raising by the Zwitzers, wherein are many persons
of great eminency, who command in chief, viz. seven Dukes, nine Marquesses,
seventeen Earls, and two or three and twenty Lords. That of the Danes, two
Dukes, seven Earls, three Marquesses, and fifteen or sixteen Lords. These are
great numbers, and it is to be feared, will do more hurt to our already too
poor Country, then they can do good. And yet we must have very many more, as
well of the barbarous Irish, as of the beggarly Scot, and the both proud and
foolish French.

We hear certainly, the peace is concluded on in France: and by an express
from P. Rupert, the Prince of Wales is assured of a strong Hold in Ireland; for
the two Princes Rupert and Maurice, are at Sea with seventy two Ships, and
Frigots, and their Randezvouz the twelfth of March, are to be within nine
Leagues of Dublin, at the Castle of Burkley.

The sixth of this instant, the Lord of Ormond, General, the Lord of
Clanrickard, Lieutenant General; the Lord Tasse, General of the Horse, the
Lord Muskerry, Commissary; and Inchiquin; and Preston, with five thousand men,
to meet Ormond and his fifteen thousand, at Pitmere, twenty miles from Dublin.

I Will assure you, this is the Princes intelligence: and if I could have got the
Copy of the Proclamation, sent to the Lord of Ormond, you should have had it;
But take the heads. First, he shows, that he has no desire to commence his
Reign in blood, and that he will freely pardon those now holding any Castle or
Garrison for the Parliament of England; That he fights only to settle himself
in the Throne of his late Father, and a deal to this purpose. This was sent to
the Lord of Ormond, by Collonell Buckworth, to be proclaimed as a Pardon to all
those that will falsify the trust reposed in them by the Parliament of England.

Hague, March 16. 1648.
A Letter from Plymouth, containing the particulars of a great Fight at Sea.
SIR,
ON the 17. of this instant, here arrived a Frigate, who upon her casting
anchor, immediately manned a long Boat to the shore, the Mariners purporting
that there has been lately a great Fight at Sea between Captain Moulton and
prince Rupert near the Western point, and that after a bloody fight, it pleased
God to crown the said capt. Moulton with Victory, and to sink two of the
enemies ships, viz. the Leopard (formerly called by the name of the Kings
Royal Swallow) carrying 40 pieees of Ordnance, and the Patrick of Ireland
carrying 24 This fight continued for the space of two hours, being with great
gallantry disputed by both parties; and after the exchange of several dreadful
Vollies, the enemy perceiving two of their ships bequeathing themselves to the
merciless waves, held off, and with a fair gaile lanched forth into the Ocean:
it is said the loss is very great on both sides, many being slain and wounded,
yet the Mariners in the said Frigate make mention, that the loss of the enemy
does far exceed ours, by reason of above 80 being drowned at the sinking of the
aforesaid ships. Captain Moultons Squadron consisted of about twelve ships,
prince Ruperts four and twenty. Some of ours are exceedingly torn and battered,
but since repaired and mrde whole: its further intimated, that in this fight
there were between two and three hundred killed and wounded, the princes men
begin to moulter away, and die apace, the bloody flux, and other diseases
being very brief amongst them (a just judgment to all perfidious Christians)
if the parliaments Summers Fleet be but expedited to Sea, and timely assistance
sent unto capt. Molton, no doubt, but he will be able to give a good account of
this Summers Expedition. Oh! what a sad thing it is, that a handful should
perish at Sea, when thousands may be spared at Land.

Plymouth 21 March, 1648. Imprimatur,

The: Jennings.



Reader, There is a mistake in the foregoing page, viz. the word Leopard, for
Swallow.

FINIS.

