A BLOODY FIGHT AT BLACK-WATER IN IRELAND: WHERE Almost 5000. Protestants are
put to the sword by the Rebels. With a List of the particulars; A Relation of
the manner; and the Names of the chief.

And a Declaration concerning the Archbishop of York, and Diverse Gentlemen,
and others, that deserted the King, protesting against the Proceedings of the
Parliaments Enemies.

And how Major-Generall MITTON has taken from the Lord BYRON two
Demi-Culverins, two Murdering-Pieces, 200. Arms, killed some, and taken diverse
Prisoners, and good store of Provisions and Ammunition.

Printed by the Original Papers, and Entered into the Register Book, and
published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by Jane Coe, June the 15. 1646.

NO Irish Rebels are yet come into Wales. Major General Monro of the Scots
forces had a Randezvoves on Wednesday June 3. at Blaces of 500. Horse and
Foot, and marched the next day toward Banburb, where Owen-Ro-On^ale Mac-Art
was quartered with about 9000. Horse and Foot, On Friday June 5. he faced the
Rebels near the black-water, and charged them that evening with our horse they
amberscaded the woods; but we beat them away, and pursued them to their Body:
That night was a very bloody fight: but the Rebels exceeding the number of the
British, and being well armed and mounted they routed first our Horse, then our
Foot, though with some loss on their part, Monro came to Belfast with only
6. Horse: The Lord Conwayes son escaped and some others, but most were lost.
There is great need to hasten supplies least Ireland be totally routed. Let
not England quarrel with friends (because some Clergy would set the Kingdom in
a new flame) but cherrish those who act for our Peace.

H List of that bloody fight at Black-Water in Ireland, June the 5. 1646. by
the Irish Rebels againtst Major General Monro:
7. Piece of Ordnance taken, 2. of them small. 5000. Arms, All they had
almost. 4000. Foot, and upward, killed taken and Routed. 600. Horse routed:
some killed and taken. Lord Mount-gomery,, Lord Ards killed or taken. Lord
Blany sore wounded, and taken, and dead. Almost all the Foot Officers and
Soldiers put to the sword.
AMongst the many wonderful ways and works of Gods providence of late for
the encouragement of his Servants, daunting the adversaries, and carrying on
his own great Work against the malice and multitude of the Enemies, it should
secure none of the least, but rather most remarkable, which has been done of
late in North Wales by that poor, and two much neglected and despised power,
under that valient, active, and selfe-denying Gentleman, Colonel Thomas
Mytton, Major General for those Counties; who as he was by the wisdom of
the Parliament thought fit and chosen out, and designed to that Service, so do
many singular qualifications and indeed all the passages of Gods providence in
his Service seem to proclaim him a man appointed by God himself also for that
employment, and to have your Joshuas promise made him, hat no Enemy shall be
able to stand before him; to instance only in this late business of Carnarven
concerning which (that God may have his due praise) these perticulors seem
remarkable.

1. The discouragements which might have hindre his advance, if he had
consulted with flesh and blood, as namely the great work he had newly
undertaken at Denbigh, the besieging whereof required his full strength that
might be sparred for his other Sieges.

2. The Regiments being near to Carnarven 30. miles from any place of
Retraite, and Conway a Garrison of the enemies in the midway betwixt him and
his main Body.

3. The number of the Enemies against whom he was to march being 250. Foot,
and 50. Horse, beside Gentlemen as was reported.

4. The quality of their Soldiers being Lathamites Beestoniers, and such
expert and active Soldiers as the L. Byron could procure, or England, or
Ireland would afford

5. The desperate condition of their Field Marshall General the Lord Byron, who
therefore being by the Honorable Parliament exempted in all lykelihood would
fight it out to the last man.

6. The want of pay for his poor Soldiers who (notwithstanding) the voate of
the Honorable Houses, and diverse Letters from the Committee of the Kingdoms
have received little pay for many Months bygone, the good hand of God
carrying him above all difficulties, and making way for his march raising up
the Spirit both of frineds and foes, in a wonderful manner to contribute aid
unto his enterprise, for God had preserved one principal Instrument. viz. Mr.
Thomas Glyn who in all these trials appeared Parliament prooffe, who having
great power, in those parts did by his invitation prevail much for the
Generals advance. 2 God incline the hearts of some who had been Commissioners
of Array, and accordingly yield to promise assistance to his work. 3. But
principally the confidence the General had of help from Heaven, and this
assurance gained out of former experiences which causes him cheerfully to set
upon the work as follows.

He drew out his Leagure at Denbigh a party of about 300. Horse and Foot, and
led them in his own person advancing near Conway a strong hold of the Enemies,
near which place they took 11. prisoners marching, etc.

Yea my Lord of York, was very zealous to promote this work, keepeing his
house Penryne a Garrison against the Lord Byron for which he suffered many
bitter invectives from the said Lord, Sir William Williams also was very
forward to afford to afford the General all accommodations fortifying also his
house against the Lord Byron, marching from Abarystwidd with a pass to
Carnarven but falsifying the same they went for Conway, two whereof were Irish
which the General caused to be hanged immediately according to the Ordinance in
that kind.

From thence they advanced toward Penrin, where the General and Officers were
kindley entertained and feasted, (being Wednesday the 29. of April) where the
enemy was ready to entertain them, having lined their hedges, ditches, to
obstruct their passage, and furnished the Subburbs with a great strength both
of Horse, and Foot, the General having viewed their condition, divided his
Body into a parts, leading one of them himself toward the high Rock, and the
Subburbs on the North-side of the Town, where the chief strength of the enemy
lay, but the dispute continved not long; for though the enemy came out
furiously, yet the gallant behavior of that small party which the General
(wherein the Lancashire forces under Captain Aspin^al and captain Birch must
not lose their due praise) speedily forced them from the hedges to the houses,
and from the houses without out the walls to the Town within, not permitting
them to finish their Fireworks, about which they very busily set themselves in
their retreat, viz. to fire all the houses without the walls.

1 Gods powerful presence in the disposition and preservation of the Leagure,
for the Situation of the Castle was such, as forced the division of the
Generals small strength, viz. The Land forces on the North side the water in
the Suburbs, and the Generals men on the other side the River at Godallen, by
which means there was near two miles (the ordinary way) to each others Guard,
and ^herfore could admit no relief in case either parties should be engaged.

2 Though the Enemy took the advantage of this disunion, and made two desperate
sallyes upon the Generals men: the former the 2. of May: the latter the 7. yet
was then God seen in the Mount, for in the former toward day break they issued
out at a low water (for that was their only opportunity) 80 Foot, and 40 Horse;
but such was the vigilancie of the Officers, or rather the care of Isreal's
Watchmen, that they were ready to entertain them forced them back, took three
Soldiers, and one Captain Birkit, being Captain-Lieutenant to the Lord Byron,
and the considerablest Captain in his Garaison. In the second fall Horse in the
day time, with a resolution to cut off all that small party but God so
strengthened the hearts and hands of his Servants Captain Evans and Cornet
Tongue with their men that within the space of half an hour they forced their
retraite having 5. slain on the ground, whereof one was a Lieutenant, and
another an Ensign, and 16. prisoners, among whom were 3. Irish, and therefore
hanged according to the Ordinance.

3. That although (for prevention of their relief by fresh water, or other
provision by Sea) the General was forced to erect a Sconce upon the Sea Bank,
and draw trenches down to the Sea, out of which his men might fire securely;
yet God did so wonderfully guard his men that neither Soldier nor Pioneer
(though working night and day for diverse weeks together) lost a drop of blood.

4. God marvellously changing the hearts of the People in those parts, where
was wont to be the Kings recruiting place, but now a mavelous compliance of
the Country with the General, whose affections he has gained by his fair
deportment toward them, and his tender care over them, least violence should
be offered to their persons or goods; of which compliance the Enemy in the
Castle took special notice, and scornfully styled them Bumpkins, and many times
would (from the walls) rail against the Bumpkins, and damme themselves,
saying, if the Bumpkins had been as true to them, as they proved to Mitton, he
had never come to besiege them.

Their affections further are observed by their raising a complete Company of
able men, and presenting them to the General, and are now under the Command of
Captain Dawson, with addition to his Forces, gave liberty to some of his own to
draw off from the Leagure, and lie about Abber to restrain the insolency of the
Conway youths who did raven and spoil all the Country over; and this
occasioneth an Express of Gods goodness further to the Generals forces, there
being about 30 horse commanded by Cornet Grant, belonging to Colonel Michael
Jones, the noble Governor of Chester. On Thursday the Fourth of this instant
June, about one of the clock in the morning the principal strength of Horse
and Foot out of Convay were discovered to have gathered all the Cattle and
horses about Abber, and hasting with them toward their Den, which the Cornet
having notice of, be^urred himself very faithfully and gallantly, fell so
fiercely on the Enemies horse, that he put them to a retreat, and pursued them
to the walls of Conway, and in his return rescued the Cattle and Goods, and 42
Soldiers, and brought them prisoner to Bangor.

Herein lastly God was seen in this work that although the town and castle were
impregnable, the Enemy therein so considerable, having store of Provision and
ammunition for 3 Months longer, yet God forced them to stoop and yield up the
town and castle to the hands of the General for the service of the Parliament
upon Saturday the 6 of this instant June, upon the Articles for that purpose.
Where in the Castle or Town were found two Demiculverins, two murdering
Pieces. 200. Arms, and great storo of Ammunition, and Provision as above said,
and amongst their booties we must not miss the Lancashire Bear-ward and his
great bear who had a Petition from the Lord Byron and little for free puarter
for himself and his beast, very forme^^^ drawn in Parchment.

FJNJS

