THE Condemned Man's REPRIEVE, OR Gods Love Tokens, flowing in upon the Heart of
WILLIAM BLAKE, a penitent Sinner, giving him Assurance of the pardon of his
Sins, and the Enjoyment of Eternal Happiness, through the Merits of Christ
his Savior. Recommended by him (being a condemned Prisoner for Manslaughter
within the Statute) unto his Sister, and bequeathed unto her as a Legacy.

Galathians 6. 14. 17. God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world. LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop, Anno Dom. 1653.

The condemned Man's Reprieve.
Gods tokens of Love, sealed and locked up in the heart of a Saint, by the
Spirit of God, with the key of Love: The riches of Gods grace flowing in upon
the soul of a Saint, expressed with joy and thankfulness to his abillity,
finding himself unable to speak what sweet taste, what infinite consolation, he
finds in Christ Jesus.
What tempests! what fiery darts of Satan have been thrown at me! what
wounding of conscience! what flames of Hell fire flashing in my face upon
remembrance of my sins, which I have acknowledged to my God, in prayers and
tears! how long did I pray and desire others to pray for me, before I could
find comfort! how long did the Devil lead me away captive in sins which I
knew not to be sin, when I thought I had comfort, and it was no true comfort!
till thou O my most lust and Loving God did by the convincing power of thy
Spirit, discover to thy poor creature his own emptiness, and vilde condition
by nature, I had both self love and spiritual pride within me; how willingly
would the Devil have posted me to Hell with those sins, had not thou, O
my God, humbled me, and made me see my self in the looking glass of thy Word,
with thy Spirit, I was mere vanity, as the dust that flees away! I confess
to thee (my most just God) my repentance was not true, my sorrow and tears thou
regardest not, because I was self, till thou threwest me down in my self, and
made me humble; I perceive thou delightedst not in me, nor had I such
delight as now, (I bless thy Name) I do find; and do here set down in writing
to the praise of thy Name, to the exalting the eternal infinite mercies of thee
my Eternal Loving God in Jesus Christ; living in me to the sole praise of thy
Name: how long was I under the spirit of bondage! how long did I fear the grand
enemy of mankind the Devil! but Lord thou had compassion upon me when I was
afar off, and how sweetly at last in the midst of tears, and groans, did
thou come and refresh my fainting soul with a still, low, but sweet voice,
Son be of good choar, thy sins are forgiven thee: how often Lord have thou
turned my tears of sorrow into tears of joy! what comfort have thou given me
in my prayers, when I found by faith in thee, comfort from thee! how have thou
strangly, and powerfully, with faith in the Lord Jesus taught me to pray unto
thee, with thine own Spirit! how has my soul often melted into tears from the
apprehensions of thy Love, and many manifest tokens of thy Love! thou have put
my tears into thy bottle, my heart makes an ekko, as thou emptiest it, so thou
fillest it again, and every heart-tear sounds a heart-filling joy, Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted: oh what a calm do I feel in my
soul in my meditacion of thee! and yet Lord, when I look back upon the World,
and my own natural thoughts and consultacions with flesh and blood, what rough
and tempestious waves, do arise in my mind! but Lord I trust in thee, and did I
not constantly servently call aloud to thee in my prayers, ( Lord help me or I
perish) it were impossible I should be saved: and how could I find such joy in
tribulacion, did not thou keep up my heart by true saving Faith in thee my
God, in and through Jesus Christ the true consolacion of my poor soul, in this
weak creature?

O my God, I cannot express thy Love to my poor soul, it is infinite! I am but
finite, I can but wonder, and not enough, thou breathest into me full streams
of thy Love: how does my soul earnestly desire to empty it self in thee! the
more I express to thee, the more thou fillest me, how lovingly do thou
refresh my soul with thy blessed Spirit! and how blessedly my soul yields to
the love of thee my Love, by thy Love in me: my Love, my Joy what melody do I
hear! what sweet low music, does thy Spirit sound in my heart! O that thou
would make it an Instrument, that it live yet till it breath forth its
sound, and praises to thy Name: name me for one of thy faithful servants to
whom thou intendest to say, well done my good and faithful servant: Lord not
my will, but thy Will be done by me thy poor, and unworthy servant, on Earth,
as it is in Heaven, Lord I am thine, do with me what thou will, Lord let me
hear thy voice, let me know it, that I may run willingly if thou call,
presently let me be ready with my wedding garment, to meet thee sweet Jesus, if
thou bid me stay, give me patience, let thy Will be done by me, in me, with me,
do what thou will Lord I am thine, command willingness in me to obey thee in
all thy Commands, command what thou will my faith is such in thee, thou will
enable me; thou will not forsake them that trust in thee, Lord my trust is
wholly in thee, Lord thou know I am feeble, and weak, but thou art strong
and powerful, oh my God uphold me with thine Almighty power, that I fall not
from thee: I am vilde and impure, mutable, but oh my God thou art holy, and
just, pure, unchangable immutably good, my chiefest good; my God I am
uncertain, but thou art certainly my most mercyful God: my ways are not like
thy ways: O that thou would direct my feet according to the revealed Will
of thee my God, but (O my God) I have not kept thy Statutes, I have walked out
of the way in the Wilderness of sin, but (sweet Jesus) thou sweetly tellest me
thou art the way, the truth, and the Life, I will therefore lay hold on thee,
thou have promised me thy Love; I am thine, stay me, I am sick: thou art my
life, comfort me, or I shall die, warm my soul that it cool not, cherish me my
Love, my heart will elce fayl me, O God make me constant, faithful, as thou
art faithful, give me more golden apples of thy Love; give, that I may give
thee the praise of thy Love, give me yet more of the riches of thy grace, that
I may be liberal to others, as thou art liberal to me, express more of thy
Love to me, that I may extol thee in my expressions to others, who are thy
Saints and Servants, who are part of my life, thou have made us one in thee and
thou art one in us, thou art the Vine, we but branches, O make us fruitful,
water our hearts, bathe our souls in the Ocean of thy Love, open the Fountain
of thy Love, that we may swim pleasantly in the streams of thy Love, till we
come to thee the water of Life, the head Spring of all our joy, with thee for
evermore.

O my God, what joy do I already see by the eye of my Faith! I know not where
I am; I see but dim light, but my comfort is, I shall come to more glorious
light, I shall one day see thee perfectly, enjoy thee more fully; I feel the
reflexes and the glittering Sunbeams of thy Love sweetly warming my soul; my
eyes are watery with looking up to thee, the very apprehension of thy Beauty,
the Sunbeams of thy Love force tears from my eyes, thou art the cause I
weep, and joy of my weeping, thou make me weep with thy Love, I am sick with
thy Love, and thou healest me with it, thou emptiest and fillest me, thou
throwest me down, and liftest me up, how does thy Love play with my soul! and
how does my soul play and delight it self with thy Love! my Love, my Joy, hide
not thy self from me, but hide me in thee, let me find thee always in me,
that I may always find my self in thee; let me hear thy voice pronouncing
me fair, then shall I enjoy all thy hidden treasures, all thy vast
possessions, all thy sparkling Beauty, glorious Holiness, divine Wisdom! make
sure to me thy promises, thy all-in-all in me, that I may be all in thee, who
am thine: What need I fear, that have thee for my Defense, that have made me
more then a Conqueror through thee, therefore I shall want nothing; who shall
lay any thing to my charge, being thou have freed me from my sins? what should
daunt me, or discourage me, that do enjoy thy Love? thou possessest my soul,
and defendest me from my enemies with thy power: What shall separate me from
thee, who art my God, and I am thy creature? the Law cannot pronounce me
cursed, for my Savior has kept it for me, and so pronounces me blessed; I am
no more my own, I am Christ's, and he is mine, he died for me, he has
mortified sin in me, he has subdued my sins in me, I find no more pronenesse
to sin, my desires are made conformable to thine, I desire no longer to live
in my self, but in thee my Christ; I regard not iniquity in my heart, the love
of my Christ makes me loath my self and my base corruptions, I have a base
esteem of my self, I have a perfect hatred of sin, that I see lives in me, I
live not in it; the death of my Beloved that once died for me, has mortified
my sins, they have no rule over me, my Love, my Christ is my Ruler by his
Spirit, I can accept of no other Guide; though sin be in me, yet I am out of
my sins in my Christ.

O World, O Flesh, O Devil, let me alone, you have nothing to do with me,
let me serve the Lord my God, for I am his, I was yours too long, get you gone,
I command you in the name of my beloved Christ; though it be true that I did
often transgress the Law, yet my Savior he has pleaded for me, he has
procured a pardon for all my sins, and sealed it, he has set his hand to it,
and has put it safe locked up with the key of his Love, in my heart by his
Spirit, all the Devils in Hell can never get it from me; I fear not, you can
but kill my body, you can do no more; the Lord will raise me up again at his
coming, and then my corruptible body will be made incorruptible, and this
body which is mortal shall be made immortal, and glorious; then will this
his Spirit which bids me write, here come again and own me, by the virtue of
my Beloved shall I be raised up again to meet the Lord my God, with joy and
rejoyceing, to the praise and glory of his great and holy Name; this is true,
for Christ himself (in whom only I trust for Salvacion) has told me so,
whatever you plead against me it is to no purpose, for I have a righteous
Advocate at Gods right hand; nay further, I have Gods discharge within mine own
heart, which is my acquittance, you have nothing to require (O Law) but death
the wages of sin, that pray take whenever it pleases God you shall have
it, as for my soul my God by his free Grace has clasped it in his arms of
mercy, I am his darling his jewel, J see plainly that he delights in me,
he lives in me by his Spirit, and I in him by my Faith: although I have (I
confess) broken the Law, yet Jesus Christ kept it, and he has satisfied the
justice of God it makes as much to my discharge, as if I had kept it my self;
as my Savior was beloved of God the Father, so am I through faith in him:
You Will say I transgress the Law daily in thought, word, or deed, I say no, it
is not I but sin that dwells in me: I have a bad neighbor, but Christ will
give me patience and courage to war against my enemy, it shall have no power,
it may take the best Saint cowardly and unawares, but I bless God I have
strength from Christ by his Spirit that beats him out of doors, he lodges not
in my heart, I have no room but for my Love, my Christ, I am wholly his, and
he is mine; for should I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord would not
hear my prayers, I see by the eye of my faith that I am freed from sin, though
not free from sinning, I will rejoice though sin dwell in my flesh, O my
beloved Christ, I see there is more good in thee for me, then there is evil in
sin against me: O my eternal God, thou art more pleased with me thy poor
creature for my Christ thy Son's sake, then ever thou were displeased with me
for my sins sake, O my God I lay them all open before thee, I confess and
forsake them, to come to thee my God for mercy; thou have promised me
forgiveness, forsake me not my God, for I am resolved (by the assistance of
thy Spirit) never more to forsake thee; do not thou leave me comfortless, but
support me by the Almighty power of thy Spirit within me: how odious does sin
appear to my soul! how fain would the enemy of my soul undermine it, and weaken
my faith in thee! what strivings, and subtle temptacions, has the Devil to
ensnare the soul of thy Servant if he could! how fearful am I when I think of
any thing but thee! be thou therefore the continual meditacion of my heart; how
fearful am I to look on, orcommune with the World, or the vanities of the
World, least they should draw away my mind and affections! but Lord I bless
thy holy name I see thy Love and mercy in this, thou let me see all things
besides thee to be vanity and vexacion of Spirit, O let me see thee and delight
in nothing but thee: instead of thinking of vain transitories, let thy Servant
meditate, as now, so always, of glorious eternities: and O sweet God, let me
think upon my sins, and the vildnesse of my base heart, to humble me in the
sight of my own nothingnesse, lay me low, to raise me high in faith, to rely
wholly on thee, O that I might never act but as thy faithful servant, as
becoming thy Son, that I may be able to cry unto thee Father; though my actions
seem to me (as they are) unfaithful, yet Lord thou art faithful, a Father to
me in Jesus Christ; oh sweet God that thou would cause the sight of my sins
to be as a means to kill sin in me, let it make much to my sorrow, that my
heart is false, but let it make much more to my joy, that thou (my joy my God)
art true; let it sad thy Servant, that I am so sinful, but let it much more
rejoice my soul that thou my Lord Christ art holy, oh let the Love of thee be
my love, that thy holiness may be made mine, when will thou oh my God? thou
art my comfort, thou will shortly set me free, that by thy strength I may
triumph over this body of death: oh my God though sin break off sometimes my
communion, yet let i^ never separate my union with thee: how do thou make me
rejoice even while I mourn over sins because I see through Faith in thee
sweet Jesus they can be no prejudice to my everlasting safety in thee, so much
I perceive thou love me, for thou would not have given me so much Faith in
thee, did not thou love me: my Love I am thine, and thou art mire, I have
vowed to thee, and thou will make me faithful as thou art faithful, because
I trust in thee. O my God let me have more encouragment from thee, then
discouragement from sin; for though my sins reach the clouds, yet I see by the
eye of my faith the mercies of thee my God are above the Heavens; though my
sins do overflow me, yet the free graces of my God overflow my sins: Oh sweet
Jesus let thy Love and Righteousness so cover my sins and imperfections,
that the Lord may see no iniquity, which thou have not satisfied for, and
pleaded for, and procured pardon for me that am thy servant.

Oh my God thou know my wants, and troubles, suffer me at no time to be
troubled at them, let me bid all welcome, thy will be done, though thou cause
sorrow, yet will thou have compassion according to the multitude of thy
Mercies; when my outward comforts eb let me feel the high Springs of my inward
joy, and consolacion in thee, flowing in upon my soul: drown thou all my
sorrows in the Ocean of thy Love: O my God though I am not the subject of
comfort, yet is my comfort sure in thee the object of my faith, Lord I perceive
thou laidst it for me, when thou laidst it from me, thou let me see by the
Sunshine of thy Love, what this imprisonment, malice of men, persecuting me
means, as liberty, or the best contentment: I will not therefore be
discontented, I could not be content, did I not see it is thy Will, it is thy
Will that I desire to conform my self unto, so come what will it is welcome:
Oh my God let me have any thing or nothing, let me abound with friends or have
none, let me rejoice or be sorrowful, let me be in prison or at liberty, let me
live or die, it is all one to thy servant; for Lord thou know, I account
nothing my joy but thee my God, and to be in all things as thou will have me;
O my God I desire not to be at my own dispose or choice* my choice is thee, to
rest quiet in thy determinacion; though thou send me comforts, yet will I not
account them my comfort, but thee my comfort, though I have no outward comfort,
yet thou have not left me comfortless, though I pass through many sorrows
and tribulacions, yet by the light of thy grace thou dispercest the clouds of
my sins, and let me see my way, its Heavenward to thee.

Dear sister, would thou have such enjoyments? seek then, and thou shall
find, but thou must seek diligently, remove all lets and impediments, that may
hinder thy sweet union and comunion with my Christ, he is worth seeking, worth
finding, trifle not away your precious time with the things of the World, know
that God allows Dogs under the table such bones to pick.

But let Jesus Christ be thy daily bread, let it be thy meat and drink, to do
the Will of our Heavenly Father: by this you may perceive (if Christ incline
your heart) and see by the ey of your faith in Christ and find the way to
Heaven is by Christ, by him only: says he to you, I am the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; one of the fathers (I remember) says; the Way, without which we
wander: the Truth, without which we shall run into error: the Light, without
which we shall sit in darkness: there is no other reason I can give to any
that are out of Christ why they are out, but it is because of their unbeleif,
they do not believe on him; every one is apt to sail do, let me ask that man
or woman then, did you willingly and readily obey his voice? how do you love
him? do you testify your love by your actual obedience, to the utmost of your
abillities to keep his commandments? are you out of your selves? do you live
above the World? have you left off feeding upon the vanities thereof? are you
fed with the bread and waters of life? are you delighted with the riches of
Gods Grace, accompting no want like to the want of grace? do you not more
mind the riches of the World, the devices and desires of your own base
treacherous hearts deceitful carnal hearts, more then the Will and Mind of
my God? in brief, wou^d'st know whether thou art in Christ then have regard to
him; where the treasure is, there the heart will be also.

My dear sister, let not the World (which leads away captive so many) draw thee
away: let all thy senses be locked up in thy soul, and let that be full of
Christ, let thine eyes be delighted in the reading of the Word of God: let your
ears be stopped from hearing those things which savor not of graces which edefie
not, but hear readily dilligently the true and sound speakings of God, listen to
the sweet low voices, and secret whispers of his Spirit: taste how sweet Jesus
Christ is to hungry and thirsty souls; smell how sweet his garments are: feel
the smooth, fine, wrought, and silken linning of the Saints; see you mind what
I have taken pains to write you; hear, taste, smell, see, feel, in your soul
that you have in your body, the marks of my sweet Jesus; Gall: 6 and 17 verse,
and then you will not account, or call gold and silver, riches; nor
advancement, honor; nor learning, wisdom; you will be rich, honorable, and
wise without them, within your self all in Christ, Christ in you; and you will
see all the glory of the World, but skin-deep; a Sun blast defaceth it, like
Time, not abiding, passing away; a mear nothing but vanity and vexation of
Spirit: pomp is but fancy, gold but dust, fame but breath, praise but a blast,
the worlds sweet is bittrernes: have you not found it so? its love, lovelesse;
its splender, darkness; its fulness, emptiness; its all, nothing, but
vanity, and pray what is that? a Saint may as well live and feed on the wind, as
on the things of the World, it may fill the fancy and starve the soul, it may
starve and leave the soul empty of grace; therefore have I bid the World
farewell welcome Heaven upon Earth, I have no comfort no happiness nothing
without thee sweet Jesus, I am thine, and thou art mine.

Oh my dear Sister, believe me for my Christ's sake, there is no consolacion
but in my Christ; love nothing, look upon nothing, enjoy nothing, have no
contentment in any thing but what is of him, from him, and by him, all to his
praise: let God have all the glory in Christ, let him be glorified for all,
John 1. 16. beware of spiritual pride, thy selfe-flattering heart, rest not
upon what you have received: read Romans 11. 6. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. build not your
Tabernakle here, let not that be your light, but let God be your light; eye not
your comforts so much as the God of comfort; look not so much on your graces as
on the God of grace, repose your self in nothing, quiet your self in nothing
but in God himself: our graces are but wedding attire, oil in lamps; joy and
consolacion but wedding cheer, we are not satisfied with it, the soul is
infinite: Work out your Salvacion with fear and trembling, until you come to
enjoy God fully, in the very bosum of Christ, co-heires with him: the seeds of
his word sown in our hearts here, are but gleanings to what we expect; our
best summer days here are but as nipping winters, in comparison of that
everlasting summer: we look to enjoy an eternity of the Sunny-shinings of Gods
face, love, and glory, to shine upon us in glory with and to him for ever.

Those rivers of joy we swim in here toward him, are but as a few drops in
comparison of that height and depth, length and breadth, that bottomless Ocean
of his Love laid up in Christ for us; our greatest light here below, is but as
a dark Vault to God and the Lamb: He is the light of that City unto which thy
Brother is going, endeavor to get in at the strait gate, remember it is not
every one that calls Lord, Lord, shall enter, but he that does the will of
our Heavenly Father which is in Heaven: be pressing forward to the mark of our
high Calling, to arrive to the knowledge of that Love which passes knowledge,
to apprehend our God as we are apprehended of God: Rest not (dear Sister) till
you come to Heaven, where our faith shall be seeing, and our hope possession.
Observe, let your love be pure for God, seek not God for heaven, but heaven
for God, that heaven which is God who is the heaven of heavens: God only in
all, above all, and beyond all: let him be our all-in-all in our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we are more then conquerors; to whom only (as is most due) be
ascribed by thee and me, the sole glory and praise of this my writing to thee:
I beseech the Lord, to give us heavenly wisdom, to understand spiritually the
will and mind of God revealed in his Word: so I pray daily, fervently, and
sincerely, for thee and all the Saints and Servants of God, with faith in the
Lord Jesus, whose servant I am, and in him,

Thy assured loving Brother WILLIAM BLAKE.
Exon Iayle June 25. 1653.

