A BLOODY BATTLE: OR THE REBELS OVERTHROW, And Protestants Victory.

Being a true Relation of a great skirmish fought between Sir Thomas Moore of
the Protestant party, and Maqueres the General of the Rebels, on the 2. day of
December. 1641.

Also, of a cruel and detestable Murder committed by 7. Soldiers on the body
of Mr. Atkins, his Wife, and young Child.

In what a horrid manner they Ripped up his Wives womb being great with Child,
and afterward burnt her and her Child in most lamentable manner.

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.

A Bloody Battle, OR The Rebels overthrow, and Protestants victory.
ON Thursday being the second of December. the chief Commander of the Rebels
Maqueres, marched toward Kilkanie with intent to plunder it, but Sir Thomas
Moore having had intelligence of his purpose, with all speed raised the
Protestants that were resident in those parts, encouraging them to make
resistance, who were already resolved, rather to dye in defense of their
Christian liberties, then to live in servitude to the Papists cruelty, yet
nevertheless, Sir Thomas Moors pious and Heroic exhortations made them more
confident, and added wings of expedition to their wished design, so that in one
three hours there were assembled above 3000 Protestants armed with offensive
arms though not defensive, indeed, they had a confidence in God, whose power
they knew could shield them; therefore thus armed as they were, they marched in
order toward Kilkanie, where being once arrived, they found the Town making a
weak resistance, but Maqueers being strong in men and Ammunition (which he
obtaind when he surprised the Neweries) fell on most fiercely forcing of a
passage, despite of their resistance, on both sides men were slain, whose
Carkcases bestrewed their mothers bosom, the earth wept in blood to see, her
native children foster cruelty, each trod the wine press of rebellious wrath,
Death triumphed in his colors, this bloody conflict made the earth appear a
Marian Golgotha, the ground had changed it is verdant Liuerie, and put on
Scarlet, it was roab'd in blood, the Sun did hide it is glorious Rays, the
heavens were mantled in a dusky cloud mixed with some streakes of red, which
seemed to express the blushing of the sky, to see man use such inhumanity.
Death and Destruction reveld in the fight, for each man there did strive, who
first should die, thinking it base to live subject to fortunes scorn.

Unto this doubtful Combat soon arrived Sir Thomas Moore, and his
associates, who with a sierce alarm fell upon the reere of those Rebellious
Papists, who had almost obtaind an en trance into Kilkanie, but finding that
they were surprised, and that Sr. Thomas Moore was at their heels, they left
the town, and drew themselves into a Complete body, fronting those new come
forces with such courage: as if it were a pleasure unto them to spill poor
Protestants blood.

The Battle joined, and many men lay gasping on the ground on either side,
especially the Rebels, for the Protestant forces being in two divisions, did so
bestirre them, that had not Maqueers his heels been better then his hands, he
had happily been higher by the head then he is; in breife, it pleased God of
his abundant mercy so to bless the poor Protestants, that though their foes
were three for one in number, yet they had the Victory and their foes were put
to flight, only there was slain almost 300 Rebels, and many taken prisoners
which plead that it was contrary to their wills to serve, only they were
forced by Macqueers, who they say in every place that he comes in forces the
Kerns to serve him, threatening to seal their denial with death, and by that
means fortifies and strengthens himself, and his adherents, animating them on
to mischief of all sorts and degrees, to wit, Rapes, Murders, and most
Inhumane and incestuous Acts, gilding over all their Vices with a pretended
show of Religion, calling their war a Religious war, nay they are so
impudent that they say they are warranted by their holy Father, his Holiness
the Pope.

Likewise many outrages are daily committed by those Rebels, which are dispersed
about the South-West of Ireland, to the intent that they may breed Commotions
and disturb the Kingdom, and have the greater possibility to obtain their
desires, which J trust to God will never have any period, except it be in their
own ruins, I beseech thee O Lord let them fall themselves into that pit of
destruction which they provided for us,

Hear us good Lord we beseech thee.
Here follows the Relation of a horrid Murder committed by the Rebels on the
bodies of Mr. Atkins, his wife, and his young child, being an Jnhabitant some
five miles from Kilkanie.
It chanced the next day after the flight of the Rebels from Kilkanie, that 7.
Soldiers of the Papists faction, happened to the house of one Mr. Atkins who
rushing in resolutely, demanded money of him, he being astonished at the sudden
approach of those fellows, stood a prittie while, not knowing what answer to
make, or how to satisfy their desires, yet after a little consideration, he
told them, that they were welcome, and what he had to his power was at their
service; yet nevertheless they being blood-thirsty Salvages, not deserving the
title of humanity without any more words beat out his brains, then they laid
hold on his wife being big with child, and ravished her, then ripped open her
womb, and like so many Neroes undantedly viewed natures bed of Conception,
afterward took her and her Infant and sacrifiz'd in sire their wounded bodies
to appease their immaculate souls, which being done, they pillaged the house,
taking what they thought good, and when they had done, they set the house on
fire, this and innumerable more horrid murders are committed by those
Rebellious Papists which count it a meritorious work to imbrew their hands in
the blood of the poor Protestants, God I beseech him of his abundant mercy,
send us aid, so that we may be able to advance Christ's Standard, in despite of
those Romish Crosses, and let all true Christians cry, Amen.

F^N^S.

