BLOODY NEVVES FROM SCOTLAND DECLARING The particulars of a great and bloody
Fight near Sterling Bridge, between the English Forces commanded by Lieuienant
General Cromwell, and the Scottish Forces, commanded by Major General Monro.

WITH The full particulars of the Fight, the manner of their Engagement, the
number killed and taken prisoners, the total routing of Major Genesis Monro and
all his Forces, and taking of all his Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition.

ALSO, The Scots Declaration to Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, and His express Demands
to his Army. With the discovery of a bloody Plot against the Lord Genesis Fairfax,
showing the manner how he should have been stabbed at St. Albans, and 40
Parliament men put to the sword.

Printed for C. W. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, 1648.

BLOODY NEWS FROM SCOTLAND Declaring The proceedings of Lieut. Genesis Cromwell
against the Scottish Army commanded by Major Genesis MONRO.
SIR,
SInce the advancing of Lieut. General Cromwell over the River Tweed, with the
English Army, some overtures have happened, very considerable and remarkable,
to the everlasting honor and same of the English Nation; the particulars
whereof, I shall here insert, as follows.

The Lieutenant General had no sooner set footing on the Scots ground, but
great acclamations of joy transcended from one part to another, amongst the
well-affected party of that Nation, throughout the Southern Climate; protesting
to assist him, with all that was near and dear unto them, for regaining of
their liberties, the gaining of a right understanding between both nations, and
the vanquishing of the common Enemy of both Kingdoms.

And upon a general Council, in relation to the Affairs of our Neighbor
Nation; it was ordered, That the Parliaments two Armies of England and Scotland
should forthwith advance against Monro and his Forces, and the question being
stated who should command in chief the Van of the Army, to advance against
Sterling Bridge, the main Body of the Enemies Army having entrenched themselves
thereabouts, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell rose up at the Council Table, and declared
his great willingness to appear in the Van, and to advance and engage with
them, against the adverse party of peace and truth; which was unanimonsly
assented to, and upon the 26. of this instant (we herr) that the Lieutenant
General advanced with seven English Regiments of Horse and Dragoons toward
Sterling, to fight the Enemy; but being discovered, and information given to
(the young sparkish Royalist) Monro, he immediately drew out five old Regiments
of Horse and Dragoons that accompanied him from Ireland, and five new raised
Regiments under the conduct of the Earl of Lanerick, and advanced with the
said party, commanding forth his Scouts, who had no sooner traversed two or
three of the Scottish Hills, but they discovered the English Banners: whereupon
they made toward their Body, certifying that a small party of English were
ranging about the Country, and the rest of them had taken up their quarters in
several Villages adjacent:

Upon which tidings Monro advances, and coming near to the English Forces the
Lieut. Genesis prepared to receive them, insomuch that both Armies engaged
disputing the ground with great resolutnessE and gallantry, the famous Sparks
of Chivalry (on each side) exchanging many a bullet betwixt the two Bodies,
firing at the very Breast, and counterchanging their ground, during which
Couflict, Monro appeared visible in the very Front of the Enemy, who upon a
sudden, endangered (much) our left Wing; but after a sharp dispute, the Lieut.
Genesis routed ^^em, put them to a disorderly retreat, killed above 60 upon the
place, and took about 100. prisoners, with the loss of 20 men.

We hear that old Monro in Ireland has had a great Defeat by Col. Munk, and
all his Ordnance, arms, and ammunition taken.

Peatling upon Tweed, 28. Sep. 1648.

On Satterday Sep. 30. the great. Plot against the house of Commons were
discovered, wherein 80. of them should have been massacred by a party of
Royalists, who (as they said) opposed the Treaty in the House.

The Demands of Lieut. Genesis Cromwell.
Whereas we are marching with the Parliaments Army into the kingdom of
Scotland, in pursuanoe of the remaining part of the Enemy, who lately invaded
the kingdom of England, and for recovery of the Carrisons of Berwick and
Carlisle, These are to declare, that if any Officer or Soldier under my
command, shall take or demand any money, or shall violently take any horses,
goods, or victual, without order, or shall abuse the people in any sort, it
shall be tried by a Council of War; and the said person so offending, shall be
punished according to the Articles of War, made for the government of the Army
in the kingdom of England, which is death. Each Colonel, or other chief
Officer in every Regiment, is to transcribe the Copy of this, and to cause the
same to be deivered to each Captain of his Regiment, and every said Captain of
each respective Troop and Company, is to publish the same to his Troop or
Company, and to take a strict course that nothing be done contrary hereunto.

Given under my hand this 20. of Septem. 1648. O. CROMWELL.


The manner of the English Army marching into SCOTLAND.
SIR,
Major Genesis Lambert is marched into Scotland with 8. Regiments of horse and
foot, Lieu. Gen Cromwell will suddenly follow: upon the conjunction of both
Bodies the Army will amount to 9000. horse and foot, Lanerick and Monro are
about 8000. the Marq. of Argyle not above 5000, most of them foot, and young
soldiers, and so no way able to deal with Monro, whose army confists (for the
greatest part) of old soulders, and men of resolute spirits.

But Col. Genesis Lambert is joined with General Lesly, and the English has
alarmed them at Sterling bridge, the Munroians having possession thereof, a
place of great advantage, and by which they do hold much the greater part of
Scotland at their devotion Genesis Lesleys (which stands for the Parliament of
England) quarters six miles on this side Monro, who before the English had
crossed Tweed, sent a Herald to Monro, requiring a Treaty, in which was agreed,
That the said Monro and his Irish forces should depart the said kingdom, and
have an Act of Indemnity for himself and his Army.

But like a good honest Turk, contrary to Faith, under pretense of sending a
Guard to secure the aforesaid Bridge, advanced over and fell upon the Marquis
of Argyle, killed and took seven hundred of his men, and forced the rest to a
retreat.

The Lieutenant General is upon his march toward them, and a sudden
engagement is expected. Monro gives out that he is resolved to fight him: he
has summoned in most of the Inhabitants in those parts, and cut off many
Bridges, declining fighting with the English.

Col. Bright and Scoutmaster General Row are sent to the Marq. of Argyle to
consult about assisting them, and what way will be best therein. The Governor
of Barwick has returned answer to the Lieut. Gen: Summons, That he received
the Government thereof from the kingdom of Scotland, and upon their Directions
would deliver it to any. by the next I doubt not but to give you an account of
the surrender thereof, and remain

Hadding upon Tweed, 28 Sept, 1648. Yours, etc.


The new Discovery, againSt the Lord General.
ON Satterday last Letters came to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax,
intimating, That there was a great Conspiracy and Design complotted by the
Royalists against his Excellencies person, and that it was resolved, to have
the said Plot put in execution, during his residence at St. Albans; the manner
thus, viz. That two persons of most desperate and insolent fortunes, were
designed (by the Royalists) to give their attendance at the said place, and to
be resident at the Generals quarters, there to take their opportunity, for the
stobbing of the Lord General, either by Dagger or Knife.

FINIS.

