Bloody News from PARIS; OR, A Relation of the Tragical End of some Persons of
Quality at PARIS, who on the 8th. of this instant August, 1689. suffered for
their Witty Zeal the severe Revenge of Lewis the most Christian King. 25. Aug.
1689.
ABout the latter end of the last Month three Persons of Quality were seized
and committed to Prison at Paris, for a bold Attempt upon the Glory of Lewis
the Great, the French King, especially at such a ticklish juncture of time as
this is, when prophetic Hints are very ungrateful, now his ambitious Designs
seem to incline to a Period.

They were, the Baron of Killingsang, a German; with the Marquis de
Pissentieux, and Monsieur de Feuillages, both Frenchmen; and their Crime no
less than the Pasquinading the King out of his Title to his Crown, by comparing
him with two other Competitors: The Pasquil was in two Languages, French and
Latin, which for the satisfaction of the English Reader, is now by an ingenious
Pen translated into the third; all which are here subjoined.

For the unpardonable Offense of being the Authors, and of having affixed this
Satyr upon the French King's Statue, erected by the Duke de Feuillade in the
Place des Victoires at Paris: The three Gentlemen were shortly after brought to
a Trial, and after a most severe Enquiry and Examination, by way of the most
exquisite Torture, two of them, to wit, the Marquis de Pissentieux, and the
Baron of Killingsang, were convicted and sentenced to Death, the third being
acquitted for want of the least Proof, which in that Case would have been
sufficient.

According to the Sentence pronounced against these two unfortunate, though
well-meaning Gentlemen, they were on the 8th. of this instant August hanged in
the place where they had affronted the King in his Statue, and afterward
quartered, their Quarters being ordered to be publicly exposed a Fortnight to
the view of the People, in the Avenues of the place, which is a Spectacle so
nauseous, that it is supposed, few will be invited to gaze at it.

The Pasquil in FRENCH.
Louis, Jacques, and Guillaume
Sont trois Rois du meme Royaume;
Mais avec cette diversite,
Jacques ne l'a jamais ete,
Louis en est toujours le Maitre,
Guillaume le pourra bien etre.
LAT.
Tres modo Francorum ostentant insignia Reges,
Verus adhuc Princeps Ludovicus; tuque Jacobe,
Qui nunquam fueras nisi solo nomine; sed re
Wilhelmus tandem, ni fallant fata, futurus.
ENG.
France totters under these three Royal Names,
Great Lewis, Greater WILLIAM, Little James.
Lewis still braves it, the possessing King,
James only can an empty Title sing,
For WILLIAM Fate reserves both Name and Thing.
The Translator's DESCANT.
How equally foolish are Titles and Things,
Our James has three Kingdoms, and France has three Kings.
The good People of France want Freedom and Bread,
And James his three Kingdoms are dropped from his Head.
Then he surely's happy, who truly can say,
I Have no Kingdom to govern, no King to obey.
Licensed,

Aug. 20. 1689. J. Fraser.

Printed for R. Baldwin in the Old Baily. 1689.


