A Bloody Fight in France, BETWEEN The Kings Army, and the Parliaments, near
the City of Paris: With the manner how the Citizens sallyed forth, and the
great Defeat given them by His Majesty's Horse, commanded by the titular Duke
of York; with the besieging of the City; and a Treaty for the surrender: Also,
a great Victory obtained by the English against the French at Sea; the number
of ships sunk and taken; and the seizing of the most richest Prize that has
been known for many years.

woodcut of a man with a poleaxe atop a horse May.15

London, Printed for Richard Hare, 16^2.

Another great VICTORY Obtained by the King of France, Against the Prince of
Conde, near the Gates of Paris, etc.
SIR,
SInce the Defeat given to the Prince of Conde near St. Dennis, the Lord
Marshal Turein advanced with two thousand Horse toward Paris; which the Lord
Marshal de Hospital (Governor of the City) perceiving, commanded the Gates to
be shut, and the Trained Bands to be in readiness; by which timely Allarm, the
Citizens were soon in a posture of Defense; and upon the near approach of the
Cavalry, a considerable party of the Citizens were commanded forth, who gave a
gallant Onset, but received a great Repulse; for the Kings Horse charged with
such an irresistible resolution, that they quickly made good their way through
the very thickest of the young Infantry; and upon their countermarching charge,
galled them so extremely with small shot, and Lances, that they immediately
dissipated them, breaking their Ranks, and forcing them to retire into the City
with many cracked Crowns: This blow proved very disadvantagious to the
Parisians, by reason that the Kings party gained an opportunity hereby to block
up the City, and to intercept provisions from any pass whatsoever. And has
also now begat a Treaty, for a rendition of the said City: which if it prove
effectual, by all consequence it appears, that the rest of the Garrisons will
soon submit, and finally a general peace to be established. The King has sent
for the Lord Dighy from the Governm, of Mantes, to confirm a greater Title of
Honor upon him; so that his Lordship has left Sir Lewis Dives Governor for
his Majesty.

Genesis Harcourt is advanced with his Army near to the City of Bordeaux, with a
Design, to make a sudden and general Assault; for he has gained a great
advantage of the Enemy, and has drawn most of his forces before it. He has a
very considerable Army, consisting of about twelve thousand foot, and three
thousand horse, which are most of them quar^ered from the Suburbs to Reolle,
and from thence to Nerai. The Duke of York (so called here) is in great favor
with the French Cavalry; and as his Actions gains honor, so does his Name
purchase Fame; for since he received the sole Command of the Switzers, he has
performed singular service in three several fights. As for further particulars,
in relation to the engagement of both Armies, and the King of Scots, J shall
refer you to the Abstract of the next Posts Letters.

St. Germans, May 17. 1652.
An exact Relation of the great Fight between the French and English, on the
eleventh of this instant May.
ON Monday last, being the seventeenth of this instant May, we received
intelligence, that the Parliaments ships having notice of the French Fleet,
bound from the Indies, were designed for the Coast of Marvella, the Elizabeth,
the Leopard, the Lion, and diverse others, resolved to intercept them, or sink
by their sides; And accordingly, making up toward them, they had not sailed
many hours, but they discerned the Royal Navy, being the richest that has been
taken for many years; and coming within Canon shot, gave them seven broad
sides; but was answered again, treble the number; whereupon both Fleets
prepared for fight, and immediately the Canons began to roar, and small shot,
from the Decks, slew most thick and violent, till it pleased God, after a sharp
Conflict; the French began to decline engagement, and endeavored to make an
escape; which the English perceiving, made up close to them, and soon after
boarded four, wherein was plenty of rich Commodities; as appears by the ensuing
Schedule, viz.

6000 Pieces of Mercoolees. 5000 Pieces of Derebands. 4520 Pieces of Broad
Baftaes. 22440 Pieces of Narrow Baftaes. 880 Pieces of Tapseiles. 1066 Pieces
of Guniea Stuff. 500 Pieces of Nicannees. 400 Pieces of white Guzzees. 900
Pieces of blew Guzzees. 1060 Pieces of Pintadoes. 1080 Pieces of brown
Dutties. 1499 Pieces of blew Dutties. 9091 Pieces of Sannoes. 2850 Pieces of
colored Ginghams. 9300 Pieces of Sallampores. 8095 Pieces of Long Cloth. 240
Pieces of brown Ginghams. 309 Pieces of Oringall Bettellees. 303 Pieces of
Moorees. 330 Pieces of white Ginghams. 80 Pieces of blew Sallampotes. 1900
Pieces of Chillees. 34500 Pieces of Parcallees.
In this fight, it is said, that the French lost about four hundred men, besides
the loss of two ships, which were sunk: The English had likewise many slain and
wounded, and their ships extremely torn and battered.

FINIS.

