A DELINEATION of the LADIES HOSPITAL at HIGH-GATE
The Title (The Ladies etc) no Diminution, but Honor to it, witness Two Sacred
Monuments in their Honor; The Praise of the Virtuous Lady by Solomon, Jedidiah
or the Lords Beloved; the Epistle to the Elect Lady by John the Beloved
Disciple.
This Delineation of a Model, though in the Dust, as the most moving Petition
to Revive the work, and Rescue the Petitioner is humbly Dedicated to those
Honoble: Persons, of what Degree soever; who have by their Contributions at the
very time; By their Promises; By their Approbation under their Hands; By their
Acceptance of Small Presents; obliged themselves, I humbly Say, to God, and
not to Man in so Pious a work, or who may by their Piety, and Charity, become
favorers of it. By W.B. Who at, first, and ever since Owned himself only the
most Humbly Petitioner for so Great a Work, and yet when he first Designd it,
was worth 6000, in a full Trade and free from any Incumbring Debt; But by
Provision for his Family; By Purchaces and Buildings for this Work, By an Essay
of the Design, in the Maintenance of Children at this School, above two years,
By Presents to Persons of Honor, and Piety, has Expended 5000 and was for
Debts contracted, only for this Hospital, and well enough Secured* Seized
Imprisoned, above Two years, Just at the Heiyht of his Expencee, before his
Receipt of the Promised Assistances, to have Repayd hiim and Enabled the Work.
All these so nigh together are fronted by a Pleasant Green or Square.

This Petitioner was never disloyal, but did some good Seruis, as may apper by
a Noble Earl, and the late Duke of Albermarl^ hand, and Seal.

yet he cannot but think, the hand of God has been against his Son, for being
Persuaded, to Oppose this so good a design, as well, as Afflictions in many
familys, who should have in y^ buisiness

O Lord, who have taught us, that all our doings without Charity, are nothing
worth, send thy holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of Charity, the very bond of Peace, and of all virtues, without which whosoever
Lives, is accounted d^^^ before thee grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ
his sake Amen.

But truer Charity was never Indeauoured toward your Children, since the
Parishes were in being

Pray Gentlemen of the Destr^^^ peruse your P^ayer in a Frame given you in the
year 82*

Dorchester House, Mortgaged 1200li. cost 1700. worth 2000 li Buying, and four
sold for this design.


If ye Reverend docters with ye Vestrys would be so Semaritanly kind as to
(...) one to Solicit for this in each Parish it migt be a Soul Mercy, to their
poor, children, and even raise this to the perpetual Praise of our Most
excelent Religion

HIGH GATEHOUSE


H This Dorchester House Intended for Maiden Children II: where may be
Contrived, in a long Appartment, a Hall under, and two Stories of Lodgings
over, of 130 foot long KK Its walks, and Grounds, ten Acres, where Tenements
for Cityzens Summers Reception, might have raisd a good Revenue to the
Hospital: For the sake of coveting this and the Mansion house from it, the
whole Design was Rauag'd, and my Family set against me to Obstruct all Charity
keeping me in Prison to force the Sale of all for the Advantage of 2 or 3
Mortgagees

There are 6 Tenements new built, besides there is inviting ground for 10 or 12
more with Gardens, if any of the 6 Parishis would buy, or build, an house, as a
Rent for their Poor, it might probably cause ten times more, to be built, or
given to their poor it being to much in the eye of the Charitable Gentry, and
so as all debts and Mortgage^ is might be paid of, with 23 or 24^0li would do,
the buildings, Land, and houses bing Still worth three times, the money for
this design an eqiutable Title in me, to dispose of all, as firm as the Earth,
on which it stand find hope it will be so Judged So that these Parishes will
likely neue^ have a better Oppertunity to do their Children good whilst the
Hills reman, and let this be as, a Memorial to hang in your houses, aganst
Such as have or would betray it

And a further observation of Providence etc.

But yet cannot but hope the Reuerd Doctrs: will perswad the Mortgagees to take
ye just dues or equity enforce it

No building ever abused like this, and yet reported to be fallen down, and I
Madd, to discourage all assistance.


If Sr Francis Pemberton, Fran: Blake^ny Bro: Mr Willm Ashurst, Draper, (...)
Mortgagees, would yet comply, all might (...) go Immediately forward, with some
100li annual advantage in the Town of Highgate.

This, long building; Mortgagd 150, appris'd moderatly at 940li. worth for this
design double EE this house and ground; Morgg: 560li. cost 900li. worth for
this much more.


The Buildings Erected for the School House with its two halls Its Lodgings
above DD Its Well formed School Its Green for Recreation EE The Mansion House
of the Petitioner first only a Sumers Recess from London, which having that
great, and Noble City, with its Numerous Childhood, under veiw gave the first
thought, to him of so great a Design: Intended now for Lodgings of Retgrement
for Such as by His Maties: Favor might be Governers of the Hospital.

FF Its Gardens to train up Some Youth to that Service:

GG Its Grounds being 8 Acres: all adjoining to the house All these Dedicated
by a Solemn Devotion to God, and cannot be Andniaz'd, and Sapphiraed, being so
uncontrouertible a Good purpose without their Sin.

It Is humbly prayed, that such as may be willing, to Subscribe or get any thing
Subscribed, toward Retriueing or Raising is Charitable work, would send to ye
Reverend Doctr; Lecturer, Churchwarden, or Vestry of St Gylsis St Clements, St
Paul's, or the Sauoy.




