A BLOODY FIGHT IN ESSEX UPON Friday last, being the 9 of this instant Month
of June, 1648. betwixt a Party of the Essex Forces commanded by Captain Beard,
and a Party of Horse, who was going after Goring.

With the number that were slain on both sides, and the Resolution of the
Inhabitants of Essex, touching the said Goring and his Forces.

Likewisewise, a great Fight in the North, and fifty Colonels,
Lieutenant-colonels, Majors, Captains, and other Officers, slain and taken
prisoners.

With a Relation of the Duke of York his landing at Yarmouth in Norfolk with
2000. men.

June 12 LONDON: Printed for R. W. 1648.

A great and bloody FIGHT IN NORTHAMPTONSHIRE,. BETWIXT The Parliaments Forces
and the Cavaliers.
SIR,
THis morning about 4 or 5 of the clock, there happened a great Fight within 14
miles of this town, occasioned by the sudden pursuit of Liecester horse,
commanded by Col. Hacker, and the Lincolnshire Forces, commanded by col. Wait,
who fell upon the Enemy at a little Village called Woodcroft early this
morning, and entered into a very strong Engagement, and not dispute, the Enemy
defending of themselves very resolutely, col. Hudson charged Col. Hacker with a
Forlorn of Horse, and disputed the case for about half an hour, but at the last
were forced to retreat but Major Bisse drew up with a Reserve, and flamed
colonel Hacker: whereupon he divided his Body into two Divisions, and charged
them both, exchanged ground, and put them to a rout. Col. Hudson and Major
Bisse was slain upon the last Onset, capt. Mercer, capt. Shaw, and capt.
Hawkins in the pursuit. Lieut. Col. Green was also desperately wounded, with
about 30. more, and has taken prisoners Lieut. col. Shaw, Major Dalton, and
near upon 40. Captains, Lieunants, Ensigns, and other inferior Officers,
besides 200. common soldiers, the rest got over hedges and escaped: they lost
also near upon 300. arms.

These were Officers that were appointed to have raised two Regiments for the
King, in Lincolnshire and other counties adjacent. We are now putting our
selves into a posture of defense, and to unite our selves together in a firm
and unanimous association, to oppose all Forces whatsoever, either foreign or
domestique, that shall obstruct or hinder the peace and tranquillity of the
Northern Associations.

Northampton 9. June, 1648.
A Letter from Essex, declaring the manner of the last Fight upon Friday last,
being the 8. of this instant June, 1648.
SIR,
THis morning about 8. of the clock in the forenoon, Captain Beard (a Tanner,
being exercising a Company of the Essex Foot, a party of Horse appeared within
sight and on a sudden advanced, and gave fire on them, retreated and rallied
again: whereupon the Captain perceiving that it was an Enemy, put his men into
a posture to receive them, and upon their second-charge gave them a volley,
which caused two of their Troopers to dismount, with the loss of one man on
our side; insomuch, that at the last here began a desperate engagement, which
continued in dispute for the space of half an hour, but at the last the said
troop of Horse retreated, and as we suppose, are gone toward Goring, for since
we are informed, that it was a troop raised by a great Delinquent, and formerly
an actual Enemy against the Parliament: it is supposed, there was some great
person among them, by reason of the two Sumpture Horses, who (as we are
informed since) were laden with great store of rich treasure.

There was slain in this Conflict to the number of 8. sive of ours, and three
of the Enemies, and one taken prisoner, who is since dead.

The Essex men are much incensed against Goring, and his party, and are
resolved to oppose him, and to clear the County of all his Confederates, most
of the Inhabitants of this County having unanimously declared both against him
and his proceedings; for it is credibly reported, that he had a great design
against this Kingdom, and that his endeavors are, for the letting in of a
foreign Enemy.

Eppington 9. June, 1648. There is a great Rumor, that the Duke of York is
landed at Yarmouth in Norfolk, with 2 or 3000. men; but I give you this not for
any real truth I suppose to be in it, but that you may see the various Rumors
that are spread abroad; therefore you may take it rather for a report of those
that would have it so, then for a certainty that it is so.



A Declaration of the Parliaments Forces in the North, and of the proceedings
of the Forces in Scotland.
SIR,
THe work goes on apace, touching the raising of new Forces, and putting of
them in a Regimental way of Discipline, and our Forces have declared their
unanimous Resolutions to fight the Enemy. Col. Lilborn with M. Genesis Lambert,
going to the quarters of, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, faced a considerable party of
them, but they had no mind to engage, Lancashire stands firm for the Parliament
Graydan L. Roxborows creature, and our English C. Erington have brought two
Troops of Scots horse on this side Tweed: our English Troops at Anwick, have
fetched in Collonell Weldens Wheat, least the enemy at Barwick take it, as they
did him; we are here in great fears both from Scotland and Langdale; and expect
they come come with Armies into this Country within this week: the people see
no help from Parliament, and therefore wisely for the other side, as likest to
prevail and say, they perceive the Kings party is permitted to grow the better
to make terms for the King Lord Argile is gone to a Castle which he is Captain
of, not having a mind to trust a Parliament, the Parliament have summoned his
return and if be comes not its like they will proceed against him, Langdale is
still estimated 10000 he wants money and begins to weary his friends which will
put him upon a sudden remove.

Our affairs here are more and more distracting (which would not be) did you
in South, as we hear, bear up up gallantly against them who intend the
destruction of all in both, that fear an oath, in Tindale was lately a great
convention of persons of quality, as the Lord Lothian, Roxborow, Grainstone,
and others, diverse Knights and Barons, with most of the Gentry of Tindale and
Marse, about raising men for England, at which appeared, out of sour
Presbyteries, diverse Ministers, and Elders, on behalf of the respective
parishes, who presented their Petitions, that the Parliament would give
satisfactory answer to their eight Propositions, and until that be done, to
proceed no further in an engagement; great disputes were, but at last the
moderate party carried it, that they would Petition to the Parliament according
to the Ministers desire, It was ordered that the Petitions should be compared,
whether they all tended to the same thing; and when two disaffected to the
Church were named for that work, there arose a new debate, and upon the
question, they were forbidden, and two others appointed upon known integrity,
which gave great content to the godly people, and so enraged the other, that in
a deep melancholy, hanging down their heads, they rod out of town with a
drooping company. The Lord Hume has chosen all his Officers, but for men, he
can get none; some few are taken up by Major Hume at Olnwick, and sent into
Glendale, to quarter there: Kelsoe has petitioned to the Committee, though
against the Lord Roxborow: Fife and Angus will not raise a man, but by way of
opposition, has put themselves in a posture of defense; Argile and other
shires, do the like, and this backwardness arises, as for other reasons, so
chiefly because Duke Hamilton is General; it; believed the present force
continued to this time, will not disband until they have their Arrears.
Nothing so much incourages raising an Army here as that the Parliament of
England sends none to the North, to suppress Langdale, and those under his
command, and those those that like not this War here, therefore think all is be
come Cavaliers in the South; that no care is taken to regain Barwick and
Carlisle; the Ministers preach here violently against the war, and say, that
they that lead on this expedition are thieves, and companions of thieves, with
other like expressiions: diverse Ministers are chosen to go to Edinburgh, to
Solicit their Petition.

The great differences in Scotl. does retard yet is not like to hinder an
Armies coming for England, and what more encouragement can be given, then that
there comes not force enough from the Parla, to suppress the English gathered
under Langdale, that the design goes on, appears in that Barwick and Carlisle
are supplied with Arms and other things from Scotland, Lotherdale sent lately
22 load in to Barwick its conceived they are well armed in Cumberland, a party
from thence last Friday took Major Shafto, with 16 of his men he was raising a
troop of horse about Beywell these were surprised by Colonel Carnaby, and
others of the Country that knew the way to them: the Major is carried to
Carlisle this is a great discouragement to others that were arming. Langdale
had musters about Hetursell, and Grindon, and others, and news is come, that
his main body will quarter a Heman this night, or to morrow; they may come
whither they will, or go whither they will, nothing comes to us therewith to
oppose them: the Scots in Ireland are daily expected, money is sent to fetch
them; the Parl iament at Edinburgh sits again, great matters are expected.

Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.



FINIS.

