AN ANSWER TO The late Scandalous and Libellous PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, A
COMPLAINT to the House of Commons; And Resolution taken up by the free
Protestant Subjects of the Cities OF LONDON and WESTMINSTER, and the Counties
adjacent.

Wherein it is proved, that the Lord MAjOR of London does not usurp his Office;
but is a Legal Major, and obedience ought to be given him.

By PETER BLAND of Grays-Inne, Gent.

London, Printed for JOHN FIELD. 1643.

To the Right Honorable, and the most worthy to be for ever honored, ISAAC
PENNINGTON Lord Major of the honorable City of LONDON, and one of the Members
of the House of COMMONS in Parliament assembled.
My LORD;
POsterity will by experience find the Religious care of your Country, which
you have so zealously and wisely discharged; and I am confident that your
Lordships Memory will never meet a grave in coming Ages: And when those that
are now enemies to our wished Reformation, shall be made sensible of their
errors, they will be ready to free me from flattery: I have endeavored to give
an Answer to that Libellous Pamphlet, and it being but weakly performed, I
present it to your Lordship, not for its worth, but as an expression of that
service I owe your Lordship for being so faithful and dutiful a son to your
distressed mother ENGLAND: My Lord, I beg no boon, but your acceptance; and
lest your Lordship should suspect an insinuating end in this bold attempt, I
shall crave leave of your Lordship to go as I came, that is, to remain

Your Lordships faithful, but unknown Servant*

The Answer to the Book, entitled, A Complaint to the House of COMMONS, etc.
Complaint.

IN the third Page it is thus penned: We have seen and perused many
Remonstrances, Declarations, and Votes, and Ordinances; and our vote upon them
all is, That it had bin happy for us, more advantageous to our Religion, and
more honorable to our Nation, if they had bin strangled in the birth, and
never walked abroad in the light; and that it will never be well with us or the
Kingdom, until that they be buried in oblivion.

Answer.

The Author did here pass a Vote (in the name of the Cities of London and
Westminster) with no less ignorance then impudence, and blaming the
PARLIAMENT: he says it had been happier for us and our Religion, if they had
not put out such Remonstrances or Votes; and truly if I am not mistaken in the
Author (whom I guess to be some Jesuit or Roman Priest, or at least a
Catholic) I must confess he is in the right, for without doubt, had not the
Parliament bin, it had bin better for the Roman Catholic cause, which has
bin a long time in hopes of a good success, and which is daily endeavored to
be promoted; witness the Queens practice with the Prince of Orange and others
in Holland, and other Countries, besides the several Commissions that the King
has given to several Papists, to authorize them for the raising of an army of
their own Religion. But for the honor, which our Author says, it had been to
our Nation, if those Declarations had never bin; I believe he meant if there
had bin no just cause for those Declarations, which have mentioned nothing, but
what was justified and proved, either by writings signed with the Kings own
hand, or by oaths from men of credit, which have received unlawful commands
from the KINGS own mouth; so that I may justly use those words which the
Author uses in that third Page, viz. There are Conjurers abroad which do the
utmost of their skill to raise evil Spirits, and that we shall never be at
quiet till those Spirits are laid, which can be done by no way now but the
sword; unless we should ground our peace upon the Kings word, which (like the
laying of a spirit) in all probability would endure but seven years at most.

Complaint.

In the third Page likewise these words are pennd, viz. Our Estates were taken
away under the gentle terms of Benevolences and Loanes, where the choice was
either to part with our Estates and Land, or lie in Prison.

Answer.

'Twas a gross mistake in the Author, with whom none do join in complaint,
but such as possess naught; for the Honorable City of London (which he
abuses by complaining in its name) would never have bin so zealous for Gods
cause, if they had disliked the Parliaments proceedings; but it is commonly the
cheators practice, to go in an honest man's name to color his falsehood;
besides our estates were never taken away, 'twas only the twentieth part of our
Estates: and if the Author had looked back into former times, he should have
found this no new device; for he should have found, that at the Assembly of the
States at Lambeth, (which was at the end of that year of the Parliament of
Westminster, which was in the sixteenth year of the then King) that the King
had the fortieth part of every man's goods given him freely toward his debts:
Besides, Edward the first, the son of Henry the third, had in his third year,
given him the fifteenth part of all goods, which is more then you are taxed at,
and yet this is for the King and Kingdom too: In his eighteenth year he had the
eleventh part of all moveable goods within the Kingdom: in his nineteenth year
he had the tenth part of all Church Livings in England: and in the latter end
of his three and twentieth year, he had the tenth part of all goods of all the
Burgesses and of the Commons: And now likewise the Parliament do not free
themselves from those taxes they put upon the Kingdom. In the five and
twentieth year of his Reign, he had an eighteenth part of the goods of the
Burgesses, and of the people in general the tenth part; so then the
Parliaments favored themselves more then the people and their Countries, and
yet they were never murmured at as this Parliament is (by the Author) though in
every tax they bear an equal charge; nay, in some taxes this Parliament they
have laid the greatest burden upon their own shouldiers; Ordering, that what
Tenants paid, their Landlords should bate it out of their Rent; and if so, then
they being all Landlords must needs bear a greater part then others. In the
three and thirtieth year of his Reign, he confirmed the Great Charter of his
own Royal Disposition, and then he had given him (for one year) the fifth part
of the revenues of all the land, and of the Citizens the sixth part of their
goods: and diverse other Presidents I could give you, whereby you might see that
other Parliaments in former times, have not bin so fearful of overburthening
the Subjects, as this happy Parliament has been.

Complaint.

In the fourth Page, the Author goes forward, viz. When we found this pressure,
we ran to the Law for protection; but found by woeful experience, that
innocence was a worse crime then felony, for he that was committed for felony
was admitted to Bail, whilst he that was committed upon no cause, was upon his
habeas corpus remanded and committed to prison.

Answer.

The Author does here accuse the Parliament most foolishly and unjustly, for
every one that knows the Parliament meddles not with cases of Felony (they
being summoned to treat of things of a higher nature; and there being inferior
Courts for the punishment of such crimes) must needs suppose that he means the
Judges, though he seeks to set the people in direct opposition to the
Parliament; but our English Subjects are not led away with good lines, they all
know the benefit of a Parliament, and have ever found them the sure revengers
of an injured cause; and when Malignant Favorites have barred them from their
appeal to their gracious and religiously meaning Prince; the Parliament (being
not subject to delusion) have always been ready to receive their complaints:
And whereas he accuses the Parliament of imprisoning those that are innocent,
it is an unheard of impudence for him to make himself more able to discern
between guilt and innocence then the Parliament; if he have it by relation
only or tradition that the Parliament do so, hearesay will not appear a
sufficient excuse either to mittigate his punnishment, or maintain his wisdom;
or if he speak in his own cause only (as perchance he may) let him know that
wisemen will never own him for a competent Judge: And for the Squibb he puts
upon the Lords, he should have nominated them in particular, and then every one
would have known who he had meant; But it seems for those Lords that are here,
he aimed at none of them, else he would not have stuck to name them as well as
my Lord Mayor, and others which he has named: And for the Lords that are with
the King, it is likely he meant not them, for he knows that a general plunder
will be sufficient to pay particular debts; but which of either he meant, the
abuse of Peerage deserves a sharper revenge then those new Prisons which he
says the Lords have found out to make their sentences appear more severe.

Complaint.

In the fifth page it is thus penned, viz. It afflicts us to think of the
pressures we underwent by new Imposts, and that involuntary dangerous president
of 40. s. per tun upon Wine.

Answer.

By this it is made apparent what life he leads, and what conversation he is
of; could he find nothing worth his complaint but that; and yet for the taking
away of that his grievance, can he show no greater a sign of thankfulness to
the Parliament, then scandalizing their just proceedings, endeavoring to
render them odious to the Common people; who are the only evidences that the
Common People can show for their enjoyment of what they call their own? for
how soon had those small possessions which the poor enjoy, bin thrown down,
to build great Palaces for the reaching Pollititians in their rooms: had not
the Parliament like a brazen wall defended them against those Rebellious
Traitors who quite forget that the Subjects give nothing to the King for the
Kingdoms use, but with adjunction of their own Interests, interlacing in one
and the same Act, His Majesty's relief, and their own Liberties; which they
never do out of suspicion of the Kings Piety, or out of a fear of any ill
that the King will do; but fearing what wicked Council may by possibility
persuade him to do.

Complaint.

In the 6. page it is thus penned, viz. If it had not been thought otherwise
fit by the States, we should never have denied the Bishops a place in the Lords
House in Parliament; And though their Votes in Parliament be gone, which for
the manner of carriage in taking them away (if all be true that we hear) was
not so well as we could have wished for the Honor of that great Court.

Answer.

What an abominable lie stands the Author guilty of, for he says the City of
London could have wished the Bishopps might have still enjoyed their places in
the Lords House: when as the City Petition against them and Popish Lords is yet
extant; the King himself would no way justify the Author in that particular
(though he has not stood to accuse them all or some of them with Bribes o^ in
indirect dealing) for He Himself did pass the Bill for taking away their
Votes; so that now it is become an Act or Law: And let any knowing man judge how
ignorant and immodest the Author is in speaking against that which is enacted,
it being contrary to the Order of the House to speak then, besides the reasons
were fully debated by both sides and in both the Houses; and yet the Author
has showed himself guilty of so little: discretion, as to tax both the King,
the Lords, and the Commons for doing that, and shows not wherein they erred in
doing it: Only he makes a hearsay ground for exceptions against the Superior
and highest Court that this world has given us leave to appeal to.

Complaint.

The Author goes forward, and in his 6. page says in the name of the two
Cities, That our losses were not small, if the loss of Property, Liberty,
Life, or Religion be great.

Answer.

It Is certain the loss will be great if ever it happen, but the two Cities
are in a fair way (thanks be to GOD and a good Parliament) to keep them; Alas
the danger of losing these is on the other sides prevailing, for can any man be so
mad as to suppose that this Parliament will give away that Liberty which some
of these very Parliament Men have long since sweat for, or at least their
Ancestors with no little care procured: why should we suppose that they are
grown weary of their Estates, or if they were, have they not Children to ease
them of that burden, or is it likely that they would envy they Children so
much, as to abridge them of the liberty they themselves have hitherto enjoyed;
as if they had surffeited, and would free their Posterity from the like disease.

Complaint.

In the seventh Page of that Pamphlet it is thus penned, viz. This Parliament
to our thinking was called seasonably for our relief; and the unhappy
differences arisen in Scotland, almost miraculously quieted, and our Brethren
of that Nation returned home peaceably, but we must not forget that it cost us
300000. pounds, which we could wish had bin spared.

Answer.

It Is true that the calling of this Parliament was seasonable, and so was the
Act for not dissolving it; but for the King to violate his own Act, and
dissolve this Parliament by force (as is intended by his army) were altogether
untimely; and though we are now in a greater distraction then ever, yet the
Parliament cannot be blamed by those of judgment; for before, thjngs were
carried according to the desire of those that caused them, who being in
authority, did force an obedience from inferior subjects, none daring to
oppose them till now this Parliament; now the Parliament cannot so easily
relieve us and correct those former abuses as some expect; for when great men
and Favorites set a plot on foot, there must needs be some stir to overthrow
it, especially when the Princes best assistance is not wanting to bring it to
pass: and for the 300000. pounds that the Scots had toward their charge they
were put to; Let me tell you there was a great deal of good English blood
bought (by that means) at an easy rate, considering the occasions we may have
for their future employment: but those that caused that, missing their bloody
ends they expected from that civil war, have caused this unnatural war among
our selves, whereby they hope to compass that by the Protestant blood of
England alone, which before they endeavored by the destruction of two
Protestant Kingdoms together.

Complaint.

In the eighth Page of that Book, it is thus penned, viz. At the beginning of
the Parliament, they removed one highly charged for endeavoring the subversion
of the fundament all Laws of the Land; and though we are sure he was a great
cause of our sufferings, yet we could wish his attainder might not have been in
such a manner as to need a Declaration, that his manner of punishment should
not be drawn into example.

Answer.

There was no Declaration, 'twas but a clause in the Bill of Attainder, and
that clause is no ready way neither to draw a suspicion upon the justice of his
sentence: for this Parliament is not the first that have done so; for by the
Statute of 25. E: 3. which is the Statute of Treasons, you shall find that the
very clause which this Parliament has used in the Earl of Straffords
Attainder is, used there, viz. No Judges shall presume to make any thing
Treason that is not Treason by that Statute, except it be done by the
Parliament: and though the Earl of Strafford was adjudged a Traitor by the
Parliament; yet I hope this Parliament has the same authority to keep this
from being a President, that the Parliament in Edward the thirds time, had for
hindering the Judges to go according to former Presidents.

And then for that part of the Pamphlet which lays aspersions upon the House,
for letting the Bishop of Canterbury and Judge Bartlet, lie so long in Prison
before they be tried; let me answer with that old rule; quod defertur non
aufertur: all the world sees there are businesses that are more urgent then
their Trialls, about which the House is wholly employed: besides, who does not
see that the Parliament takes no delight in shedding of blood? and therefore if
a temporal imprisonment will amend the Malefactors, what though the Parliament
be willing to spare their lives, and wave the accusation of Treason against any
prisoner? must it therefore follow that they could not make good their
accusation? No, Parliaments are great bodies, and though they move but slowly,
they are the less subject to rashness.

Complaint.

In the ninth Page of that Book it is thus penned, viz. For the honest Lord
Major Gurney, if you will believe us which were present at his trial, he might
with more honor and justice too have been acquitted then sentenced, his
greatest fault being his obedience to his King.

Answer.

'Twere strange if the world should believe you the sooner for being an
Auditor, and by that means undervalue the judgment of a Parliament: besides,
your reason you give shows the weakness of your judgment; for when the Kings
command is pleaded to justify an unlawful Act, 'twill be no bar to the
censure, for the King himself cannot be questioned for the fact, but he that
the King imployes must endure the brunt; for the Kings command cannot be a
dispensation for any man's offending me: and for the scandalls that are by that
Book laid upon the House of COMMONS and LORDS both, they are so fearfully
guilt with impudence, that I dread to read them; and therefore for an answer to
them, I shall only say, that I think it no less Treason in the Pamphleteer
that does his best endeavor to raise a War against the Parliament, then it is
in them that fight the Battle.

Complaint.

In the thirteenth Page of that Book it is thus penned, viz. What shall become
of the multitude of the zealous Sectaries and Rabble of ignorant people sent to
both Houses, but especially to the House of Peers, by Captain Ven and his Wife,
and Isaac Pennington, to cry justice, justice, and no Bishops, no Bishops: to
terrify some Lords from the House, and to awe others that were there.

Answer.

Here we may see with what invective malice the Pamphleteer did write against
those that stand for the Parliament, and so consequently for Gods cause; could
not that breeding which your lines tell you have had, bridle your unmannerly
passion so much as to give the Lord Major his due Title of Honor? the King
Himself (who indeed is always modest in his expressions which are free from
passion) was pleased to give him his Title of Alderman in his last Declaration,
and could you afford no better an expression then plain Isaac; if you doubt
him to be a legal Major, yet you cannot except against his being Alderman, and
then I hope if he had not bin a branch of that Noble and ancient family from
whence he is undoubtedly descended, yet at least he might have had the addition
of a Gentleman by his being Alderman of the City of London, and a Parliament
man for that City; but certainly he is now (being legally chosen and sworn)
as legal a Major as any of his Predecessors were before: all that you can urge
against his Authority, is that he has not Commission from the King? Pray see
your errors now, by the Charter of London the Office of the Lord Major should
not go by course, but by the Cities election; and by that Charter the King is
(according to his promise at his Confirmation of it) to give a Commission to
him whom the City does elect, now they have elected Alderman Pennington, and he
is Sworn, now if he should have no Authority, for want of a Commission, then
you blame the King for not dealing with his City according to their Charter
first granted by his Royal Predecessors, and since confirmed by himself; now
I think if the Pamphleteer had known this, rather then have laid such a fault
upon the King, he would have acknowledged him to be Lord Major of London, and
have given him his Title.

Complaint.

In the 19. page it is thus penned, viz. We could never learn of any great
experience of Marshall valor in my Lord Say or his Son, that made them
undertake employments of that nature.

Answer.

For that Scandal laid upon my Lord Say his Son, it is likely you were the first
broacher of it; for one of that factious and bold spirit your pamphlet shows
you to be endued with, would scorn to take news at the second hand,
especially having so good an invention: It Is better to employ some honest men
that have but little skill, then skillful knaves that have no honesty: yet at
the end of Keynton Bataile there was no great sign of unskilful Commanders.

Complaint.

In the 20. page of that Book it is thus penned, viz. We should weary out a
patient reader to tell all our dstresses, and how the businesses of Ireland
have been carried, but 'twould have trenched too much upon the honor of those
Houses.

Answer.

That is mightily feared by you, who if ever Treason were committed by writing
a Pamphlet, you are guilty; for never was that impudence head of in any age
that you have expressed against the State: And if Burton and Pryn and Bastwicke
did deserve to lose their ears, I am sure thy life is forfeited: You will not
speak of Ireland least you should lay the Saddle upon the right Horse, for
it was the Parliament that sent the Coats and other necessaries for Ireland, but
it was not the Parliament that stopped any, what greater offense can there be then
to threaten that great Council the Parliament as you have done; was the poor
man drawn, hanged and quartered, that raised a Tumult against the Bishop of
Canterbury who was but of the Kings Privy Council? and shall it not be Treason
to encourage others to war against a Parliament which is the Kings gveat
Council: have other men been punished for their contempts shown to an
inferior Court, and shall you go free for not only obeying, but wilfully
opposing that court from whence there lies no appeal? have others bin severely
punished for uttering words that did only imply what you have openly published
to all the world, and can you imagine to escape the sentence of severity for
your inviting others to your own degree of Rebellion, which you have done in
the 24. page of your book, where you desire all others to join with you in the
opposition of all Ordinances that are made by the Parliament; And thus I have
done with your Pamphlet, but for your self, I shall leave you to the just
sentence of the Honorable Houses of Parliament.

FINIS.

