THE COMPLAINT OF MARY BLAITHWAITE WIDDOVV; Setting forth her sad Condition,
occasioned by the late dissolution of the Parliament, and neglect of justice
ever since.
Die Veneris 10 Martii 1647.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that the Petition of Mary
Blaithwaite, and the Articles anexed, are hereby referred to Sir Edward Leche,
to examine the business, and state the same, and make report thereof to this
house with all convenient speed.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parl.

OH that there were but an eminent man of power that would stand up in the gap
to judge the fatherless, and hear the cause of the Widow, that I might apply
my self unto him for justice; for I cry night and day, and groan under the
burden of my oppressions, and there is none to deliver me out of the hand of
the oppressors; which makes my heart so overwhelmed with sorrow and grief,
that I cannot ^orbeare; for my case depended before the late dissolved
Parliament, and ^hey would have done me justice if they had not been
interrupted, but now my case is more remediless then the poor Widow, who
importuned the unjust Judge, who neither feared God, nor reverenced man, and
yet did her justice, but I can have none for me; but am forced after much
labor in vain, and many a weary step, to no purpose, to make my self a fool
in Print, hoping hereby I by some hand, mouth, or pen, this my complaint may
come to the ear of that great man, who has taken upon him the Protection of
the Common wealth. etc. to stir him up to come forth and here the Widows
complaint, and give relief unto me and my fatherless children, according
unto the tenor of my Petition: a Copy whereof follows, with the state of my
case.

To the Right Honorable the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The Humble Petition of Mary Blaithwaite of Sickmurther in the County of
Cumberland Widow.
Humbly showing,
THat your Petitioner did exhibit her humble Petition with Articles thereunto
annexed to the late House of Lords, and therein did set forth the losses,
sufferings, and cruel usage of her late husband, and her self, for their
fidellity to the Common wealth; by Sir Wilfred Lawson Knight, Simon Musgrave
and Leonard Dikes Esquires, Sir Phillip Musgrave Barronet, Henry Pierson and
James Pierson Attorneies, John Hudson, Michael Croplace and William Leach, all
then notorious Delinquents, which Petition was grounded upon an ordinance of
the eighteenth of August 1642, whereby the well affected of the North should
have reperation of their losses, out of the Estates of the Delinquents that did
the wrong; upon which said Petition your Petitioner obtained an order of
reference to Sir Edward Leech Knight, who issued out his summons to the
several persons, some whereof were examined, but the two Persons who were the
principal authors and actors in all your Petitioners sufferings, did contemn
and would not be examined, by reason whereof and of Sir Edward Leech his
death, (which happened soon after) the taking away of the house of Lords,
dissolving of the late Parliament, your Petitioner could reap no benefit of her
seven years attendance: and forasmuch her losses, sufferings and cruel usage
are set forth in the said Articles, and for that she dares not return to her
Country, and children, which is more then 250 miles distant hence, unless
she be by your honors relieved and secured against the oppressions of the said
Persons, and the others complained of, and the rather for that your Petitioner
has attended more then eleven months upon his Highness Proclamation or
Declaration to re^ieve the oppressions of the poor, but could never g^t an
answer from Mr. Sadler one of the Masters of Requests, nor from Mr. Ha^ter to
whom M^. Saddler did deliver the Petitioners Petition, neither any answer to
the Petition she delivered to Major General Lambert, to present to his
Highness, and now she is remediless but by your Honors.

May it therefore please your Honors to refer your Petitioners greivances to
some Committee, or other fit Persons whom your wisdoms shall apoint to be
examined and reported, that thereby she may receive a comfortable issue of her
long attendance, and return to her family with relief and security.

And she will daily pray etc.

The state of my Case is as follows.
I Coming from London into my Country, to serve an Order of Parliament upon
my adversaries, Henry and James Pierson, Delinquent Attorneys at large;
whereupon the Commissioners of Array cast me into Prison, was several times
brought before Sir Phillip Musgrave, one of the Commissioners of Array, and the
Kings chief Commander in Cumberland, and accused for one of the Parliaments
Intelligencers, and thereupon committed to the custody of the High Constable,
upon which account, m^ Husband had his doors broke open, and his goods to a
great value taken away, and my Adversaries also procured several Watrants to
bind us to our good behavior and I was thereupon by their means dragged on the
Market day through Cockermouth streets, and afterward suggesting that we
dispersed scandalous Pamphlets for the Parliament, apprehended us upon the
Sabbath day in the Chapel, at the time of public worship, by a Warrant from
the aforesaid Commander in chief, and the said James Pierson having brought a
Cart to the Chapel door, and commanded all the people in the Kings name to
aid and assist them in carrying us before Sir Wilfred Lawson another of the
Commissioners of Array, who caused us to be close imprisoned and locked up the
first night, and the next day committed us both to Carlisle Goal, and the more
to express their cruelty and malice, Hudson another of my Adversaries, who was
then Constable, having brought another Cart, they c^used me to be bound in i^
on my b^cke with my face upwards under the horses tail, and in a most inhumane
m^nner, caused the horses to gallop the more to torment me, and under pretense
of searching for Parliament Papers, stripped my Husband to his shirt, and me to
my smock, which they tare in an uncivil manner, and gave direction to lay me
in irons, and both my husband and my self were put amongst the common Rogues
and Thieves: and for pretended charges in carrying us to Prison, Hudson and the
two Piersons servants, Crackplace and Leech, did take from us one Cow, and
certain horse loads of Oats and Oat-meale, by warrant from Sir Wilfred Lawson,
for which there is no satisfaction made to this day.

Moreover, my Adversaries forced me to travel to Oxford to answer a Subpena
at Hudsons suit; and arrested me and my Husband many times upon Writs of
privilege vexatiously, and never declared against us: Again my Adversaries
caused me and my husband to be indicted seven several times, and six times to
be bound to the good behavior, and five times to the Peace, procuring all
their Warrants from the Commissioners of Array; and vexed our children and
servants, and day laborers with continual Warrants, without cause in an
illegal way; so that none durst work for us for fear of the two Piersons,
who threatened to have them in Goal in a week, if they did work a day for us;
which was the utter undoing of us and our whole Family; and the said two
Piersons confederated with Crack place and Leech their two servants, to make
false and feigned Articles, and swear them against me, to prevent the hearing
of my cause upon two Writs of error, and so obtained a special Supplicavit
against me, and cast me into New prison, where I lay twenty days, but when
they were examined before the Commissioners of the great Seal, they were
adjudged frivolous, vexatious, and malicious, and thereupon I was released of
my imprisonment, but never had any satisfaction to this day: And these two
Piersons procured unjust and illegal Judgments against us out of the Upper
Bench, and procured the Records to be falsified, as was made appear before
Judge Bacon and Judge Rolls in open Court, by Affidavit of Mr. Benson, Clerk
in Court, Whereupon the Judgments should have been given in, and the unjust
Attorneys put out of the Rolls from ever practicing more, which the Judges
ought to have done; but instead thereof put me off with Writs of Error, and
have delayed me to this day. And in conclusion, my Husband by these their
cruel usages became extreme weak and diseased, and never enjoyed himself, but
being bereaved of common sense, died in a consuming condition.

Here follows a Copy of the VVarrant.
Cumb.
FOrasmuch as we are informd, that Mary the Wife of Henry Blaythwait, is one
that does not stand affected to his Majesty's service, and is suspected to
disperse scandalous Pamphlets. These are therefore to Will and Command you that
you take and arrest the bodies of the said Henry Blaithwait and Mary his Wife,
and them carry before the next Justice, to enter into recognizance with good
Sureties, not only to appear at the next Sessions, but also not to depart this
County without license of the Commander in chief: Whereof fail you not.

Given under our hands this 19. April, 1644. Philip Musgrave Leo Dykes.

To the Constables of Withop, Se^kemurther, and Embelton, and if that they
shall refuse to become bound as aforesaid, that then you commit them to the
Goal at Carlisle.



OH that I could come to speak with his Highness, that I might say unto him,
My Lord Protector, do justice for me a distressed Widow and my fatherless
Children, lest when your Wife is a Widow, and Children Fatherless, they cry
and be not heard; for (my Lord) the same measures that men measure to others
shall be measured to them again. O my Lord, I beseech your Highness do me
justice, lest the Proverb be verified upon you, He that removes a stone it
shall fall upon him; and he that breaks a hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.

What a sad thing is it that I have worn out my friends, and my friends
friends to get justice, having spent so much, and been burdensome so long by
waiting for justice, which has made me out of patience, and one of my
country men (Mr. Musgrave by name) to pacify me wrote a letter for me to
Major Gene. Lambert, and Mr. Chidley being of a meek spirit, was prevailed with
to deliver it and receive his answer, which was no way satisfactory to me,
which made me to press my Lord Lambert earnestly to do me justice, if not for
pity sake yet for country sake, who told me that he neither would nor could
do any thing for me, and then I told him that not one Parliament man that
came out of our Country did good for their country; so I despaired of help.

Yet by Mr. Musgraves persuasions I went once again, and meeting Mr. Chidley
at the Counsel entreated him to do me the favor as to speak once more to my
Lord Lambert about me, who was not willing, but after he spoke to Mr. Musgrave
and had information from him of the opinion of Pr. Bradshaw, how that I could
not have remedy by Law, went to my Lord Lamberts lodgings in White Hall to
inform his Lordship, but coming importunately to speak for me as one who
would have no nay but would speak with that great man, was for his
peremptoriness, and malipertness thrust out and threatened to be said by the
heels.

Here follows a Copy of Mr. Musgraves Letter.
SIR:
When I look upon the Lord Protectors Oath for governing the Nation according
to the form of Government prescribed, and his promised with an oath to
administer justice and Law equally, and consider how we can have no access
unto him to present either private or public grievances and abuses, so as
poor people are wasted and spent out with fruitless attendance, I nothing can
admire at the universal discontents and murmurings of the people, with the
highness of the enemies Spirits, who wait for a change, and whom no favors or
preferments will bring over to you, there is an established Law, that none that
have been in actual arms against the Parliament shall bear any Office of
trust or power in this Common wealth; yet I am told that you not long since
sent down a Commission to your Brother Listers Brother in Law (for one Cavaleer
would bring in one another) a compounded Delinquent to be a Justice of Peace,
but upon Pruite of the Scots increasing, he declined to take the oath of a
Justice of beace. I know a Delinquent Justice, an enemy to all honest men,
disabled; and fined for executing that office, again put in Commission by the
Lord Protector contrary to his oath. While the former Parliament was low in
their own eyes, observed their Oaths, their Ingagemnets; God blessed them, and
gave up their Enemies unto them; but when they slighted their Declarations,
Oaths, and Promises, thinking by policy to establish themselves, and stand by
their own strength, God stirred up their own Servants to rise against them,
and lay them aside with contempt. And if the Lord Protector walk in their
paths, let him not think to be established, but expect the Lord will raise an
Adversary unto him stronger then him, and his Oath will be required at his
hand. Captain Howard upon the recommendation of Sir Patricius Curwen, a Colonel
for the late King, in few days procured one Harberts Petition to be read, and
got him reparation for the loss of his Boat, which Harbert is a notorious
Delinquent, otherwise I believe Captain Howard would not have appeared for
him: This poor woman has attended eighteen weeks for the reading of a
Petition, and not yet read, nor like to be, unless by your means, if the Lord
Protector thus disregard his oath, the poor and oppressed, promote Cavaleers
and his enemies, and thus let them pass, without giving account for their
rapines and barbarous usages of your distressed friends, what may we expect
the end will be? Read the Widows Papers, and if such as she complains of
shall pass without account, or be fit to govern us, tell us, and we shall
forbear to trouble you. Captain Howard told the woman she would fare worse for
my sake: I never had penny of her, what I do is for her sufferings and the
justness of her cause; President Bradshaw can inform you of her, if you ask
him. I am persuaded if the Lord Protector do her not justice, the high
Protector that rules Heaven and Earth will lay both you and him aside, as he
has done to Kings and Parliaments, and set up others in your steads, that will
regard an Oath and his fear; but I hope better things of you, and shall pray
that God may guide and direct you with his holy Spirit, to walk in his fear,
and to help the distressed. Sir, I am as I write,

Your Servant for the Truth, Jo. Musgrave.
19. May 1654.
For the Honorable, Major General Lambert, one of His Highness Council,
present.

A word to the Reader.
IF any man shall blame me a poor distressed Widow for soliciting His
Highness, and Petitioning the Parliament, let them know that my oppressions are
so great and so insufferable, that I cannot do less then crave for justice,
from which I have been so long detained.

Mary Blaithwait, Widow.

FINIS.

